ICAR. 15. IX /600 Vol. IX 1939 THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science AND Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. Rs. 2 or 3 s. 6 d. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI. 1941 Price Annas 5 or 6d.
List of Agents in India and Burma from whom Government of India Publications are available. ABBOTTABAD.The Indian Journal of Weterinary Science and Animal Husbandry EDITORIAL COMMITTEE P. M. KHAREGAT, C.I.E., I.C.S., Vice-Chairman, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research W. BURNS, C.I.E., D. Sc., I.A.S., Agricultural Commissioner with the Government of India. F. WARE, C.I.E., F.R.C.V.S., F.N.I., I.V.S., Animal Husbandry Commissioner with the Government of India. RAO BAHADUR B. VISWANATH, F.I.C, F.C.S., Director, Imperial Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. F. C. MINETT, D.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. J. C. GHOSH, D.Sc., Director, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. JAMES N. WARNER, M.Sc., Offg. Professor of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad. S. BASU, O. B. E., I.C.S., Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. EDITOR F. M. DE MELLO, B.A., B.Sc. (ECON.) The Editorial Committee, in its work of examining papers received for publica- tion, is assisted in an honorary capacity by a large number of scientists working in various parts of India. 1. Contributions and books and periodicals for review should be addressed to the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, Publication Section, New Delhi. 2. Communications regarding subscription and advertisements should be addressed to the Manager of Publications, Civil Lines, Delhi.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES OBSERVATIONS ON THE EXISTENCE OF CONTAGIOUS BOVINE PLEURO-PNEUMONIA IN BRITISH INDIA WITH AN ACCOUNT OF PRELIMINARY PATHO- LOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF CASES OF THIS DISEASE REPORTED FROM ASSAM BY J. F. SHIRLAW, M.R.C.V.S. Pathologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 5th December 1938) (With Plates V and VI) SINCE the earliest days of veterinary organisation in British India, the question of the existence of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia has frequent- ly recurred. Over this question opinion has always been divided and no satisfactory answer has yet been given. The wide areas to be covered the difficulties in disease nomenclature, the insufficiency of an expert staff com- petent to differentiate between the various types of bovine pneumonia have all contributed to this failure to reach conclusions regarding this problem. Many standard authorities quote the existence of the disease in India ; others refer to its existence in vague or ambiguous terms, while the majority fail to mention it at all, the presumption being either that no authentic in- formation was available or that they considered it not to exist. Hutyra and Marek state : " In Asia, the disease appears especially wide- spread in the Russian territories as well as in India ". Baldrey and Williams [1909] make mention of the disease in India and Woodruff [1934], Moore [1906], Miller [1935], Gaiger and Davies [1938] state that it exists in Asia. As the latter writers do not specifically exclude India, it must be concluded that their opinion is that the disease does exist here. Edmonds and Walker [1929] consider that the occurrence of contagious bovine pleuro-pncumonia in India is doubtful. Henning [1932] mentions the existence of the disease in central Asia and India. Currasson [1936], in writing on contagious bovine pleuro-pneu- monia states : " L'Inde anglaise a été très atteinte a la fin du xixe siècle : dans la seule province de Bombay il y avait, en 1894, 1,215 malades. Depuis. elle est moins inquiétante. En 1929 et 1930, il y avait encore de foyers dans quatres préféctures ". Edwards [1927] in a discussion at the Far Eastern Association of Tropical Medicine, when speaking of the peculiar anomalies of geographical distribu- tion of diseases in eastern countries, said : " One knows very well that pleuro- pneumonia is a very serious and widespread affection of cattle over a large (139)
140 Contagious Bovine Pleuro-pneumonia in British India part of the African continent and also occurs in the Far East, while India in her intervening position for some reason has escaped infection. Is there any risk of the disease becoming established in the country through the importation of affected cattle from the countries where it exists " ? Law [1906] gives " phush phush ", " pirdaho " and " pheepree ", as Bengali synonyms of the disease, which he considered a true pleuro-pneumonia contagiosa of cattle, although he makes no mention of the disease elsewhere than Bengal. In the Quarterly Journal of Veterinary Science in India, Army Animal Management, Nunn [1885] mentions " phepri" and " khulak " as Punjabi synonyms of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, and in the same publication, the occurrence of this disease is mentioned in Shahpur (Punjab) in July and September (1884), while in 1890, an editorial indicates the necessity for research upon the disease. In the Annual Administration Report of the Civil Veterinary Department in India (1892-93), bovine pleuro-pneumonia is included in a provisional list of diseases believed to occur in India, in the class ' non-ordinary' (i.e., not ordinarily amenable to treatment.) No mention is made of the specific contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, the features of which, at that time, were well known. It is presumed, in view of the fact that the prevailing Indian form was designated ' non-ordinary', that the relationship between the form of bovine pneumonia in India and the widely known and specific contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, was accepted. In succeeding annual reports, mention is again made of the same disease. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, remarks (1893-94) on the prevalence of Anthrax, Rinderpest, Foot-and-Mouth disease and bovine pleuro-pneumonia. The inclusion of the last mentioned with formid- able epizootic diseases leaves little doubt as to the seriousness of the disease, During the same year, the Central Provinces report pleuro-pneumonia in addition to the usual epizootic diseases. In 1894-95, the Superintendent. South Punjab, reports that 138,000 bovines were attacked with pleuro-pneumonia in the Ferozepore area alone, of which about 4,000 died and in the same year, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, mentions the existence of the same disease in several districts, with an incidence of 336 animals affected and 274 deaths, while from Bengal, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, reports : " Pleuro-pneumonia in the contagious form may be said to be non-existent, at least no case has come to my knowledge ". In the report for 1895-96, this opinion is again reiterated : " The disease as a contagious malady may be said to be non-existent in Bengal". In the report for 1897-98, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, North Punjab, states : " Pleuro-pneumonia..........only 62 cases ..........It is very doubtful if these were true contagious pleuro-pneumo- nia. It is much more likely that they were ordinary pneumonia with pleurisy." In Bombay Presidency during the same year, there were only four animals affected, with two deaths.
J. F. SHIRLAW 141 It is an eminently important observation that during the years covered by the reports of the Animal Administration, no mention has been made of hæmorrhagic septicæmia, now recognised as the most important bovine epizootic, in which pneumonia in the more subacute cases, not infrequently simulating the lesions of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia is, a character- istic. It is noteworthy, in these reports., that the most Serious epizootic of bovine pneumonia recorded was reported from a localised area, which is today recognised as one of the centres wherein hæmorrhagic septicæmia, in epizootic form, is normally encountered. The history of the disease in India may be further studied in the annual reports of the Civil Veterinary Department of the provinces. From the year 1900, reports of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia have been issued from Bombay Presidency (including Sind), the provinces of Punjab, Bengal, the United Provinces, the Central Provinces and Berar, and Assam. Punjab. 1893-94 . . . . Bovines attacked. . . . . 139,518 Bovines died . . . . . 5,155 1896-97. . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . 233 Bovines died . . . . . 66 1897-98 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . 117 Bovines died . . . . . 45 1899-1900 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . 565 Bovines died . . . . . 275 1900-01 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . 154 Bovines died . 76 1903-04 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . 49 Bovines died . . . . . 14 In succeeding years, there is no further mention of bovine pleuro-pneu- monia. In disease returns, a separate entry for hæmorrhagic septicæmia is made, and cases of bovine pleuro-pneumonia entered as such. No direct evidence is available that cases designated as bovine pleuro-pneumonia had been definitely diagnosed as contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, although the remark of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, (1897-98) indicates that, in certain quarters, the existence of the disease had been suspected. Bombay Presidency. 1897-98 . . . . Bovines attacked 4 Bovines died . . . . . 2 1898-99 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . Nil 1899-1900 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . Nil. 1900-01 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . 10 Bovines died . . . . . 5
142 Contagious Bovine Pleuro-pneumonia in British India 1901-02 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . Nil 1902-03 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . 7 Bovines died . . . . . 7 1903-04 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . 30 Bovines died . . . . . 26 1904-05 . . . . Report not available 1905-06 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . Nil. During these years, no separate entries of hæmorrhagic septicæmia were made in disease returns. After this procedure was commenced in the year 1906, no further mention was made of bovine pleuro-pneumonia as a specific disease entity. The remark of Joslen, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, commenting on the returns of bovine pleuro-pneumonia for the year 1903-04, is significant of the doubt already existing regarding the correct diagnosis of cases accepted as contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia. He says, " I am doubtful if the diagnosis was correct in these cases. Conta- gious pleuro-pneumonia I have not met with in the plains of India ". No further mention of bovine pleuro-pneumonia is made from Bombay, until, in 1928-30, when further cases are reported. During the years 1931-32, contagious pleuro-pneumonia was reported front Karachi district. Seven calves died out of eight attacked. In 1932-33; thirty deaths from bovine pleuro-pneumonia were recorded- The fact that these cases were not accepted as hæmorrahagic septicæmia in- dicates doubt as to the diagnosis of the type of pneumonia reported Bengal. 1900-01 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . 13 Bovines died . . . . . 8 1901-02 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . .. 11 Bovines died . . . . . 11 1902-03 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . Nil. 1903-04 . . . . Bovines attacked . . . . . Nil. 1904-05 . . . . No mention. In the year 1905, a separate entry is made for hæmorrhagic septicæmia and, as no further reports are made of bovine pleuro-pneumonia, it must be presumed that considerable doubt existed as to whether authentic contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia was actually a disease entity with which to reckon. Trydell, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal [1905] remarks, " .... the machinery employed for the collection of these statistics has been found to be insufficient to ensure even approximate accuracy ". This state- ment, in conjunction with the fact that no further cases of bovine pleuro- pneumonia were reported after 1905-06, is doubtless an indication of the extreme caution taken in expressing an opinion regarding the actual existence of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia,
J. F. SHIRLAW 143 United Provinces.144 Contagious Bovine Pleuro-pneumonia in British India A series of culture tubes sown with the suspected fluid were examined for the presence of colonies of Borrelomyces peripneumoniae, and beyond a few discrete colonies of a coliform organis, no growth of the organism specially sought was evident on examinati between the second and fifth days of cultivation. On naked eye examination, the small pieces of lung showed lesions which presented a considerable resemblance to those described in contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, and the description of the early lesions of this disease, " isolated, small, dense, sharply circumscribed nodular foci with broadened interlobular connective tissue " (Meissner) were readily apparent. The inter- lobular connective tissue of the lung was widely infiltrated by a clear or greyish gelatinous exudate and with the coincident hyperplasia of this tissue, the ' marbled ' appearance of the lung was typical. (Plate V, fig. 1). The lymph vessels in the larger traveculae of the interstitium were widely distend- ed with coagulated fibrinous exudate. Several of the smaller vessels were thrombosed (terminal branches of the pulmonary artery) but this was not a general lesion. Small, discrete areas of infarction were present, and areas of interstitial hæmorrhage were frequent. The lung lobules, sharply outlined by the lesions affecting the interstitial tissue, were in a comparatively uniform degree of catarrhal inflammation. Hepatization, variegation of the lobules, with the presence of practically unaffected lobules, a lesion peculiarly specific of contagious bovine pleuro- pneumonia, were absent. Microscopic examination revealed the interstitial exudate to be fibrino- cellular, a dense accumulation of cells being present on the outer margin of the distended spaces and around the widely patent lymph vessels. The air vesicles contained an exudate mainly catarrhal with little fibrin and were not distended with fibrinous exudate as in true contagious bovine pleuro-pneu- monia. No evidence of lobular necrosis was evident and the areas of necrosis ap- parent on macroscopic examination appeared to be related to the peribronchial tissue, which was densely infiltrated. Evidence that the essential lesions were bronchiogenic was not lacking in view of the degree of inflammatory change affecting small bronchi and bronchioles. Scattered here and there through the lung tissue were observed, in over- night-Giemsa stained preparations, what appeared to be the spores of a fungus. These averaged about 6 µ in diameter and various forms of budding, sug- gestive of a torula or a cryptococcus, were observed. Dehiscence of these spores could be seen in many places, with the formation of a curved, sheathed protoplasmic stem, very faintly staining, terminating sharply in a point. It is not intended at this preliminary stage of the investigation, to express an opinion as to the identity of these bodies, nor of their source of origin. Their presence in the epithelium of the bronchi, whence they may be seen migrating
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE V [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2
Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Camera Lucida J. F. SHIRLAW 145 into the peribronchial interstitium (Plate VI) and their frequent numbers in the blood vessels, correlated with the fairly frequent thrombosis of the vessels, indicates a possible pathogenesis. It is reasonable to consider that this case was one of mycotic pneumonia but, as the tissues had been sent preserved in formalin, no further work was possible to corroborate this opinion. No detailed record of the clinical case was supplied with the material for examination and no evidence could be obtained that the animal, from which the lung tissues had been obtained, had died during the course of an epizootic. Contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia was again reported from Assam in March, 1938. With the dispatch of tissues and fluids for examination, the Disease In- vestigation Officer, Assam, reported that these were selected from an animal dying during the course of a severe epizootic in which there was considerable mortality. " The disease appeared enzootic in particular localities, with a ten- dency to affect fresh centres in the neighbourhood and was seasonal, occurring during the advent of the monsoon. During the course of an outbreak, acute and chronic cases are encountered, the former of four to six days and the latter of twelve to twenty days duration. In acute cases, a moderate pyrexia of 104. 6°F. was noted and both lungs were equally involved. In chronic cases, there was a marked tendency for only one lung to be affected. On 'post- mortem examination, the lung from a chronic case was uniformly hepatized and firmly adherent to the chest wall. The chest cavity contained about a gallon of sanguineous fluid and a similar fluid was noticed on incision of the lung tissue, the lobules of which appeared variegated ". The tissues sent for examination were ampoules of heart blood, of lung and of pleural exudate, and pieces of lung in 50 per cent glycerine and 5 per cent formalin. Experimental transmission of the disease with the material supplied was immediately instituted at Mukteswar. No transmission experiments were conducted with the blood or with the fluid exudates collected from the pleural cavity and the lung, which were grossly contaminated. The material used for transmission experiments was a portion of the glycerinated lung. This was washed in sterile distilled water and finely triturated with sterile sand in normal saline. Two c. c. of the supernatant fluid was inoculated subcutaneously into the rightside of the neck of a hill bull, five years of age. A soft painful swelling, of the size of a golf ball, developed within twenty-four hours, and persisted for sixteen days, when it ruptured and discharged a thin pus from which no micro-organisms were cultivable on selected media. The abscess healed uneventfully, with no ex- tension, and during the entire period of observation extending over two months no febrile or systemic disturbance was noted on the part of the animal. A second hill bull of the same age, received a larger inoculation of five c. c. of the saline suspension, with similar results. B
146 Contagious Bovine Pleuro-pneumonia in British India Attempts at the cultivation of the causal organism of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia from the samples of exudate, unfiltered and filtered (Berke- feld V) were negative in Bennet's medium. The technique employed was that of Tang and Wei in their study of this organism. On routine media, no growth of any organism of significance was apparent. On naked eye examination of the formalin preserved lung, the lesions were found to be similar to those in the previous specimen with, in addition, a more uniform thrombosis of the terminal branches of the pulmonary artery and endarteritis of the proximal branches. Hæmorrhagic infarcts corresponding in dimension and distribution with the area of lobules supplied by these vessels were scattered throughout the lung pulp. The majority of the lobules still contained air and there was no evidence of variegation or hepatization. The lesion had evidently originated from the smaller blood vessels of the interstitium. Microscopically, the ' fungoid' bodies were present in considerable numbers within the bronchial mucosa, throughout the interstitium and in the blood vessels. In a subsequent report, the Disease Investigation Officer, Assam, stated that he had inoculated two calves with 10 c. c. of the pleural exudate from a recent case, and had observed huge swellings at the site of inoculation. There is no record, however, of his having attempted transmission in animals over twelve months, which are known to be susceptible to experimental infection, with the development of systemic reaction, and no information was forthcoming on the epizootology of the disease, the number of animals affected during the course of the outbreak, the cattle population of the area in which the disease made its appearance, the percentage of deaths or the movements of cattle in the affected areas. He mentioned, however, that sporadic cases of the disease could be found during any part of the year in the affected localities,where once there had been a wide epizootic. This statement, in conjunction with the negative transmission experi- ments conducted in the field and at Mukteswar, and the pathological findings, including the negative attempts at the cultivation of the causal organism of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, throws grave doubts on the contention that contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia exists in Assam, if the materials subjected to examination were representative of the disease suspected. In a later report, June 1938, the Disease Investigation Officer comments on the difficulty experienced in procuring authentic figures concerning the incidence and mortality of the disease, although he reports that in an examination of the pus from the abscesses which developed subsequent to the inoculation of the pleural exudate of an acute case of the disease, he observed peculiar ' fungoid ' or ' needle-like ' bodies which did not stain by Gram's method. This is an interesting observation helping, as it does, to accumulate more evidence regarding the possible significance of these forms.
J. F. SHIRLAW 147 It may not be out of place to mention that during the last few years, three cases of sporadic pneumonia, in which the appearance of the lung was highly suggestive of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, occurred at Mukteswar (Plate V, fig. 2). In two of these cases, the lesions were histologically similar to the Assam specimens and in both, a fungus was readily apparent. Unfortunately, these specimens had been fixed before the necessity for a cultural examination, which the histological examination indicated, was realised. The fungus in these cases, however, appeared conidial in type and unlike that described in the Assam specimens. The third specimen showed a greater interstitial involvement with small foci of suppuration in the bands of hyperplastic tissue and a comparative absence of exudate, with lobular necrosis. Corynebacterium pyogenes bovis was readily isolated from this tissue and it was evident, on histological exami- nation, that it was responsible for the lesions. Edwards (unpublished work, 1927), discussing the problem of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia in India, commented on the striking similarity between the pneumonic lesions of this disease and those associated with a chronic corynebacterial infection. DISCUSSION A survey of records shows that at no time has there existed any unanimity of opinion on the occurrence of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia in India. The significant remarks of the Animal Administration to the effect that bovine pleuro-pneumonia should be classified under ' non-ordinary', i.e., belonging to the group of epizootic diseases, throw more than a suspicion on the existence of the belief in the minds of the authorities that contagious pleuro-pneumonia of bovines was a factor to be reckoned with in disease control. The categorical statements in later Animal Administration reports doubt- ing or even strongly denying the existence of such a disease in centres previously considered infected (e.g., Bengal) seem, in the first few years of the present century to have gained such ground, that by 1905-06, the reports of this disease have suddenly ceased and more attention is being paid to the common epi- zootic bovine pneumonia, about which, at this time, much was being learnt. This disease, bovine hæmorrhagic septicæmia, known for many years in France and in other countries, had, at the beginning of the century, come under serious consideration as one of the most important bovine epizootics, and it appears probable that, awake to rapidly developing concepts of animal disease in other countries, reorientation of veterinary opinion in India occurred in connection with this epizootic in common with many others. The striking similarity between the pulmonary lesions of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia and the more subacute lesions in hæmorrhagic septicæmia can readily be accepted as one of the cogent explanations of the general con- fusion regarding the disease.
148 Contagious Bovine Pleuro-pneumonia in British India The fact that we hear little more of this disease after 1905-06, when bovine hæmorrhagic septicæmia sprang, more or less suddenly, into promi- nence lends weight to this view. The outbreak of bovine pleuro-pneumonia in Ferozepore area affecting 138,000 bovines was, on prima facie evidence one of hæmorrhagic septicæmia. This outbreak remained peculiarly localised and it is well known that this is exactly what does happen during an outbreak of hæmorrhagic septicæmia. The disease, originating in an area of dense cattle population flares up quickly to a climax, when the majority of animals in that area are affected and then suddenly abates, recurring again with less severity the following year and succeeding years, until, on the emergence of a new generation with little inherited resistance, the disease again makes its appear- ance in epizootic form. The peculiarity of these epizootics is their tendency not to spread to ad- jacent herds. Contrast these facts with those known about bovine pleuro- pneumonia. This disease occurs insidiously and slowly in a herd and " after the introduction of the disease it is usually weeks before it becomes manifest and months before all the susceptible animals have become affected in stall and still longer in the case of animals at pasture. In the case of affected animals ............ infection recurs continually and may become established on farms for years when even apparently cured animals may transmit the virus to the fresh arrivals " [Hutyra andMarek]. This succinct expression of the epizootiology of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia is one that has never been observed in cattle herds in India and conversely the epizootiological features of hæmorrhagic septicæmia are well known to and frequently en- countered and commented upon by workers in the field. It is impossible to conceive localised outbreaks of contagious bovine pleuro- pneumonia. When it makes its appearance in a country previously free from the disease the effects are disastrous. " The disease has decimated herds throughout Europe and in other parts of the world on several occasions and probably has been directly responsible for the death of more cattle than any other single disease with the possible exception of cattle plague (Rinderpest)." [Miller, 1935]. As an illustration, the disease was reintroduced into Great Britain in 1860 and in that year one hundred and eighty-seven thousand head of cattle died. One has no hesitation in affirming that if this disease did exist in India much more would have been heard of it. The silence of the last three decades on the subject is practically certain evidence of its non-existence and the reports of sporadic outbreaks (Sind, etc.), appear to enhance the evidence. Contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, as already observed is not a sporadic disease. The outbreaks reported in recent years from Assam have been fairly fully dealt with and the evidence goes to show that this form of bovine pneumonia is certainly not true contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia associated with a Borrelia infection. It is true that the lesions bear a striking resemblance to the latter disease but comment has already been made on the fact that a form
J. F. SHIRLAW 149 of mycotic pneumonia simulating the lesions of contagious bovine pleuro- pneumonia has been encountered in sporadic form in cattle maintained at Mukteswar. The finding of what appears a true fungus in the lesions of the disease in Assam correlates the observations on the disease in cattle at Muktes- war. It has been reported from Assam that the peculiar type of bovine pleuro- pneumonia observed occurs in sporadic form. It has already been noted that bovine pleuro-pneumonia is not a sporadic disease. It would be premature, at this early stage of the investigation, to attempt to explain the etiology of the disease in Assam ; only two sets of specimens have been examined, but it is significant that, in both cases, the type of lesion appears peculiar to the disease and is one which could be readily explained on the basis of infection by a fungus, as in the cases observed at Mukteswar. The essential origin is bronchiogenic and on the mucosa of the bronchi are seen masses of spores which penetrate through the bronchial coats into the interstitial tissue. Hæmorrhage of the small vessels of the bronchial wall is apparent and a suitable explanation of the essential lesions of the peculiar type of pneumonia described is that the spores enter the ruptured venules of the mucous coat and thence make their way by the bronchial veins to the right heart whence they return by the pulmonary arteries, the terminal branches of which, being an end arterial system, they occlude with the development of the lesions described. The fact that only one side of the lung may be affected is explained by the observation that each lung is supplied with its own special and anatomically different bronchial vascular system. In mycotic pneumonia, Folger [1926] postulates a blood stream spread of the spores, but it is contended by the writer that this is not necessary in view of the anatomical distribution and peculiarities of the bronchial vascular system. The spores developing in the lung in a case of mycotic pneumonia can, and probably do, return to the lung by the branches of the pulmonary- artery. The blood stream spread theory is hardly tenable in view of the fact that no observations are available of the effects produced in the end arterial system by circulating spores. If spores were circulating in the blood, a more general thrombosis of the end arterial system, with the development of obvious infarcts in the special organs supplied, would be of certain occurrence. This not entirely irrelevant digression in pathology indicates the need for continuous and intensive investigation on pneumonia of bovines in India. CONCLUSION There is no evidence that contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia exists, or has ever existed, in British India.
150 Contagious Bovine Pleuro-pneumonia in British India REFERENCES Baldrey, F. S. H. & Williams, W. O. (1909). William's Veterinary Medicine, p. 170. Bennet, S. C. J. (1932). Jr. Compar. Path. & Ther. 45, 257-292. Currasson, G. (1936). Traite de Path. Exot. Vet. 2, 508. Edmonds, C. R. & Walker, G.K. (1929). Diseases of Animals in Tropical Countries, 2nd edn., p. 345. Edwards, J. T. (1927). Trans. Far East Assn. Trop. Med. 3, 596. Folger. Quoted by Hutyra & Marek (1926) 1, 695. Gaiger, S. H. & Davies, G. O. (1938). Vet. Path. & Bact., 2nd edn., London. Henning, M. W. (1932). Animal Diseases in South Africa, p. 466. Hutyra, F. & Marek, J. (1926). I. 483. Joslen, F. Ann. Rept. C V. D.Bomb. 1903-04. Law, J. (1906). Vet. Med. 4, 645. Meissner, H. Quoted by Hutyra & Marek (1926). 1,489. Miller, W. C. (1935). Black's Veterinary Dictionary, p. 260. Moore, V. A. (1906). Pathology of Infectious Diseases of Animals, p. 388. Nunn, J. A.(1885). Quart. Jour. Vet. Sc. in India, 3, 60. Tang, F. F. & Wei, H. & Mc. Whirter, D. L. (1935). Jr. Path. & Bact. 40, 391-406. STUDIES IN THE QUALITY OF THE INDIAN AND THE WESTERN TABLE BUTTERS BY ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA, B.AG., ANI HUS. (BOM.), B.Sc. AGRIC. (EDIN.), N.D.D. (SCOT.) Imperial Dairy Expert, Bangalore AND NOSHIR S. DOCTOR, B.Sc. Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore (Received for publication on 14th October 1938) THE quality of table butter manufactured in this country is often adversely criticised by foreign visitors who are used to a particular flavour in butter, available in their own country. For this, some blame the skill of the Indian butter manufacturer and assert that the art of butter making is very defective in this country. Whereas, there are others who, with a view to justify the expansion of the trade of imported butter into India, assert that the quality of the butter produced depends on the species of animals obtainable in different countries, not to speak of the kind of food taken by the animals. The authors therefore set about to investigate how far each of the above assertions was correct and if necessary assign reasons as far as possible for the difference which may be found to exist. In order to meet the criticism that the art of butter-making is little known in this country, the butter-manufac- turing part of the experiment was put in charge of one of the members of the staff of the Imperial Dairy Institute, Bangalore, who has experience of making butter not only under various conditions in India, but also had training under expert butter manufacturers at some of the best butter-making factories and creameries in Great Britain and Ireland. To meet the grounds regarding the kind of animal and the food given to it, it was arranged to obtain milk from herds of one Indian and one foreign breeds of cows and from buffaloes main- tained, fed and handled under the same conditions and at the same place. The results described below are of a preliminary nature as more detailed investiga- tions into the nature of the fatty acids in the milk fat of the different classes of animals are still being carried out. Butter has been graded for years by the skilled sense of taste and smell of commercial and official judges on an arbitrary standard, factors like flavour, body, salt, colour and packaging being assigned numerical values according to their importance, flavour (taste and smell) scoring the highest. The arbitrary grading standard adopted in America is on the numerical basis of 45 points for (151)
152 Quality of Indian and Western Table Butters flavour (out of 100), 25 for body, 15 for salt, 10 for colour and 5 for package [Parker and Shadvik Jr. 1937]. Even from the customer's point of view, a good quality butter put in the market is selected from its flavour and appear- ance. It is evident, therefore, that flavour is one of the most sensitive and im- portant factor in determining the quality of butter. As early as 1850 it was known to butter makers that the flavour of butter could be definitely influenced by souring ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND N. S. DOCTOR. 153 It is quite possible that further investigation will tend to indicate that this chemical will share with diacetyl some importance as a source of aroma of butter. The quantitative determination of diacetyl, the most important ingredient from the standpoint of butter flavour, is based upon the most important reac- tion in which diacetyl reacts with hydroxylamine hydrochloride and nickel chloride with the formation of a red precipitate of nickel salt of dimethyl- glyoxime. Very recently Pien, Blaisse and Martin (1936) have developed quite a new colorimetric technique for detection and quantitative determina- tion of diacetyl. It would thus appear that it is now possible to make chemical determina- tion of aroma in butter and butter cultures and that the production of diacetyl, an important ingredient responsible for fine butter flavour, is quite dependent on the method of ripening the cream and its churning into butter. EXPERIMENTAL To avoid all possible sources of errors, this investigation was conducted under well controlled conditions. Two breeds of cows, Sindhi for the Indian breed and Jersey for the European, and the Surti breed of buffaloes were select- ed for the experiment. Both the breeds of cows were available in the herd maintained at the Dairy Farm of the Government House at Ganeshkhind and were made available for the purpose of this investigation through the courtesy of His Excellency Lord Brabourne, the then Governor of Bombay. The Surti buffaloes were obtained for the purpose of the experiment from the Civil Dairy Farm, Kirkee, through the courtesy of the Principal, Agricultural Col- lege, Poona. This was done to ensure uniform climatic and environmental conditions for all the three classes of animals. Due attention was given to their methods of housing, cleaning, exercising etc., which were maintained strictly identical in the case of the two breeds of cows. This, however, could not be done with the buffaloes as they could not adapt themselves to the new surroundings at the Government House Dairy Farm where they had to be re- moved for the purpose of the experiment. Their milk had therefore to be brought to the Government House Dairy Farm to be converted into butter. As the Jersey stock available in India was limited, only four animals of each breed were selected for the experiment. All the animals were kept on the same identical ration for eight weeks before the experimental samples were collected. Milking, separation of cream, churning, etc., were carried out simultaneous- ly under conditions which were conducive to best results. Scrupulous care was taken to keep off all other kinds of flavour due to feed, vessel, churn, etc. C
154 Quality of Indian and Western Table Butters To have a critical comparative study of Indian and Western butters equal quantities of milk from each breed were collected every day and the cream separated immediately and allowed to stand at 40° F. without addition of any external butter culture ' starter ' till sufficient quantity was collected to yield a churning. The percentage of fat in all the samples of cream before churning was 30 to 33. The rate of churning was about 45 to 60 revolutions per minute, and the temperature of churning was maintained at 52°ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND N. S. DOCTOR. 155 Second lot of samples of butter (2nd week) Lb. of milk Fat per cent Lb. of cream M E M E M E 1st day . . Sindhi . . . 14.0 9.8 4.5 5.7 1.3 1.3 Jersey . . . 14.0 9.8 4.2 5.7 1.2 1.2 Buffaloes . . . 8.0 8.0 7.3 8.0 1.1 1.2 2nd day . . Sindhi . . . 13.8 13.8 4.6 6.0 1.4 1.6 Jersey . . . 13.8 13.8 4.5 5.8 1.4 1.8 Buffaloes . . . 8.0 12.0 7.4 7.9 1.1 1.11 Cream kept for 48 hours at 40°F. Cream acidity . . . . . . . . 0.18 per Yield of butter { lb. oz. Sindhi . . . . . . 2 8 Jersey . . . . . . 2 8 Buffalo . . . . . . 2 7 Third lot of samples of butter (3rd week) Lb. of milk Fat per cent Lb. of cream M E M E M E 1 st day . . Sindhi . . . 19.8 11.0 3.9 5.5 1.9 1.5 Jersey . . . 19.8 11.0 4.1 5.5 1.1 1.4 Buffaloes . . . 12.0 12.0 7.0 8.0 1.7 1.1 2nd day . . Sindhi . . . 14.0 12.0 4.2 5.7 1.3 1.2 Jersey . . . 14.0 12.0 4.5 5.8 1.4 1.3 Buffaloes . . . 12.0 12.0 6.5 7.4 1.6 1.9 Cream kept for 48 hours at 40°F. Cream acidity . . . . . . . . 0.21 per cent Yield of butter { (Buffalo . . . . . . 0.20 per cent) lb. oz. Sindhi . . . . . . 3 0 Jersey . . . . . . 3 0 Buffalo . . . . . . 3 12 N. B.156 Quality of Indian and Western Table Butters The samples of butter, immediately on preparation, were put into tins and the butter hardened in a frigidiare before despatch. The tins were then packed in ordinary wooden cases stuffed with sawdust. On arrival at Banga- lore, the samples were tested for their quality taking the usual factors of flavour, body, colour etc., into consideration as shown in Table II below (and stored in cold at ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND N. S. DOCTOR. 157 Second lot.158 Quality of Indian and Western Table Butters when maintained under cold store conditions but soon became soft and bodiless on exposure. In flavour and aroma Jersey scored the best as long as the but- ter was kept under covered and cool conditions. The aroma in particular fast disappeared under ordinary atmospheric conditions. Sindhi scored second best but maintained its flavour more vigorously and for a longer time than the Jersey. In all cases that oily feel to the palate was absent in the case of Jer- sey and it was more pronounced in the case of buffaloes than in the Sindhis. It can be generally concluded that when kept under refrigerated conditions Jersey and Sindhi butters were more or less equally good in flavour and body, but when exposed to ordinary working conditions, Sindhi butter was found to be superior in flavour, body and hardness to Jersey butter. Under these conditions the buffalo butter came very near to Sindhi in quality. The Jersey butter was found to be slightly richer in aroma as compared to the Sindhi and the buffalo immediately on opening the samples. As dia- cetyl is the chief ingredient responsible for this aroma it was fully dealt with. Quantitative determination of diacetyl was carried out with 400 grm. of butter in an all glass apparatus. The method of C. R. Barnicoat [1935] was adopted for estimation of diacetyl as it was found to give consistent value over other (gravimetric) recommended procedures. On examination diacetyl content was found to be absent in all samples. Citric acid content of cream before churning was also estimated (by courtesy of Dr. Daji). This was found to be in traces in all samples without any appreciable variation between the three samples. All these samples were then subjected to critical physical and chemical examination. The physical constants of butter samples were determined according to British standard methods [1936]. Moisture per cent Fat per cent Curd and salt per cent Acidity (acid value) Jersey butter Sample 1 . . . . . 17.58 81.17 1.25 1.23 Sample 2 . . . . . 17.38 81.26 1.36 1.24 Sample 3 . . . . . 17.50 81.21 1.29 1.22 Sindhi butter Sample 1 . . . . . 16.44 80.48 2.79 2.82 Sample 2 . . . . . 16.50 80.77 2.75 2.70 Sample 3 . . . . . 16.48 80.75 2.81 2.78 Buffalo butter Sample 1 . . . . . 16.97 80.37 2.66 1.34 Sample 2 . . . . . 17.00 80.36 2.64 1.35 Sample 3 . . . . . 16.92 80.48 2.60 1.34
ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND N. S. DOCTOR. 159 Sampling of butterfat.160 Quality of Indian and Western Table Butters were carried out by the latest procedure recommended [Analyst, 1936]. Re- fractive index measurements were taken on Abbe's Refractometer at 40°C. and converted to butyro-refractometer reading at 40°C. Carotene content was determined by Ferguson and Bishop [1936] method. VitaminZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND N. S. DOCTOR. 161 TABLE IV Butter-fat Samples M. P. O°C. R. Index at 40° C. B. R. Reading at 40° C. R.M . Value Pol. Value Kir. Value Sap. No. Iodine No. Thiocy- anogen No. Per cent Fatty acids calculated as glycerides Sat.unsat./ linoleic-oleic Acidity (Acid value) Carotene mgm per 100 gms. Vitamin A. B. V. per gm. Jersey 1. . 36.20 1.4541 42.5 26.3 2 21.8 224.2 35.2 31.3 63.6 4.2 32.2 0.79 1.7 29.6 2. . 36.00 1.4541 26.0 2 21.4 225 35.0 0.97 1.8 28.8 3. . 36.40 1.4541 26.9 2 22.0 225.6 34.9 0.78 1.8 30.0 Sindhi 1. . 37.40 1.4532 41.1 29.1 2.5 23.9 229 29.0 28.5 66.9 1.8 31.3 2.4 0.79 22.1 2. . 37.20 1.4532 29.3 2.8 24.8 228.8 29.8 2.3 0.76 22.8 3. . 37.20 1.4532 29.2 2.6 24.0 226.4 30.0 2.3 0.80 23.0 Buffaloes 1. . 36.80 1.4541 42.5 30.6 1.5 26.7 229.8 33.9 33.1 61.5 2.1 36.4 1.3 0.05 15.4 2. . 37.00 1.4541 30.6 1.5 26.8 231.6 34.0 1.3 0.05 15.9 3. . 86.60 1.4541 30.7 1.58 26.8 229.6 34.9 1.3 0.05 16.2
162 Quality of Indian and Western Table Butters Raven [1937] has shown that the flavour of butter is greatly affected by its body and texture which subsequently depend on the technique of butter making. Since all butter samples in this experiment were prepared by an ex- pert under identical and ideal conditions, the difference in flavour cannot be attributed to this factor. The analytical results obtained showed a marked difference in the chemical composition of butter fats of the three classes of animals. The most charac- teristic difference is the higher carotene and vitamin-A content of the Jersey butter over others. This difference could mainly be attributed to the greater assimilation of the pigment (carotene) from the feed by the Jersey than by either the Sindhi or buffalo. It has also been found [Eckles, Combs and Macy, 1929] that some breeds of cows, for unknown physiological reasons, transform more of the carotene from the feed to the fat. Even individuals of the same breed kept on uniform and identical ration show marked difference in carotene and vitamin-A content in fact [Davies, 1936]. The Reichert Meissel, Iodine and Cyanogen values obtained in this experiment really indicate the difference in chemical composition of butter fats. The same is also roughly indicated from the melting point determinations. Lowering of melting point generally indicates the presence in higher proportions of the principal soft fats, like olein and butyrin, in the butter fats. The characteristic butter flavour is partly attributed [Eckles, Combs and Macy, 1929] to the glycerides of the volatile group of fatty acids and of these the butyrin is found to be the most important and delicate component. It is quite probable, therefore, that the difference in fatty acids compo- nent might account for this difference in flavour, which is ultimately due to the different fat metabolisms of the individual breeds (the detailed analysis of individual fatty acids in butter fats is under progress). Since in this ex- periment the ration along with other external treatment was kept uniform and identical in all cases (except in the case of buffalo where animals were kept un- der slightly different housing conditions), this difference in individual fatty acids, carotene and vitamin-A content, may therefore be attributed to the gene- tical difference. However, judging quality from the existing arbitrary numeri- cal standard of grading, the flavour of Jersey butter (which, however, was short lived) scored higher over the Sindhi and Sindhi higher over the buffalo. The lower melting point of Jersey as compared to Sindhi and buffalo butter proved a lack of ' standing up ' quality in Jersey. Butyrin and olein are to a certain extent responsible for flavour and are also the cause of softness in but- ter. Jersey butter while superior in flavour, lacks " standing up " quality. This is a distinct disadvantage in a country like India, as this would necessitate the use of refrigeration to maintain the butter in a presentable condition to the consumer. Firmness in butter cannot be incorporated, but flavour can be improved artificially by adding butter culture distillate. Thus, if flavour were the only handicap which prevented Indian butter being graded in the same class with Western, it would appear possible from the researches of
ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND N. S. DOCTOR. 163 Ruehe and Ramsey (loc. cit.) to remedy it by adding butter-culture distillate, to give it a flavour required by a particular class of customers. It may, however, be pointed out that a preference for a particular type of flavour is dependent more upon the habitual association of the consumer with that flavour rather than any distinctive merit of the same. For instance, although buffalo fat (ghee) is poorer in its nutritive value, i.e., carotene and vitamin A-content, than the Jersey or the Sindhi, yet the Indian consumer has a distinct preference for the former on account of its typical ghee flavour and taste. It may therefore be concluded that under ordinary working conditions in India, Sindhi butter proved superior to Jersey in firmness and flavour in the long run. SUMMARY An experimental investigation to study the difference in quality of the Indian and the Western table butter is described. The butter samples were prepared under identical and ideal hygienic con- ditions from selected Jersey (English), Sindhi and Surti buffalo (Indian) herds kept on uniform and identical treatment with regard to feed, environmental conditions, etc. English butter scored slightly higher over Indian butter in flavour on opening the tins, but this was short-lived. In body, firmness and standing up quality, the Indian butter scored higher. These differences in quality might be attributed to component fatty acids as well as to carotene content, and these in turn are to be attributed to differences in breed. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors wish to express their thanks to Professor V. Subrahmanyan, D.Sc., F.I.C. and Mr. B. N. Banerjee, M.Sc. of the Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, for their interest and advice in the course of this investigation. They are also thankful to the Livestock Expert, Bombay Presidency, Mr. E. P. Little of the Government House, Ganeshkhind and to the Principal, Agricultural College, Poona, for very kindly helping to obtain the samples of butter. REFERENCES Banerjee, B. N. (1936). Agric. and Livestock in Ind. 6, 274. Barnicoat, C. R. (1935). Analyst, 60, 653. Blaisse, J. and Martin, R. (1938). Lait 16, 9, 243. Bockhout, F. W. J. and de Vries, J. J. (1919). Centralbel f. Bakteriol. II Abt. 49, 373. British Standard Methods for the Sampling and Chemical analysis of butter (draft) 1936 Davies, W. L. (1936). The Chemistry of Milk. Eckles, C H., Combs, W. B. and Macy, H. (1929). Milk and Milk Products. Ferguson, W. S. and Bishop, G. (1936). Analyst, 61, 515.
164 Quality of Indian and Western Table Butters Hammer, B. W. (1936). Proc. Am. Assoc. Creamery Butter Manufacturers. Hammer, B. W. and Bailey, D. E. (1919). Iowa Agr. Exp. Sta. Res. Bul. 55., 223. Ind. and Eng. Chem. (Analytical Edition) (1936). 8, 4, 234. Lyons, J. (1936). Economic Proc. Royal Dublin Society, 3, 2, 19. Michaelian, M. B., Farmer, R. S. and Hammer, B. W. (1933). Iowa Agr. Exp. Sta. Res Bul. 155. Michaelian, M. B. and Hammer, B. W. (1935). Ibid, 179. Mohr, W. (1925). Milchwirtschaftl. Forsch, 2, 24. Parker, E. M. and Shadvik (Jr.) G. W. (1937). Food Research, 2, 3, 227. Pien, J., Blaisse, J. and Martin, R. (1936). Ann.falsif, 29, 204. Raven, H. C. (1937). Proc. 10th Ann. State Coll. Wash. Inst. Dairying 12-13. Report of the Analytical Methods Committee, (1936). Analyst, 61, 404. Ruehe, H. A. and Ramsey, R. J. (1935). Proc. Dairy Manufacturers Conf. Univ., of Ill. Van Niel, C. B., Kluyver, A. J. and Derx, H. G. (1929). Biochem. Ztschr. 210, 234.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE VII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ventral view of Polyorchitrema piscicola Gen el. sp. nov.
KEY TO LETTERING Act. .. .. Acetabulum Gt. .. .. Gonotyl I. c. .. .. Intestinal caecum Mt. .. .. Metraterm 0. .. .. Ovary 0. s. .. .. Oral sucker Ph. .. .. Pharynx P.p. .. .. Pars prostatica R. m. .. .. Retractor muscle T. .. .. Testes Ut. .. .. Uterus Vt. .. .. Vitellaria V. s. .. .. Vesciula seminalis
STUDIES ON THE FAMILY HETEROPHYIDAE ODHNER, 1914 PART III166 Studies on the Family Heterophyidae Odhner, 1914 Prominent, deeply staining and fair-sized gland cells are present in the pre- acetabular part of body. The subterminal, muscular oral sucker measures 0.48H. D. SRIVASTAVA 167 composed of seven to nine grape-like bunches of small follicles. The bunches are arranged behind one another and open through small ducts into the an- terior and posterior longitudinal ducts of each side which meet to form the horizontal vitelline ducts. The latter open into a small, triangular yolk re- servoir lying just behind the Mehlis gland. A common vitelline duct given off from the yolk reservoir opens into the oviduct near the opening of the re- ceptaculum seminis. The intricately coiled uterus lies usually in the inter- caecal space between the mass of testes and the level of the anterior end of the vitellaria. Often the uterine coils overlap the caeca laterally and extend to short distances on the sides of the testicular mass. Terminally the uterus continues into a feebly muscular and narrow metraterm which lies to the right side of the pars prostatica. The small ductus hermaphroditicus formed by the union of the metraterm and the ductus ejaculatorius opens into the ventro- genital sinus just in front of the acetabulum. The eggs are numerous and operculate and measure 0.03168 Studies on the Family Heterophyidae Odhner, 1914 blindly near hinder end. Excretory bladder Y-shaped, with cornua extend- ing to the level of pharynx. Testes composed of a mass of thirty-five to fifty follicles situated in the posterior third of body and overlapping the caeca laterally ; vesicula seminalis tubular ; pars prostatica and ductus ejaculatorius well developed ; ductus hermaphroditicus small. Ventro-genital sinus encloses acetabulum, gonotyl and genital pore and opens to the outside through a small, triangular pore close behind the intestinal bifurcation. Ovary pre-testicular, median, compact or lobed ; receptaculum seminis well developed ; Laurer's canal present. Vitellaria lateral, follicular, follicles arranged in bunches, extending from a little behind ventro-genital sinus to hinder end. Uterus mostly pre-testicular, rarely extending a little on the sides of the testicular mass ; eggs small, numerous and operculate. Parasitic in the intestine of fresh-water fishes. Type genus.THE MORPHOLOGY AND SYSTEMATIC RELATIONSHIPS OF A NEW PARASITE, WARETREMA PISCICOLA, GEN. ET. SP. NOV., REFERABLE TO A NEW FAMILY170 A New Parasite, Waretrema piscicola thirty minutes, though in sea water they remain alive for nearly two hours. The body is fairly muscular and fusiform. In permanent mounts it measures 2.24 to 5.36 * in length and 0.48 to 0.94 in maximum breadth, which occurs at about the middle of the body length. It has feebly developed cutaneous gland cells all over the body and the cuticle is studded with very minute, backwardly directed spines in the pre-acetabular region. The suckers are spherical and muscular. The oral sucker, measuring 0.15 to 0.3 in diameter, is markedly subterminal and has a crown of six prominent, conical papillae, arranged radially on the dorsal side of the anterior half of the sucker. The papillae have minute spines like those of the body wall. In some specimens the ventral margin of the oral sucker appears to be cleft. The acetabulum, 0. 24 to 0. 4 in diameter, is situated at the end of the first third or quarter of the body length. The size ratio between the oral sucker and the acetabu- lum is as 2 : 3 or 3 : 4. The prepharynx is fairly long, 0.1H. D. SRIVASTAVA 171 0.12. Usually it lies in the median line, about the middle of the body length. The small oviduct receives a duct from the receptaculum seminis just before entering the shell gland mass, which is situated between the ovary and the right body wall. A small Laurer's canal is given off by the receptaculum seminis just before opening into the oviduct. The yolk reservoir opens into the oviduct just before the opening of the receptaculum seminis. The vitel- laria are composed of ten elongated, spindle-shaped lobes, extending in equal numbers both in front and behind the testis. All the lobes join together halfway between the testis and right body wall, at about the level of the anterior third of testis. In front of the testis, the lobes extend up to the anterior margin of the receptaculum seminis and posteriorly to the last third of the post-testicular space. In contracted specimens the vitelline lobes extend anteriorly up to the middle or anterior third of body length, and pos- teriorly almost to the hinder end. The uterus is short, pre-ovarian and con- tains a moderate number of ovoid, light brown, thin-shelled eggs of 0.05 to 0.07 by 0.038 to 0.05 size. The terminal part of the ductus hermaphroditicus is protrusible. The excretory bladder is Y-shaped. The main stem bifurcates into two fairly long cornua at the hinder end of testis. The excretory pore is sub- terminal and is guarded by a feebly muscular sphincter. Waretrema piscicola Gen. et. sp. nov. resembles the papillose Allo- creadiidae in having a crown of six papillae dorsal to the oral sucker, in the pre-ovarian character of the uterus and in the position of the genital pore in front of the acetabulum. However, it differs remarkably from the latter group of parasites in the length of oesophagus and caeca, presence of a single testis and of a peculiar structure termed as hermaphroditic sac, the character and position of vitellaria, besides the Y-shaped character of the excretory bladder. The new genus resembles the members of the family Haploporidae Nicoll, 1914, Dicrogaster, Haploporus, Saccocoelium and Lecithobotrys [Looss, 1902]172 A New Parasite, Waretrema piscicola GENERIC DIAGNOSIS OF Waretrema. Medium-sized, fusiform distomes with minute backwardly directed spines in the pre-acetabular region. Oral sucker smaller than acetabulum, bearing a dorsal crown of six conical, prominent papillae, arranged radially in a semi- circle round the anterior half. Acetabulum larger than oral sucker, situated at the end of the first third or quarter of body length. Prepharynx and oesophagus fairly long ; pharynx well-developed ; caeca elongated, saccular, ending blindly in front of ovary. Testis single, ovoid, in posterior third of body ; vesicula seminalis divisible into externa and interna. An elongated tubular cirrus-sac like structureDEG-NALA DISEASE OF BUFFALOES : AN ACCOUNT OF THE LESIONS AND ESSENTIAL PATHOLOGY BY J. F. SHIRLAW, M.R.C.V.S. Pathologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 23rd January 1939) (With Plates X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV and XV) DURING the year 1929-30 there was reported, from the Sheikhupura and Muridke parts of the ' Deg Nala' area of the Punjab, a peculiar disease of buffaloes which occasioned such serious loss as to lead to a special enquiry into the pathology and etiology of the condition. It was reported from numerous villages that animals were dying in large numbers from a disease which, from its superficial appearance, the villagers termed ' leprosy ' and that once attack- ed many animals never recovered, but progressed slowly and steadily with ag- gravation of the cardinal symptoms to profound cachexia and death. The ' Deg Nala ' is a low-lying tract of land bordering the course of the Deg river, extending roughly from the foothills of Jammu State to Changa- Manga, forty-four miles south-west of Lahore where the tributary joins the Ravi river. This riverain area, extending variously in depth, is naturally marshy and during the rainy season is inundated. In close proximity to the irrigation canals, it acquires from a process of seepage a further complement of water which maintains the general marshiness over a protracted period during which the surrounding higher land has maintained its scrub-like desert charac- ter. The Deg Nala is, therefore, as one would expect, one of the largest grazing areas in the Punjab, and here174 Deg-Nala Disease of Buffaloes The first evidence of the disease is general malaise, unaccompanied by fever and attended by signs of vague abdominal pain, disinclination for move- ment and a painful gait suggestive of laminitis. Anorexia is present though the animals show a desire for food. An examination of the tongue reveals a marked anterior swelling with considerable pain on manipulation. After a variable period of time, areas of subcutaneous oedema develop, generally confined to the extremities, i.e., feet, tail and ears or occasionally more wide- spread in the posterior abdominal area and perineum. In one or two cases, the entire head appeared diffusely swollen. Gradually, the swellings abate rendering more definitive the exact location of the lesion which, on palpation, appears less oedematous and more proliferative. At this stage, the initial malaise disappears, the affected animal feeds normally and apart from a slight lameness and swelling of the feet, the way to recovery appears well establish- ed, and the majority of animals return uneventfully to normal health. Certain animals (20-30 per cent) do not, however, present this happy termination of an illness which is apparently in the majority of cases, of a fleeting nature. Such cases remain decidedly ill. They rapidly lose condition, and anaemia with marked eosinophilia is manifested. A secondary oedema is seen localised in the proximity of the dewlap, while the oedema first noted in the extremities increases in volume, the overlying skin being tense and devoid of sensation. The oedematous fluid is gradually absorbed and replaced by a proliferative tissue which, produced in excess, confers a marked thickening upon the affected part. The overlying skin becomes dry and rough in texture, necrotic in appearance and quite insensitive. There is no involvement of the lymph vessels (lymphangitis) or of the superficial lymph glands of the affect- ed parts. The proliferative induration of the subcutis and the dry wrinkled skin accord an elephantiasis-like appearance to the affected limbs. The ears and tail are obviously affected with dry gangrene and a sharp line of demarca- tion between the dead and healthy tissues is seen. Sloughing shortly occurs and in this way, the animal is bereft of tail and ears. Not infrequently a similar fate befalls the anterior portion of the tongue. The affected areas of the skin of the limbs fissure deeply and the necrotic skin peels away from the underlying tissues, exposing a bleeding raw surface which normally under- goes cicatrisation in spite of its liability to secondary infection. Lesions around the hoof are more serious : a necrotic ungulitis is not unusual result- ing in a shedding of the digits while occasionally the entire hoof may be lost. In such cases as those described the prostration and cachexia appear out of all proportion to the external manifestation of disease and one is forced to the conclusion on clinical symptoms alone that, whatever the cause of the external lesions, grave systemic disturbance is responsible for the progressive cachexia and inanition resulting in death. Post mortem examination on eleven animals, dead and destroyed in various stages of the disease, revealed a consistency of lesions which throws some light on the method of production of the external lesions and the profound cachexia which accompanies them. On dissection of an affected limb the subcutis is indurated by new connective
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 'Deg-Nala' disease Lesions affecting an artery of the subcutis. Note the proliferation of the vasa vasorum of the external coat and at A, one of these vessels undergoing endarteritis obliterans
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 'Deg-Nala' disease. Parasitic atheroma of the aorta
J. F. SHIRLAW 175 tissue somewhat granulomatous on superficial aspect. Histological examina- tion of this tissue shows it to be relatively normal tissue resulting from the proliferation of the fixed connective tissue elements of the part, with a mild degree of mononuclear infiltration, and a certain proportion of eosinophiles. There is no tendency to focal necrosis or aggregation of leucocytes with vascu- lar congestion and secondary inflammatory changes such as characterise an infective process. The appearance of the new tissue is indicative, on the other hand, of a connective tissue cell hyperplasia dependent on functional derangement of the vascular supply of the tissues, leading to the oedema which characterises the earlier lesions. The oedematous fluid distends the subcutaneous tissue along the channels of least resistance, being limited only by fascial planes which maintain the fluid under pressure. Examination of the fluid proves it to be purely transudative. The blood vessels of the new tissue show various stages of a process culminating in total occlusion. There is no thrombosis but rather an insidious and progressive mesarteritis resulting in a gross thickening of the vessel wall and a constriction and fin al obliteration of the lumen. The tunica intima and the endothelium appear passively to resist the encroachment of the new formative tissue derived from the tunica media until it appears that the narrowing of the vessel evokes an eventual response on part of the intima with a final endarteritis obliterans. The vasa vasorum of the adventitium show a marked proliferation, and an incipient thickening of the parent stems. Synchronous with this process leading to destruction of the structure and function of the arteries there is noted an attempt at the formation of new arteries (establishment of collateral supply?) but even these, before they have attained any dimension, commence to participate in the pathological changes affecting the parent vessels. The veins are seen to be dilated to maxi- mum capacity and the explanation of the tissue oedema in an early case appears obvious. The lymph vessels are equally distended, show considera- able attempt at proliferation, and appear blocked with coagulated lymph which has retracted from the walls of the vessels. In three cases, there was an extensive thickening and occlusion of all the vessels of the affected limbs. These vessels, both arteries and veins, appeared as thickened cords and it was impossible to determine an existing collateral circulation. In one of these cases, necrosis was so absolute as to lead to sloughing of the worst affected limb just above the femoro-tibial articulation. Similar lesions affecting the vascular supply are seen in the tail and ears. It will be seen, therefore, that the superficial lesions depend upon a gross derangement of the vascular system of the extremities of the body. On histological examination of the tissues, no apparent etiological factor can be determined. It is evident that the process is insidious and unaccompanied by any inflammatory change, an observation which is validated by the failure to isolate any organisms of pathogenic significance from the substance of the lesions. The examination of teased specimens of tissue and the serial
176 Deg-Nala Disease of Buffaloes sectioning of the blood vessels supplying the affected parts yielded negative results. The still patent blood vessels well proximal to the lesions were opened up and the contents specially examined for parasites, especially nematodes. None were found. Reference has been made to the grave prostration and cachexia evinced in progressive cases. The reason for this is seen in a general post mortem. The liver is enlarged, darker in colour and frequently bile stained. It is increased in consistency. Haemorrhages are apparent in number under the capsule and throughout the substance which bleeds excessively on incision. The liver is literally swarming with schistosomes (S. indica) . On holding a web of mesentary up to the light, large numbers of these worms can readily be seen, while the portal vein is teeming. So intensive is the invasion of the portal venous system of the liver that inflammation of the veins has occurred followed by rupture and haemorrhage, with fatty degeneration or necrosis of the surrounding lobules. In some areas, there is complete destruction of parenchymatous tissue with the formation of haemangiomatous areas. In advanced cases, breakdown of the vascular system of the liver is striking. Parasitic atheroma of the aorta was encountered in nine out of eleven cases examined. In two cases, it was extensive, with degeneration of the fibres of the elastic coat and development of aneurism. In one case, death had resulted from rupture of such an aneurism at the root of the aorta. The posterior aorta is affected more frequently than the anterior and in one case an atheromatous lesion was observed in the left coronary artery. On sec- tion, ' nests ' of nematode parasites are seen well below the surface of the affected blood vessel, with numerous calcified patches. Worm tracks and nodular, superficial pearl like lesions are visible on naked eye examina- tion of the surface and teased preparations invariably yielded two types of adult parasites (a) Onchocerca armillata and (b) Eleophora poeli, the latter from the nodular lesions. As this disease seemed, on circumstantial evidence, to bear some relation- ship to the ingestion of poisonous plants or fodder in itself toxic through immaturity, over-ripeness, or parasitism (e.g., ergot)Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 'Deg-Nala' Disease Proliferative 'Granulomatous' tissue of the subcutis. Note the attempt at formation of collateral supply to compensate for the occluded artery (A) and the early changes, similar to those affecting the parent stem, occurring in the collateral branch (B)
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XIV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 'Deg-Nala' disease. Skin lesions on abdominal wall
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 'Deg-Nala' disease. Necrotic ungulitis
J. F. SHIRLAW 177 progress to a hopeless termination, and it appeared from the feeding experi- ments, necessarily limited as they were, that dietetics is not a factor in the pathogenisis of the disease. Random samples of grass and herbage from the Deg Nala were sent to the Lyallpur Agricultural College for botanical exa- mination. No potentially poisonous species were detected. The possibility of ergot poisoning was one of the earliest factors considered. No rye is either grown or fed to stock and this fact ruled out this hypothesis : nor could any parasitism be detected in the usual fodders such as sorghum, berseem, etc. During more recent years, less has been heard of Deg Nala disease, and enquiries into its incidence have met with little information. The disease has not, apparently, recurred with the same severity and loss as in the year 1929-30, although in 1933, urgent demands from the Deg Nala area were received in connection with further investigation. The faulty reporting of disease coupled with apathy are not above suspicion as a cause of failure to obtain accurate figures concerning incidence and mortality. In 1934, while on tour in connection with Rinderpest vaccination, a number of young buffaloes were seen severely affected in one small village. Several of them were in a hopeless, moribund state, with complete sloughing of the ears, feet and tails. It is impossible to venture an opinion on the cause of this disease. It is possible, with reasonable discretion, to eliminate poisonous plants and fodder and bacteria as a source of infection, and probably protozoa, as no protozoa have ever been seen in the lesions. The lesions are consequent on prolifera- tive changes within the walls of the smaller arteries of the affected parts and according to the period of development of the lesions, the vascular changes must be slowly and insidiously produced. The changes within the terminal arteries are, obviously, dependent not on the presence of a toxic substance or irritant in the circulating blood, but on an interference with the nutrition of the artery itself through the vasa vasorum. It is evident that the passage of a foreign substance or irritant has induced in these vessels a primary en- darteritis with gradual endarteritis obliterans, and that there has occurred a sympathetic rapid opening up of pre-existing vascular channels to compensate for the loss of the parent stemsGYALOCEPHALUS CAPITATUS LOOSS, 1900 BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C. Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College (Received for publication on 15th October 1938) (With two text-figures) GYALOCEPHALUS CAPITATUS is found in the colon of horses and was first described by Looss in 1900. From the references quoted by Yorke and Maplestone [1926] it is seen that the parasite has been recorded in Holland, South Africa and Great Britain, and it appears that these worms are found in small numbers in equines. The writer found about a dozen of these worms in three jutka (hackney) ponies out of over fifty examined during the last four years in Madras. No mention of this worm is made either by Bhalerao [1935] in his monograph on Helminth parasites or by Baylis [1936] in the Fauna of British India. The writer, therefore, thinks that this worm has not been so far recorded in India. A very brief description of the worm is given in this paper, since Yorke and Macfie [1919] have dealt with it completely. The male measures about 7 mm. in length and the female about 9 mm. The mouth is directed straight forward. There are four head papillae, viz., two lateral, one dorsal and one ventral. The external leaf crown arises, from the mouth collar. The mouth capsule has the shape of a goblet with a short neck, embedded partly in the dilated anterior end of the 180 GYALOCEPHALUS CAPITATUS LOOSS, 1900. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Head. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Bursa of male.
A CASE OF EQUINE EMBRYONAL NEPHROMA BY M. Y. MANGRULKAR, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.T.V.M. (EDIN.) Assistant Pathologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 7th September 1938) (With Plates XVI and XVII) EARLY this year morbid neoplastic tissues from a horse were received from the Officer Commanding, Military Veterinary Hospital, Rawalpindi, for histo- pathological examination and diagnosis. The following information was furnished by the officer with regard to the clinical history of the case :182 A Case of Equine Embryonal Nephroma side, into the abdominal cavity. This tumour was closely adherent to the spleen, stomach and bowel, and involved the posterior aorta and almost encircled portions of the intestines without, however, interfering with them. On its surface the tumour bore three smaller growths between a large orange and small melon in size. The surface of the liver, and to a less extent the posterior surface of the diaphragm, was thickly studded with neoplasms. In all, about 1,000 new growths must have been present in the abdominal cavity. Only the right kidney was traced. Due presumably to the pressure of the large tumour upon the ureter a portion of this kidney showed hydronephrosis. The other kidney was not found; it had probably degenerated within the main tumour mass. The organs in the thoracic cavity were entirely free from any metastasis. Death was suspected to have followed severe haemorrhage perhaps due to the rupture of a large vessel involved by one of the neoplasms. The ruptured vessel, however, was not traced. The materials submitted for examination consisted of portions of the large tumour and of smaller ones on the spleen, liver and diaphragm. To the naked eye, the formalin fixed tumours presented a greyish, encap- sulated, more or less rounded appearance with signs of superficial erosion and haemorrhage. On incision, very fine translucent trabeculae, radially disposed, appeared to run through the substance of the tumours. Haemorrhages in the interior of the neoplasms were frequently observed. The growths on the liver, spleen and diaphragm did not seem to invade these organs and were separated from them by what could be interpreted as a markedly thickened layer of peritoneum which seemed to extend over the base of the tumour. The growths on the diaphragm were only loosely attached to this organ and could be easily and cleanly detached from it. Only a portion of the depending main mass was received. The microscopical picture could be divided broadly into two components : (a) thick strands of connective tissue and (b) areas consisting of highly cellular tissue. (a) The connective tissue strands were well formed and rich in collagenous fibres among which smooth muscle cells could be easily seen (Plate XVI, fig. 1 and Plate XVII, fig. 2). Occasionally a round cell with deeply staining, spheroidal nucleus was encountered which showed division into cells which could be interpreted as leiomyoblasts. Well-formed blood vessels were frequently observed. On the whole, mitosis was only rarely observed in this portion of the tumour. Haemorrhages of varying size were frequent. (b) The cellular tissue occupied the spaces between the connective tissue strands and showed a variety of arrangement and histological structure. The arrangement was illustrative of all transitional stages between mere
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XVI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A typical field illustrating connective tissue bands and formation of glands (left) from sarcomatous tissue (right bottom corner) × 90 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. A field rich in sarcomatous moiety of spindle cells with attempts at gland formation × 90
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XVII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A field illustrating a more advanced stage than depicted in Pl. XVI, Fig. 2. × 90 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. A field showing formation of glands squeezed between broad bands of connective tissue × 90
M. Y. MANGRULKAR 183 clusters of cells and the formation of glandular structures resembling short and long, hollow tubules or alveoli. By suitable staining methods, connective tissue fibrils could be demonstrated ramifying in the cell-masses. Minute connective tissue streaks could also be seen between the tubules (Plate XVI, fig. 1). Such minute blood vessels as were carried by these streaks appeared delicate, with evidence of haemorrhage resulting in effusion of blood into the tubules. The cell clusters consisted of round cells or spindle-cells, the nuclei of which were on. the whole vesicular. The presence, size and number of nucleoli. were inconstant. The size of the cells varied within a narrow range. It was not difficult to discover fields illustrating, as mentioned above, the differentiation of such cell masses into glandular structures, mitotic pro- liferation being evident in both situations. By ingrowths of connective tissue smaller cell clusters were formed which gradually changed from a solid mass or cord into a hollow glandular structure, the lining cells of which showed a tendency to become arranged in a single layer. More often, however, by active proliferation rather than by imperfect differentiation, the lining of the glands presented a pseudostratified appearance like that of tracheal mucosa. The cells were somewhat columnar, disposed perpendicularly to the axis of the gland ; the cytoplasm appeared finely granular. Mitotic figures were frequent and the entire picture (Plate XVII, fig. 1) bore a close resemblance to certain types of adenocarcinoma. No secretion was present in the glands. Capillary haemorrhages between and in the tubules were common in areas where the glands were closely packed together. In medium-sized metastatic tumours which appeared to have undergone apparently little modification in their true neoplastic structure, an active growth of the glandular moiety was seen, the tubules being arranged radially, at once recalling the structure of the adult kidney, although recognisable glomerular formations were not present in the neoplasm. It must be stressed here that, on the whole, this type of histology was a very prominent feature of the tumours under report. The lining of the glands was occasionally seen to form papilliform pro- jections into the lumen. This feature, however, stopped short of the formation of a typical papillary adenomatous structure. At places either due to pressure of the better developed connective tissue strands, or due to lack of differentiation of the glandular structure, cell cords or clusters were encountered either singly or in groups, squeezed, as it were, between the connective tissue strands, thus presenting a picture of marked resemblance to a scirrhous cancer. In sections of the large tumour, hyaline change was noticed in the connec- tive tissue.
184 A Case of Equine Embryonal Nephroma DIAGNOSIS AND DISCUSSION The gross microscopical picture of the tumour is at once suggestive of an adenocarcinoma and in the absence of sufficient information, material or de- liberation one would feel justified in diagnosing the tumour as such. A closer examination would, however, reveal the presence of a sarcomatous cellular moiety and demonstrable stages in the derivation therefrom of more or less drawn out glandular structures. If one adds to this the presence of well- formed, interspersed trabeculae of connective tissue, one is compelled to desist from giving the verdict in favour of a carcinoma. The nearest approach to a histologically correct diagnosis would be the designation adenosarcoma a term which has been employed on more than one occasion to describe tumours similar to the one under study. If one considers the clinical and autopsy records, and the complex nature of the growths, a more definite diagnosis of embroynal nephroma seems inevitable. The available information points to the fact that the primary tumour was the one which hung down into the peritoneal cavity on the left side and in. which the left kidney was presumably absorbed. The hydronephrotic change in the other kidney, the duration and nature of illness, and the extensive peritoneal metastasis indicate that the neoplasia was of some duration, the primary tumour gradually inter- fering with the function of the left kindey and ultimately replacing it. In human beings embryonal nephromata are most commonly met with in. children and are generally known as Wilm's tumours. There is reason to suppose that these are derived from embryonal cells which have separated from the mesoblast at or about the time of the formation of the renal blastema, but have lain dormant until the time when, due to some exciting cause or due to the disappearance of the restraining influence, the cells have assumed neo- plastic propensities and started to proliferate. The resulting growth is always a mixed one, the degree of heterogeneity of the constituent tissue elements depending upon the stage at which the neoplastic cell-rest was formed. It is not at all difficult to appreciate the fact that a cell at an early stage in ontogeny is less differentiated and thus, as a rule, possesses the power to produce a variety of histological structure. This is particularly true in the case of mesodermal cells from which are normally derived widely dissimilar structures, so that " the more embryonic and less differentiated the cells from which the tumour origi- nates, the more complicated will the structure be because of the multipotency of the undifferentiated mesodermal cells " [Wollstein, 1927]. Naturally, the resulting tumour is most often of the nature of a teratoma. In some of the tumours (e.g., of children and pigs), obviously arising from rests derived rather early in ontogeny, striped muscle, cartilage and even bone have been observed. In such tumours due to lack of differentiation and organization, the resem- blance of the resulting growth to the adult kidney is relatively less noticeable. One need not wonder, therefore, at the inconstancy of the component tissues or at the lack of uniformity of the histological picture met with in embryonal nephromata because the qualitative as well as the quantitative composition of the growth must depend upon the stage at which the tumour cells have be- come detached from the parent germ-layer.
M. Y. MANGRULKAR 185 In domesticated animals the order of frequency of the incidence of em- bryonal nephroma would appear to be pigs, fowl, rabbit and bovine although the experience of individual observers may not be in harmony with this general remark based mainly on statistics collected by Feldman [1932]. Thus in the tumour collection at Onderstepoort no specimen of the growth in pigs is present [Jackson, 1936]. Similarly at the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (India), in a collection of about 400 tumours, there is only one specimen from the fowl and one from the bovine, whereas, no embryo- nal nephroma has been recorded from rabbits, hundreds of which are autopsied annually. Recently embryonal nephroma has been described for the first time from the sheep (one case) and horse (two cases)186 A Case of Equine Embryonal Nephroma In the case under report four features of interest are observed. Firstly' the presence of metastases on the peritoneum alone at once throws a sugges- tion in favour of spread by contiguity and transplantation. Secondly, the profuse formation of tubular glands is indicative of a more differentiated cell- rest. In fact, had it not been for the presence of a mixed type of structure with demonstrable sarcomatous areas, one would be inclined to label the growths as metastasizing simple renal adenocarcinomata which, too, are known to arise [Ewing, 1934] from well-differentiated renal blastema (also from tubules of the adult kidney, in which case they are not embryonal). The third notable feature, but one which should cause little surprise, is the reported occurrence, following work, of haematuria which, however, is regarded in human pathology as a clinical symptom suggesting a hyperne- phroma, i.e., adrenal tissue tumour of the kidney (Boyd, 1934 ; Kettle, 1925). Lastly, the involvement, apparently primarily, of the left kidney may prove to be interesting, for in Mathews' [1929] twelve cases in chickens the primary tumours were always present on the left side. No such information is, however, available in connection with the tumours in other animals and, therefore, it may be too early at present to attach any significance to the phenomenon. The author is greatly indebted to Capt. K. I. Barlow, Offg. Officer Com- manding, Military Veterinary Hospital, Rawalpindi, for supplying the material and information which have rendered possible the recording of this interesting and rare condition. REFERENCES Beattie, J. M. and Dickson, W. E. C. (1926). A Text-book of Pathology, London, p. 917. Boyd, W. (1934). A Text-book of Pathology, London, pp. 652-653. Bremer, J. L. (1936). Text-book of Histology, Philadelphia, pp. 366-375, Ewing, J. (1934). Neoplastic Diseases, London, pp. 65, 105 and 794-798. Feldman, W. H. (1932). Neopl. Dom. Animals, London, pp. 357-372. Jackson, C. (1936). Onderst. J. Vet. Sc. Anim. Husb. 6, 1, 349-353. Kettle, E. H. (1925). The Pathology of Tumours, London, pp. 199-200. MacCallum, W. G. (1932). A Text-book of Pathology, London, pp. 1136-1137. Mathews, F. P. (1929). Adenosarcomata of the Kidneys of Chickens, J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 74, 238-246. Wollstein, M. (1927). Cited by Feldman.
A STUDY OF THE LIFE-HISTORY OF A COMMON TAPEWORM, MESOCESTOIDES LINEATUS, OF INDIAN DOGS AND CATS * BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, D.Sc. Helminthologist (On special duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 26th May 1938) THE aberrant family Mesocestoididae Benham, 1901, of Cyclophyllidean cestodes is characterised by the presence of several peculiar features, such as divided yolk glands, genital pore situated on the ventral surface of the seg- ment, thick-shelled egg capsules and pleurocercoid type of larva. The family contains only one genus188 Life-history of Mesocestoides lineatus 2. M. ambiguus Vaillant, 1863, of Viverra genetta from North Africa. 3. M. (Taenia) augustatus (Rud., 1819) of Meles taxus from Europe. 4. M. bassarisci MacCallum, 1921, of Bassariscus austula from Mexico. 5. M. candelabrarius (Goeze, 1782). 6. M. (Ptychophysa, Taenia) canis lagopodis (Rud., 1810) of Vulpes lagopus from Europe. 7. M. (Taenia) cateniformis vulpis (Gmelin, 1790) of foxes. 8. M. (Taenia) chrysH. D. SRIVASTAVA 189 length, 1 cm. to 160 cm., and in the shape of their mature segments. It is difficult to explain precisely these specific variations which may be due to some factors influencing the life-history, such as the individual or specific resistance of the host or its suitability to the development of the parasite, or it may be due to differences in the state of maturity of the larvae or may cor- respond to varieties or strains within the species. Specimens of M. lineatus with segments broader than long may be referred to M. lineatus var caesta, while others with segments longer than broad to M. lineatus var litterata. These varietal differences are merely conventional, as intermediate forms are not uncommon. The other species, M. perlatus, is usually parasitic in birds. The testes in this species are mostly external to the excretory vessels. Though a vague suspicion existed since 1874 when Leuckart pointed out the similarity of scolices of " Cysticerci " from the abdominal cavity of lizards with Taenia litterata of foxes, it was Henry [1927] who for the first time proved that Tetrathyridia are the larvae of Mesocestoides sp. Schwartz [1927] fed Tetrathyridia from the peritoneal cavity and lungs of a mongoose to a dog and a cat and forty-six to fifty-one days later obtained adult specimens of a species of the genus Mesocestoides. Five years later Joyeux and Baer ob- tained mature worms, referable to M. ambiguus, by feeding Tetrathyridia from a snake, Elaphe scalaris, to a cat. In both the above experiments the time of development was very long which might be due to unsuitable material. Witenberg [1934] carried out feeding experiments on dogs and jackals and found that Tetrathyridia from the serous cavities of cats and hedge-hogs and liver of lizards gave rise to mature specimens of M. lineatus in two to three weeks time. He found that Tetrathyridia elongatus (Blumberg, 1882) from cats is identical with the Tetrathyridia found in hedge-hogs, foxes and lizards. Tetrathyridia are highly contractile, flat, semi-transparent bodies, broad- er anteriorly and tapering posteriorly. They are provided with an invagi- nated scolex bearing four unarmed suckers, and without a rostellum. The Tetrathyridia found in mammals are much larger than those parasitic in reptiles. The term190 Life-history of Mesocestoides lineatus hills, showed that nearly all of them are heavily infested with Tetrathyridia. The larvae are highly contractile and measure 1.5 to 4 mm. in length. The broadly rounded anterior end bears an invaginated scolex with four unarmed suckers. A large number of these larvae were fed to two clean, parasite-free jackal pups, both of which died in sixteen to seventeen days. On post mortem examination both were found to be heavily infested with a very large number of adult specimens of M. lineatus. On an examination of over a dozen speci- mens of the common Himalayan viperAN UNRECORDED NEMATODE PARASITE OF THE INDIAN DOMESTIC PIGEON WITH REMARKS ON ORNITHOSTRONGYLOSIS BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, D.Sc. Helminthologist (On special duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun. (Received for publication on 26th May 1938) (With three text-figures) THE nematode genus Ornithostrongylus is referable to the subfamily Trichostrongylinae [Leiper, 1908] of the family Trichostrongylidae [Leiper, 1912]. The genus was created by Travassos in 1914 with O . fariai, as the type species. The genus is exclusively parasitic in the intestine, gizzard and proventriculus of birds, and apparently has a cosmopolitan distribu- tion. So far more than half a dozen species have been described under the genus, some of doubtful validity, but the most important from the veterinary point of view is Ornithostrongylus quadriradiatus [Stevenson, 1904] which usually occurs in the small intestine of the domestic pigeon192 A Nematode Parasite of the Indian Domestic Pigeon Delicate, slender worms with a pinkish hue when fresh. The cuticle about the head is inflated to form a vesicular enlargement. The mouth is simple, unarmed and without visible papillae. The body cuticle has a number of longitudinal striations. The oesophagus is of medium length. The male specimens measure 9 to 12 mm. in length and have a bilobed bursa with ill- defined dorsal lobe. The ventro-ventral rays are close together and parallel with their tips curving anteriorly; the medio-dorsal ray is comparatively straight, the postero-lateral and dorso-lateral rays diverging from it, and the divergence emphasized at the tips, which tend to recurve; the externo- dorsal ray is shorter than any of the previous rays and is bent posteriorly near its middle; the dorsal ray is much shorter than other rays and bifur- cates near its tip into two short branches which are deeply cleft, the internal branches of the cleft terminating in two short tips. The two spicules are 0.15H. D. SRIVASTAVA 193 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Fig. 1. Head of O. quadriradiatus. Fig. 2. Bursa. Fig. 3. Telamon. H
194 A Nematode Parasite of the Indian Domestic Pigeon moved, they frequently tip forward on the breast and head. Food is usually refused or is frequently regurgitated along with bile-stained fluid. The excessive consumption of water is so marked that some pigeon keepers are reported to have remarked, " The pigeons drink themselves to death ". There is pronounced greenish diarrhoea, loss of weight is rapid and death is preceded by prostration and difficult and rapid breathing. Several workers have observed that the ' fancy' and valuable breeds of pigeons are the most sus- ceptible. The worms burrow into the intestinal mucosa causing caterrhal enteritis which results in debilitating diarrhoea and interference with the normal functions of the intestine. Moreover, the worms are blood-suckers. They cause severe damage to the intestine and in fatal cases extensive destruc- tion of the mucosa accompanied by an abundance of bright green mucus is almost invariably present. The worms are found tangled in a mass of mucus and sloughed epithelium. They live deeply embedded in the mucosa and their attachment to the intestine produces necrosis of the surrounding tissues. In the absence of any anthelmintic of proved efficacy against the para- site, preventive measures should be taken to check the spread of infection. Though there is apparently no age resistance, pigeons of different breeds should be separated as the susceptibility of birds differs with their breeds, and the more sturdy breed may serve as a source of infection for the less resistant ones. The most effective control measure consists in the main- tenance of an environment unfavourable for the pre-parasitic stages of the worm. From a detailed study of the ova and the larval stages of this parasite, Cuvillier [ 1937 ] found that the two lethal factors are air drying and direct sunlight. Drinking troughs and baths should be exposed to the sun and so arranged that water will not be splashed over the pen. The houses should be kept clean and so constructed as to admit plenty of sun light to the interior as well as the runs. The author is grateful to the Pathologist and the Director of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun, for much kind help. REFERENCES Baylis, H. A. (1936). Fauna of British India, Nematoda, 1, (Ascaridea and Strongy- loidea). Cram, E. B. (1927). U. S. Natl. Mus. Bull. 140, pp. 465. Cuvillier, E. (1937). U. S. Dept. Agri., Tech. Bull. 569, pp. 1-36. Komarov, A., and Beaudette, F. R. (1931). J. Amer. Vet. Mcd. Ass. 79, (N. S. 32) pp. 393-394. Leiper, R. T. (1908). Third Rep. Wellcome Research Lab., London, 187-199. ACTIVE IMMUNISATION WITH GOAT TISSUE VIRUS IN SHEEP AGAINST RINDERPEST BY H. S. BAWA, M. R., C. V. S. Veterinary Investigation Officer, Sind and Ajmer-Merwara, Karachi AND C. S. G. HAJI, G.B.V.C. Officer-in-charge, Goat Virus Producing Station, Karachi (Received for publication on the 18th November 1938) (With ten text-figures) THE experiments were carried out at Karachi, under controlled conditions, to study the nature of the reaction in sheep after goat tissue virus inocula- tion and to ascertain whether they can be safely immunised against rinder- pest with goat tissue virus alone or whether anti-rinderpest serum is necessary with virus simultaneously. In the field at Kekri, Ajmer-Merwara where a severe outbreak of rinderpest in sheep and goats occurred during the months of March, April, May and June 1938, passive immunisation with varying doses of serum was tried, but the results were not altogether satisfactory and further this method of immunisation was found to be expensive. Koch [1897] showed that the virus of rinderpest could be propagated in sheep and goats by blood inoculations from an infected ox and the infection once set up could be transmitted to other sheep as well as bovines. Nicolle and Adilbey [1902] and Kolle and Turner proved infectivity of the virus to sheep and goats. They also showed that after inoculation of virulent blood in sheep, a temperature reaction only occurred and no other symptoms were observed. Difficulty was some times experienced in sheep in differentiating normal variation in temperature and those due to infec- tion. According to Walker [1922] when sheep were artificially inoculated with bovine blood virus, thermal reaction was only noticed and with the exception of slight discharge from the nostrils no animal died excepting one, in which on post mortem examination no lesions of rinderpest were detected. Srikantaiah [1934] inoculated a batch of six sheep with goat virus and got very severe reaction. Out of the six sheep, three succumbed to the disease. These results led him to the conclusion that a dose of anti-rinderpest serum was indicated with goat virus, whenever sheep were to be immunised against rinderpest, for, the use of goat virus alone was unsafe. Viswanathan [1937] also points out that a dose of anti-rinderpest serum ranging from 20 to 25 c.c., is essential for sheep simultaneously with 0.5 c.c. of virus, in order to immunise them with due safety. (195)
196 Goat Tissue Virus in Sheep against Rinderpest EXPERIMENTAL Three batches of two sheep each were inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. of goat tissue virus emulsion at different periods. Batch No. 1 of Chapri breed sheep gave a very mild reaction, sheep No. 1 showed highest temperature of 104° on 5th day and sheep No. 2 the same temperature on 3rd day. Batch No. 2 of Thari breed sheep, inoculated as above, registered severe temperature reaction in sheep No. 3 and 4 which showed the peak of tempera- ture curve at 106. 4° and 105° on 2nd day. Batch No. 3 consisting of sheep No. 5 of Chapri breed and sheep No. 6 of Thari breed, showed highest temperature of 104.4° and 106° on 5th and 4th day respectively. From the above evidence it appeared that the Thari breed of sheep in Sind was more susceptible to goat virus inoculation than the Chapri breed. No other symptoms were shown by the experimental sheep except that they were slightly off feed for a couple of days or so. No sheep succumbed to the disease. IMMUNITY TEST Sheep No. 2 from batch No. 1, sheep No. 3 from batch No. 2 and sheep No. 5 and 6 from batch No. 3 were inoculated sub-cutaneously with 1 c.c. of rinderpest hill bull blood virus, obtained from Muktesar, on 27th day, 19th day and 27th day respectively with a view after goat tissue virus inoculations to see if the sheep inoculated with, goat tissue virus were immune to rinder- pest or not. None of the sheep so inoculated with hill bull virus showed any temperature reaction or other symptoms, and appeared to have developed solid immunity against rinderpest. CONTROLS Batch No. 4 consisting of sheep No. 7 and 8 were kept as controls and were given 1 c.c. of hill bull virus sub-cutaneously. They showed temperature re- action of 104.8° and 106.2° on 2nd and 3rd day respectively. No other symp- toms were observed. The temperature reaction shows that the virus was viable. TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENTS A black he-goat, 12 months old, was given sub-cutaneously 5 c.c. of blood drawn directly from jugular vein of sheep No. 3 which had registered a tempe- rature of 105.8° on 4th day after goat tissue virus inoculation. This animal showed a typical reaction and on 3rd day the highest temperature of 105.2° was recorded. A red calf, one year old, was also inoculated sub-cutaneously with 5 c.c. of blood drawn from sheep No. 8 (control) showing a temperature of 104° on 6th day after inoculation with 1 c.c. of hill bull virus. This calf
H. S. BAWA AND C. S. G. HAJI 197 showed a temperature of 104° on the 4th day of the inoculation. These ob- servations show that the disease can be conveyed by blood inoculation from sheep to goat and calf and that the virus is not exalted in any way by passage through sheep. Immunity test with hill bull virus was conducted on this goat on 15th day after blood sub-inoculation from sheep. There was no reaction and the goat proved solidly immune to rinderpest. INOCULATIONS IN FACE OF OUTBREAKS As rinderpest in sheep and goats was prevalent at Kekri, Ajmer-Merwara during the months of August and September 1938, opportunity was taken to try goat tissue virus alone inoculations in order to confirm the findings of the experiments carried out at Karachi. As a precautionary measure, a batch of only five sheep was given 1 c.c. of goat tissue virus emulsion to see what kind of reaction was shown by Raj- putana breed of sheep. Temperature of the five sheep so selected ranged between 101° to 102° prior to inoculation with goat tissue virus. On 5th day of the inoculation these animals showed very slight thermal reaction, the temperature ranging between 102° to 103.5°. No other symptoms were ob- served. Within ten days after the inoculation the temperature of all the five sheep ranged between 101° to 102°. As the reaction in the above batch of sheep was not severe, another batch of forty-five sheep was inoculated with 1 c.c. of goat tissue virus emulsion. Animals showing temperature above 102.5° were not included, as there was danger that they might be in the incubative stage of the disease. The temperatures of this batch of forty-five sheep ranged between 102.5° to 103.5° on the 5th day of the inoculation. Congestion of mucous membranes was noticed in two animals. Though none of the inoculated animals died of the disease, ten out of twenty uninoculated animals succumbed as a result of natural infection. After the vaccination disease died out from the herd. These experiments seem to show that goat virus method of inoculation is quite safe for sheep. CONCLUSIONS 1. Prophylactic vaccination against rinderpest with goat tissue virus alone proved quite safe for sheep, both under controlled conditions as well as in the face of a natural outbreak. 2. As a result of goat tissue virus inoculation sheep developed solid im- munity against rinderpest. 3. Different breeds of sheep showed certain variations in susceptibility to goat tissue virus inoculation. 4. Disease can be transmitted from sheep to goat and calf by blood sub- inoculation. 5. Rinderpest virus passaged through sheep was not exalted in virulence for goat and calf.
198 Goat Tissue Virus in Sheep against Rinderpest REFERENCES Koch, R. (1897). Zentralbl. f. Bakt. 1, 21, 526. Kolle and Turner, cited by Hutyra and Marek (1926). Spec. Path and Therap. of diseases of domestic animals. pp. 312. Nicolle and Adilbey (1902). Cited from investigations on Rinderpest immunisa- tion. Thesis presented by Hall, G. N. to the Vety., Faculty of the University of Zurich. Srikantaiah, G. N. (1934). Ind. Vet. J. 2, 104-108. Viswanthan, G. R. (1937). Summary of work done by Veterinary Investigation Officer, Madras 1933-34 to 1936-37. Walker, J. (1922). Bulletin No. 4 Kenya Dept. Agri. Div. Vety. Res. 19-28,
H. S. BAWA 199 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Short-tailed ewe No. 1, Age 15 months, Breed Chapri.
200 Goat Tissue Virus in Sheep against Rinderpest. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Short-tailed ewe No. 2, Age 1½ years, Breed Chapri.
H. S. BAWA 201 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Short tailed ram No. 3, Age 16 months, Breed Thari.
202 Goat Tissue Virus in Sheep against Rinderpest. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Short-tailed ram No. 4, Age 1 year, Breed Thari.
H. S. BAWA 203 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Short-tailed ewe No. 5, Age 1½ years, Breed Chapri.
204 Goat Tissue Virus in Sheep against Rinderpest. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. Short-tailed ewe No. 6. Age 1½ years, Breed Thari.
H. S. BAWA 205 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7. Short-tailed ram No. 7, Age 15 months, " Control ". [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 8. Short-tailed ram No. 8, Age 15 months, Breed Sindhi, " Control ".
206 Goat Tissue Virus in Sheep against Rinderpest. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 9. Black he-goat No. 1, Age 1 year.
H. S. BAWA 207 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 10. Red calf No. 1, Age 1 year.
THE MORPHOLOGY AND SYSTEMATIC RELATIONSHIP OF A NEW PARASITE210 A New Parasite, M. Ovocaudatum The testes, two in number, are reniform with tri-lobed outer and regular inner margins. They are situated almost symmetrically in front of the pos- terior third of the body, overlapping the caeca. The right testis, 0.7 × 0.3, is slightly larger than the left which measures 0. 58 × 0. 36 in size. The vesi- cula seminalis lies to the right of the acetabulum and consists of a long, fairly broad tube with three or four constrictions and twists. It extends from a little behind the acetabulum to about one-third the distance between the acetabulum and intestinal bifurcation. Anteriorly it continues into a small, ill-defined, pars prostatica with a few prostate glands and a wide ductus ejacu- latorius. The latter joins the terminal part of the uterus to form a small genital sinus which opens in the median line, close in front of the acetabulum. Both the genital pore and the acetabulum lie in a small depression on the ventral body surface to which are attached a few feebly developed retractor muscles. The ovary measures 0.5 × 0. 52 in size and consists of a large number of pear-shaped follicles, arranged radially in a spherical mass in the median line a little anterior to the testes. The receptaculum seminis, 0.22 in diameter, is a small, spherical, thin-walled sac, situated a little in front of the ovary. A small Laurer's canal is given off from the duct of the receptaculum seminis. The vitellaria consist of a large number of small, irregular follicles which ex- tend from the anterior margin of the testes to the first quarter of the body length, without meeting in the median line. The shell gland complex lies in the space between the ovary, receptaculum seminis and the left body wall. The uterus extends, in transversely coiled descending and ascending arms, from the acetabulum to a little distance in front of the blind ends of the caeca. Laterally it extends up to the body wall. The eggs are roughly triangular in shape, operculate and measure 0. 015H. D. SRIVASTAVA 211 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 a. Ventral view of Mehrailla ovocaudatum [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 b. An egg highly magnified showing the polar filament. Key to lettering. G.p. . . . . . . . . . . . . Genital pore. O. . . . . . . . . . . . . Ovary. R.s. . . . . . . . . . . . . Receptaculum seminis. T. . . . . . . . . . . . . Testis. Ut. . . . . . . . . . . . . Uterus. V.s. . . . . . . . . . . . . Vesicula seminalis. Vt. . . . . . . . . . . . . Vitellaria.
212 A New Parasite, M. Ovocaudatum of the body length. Vesicula seminalis long, constricted and twisted ; pars prostatica ill-defined; ductus ejaculatorius well-developed; genital sinus small. Genital pore and acetabulum situated in a genito-acetabular depres- sion on the ventral body wall. Ovary pretesticular, median and follicular ; follicles aggregated into a mass. Receptaculum seminis and Laurer's canal present. Vitellaria follicular, extending from anterior border of testes to first quarter of body length, without meeting in the median line. Uterus well- developed, post-acetabular; eggs small, roughly triangular, with a polar filament at the aopercular end. Excretory bladder Y-shaped. Parasites of marine fishes. Type-species.THREE NEW PARASITES OF THE GENUS ACANTHOCOLPUS LUHE, 1906 (FAMILY- ACANTHOCOLPIDAE)* BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, D.Sc. Helminthologist (On special duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 8th June 1938) (With Plate XVIII) LUHE in 1906 created the genus Acanthocolpus and the subfamily Acan- thocolpinae for a parasite which was collected amongst others from Ceylonese fishes by Professor Herdman and Mr. Hornell and were given to him for study. Three years later he created the family Acanthocolpidae with Acan- thocolpus as the type genus. Hitherto the genus is represented only by the type species214 New Parasites of the Genus Acanthocolpus Luhe The testes, two in number, are situated in tandem in the intercaecal space close behind the ovary. The oval anterior testis, of 0.48 to .052 by 0.26 to 0.28 size, lies in contact or partially overlapping the posterior testis, which is wedge-shaped and measures 0.5 to 0.6 by 0.3 to 0.34 in size. The cirrus sac measures 1.0 to 1.1 by 0.12Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XVIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 Ventral view of Acanthocolpus luhei [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 Ventral view of the genital opening of A. indicum [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 Microphotograph of Fig. 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 Ventral view of A. orientalis Key to lettering G. si. .. .. Genital sinus Mt. .. .. Metraterm
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 215 ductus ejaculatorius 0.4 by 0.04 ; genital sinus 0.14 by 0.04. Ovary median, equatorial, 0.14 in diameter. Vitellaria extending posteriorly up to the first seventh part of the body length. Uterus pre-ovarian ; eggs 0.06 by 0.04 ; metraterm 0.46 by 0.06. Acanthocolpus orientalis, n. sp. Host.216 New Parasites of the Genus A canthocolpus Luhe length of the genital sinus, besides the measurements of the various organs. From A. luhei it can be distinguished by the size ratio of the suckers, length of cirrus sac and the anterior extent of the vitellaria. Besides the points which distinguish A. orientalis from A. luhei, the former differs from A. indicum in the position of the genital pore as well. The author is grateful to the Director and Pathologist of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun, for their kind encourage- ment. REFERENCES Lühe, M. (1906). London Roy. Soc. Rep. Pearl. Oyster, 5, 97-108. -------------(1909). Parasitische Plattwurmer, I. Trematodes. Susswasserfauna Deut- schlands, Heft, 17. Srivastava H. D . (1938). Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong., Sect. Vety. Res.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
SURRA IN HYDERABAD STATE * BY M. R. MAHAJAN, M.R.C.V.S. Veterinary Investigation Officer, H. E. H. the Nizam.s Dominions. Hyderabad-Deccan (Received for publication on 5th May 1938) (With Plate XIX and a map) INTRODUCTION VETERINARY investigation work was started in the State in 1932. Since then a good deal of work has been carried out on a number of varied problems. The present paper refers to work on surra in both equines and bovines. A note by the author on ' Bovine Trypanosomiasis in the Hyderabad State' was published in 1934 in the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry; reference to bovine surra, therefore, is now confined to observa- tions made subsequently. Surra in horses existed extensively in the city of Hyderabad in the year 1910. Government appointed a special staff and framed regulations to check the havoc caused by this disease. No suitable treatment, however, being available at the time, detection and disposal of the affected animal was prac- tised. In recent years, following the method of Edwards [1928] in the use of Bayer 205 (Naganol), administered by intravaneous and intrathecal routes and by intravenous injections of Naganol cum tartar emetic, as practised in the Punjab, a few cases of the disease were treated. No case of surra in bovines had been recorded in the State, and only rare cases in the camel. This was the position when investigation of surra was taken up in 1932. SURRA IN EQUINES Cases of the disease were studied under field conditions amongst horses, donkeys and mules particularly in the Telangana districts of the State, where the disease has been found to occur extensively every year. A reference is made here only to the treatment aspect of the disease. Treatment was first started following the methods mentioned above. It was realised, however, that these methods afforded little scope to permit of their general field applica- tion, for the department has not enough staff to afford time to these lengthy methods, and the proper application of the intrathecal injection is not always possible. *Paper read at the Jubilee Session of the Indian Science Congress, Calcutta, 1938. (217) L
218 Surra in Hyderabad State Sen [1933] successfully treated artificially infected cases by a single intravenous injection of Naganol and it is on this line that the treatment of equine surra was started in 1934 in the Hyderabad State. This method simplifies the treatment, not only in the stationary hospitals, where treatment has now been permitted, but also in the field where it can be applied safely and conveniently. The simplicity of this method makes it possible to render treatment even to ponies and donkeys of the poor villagers, which other- wise, as long as they survive, remain a source of infection. The procedure of treatment adopted is as follows:Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Pt. II ] PLATE XIX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Case in advanced stage in which treatment is of no avail [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A chronic case
M. R. MAHAJAN 219 Since 1933, cases have also been recorded in Hyderabad proper, and in several outbreak forms in Nalgonda and Mahbubnagar districts. A case that flared up following reaction to the goat-blood virus immunisation against rinderpest was also recorded. Experimental work was undertaken to ascertain whether trypanosoma concerned in cases of acute bovine surra was Trypanosoma evansi or not. From an infected bullock in village Muthanpet, blood was subinoculated into equines, bovines, canines, poultry, rabbits and guinea-pigs, to study the effect of bovine trypanosome strain on them. All these animals (except poultry) became infected. The pony and dog developed symptoms of surra and were later treated successfully with Naganol. The strain was maintained in rabbits and guinea-pigs and studied, and material was also sent to the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar for further work. A heifer, aged two years, was inoculated intravenously with 5 c.c. of infected blood. Trypanosomes appeared in the peripheral blood of this animal forty-five hours later, increased gradually for three days, and then disappeared. A guinea-pig inoculated intra-peritonially with ½ c.c. of blood obtained during the negative phase revealed no trypanosomes; while ½ c.c. of cerebro-spinal fluid inoculated similarly into another guinea-pig, showed the parasites in the peripheral blood, eight days after the inoculation. In the case of a buffalo that showed trypanosomes on 25th May 1935, and did not reveal the parasite in the blood again till 3rd June, a rabbit was subinoculated with blood taken during this negative phase. Eight days later, this rabbit showed trypanosomes. On 3rd June when the buffalo again revealed trypanosomes, a second rabbit, a pony and a buffalo-calf were subinoculated with blood from this buffalo. All these were infected. A goat further subinoculated from the pony remained negative. The pony was treated successfully with Naganol. Rabbits Nos. 1 and 2 continued to show trypanosomes at irregular intervals and died. As stated above, the buffalo-calf showed trypanosomes and later remained negative for fourteen days and lost condition; and was successfully treated later with Naganol. The in-contact animals with the original buffalo showed no signs of the infec- tion. All the field experimental work undertaken to study the strain of the try- panosome concerned indicate this to be Trypanosoma evansi. The Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, also reported that on examina- tion the parasite in the blood smears appeared indistinguishable from Try- panosoma evansi. Recently, outbreaks were studied in Mahbubnagar district and 431 animals were examined, of which eleven cattle and five buffaloes were found positive. Some apparently healthy animals especially buffaloes showed try- panosomes in the peripheral blood. In these cases not even a rise of tempera- ture, usually seen in cattle, was observed. Spontaneous recovery has also been noticed in some cases.
220 Surra in Hyderabad State Bayer 205, administered intravenously in ten per cent solution, is found to be effective in the initial stage of the disease, when the animal appears apparently healthy and shows a rise of temperature only but has trypanosomes present in the peripheral blood. Naganol, however, has proved a failure in animals lying down in a semi-comatose condition, which is brought about by working the animals in the initial stage of the disease. On the other hand, treatment with tartar emetic administered intravenously appeared to be effective, when the animal is down in an acute or fatal stage of the attack. This drug appeared to be toxic to animals in the initial stage of the disease as mentioned above. Both the drugs are, therefore, useful in cattle, their use depending upon the stage in which an animal is at the time of the treatment. Two cases, one treated with tartar emetic and the other with Naganol, were given blood containing trypanosomes intravenously, forty-eight hours after the treatment. No trypanosomes were seen in the peripheral blood of these animals for four days. Another animal, which had a natural recovery from an acute attack, was given trypanosomes intravenously. This showed trypanosomes in the peripheral blood for a day, but no clinical symptoms. Incidentally, it may be mentioned that during this investigation work Trypanosoma theileria was seen in peripheral blood of a bull-calf, the only symptoms being those of staring coat and anaemia. A rabbit, subinoculated from this, failed to take the infection. The parasite failed to ' resuscitate' in the blood of the calf, when the animal was subjected to rinderpest goat blood virus vaccination. The identity of the parasite was confirmed by the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, and this is the first time that this parasite has been recorded in the Hyderabad State. SURRA IN CAMEL Two camels, out of fourteen examined, showed evidence of surra when this occurred as a serious outbreak in 1934, involving equines and camels in the villages of Gurmatkal and Utkoor in Mahbubnagar and Gulberga districts. In regard to the vector of the disease, several species of flies and ticks have been examined, and during the course of bovine surra outbreaks in Mahbubnagar, a number of tabanus flies were caught, kept in captivity and examined. Of these, three were examined after two days and showed bloody contents, revealing in one case viable trypanosomes and in another viable Crithidia tabani. The flies harbouring these were identified as Tabanus rubidus. Nothing of any particular significance was noticed in the rest. Transmission of surra by Tabanus and Stomoxys flies, however, is regarded as mechanical in India, no life-cycle having been worked out so far in any external parasite. It is very desirable to pursue further investigation in regard to treatment methods and the problem of vector, with a view to know exactly why and how natural outbreaks of the disease occur, and what could be done to control them.
M. R. MAHAJAN 221 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks are due to Mr. B. K. Badami, Director, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Hyderabad, for his helpful hints given from time to time. Thanks are also due to Messrs. Narsingh Pershad, Veterinary Inspector, Mahbubnagar, and S. Nurul Mohteda, Assistant Veterinary Surgeon, Hyderabad and Abdul Khader Khan, Veterinary Assistant, Narayanpet, and all other officials of the department who co-operated in the prosecution of this work. REFERENCES Annual Report of the Civil Veterinary Department, Hyderabad-Deccan, 1932-33, 1933-34 and 1934-35. Annual Report of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, 1935 and 1936. Annual Report of the Veterinary Investigation Officer, Assam, 1935-36. Annual Report of the Veterinary Investigation Officer, Bombay Presidency, 1933-34, 1934-35 and 1935-36. Annual Report of the Veterinary Investigation Officer, Central Provinces 1933-34, 1934-35 and 1935-36. Annual Report of the Veterinary Investigation Officer, Hyderabad State, 1932-33, 1933-34, 1934-35, 1935-36 and 1936-37. Annual Report of the Veterinary Investigation Officer, Punjab, 1933-34, 1934-35 and 1935-36. Annual Report of the Veterinary Investigation Officer, United Provinces, 1935-36. Edwards, J. T. (1928). Mem. Dept. Agri. Ind. Vet. Ser. 4, 1-100. Mahajan, M. R, (1934). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 4, 242-246. Sen, S. K. (1933). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 3, 1, 55-102.
OCCURRENCE OF LIVERFLUKE, FASCIOLA GIGANTICA, IN THE LUNGS OF GOATS BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, D.Sc. Helminthologist (On special duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 8th June 1938) OF the numerous helminth parasites infesting ruminants, the liver- flukes are by far the most important. There are two species of liverflukes which commonly infest ruminants in this country224 Liver fluke, Fasciola gigantica, in the Lungs of Goats the courtesy of Mr. S. R. Chaddha, Veterinary Investigation Officer, North- West Frontier Province, the author observed the presence of eggs of F. gigantica in one sample of nasal discharge. This finding was communicated to Mr. Chaddha who, on subsequent examination, was able to recover specimens of F. gigantica from the lungs of goats. The author also recovered specimens of this fluke from a piece of lung of a goat received from Peshawar. This appears to be the first record of the occurrence of liver-flukes in a- typical focie in goats in this country.
STUDIES ON THE HELMINTH PARASITES OF INDIAN POULTRY. PART III. THE OCCURRENCE OF TWO SPIRURID STOMACH WORMS IN FOWLS* BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, D.Sc. Helminthologist (On special duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar- Kumaun (Received for publication on 8th June 1938) THE spirurid nematodes of birds have received very little attention in this country, notwithstanding their frequency and pathological significance. In this paper the author records for the first time the occurrence of members of two genera of spirurid worms, Cheilospirura and Tetrameres, in the gizzard and stomach respectively of Indian fowls. Superfamily.226 Helminth Parasites of Indian Poultry This round-worm occurs in the gizzard of fowl and turkey in a number of countries: North and South America, Australia, France, Italy and Russia. The eggs are passed out with the faeces and hatch in the gut of the interme- diate host, which according to Cram is a grasshopper. The larvae reach the infective stage inside the grasshopper in about twenty-five days. The final host acquires infection through, eating infected grasshoppers. In fowls the worms force their way through the horny lining of the gizzard, usually in the anterior part of the organ where the lining is softest. For a period of nineteen days they remain on the surface of the muscular wall, under the lining. Be- tween the 20th and 25th day they start to penetrate the wall and are found with their heads embedded .in the muscles of the gizzard. Later on in about seventy-six days, they attain sexual maturity and are located in cir- cumscribed nodules with caseous contents. These parasites produce soft nodules in the musculature of the gizzard and thereby weaken it. They have some toxic effect on the host too. In heavy infestations they produce emaciation, droopiness, weakness and anaemia. The gizzard lining may be haemorrhagic and necrotic and the wall flabby. Sometimes the gizzard is weakened to such an extent that a rupture in the form of a large sac occurs. Owing to the location of the parasite in the final host and the migratory habits of its intermediate host, treatment and prophylaxis are obviously difficult. Family.H. D. SRIVASTAVA 227 The parasite has been reported to occur in fowls, ducks, pigeons, turkeys and a large number of wild water-birds. Observations on its life- history have been made by Linstow [ 1894 ], Rust [ 1908 ], Seurat [1914] and Sugimoto and Nishiyama [ 1937 ]. A number of invertebrates are known to serve as its intermediate hosts : such as ' water flea' Daphnia pulex, ' Sand flea' Gammarus pulex, grasshoppers, cockroaches and earthworms. Cram [ 1931 ] has demonstrated that grasshoppers serve as intermediate hosts of T. americanus. The eggs are passed out with the faeces and on being ingested by suitable intermediate hosts, the larvae reach the infective stage inside the body cavity in about nine to twenty-eight days. When the inter- mediate host is eaten by the final host, the infective larvae are freed in the pro- ventriculus and enter the glands of Leiberkühn. The larvæ attain maturity in about ninety days. The worms suck blood but the greatest damage is done when the young worms penetrate into the wall of the proventriculus, setting up marked irritation and inflammation, which may prove fatal. Due to congestion the stomach wall becomes greatly thickened and inelastic. Considerable emaci- ation and anaemia are observed in heavily parasitised birds. Treatment is ineffective, but control measures may be tried with a view to keep off the intermediate hosts. The author is grateful to the Director and the Pathologist of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun, for their kind encourage- ment. REFERENCES Cram, E. B. (1927). Bull. (140) U. S. Nat. Mus., Wash., 17, 465. EPIDEMIC IN A CONTROLLED GUINEA-PIG COLONY BY K. D. MANOHAR, M. D. Dept. of Pathology and Bacteriology, Seth G. S. Medical College, Parel, Bombay (Received for publication on 11th March 1938) WHILE supervising the animal house, the writer had an opportunity of studying the course of an epidemic in guinea-pigs. The epidemic, though natural as far as importation of the virulent organism was concerned, occurred in a controllable colony, in which, as control measures, isolation of the healthy and susceptible animals was immediately carried out and also the destruction of the obviously sick animals. The epidemic, therefore, resembled a human epidemic more or less modified by the active interference of health authorities. Weather considerations were important. After a very hot spell, rains set in violently. The animal house leaked badly and the animals were soaked through. Feeding was naturally unsatisfactory, the food getting sodden and dust laden within a few hours of distribution. The rapid de- composition of food must also have diminished the available food considerably. Flies had come in swarms. Such were the conditions when the epidemic broke out. The first impression was that the food was the source of infection. But on post mortem examination of animals, the intestines did not show in- flammatory change while the lungs were definitely haemorrhagic and showed broncho-pneumonic patches. Considering the animals, about a month before the epidemic started, one change was introduced for the safety of new-born guinea-pigs. The colony was divided into two lots. In one there were the pregnant and the newly delivered females with the new-born guinea-pigs. In the other were the rest of the animals. Although separate from each other the animals necessarily intermixed, as pregnant guinea-pigs from the common lot were transferred to the special enclosure and the grown-up guinea-pigs as well as some of the females were transferred back to the common lot. This transfer of adult pregnant females to a special enclosure and the retransferance of a large number of half-grown animals to the main enclosure produced two communitites from the epidemiological point of view. In the special enclosures there were few adults, potential carriers. The head of potential infection was definitely low in this group. In the common enclosure the conditions were exactly reversed. There were larger number of adults, presumably the carriers and a few young half- growns were constantly added. Here was a high head of infection and con- stant introduction of fresh stock. (229)
230 Epidemic in a Controlled Guinea-Pig Colony Lastly, the rate of multiplication was very rapid at this period and the increase in the total number of animals, as well as the transfers from enclosure to enclosure were frequent, exposing all animals to the infection. The total number of guinea-pigs was : Month Population Total deaths Experimental March . . . . . . 231 15 3 April . . . . . . 231 15 6 May . . . . . . 250 11 4 June . . . . . . 304 155 3 July . . . . . . 240 44 1 August . . . . . . 251 .. .. Average death rate which also includes deaths from experimental pro- cedures from September 1936 to June 1937 was fifteen per month. The increase in the population before the onset of the epidemic is significant and compares very closely with the population figures and also reduction in the number observed during June, July and August of 1936 when a similar epide- mic had occurred. Studying the details of the epidemic itself, like an air-borne epidemic, the onset was sudden with hardly any noticeable pre-epidemic phase. Deaths began to occur and the mortality rate very rapidly became high. The first control measure was without any effect on the mortality rate. The food, especially the greens, was carefully washed in tap water to remove soil contamination, was spread out on sacking to remove excess of water and then distributed. The enclosures were daily evacuated and swabbed with crude phenol solution, but it was not possible to keep them dry. This measure failed and the common lot was separated into two groups, adults and half-growns. This produced a transitory fall in mortality which again became the highest. Sixteen animals died on 25th June. As a precautionary measure, six more moribund animals were destroyed. The epidemic then rapidly declined. In this phase between 11th June to 1st July, one hundred and fifty-five animals died. Of these twenty-one were adults, three from special enclosure and eighteen from the common lot. This mortality was practically proportion- ate to adult population, in each enclosure. The figures regarding the new born are rather unsatisfactory for some of them were found half devoured. Whether these had first died of the infection and then been eaten, it is not possible to say. Sixteen new-born guinea-pigs died in this period. The rest were the half-grown
K. D. MANOHAR 231 232 Epidemic in a Controlled Guinea-Pig Colony one hundred and twenty-five guinea-pigs imported into a laboratory. Com- plete extermination of a host race is very rare in epidemiological observation. It is a biological disaster both for the parasite and the host. The occurrence of chronic extra-pulmonary lesions in the adults in the post-epidemic phase points to a wide dissemination of the infection with the establishment of some type of mass immunity. The other epidemiological consideration worth noting is the effect of weather and various hygenic measures. Epidemiologists still have not agreed regarding the effect of weather conditions on the spread of infection. In regard to air-borne acute infections, several studies from school dor- mitories and barracks have definitely shown that overcrowding is a very important factor in the spread of the infection. Haemolytic streptococci have been recovered from the air of certain wards and the number has shown a definite fluctuation with the number of occupants in the ward. In the present study a distinct crowding of animals coincided with the onset of inclement weather. The latter was probably an important factor in setting up the epidemic for an almost equal number of guinea-pigs had been reached before, and is again being reached, without the occurrence of an epidemic. The weather, though it played a possible role in initiating the epidemic, had no influence on its subsequent course. The epidemic came to a natural termination although the weather and the housing conditions remained in the same unsatisfactory state. Lastly, the complete failure of the various hygienic measures, although disappointing, suggest the need for an unbiassed revaluation of these measures in the control of human epidemics due to air-borne infection. REFERENCE Vaughan, V. C. (1925). Epidemiology, Vol I, Chapters on Pneumonia and Air-borne Diseases.
TWO NEW TREMATODES OF THE FAMILY MONORCHIDAE ODHNER, 1911, FROM INDIAN MARINE FOOD FISHES.1 BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, D.Sc. Helminthologist (On special duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 8th June 1938) (With Plates XX and XXI) So far only one representative234 Two New Trematodes of the Family Manorchidae Odhner The single testis measures 0. 22Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ventral view of Proctotrema odhneri, n. sp. Key to lettering Mt .. Metraterm C.s .. Cirrus sac
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci.& Anim. Husb. Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE XXI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. a. Hurleytrema ovocaudatum gen. ct. sp. nov. FIG. b. An egg highly magnified showing polar filament Key to l ellering Mt .. Metraterm O .. Ovary
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 235 long and narrow and bifurcates into two long, slender, straight caeca, which end blindly at the hinder end. The acetabulum has a diameter of 0.076236 Two New Trematodes of the Family Manorchidae Odhner follicular, lateral, extending from the level of the acetabulum to a little in front of the hinder end. Uterus occupies the whole of the space between metraterm and blind ends of caeca. Eggs are roughly triangular, with a polar filament at the aoperculate end; metraterm well-developed. Excretory bladder is narrow and tubular and bifurcates just behind testis. Parasites of marine fishes. Type species.SELECTED ARTICLE A DEVICE ADOPTED FOR THE FORCED FEEDING OF SUSPECTED POISON PLANTS AT THE VETERINARY RESEARCH STATION, GLENFIELD BY R.O.C.KING, B.V.Sc. R. M. Kinross Veterinary Research Officer, Veterinary Research Station, Glenfield (Reprinted from Veterinary Research Report No. 7, 1937 of the Department of Agriculture, New South Wales) A CONSIDERABLE amount of investigational work has been carried out at the Veterinary Research Station, Glenfield, with plants which have been suspected of being harmful to domesticated animals. In these investiga- tions the initial difficulty has been to entice the animal to consume the green plant either whole, chaffed, or chaffed and mixed with other fodders, such as wheaten chaff, pollard or bran. Whereas pigs will usually eat chaffed plant quite readily when it is mixed with a pollard mash, it has been found that sheep, and to a lesser extent cattle, at the Research Station refuse to each such plants, notwithstanding the fact that, in the field, animals have been noted to eat the plant in quantity. If the animals will not eat the plant as offered in sufficient quantity to permit of a reasonable test, it is necessary to resort to some method of forced feeding. Up till the year 1930 the methods used at Glenfield for administering plant forcibly to sheep and cattle were (a) hand-feeding, and (b) drenching the finely-minced plant, suspended in water, either from a bottle or by the stomach tube. The former was very tedious, and the latter required a re- latively large, and at times, excessive amount of water to be used to wash the finely-minced plant out of the bottle or down the tube. The stomach tube frequently became blocked with plant particles and required clearing, while when using the bottle there was always risk of breakage with consequent injury either to the animal, or operator, or at least loss of prepared plant. Risk of killing animals from bloating through using too much water was not infrequently experienced, necessitating cessation of administration of plant to sheep before the required dose had been given, even when such dose did not exceed one pound of plant. This effect has not been observed with cattle, probably because of the greater capacity of the rumen in these animals. (237)
238 Devise for Forced Feeding of Suspected Poison Plants It was consequently considered that some device was required whereby plant in its natural state could be administered, at least to sheep, without the use of water. In literature dealing with poison plants mention has been made occasionally of a " plant gun " but none of the authors described the device used by them. Consequently, it was thought that a description of the " gun " finally adopted at Glenfield may be of interest to those workers employed in investigating poison plant problems. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Longitudinal Section of Device for Forced Feeding of Sheep. The gun consists essentially of a metal barrel 25.5 cm. long, with an outside diameter of 1.86 cm., which, in the " home-made" instrument des- cribed, is made from a piece of heavy electrical conduit, the metal being 0.15 cm. thick. About 4 cm. from one end of the conduit a transverse cut is made in the metal extending almost to the centre of the barrel; 10 cm. from the same end another similar cut is made in the same aspect of the tube, and the metal between the two transverse cuts is removed to form a breech, the cut edges of the metal being filed smooth. Upon this breech is mounted a hopper of galvanised sheet iron about 6 cm. long, 4.5 cm. deep, and diverging in width from 2 cm. where it sits on the barrel to 4 cm. at the top, which is open. The hopper is soldered to the barrel over the opening or breech and the gun is completed by a metal plunger about 40 cm. in length which fits the barrel snugly. A collar is attached to the plunger to prevent it projecting from the muzzle and causing injury to the pharynx of the subject animal while in use. It will be found that the length of barrel in front of the hopper will suffice for all adult sheep. If it is desired to use the gun on half-grown sheep or lambs a large cork, with a hole bored in the centre to accommodate the barrel can be slipped down over the muzzle to reduce the barrel to any desired length. This gun has been shown to have many advantages over the older method and little practice is required to become adept with it. To use the gun the plant under test is minced finely in an ordinary hand, meat mincing machine and the quantity to be administered placed in a tray.. The sheep is caught by an assistant, backed into a corner of the pen and straddled in the standing position. The neck or shoulders of the sheep are held firmly by the assistant's knees and the head held lightly under the lower jaw. The hopper of the gun is filled with plant and the barrel is inserted into the animal's mouth until the muzzle has passed over the base of the tongue and is held in position by the left hand, which grasps the gun at the hopper. The right hand then withdraws the plunger and some plant is forced down into
R. O. C. KING 239 the open breech by the thumb of the left hand. The plunger is pushed forwards, forcing the plant from the breech into the animal's pharynx and again withdrawn, the breech being immediately re-charged by forcing plant down from the hopper with the thumb. This procedure is repeated until the hopper is empty, when the gun is withdrawn from the animal's mouth, the hopper replenished and the procedure repeated as long as is necessary to administer the required quantity of plant. The gun has been used to administer air-dried plant as well as fresh green plant to sheep but in the case of the former the plant was ground to a coarse powder in a hand cornmill and moistened with just enough water to thoroughly wet it. This permitted the easy administration of such material in quantity without any irritation of the larynx by plant dust. It has been found that all sheep tolerate the presence of the gun in the mouth with reasonable equanimity and generally little struggling occurs. Usually a sheep will swallow that amount of plant delivered by one or two strokes of the plunger while the gun is still in the mouth. If an animal holds the plant in the pharynx it has been found advisable to pause for a short period after about four strokes have been made with the plunger and give the animal time to swallow, after which the forced feeding can be continued. Only one sheep has been encountered which would not swallow the plant while the gun was held in its mouth. In this case three or four strokes were made with the plunger and the gun removed from the mouth, whereupon the animal swallowed regularly and did not attempt to discard any of the plant so administered. Before the elaboration of this gun the maximum dose which one could reasonably expect to administer to a sheep, without danger of bloating the animal, within one day (eight hours), was one pound of fresh green plant. By means of the gun, however, a dose of six pounds of similar plant has been administered within one day and doses of two to four pounds have commonly been given. In view of the fact that tests at this station have shown that an adult Merino sheep of about 100 lb. live weight will eat two pounds of fresh green trefoil (Trifolium sp.) within one hour if starved for twenty-four hours previously, the amount of plant which can be administered within one day to one animal is important. This is also shown by the experiments with Chenopodium atriplicinum.* *See page 95 of Veterinary Research Report, No. 7, 1937 of the Department of Agricul- ture, New South WalesABSTRACTS A Preliminary note on the experimental reproduction of bovine pleuro- pneumonia ; II. Contagious bovine pleuro pneumonia : A report on the use of new antigens for the complement-fixation and agglutination tests; III. Contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia : A preliminary note on immunity. A. D. CAMPBELL, J. Council. Sci. Indus. Res. 11, 2, 103-126. I. THE author cites the attempts of previous workers to reproduce the disease experimentally, and in this connection the work of Nocard and Roux [1901] is mention- ed wherein the attempt took the form of introducing atomized cultures of the associated organism into a sack applied to the head of five experimental bovines whereby four were apparently immunized after a transient pyrexia and the fifth was said to have shown first-stage lesions of pleuro-pneumonia at death which took place a month after the experiment began. The present paper is an account of the success achieved with the use of a modernised and perfected technique on the lines of the experiment of Nocard and Roux. In the absence of sufficient quantity of pleuritic exudate, 600 c.c. of B. V. F.O. S. medium culture, in which the organism retains its virulence for a long time, was atomized into a closed loose box, twelve feet square and ten feet high and housing eight cattle. Atomization was accomplished by means of a paint-spray gun and air at a pressure of 40 lbs. per square inch, the nozzle being so adjusted that atomization was complete in fifteen minutes. The animals were then removed to open stalls and observed clinical- ly. As a result of serological examination of these animals it was found that comple- ment-fixing antibodies were developed as early as the sixth or seventh day (some- times tenth or twelfth day) after exposure to the infective spray, the titre rising rapidly thereafter until death or slaughter. Of eighty animals so infected, thirty-three (41%) developed pleuro-pneumonia of an acute type which became clinically noticeable usually between the 12th and 18th day. The animals either died or had to be destroyed in the third or fourth week. Autopsy revealed severe typical lesions of the disease. A three months old calf, born to a vac- cinated cow but negative to the complement-fixation test, on exposure to culture spray, died within forty-eight hours and showed lesions of a hyper-acute type of the disease. From each of the thirty-three cases the casual organism was recovered. Forty-one animals (52%) developed a subacute type of the disease but showed a rising complement-fixation titre which remained at its peak for several weeks, and subsequently dropped to about one-eighth at which it persisted for a long time. Autopsy at the end of a sub-clinical protracted illness revealed lesions which were undergoing resolution and sequestration but in which the specific organism was still demonstrable culturally. (241) O
242 ABSTRACTS Two cases in the above group of forty-one were non-clinical although positive by serological test. Destroyed thirty days after exposure to atomized culture, they only showed enlarged and oedematous mediastinal and bronchial lymph glands from which the organism was isolated in culture. Such cases, it is pointed out, also occur in natural outbreaks wherein, however, their percentage is usually higher. The remaining six animals in the experiment (7.5%) showed no clinical signs only a mild transient rise of the complement fixation titre, and no specific post mortem lesions. Another method of infection, called the "catheterization" technique, was suc- cessfully employed by the author. This technique consisted of passing a rubber tube down the larynx and trachea until it reached a small bronchus, and pouring through it a culture of the organism. Out of six animals so treated, in two batches of three each five developed the disease in an acute form. The sixth was a non-clinical case which was, however, serologically positive and showed on autopsy a sequestrated lung lesion. The specific organism was recovered from all the six cases. The atomization method of infection is, for obvious reasons, more practicable than the " catheterization" technique. Animals infected by the latter method were able to transmit the disease to healthy in-contacts. It is considered that the incubation period of the disease is 3ABSTRACTS 243 inches. In a negligible percentage of cases (0.6%) the reaction may spread to the gluteal region. It is suggested that badly affected tails should not be amputated until dry necrosis has commenced; else, the inflammation may spread rapidly and thus produce serious complications. It was also noticed that the rise in complement- fixation titre and the duration of its persistence are directly proportional to the virulence of the culture used for vaccination, and that the duration of immunity is relatively shorter when less virulent strains of the organism are used. The use of the most virulent culture consistent with safety is therefore emphasized for immunization. In order to produce, if possible, a high degree of immunity reinforcement of tail vaccination was attempted by following it up by subcutaneous inoculation, eight weeks later, of a larger dose (2.0 c.c.) of culture behind the shoulder. Controlled tests made twelve months later, by exposure to infection by the atomization method, showed that up to that period the " single " method of immunization was as highly efficient as the " double " method. Serologically, however, the " double " method produces a very rapid rise of complement-fixing antibodies which persist for several weeks and then disappear slowly ; the " single " method on the contrary results in only a slight rise which disappears rapidly. It is therefore considered possible that immunity produced by the " double " method would, if tested after longer periods, be found to be more durable. Vaccinated animals were subjected to the usual serological tests. Small groups of immunised animals were exposed, simultaneously with controls to artificial infection by the atomization method. This showed that animals developed a high degree of resis- tance even as early as the third or fourth day after vaccination. The paper ends with, the method of preparation of the vaccine and the success achieved by its use in the field. [M. Y. M.] Enzootic pneumonia in sheep. R. F. MONTGOMERIE, T. J. BOSWORTH AND R. E. GLOVER. (1938). J. Com. Path. Ther. 51, 87-107. THE authors, after having investigated several outbreaks, have described an enzootic form of pneumonia in sheep. The lesions were mostly confined to the thoracic cavity. There was no direct evidence that the larvae of oestrus ovis, or nematodes in the lung tissue, played any significant part in the causation of the disease. A pasteurella-like organism was isolated in eighteen cases from the hepatised lungs, out of the twenty-two cases available for bacteriological investigation. The organism is encapsulated, haemolytic and indol negative and resembles Jones (1921) group I Pasteurella. The different strains obtained were divided into two distinct sub-groups by agglutination tests. Sheep, rabbits, guinea-pigs and pigeons were refractory to experimental inocula- tion by different routes with some of the strains which were, however, lethal to mice when injected intraperitoneally in large doses. Suspensions of lung lesions from natural cases of the disease when inoculated into healthy sheep induced definite pathological changes in the lungs but the authors found it impossible to establish a definite infective agent. The histopathology of the experimentally produced lung lesions was not entirely similar to that seen in natural cases.
244 ABSTRACTS The organisms are considered to be the terminal cause of the pneumonia. The presence of a primary filterable virus is suspected but its identity has yet to be deter- mined. The natural mode of infection is unknown. It is suggested that changes in environment and weather conditions may precipitate outbreaks. [S. G.] Some aspects of feeding in relation to livestock diseases. W. C. MILLER (1938). Vet. Rec. 50, No. 33, 1041-1047. THE author presented this paper at a meeting of the Royal Counties Division, N. W. M. A. held at Oxford and discussed in general terms, on a broad basis, some aspects of faulty feeding responsible for certain livestock diseases, without, however, entering into details of a specific deficiency caused by a particular substance. The author remarked that the farm animals in Great Britain have been gradually changed by the activities of the breeders and feeders into ' creatures' which require a very different type of dietary intake from their ancestors. The modern dairy cow must eat and deal with a far heavier and richer diet than the wild cow, her ancestor ; a level of feeding which might readily kill a cow of African indigenous breed, can be very well tolerated by a cow of a modern British dairy breed. Referring to some conditions which are typically regarded as being due to errors in feeding, the author divided the consideration of the subject into different arbitrary categories. (a) Overfeeding with balanced foods.ABSTRACTS 245 It is pointed out that a suitable ration should fulfil certain more general criteria. For instance, it should be suitable for the particular species in question; it should be made up from good quality fresh ingredients ; it should be palatable ; it should be adequate to satisfy the animals' normal appetite ; it should contain enough bulk to effect optimal visceral distention and provide a stimulus for peristalsis, secretion, and blood and lymph circulation; it should be neither unduly laxative nor binding ; it should have a good digestibility and it should be supplied in adequate but not massive quantities. [N. D. K.] Vitamin A in relation to domestic animals. Symptomatology of vitamin A deficiency in domestic animals. G. H. HART AND H. R. GUILBERT, 1937. J. A. V. M. Ass. 91, 193-200. THIS report is based on the observations of several workers besides the author. Vitamin A deficiency may cause a wide variety of alterations in body tissues and symptomatology, which has often caused confusion in diagnosis. Epithelial cells throughout the body as well as nerve cells may become involved in the syndrome. The first symptom in domestic animals involves vision and consists in the development of night-blindness. The nerve tissue, including that of the optic nerve, degenerates resulting, in some cases, in ultimate blindness. Vitamin A deficiency early in pregnancy has been found to produce permanently blind calves at birth. Blindness has been experimentally induced in pigs in this way. The progressive impairment of vision can be corrected occasionally if vitamin A therapy is started in time. Stenosis of the optic canal which is observed in some cases, is secondary. Ulceration of the cornea is common and is associated with bacterial invasion, which is secondary. Nervous symptoms may result from alterations within the central nervous system or in the peripheral nerves, and the symptoms depend on the nerves affected. These lesions once developed are usually permanent and probably often progressive. In hogs, one form of posterior paralysis is due to this cause, the development of which is usually secondary to night blindness. Early administration of vitamin A results in considerable improvement, but complete recovery is rare. Leg paralysis occurs in cattle but is not common. In the development of paralysis, incoordination of voluntary move- ments, increased excitability and convulsions are observed. In the more advanced stage convulsive seizures may occur spontaneously; this may result in death. Involvement of other epithelial structures shows the greatest variety of manifesta- tions which may cause much confusion. In poultry the mouth and throat are affected while in cattle, sheep and hogs the gastro-intestinal involvement is associated with diarrhoea; excessively loose bowels occur in new-born calves. In growing calves lung involvement, which is not uncommon, progresses pneumonia. Changes in the genital tract seem temporary in the male. Kidneys are also affected ; ' large white kidney ' in adult animals and white spotted kidney in calves are examples. [R.M.]
NOTE UNDULANT FEVER IN FRANCE* IN a recent Bulletin of the Health Organization of the League of Nations (7, Extract No. 9), R. M. Taylor, M. Lisbonne, L. F. Bidal and R. H. Hazemann, who made a study of 869 Brucella strains isolated from man and animals in France, came to the following conclusions. All the classified strains of Brucella fall into one of two types, namely, Br. melitensis and Br. abortus. Of 507 strains isolated from man, 477 (94 per cent) were Br. melitensis. While the melitensis type was definitely dangerous to man, Br. abortus was a relative- ly unimportant cause of undulant fever, and was essentially an economic and veterinary problem. Cases of undulant fever of the melitensis type were usual- ly multiple and tended to occur in localized epidemics, while those of the abortus variety were almost invariably sporadic. The incidence of undulant fever in France reached a peak in the early spring, which is the period of parturition and abortion among domestic animals such as sheep and goats. As regards age and sex clinical undulant fever was found to be rare below the ages of fifteen years and was two or three times more frequent in males than in females. Infections in goat and sheep were almost always of the melitensis type, whereas cows were the principal hosts of the abortus variety. The disease was found to occur chiefly among the rural population and in those who were brought in contact with the animals or their carcasses. The writers' studies indicated that the risk of infection through contact with animals was decidedly greater than through consumption of raw milk or fresh cheese. Sani- tary conditions were of little importance in the transmission of the disease. *Reprinted from ' Nature ', Vol. 142, No. 3598, pp. 722, Oct. 15. (247)
The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science & Animal Husbandry, Vol. IX, Part III, September 1939. ERRATA. Page 260, line 3 from bottomTHE INFLUENCE OF DIETARY CAROTENE UPON THE CAROTENE AND VITAMIN-A CONTENTS AND THE REICHERT AND IODINE VALUE OF BUTTER- FAT, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO SEASONAL VARIATIONS BY SAILENDRA MOHAN DAS GUPTA, M. Sc., Ph.D. Department of Chemistry, Medical College, Calcutta (Received for publication on 18th February 1939) IN a previous paper [Wilson, Das Gupta and Ahmad, 1937] studies were made on the absorption of carotene in the human subject. In this paper, at- tempts have been made to study the absorption of the hydrocarbon in animals, particularly the cow, which is the main live-stock in India, under typical In- dian conditions. The absorption of carotene by the cow is dependent to a large extent on carotene content of the feed. This can be seen from a study of the carotene and vitamin-A contents of milk or milk-fats which increase or decrease according as their contents in the feed are high or low. It was, there- fore, thought advisable to study the problem by assaying the milk-fats for their carotene and vitamin-A contents. This will no doubt give an approximate idea of the problem, for except for the colostrum which gives abnormal values for carotene and vitamin-A, the values are not appreciably affected either by the stage of lactation of the cow or temperature differences. Studies in the absorption by such methods are also important from the view-point of human nutrition, for milk-fat or ghee is the chief source of vitamin-A which is so essen- tial for the health of the population in India. Much work has been done in foreign laboratories in this direction, but unfortunately in India, no systematic work has yet been attempted on this important aspect of nutrition. In this paper, the experiments have been confined to the typical dietary conditions prevalent in Bengal. During the autumn, the cows mainly live upon paddy straw as the main roughage, which the cows eat readily without any discom- fort. Small amounts of concentrate like rape-seed cake are also given. The diet, therefore, contains a very small amount of carotene. The method of storing the paddy straw further destroys the carotene content of the straw. During the winter, the cows get a good supply of grass and other leafy vegeta- bles of high carotene content. This is apparently unlike what happens in western countries where the cows get the minimum amount of carotene during the winter. It will thus be seen that the cows in Bengal either live upon grass or paddy straw or mixtures of these two in different proportions according to the availability of the two roughages during the different parts of the year, (249)
250 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows During recent years, attempts are being made in India to improve the quality of ghee or clarified butter-fats which undergo marked seasonal variations parti- cularly during the autumn and the winter seasons. Thus it is stated that the best ghee is produced during the winter (from November to early part of March) and that ghee produced during the monsoon (July to October) is of definitely inferior quality [Wright, 1937]. It is in the quality of the ghee and not the quantity that the real improvement of it lies. In this paper, the changes due to seasonal variations and the effects of feeding cows with different mixtures of grass and straw and red palm oil on the carotene and vitamin-A contents of butter-fat have been studied. The Reichert values and Iodine number of butter-fats are two important characteristics of butter-fats which determine their quality. It was, therefore, thought advisable to determine these two values also along with the carotene and vitamin-A contents of butter-fats. IInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE VIII Ventral view of Waretrema piscicola Key to Lettering. D. h. . . Ductus hermaphroditicus. P. gl. .. Prostate gland. Eg. . . Egg. P. p. .. Pars prostatica. G.p. . . Genital pore. R. s. . . Receptaculum seminis. H.s. . . Hermaphroditic sac. T. .. Testis. I.c. . . Intestinal caecum. V. s. e. .. Vesicula seminalis externa. Mt. . . Metraterm. V. s. i. .. Vesicula seminalis interna. O. . . Ovary. Vt. .. Vitellaria.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part II ] PLATE IX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Magnified view of hermaphroditic sac and vesicula seminalis externa of Waretrema piscicola (for key to lettering see plate VIII)
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II ] PLATE X [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 'Deg-Nala' disease. Lesions of posterior limbs
S. M. DAS GUPTA 251 The butter from the composite milk was churned out on the last day of each week, clarified as described below, and sealed with paraffin. The morning and evening milks (about 4 lb. per cow) were collected on the last day of each week and the cream separated in a small cream separator. The butter was churned from the sweet cream in a glass experimental churn by hand. The butter thus obtained was washed with distilled water and then taken on a muslin cloth and the excess water (butter-milk) pressed out, It- was melted at 50°C, the curd skimmed off and the middle layer taken off by a pipette. It was further filtered through a layer of cotton wool when the yellow colour of the butter was prominent. It was then kept in bottles sealed with paraffin in the dark. The results are given in Table I. It may be noted here that in common with other fat-soluble vitamins, carotene and vitamin-A are separated completely from milk or cream by churning out the fat and they are not in the least affected by ordinary heating [Davies, 1936]. METHODS OF ESTIMATION Determination of Reichert and Iodine values. Samples of butter-fats analysed were pure and fresh and kept in bottles sealed with paraffin in the dark until required for analysis. The Reichert-Wollny values were determined by standard American A. O. A. C. methods with all the necessary precautions. The Iodine number was determined by the Wijs' method. Before determina- tion of these values, a portion of the sample of butter was heated to 55°C in a bottle until the fat separated from the water and curd. The fatty layer was filtered through coarse cotton-wool. The fat was liquefied before use and ex- posure of the melted fat to the air was as short as possible. The results given in the tables indicate the mean of 2 values. In the case of the blank experiments, the values varied from 0.2 c.c. to 0.4 c.c. which were deducted from the actual experimental values. Acid values of some of the butter-fats were also determined and were found to lie between 0.062 c.c. to 0.086 c.c. (in oleic acid per cent), which showed that the butter-fats analysed were free from any rancidity. Determination of carotene content of butter-fats. The carotene content of butter was determined by the following way :252 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows of the fat. As Xanthophyll only constitutes 1/15th of the total yellow colour of butter-fats, no attempt was made for its estimation [Ferguson and Bishop, 1936]. Determination of Vitamin-A content of butter.S. M. DAS GUPTA 253 TABLE I Results of analyses of melted butter-fats of two cows on rations containing different amounts of grass and straw (Cow No. D1.) Week Date on which the milk was collected R. W. (Mean for 2 values) I. N. (Mean for 2 values) Carotene (Y. U.). per grm. Vitamin. A (B. U.) per grm. 1st week . . . 12-2-37 26.4 35.8 3.8 6.8 2nd 254 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows 4. There is no definite period for calving in Vikrampur. Enquiries show that the cows are calved in such a way that the total milk output of the dairy remains practically the same. This might minimise the effect of the period of lactation on the composition of the milk to some extent. 5. During the rains, most of the grazing fields of Vikrampur are under water and the cows live upon mainly stored paddy straw, small amount of grass and sometimes green leaves of the water-hyacinth. Only small quantities of oil-cakes, middlings, husk, etc., are given which do not influence the characteris- tics of the butter-fat to any appreciable extent especially of the Reichert- values (Report No. 66 of the University of Leeds and Yorkshire Council for Agricultural Education). But during the winter (from November), the cows are put out to grass during the day time. The fields are especially rich in green vegetables e.g., Kalaisak rich in carotene (6.6 mg. per 100 grm. of fresh sak) from November to February as the rice harvest is then over. Quite reverse is the case with European countries where the cows are stabled during the winter and are fed with rations of low carotene content. It may be noted here, that the carotene content of grass as well as the stored paddy-straw undergo marked variations throughout the year. During the autumn, the carotene content of the paddy straw which has been stored during the winter is negligible. The results of analyses of fresh samples of cow's butter from mixed milk of several cows collected from dairies in different parts of Vikrampur (Dacca) are given in Table II. TABLE II Results of analyses of butter-fats from mixed milk (morning and evening) of a large herd (The samples were collected from dairies in different parts of Vikrampur during the year 1937-1938. The average temperature during July, August, September and October was about 86° F. and that during November, December, January and February was about 72° F.) Month of preparation No. of samples R. W. (Mean of 2 values) I. N. (Mean of 2 values) Carotene (Y. U.) per grm. Vitamin-A (B. U.) per grm. July . . . . 1 25.0 36.7 2.8 4.7 2 24.2 37.7 2.6 3.3 3 23.8 37.8 1.1 3.2 4 22.6 38.2 2.8 4.4 5 22.8 38.1 2.2 4.4 6 23.6 37.8 2.4 4.8 7 24.8 35.4 2.8 3.8 8 24.8 36.3 2.9 3.6 9 25.2 36.8 2.9 3.9
S. M. DAS GUPTA 255 TABLE II256 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows TABLE IIS. M. DAS GUPTA 257 TABLE II 258 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows Effect of clarification, storage, etc. on the various characteristics of butter-fats Clarification affects the carotene and vitamin-A contents of butter-fats only to a small extent. Continuous heating (e.g., indigenous method of preparing butter from curdled boiled milk or dahi) might lead to a serious destruction of them. Storage for a short time (up to one month) does not impair the contents to any appreciable extent but if preserved for longer periods, a considerable loss might occur. In one or two cases the carotene and vitamin-A contents were found to be destroyed within a few days. It may be noted here that the carotene and vitamin-A do not appear to be affected by pasteurisation and whatever has been found by some is insignifi- cant [ Davies, 1936 ]. In some of the butter-fats giving low and high Reichert-Wollny values, the Polenske values and Refractive index by the Butyro-Refractometer were determined. The values, however, found to be perfectly normal as will be seen from Table IV. The increase in the Iodine values with storage in Table VIII appears to be rather unusual. TABLE IV Relation of Reichert-value, Iodine number, Polenske value and Refractive Index of butter-fats Sample No. Reichert- Wollny value Iodine No. Polenske value Butyro- Refractometer reading at 40°C. 1 21.6 38.8 1.5 43.8 2 22.8 37.2 1.6 43.6 3 21.4 39.8 1.4 43.8 4 30.2 32.1 2.9 41.1 5 30.8 32.2 3.1 41.4
S. M. DAS GUPTA 259 TABLE V Relation between carotene and vitamin-A contents of milk and butter churned therefrom Milk Butter-fat No. of sample Carotene (Y. U.) per grm. of ether extracted fat Vitamin-A (B. U.) per grm. of ether extracted fat No. of sample Carotene (Y. U.) per grm. Vitamin-A (B. U.) per grm. 1 3.4 8.2 1 3.2 7.9 2 3.8 9.1 2 3.6 8.8 3 4.2 10.4 3 3.9 9.9 4 3.6 9.6 4 3.6 9.4 5 4.2 8.8 5 3.8 8.5 6 4.6 10.8 6 4.5 10.5 TABLE VI Effect of storage on the carotene and vitamin-A contents of butter-fat kept in a sterilised bottle sealed with paraffin wax Melted butter Fresh sample One month's storage Three months' storage Six months' storage R. W. value . . . 24.3 24.2 24.8 23.8 Iodine value . . . 35.6 35.8 36.2 37.6 Carotene (Y. U.) . . . 2.4 2.1 1.8 1.2 Vitamin-A (B. U.) . . 4.2 3.8 3.6 2.8
260 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows TABLE VII Effect of clarification of butter-fats on their Reichert and Iodine values. The table shows the changes observed during the clarification of the butter-fat by heating at 50°C and 200°F in an air oven for half an hour. Melted butter-fat (50°C) Clarified butter-fat (200°F) No. of sample R.W. value (Mean of 2 values) I. N. (Mean of 2 values) No. of sample R.W. value (Mean of 2 values) I. N. (Mean of 2 values) 1 26.8 34.6 1 26.8 34.5 2 25.6 35.8 2 25.8 35.4 3 26.8 34.6 3 26.8 34.3 4 27.4 34.8 4 27.7 34.7 5 26.3 35.2 5 26.1 35.6 6 27.2 34.8 6 27.3 34.5 7 26.8 34.8 7 26.7 34.4 8 26.6 34.7 8 26.8 34.8 9 26.8 34.1 9 26.8 34.5 10 27.9 33.4 10 27.8 33.8 TABLE VIII Effect of storage on the Reichert and Iodine values of butter-fats. They were kept in sterilised bottles sealed with paraffin wax. Name of sample Values for fresh sample Values for stored sample R.W. I. N. R. W. (Months) I. N. (Months) (Mean of 2 values) (Mean of 2 values) 1 2 6 12 1 2 6 12 1 24.2 37.6 24.4 24.4 24.1 23.6 37.8 37.9 38.2 39.8 2 25.6 36.2 25.5 25.2 25.5 24.4 36.2 36.6 36.2 38.3 3 27.8 33.8 27.6 26.8 25.8 23.2 33.8 35.2 36.6 37.4 4 27.8 33.9 27.7 27.6 27.9 26.8 33.3 33.3 33.2 34.7 5 29.9 32.5 29.8 29.4 28.8 27.2 32.4 32.6 33.2 34.6 IIIS. M. DAS GUPTA 261 experiment about 6 lb. per day. The experiment was divided into five periods as follows :262 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows the cow was, however, given larger proportions of grass from the 6th week, the carotene content increased from a value of 3.4 Y. U. in the 5th week to a value of 5.4 Y. U. in the 7th week. The Reichert value also increased along with the carotene content from a value of 24.1 in the 6th week to a value of 26.8 in the 8th week ; but while the carotene content slightly diminish- ed from a value of 5.4 Y. U. in the 7th week to a value of 5.2 Y. U. in the 8th week, the Reichert values on the other hand increased from a value of 25.6 in the 7th week to a value of 26.8 in the 8th week. The relationship between carotene content and the Reichert value does not appear, therefore, to be strictly direct. The behaviour of vitamin-A content seems to be a bit irregular. For the first 4 weeks, it remained quite steady like the carotene content. But in the 5th week, it suddenly jumped up to a value of 7.8 B. U. from a value of 6.1 B. U. in the 4th week in spite of the fact that no grass was ingested at all. Then it progressively increased along with the carotene content as the cow was given larger proportions of grass. The behaviour of cow D2 is more or less consistent, so far as the effect of dietary carotene on above characteristics are concerned. Thus with the gradual increase in the grass from the 2nd week, the carotene and vitamin-A contents of butter both increased till the 6th week. The Reichert value also increased along with the above values from 26.6 in the first week to 29.4 in the 5th week. With diminishing amount of grass from the 6th week, the carotene content gradually lowered down from 7.5 Y. U. to 5.6 Y. U., vitamin-A from 12.2 B. U. to 9.8 B. U. and the Reichert value from 29.4 to 26.6 in the 8th week. Any correlationship of these values with Iodine value seems to be complex and has been deferred for a future study but it may be said that in the majority cases it has varied inversely as the Reichert value. Studies in the seasonal variations of the above characteristics of butter seem to corroborate the results of the feeding experiments. The results are very clearly shown in the following table. TABLE X Month No. of samples tested Reichert Wollny values Iodine values Carotene values (Y. U.) Vitamin-A value (B. U.) Range Average Range Average Range Average Range Average July . . 13 22.0S. M. DAS GUPTA 263 It will be clearly seen from the table that the values for the autumn (July to October264 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows respectively, which clearly show the effect of dietary carotene on the charac- teristics of butter. The experimental results with red palm oil (Table IX) are very interest- ing. Thus in the depletion period, when the cow was only on straw and concentrate, the butter-fats gave the following values :S. M. DAS GUPTA 265 winter which has an antagonistic effect on the Reichert-values of the butter- fats. The results, therefore, clearly demonstrate the effects of carotene present in the feeding-stuff as against both the stage of lactation of the cow and cold temperature of the winter which tend to lower the Reichert-values. It must be admitted, however, that the carotene ingested in the above experiments was either in the form of grass or red palm oil which also contain considerable proportions of fatty acids. So the increase in the Reichert values with the carotene content might as well be due to fatty components present in grass or red palm-oil. So the idea developed in this paper regarding the role of carotene in the oxidation of fats is subject to experimental evidences in its favour from feeding experiments with pure carotene which are in progress. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Effects of feeding paddy straw, grass (Cynodon dactylon) and their mixtures on the carotene and vitamin-A contents of butter were studied on two cows. The Reichert and Iodine values were also determined at the same time. The carotene and vitamin-A contents and the Reichert values were found to increase on the ingestion of grass which again lowered down on the ingestion of paddy straw (containing little or no carotene). A fairly large number of butter-fats (107) prepared during the autumn and the winter seasons in Vikrampur (a well-known butter producing centre of Bengal) were assayed for their carotene, vitamin-A, Reichert and Iodine values. During the autumn (average temperature 86°F), the cows mainly lived upon paddy straw and during the winter (average temperature 72°F) the cows were fed on fresh grass, e.g., Kâlaisak, containing on the average 6.6 mg. of carotene per 100 grm. of fresh sâk. It has been found that all the above values are markedly higher in winter than during autumn inspite of the cold temperature of the season. The butter from an individual cow which was on straw during autumn and grass during winter gave similar results in spite of the adverse effects of the cold temperature and stage of lactation. Striking results have been found on feeding a cow with red palm oil when the carotene, vitamin-A and the Reichert value progressively increased as the dosages of the oil were increased. All the above experimental results suggest that the lipochrome pigment carotene may play some part in the production of more volatile fatty acids in cow's milk fat. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS My best thanks are due to Lt.-Col. T. C. Boyd, F.R.C.S., M.R.C.P.I., F.I.C., I.M.S., Rai Bahadur Dr. K. N. Bagchi, M.B., D.T.M. (Cal. & L'Pool.), F.I.C. and Dr. B. Ahmad, Ph.D., for their keen interest taken in my work.
266 Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents of butter-fat in cows REFERENCESAykroyd, W. R. and Wright, R. E. (1937). Ind. J. Med. Res. 25, 7 Crawford, M. E. F., Perry, E. O. V. and Zilva, S. S. (1932). Med. Res. Coun. Sp. Rep. No. 175 Dann, W. J. (1932). Biochem. J. 26, 1072 Davies, W. L. (1936). " The Chemistry of Milk ", Chapman & Hall, Ltd., London, p. 477 Ferguson, W. S. & Bishop, C. (1936). Analyst, 61, 511 Fraps, G. S. and Treichler, R. (1932). Ind. Eng. Chem. 24, 1079 Moore, T. (1929). Biochem. J. 23, 1268 Wilson, H. E. C., Das Gupta S. M. & Ahmad B. (1937). Ind. J. Med. Res. 24, 807 Wright, N. C. (1937). Report on the Development of the Cattle and Dairy Industries in India, p. 33.
THE EFFECT OF CERTAIN DRUGS AND MINERAL DEFICIENCIES ON HELMINTHIASIS OF RUMINANTS BY KARAM CHAND, L.V.P. Assistant Demonstrator, Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore (Received for publication on 13th May 1939) (With Plate XXII) WITH the extension of the canal system in the Punjab, the incidence of parasitic diseases has increased considerably and mention has been made frequently in the annual reports of the Civil Veterinary Department about the steady increase in helminthic infestation of domestic animals, chiefly ruminants, in low-lying, damp and water-logged areas which remain under water for a portion of a year. It is generally recognised that the economic loss occasioned by parasites is enormous, almost incalculable. The direct losses from worm infestations are probably much smaller when compared with the indirect losses, such as failure to put on weight in spite of good grazing or feeding, reduction in the birth rate of calves and lambs, reduced milk yield, and a reduced resistance to disease. There is no gainsaying the fact that only healthy stock can reproduce and rear strong, healthy and virile offspring. An animal infested with worms cannot withstand hard work and other adverse conditions so well as a non-infested healthy one. The present experiment was designed with the express object of attempting to analyse the basal causes of the increased infestation, and to find suitable treatment for some of the important parasites, with due regard to the cost of the remedy. Though there are certain drugs which cope successfully with some types of parasitic infestations, their use on a large number of animals in the field is definitely prohibited by reason of expense. It is possible that on account of repeated water-logging, the soil is denuded of mineral matter, and consequently the fodder grown on such areas lacks some of the mineral constituents essential for proper animal growth and development. Further, the decreased resistance of animals may be due to rankness and excess of fibrous constituents in the fodder of these regions, which greatly lessens assimilability, with the resultant loss of nutritive value and production of a suitable environment for infestation with parasites. *This article is based on the author's Final Report of the Punjab Parasitological Research Scheme. (267)
268 Effect of Certain Drugs etc. on Helminthiasis of Ruminants MATERIAL AND METHOD Experiments covered a period of three years from September 1934 to September 1937 at the Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore. For this purpose twenty-four calves and twenty-four sheep (all males) were selected and divided into four groups each (six animals in each group), in such a way that the total weight of each group of the same species was identical, and were put on a balanced ration (concentrates, green fodder and salt) from the middle of September. Their faeces were examined daily for helminthic egg-count up to the middle of November each year, when the degree of infestation in each animal was determined. From the latter period, treatment with anthelmintics was started which continued up to the first week of January. By comparing the egg-counts before and after the administration of anthelmintics, the efficacy of the various drugs, tried alone or in combination, was calculated. The four different groups were fed on special fodders from the middle of January. Fodder for one lot (a group of calves and a group of sheep) was procured from the water-logged region of the Deg Nullah, for a second lot from adjacent areas but not in the water-logged region, for the third from other areas neither water-logged, nor adjacent. Those of the fourth batch were used as controls and kept on a balanced ration throughout the course of the experiment. In the beginning of June the animals were artificially infested with infec- tive larvae of Haemonchus contortus and Oesophagostomum sp. and it was observed that about twenty days after this infestation, the egg-count, parti- cularly in sheep, rose to a very high level. They developed a bottle jaw condition (Plate XXII) and razor back etc. Three calves belonging to the different grass batches, and three sheep, two of which were kept on grasses and the third on the balanced ration revealed degenerative changes in the eyes leading to blindness in August. Most of the sheep and some calves succumbed to this infestation. On autopsy a larger number of worms was found in those receiving deficient fodders than in those fed on a balanced ration. Each animal was weighed regularly on the same day and at the same time every week, before its morning feed and drink. Photographs of the animals were also taken at various stages of the experiment. ANTHELMINTICS In India no organised effort has so far been made to combat the helminthic infestation in the domestic animals. In other countries, however, various drugs have been tried and good results are claimed, but some of these drugs being costly their use on a large scale is definitely prohibitive by reason of expense. Thus Dungal and Gislason [1936] report that carbon tetrachloride is very efficacious against nematode worms in sheep. Stewart and Piercy [1934] give favourable reports regarding the efficacy of copper sulphate (1 per cent solution) in parasitic gastroenteritis of lambs. Gordon [1935] found that sodium arsenite gave a variable and low average when used against Haemonchus contortus in sheep, but gave excellent results when mixed with
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part III ] PLATE XXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Sheep No. 37.
KARAM CHAND 269 copper sulphate. This combination was tried under the name of Govern- ment Wire Worm Remedy (G. W. W. R.) in South Africa where good results are claimed by Veglia [1928]. It is thought that the good results are mainly due to the closure of the oesophageal groove enabling the drug to pass directly into the abomasum. McEwen [1935] treated some lambs with copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate and kept some as controls. He states that, of the treated lot 8.3 per cent died, while of the entire control group 47 per cent died. He feels that nicotine sulphate is better than copper sulphate when used alone ; and it is suggested that the mixture owes its efficacy to the action of copper sulphate in carrying the dose direct to the abomasum. In this experiment it was noticed on faecal examination that the animals were passing the eggs of Haemonchus, Oesophagostomum and Trichuris spp. Some of them were occasionally passing tapeworm eggs which stopped spontaneously without any treatment. Sometimes coccidia oocysts were noticed, particularly in sheep. Accordingly, the treatment had to be confined to the nematode worms, and the following drugs were tried :270 Effect of Certain Drugs etc. on Helminthiasis of Ruminants Anthelmintics not possessing a purgative property were preceded and followed by purgatives. Salines were used for calves and castor oil for sheep, but later on it was observed that castor oil produced a deleterious effect on the health of sheep, and had, therefore, to be abandoned. RESULTS Butea powder and copper sulphate when tried with purgatives proved fairly effective, but due to the reason stated above purgatives had to be omitted. The administration of these drugs alone did not prove of much use. Kamala in curd-whey, melon pumpkin seeds in mucilage of tragacanth, spineless cactus in green fodder, turpentine oil in simple oil. varnonia anthelmintica in the form of an infusion (unstrained), did not prove suffi- ciently effective to warrant their use on a large scale in the field. A combination of butea with kamala suspended in curd-whey proved fairly effective. On calculation its efficacy was found to be 67 per cent in the way of eradication of parasites. Butea with embelia infusion, ferrous sulphate with aloes, and ferrous sulphate with pot. ant. tartrate did not prove satisfactory anthelmintics. Copper sulphate with kamala proved to be the most effective combination amongst those tried in this experiment. Both the constituents serve a dual purpose. Copper sulphate, besides being an anthelmintic, has the property of passing directly into the abomasum. Thus besides itself it leads kamala also directly into the abomasum. Kamala, being an anthelmintic and purgative, kills and stupefies the parasites and expels these along with others acted upon by copper sulphate. Both these constituents are reasonably cheap and easily available. This combination proved efficacious to the extent of 90 per cent. The combination of copper sulphate and sodium arsenite proved effective to the extent of 58 per cent. Though the combination of kamala with butea showed a greater efficacy, yet it cannot be favourably compared with the former combination, as the preparation of butea for administration is very tedious ; in addition to this the question of freshness of butea and kamala is an important factor. Moreover the combination of copper sulphate with sodium arsenite is cheaper. Due to these considerations it probably stands next to the combination of copper sulphate and Kamala, regarding its use on a large scale in the field. NUTRITION With regard to the relation between malnutrition and parasitic infestation as observed in these series of experiments, it is common knowledge that parasi- tic infestation in calves and sheep is noticed to be particularly heavy in young stock reared on scanty or deficient diet, but no experiment with sufficient control animals appears to have been undertaken in this country with a view to study this problem. Bearing on this question, however, there is a certain amount of literature published by workers in other countries. Thus, Ross [1932] observed that immunity of sheep to stomach worms may be weakened
KARAM CHAND 271 by subjecting them to impaired nutritive conditions. Fraser and Robertson [1933] found that the average number of worms in the poorly fed sheep was three times greater than in the well-fed animals, and the difference was statistically significant. Further, the well-fed lambs had a high degree of resistance to worm infection than those fed poorly. Ross and Graham [1933] found that pasture improvement was far more effective in improving the condi- tion of sheep infested with small Trichostrongylid worms than was drug treatment. Taylor [1934] and Mönning [1936] stress the importance of adequate feeding of sheep in the control of parasitic infestations. Robertson [1936] points out that good diet is more important in the control of parasitic infestations than drug treatment. Ross and Gordon [1933] pointed out further, that in sheep kept on a diet, low in proteins and minerals, the resistance to Haemonchus contortus was completely broken down. In view of these findings it is evident that malnutrition has an adverse effect on the resistance of the animal body towards parasitic infestations. A description of the different feeds and design of the experiment has been given under ' Material and method '. The data recorded were (1) protein consumption, (2) mineral (soluble ash) consumption, (3) parasitic counts and (4) live-weights. It was not possible to record the protein and mineral con- sumption individually for each animal as a weighed quantity of the feed was given to each group as a whole. Data for individual animals were, however, recorded for parasitic counts and live-weights. The analyses of variance of these two items during the different years are given in Appendix B. Where a large number of animals died during the course of the experiment, no analysis is given. PARASITIC INFESTATION Calves.272 Effect of Certain Drugs etc. on Helminthiasis of Ruminants same. These two conditions were not however observed in the 1934-35 experi- ments. In the next two years the animals were so selected that the differences fn initial weights were not very much and the grouping of animals for giving several feeds was done in such a way that the total weights of all the groups were almost equal. In the case of calves only, the experiments continued success- fully as there were ery few deaths. In the case of sheep, however, there were a number of deaths during 1935-36 and 1936-37, so that the final weights of only a iew animals could be recorded. Calves.KARAM CHAND 273 The following table gives the values of simple correlations between the several factors:274 Effect of Certain Drugs etc. on Helminthiasis of Ruminants Appendix A TABLE I Relation between protein consumption and live-weight Year Name of food Average daily pro- tein consumption in lb. calculated on the entire experi- mental period Live-weight, gain or loss per cent Remarks Calves Sheep Calves Sheep 1934-35 B. R. . 0.673 0.305 110 gain 50 gain *Sheep were replaced N. A. . 0.657 0.272 30 KARAM CHAND 275 TABLE II Relation between mineral intake and live-weight Year Name of food Average daily mineral (soluble ash) con- sumption in lb. calculated on the entire experimental period Live-weight gain or loss per cent Remarks Calves Sheep Calves Sheep 1934-35 B. R. . 0.662 0.242 110 gain 50 gain N. A. . 0.295 0.102 30 276 Effect of Certain Drugs etc. on Helminthiasis of Ruminants TABLE IV Relation between mineral intake and parasitic infestation Year Name of food Average daily mineral (soluble ash) consump- tion in lb. calculated on the entire experi- mental period Parasitic infestation. No. of worms Remarks Calves Sheep Calves Sheep 1934-35 B. R. . 0.662 0.242 42 4,255 *The only sheep which developed severe Hae- monchosis was out of this batch. N. A. . 0.295 0.102 91 4,934 D. N. . 0.412 0.137 76 19,417* A. D. N. 0.442 0.084 63 5,282 1935-36 B. R. . 0.699 0.179 118 1,501 N. A. . 0.091 0.036 638 3,849 D. N. . 0.114 0.042 575 3,500 A. D. N. 0.167 0.040 441 3,869 1936-37 B. R. . 1.062 0.254 188 1,919 N. A. . 0.380 0.096 200 2,059 D. N. . 0.199 0.073 1,027 3,138 A. D. N. 0.201 0.078 582 2,782 TABLE V Relation between live-weight changes, minerals intake and parasitic infestation Year Name of food Live-weight changes per cent Minerals (soluble ash) in the daily ration Parasites. No. of worms Remarks Calves Sheep Calves Sheep Calves Sheep 1934-35 B. R. . 110+ 50+ 0.662 0.242 42 4,255 N. A. . 30+ 33 + 0.295 0.102 91 4,934 D. N. . 15+ 12KARAM CHAND 277 Appendix B TABLE I Analyses of variance of parasitic counts Due to D. F. S. S. Variance V1V2 Significant or not Calves. 1934-35 . . Between feeds . 3 5775.10 1925.03 ' Within groups' Not significant Within feeds . 13 26259.02 2019.92 higher S.S. Total . 16 32034.12 1935-36 . . Only a few samples Not analysed 1936-37 . . Between feeds . Within feeds . 3 6 119008.93 894917.17 396669.64 149152.86 2.7 Not significant Total . 9 2084926.10 Sheep. 1934-35 . . Between feeds . 3 757915342.37 252,638447.45 5.8 Significant at 1 per cent level Within feeds . 15 645778226.26 430,51881.75 Total . 18 1403693568.63 1935-36 . Between feeds . 3 18162912.5 6054304.16 2.9 Not significant Within feeds . 14 28706350.0 2050453.57 Total . 17 46869262.5 1936-37 . Between feeds . 3 3676549.75 1225516.58 ' Within groups ' Not significant Within feeds . 11 28635874.05 2603261.27 S. S. higher Total . 14 32312423.80 TABLE II Analyses of variance of percentages of increase in weight after correction for differences in weights at the commencement of the experiment Due to D. F. Initial weight Percen- tage Increase S. S. Products Adjusted S. S. Adjusted M. S. Significance V1/V2 Conclusions Calves (17 animals) 1934-35 Between feeds . 3 38699.6 19559.7 278 Effect of Certain Drugs etc. on Helminthiasis of Ruminants TABLE IIGOAT VIRUS VACCINATION IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES AND BERAR* (FINAL REPORT) BY CAPTAIN BACHAN SINGH, M.R.C.V.S. Veterinary Investigation Officer, Central Provinces and Berar INTRODUCTION The economic and scientific importance of rinderpest which is known to be responsible for 60 per cent of the total annual mortality in cattle in India, has been more realised in recent years, and this vast problem has come into greater prominence since the appointment of the Disease Investigation Officers under the auspices of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research in the country. The original researches conducted at Mukteswar Institute by Dr. Edwards between the years 1926 and 1928, went to prove the value of " goat virus alone " method of vaccination and possibility of its introduction in indigenous breeds of cattle in India. The Central Provinces Veterinary Department got the credit for having introduced the above method of vaccination for the first time in India in 1930, under the guidance of the late Major R. F. Stirling, who was successful in his attempts in proving the efficacy of the method in field conditions by inoculating a number of animals, with satisfactory results. With a view to study, on a comprehensive scale, the various aspects of this new method of vaccination and to make it " fool proof ", a scheme for employ- ment of a field staff consisting of eleven Veterinary Assistant Surgeons was prepared by the Local Government and submitted to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, for sanctioning the necessary funds, and was approved by them in 1934. The scheme actually came into force from March 1935. The sanctioned staff consisting of one Senior Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Mr. G. D. Pani, who had previously worked under Major Stirling as his field assistant in Goat Virus Work, and ten Veterinary Assistant Surgeons, fresh graduates from different Colleges in India, was appointed under the scheme from 15th March 1935. To begin with, a preliminary course of training for the benefit of the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons was arranged at Nagpur, where they were trained in the technique of goat virus vaccination. The team of field workers under the control of the Veterinary Investigation Officer made a start in the district of Saugor with Saugor as their headquarters. During the first year of the scheme, that district remained as the centre of their activities. The reasons * Scheme financed by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for three years from March 1935 to March 1938. (279) E
280 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar for selecting that particular district was that due to greater movements of nomadic cattle imported into the Province from neighbouring States like Gwalior and Bhopal, rinderpest had been a perpetual source of menace to the cattle of that district and the nomadic herds coming from States were respon- sible for dissemination of the disease. During the first year of the scheme, as many as 1,17,115 head of cattle in 414 villages were protected by the " goat virus alone " method ; out of these 4,000 animals were inoculated with tissue virus manufactured locally. The system of field work followed was mass inoculation of cattle in villages lying on main routes by which nomadic cattle move. The results of these inocula- tions were strikingly successful in gaining the confidence of local cultivators in this method of vaccination. Up to the middle of the second year, the scheme was continued in the same district by which time most of the cattle of the villages situated along all the important routes were immunized against the disease. In order to collect more comprehensive data in varied conditions, the work was extended to different centres in the Province where there was a demand for such work, and Nagpur was made the central station for experi- mental work and production of virus. On shifting to Nagpur in October 1936, the manufacture of tissue virus was intensified, and moreover, the Provincial Veterinary staff was also trained in the technique of manufacture of tissue virus which was introduced for the first time in the Province. In the three years during which the scheme remained in force, the in- vestigation work was carried on altogether in 9 districts, viz., Saugor, Jubbul- pore, Hoshangabad, Nimar, Chhindwara, Balaghat, Bilaspur, Amraoti and Nagpur. Apart from the study of various interesting problems relating to goat virus vaccination, a large number of cattle were protected against the disease with the result that the incidence of rinderpest became considerably less as compared to former years when only serum inoculation was done, and thus a great relief was afforded to the cultivators. Altogether in three years, as many as 382,621 animals were inoculated with different methods and the results have been extremely satisfactory throughout (The details of the vaccinations are given in Appendix A). The main problems which formed the technical programme of work approved by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research are enumerated as under:BACHAN SINGH 281 (d) What complications, if any, may arise in goats as to render the use of virus unfit for vaccination ? (e) How should the virus be distributed in the field during all seasons and varying weather conditions ? (f) What is the extent of loss in condition and milk yield that may be occasioned in the cattle after vaccination ? (g) By what method of feeding of adjuncts to normal food during all seasons of the year can sufficient Vitamin A be introduced in the animal system, so as to prevent the loss of flesh and milk yield after vaccination ? (h) What are the common protozoan diseases such as piroplasmosis, trypanosomiasis and coccidiosis which may resuscitate with vaccination ? (i) What is the extent of loss that may be caused due to above complica- tions after vaccination ? (j) What remedial and control measures could be applied in the field so as to check the mortality on that account ? (k) How and under what circumstances can goat virus vaccination be undertaken during actual outbreaks of rinderpest in the field ? (l) At what minimum age cattle could be vaccinated so as to confer the maximum period of immunity against the disease ? (m) What may the maximum period of immunity be in the different breeds of cattle in the Central Provinces ? PRODUCTION OF VIRUS The blood virus was originally obtained from Muktesar laboratory in August 1935, and was kept alive by regular " passage " through local goats and remained potent till the termination of the scheme when its manufacture was stopped. It had undergone as many as 263 " passages " without showing any deterioration in its virulence which could be judged from the type of reac- tions shown by cattle. Similarly the local strain of virus was " passaged " 191 times without loosing potency (The details are given in Appendix B). The reactions produced by blood virus both in cattle and buffaloes of indigenous local breed have been observed to be of the usual mild type except that in buffalo-calves there has been some tendency for developing more marked type of reactions, both clinical and thermal, but in the majority of cases recovery was the sequence. This shows that the reaction set up by goat virus varies in accordance with the local conditions, breed of animals, as well as individual susceptibility. However, in the light of the above experience no hard and fast rules could be made out which suit the general needs and require- ments of each and every province, therefore, in view of these, adjustments have to be made according to the local conditions.
282 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar PRODUCTION OF TISSUE VIRUS During the period when the virus-producing centre remained at Saugor, a lot of difficulties were encountered in the manufacture of tissue virus as there was no adequate and proper accommodation available for its preparation; hence it could not be introduced earlier in the province. The manufacture of goat blood virus was started at Saugor from the very beginning and the seed material was obtained from Muktesar laboratory. On certain occasions when there was a rush of work the virus was manufactured in the villages at the scene of activities of the field staff with satisfactory results. With the change of head- quarters to Nagpur in September 1936, where better laboratory facilities exist the manufacture of tissue virus was started and the provincial laboratory staff was also trained in its manufacture with a view to introduce this method of vaccination on a large scale in the Province. REACTION IN CATTLE It has been noticed that the reaction in the case of tissue virus is milder than that of blood virus both in cattle and buffaloes, and in old animals it is usually imperceptible. In such cases the duration of immunity is bound to be of short interval, which is decidedly a disadvantage of tissue virus when compared with " blood virus " which on account of its potent nature of reac- tion confers a more lasting immunity. BLOOD VIRUS " LOCAL STRAIN " This second strain was originally drawn from a case of rinderpest and after the 40th " passage " through goats it became attenuated for local cattle. Since then it has been used in a large number of animals both cattle and buffaloes of indigenous breed with satisfactory results, though the reactions produced in buffalo-calves especially, have been observed to be of severe type but without being fatal. After the 80th " passage " the local virus became milder in its reaction for buffaloes as well, and thereafter it did not show any further attenuation and became " fixed " in its virulence. The total number of animals inoculated with it comes to 46,767, including buffaloes. TISSUE VIRUS " LOCAL STRAIN " The intensity of reaction among local indigenous cattle was observed to be akin to that of " Muktesar strain " " blood virus " and hence was more potent and of more uniform nature than the Muktesar strain " tissue virus ". With this method as many as 58,311 animals were vaccinated and the results have been very encouraging. The main problems comprising the programme of work under the scheme as already mentioned above were thoroughly studied and the conclusions arrived at after a comprehensive investigation are discussed below seriatim.
BACHAN SINGH 283 (a) The best method of obtaining virus, Muktesar or local A systematic investigation carried on under the scheme has proved that Muktesar strain of virus which had been maintained at that laboratory since 1927, when Dr. Edwards for the first time was able to " attenuate " rinderpest virus, is absolutely harmless both for indigenous and imported cattle and owing to its low virulence it can safely be used for the latter class of animals along with a small dose of serum. Moreover, for the indigenous breed of buffaloes it has been found to be equally harmless in this Province which perhaps is due to the influence of some local conditions, for, in other provinces, the " virus alone " method has led to some serious complications and severe reactions in this class of animals. In heavy milch buffaloes possessing unknown suscep- tibility to rinderpest, it is always a wise policy to give a small dose of serum along with virus with a view to obviate the risk of severe reactions, and more- over, by this method the loss in milk yield is prevented to a great extent. From experience with indigenous cattle, the " virus alone " method is an ideal method for general adoption in the field both on preventive and pro- phylaxis scale against rinderpest, and is now largely used in the Province. (b) The number of passages required for the fixation of local virus About the beginning of 1936 the above problem came under study at Saugor. The virus was obtained from an actual case of rinderpest and it was given to a buffalo-calf which developed pathagnomonic symptoms of the disease. At the height of thermal reaction the virus was drawn from the buffalo-calf and injected into two healthy goats which similarly developed a typical rinderpest reaction both clinical and thermal. The virus at the height of their thermal reaction was drawn from both the goats and inoculated into two new healthy goats, and in this manner the " passage " of virus was continued in series of goats, on every fourth day and at each passage its viru- lence was tested in buffalo-calves. After the 30th passage onwards it was observed that the virus started becoming milder in its antigenic properties with the result that on the 40th " passage " when it was tested on a batch of fifteen animals all of them withstood inoculation. Except diarrhoea which was observed only in a few animals no other complications were noticeable. From the 40th " passage " onwards the virus was used in cattle with very good results in a number of villages in Saugor district. At the 80th passage the virus became still milder in its reaction for indigenous breed of buffaloes. In all 105,078 head of cattle including 19,558 buffaloes were in- oculated with local strain of blood and tissue virus with good results, the same as in the case of Muktesar virus. (The details of these inoculations are given in Appendix C).
284 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar (c) The suitable age of goats for virus production The above problem was not studied from a statistical point of view due to lack of funds and proper facilities, but from the field point of view the ex- perience gained in relation to this problem shows that the age considered most suitable for production of goat virus is 2 to 3 years. At this age the ani- mals, being in the prime of life show a regular form of reaction both thermal and clinical to virus inoculation which is a great guide for a field worker, and the maximum quantity of virus can be drawn, which is another great advantage. Male goats are preferable due to the fact that female goats injected when pregnant are liable to abortion followed by other complications which are apt to render the virus unsafe for vaccination. In view of the above as far as possible, pregnant animals should be avoided for virus production. Sheep are not suitable for virus production for the reason that the reaction set up by goat virus in them is not at all reliable, being of an erratic nature. Bleeding of this species of animals is also another difficulty one has to consider. (d) Complications in goats which render the virus unsafe for use No serious complications were observed in virus producers. In one goat which died suddenly on the date of bleeding after showing symptoms of diarrhoea, post mortem examination revealed septicaemic condition and on examination of smears made from the liver and heart, the presence of organisms resembling Pasteuralla Oviseptica was detected under the microscope. The other complication observed was incidence of " contagious ecthy ma " which was responsible for the wholesale affection of goats during the rainy season at Saugor during 1935-36, 1936-37 and at Nagpur during 1937-38, but the virus from such goats was found to be harmless for cattle and the disease appeared to be of a non-transmissible character. The only dis- advantage found was that the thermal and clinical reactions of the affected goats were apt to be misleading, hence in such cases greater care is essential in interpretation of reaction on the part of an operator. Any other serious complication like Anthrax was never seen though goats do get the disease which is known to be cent per cent fatal in them. It is always the best policy to select healthy young goats for the purpose of virus manufacture and they should be kept under observation for at least twenty-four hours before the virus is given to them and blood smears should be examined under the microscope. On the date of bleeding it is highly essential that their blood smears should be examined and this procedure should be rigidly followed. (e) The distribution of virus in the field during all seasons This most important problem was thoroughly looked into during the operation of the scheme. As long as activities of the goat virus staff remained confined to Saugor district only, no difficulty was experienced in the supply of
BACHAN SINGH 285 virus to them as the virus was usually made available on the scene of their activities within forty-eight hours of its bleeding. When a large number of cattle were available for inoculation and the place was situated in the interior far from any approach road, it was found very convenient to produce virus at the scene of activities, but this method cannot be made use of at every place due to lack of proper facilities for bleeding of goats. Moreover, it was objected to by a certain class of people in villages. The practical method for sending virus to a distant place where rail- way connection is available is to collect the virus in small-sized bottles of 2 oz. capacity and pack them in a small wooden box specially made for this pur- pose. In the winter season the virus sent in such a manner can be kept potent and fit for use for at least 120 hours, but during the intense heat of summer it begins to deteriorate in a short time, and consequently needs more care in packing, etc. The procedure followed hitherto was to pack virus bottles in a box, in either sawdust or ordinary straw, filled up with ice, and despatch it by railway parcel. In this manner the virus can be kept alive up to 72 hours from the time of its bleeding. In the case of tissue virus such precautions are not necessary ; after careful ampulling the virus remains in good condition for 10-12 days during winter and 5-6 days in summer. Moreover, its distribution to the field staff is very convenient by ordinary post with very little expense. From a laboratory centrally located, the tissue virus can easily be made available to the district staff throughout the province all the year round, which undoubtedly is its greatest advantage over blood virus. How- ever, from personal experience in dealing with this problem, no hard and fast rule can be made; adaptations have to be made to suit the local conditions. (f) Loss of condition and milk yield after vaccination The most disquieting factor resulting from the " goat virus alone " method hitherto observed was loss in milk yield both in cattle and buffaloes. Every possible endeavour was made by the staff working in different localities to obtain data relating to this problem, but they had to depend solely upon information received from cattle owners during the course of investigation, and this was of such a conflicting nature that it cannot be taken as accurate enough for drawing final conclusions. The information received, however, goes to show that after goat virus vaccination the milk yield is decidedly affected, particularly in those animals which are not properly cared for during the reaction period, and that loss in yield varies from 20 to 50 per cent. With a view to determine the exact loss in milk yield after active immunization by different methods, viz., blood virus, tissue virus and blood- cum-serum, a small scale experiment was arranged at the Agricultural College Dairy, Nagpur. The summary of the experiment is as follows :286 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar 1 c.c. of blood virus from goat No. 768 was given subcutaneously and their thermal reaction and milk yield recorded both morning and evening. The second batch of animals (three cows and two buffaloes) was injected with tissue virus prepared from the same goat No. 768 ; their reaction and milk yield recorded both morning and evening. The third batch of four animals (two buffaloes and two cows) was injected with blood virus along with 20 c.c. and 10 c.c. of ordinary anti-rinderpest serum respectively. In all the animals their reactions and milk yield were recorded regularly both morning and even- ing for ten days. The highest loss was noticeable in the case of blood virus, which went as high as 52 per cent, then comes tissue virus to the extent of 30 per cent, the lowest loss being 25 per cent due to blood- cum-serum. The table showing the details of the experiment is appended in Appendix F. The above experiment points to the conclusion that with a view to ob- viate the risk of loss in milk yield, " the virus- cum-serum " method of inocula- tion is the safest one to adopt. (g) Feeding of cattle during reaction period Although this problem could not be studied very thoroughly due to lack of proper facilities for this type of work in the villages and also due to paucity of funds, the observations made in the course of investigation both in villages and Government dairies, however, show that in well-fed animals receiving sufficient grain ration and succulent fodder containing vitamin A, during the reaction period, the bodily condition is not much affected. The loss in milk yield is also less as compared with that of animals kept in a neglec- ted state. The necessity of feeding the animals liberally during the reaction period after goat virus inoculation is, therefore, quite obvious and all the more so in the case of milch animals. (h) Resuscitation of protozoan diseases This important problem was thoroughly looked into by making clinical observations as well as by microscopic study of blood smears obtained during different phases of the reaction period on as many as 2,180 cattle. This led to finding of Babesia bigeminum, the cause of Piroplasmosis in fifty-seven animals and Theleria mutans in 387 cases. In the majority of cases which had shown the presence of Babesia bigeminum in the blood circulation, the clinical symptoms of the disease were totally absent and the animals were mere carriers of the disease. In the case of Theleria mutans infection not a single case had shown any evidence of clinical symptoms of the disease, which goes to prove that the presence of this type of protozoa is of no serious consequence in the course of active immunization of cattle with goat virus against rinderpest as far as indigenous breed of cattle are concerned. As regards the resuscitation of Trypanosome infection, its occurrence during active immunization work has not been observed, but in the enzootic area during the season of its incidence every precaution should be taken, as it is liable to cause great complications in view of its nature of assuming virulence all of a sudden (The details of blood examination are given in Appendix D.)
BACHAN SINGH 287 Of the protozoan diseases the most important condition which is likely to cause some trouble is Coccidiosia infection. The common variety of pro- tozoa inhabiting the alimentary tract in cattle is known as Eimeria zurni. During the course of vaccination work its resuscitation has been commonly observed in weak and emaciated animals which are usually kept in a neglected state under unhygenic conditions. The symptoms noticed in the majority of the cases are of chronic nature, viz., passing of thin faeces containing a lot of mucoid material giving an offensive smell. The animal becomes dull, appetite is disturbed, it rapidly begins to lose bodily condition, anaemia sets in and if not properly looked after it ultimately succumbs. The condition is amenable to treatment provided it is undertaken in time. Special coccidiosis powder consisting of Ferri sulph, Copper sulph, Catechu, Areca nut and pulvis zingiberis along with proper nursing and feeding of sick animals has proved to be very efficacious. Carbon tetrachloride recom- mended by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for trial against this disease has proved to be less effective than the above mentioned method of treatment. (The details are given in Appendix E.) (i) The best method of control of rinderpest outbreak In the course of investigation every possible attempt was made in the study of above named problem. Altogether 56 natural outbreaks of the disease were attended by the staff and goat virus alone method (blood or tissue virus) was given a trial. Except one village where a number of animals already vaccinated with tissue virus " Muktesar strain " got a subsequent infection and succumbed to it, at other places the results of vaccinations have been very satisfactory. For the first time the goat virus alone method was employed in dealing with actual outbreak of the disease and since then, owing to the good results obtained this method has been brought into use in place of serum alone method. Experience has proved that the former method is decidedly far superior to the latter in view of its cheapness and the longer period of immunity it confers. For effective control of the disease in any particular area the wholesale vaccination of cattle in villages surrounding the scene of outbreak is very essential with a view to establishing an immune belt which greatly helps in checking its further spread, and the above procedure in dealing with rinderpest outbreaks has been found to be strikingly useful for controlling the disease. (j) The minimum age for effective vaccination No controlled experiments were conducted due to lack of funds for pur- chase of the large number of calves required for this purpose ; but from field observations made during the course of investigation in villages, it appear- ed that six months is quite a suitable age for safe vaccination, below that age vaccination is not recommended as the immunity conferred is of doubtful nature and does not seem to last long. (k) The maximum period of immunity conferred by goat virus On several occasions tests with bull virus were conducted in order to determine the duration of immunity conferred. The longest period of F
288 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar immunity observed so far in this Province was three and a half years. This test was carried out at Garhi farm, where a batch of four vaccinated animals proved immune to bull virus and showed neither any clinical nor thermal reaction. As regards the question of immunity established in the case of tissue virus it has not been tested beyond one year's duration. Further tests will be carried out in the near future in order to determine the duration of immunity. VACCINATION OF NOMADIC HERDS During the period the scheme remained in operation in Saugor district, opportunities were taken to popularise goat virus vaccination among nomadic cattle dealers who import cattle into the province from Gwalior and Bhopal states. By our systematic propaganda and repeated persuasion it was possible to make those dealers realise the great value of the method of vaccination with the result that now they themselves press for inoculation of their herds. TATTOOING AND BRANDING An important problem which unfortunately could not be tackled under the scheme is that of marking of animals vaccinated with goat virus for the purpose of identification. In some animals tattooing was tried without any material success due to the complexity of the process, and moreover, it was objected to by the villagers. Branding was also given a trial on the face and neck regions in a number of animals but it had to be abandoned due to the same reasons stated above. CONCLUSIONS The investigation has led to the following conclusions :BACHAN SINGH 289 (viii) Besides its cheapness in cost, the other great advantage in the case of goat blood and tissue virus is that, if extensive inoculations are carried out in an area on a prophylactic basis, the chances for spread of infection from vaccinated to non-vaccinated animals are very remote. In conclusion it may be mentioned that apart from the large amount of valuable scientific data dealing with the various aspects of goat virus vaccination obtained under this scheme, the Province has been materially benefited by this mass inoculation of cattle in certain areas where those cattle will remain immune to the disease at least for three to four years to come. Another great advantage is that goat virus vaccination has been made very popular among the local people and nomadic cattle dealers and has thereby facilitated the working of the Cattle Disease Act which will be enforced very shortly. With the successful working of the Act, it is hoped that the incidence of rinderpest, which is responsible for heavy mortality in cattle every year, will be greatly reduced in the near future. APPENDIX A Statement showing the number of inoculations performed with different strains of goat virus during the last three years from 15th March 1935 to 14th March 1938. Year Total number of villages No. of inocula- tions performed with blood virus "Muktesar strain " No. of inocula- tions performed with blood virus " Local strain " No. of inocula- tions performed with tissue virus "Muktesar strain " No. of inocula- tions performed with tissue virus " Local strain " No. of inocula- tions performed with serum simul- taneous method Total Remarks 1935-36 . . 414 111,982 ... 3,858 ... 1,275 117,115 1936-37 . . 806 71,278 27,526 22,513 19,141 719 141,177 1937-38 . . 733 21,353 19,241 44,565 39,170 ... 124,329 Total . 1,953 204,613 46,767 70,936 58,311 1,994 382,621 Total number of inoculations performed=3,82,621 in 1,953 villages. APPENDIX B Statement showing the number of strains, number of goats, etc., used for virus production, during the last three years, from 15th March 1935 to 14th March 1938. Year " Muktesar strain " " Local strain " Number of goats used Number of goats slaugh- tered for tissue virus Number of passages undergone Number of goats used Number of goats slaugh- tered for tissue virus Number of passages undergone Remarks 1935-36 . . . . 304 ... 95 75 ... 125 1936-37 . . . . 231 29 184 250 18 108 1937-38 . . . . 95 39 263 94 32 191 Total . 630 68 ... 419 50 ...
290 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar APPENDIX C Statement showing the number of buffaloes vaccinated with goat virus during the last three years, from 15th March 1935 to 14th March 1938. Year Blood virus Muktesar strain Tissue virus Muktesar strain Blood virus local strain Tissue virus local strain Blood virus and serum 1935-36 . . . . . . 20,516 1,007 ... ... 322 1936-37 . . . . . . 15,766 5,235 4,493 5,160 301 1937-38 . . . . . . 3,510 6,306 2,733 7,172 ... Total . 39,792 12,548 7,226 12,332 623 Total number of buffaloes vaccinated with goat virus = 72,521 APPENDIX D Statement showing the number of blood smears examined with their results during the last three years from 15th March 1935 to 14th March 1938. Year Number of blood smears examined Number of blood smears positive for Theleria mutans Number of blood smears positive for Babesia bigeminum Number of blood smears positive for Trypano- some evansi Number of blood smears positive for Lucocy- tosis Number of blood smears positive for Filaria infection Remarks 1935-36 . 1,185 234 30 ... ... ... 1936-37 . 833 127 24 1 ... ... Percentage of T. mutans 17.75 per cent 1937-38 . 162 26 3 ... 1 1 Percentage of B. bigeminum 2.61 per cent Total . 2,180 387 57 1 1 1 APPENDIX E Statement showing the number of samples of faeces examined during the last three years from, 15th March 1935 to 14th March 1938. Year Number of samples of faeces examined Number of samples positive for coccidiosis Number of samples positive for other infec- tion Percentage of cases positive for coccidiosis Remarks 1935-36 . . . 224 153 1 Ascaris 68.3 1936-37 . . . 47 35 ... 74.46 On the whole percentage comes to 65.5 1937-38 . . . 31 18 ... 55.5 Total . 302 206 1
BACHAN SINGH 291 APPENDIX F Summary of experiment conducted on loss of milk yield in respect of Goal Viru Vaccination The summary of the above named experiment as referred to in the report is given as under :292 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar APPENDIX Table showing the details of experiments in respect of loss of milk yield Serial No. Method of Vaccination Class of animal Name of animal Breed* Age Lactation Month of lactation Month of pregnancy Average milk yield per day in May Average milk yield 10 days prior to vaccina- tion lbs. lbs. 1 Blood virus alone Cow . Urvasi . BACHAN SINGH 293 F294 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar APPENDIX G Summary of experiment in respect of fixation of local rinderpest virus Procedure.BACHAN SINGH 295 APPENDIX G 296 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar APPENDIX GBACHAN SINGH 297 APPENDIX G298 Goat Virus Vaccination in the Central Provinces & Berar APPENDIX G PASTEURELLOSIS IN WHITE MICE* BY V. R. RAJAGOPALAN, G. M. V. C. AND V. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN, G. M. V. C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun. (Received for publication on 7th February, 1939) (With Plate XXIII) DURING the month of August 1937, an epizootic occurred in the white mice bred and maintained for experimental purposes at the Imperial Veteri- nary Research Institute, Mukteswar. Materials from a number of animals that died were submitted to bacteriological examination and from all these an organism of the Pasteurella group was isolated. The object of this paper is to give the cultural, biochemical and serological characters and to record some salient facts in regard to the identity of the organism. The outbreak was first noticed in the middle of August and the course of the disease was so acute that some were stated to have died within a few hours ; young as well as old mice were found to be the victims. Immediate adoption of hygienic and other precautionary measures helped considerably in limiting the spread of infection. NECROPSY Post-mortem findings were uniform in all cases excepting slight variations in the degree of severity of the lesions. The general condition of the animals was fair with the exception of a few that appeared slightly anaemic. On opening the carcase numerous haemorrhagic spots were noticed over the peritoneum and pleura. A drop or two of sero-sanguinous fluid was often present. Pneumonic lesions were found in the lungs, which in most cases were consolidated. In two instances the lungs were adherent to the chest wall. The bronchii contained a few inflammatory patches, coated with dirty white frothy discharge. The pericardial sac presented a few petechiae. The liver was usually congested, enlarged and slightly friable and was deep brown in colour. The spleen was dark in colour, deeply congested and distinctly enlarged. The parenchyma appeared soft and even the slightest pressure burst the cover- * Paper read at the Indian Science Congress, 1939. (299)
300 Pasteurellosis in White Mice ing, exposing the dark red pulp that was almost semi-solid in consistency. The kidney was congested, the capsule showing inflammatory patches. Lymph glands were also inflamed. Smears from heart blood, spleen, liver and lungs were stained and examin- ed. In almost all the stained preparations, the organism appeared mostly ovoid, some of them as elongated rods, with bipolar staining. In some smears of the heart blood, they were rare but a number of them were present, evenly distributed, in the organ smears. Materials from the organs were subjected to the usual cultural examination on laboratory media and final readings were taken after 48 hours at 37° C. MORPHOLOGY The organism grown on solid medium appears as short rods, most of them ovoid, some as elongated rods, slightly convex sides, rounded ends, arranged singly and in pairs. It is gram-negative, non-motile, non-sporulating and non- acid-fast. In smear preparations of broth culture no marked morphological difference could be noticed excepting that the bacillary form is, perhaps, more frequently seen. Attempts to demonstrate capsules, if any, by various methods in tissue and culture smears, proved unsuccessful. CULTURAL CHARACTERS Agar :Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part III ] PLATE XXIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Four days' old culture of Past. muricida showing wrinkled appearance ; the one on the right is 24 hours' old [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Seventy-two hours' old broth culture of Past. muricida showing stalactite formation.
V. R. RAJAGOPALAN & V. R. GOPALKRISHNAN 301 TABLE I Comparative tests of mouse organism with some stock Pasteurella strains. Tests Mouse organism C. 11 Pasteure- lla 2 Past. 10 Past. 14 Past. 34 Remarks Adonite . . . . +30 302 Pasteurellosis in White Mice Details of other strains used for comparative tests. Stock No. Organism Source Past. 2 . Pasteurella boviseptica . . . . . Brazil. V . R. RAJAGOPALAN & V. R . GOPALAKRISHNAN 303 of carbolised saline was added and the growth was displaced with the help of platinum loop or preferably with a capillary pipette having a little curve at the tip. For convenience, it is better to have the least required quantity of carbol saline. In the process of emulsification it was invariably found that the culture adhered to the loop and moved about in a stringy form with out detaching itself from the loop in spite of smart shaking. Hence a capillary pipette was found better for reasons stated below. The saline suspension was transferred to a sterile mortar. Along with the suspension a small length of the narrow portion of the capillary tube in- cluding the curved end was crushed with the pestle so that the fine pieces of of glass aided in breaking up the strands or flocculi. After about ten minutes trituration, a uniform emulsion was obtained. For the removal of the glass particles, the solution was centrifuged for three minutes at 1,000 R. P. M. The supernatant fluid was removed and the opacity standardised for the test. It was found that the antigen prepared as above, remained quite stable. The agglutination test was carried out by the usual macroscopic method. Serum was put up in a series of six dilutions from 1/25 to 1/800. The bac- terial suspension was added and the test was conducted in the waterbath at 55°C. and the readings were taken at the end of 4 and 24 hours. The homologous titre (mouse organism) was found to be 400. The next step was to find out whether the organism possessed any serological relationship, and if so the degree, with the other members of the Pasteurella group. The serum was submitted to cross-agglutination test against eleven different antigens (Table II). TABLE II Serum Antigen 1/25 1/50 1/100 1/200 1/400 1/800 C Result Mouse organism (Rabbit 99) Mouse organism C C C C P . . . . 400 (Homolo- gous) 304 Pasteurellosis in White Mice From the above table it is evident that the organism bears some serolo- gical relationship with Past. cuniculicida but there was no reaction with strains of Past, pseudotuberculosis rodentium. TABLE III Cross-test Serum Antigen 1/25 1/50 1/100 1/200 1/400 1/800 C Result C. 9 . Mouse organism C. 10 . V. R. RAJAGOPALAN & V. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN 305 TABLE V Cross-agglutination Serum Antigen ½ ¼ 306 Pasteurellosis in White Mice Yusef [1935] employed the precipitation test to overcome certain obvious difficulties in the agglutination test. He established three serological groups in dealing with most of the strains used previously by Cornelius (loc. cit) , and discussed certain unaccountable discrepancies when comparing his results with the findings of the previous worker. Smillie [1920] isolated Pasteurella organisms in wild rats. Attempts to correlate the above by serological methods with Past. pestis, were unsuccessful. Thus it is apparent that the species specificity of the known members of of the pasteurella group still remains unsettled. This is, perhaps, one of the reasons why Topley and Wilson [1937] have stated that " there is still a disposi- tion to treat the Pasteurella group as a convenient refuge for any small, gram-negative bacillus whose identity has not been accurately ascertained ". Conflicting as the opinions are in regard to classification, they are sufficient to emphasise the fact that a very close relationship exists between these or- ganisms and to demonstrate their distinct characters, if they do exist, most delicate and reliable serological tests must be employed. A further difficulty, however, in the way of serological study of these organisms arises from the fact that they are but poor antigens, both for the excitation of antibody produc- tion and for serological reaction in vivo. In view of the opinions stated in the foregoing paragraphs, it would seem that there is sufficient evidence to show that the mouse organism possesses the common characters of the Pasteurella group. As regards its type, the mor- phological, cultural, and biochemical characters indicate that it is similar to Pasteurella muricida, Meyer and Batchelder [1926]. They have described in detail the tests of 34 strains of rat pasteurella obtained in the course of plague control work in Oakland and Alameda. They observed that maltose was seldom split by fresh strains while old cultures repeatedly acquired the property of fermenting it. But the organism under study fermented mal- tose in about 24 to 48 hours. Such variations, however, are not uncommon and are likely to appear within the boundaries of any species or strain. The stalactile formation observed was suggestive of similarity with Past. petis but this was ruled out by the absence of capsule formation and abi- lity to ferment sucrose. In discussing its relationship with Past. pseudotuberculosis rodentium it would seem necessary to go a little further in detail. The mouse pasteurella possesses the character of true animal pasteurella in its ability to ferment suc- roseV. R. RAJAGOPALAN & V. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN 307 reaction between Past. pseudotuberculosis rodentium sera and mouse pasteurella antigen, similar to that observed by Smillie (loc. cit), seems curious but not unaccountable. SUMMARY An outbreak of rodent septicaemia in white mice, maintained for experi- mental purposes at the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, is described. The causal agentTHE IMPORTANT HELMINTH PARASITES OF HORSES310 Important Helminth Parasites of Horses structure, size, habits, life-history and in the degree of harm they cause to the host. In order to keep the horse in sound condition it is necessary to pay sufficient attention to its parasites. In this paper the parasites of the greatest importance are discussed in more detail than those of less importance ; and only those methods of treatment which have been found to be effective against the parasite or parasites involved have been recommended. In literature a large number of drugs have been recommended for the treatment of helminth parasites of the horse. Any one of them, when given in suffi- ciently large quantities, may result in the expulsion of some of the parasites present, but to make the treatment as effective as possible it is essential to choose the right drug from the large number of anthelmintics available for administration. All the three main groups of helminths, flukes, tapeworms and round- worms are found in the horse, and often in large numbers too. The flat- worms, comprising flukes and tapeworms, of the horse are relatively un- important, but the round-worms are very important and are responsible for most of the damage. FLUKES Only a few species of flukes occur in the horse, though several forms which normally occur in other hosts have been reported as accidental para- sites. The common liver fluke of ruminants may at times infest the horse. Liverfluke disease in equines appears to be rather rare. However, in cases where treatment is considered necessary carbon-tetrachloride may be used with safety to adult horses in doses of 25H. D. SRIVASTAVA 311 nodulated cirrhosis is produced by the deposition of the ova in the liver. Positive diagnosis depends on the finding of the characteristic ova in the faeces of the host. As the adult parasite inhabits the vascular system, in- travenous administration of tartar emetic or antimosan is indicated. The treated animals should be prevented from acquiring fresh infestation. The common control measures in fluke infestation should be adopted, such as, proper disposal of excreta, destruction of the intermediate host and the keeping the animals off the sources of infection. TAPEWORMS Horses are known to harbour three species of tapeworms of the genus Anoplocephala. The large, A. magna, and the dwarf, A. mamillana, horse tapeworms usually occur in the small intestine and may occasionally be found in the stomach. The third species312 Important Helminth Parasites of Horses Kamala may be administered in capsules of 30 grm. to adult horses after the animal has been fasted for 24 to 36 hours. The drug has a purgative action and seldom needs to be followed by a purgative. It should not be given to very young or old and weak animals or those suffering from febrile diseases, such as influenza, strangles and infectious anaemia. Oleoresin of male fern may be given to adult horses in doses of 3 to 6 drm. (10 to 20 grm.) in capsules after fasting the animal for 24 hours. It should be immediately preceded or followed by a quart of linseed oil. All these drugs should be given to animals in good condition which can presumably withstand their effects. No definite prophylactic measures can be formulated until the life-history of the parasite has been established. However, proper disposal of excreta in which mature segments and eggs are voided should be practised, as suggest- ed in the case of round-worm infestation. ROUND-WORMS Of the helminths infesting the horse, round-worms are by far the most common and important. These vary considerably in their size, structure, biology and injuriousness. For the completion of the life-cycle some of these require an intermediate host in which they undergo a part of their develop- ment, while other species are transmitted from one animal to another directly by eggs or by their infective larvae. The majority are transmitted directly, without the agency of an intermediate host. Some of these worms are blood suckers, others do damage in various ways : all of them probably tend to produce unthriftiness, in some cases going on to cachexia. ASCARIDS The large intestinal round-wormPLATE XXIV [ Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Ascarids journey through the body of the horse (After Schwartz, Imes and Wright) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Life-cycle of the horse ascaridH. D. SRIVASTAVA 313 The infective eggs on being swallowed by a suitable host with grass, water or dry feed, which has become contaminated with manure, hatch in the intestine and the liberated larvae burrow into the wall of the gut. They may pass through into the peritoneal cavity and thence to the liver, but usually they migrate with the blood stream to this organ. From the liver they are carried by the blood through the heart to the lungs, where they are arrested in the capillaries, although some may pass through the arterial circulation and reach other organs like spleen and kidneys and even the foetus in a pregnant animal. The majority of larvae escape from the lung capillaries into the alveoli and finally crawl up the windpipe and are swallowed. On again reaching the small intestine they settle down and develop to maturity in eight to ten weeks. The migration through the liver and lungs is completed in about a week (Plate XXIV). In heavy infestations the larvae during their course of migration do considerable damage. Destruction of tissue and haemorrhage may occur in the liver, but the most important lesions are produced in the lungs, where the larvae cause numerous small haemorrhages and oedema. Secondary bacterial invasion of the weakened lung tissue may lead to lobular pneumonia.. Larvae which find their way into the general circulation may cause small haemorrhages in important organs like brain, myocardium and. kidneys, though some of the lesions thus caused are probably due to toxins. When present in large numbers, specially in foals and young horses, ascarids produce digestive disturbances of various sorts and may cause colic. Frequently they become entangled with one another, forming large masses which may cause intestinal obstruction. The entangled mass of worms may even lead on to a rupture of the wall of the intestine, or the worms may even perforate the wall of the gut and produce a fatal peritonitis. Foals usually suffer most from this parasite. In the early stages of infestation a rise in temperature and cough may be noticed. Later on the animals become unthrifty with rough, staring coats, but expulsion of the worms often results in marked improvement in their condition. The worms liberate toxins which are exceedingly harmful to the host. The infestation is diagnosed by finding eggs or the worm itself in the faeces. Carbon di-sulphide is very effective against ascarids in horses. After fasting the animal for 18 hours, the drug is administered with a stomach tube or in capsules in a dose of 6 drm. (24 c.c.) per 1,000-lb. body-weight. The worms are passed for several days after treatment. Purgatives should not be given as superpurgation may be produced. Fats and oils should be avoided, for they promote the absorption and increase the toxicity of the drug. Often the drug produces limited areas of inflammation in the stomach, but this is of no consequence. Carbon-tetrachloride is also fairly effective, but oil of chenopodium is not sufficiently effective against this parasite. The former is given in doses of 6 to 12 drm. (25-50 c.c.) for 1,000-lb. animal. Though a purgative is not essential, it is advisable to give a saline purgative.
314 Important Helminth Parasites of Horses In order to prevent foals and young horses from becoming heavily in- fested before they have developed the necessary ability to cope successfully with a heavy worm infestation, it is essential to pay special attention to the sanitation of the foaling barns and paddocks and pastures. The paddocks and pastures should be clean and free from infestation. Rotation of pastures by moving horses to pastures meant for cows and sheep and vice versa, may be useful, for the parasites of ruminants are not as a rule transmissible to horses. Though the infestation is usually acquired on pastures, ill-kept stables contribute in no small measure to it. Under pasture conditions the eggs and larvae are exposed to many unfavourable influences, but in ill-kept and manure-laden stalls they are not only protected from the adverse in- influences which prevail in the open but have an abundant supply of moisture, shade and suitable temperature for their development. It is, therefore, necessary to pay special attention to stable sanitation. Feed and water should be supplied in such a way that contamination is not possible. Proper disposal of manure as recommended in connection with the control of strongyles will be of material help in this direction. PIN-WORMS The pin-wormsPLATE XXV [ Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Life-cycle of one of the blood strongyles (After Schwartz, Imes and Wright) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Section through the wall of the large gut showing the head of an attached, blood strongyle (After Wretzel) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Life-cycle of the large stomach worm - Habronema muscae (After Schwartz, Imes and Wright)
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 315 may be applied around the anus to relieve pruritis, and to kill adhering eggs. Oil of turpentine is also an effective treatment when given in a dose of 60 c.c. for a l,000-lb. animal immediately preceded or followed by a litre of raw linseed oil. Prophylaxis is a matter of sanitation with reference to stables, feed and water, besides the proper disposal of manure. STRONGYLES Horses are infested with many kinds of strongyles, and often with large numbers of several species. It is rare to find a horse entirely free from these parasites, and on the other hand it is common to find them heavily infested. Over 40 species of these worms are known to occur in horses, mules and donkeys. Some of them are blood suckers while others are not, but the in- festation is usually a mixed one. The general symptoms of strongylosis may be taken to be caused by all of them collectively, though the blood sucking species are naturally the more harmful. The equine strongyles may be divided into two broad groups. The large strongyles which are also commonly known as blood-worms, red-worms, sclerostomes or palisade worms and the small strongyles which are much smaller in most cases than the red-worms, though some of these may be almost as large. THE LARGE STRONGYLES OR PALISADE WORMS Three species of the large strongyles are of common occurrence in the colon and caecum of equines. The worms are red in colour and are frequently found firmly attached to the wall of the gut by means of a rather formidable buccal capsule. The three-toothed strongyle316 Important Helminth Parasites of Horses to heat also and migration is more active in warm than in cold weather. Certain amount of moisture is necessary to enable the larva to crawl up blades of grass. Under unsuitable conditions, the larvae penetrate into the upper layer of the soil. They can sink to the bottom of water and may remain alive for a month or so. Under favourable conditions of shade, moisture and temperature they can remain alive for a couple of years. The larvae ordi- narily remain in or near the manure where they hatch but they may be scat- tered by wind and rain over large areas. On being ingested by a suitable host the infective larvae cast off their sheath and, though the course taken by the larvae of the different species has not been definitely ascertained, it is known that practically none of them directly settle down in the caecum and colon to attain maturity. They usually penetrate into the mucosa of the intestine, are taken up by lymph and blood and undergo extensive migrations through the various organs or tissues, such as liver, pancreas, spleen, lungs, kidneys and other organs of the host before they return to the large gut. During this course of migration some of the larvae get caught in the various organs as erratic forms, specially in the interstitial connective tissues of the pancreas. The larvae of S. edentatus burrow through the wall of the intestine and reach the connective tissue underlying the peritoneal lining of the abdeninal cavity where they remain for about three months and increase much in size. They then migrate towards the root of the mesentery and finally reach the wall of the intestine, into which they penetrate. In the wall of the intestine they become lodged in large haemorrhagic nodules which finally break open into the lumen and release the worms. Opinion is divided with regard to the normal route of migration of the larvae of S. vulgaris. After reaching the intestine some reach the liver and lungs, via the blood stream, while others are found in the wall of the anterior mesenteric artery, where they give rise to the formation of aneurysm and the deposition of a thrombus on the altered intima of the vessel. Some bel eve that the latter is the normal course and the larvae are transported back to the intestinal wall by the blood, after they have escaped from the aneurysm into the lumen of the artery. They finally penetrate into the lumen of the gut. Others maintain that the latter course is taken by those larvae which have gone astray, the normal route of migration being via the blood through the lungs, like ascarid larvae. The worms live attached to the wall of the gut which they injure. They draw into the buccal capsule the intestinal mucosa in the form of a plug (Plate XXV, fig 2) and rupture the blood vessels and suck blood, after digesting the superficial layers, or cutting into the mucosa by means of their teeth. The secretions of the oesophageal glands of the worms act on the mucosa, digesting and liquefying the cells. As the worms suck blood, the loss of blood may be considerable in cases of heavy infestations and may lead to anaemia, weak- ness and oedema of the various parts. Digestive disturbances of various sorts, such as diarrhoea and loss of appetite, et cetera develop and the animal
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 317 becomes emaciated, is easily exhausted and the coat becomes rough. The worms wander about in the gut and their bites cause small wounds in the wall through which harmful bacteria may gain entrance. The migrating larvae also cause injuries of various types to the organs and tissues through which they pass. Whether or not these parasites produce toxic secretions is not de- finitely known, but they must be harmful when they die and disintegrate in the bowel. The larvae of the single-toothed strongyle318 Important Helminth Parasites of Horses by an aloes ball. In some cases excessive purgation may result following the use of raw linseed oil. This undesirable action is probably due to impurities in the oil and hence a good grade of oil should be used. It is, however, better to use the following mixture: for weanlings, castor oil four to six ounces and neutral oil one pint; for yearlings and two-year-olds, castor oil six to eight ounces and neutral oil one pint; for three-year-olds and older, castor oil eight to ten ounces and neutral oil one and a half pints. Some prefer the following formula : For a 1,000-lb. or heavier animal mix four to five drm. of oil of chenopodium, one and a half ounces of turpentine, five to six ounces of castor oil and sufficient of a light mineral oil to make a pint. Pregnant mares should not be treated with this drug. Carbon-tetrachloride is also very effective against strongylesH. D. SRIVASTAVA 319 material, but these are all rather expensive and some are even harmful to vegetation. The addition of urine to manure heaps is, however, useful. In America and some European countries double walled and floored insulated containers are used in which manure is stored for at least two weeks, during which all the larvae and eggs are destroyed by the heat of fermentation. These are, however, expensive, and a simple method of manure disposal is direct transport to field and broadcasting thinly. It will be better if horses are not allowed to graze in fields on which horse manure has been used. Above all regular treatment will do much to reduce the infestation. THE SMALL STRONGYLES Under this are grouped a large number of species of strongyles belonging to the genera Triodontophorus, Oesophagodontophorus, Craterostomum, Gyalo- cephalus, Poteriostomum and Trichonema. The worms occur in the colon and caecum and some of these may cause marked injuries. Triodontophorus tenuicollis produces severe ulcers in the wall of the colon in which clusters of worms are found ; while the larvae of Trichonema produce nodules in the intestinal wall. The small strongyles do not ordinarily feed on blood but live on the intestinal mucosa of the host. Horses usually have a mixed infection of both the large and small strongyles and the latter, together with the former, contribute to the picture of gross parasitism. The details of the life-history of these parasites have not been studied, but the control measures against these are the same as for the large strongyles. The same treatments as for the large strongyles are effective for these also. However, oil of chenopodium and normal butylidine chloride are specially effective against these worms. Carbon-tetrachloride is less effective. Embedded in the lining of the stomach of the horse occurs a small bursate worm320 Important Helminth Parasites of Horses THE LARGE STOMACH WORMS The life-cycles of the round-worms so far considered are direct, the host acquiring infection through contaminated feed or water. There are, however, several round-worms, in the life-cycle of which an intermediate host is inter- colated. The most important of such worms are the ' large stomach worms of the horse ' belonging to the genus Habronema. There are three species of these : H. muscae (Carter's stomach worm) occurring free in the stomach or attached to its wall; H. microstoma occurs free in the stomach but is capable of penetrating the wall of the stomach and producing small ulcers ; and H . megastoma which is the smallest of the three and occurs in tumours in the stomach. The eggs of these worms have a very flexible shell. The eggs and larvae are passed out in the faeces and if ingested by maggots of suitable flies, which ordinarily develop in the manure, they undergo further development which keeps pace with the development of the maggots. The infective stage is reached in the maggot at about the time when the latter pupates. H. muscae and H. megastoma develop in the house-fly while H. microstoma develops in the stable-fly. In the adult fly the larvae occur free in the abdominal cavity and may pass forward into the proboscis. The horse acquires infection by swallowing live infected flies or infected flies which have been dead only a short time and still contain live larvae. Another and possibly more common mode of infection is : As the flies suck the moisture of the lips and nose, the larvae present in the mouth parts of the fly wriggle out, being stimulated by the warmth and moisture of the horse's body. The larvae thus deposited on the lips are readily swallowed while those which get into the nasal cavity wriggle into the pharynx and are swallowed. On reaching the stomach of the final host they develop to maturity (Plate XXV, fig. 3). The free living forms are injurious on account of their tendency to attach themselves to and penetrate into the stomach wall causing irritation which results in chronic catarrhal gastritis with the formation of much mucus. The large mouthed wormH. D. SRIVASTAVA 321 though it is not necessary. If the solution is not siphoned off, then 15 to 20 minutes should be allowed to lapse before further treatment. Carbon-di-sulphide is then administered in capsule or by stomach tube in a dose of 6 fluid drm. (24 c.c.) to an animal weighing 1,000 lbs. No purgative should be used with this treatment. Prophylaxis is a matter of proper disposal of manure and the sanitation of the stables. In cases of cutaneous habronemiasis or ' Bursati' the following astrin- gent powder is applied until the wounds are healed. Plaster of paris 100, alum 20, naphthalin 10 and quinine 10 parts. Good results are reported from the use of a caustic paste composed of arsenious oxide 1 part and flour 5 parts. Washing the sores with ether or chloroform and then painting them with colloidin has also been recommended. Some prefer the use of 5 to 10 per cent formalin applied by means of a cotton pad which is left on the sores for two or three hours every day. As a measure of control skin injuries should be protected from flies ; though in view of Datta's findings, from which it appears that the lesions are produced through the general circulation, wound infection obviously plays an insignificant rôle. THE NECK THREAD-WORM The ligamentum nuchae of the horse is often infested with a long, slender, coiled worm known as Onchocerca cervicalis. In the life-cycle of this parasite certain biting flies, known as midges, act as intermediate host. The worms weaken the resistance of the ligamentum nuchae by irritation and the forma- tion of small nodules. The larval forms of this parasite are suspected to be responsible for the production of fistulous withers and Lichen tropicus or ' Khoojlee ' in horses. Treatment and prophylaxis are obviously difficult. THE EYE-WORMS Two minute, whitish, slender worms belonging to two different genera Thelazia and Setaria are often found affecting the eyes of horses. They are most commonly found in the lachrymal ducts, or beneath the eyelids. They may cause conjunctivitis, and the cornea may become opaque. They can be easily removed by surgical operation after the instillation of a local anaesthetic. The life-cycle of these parasites is unknown. EQUINE MICROFILARIASIS The literature on equine microfilariasis is very scanty. The occurrence of microfilariae in equines is not common, nor are the larvae usually associated with any definite clinical symptoms. In rare cases, when microfilariae are present in large numbers they may produce anaemia, general lassitude and debility. There are, however, two important conditions322 Important Helminth Parasites of Horses microfilariae. The microfilariae in Lichen tropicus are never found in the blood of the affected animals. The adult worms of the larvae associated with these two conditions are not yet definitely known. No satisfactory treatment for these two conditions is known. Sub-toxic doses of arsenious acid; intravenous administration of neo-arseno-phenamine; potassium antimony tartrate and sodium antimony tartrate are not beneficial in the treatment of Lichen tropicus. The author is grateful to the Offg. Director, Mr. J. R. Haddow, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., I.V.S., for kindly going through the manuscript and offering some useful suggestions. He is indebted to Drs. Schwartz, Imes and Wright for the illustrations in this article.
REPORT ON TWO UNRECORDED NEMATODE PARASITES FROM DOMESTICATED ANIMALS OF INDIA OR BURMA BY R. C. CHATTERJI Helminthological Institute, University of .Rangoon (Received for publication on 21st February 1939) (With six text-figures) THE present paper deals with two parasitic nematodes, recorded from domesticated animals in other parts of the world but not hitherto reported from India or Burma. The first324 Nematode Parasites from Domesticated Animals pairs dorso-lateral, each pair originating from the dorsal and ventral angles of each lip and extending almost to the posterior extremity without [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 Acuaria (Cheilospirura) hamulosa Anterior end : Lateral view anastomosing or recurving anteriorly. Cordons posteriorly corrugated, apparently comprised of a series of elongate bosses placed irregularly one behind the other. Mouth opening into an elongate pharynx with its cuticularised wall showing transverse striations. Oesophagus long and composed of an anterior muscular portion and a long posterior glandular portion, its opening into intes- tine guarded by three valves. Nerve-ring encircling muscular oesophageal part close to its commencement. Male.R. C. CHATTERJI 325 oesophagus 0.6-0.72 and posterior portion 2-2.3 long. Nerve ring 0.27-0.35 from anterior end. Posterior end of body coiled ventrally and provided with two well-developed caudal alae. Caudal papillæ consisting of four pairs of preanal and six pairs of postanal papillæ; of the latter, two small pairs near [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 Acuaria (Cheilospirura) hamulosa Posterior end of male ; Lateral view.
326 Nematode Parasites from Domesticated Animals caudal extremity, the third pair a little larger and anterior to the first two pairs the fourth pair larger and much anterior to the third, the fifth and sixth pairs, about the same size as the fourth and a little posterior to cloaca. Workers seem to differ in their views regarding the number of these postanal papillæ. Cram [1927] and Neveu-Lemaire [1936] record five pairs, whereas, Baylis [1929], Monnig [1934], Sprehn [1932], and Tubangui [1927] record six pairs. The present material shows six pairs but, unlike that of Tubangui, the last two pairs of postanal papillæ near the tip of the tail are smaller than other papillæ. Spicules markedly unequal and dissimilarR. C. CHATTERJI 327 such intermediate hosts. The infective larvae become free in the bird's gizzard and within 24 hours penetrate the wall of the gizzard, grow to maturity and in a period of approximately 90 days the gravid females lay eggs. FAMILY FILARIIDAE (COBBOLD, 1864) CLAUS, 1885 SETARIA BERNARDI RAILLIET AND HENRY, 1911 Host.328 Nematode Parasites from Domesticated Animals margins are slightly convex, or straight or depressed antero-posteriorly, the condition varying with different degrees of contraction of the head end. Dis- tance between dorsal and ventral projections of peribuccal ring 0.05-0.08. Oesophagus divided into short muscular and long glandular portions. A pair of [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 Setaria bernardi Anterior end of female; Lateral view [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 Setaria bernardi Anterior end ; Dorsal view
R. C. CHATTERJI 329 small lateral papillae-like apendages near tip of tail, as in many other species of Setaria, but mentioned neither by Bernard and Bauche nor by Sandground, is present in both sexes. The present specimens are comparatively smaller in size than those recorded by previous workers. Male.330 Nematode Parasites from Domesticated Animals one pair adanal near anterior lip of cloaca, and three postanal, the last three being situated more or less at equal distances from one another. Bernard and Bauche [1911] mention the presence of four pairs of postcloacal papillae, the one nearest to cloaca (called 4th by Bernard and Bauche) being situated at 0.01-0.02 from the following one (3rd.). According to Sandground [1933] there are three pairs of preanal and four pairs of postanal papillae though his figure (fig. 32) of the caudal end of male shows exactly the reverse condition, i.e., four pairs preanal and three pairs postanal. In the arrangement of the post- anal papillae the present form agrees with the figure of Sandground and his contention that" the two lateral rows of preanal (probably a mistake for posta- nal) papillae are situated so close to the median line that there would sometimes appear to be four instead of three papillae on each" however seems correct. Sandground does not mention the presence of papillae near the cloaca, a pair of which was present in these forms. Spicules unequal and dissimilar : left being long with a base 0.2-0.21 long in the form of a stout curved tube to which is attached a distal slender part appearing to consist of two lash-like portions coiled with one another at certain points and ending in a membraneous tip curved at an obtuse angle with the shaft: right short and stout, 0.12-0.14 long, with thickly-studed spines around its external surface and bearing a dorsal gutter. The length of the filamentous portion of the left spicule has been a disputed point, Bernard and Bauche recording it as 0.07 and Sandground as 0.15 : in the present material it was seldom found to be less than 0.22, a length that exceeds the length of the basal portion of the spicule. Female.R. C. CHATTERJI 331 muscular and glandular portions of oesophagus bending round the oesophagus, joining afterwards with the two uterine tubes. Tail slightly coiled, ending in a blunt, slightly swollen termination provided with irregular papillae-like projections: in some cases where the tail end was contracted the papillae were not conspicuous but the rugged and ' shagreened' nature of the tip was clearly noticed. Eggs oval and at primitive stage 0.026-0.031 × 0.015- 0.018 (according to Bernard and Bauche 0.038 × 0.018), developing into embryos which are finally liberated in the uterus. Sandground [1933] considers S. bernardi identical with S. congolensis, the reasons for his belief being the identical nature of the caudal papillae and the more or less equal lengths of oesophagus and spicules. S. congolensis have four pairs of large postanal and three pairs of small preanal papillae, the reverse is the condition in S. bernardi and in addition to which there is one pair of adanal papillae, which is probably equivalent to the fourth pair of postanal papillae of Bernard and Bauche. The glandular portion of the oesophagus in the former varies from 13-16 where body-lengths of male and female are 8 cm. and 11-14 cm. respectively, but in the present form, where lengths of male and female are 9-10 cm. and 15-18 cm. respectively, the length of glandular oesophagus is 8.6-10. Moreover, the spiny nature of the right spicule and the peculiar shape of the left spicule with its comparatively long flaggellated end, omitted by Bernard and Bauche and also by Sandground are additional differences from S. congolensis. The author having found the characters of the spicule so different from those described by Bernard and Bau- che and also by Sandground,332 Nematode Parasites from Domesticated Animals Cuvillier, E. (1933). J. Parasitol. 19, 244-245 Monnig, H. O. (1934). Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology. London, 229 Purvis, G. B. (1931). Vet. Rec. 528 Railliet, A. and Henry, A. (1911, 1). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 4, 386-389 COTUGNIA BROTUGERYS, MEGGITT, 1915 (FROM GALLUS DOMESTICUS, HOSUR CATTLE FARM, MADRAS) BY S. VAITHIANATHA MUDALIAR, G.M.V.C. Assistant Lecturer, Department of Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College (Received for publication on 25th March 1939) The only available record of this parasite seems to be by Meggitt, from Burma, from Platycercus eximius [quoted by Southwell, 1930] and the present description is the first from India. The worms described now were collected from a Leghorn cockerel and were sent to the College for identification. The largest specimen measured 100.0 × 2.0.* The mature segments are 0.6 long and 1.8 wide. The gravid segments measure 1.2 in length and 1.8 in width. There is slight overlapping of segments both in front and behind. The genitalia are double in each segment and the genital pores are situated usually at the anterior third of the lateral margins of the segments but in a few of them, their position may be at the middle of the segments. The Scolex is roughly square in shape and measures 0.9 × 0.7. The suckers are circular, with a diameter of 0.3. The rostellum is smaller in dia- meter than the suckers and measures 0.22 in width. It carries a double row of a very large number of hooks, each measuring 0.12 long. The testes are numerous and are situated behind the middle of the seg- ment, extending laterally on both sides beyond the excretory vessels. The cirrus sac reaches the excretory vessels and, in a few cases, crosses the same. The cirrus is unarmed. The ovary consists of a few thick lobes arranged in a fanlike manner and the vitellaria are situated posterior to the ovary. The shell-gland is not clearly seen. The uterus is not persistent but breaks up into a number of thick-walled capsules enclosing three to five eggs in each. This description agrees with that given by Southwell [1930] for Cotugnia brotugerys, Meggitt, 1915, recovered from a different host, viz., Platycercus eximius. REFERENCE Southwell, T. (1930). Cestoda II, Fauna of British India, 109ABSTRACTS Excretion of Streptococcus pyogenes in the milk of naturally infected cows. BENDIXEN, H. C. and MINETT, F. C. (1938). (Journal of Hygiene Camb. 38, 374-383.) THE authors record observations on two cows known to be responsible for out- breaks of tonsilitis or scarlet fever due to excretion of Str. pyogenes in the milk. In the case of one cow (M. 36), no marked clinical manifestations of mastitis were noticed, but the milk from the affected quarter (L. F.) was altered and Streptococci in almost pure cultures were recovered from the milk for a period of about thirteen months including a dry period of three months. The other quarters remained unaffected. Experimental infection into the teat canal of another cow with culture from the L. F. quarter set up clinical mastitis. The animal was subsequently killed and histo-pathological examination of the affected tissue revealed chronic inflammation. The second cow had a previous history of injury to the R. F. teat resulting in clinical mastitis of both the fore-quarters. Haemolytic streptococci which proved fatal to mice, were isolated from milk samples of affected quarters, in this case the duration of excretion of Str. pyogenes was not more than six weeks. The importance of injuries to the teats in the spread of mastitis is emphasized. (J. A. I.). Studies on the microbiology of the caecum of the horse. F. BAKER, and R. MARTIN (1939). (Zeutralblatt Bakteriologie, Parasitenkunde und Infektion- krankheiten, Bd. 99 pp. 400-424.) THE authors in this article have paid particular attention to the features which attend the disintegration of cell-wall substances. Changes taking place in slitu were observed by direct microscopical examination of the caecal material fixed in 10 per cent formalin. Along with this polariscopic and microchemical methods were employed by means of which it has been possible for them to establish, with considerable amount of precision, not only the nature and extent of disintegration taking place, but also the characteristics of the micro-organisms by which it is effected. Prevalence of iodophile microflora and fauna and the significance of this feature have been discussed in relation to the synthesis and degradation of carbohydrates in the caecum. The authors claim that in the caecum of the horse, the presence of functional activity of protozoa is far more prominent than in either the guinea-pig or the rabbit. It has been demonstrated that the cyto clastic process is brought about by the action of iodophile mirco-organisms exercised in situ. The processes involved in the disinteg- ration of the components of cellulose and hemicellulose, as evidenced by polariscopic method and microchemical and staining reactions, are described in some detail. Two phases in the destruction of the optically birefringent polysaccharides have been noticed. In the first phase of reaction, the colour reactions with chlorzinciodine and staining with 335 M
336 ABSTRACTS congo-red were seen to have been intensified ; whilst the micellar substratum remained intact. In the second phase the micellar substratum was found to be entirely disorga- nised, double-refraction ceased, and both microchemical and staining reactions disappear- ed. Evidence is put forward to show that the cyto clastic micro-organisms, which include vibrionic and coccoid forms, are stages in the life-cycle of a single polyphasic species. With regard to the functional attributes of the indigenous protozoa, as investigated the authors in the species of the genera C ycloposthium, Paraisoiricha, Didesmis, Ble- pharocorys and Blepharocouns, the digestion of strach grains and iodophile micro- organisms was observed. Ingestion of cell-wall substances by these protozoa was either very little or altogether absent. It is said that the size of the particles acted as a. limiting factor. Only small fragments were ingested and these were, in the majority of cases, already in process of disintegration through the action of adherent cyto clastic mirco-organisms. The authors, on these grounds, conclude that the protozoa are not primary agents in effecting disintegration of cell-wall substances in the caecum. Based on their observations the authors have discussed in detail the presence and characteristics of an iodophile microflora with reference, in general, to the establishment of a functional field and, in particular, to the organisation of carbohydrate metabolism in the caecum. A symbiotic, rather than parasitic, relationship is emphasized [H. N. R.]. Tick borne diseases. W. O. NEITZ, and P. J. Du TOIT (1938). (Jour. S. A. Vet. Med. Assoc. 9, 85-124). THE authors have described the animal and human diseases transmitted by the two families of ticks, viz., the Argasidae and Ixodidae. The former transmit: (1) spirochae- tosis which includes : (a) Relapsing fever in man conveyed through the agency of Ornithodorus genus, while wild rodents act as reservoirs ; (b) Avian spirochaetosis, Argas persicus being the vector of Spirochaeta anserina; (c) spirochaetosis due to S. theileri and conveyed through Boophilus sp. and Rhipicephalus evertsi. (2) Aegyptonellosis in fowls, geese and ducks caused by Aegyptonella pullorum and conveyed through A . persicus. The Ixodidae are responsible for : (1) Piroplasmosis including (a) Redwater in cattle caused by B.bigemina and transmitted through various species of Boophilus, Rhipi- cephalus and Haemophysalis ; (b) Piroplasmosis of sheep caused by B. ovis and conveyed through the adults of R. bursa ; (c) Equine Piroplasmosis caused by B. caballi and Nut- tallia equi and transmitted through Dermacentor silvarum and species of Hyalomma and Rhipicephalus ; (d) Biliary fever in dogs caused by Piroplasma canis, the vectors being H. leachi and R. sanguineus which carry the infection through all stages of development; (e) Babesiosis in dogs caused by B. gibsoni through H. bispinosa (2) Theileriasis including (a) Theileria annulata infection in cattle through H. dro- medarii asiaticum; (b) T. dispar infection in cattle through adults of H. detritum mauretanicum and H. impressum near planum; (c) T. parva infection in cattle through different species of Rhipicephalus ; (d) T. mutans infection in cattle through R. evertsi and R. appendiculatus ; (e) T. ovis infection in sheep through R. bursa (3) Anaplasmosis including (a) Anaplasma marginale infection of cattle through different species of Boophilus, Ixodes ricinus and H. punctata; (b) A. ovis in sheep
ABSTRACTS 337 through R. bursa adults and Ornithodorus lahorensis. (4) Rickettsiosis including (a) Heart water in ruminants through A. lebraeum ; (b) Rickettsia bovis infection in cattle through species of Hyalomma; (c) Rickettsia canis infection in dogs through R. sanguineus. Mention has also been made about the tick-transmitted rickettsiosis of man and dog including (a) Fievre boutonneuse ; (b) Sao paulo typhus ; (c) Tick bite fever ; and (d) Rocky mountain spotted fever of man. (5) virus diseases, viz338 ABSTRACTS The Guernseys, however, appear to be more subject to intestinal and respiratory disorders at low carotene intakes. Calves require a higher carotene intake in winter than in summer- One to two years' old heifers, however, show little or no vitaminORIGINAL ARTICLES. THE POSSIBILITIES OF CATTLE FLY SPRAYS IN INDIA* BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.R.E.S. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 21 August 1939) (With two text-figures) INTRODUCTION THE use of repellent sprays for protecting cattle from attacks of flies constitutes, at the present time, an integral part of dairy practice in the pro- gressive countries of the world, although opinion would appear to be still divided as to whether the protection thus afforded results in an actual increase in the yield of milk. It is even held by some workers [Freeborn, Regan and Folger, 1925] that, by reason of certain untoward physiological effects pro- duced by them, the application of commercial fly sprays with a base of pet- roleum causes a reduction340 The Possibilities of Cattle Fly Sprays in India extent to which cattle are liable to be terrorized by attacks of flies, the writer cannot do better than reproduce the following passage from a letter addressed by one of the authorities in charge of the farm referred to above : ' The cows are worried both by day and night by flies. You saw how they always stood huddled together so as to give one another as much protection as possible. They graze in the same way even during the night. They are constantly jostling one another and only a few leading the herd get any decent grazing. One of the two newly purchased bulls from Ferozepur simply refuses to stay with his herd at all on account of fly trouble and wants to spend the whole day under cover.' The experiments that are to be described presently were carried out during September-October in two consecutive years, when the two prevalent species of biting flies on the farm were Lyperosia exigua and Musca crassirostris. The former, in particular, was a source of great annoyance by reason of the determined manner in which it attacked its hosts, which included calves as young as one month old. Curiously, Stomoxys calcitrans which, as in most other countries, is a ubiquitous pest of cattle in India, was conspicuously absent at the time. There were about 340 head of cattle on the farm, including 40 milch cows and the majority of these were of the Sahiwal breed. MATERIAL AND METHODS In the trials carried out during the first year, only two sprays were tested for their repellent action against the two species of flies mentioned above. These were :S. K. SEN 343 The repellents tested during the following year, including the one just mentioned, comprised:344 The Possibilities of Cattle Fly Sprays in India carried out, but also during the three weeks both preceding and following these operations. An examination of some of these records (as graphically represented in Figs. 1 and 2*) shows that a very noticeable increase in the yield of milk occurred in the case of four sprayed cows (Fig. 1) and that this yield was sufficiently consistent to warrant the conclusion that it was due to the effect of the spray. As for the actual amount of increase in the yield, this was worked out at a daily average of 1.6 lb., the average for the individual cows ranging from 0.6 to 3.1 lb. as shown in Table I below :[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1.Milk records of four sprayed cows on alternate days (341[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Milk records of four control (unsprayed) cows on alternate days (345S. K. SEN 347 weeks following the use of the spray was still appreciably higher than that during the period preceding its use, so that it would seem that the effect of the spray persisted for this length of time after it had been discontinued. In regard to the controls, one of them (Cow No. 218) showed a sudden and somewhat abnormal increase in yield after calving on the 24th of September 1937, and if this animal be excluded from consideration, then the level of the milk yield in the case of the controls remained stationary for all practical purposes (Fig. 2). As a matter of fact, the average of daily yield in the case of these four animals, during the period of spraying operations, was actually worked out at 348 The Possibilities of Cattle Fly Sprays in India As for the cost of the spray, this was calculated at slightly less than six pies (exclusive of freight) per spray of 60 c. c. It is, however, very probable that a much smaller quantity would prove equally effective, because the re- sults of similar trials carried out by Freeborn and Regan [1932], in U.S.A., appeared to them to point to the conclusion that, in order to obtain an average repellent efficiency of 80 per cent over a period of 21 hours with petroleum oils containing pyrethrum, pine oil or both, it was necessary to apply 'approximately 250 c. c. of spray per 1,000 lb. of cow ' and, furthermore, according to the same workers, 20 c. c. of a very light spray is a complete coverage for a cow weighing 1,000 lb. On the basis of these calculations, 30 c. c. of the ' Pyrocide 20 ' spray should be a good coverage for cows of Sahiwal breed and at the same time give a fairly high repellent efficiency for a period of ten hours (7 A.M. to 5 P.M.). The cost, however, would obviously require to be further reduced if the use of cattle fly sprays is to find a ready place in dairy practice in India. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The two factors which impose a limitation on the value of repellent sprays in combating cattle flies in India are their liability to cause burning of the skin and their high cost compared with the benefit they may be expected to accrue from their use in the case of cows of low milk yield. The paper dis- cusses the possibility of overcoming these difficulties in the light of the results of a series of fly repellency tests carried out in one of the Government cattle farms in the United Provinces. In the course of these tests, it was observed that a spray consisting of high speed Diesel oil, ' Pyrocide 20 ' (a concen- trated extract of pyrethrum flowers) and pine oil, when applied on Sahiwal cows for 21 consecutive days, during October, did not produce any burning or scurfing of the skin, although the spray proved to be very effective against Musca crassirostris and Lyperosia exigua, which were at the time the two prevalent species of biting flies on the farm. About 60 c. c. of the fluid was used for each spray and the cost of this quantity was slightly less than six pies. In view, however, of the results recorded in this field by workers in other countries, it is probable that a much smaller dose would prove equally effective. The use of the spray was also found to result in an appreciable increase in the yield of milk. REFERENCES Bishopp, F. C. (1931). U. S. Dept. Agric. Farmers' Bull. 1097, 17 Freeborn, S. B., & Regan, W. M. (1932). J. Econ. Ent. 25, 167-74 AROMA IN DAHI. I. ISOLATION OF A NEW STRAIN OF STR. DIACETYL AROMATICUS FROM INDIAN DAHI II. PRODUCTION OF AROMA IN MILK CULTURES INOCULATED WITH THE NEW STRAIN OF STR. DIACETYL AROMATICUS BY R. KARNAD, M.Sc. (Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore) (Received for publication on 28th March 1939) (With Plate XXVI and one text-figure) INTRODUCTION DURING recent years, more and more attention is being paid to the aroma- producing micro-organisms of butter, in view of the important part they play in the development of the flavour, which is the chief factor determining the market value of butter. Recent researches [Hammer, 1920; Knudsen, 1931; Kluyver, 1933; Ruehe, 1937; Storch, 1919; Van Beynum, 1937 ; Vas and Csiszar, 1936] in the bacteriology of ' starters' used for butter-making have shown that good starters contain, in addition to Sc. lactis, or of a closely related species named by Orla-Jensen Sc. cremoris, one or more streptococci which enhance the aroma of butter through formation of volatile acids. The aroma bacteria were discovered almost simultaneously by the Dutch investigators, Boekhout and Ott de Vries [1917] in Holland, by Hammer and Bailey [1919] in America, and by Storch [1919] in Denmark. According to Hammer, the outstanding character of the aroma bacteria is the formation of volatile acids and other aromatic products by fermenting the citric acid of milk. He has characterized the ' associated organisms' into two groups Sc. citrovorus and Sc. paracitrovorus [Hammer, 1923]. Orla-Jensen and Spur [1926] found certain capsule forming bacteria having an important influence on the formation of butter aroma. Their ability to ferment citric acid is of minor importance. They produce l-lactic acid from lactose in presence of yeast extract, and belong to the 350 Aroma in Dahi Recent work has shown that diacetyl, CH3. CO.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part IV ] PLATE XXVI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Fresh culture of 'Str. diacetyl aromaticus' (growth in milk) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. 'Str. diacetyl aromaticus' growth in yeast extract with 2 per cent dixtrose- and 2 per cent Calcium carbonate
R. KARNAD 351 I.352 Aroma in Dahi Indol.R. KARNAD 353 milk alone, but do so on the addition of citric acid [Joshi and Ram Ayyar, 1936]. The organism described in this paper does not produce a high volatile acidity in milk and produces a considerable amount of acetyl-methyl-carbinol and diacetyl without the addition of citric acid to milk. The organism can be considered to be a new species, its chief characteris- tics being the production of aroma, mainly by the formation of diacetyl in the culture. II.354 Aroma in Dahi one litre of the distillate. Only a portion of the volatile acid is secured with this procedure so that the method is of value only for comparative purposes. Acidity.R. KARNAD 355 TABLE III Diacetyl content of mixed cultures of aroma bacteria and lactic acid bacteria. (pH 4.4 ; period of incubation five days; temperature 28° C.) Culture Weight of diacetyl in mg. 1 litre of standard culture of aroma bacteria . . . . . 48.27 1 litre of culture of aroma bacteria plus lactic acid bacteria . . 58.16 Influence of citric acid and citrates on the production of diacetyl.356 Aroma in Dahi TABLE V Increase in the production of diacetyl by addition of neutral sodium citrate to milk; (p H 4.2R. KARNAD 357 to the milk before inoculating the culture. The results obtained are tabulated in Table VII. TABLE VII (250 gm. of milk culture used for each distillation) Culture Time (hrs.) Temp. °C. N/10 alkali in c.c. Blank ....... 72 37 5.6 Addition of 0 . 2 per cent citric acid . . 72 37 5.6 Blank....... 24 37 5.3 Addition of 0 . 2 per cent citric acid . . 24 37 4.4 Addition of 0 . 3 per cent citric acid . . 48 37 4.3 Addition of 0 . 4 per cent citric acid . . 96 37 3.9 Addition of 0 . 2 per cent neutral sodium cit- rate. 120 30 5.2 Citric acid and citrates do not appreciably increase the volatile acid content of the culture (Table VII). It is interesting to note, however, that the volatile acidity is increased by the addition of yeast extract, and a mixture of yeast extract and neutral sodium phosphate to the milk (Table VIII). TABLE VIII Culture Time (hrs.) Temp. °C. N/10 alkali in c.c. Blank....... 68 30 4.3 Addition of 10 per cent yeast extract 68 30 10.9 Ditto 92 30 14.4 Addition of 5 per cent yeast extract . 68 37 4.6 Addition of 5 per cent of yeast extract plus 0.2 per cent sodium phosphate. 68 37 5.7 Blank....... 68 30 3.9 5 per cent yeast extract . . . . 68 30 6.0 10 per cent 358 Aroma in Dahi Effect of neutral sodium phosphate.R. KARNAD 359 SUMMARY A new species of butter aroma bacteria Str. diacetyl aromaticus has been isolated from Indian dahi by plating on lactose-litmus-agar. This charac- teristic type of Streptococcus is a powerful producer of acetoin and diacetyl in milk culture without the addition of citric acid or other acids and produces less volatile acidity than the citrovorus group. This organism is different from Sc. lactis in its biochemical characteristics. It also differs from Sc. cremoris and Str. citrovorus and Str. paracitrovorus. Aroma development in the culture is highest at a temperature of 25°-28°C after 48 to 72 hours' incubation. The maximum amount of diacetyl is pro- duced in the culture after 72 hours when the pH is about 4.8. Addition of yeast extract to the milk improves the flavour and the yield of diacetyl. In association with a lactic acid organism the aroma bacteria gives a higher yield of diacetyl. Neutral sodium citrate increases the yield of diacetyl to an appreciable degree. The volatile acid content of the culture is not increased by adding citric acid and citrates (0.2 to 0.4 per cent) to the milk. Yeast extract has a pronounced effect in increasing the volatile acidity. A mix- ture of yeast extract and phosphate increases the volatile acid production. The flavour of butter is improved on the addition of neutral sodium phosphate to the milk before inoculating the culture. A mixture of phosphate and yeast extract gives better results. Phosphates have a stimulating effect on the production of gas by Str. diacetyl aromaticus. This species of Streptococcus would appear to have great possibilities in butter-making. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The author wishes to thank Dr V. Subrahmanyan and Mr B. N. Banerjee for their kind guidance and help throughout this work. REFERENCES Barnicoat, C. R. (1935). Analyst 60, 656 360 Aroma in Dahi Joshi, N. V. and Ram Ayyar, C. S. (1936). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 6, 141 Kluyver, A. J. (1933). J. Soc. Chem. Ind., 369-T Knudsen, S. and Sorensen, A. (1929). Zentr. Bakt., II. 79, 75 DAMAGE TO HIDES CAUSED BY CATTLE TICKS IN INDIA BY B. N. SONI, B.Sc. (PB.), B.Sc. AGRI. (EDIN) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 24th July 1939) (With Plate XXVII) INTRODUCTION THE Hides Cess Enquiry Committee, in their Report published in 1929- 30, remarked as follows :362 Damage to hides caused by Cattle Ticks in India Cooper Cattle Dips) observe : ' Cattle ticks have a very deteriorating effect upon hides and calf-skins, particularly calf-skins. We do not buy many Southern hides or skins on account of the ticks, but when we do get some here we are obliged to sell them for No. 3 stock at about one-third less price than good Northern stock free from ticks. This does not apply so much to heavy hides for sole leather purpose but for all light hides and calf-skins, it renders them altogether useless, for all kinds of leather. It would be greatly to the advantage of all concerned, both hide dealers, tanners and cattle raisers, if something could be done to destroy ticks.' Messrs. Emery & Co., Chicago (cited in the same work), write : ' Ticky hides or Southern hides do not sell for as much money as the Northern hides. These ticky hides when unhaired are all spotted and make a very poor leather and most tanners refuse to buy any Southern hides at any price.' Mr. J. M. Bond, Chicago, remarks : ' In regard to cattle ticks, I would say that they damage the hides so badly that very few of them can be sold in this market and when they are sold, the price is from 2 to 2½ cents lower than the price of our Northern and Western hides. This reduction is largely due to tick damage, though partly to poor take-off. I handle very few Southern hides on account of ticks.' Considering the ecological conditions of India which are very favourable to the increase of tick population, the writer is of the opinion that the tick problem is probably not less serious in India than it is in the United States of America, where an enormous amount of money is spent every year upon the control of these pests. A large percentage of the chrome leather now pro- duced in India is finished with the grain left on so that all imperfections and tick marks on the grain side show very plainly. Formerly leather for uppers was made from bark-tanned stock and was buffed and the grain removed. For this leather tanners could use cheap hides that were covered with imper- fections and tick marks. The situation today, as it has been explained, is very different, as there is an increasing demand for grained leather, and for this large proportions of Indian hides will not be available until the tick is eradicated. EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS ON TICK DAMAGE ' The injury caused to hides by the perforations made in the skin by the maggots of the Warble-fly are familiar to most cattlemen. They are large and local (on the back) and form conspicuous blemishes that at once discount the value of the hide stock so affected. The smaller but much more numerous pit marks made by ticks are less familiar to them because less obvious, but are recognized by purchasers of hides as by no means negligible blemishes, not only because they are punctures in the hide substance, but by reason of the permanent stains that surround each puncture on the finished leather.'.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sei. & Anim. Husb. Vol. IX, Part IV ] PLATE XXVII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 Portion of raw hide showing tick bites [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 Tick marks on a piece after it had been tanned [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 Tick marks on finished leather
B. N. SONI 363 of the finished leather ', ' spotted and make a very poor leather', ' black spots in the leather ' On a piece of raw hide the tick bites are distinguished by small inflamed or reddened areas somewhat swollen (Plate XXVII, fig. 1). When examined with a lens the skin in a narrow circle about the tick puncture is found densely packed with infiltrated cells. Thus the grain of the hide is damaged and the tanned leather is weakened and spotted. In order to ascertain the actual nature of damage, an experiment was undertaken by the present writer at the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, when young larval forms of the two most commonly occurring species of tick in India (Boophilus australis and Hyalomma ægyptium) were made to feed on a hill bull in fairly good condition. After a period of 30 days, the bull was des- troyed and its hide taken off. The hide was salted and dried and cut in six pieces showing separate regions of the animal's body and was sent to the Chrome Leather Co., Ltd., Madras, for tanning. The tanner's report is reproduced below :364 Damage to hides caused by Cattle Ticks in India Co., Ltd., Madras, for finishing. An examination of the finished material left no room for doubt that the appearance of tick marks on the tanned hide is the reaction to tick bites, resulting in the subsequent ' spotting ' of the finished leather (Plate XXVII, fig. 3). EXTENT OF LOSS SUSTAINED BY THE HIDE INDUSTRY Hides and skins are now articles of international trade and they are often tanned in countries far away from their places of origin. To give an unhappy instance, the present author has information that recently 35 per cent of a consignment of 18,000 goat skins sent to America for tanning by Messrs. Marks & Co. of Calcutta were declared complete rejections by the tanners. The sole cause upheld was the damage caused by ' warbles ' and ticks. This is similar to the position in the wool trade, where the dirty condition of wool exported from India has been adversely criticized by foreign consumers. Further information gathered by the present author through the courtesy of Mr. Bleeck and the Chrome Leather Co., Ltd., Madras, revealed the fact that tick damage is one of the most important factors governing the grading of hides in India. Repeated observations made by the tanners and exporters have led them completely to reject or heavily depreciate raw stock raised in certain areas of the country called ' ticky ' areas. Dacca in Bengal and the Malabar Coast in southern India are held to be the worst tracts from this point of view, while a large proportion of the hides produced in Bengal and Madras are depreciated on this account to the extent of 50 per cent of the price by the Chrome Leather Co., Madras. Similarly, Cawnpore tanners have stated that 50 to 60 per cent depreciation in price is caused by ticks alone to nearly 20 to 30 per cent of the total stock produced in the United Provinces, Punjab and the North-West Frontier Province. While grading a large stock of tanned hides the selector or the jachandar, as he is called, keeps a look out for any tick marks. The de-grading of tick-damaged stock varies from one grade to four grades, depending upon the intensity of tick blemishes per sq. in. These blemishes are capable of causing a reduction of Re. 1-8 to Rs. 3-8 per piece which would normally be valued at about Rs. 7. SUMMARY Ticks always damage hides and prices are reduced accordingly. The Hides Cess Enquiry Committee have briefly dealt with the subject of tick damage to hides and skins in India. Available literature shows that, in the United States of America,' ticky' hides or Southern hides do not sell for as much money as Northern hides and these' ticky ' hides when unhaired are all spotted and make a very poor leather and most tanners refuse to buy Southern hides at any price. Information collected by the present writer from some of the leading tanneries and hide dealers in India and also certain experimental observations carried out by him at Mukteswar lead to the con- clusion that the problem of tick damage to hides and goat skins in India is probably not less serious than in the United States of America. The worst
B. N. SONI 365 tracts from this point of view in southern and eastern India were found to be the Malabar Coast and Dacca. Hides produced in the United Provinces, Punjab and the North-West Frontier Province are believed to be tick-damaged to the extent of 20 to 30 per cent of the total stock, with a depreciation of 50 to 60 per cent in price. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The facilities extended by Mr. J. R. Haddow, Offg. Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, and the guidance rendered by Mr. S. K. Sen, Entomologist, are thankfully acknowledged. The author is also indebted to Mr. J. Bleeck of Calcutta and the management of the Chrome Leather Co., Ltd., Madras, for providing useful information on the subject. The illustrations were prepared with the help of Mr. S. Sen Roy, Artist, to whom the writer is grateful. REFERENCES 1. Damage to Hides caused by Cattle Ticks. (Published by the proprietors of Cooper Cattle Dips, n. d.) 2. Report of the Hides Cess Enquiry Committee, 1. (Calcutta, Government of India, Central Publication Branch, 1930)
STUDIES ON THE MORPHOLOGY OF THE LARVAL FORMS OF HYPODERMA CROSSII PATTON * BY B. N. SONI, B.Sc. (PB.), B.Sc. AGRI. (EDIN.) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 26th January 1939) (With Plate XXVIII) INTRODUCTION THE occurrence of Hypoderma crossii, as a parasite of goats in the Punjab (Salt Range Area), was first discovered sometime in 1922 by Captain Cross, Camel Specialist, Civil Veterinary Department, India, and the species was described by Major W. S. Patton during 1922-23. It was named after the discoverer. As a result of short surveys in the Punjab and the North-West Frontier Province, the present author has been able to collect a large number of Hypo- derma larvae affecting goats. The collection contains both young and full- grown larvae and the author proposes to redescribe these in the present paper. It is also proposed to indicate the main morphological features of the full- grown larva of H. crossii, as distinguished from those of the larva of H. linea- tum, in the same stage. YOUNG LARVA The young larva of H. crossii is pure white in colour with black spiny armature spread over different segments of the body in transverse linear arrangement. The larval body is club-shaped, tapering towards the posterior end which terminates in a pair of spiracles. The size of the larva at this stage varies from 7.5 mm. to 10.5 mm. in length × 2 mm. to 4.5 mm. in greatest breadth (i.e. at sixth and seventh segments). Each transverse band on the ventral surface of the larva consists of six to eight rows of minute, black, chitinous spines. These encircle the body of the larva from the second to the fifth segments inclusive. Each of these four segments has a band near the anterior margin and a similar band in front of the posterior border. The sixth segment has a complete band only on the anterior border, the band in * Presented at the Indian Science Congress held at Lahore in January 1939. (367)
368 Studies on Larval Forms of Hypoderma Crossii front of the posterior margin being confined to the ventral surface only of the larva. On the dorsal surface, the seventh to the tenth segments inclusive show a complete absence of spines ; ventrally the seventh to the ninth segments inclusive have each a double band of spines, both on the anterior margin as well as in front of the posterior border. The tenth segment is entirely without spines dorsally as well as ventrally. Unlike the full-grown larva, the body is devoid of rings of fleshy, recurved, spine-like tubercles [Plate XXVIII, fig. 1, (a), (b) ]. The posterior spiracles consist of a pair of orange-brown stigmatic plates, each of which is composed of a number of thick-walled round discs or rings, varying from 14 to 18 in number in different specimens. These discs are closely connected to each other leaving an empty space in the centre of the plate (Plate XXVIII, fig. 2). FULL-GROWN LARVA It is barrel-shaped, its general colouration being cream-buff. It measures 15.5 to 17.5 mm. in length and from 8 to 9.5 mm. in greatest width (i.e. across the sixth and seventh segments). Each segment from the second to the eighth inclusive bears, near its anterior border and extending completely round the dorsal, lateral and ventral surfaces, a compound ring of more or less fleshy, recurved, spine-like tubercles, some of which, on the second segment at any rate, have black, chitinous points. On the ventral surface, each of the three following segments bears, near its anterior border, transversely placed, similar bands of fleshy tubercles. The dorsal surface is devoid of tubercles on these three segments. The transverse band of forwardly directed chitinous spines are observed ventrally on the posterior borders of the segments from the second to the eighth inclusive. No spines are visible on any of the segments on the dorsal surface. Posterior spiracles consist of a pair of orange-brown posterior stigmal plates, each plate being composed of a large number of slightly oval, thick-walled discs, which are irregularly placed and are fairly close to each other, thus giving the whole plate a homogenous appearance (Plate XXVIII, fig. 3). A comparative study of the spiny armature of a large number of full- grown larvae of H. crossii and H. lineatum has shown that the latter possess on the ventral surface a number of transverse bands of forwardly directed, chitinous spines on each of the second to the tenth segments inclusive, while in the case of H. crossii larvae, similar bands of spines are present only from the second to the eighth segments inclusive. Dorsally, the larvae of H. lineatum possess a single row of transversely placed spines on each segment from the second to the fourth segments inclusive. The fifth to the tenth segments inclusive are each provided with a number of transverse rows of spines, whereas the larvae of H. crossii, on the dorsal surface, are completely devoid of spines (Plate XXVIII, figs. 4 and 5).
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX Part IV ] PLATE XXVIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 a. Ventral view of young larva of H. crossii [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 b. Lateral view of young larva of H. crossii [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Posterior spiracles of young larva of H. crossii [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Posterior spiracles of full-grown larva of H. crossii [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 a. Dorsal view of full-grown larva of H. crossii [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 b. Ventral view of full-grown larva of H. crossii [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5 a. Dorsal view of full-grown larva of H. lineatum [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5 b. Ventral view of full-grown larva of H. lineatum
B. N. SONI 369 SUMMARY A young larva of H. crossii measuring 7.5 to 10.5 mm. in length and 2 to 4.5 mm. in greatest breadth, possesses on its ventral surface a double band of spines, on each segment, from the second to the ninth seg- ments inclusive. On the dorsal surface there is a double band from the second to the fifth segments only, the sixth segment having a single band on the anterior border only. The seventh to the tenth segments inclusive on the dorsal surface and the tenth segment all round are completely devoid of spines. A full-grown larva of the size of 15.5 to 17.5 mm. in length and 8 to 9.5 mm. in greatest width possesses, on its ventral surface, transverse bands of forwardly directed chitinous spines, on each segment from the second to the eighth segments inclusive. No spines are present on the dorsal surface of these larvae. A full-grown larva of H. crossii may be differentiated from a larva of H. lineatum in the same stage by the fact that the latter possesses transverse bands of spines on its ventral surface from the second to the tenth segments inclusive. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The guidance rendered by Mr. S. K. Sen, Entomologist and the facilities provided by the Director of the Institute during the course of this study are gratefully acknowledged. The writer is also indebted to Mr. S. Sen Roy, Artist, for assistance in preparing the illustrations. REFERENCES Cross, H. E. (1925). Agric. Res. Inst. Pusa Bull. 160 Patton, W. S. (1922-23). Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 573-8
A FEW UNUSUAL HELMINTHS OF SOME DOMESTIC ANIMALS IN INDIA* BY G. D. BHALERAO, D. Sc., PH. D. (LOND.,) F. Z. S., F. R. M. S., F. A. Sc. Helminthologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 27th May 1939) IN spite of sustained efforts for the last ten years on the part of several workers in this country, the helminth fauna of the domestic animals in India has not yet been completely explored. The truth of this statement can well be appreciated by a glance at the number of new species described and new records of helminths made from time to time by the helminthologists in India. The present communication gives details of the study of three helminths recorded for the first time in India with additional data concerning a species previously described. Mesocestoides litteratus372 Unusual Helminths of some Domestic Animals in India species of cestode which was later identified as M. litteratus. A few obser- vations based on the material at the disposal of the writer are given below :G. D. BHALERAO 373 is probable that these floating scolices observed by Gaiger and Hall have been overlooked on account of their being drained away along with the serous fluid of the cyst when it was broken. As remarked by Hall, the heads separate from the bladder wall with extraordinary ease. The scolices are arranged on the bladder wall in groups but their number in each group varies. One out- standing feature of the cyst, which has not been observed by any previous worker, is that the scolices are present not only on the inner surface of the bladder wall, but are also noticed on its outer surface. This phenomenon, which is a result of evagination of the scolices, has been observed in the case of C374 Unusual Helminths of some Domestic Animals in India description of both the sexes, but for the present a few observations on the material at my disposal are given below. It is a curious fact that Tubangui, who propounded the species P. bovicola, had also only two females for study. The worms measure 37.3-43 mm. in length. The anterior end is orna- mented with transverse ridges interrupted at irregular intervals, the rest of the cuticle is striated, the striations being 0.0025-0.003 mm. apart. The cervical papillæ are situated at a distance of 0.212-0.233 mm. from the anterior end. The VISCERAL GOUT OF FOWLS IN INDIA* BY S. GANAPATHY IYER, G.M.V.C. Offg. Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 10th February 1939) INTRODUCTION THE term Visceral gout is applied to a condition of the organs, charac- terized by a chalky appearance with fine whitish flour-like deposits. It is said to result from the accumulation of uric acid in the blood and an altered function of the renal system leading to the storage and deposition of urates in the tissues of the internal organs. The present paper is the result of having encountered visceral gout in dead fowls from time to time. In parti- cular mention may be made of the recent incidence of five such cases in one week during the month of June 1938, among what were considered to be healthy fowls. Gout of joints is not uncommon but in none of the cases comprising the subject of this paper was there any abnormality of the joints, and as mentioned above the lesions were confined to the viscera and simulated the description given in textbooks. ETIOLOGY The cause of the gout in the fowls under study is not definitely known. Various opinions have been expressed with regard to its etiology ; one theory is that it is due to a fungus. The feeding of birds with abundant horse meat for several months, chronic poisoning by oxalic acid, carbolic acid, corrosive sublimate, aloin and acetone are known to cause typical gout [Kaupp, 1933]. Ligaturing the ureters of the bird can produce deposition of urates in the tissues. The dietetic cause may be attributed to forced feeding with rich protein diet combined with inadequate exercise. Tuberculosis and chronic forms of fowl cholera may also cause similar changes in the joints [Hutyra and Marek, 1926]. Most of the above causes are considered improbable in the fowls under reference. No fungus or pathogenic bacteria were seen on microscopical and cultural examinations and it may reasonably be assumed that only dietetic errors were involved. PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY The birds were very light when received for autopsy. The eyes were sunken. On opening the thorax and abdomen there was chalky adherent deposit over the heart, pericardium, air sac membranes, liver, spleen, kidneys, the entire external surface of the intestines, including the mesentery and the * Paper read at the Indian Science Congress, 1939. (375)
376 Visceral Gout of Fowls in India genital organs. The lesions were almost uniform in all the fowls. However, in one bird No. 49, the kidneys were infiltrated with abundant white fine granular material and macroscopic appearance of the kidney was like that of brain. By scraping with a blunt scalpel, the white deposit could be removed with little difficulty as a pasty mass. Neither the microscopic nor the cultural examination of the heart blood, liver and spleen suggested the incidence of any specific parasitic bacterial infection. There was no diarrhInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX Part IV ] PLATE XXIX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Scolex showing rostellum and suckers [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Scolex showing rostellum and suckers
ON A SPECIES OF JOYEUXIA, LOPEZ-NEYRA, 1927, FROM A CAT (FELIS CATUS DOMESTICA) BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C. Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College (Received for publication on 25th March 1939) (With Plate XXIX and one text-figure) THE genus Joyeuxia has been created to contain certain tapeworms which differ from Dipylidium in having a larger number of crowns of hooks, a smaller number of testes and egg capsules containing each a single egg. The shape of the hooks, however, is the same as in Dipylidium. Baylis [1929] notes two species of Joyeuxia, viz. J. chyzeri (V. Ratz, 1897) and J. pasqualei (Diamare, 1893). Hall [1920] has described the former basing his description on the dia- gram made by Von Ratz. Southwell [1922] has recorded Dipylidium gervaisi Setti, 1895, in the collection of the Calcutta Museum and he [1930] gives a brief description of the parasite in the Fauna of British India. From his description it is seen that the worm has a rostellum which bears 8 to 12 rows of rose-thorn-shaped hooks and the egg capsules contain each a single egg. It seems therefore reasonable to include it in the genus Joyeuxia. The author collected sometime ago two specimens of Joyeuxia along with about eight specimens of D.caninum from an old and sickly cat that strayed into the college laboratory. It is proposed to give here a brief description of the former. The length of the strobila of the worms is about 4 cm. and the maximum width is about 1 . 4 mm. The head is about 0 . 300 × 0.400 mm. and each sucker is about 0.140 mm. in diameter. The retractile rostellum is 0.125 mm. long and has on it about 13 rows of rose-thorn-shaped hooks. The hooks in the anterior row are comparatively large and they diminish in size gradually in the succeeding rows posteriorly (Plate XXIX figs. 1 and 2). Each mature segment is broader than long. The genital atrium is in the anterior third of the margin of each segment. The average dimension of each is about 1.2 × 0.275 mm. The male genitalia consists of about 50 testes in each segment and the cirrus sac almost reaching the excretory canal. The female genitalia consists of two ovaries, one on either side of the seg- ment, situated at a small distance inside the excretory canals. Each ovary appears to be a bunch of follicles, from which arises the vaginal tube which is a little longer than the cirrus sac, and opens posterior to it, in the genital atrium (fig. 1). The vitellaria and the shell gland could not be clearly seen. In the gravid segments, the uterine capsules have relatively thin walls and each contains a single egg. (377)
378 On a species of Joyeuxia, from a Cat [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Mature segment showing genitalia It is interesting to note that this is the first record of finding, in South India, a member of the genus Joyeuxia, but it seems difficult to determine the specific identity of the worm described, because in Joyeuxia, as in Dipy- lidium, it is possible for different observers to obtain varying results regarding the number of rows of hooks on the rostellum. The number of crowns of hooks on the rostellum in J. gervaisi is from 8 to 12, in J. chyzeri it is 13 to 14 and in J. pasqualei it is 16, whereas in the worm described above, it is 13. Under the circumstances, the author is inclined to think that the worm under consi- deration is J. chyzeri (V. Ratz, 1897). REFERENCES Baylis, H. A. (1929). A manual of Helminthology. B. T. & Cox. London Hayl, M. C. (1920). Proc. V. S. Nat. Mus. 55, 68-72 Southwell. T. (1922). Annals of Trop. Med. 16, 127 PARALYSIS IN A PIGEON DUE TO DOYLE'S (RANIKHET) DISEASE VIRUS* BY S. GANAPATHY IYER, G.M.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 10th February 1939) (With Plate XXX) INTRODUCTION SINCE the first discovery of ' New Castle disease' now known as Doyle's disease in India among poultry by Doyle [1927], various workers on the same disease of birds in other parts of the world including this country believed that this condition was a new addition to veterinary medicine. The identity of the differently named diseases, New Castle disease [Doyle, 1927], Pseudo- fowl-pest [Picard, 1928], Avian-pest [Farinas, 1930], and Ranikhet disease [Cooper, 1931], has been determined by cross immunity tests by exchanging virus from one country to another. The study of paralysis in relation to any specific disease among birds has received great attention during recent years. Doyle's disease of birds, especially fowls, is one in which the paralysis of the wings, legs and neck is not an uncommon symptom in cases which tend to run through a subacute or chronic syndrome when the virus affects the cerebrospinal system. In this neurotropic form, the bird lives for a longer period than in the acute generalized disease and as such it remains a carrier of the infection and thus it is a menace to the control of the disease under field conditions. If des- truction, as is generally carried out in western countries in particular with fowls, were possible in India, the dissemination of the virus, it is apparent, would seldom occur. Achievement in this direction is a thing to aspire to only after years of extensive propaganda in rural areas. It has very frequently been observed among experimentally infected pigeons, that para- lysis of wings and legs is one of the characteristic features of Doyle's disease. In the past, paralysis was considered to be a proof of dietary deficiency. Vitamin deficiency has been shown to cause symptoms of paralysis and suffi- cient data have been put forward by various workers that the depletion or exclusion of vitamin-B from the food invariably results in nervous symptoms. Pigeons are known to suffer from polyneuritis resulting from vitamin-B deficiency and it is possible to reproduce the condition by feeding pigeons on polished rice. In India the existence of true cases of paralysis in birds due to deficiency and independent of Doyle's disease infection needs confirmation. Biological tests conducted at this Institute from time to time with emulsions of organs from birds suffering from paralysis have mostly been demonstrated to be the * Paper read at the Indian Science Congress, 1939. (379) G
380 Paralysis in a Pigeon due to Doyle's (Ranikhet) Disease virus result of Doyle's disease as the primary etiological factor. The most suscepti- ble birds die of acute condition too quickly to exhibit any symptoms of para- lysis, but less acute and lingering cases suffer from paralysis of wings and legs either alone or with an accompanying involvement of the head and neck in some. Experimental Doyle's disease in pigeons.S. GANAPATHY IYER 381 for other bird infections and separate attendants are provided. Thus, there was practically no possibility of accidental Doyle's disease infection in this shed. Drooping of wings with marked paralysis of the legs was the symptom in the pigeon which attracted attention, while harvesting pox virus crusts, and led to a suspicion that Doyle's disease might be the cause. There was a whitish diarrhoea soiling the tail feathers. In order to determine the speci- fic cause of the paralysis, the bird was destroyed the same day that the ner- vous symptoms were observed. The post-mortem examination revealed intestinal congestion and slight spleenic enlargement. From the heart blood a pure culture of Escherichiacoli was isolated. In addition, the films showed Haemoproteus, a frequent finding in the experimental birds at this Institute. The autopsy revealed nothing unusual otherwise. The whole spleen was removed with aseptic precautions, emulsified in 10 c. c. of normal saline solution, and filtered through a Seitz filter. A healthy fowl was injected subcutaneously with the whole filtrate. This fowl reacted (Doyle's disease) and died. TABLE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
382 Paralysis in a Pigeon due to Doyle's (Ranikhet) Disease virus INOCULATION IN SERIES When the first subinoculated fowl (No. 92), Table I, died of an infection which simulated Doyle's disease (Plate XXX, fig. 1), further passages by subinoculation with the spleen emulsion from the above fowl were carried out in more healthy fowls all of which died and the syndrome was exactly like that of Doyle's disease (Plate XXX, fig. 3). During the second passage, in addition to a healthy fowl, another fowl No. 366 which had recovered from an inoculation with Doyle's disease virus of fowls had proved immune to a number of subse- quent immunity tests. Thus the cross immunity was tested and it suggested that there was complete immunological identity between the pigeon and the fowl strain of virus. In addition, four pigeons were injected with the organ emulsion from fowl No. 106 (2nd passage). Two pigeons reacted with the characteristic drooping of wings and paralysis of legs and died of the infection, while the remaining two reacted and survived (Plate XXX, figs. 2 and 4). In this con- nexion the observation of Doyle [1927] may be cited. The pigeons used were adult and the failure to infect all of them is thus explained by their age. DISCUSSION It is curious to note that the natural infection with Doyle's disease virus in the pigeon was confined to one bird and that the infection did not spread to other pigeons which were in close proximity. The timely "segregation of the pigeon, complete disinfection of the premises and the cages, and the resis- tance of pigeons to contact infection with fowl virus are presumably the factors concerned. It may be borne in mind that in the preparation of fowl-pox vaccine from pigeons in large numbers, after the method of Doyle [1927], there is the potential danger of incorporating Doyle's disease virus along with bird-pox virus. The possibility of bacteria or protozoon parasite in association with the virus in the pigeon as factors in the causation of the paralytic symptoms of Doyle's disease was completely eliminated by filtration experiments. Since the experimental disease and the pathological anatomy of the dead fowls suggested no difference in the infectivity of the two strains, viz. fowl and pigeon, the early hope entertained that the discovery of an altered anti- genic strain from pigeons proved futile. Petechiae in the proventiculum and acute inflammation of the rectum were the characteristic lesions in the sub- inoculated fowls. REFERENCES Cooper, H. (1931). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. Anim. Husb. 1, 107-23 Doyle, T. M. (1927). J. Comp. Path. Ther. 40, 144-69 Farin as, E. C. (1930). Philli. J. Agric. 1, 311-64 Picard, W. K. (1928). Dept. Agric. Industr. Commer. D. East. Ind. Vet. Bull. 65
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim.Husb., Vol. IX, Part IV] PLATE XXX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fowl No. 92 FIG. 1. Thermal reaction in Doyle's disease [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Pigeon No. 200 FIG. 2. Thermal reaction in Doyle's disease [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fowl No. 127 FIG. 3. Thermal reaction in Doyle's disease [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Paralysis of the wing and legs in a pigeon infected with Doyle's disease virus (experimental)
ON THE SUCCESSFUL TRANSMISSION OF VARIOLA IN GOATS IN A GENERALIZED FORM* BY S. GANAPATHY IYER, G.M.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 10th February 1939) (With Plate XXXI) IN Variola, the reproduction of the disease artificially for either diag- nostic work or for conferring active immunity in animals threatened with contact infection, is mostly achieved by localizing the infection on the skin in some part of the body. It is seldom that generalized eruptions occur following intracutaneous inoculation. Under field conditions, Variola in goats is characterized by different forms. When kids are the victims, the classical lesions of pox are not always observed, and the skin lesions in a desiccated form or suspended in 50 per cent glycerinated saline solution are the usual biological materials needed for a satisfactory diagnosis. Two forms of goat-pox are likely to occur. One form is the mild and localized one believed to be the result of infection with cow-pox. The natural trans- mission of sheep-pox to goats is alleged to cause a very severe form of pox in goats. At the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, from an examination of various specimens of goat-pox materials, there is some indi- cation that there may exist several strains of goat-pox virus. Hutyra and Marek [1926] state that the identity of the goat-pox virus is still an unsettled problem. Records of having transmitted pox in goats in a generalized form ex- perimentally using such biological materials as blood and other internal organs are not many and in India similar attempts have seldom been made. This paper records the successful reproduction of experimental goat-pox lesions in goats in a generalized form following the subcutaneous injection of materials such as blood taken at the height of thermal reaction and spleen after death. TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENTS In the first instance a specimen of defibrinated blood from the jugular vein of a goat, referred to as one of an outbreak of disease in goats in the Bombay Province, was subinoculated into two healthy goats and kept in an isolated chupper, for observation. The true syndrome of Variola was reproduced. The vesiculo-pustular lesions were in abundance on the under surface of the abdomen and the inner side of the thighs. * Paper read at the Indian Science Congress, 1939 (383)
384 Successful Transmission of Variola in Goats Confirmation of this finding was considered necessary and accordingly goat-pox virus isolated from one of our stock strains which originated in the North-West Frontier Province two years earlier was tried. In one of the recent subinoculations with this virus a sample of blood was drawn from a reacting goat (No. 136) at the first thermal rise, and was directly injected under the skin of two healthy goats (Nos. 139 and 141) on the 19th of July 1938. These goats were kept in segregation. Lesions of pox more marked on the external and internal parts of the buccal cavity were observed in both these animals which eventually recovered (Plate XXXI, fig. 1). The same virus in the form of crusts when inoculated by scarification of the skin of the abdomen of goat No. 130 (Plate XXXI, fig. 2), produced localized lesions confined to the seat of scarification. It is therefore evident that the virus of pox (goat) is present in the circulation during the initial febrile stage, sufficient in concentration to reproduce the disease in susceptible goats. While the results obtained in these cases were identical, a third specimen of spleen tissue and crustaceous lesions from a goat, suspected to have died of natural pox, became available for further work on the 7th of June 1938. Nodular lesions in the lung were predominant in the above goat. The subinoculation of the spleen emulsion in normal saline solution under the skin of two healthy goats resulted in the transmission of a genera- lized form of Variola and when the goat died of the infection, autopsy revealed in addition to the cutaneous and buccal pox lesions, nodular lung lesions as well. The crusts received with the specimen of spleen from the same goat were also submitted to biological test by scarification in two goats. Only local lesions were observed in this case. DISCUSSION The facts presented in this paper indicate that under certain conditions blood and spleen from goat-pox suspected cases may be used for diagnostic work when the more usual cutaneous crusts or pustular material are not avail- able. It is well known that in true and typical outbreaks of goat-pox, diffi- culty is seldom experienced in diagnosing the condition. But in a typical outbreak, especially in kids, where skin lesions are not available, internal organs such as spleen may with advantage be sent in 50 per cent glycerinated saline for animal inoculation work. REFERENCE Hutyra, F. and Marek, J. (1926). Special Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic Animals, 1 , 377-400
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX, Part IV ] PLATE XXXI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Goat No. 139RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE DEGREE OF REACTION AND IMMUNITY IN SERUM SIMULTANEOUS INOCULATION IN RINDERPEST BY K. S. NAIR, G.B.V.C., M.R.C.V.S., D.T.V.M. Superintendent, Serum Institute, Madras D. NILAKANTA AYYAR, G.M.V.C. AND A. R. MADHUSUDAN, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Assistant Surgeons, Serum Institute, Madras (Received for publication on 10th July 1939) A ' BLOCKED-OUT ' reaction, which is brought about by giving massive doses of serum in animals inoculated by the serum simultaneous method against Rinderpest, has been suggested as a possible cause for the breakdown of immunity. Apart from the question of cost, this blocked-out reaction would be an ideal method of immunization provided the production of immunity is not interfered with, since the temporary inconvenience and the risk of a severe reaction could be obviated. In order to find out if it is at all possible to block out the reaction and at the same time confer immunity to the inoculated, the following experiment was undertaken. At the outset, it was necessary to find out the required dose of serum that would bring about a blocked-out reaction to a fixed dose of virus. Susceptible young buffalo-calves were selected and were injected with 1 c.c. of virulent Rinderpest virus simultaneously with serum at rates of 25, 30, 35, 40, 45 and 50 c.c. per 100 lb. body-weight. The results are summarized in Table I. It is observed that the reactions are not blocked out with doses up to 35 c.c. per 100 lb. body-weight. Higher doses do block out the reaction but with- out in any way interfering with the production of immunity. All the animals under experiment were tested with a 5 c.c. dose of virulent bull virus at varying intervals ranging from 13 to 44 days and they have been found to possess a solid immunity as judged from the absence of any Rinderpest reactions after the test dose of virus. (385)
386 Serum Simultaneous Inoculation in Rinderpest TABLE I Institute No. of the calf Weight of calf in lb. Date of inocula- tion by serum simulta- neous method Kind of virus used Rate of serum per 100 lb. body- weight Total quantity of scrum given Reactions Date of retest with bull virus Interval between primary inocula- tion and retest Reactions after retest Remarks Days 59 234 7-9-38 Bull . 25 c.c. 59 c.c. Thermal and Diarrhoea 10-10-38 32 No reactions. 60 266 7-9-38 Do . 25 c.c. 67 c.c. No reactions 10-10-38 32 Do. Perhaps an im- mune calf. 1m 121 245 8-12-38 Goat . 25 c.c. 61 c.c. Thermal only 28-12-38 19 Do. 122 231 8-12-38 Do. . 25 c.c. 58 c.c. Thermal and Diarrhoea . 28-12-38 19 Do. 61 280 7-9-38 Bull . 30 c.c. 84 c.c. No reactions. 10-10-38 32 Do. . Immune Calf.? 62 244 7-9-38 Do. . 30 c.c. 73 c.c. Thermal and soft faeces 10-10-38 32 Do. 123 231 8-12-38 Goat . 30 c.c. 69 c.c. Thermal only 28-12-38 19 Do. 124 239 8-12-38 Do. . 30 c.c. 72 c.c. Slight thermal 28-12-38 19 Do. 155 247 0-1-39 Do. . 35 c.c. 56 c.c. Do. . 23-1-39 16 Slight thermal from 13th to 15th days. 171 285 31-1-39 Do. . 35 c.c. 100 c.c. No reactions 16-3-39 43 No reactions. 156 203 6-1-39 Do. . 40 c.c. 81 c.c. Do. . 23-1-39 16 Slight thermal from 9th to 10th days. 172 287 31-1-39 Do. . 40 c.c. 115 c.c. Do. . 16-3-39 43 No reactions. 157 198 6-1-39 Do. . 45 c.c. 89 c.c. Do. . 21-1-39 14 Do. 173 242 31-1-39 Do. . 45 c.c. 109 c.c. Do. . 16-3-39 43 Do. 158 217 6-1-39 Do. . 50 c.c. 108 c.c. Do. . 20-1-39 13 Do. 174 260 31-1-39 Do. . 50 c.c. 130 c.c. Do. . 16-3-39 44 Do.
K. S. NAIR, D. NILAKANTA AYYAR AND A. R. MADHUSUDAN 387 Calves Nos. 155 and 156 have, however, shown a slight thermal rise after the retest dose and this can only be regarded as due to causes other than Rinder- pest reactions. Perhaps it was due to Theileriasis since Theileria mutans was present in the blood of these animals. Ordinarily, a dose of more than 30 c.c. of serum per 100 lb. body-weight is not employed in serum simultaneous inoculations in which case a blocked- out reaction is not produced, and when a blocked-out reaction does occur as a result of employment of higher doses, it does not interfere with the establish- ment of immunity. The conception that a blocked-out reaction will not confer a high degree of immunity is not in conformity with the results obtained in this study. CONCLUSIONS 1. Under the conditions of this experiment the immunizing value of a ' blocked-out' reaction was not inferior to those in which symptom synd- rome was present. 2. This phenomenon can be brought about among susceptible buffalo - calves in serum simultaneous inoculations by giving a uniform dose of 1 c.c. of Rinderpest virus to each individual and 40 c.c. or more of anti- Rinderpest serum to every 100 lb. body-weight of the animal. SUMMARY Experiments were undertaken to find out if a ' blocked-out ' reaction brought about by massive doses of serum in animals inoculated by serum simultaneous method, would interfere with the production of immunity. Young susceptible buffalo-calves were inoculated by the serum simultaneous method employing an infective dose of 1 c.c. of virus and serum at doses of 25 c.c. 30 c.c., 35 c.c., 40 c.c., 45 c.c., and 50 c.c., per 100 lb. body-weight. From a study of the reactions in these calves, it was observed that calves that received serum up to 35 c.c. per 100 lb. body-weight reacted to the inocu- lation and those that received higher doses did not show any reaction but without interfering with the production of immunity as judged by the absence of reactions in these calves to a subsequent test dose of virus. So, it is concluded that 'blocked-out' reactions do not in any way hamper the production of immunity. H
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. IX Part IV ] PLATE XXXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A bullock suffering from cutaneous microfilariasis (six years old)
CUTANEOUS MICROFILARIASIS IN INDIAN CATTLE * (PRELIMINARY REPORT) BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, M.Sc., D.Sc. Helminthologist (On Special Duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 4th May 1939) (With Plate XXXII) IN recent years a number of important diseases of Indian domestic animals, which had baffled solution for a long time, such as bovine Nasal Schistosomiasis and Hump sore, equine hepatic cirrhosis, Bursati and Lichen tropicus, etc. have been definitely proved to be of helminthic origin. In this paper the author describes yet another disease of Indian cattle which is due to helminthic infestation. It is a peculiar, chronic form of skin disease affecting cattle at certain places in the Bombay Province to which attention was drawn by the Director, Veterinary Services, Bombay, during one of his visits to this Institute. Subse- quently, through his courtesy, a six-year old bullock suffering from the disease was received at this Institute. When the animal arrived at the Institute, it had practically no hair on the greater part of its body. The skin showed numerous scars of healed lesions generalized all over the body and from several places pieces of skin had peeled off. The skin was very tender and peeled off in patches at the slightest injury or abrasion, leaving bright-red, bleeding surfaces, which attracted swarms of flies. Nevertheless, the animal was in good bodily condition and fed well (Plate XXXII). However, it is not difficult to imagine that the working capacity of the affected animal must have been considerably reduced on account of the numerous wounds and constant irritation. Though sections of pieces of skin from the animal revealed the presence of numerous microfilariae, repeated examination of blood smears and the centri- fuged deposits from large quantities of blood proved to be negative for adult worms and larvae. However, large numbers of microfilariae were recovered from fresh pieces of skin incubated overnight in normal saline at body tem- perature. The microfilariae are unsheathed and measure 0.252 to 0.28 mm. in length and 0.004 mm. in breadth. They have a rounded anterior end and a *Paper read at the meeting of the Section of Veterinary Research of the Indian Science Congress, 1938 (389)
390 Cutaneous Microfilariasis in Indian Cattle sharply pointed and slightly curved posterior extremity. The number of the larvae in the skin is subject to seasonal variations. With the approach of winter the number of microfilariae in the skin rapidly decreased and finally the larvae almost disappeared and the skin presented almost a normal appearance ; but with the return of the hot season the larvae and the associated clinical manifestation reappeared. At first sight the animal appeared to be an advanced case of ' cutaneous bleeding ' or ' blood boils ' due to a very heavy infestation with Parafilaria multipapillosa. These parasites live as adults in the subcutaneous and inter- muscular connective tissue and produce subcutaneous nodules which appear suddenly, break open, blead and then heal up. The condition is seen during summer and disappears in winter. The microfilariae of P. multipapillosa measure 0.22 to 0.23 mm. in length and 0.009 to 0.01 mm. in breadth and are never found in the blood of the host. Apart from the absence of the microfilaria in the general circulation and their seasonal incidence, the disease described in this paper and the one caused by P. multipapillosa have no points of similarity between them. There is only one reference in literature to a somewhat similar disease occurring in Japanese cattle described by Oguni in 1927, as ' Wahi' or ' Kose ' or an elephantiasis-like disease. This disease has been known among Japanese cattle for a long time and was considered to be merely a kind of scabies, or referred to as intoxication or some other condition till Oguni [1927] succeeded in demonstrating a type of microfilariae which is believed to be the cause of this disease. The cases usually occur in summer in large numbers and are rare in winter, three to seven years old animals being mostly affected. Symptoms differ according to the stage of the disease. The lesions are usually found on the skin of the head, neck and back. At first several small nodules, which may be felt with stroking, appear here and there on the skin. In some cases many parts of the skin are peeled off, leaving bright red, sensitive, moist and bleeding surfaces. As the disease progresses the number of nodules increases, hairs fall off and thick folds due to the thickening of the skin are gradually formed on the neck and throat, which ultimately present the appearance of elephantiasis. Severe itching is a constant symptom of the disease and conti- nuous rubbing, biting and scratching due to irritation result in loss of condition. The symptoms are less severe in winter and the animal appears to be normal but with the return of warm season the lesions reappear, assuming larger propor- tions. The microfilariae, which are found in the blood, measure 130µ in length, the breadth being equal to the diameter of the red blood corpuscle. The larvae appear to be without sheath. The microfilariae and eosinophiles are abundant in the initial stages of the disease but practically disappear in ad- vanced cases. The points of similarity between the Japanese and Indian disease are the seasonal incidence, both flaring up in summer, peeling of pieces of skin at the slightest injury, casting of the coat in patches and the causative agents of both
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 391 being unsheathed microfilariae. The disease in Indian cattle differs from that in the Japanese cattle in the absence of any predisposition of the skin of certain parts of the body, nodules in the skin, thickening of the skin at the neck, etc., with subsequent elephantoid development and in the absence of the microfilariae in the blood. Further, the larvae found in the Indian cattle are larger in size than those of the Japanese. The author is deeply grateful to Mr. W. Taylor, M. R. C. V. S., D. V. H., I.V.S., Offg. Director, and Mr. T. J. Hurley, M. R. C. V. S., D. V.S.M., I. V. S., Offg. Pathologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for their much kind encouragement. REFERENCES Oguni,H.(1927). J.Jap.Soc.Vet.Sci.,6 ,188-90 Srivastava, H. D. (1938). Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong. Sect. XI, Abst. No. 5
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX Part IV ] PLATE XXXIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Life-cycle of P. macrorchis (After Macy, 1934) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Life-cycle of Davainea proglottina (After Reis and Nobrega)
THE IMPORTANT HELMINTH PARASITES OF POULTRY394 Important Helminth Parasites of Poultry From its normal habitat, the bursa fabrici, the parasite enters the oviduct in laying birds, being probably assisted by the movements of that organ, and is responsible for acute inflammation and consequent production of abnormal eggs and discharge of albumen. Owing to irritation, the oviduct performs retroperistaltic movements causing broken yolk, albumen, bacteria and parasite material to enter the peritoneal cavity and giving rise to acute peri- tonitis. The disease is frequently fatal even in moderately heavy infestations. An interesting, though not serious, aspect of the disease is the occasional occur- rence of living parasites and parasite material inside the shell of a perfectly normal egg. This inclusion is possible because the parasite lives on the sur- face of the oviduct, which secretes the egg material. The infected bird becomes extremely emaciated and anaemic. Post mortem examination reveals the presence of fibrinous peritonitis with a large amount of a sticky, yellow exudate, containing large masses of egg-yolk and albumen, parasites and their eggs. The ovary has a number of diseased, collapsed ovules, containing greyish-yellow, egg-yolk-like material mixed with fibrin and pus. The oviduct is distended and its lumen contains a large amount of albuminous material forming clots. The mucosa is covered with a sticky exudate consisting mainly of albumen, blood and fibrin ; large number of flukes are also present. There is a sharp decline in egg-production which falls to about 10 per cent of the normal. The diagnosis of the disease, especially in the initial stages, is usually difficult. The earlier symptoms, e.g. laying of soft-shelled eggs and decrease in egg-production, are likely to be attributed to nutritional irregularities. A positive diagnosis is possible by the finding of the mature parasite or its eggs in the faeces or the egg of the suspected bird. In the absence of a constant passage of bulky material through the oviduct, the eggs are probably dis- charged only periodically, hence faecal examination is not always reliable. In the absence of a positive diagnosis, the following symptoms, when taken collectively, are strongly suggestive of prosthogonimiasis : Inactivity of the bird, sharp decline in egg-production, laying of soft-shelled eggs, presence or chalky-white crusts on the feathers around the cloacal region and of hard- cream coloured chrunks of abortive egg-white and yolk in the oviduct and abdominal cavity and the distended oviduct filled with fibrinated pus and the abdominal cavity with pus-exudate, parasites and eggs. The worms in the oviduct cannot be removed by any method of treat- ment. In the early stages, while the parasites are still in the intestine, it may be possible to remove them and thus prevent their entry into the oviduct. Successful results have been obtained in the treatment of prosthogonimiasis with carbon tetrachloride given in repeated doses of 1.5 to 1.7 c. c. in liquid cereal. On account of its toxicity the drug should be used with care. The occurrence of the parasite in migratory birds, the lack of marked host specificity and the migratory nature of its second intermediate host render the problem of prevention extremely difficult. The only possible method of prevention is by keeping poultry fenced away from permanent ponds and lakes. As adult dragon-flies are easily caught by poultry on damp
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 395 mornings, the birds should not be let loose in the morning until the dragon- flies are out of the weeds. Another fluke, Lepoderma arcuatum, has also been reported from the oviduct of the fowl in Russia, but nothing is definitely known about its patho- genicity and life-history. The intestine may harbour large numbers of worms of different species of the families Echinostomidae, Strigeidae and Plagiorchiidae. Members of the family Echinostomidae occur in the duodenum, small intestine, rectum and rarely caeca of the fowl, duck and goose. The eggs are discharged in the gut of the host and pass out with the droppings. Under favourable condi- tions, the eggs hatch and the miracidia penetrate into a suitable molluscan host and develop into cercariae. The latter come out and encyst either on another snail, an amphibian or fish. The final host acquires infection by ingesting the second intermediate host bearing encysted larvæ. In light infestations, these parasites do not produce any marked symptoms, but when present in large numbers they may be responsible for severe enteritis. The birds show inappetence, diarrh396 Important Helminth Parasites of Poultry A number of monostomatous trematodes of the genera Notocotylus and Catatropis and the distome Harmostomum commutatum parasitize the caeca and in rare cases rectum of the fowl, duck, goose, turkey and wild birds. These flukes are usually not harmful, but in heavy infestations may produce inflammation and necrosis of the caeca due to irritation. The life-cycle of H. commutatum is not known. The cercariae of the monostome encyst on aquatic vegetation and snails, whose ingestion is responsible for the infection. No satisfactory treatment is known, but the one recommended for the caecal round-worm may be tried. Another group of monostomes which infest birds belong to the family Cyclocoelidae. These parasites live in the body cavity, air sacs, trachea and the nasal cavity of the duck, goose and other aquatic birds. The cercariae encyst in the first intermediate snail host which transmits infection. The larvæ reach their final habitat probably via the blood stream. These parasites cause obstruction of the trachea and the host may die of asphyxia. No treatment is known. Infected waters should be avoided and attempts may be made to exterminate the snails. A small skin-flukeH. D. SRIVASTAVA 397 occasionally produce inflammatory processes in the intestinal wall. No satisfactory treatment is known. Avoidance of infected waters and the des- truction of snails may help to control the infestation. THE CESTODES OR TAPEWORMS A large variety of tapeworms commonly infest poultry. They all occur in the intestine and vary in size from a few millimeters to about a foot in length. The eggs, either separately or contained in mature segments, are passed out with the droppings ; but the development of the larval stage de- pends on the eggs being taken up by some suitable intermediate host, in the body of which they develop. A variety of invertebrates, such as slugs, snails., earth-worms, insects and crustacea, etc., serve as intermediate hosts of the tapeworms infesting poultry. When an intermediate host is swallowed by a suitable bird, the contained larval tapeworm is set free in the intestine. It attaches itself to the wall of the gut and rapidly develops into an adult tape- worm (Plate XXXIII, fig 2). As adults, tapeworms live in the intestinal tract of the final host, and through their body absorb nutrients taken in by the bird. However, in light infestation, they do not have any marked detrimental effect on the health of the bird. Turkeys and geese are most susceptible to the harmful effects of cestode infestations, but fowls are less so. Ducks are rarely affected and may harbour large numbers of worms without suffering much harm. Though the different species of tapeworms of poultry vary greatly in their pathogeni- city, in heavy infestations they all rob the host of much of its food. The birds become unthrifty and show an unkempt appearance of the feathers, droopiness, thirst, emaciation and anaemia. At first, appetite may remain good but it gradually diminishes. The irritation caused by these worms produces derangement of digestion and catarrhal condition of the bowels. In laying birds, egg-production may be decreased or even suspended. The birds suffer, from extensive muco-catarrhal enteritis, manifested by diarrhoea, the excrement being usually streaked with blood. Convulsions or partial paraly- sis, the leg being specially involved, may also develop. Young birds suffer most and their growth is considerably retarded. The dwarf tapeworm-398 Important Helminth Parasites of Poultry are paretic symptoms, neurolymphomatosis and other causes must be ex- cluded. Kamala has been found to give good results when administered in doses of 1 gm. for a mature fowl and 2 gm. for turkeys. It may be given in the form of a pill, in a capsule or bread. Fasting overnight, though not necessary, is advisable ; but no purgative is necessary, as the drug itself has a purgative action. An overdose of this drug, which is quite toxic, may do more harm than good and hence it is advisable to determine the correct dose, in proportion to the size and condition of the bird, by treating a few of the birds, before undertaking a wholesale treatment of the flock. Treatment with this drug is dangerous if the birds are affected with roup or other debilitat- ing condition. Though often practised, treatment of a whole flock with this drug by admixture with food is less effective than individual treatment. Though several remedies have been recommended for the removal of tape- worms in poultry, the two drugs in common use are Kamala and Iodine Vermi- cide. Experimental evidence adduced in recent years does not justify the use of the former drug to the same extent as of the latter. Kamala has a ver- mifugal action. It does not remove scolices and is comparatively less effective in removing strobilae and may be very harmful in certain cases, especially to birds in poor condition. The Iodine Vermicide and Iodine Suspensoid (Merck) are colloidal iodine preparations of the hydrosol type. In recent years, it has been conclusively proved that colloidal iodine possesses a vermicidal action and removes strobilae in a surprisingly short time. In the removal of strobilae it has been found to be a hundred per cent effective. One pound of Iodine Vermicide (Merck) is diluted with water to make one gallon. One ounce of this is introduced into the gizzard of each fowl by means of a special bulb syringe fitted with a long slender nozzle. Its introduction into the gizzard, which retains the minutest quantity of fluid, ensures its passage directly into the intestines, so as to reach the infected region within a few minutes and thus increases the effectiveness of the treatment. For the treatment of birds in poor condition, Iodine Vermicide is safer than Kamala. It is not only harmless, but has a stimulating effect also on the treated birds, as evinced, usually in 48 hours, by increased appetite and activity. Its use is further justified on the basis that the life-cycle of the parasite is interrupted with the consequent prevention of the spread of infection ; for it not only removes the strobilae but also kills the contained larvæ (Onchophores) and thus destroys a large number of potential tapeworms. Tapeworms penetrate deep into the crypts of the mucosa, even down to the muscularis mucosae, hence their heads (scolices) are not usually acted upon by these drugs, which cannot reach them. Alkaline treatment by giving sodium-bicarbonate in drinking water, previous to the administration of the taeniacide, in order to remove the mucus coating of the intestine, does not always help the removal of the scolices. In heavy infestations, sometimes the biological saturation point is reached and the development of some of the worms is retarded or completely checked. These worms develop into adults in one or two weeks, following treatment. It is, therefore, advisable to
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 399 repeat the treatment in three to four weeks, if necessary. Besides strobilæ of tapeworms, Iodine Vermicide kills and removes all the Ascaridia and acts on a fair proportion of the caecal worms. Considerable number of young Ascaridia, however, may be situated deep in the crypts of the mucosa and thus escape the action of the drug. However, a second treatment will remove all of these if sufficient time is allowed for their development and passage into the lumen of the intestine. In literature a large number of drugs, such as carbon tetrachloride, areca nut, turpentine, cotton seed oil, thymol, arecoline hydrobromide, con- centrated lye, brilliant green sulphate and brilliant green picrate, etc., have been mentioned for the treatment of taeniasis in poultry ; but most of these have been found to be unsatisfactory and discarded following the discovery of more effective treatments. The frequent failures of even the most efficacious anthelmintics are due to the results of poor poultry management, which cannot be made up by merely administering a worm remedy occasionally and doing nothing more to check the spread of infection. The large numbers of invertebrates, which serve as intermediate hosts of tapeworms, complicate control measures against these parasites. Prevention consists in making it impossible for birds to consume the intermediate hosts, and for the latter to acquire infection. Pro- per disposal of droppings, screening of drooping boards, frequent cleaning and disinfection of poultry houses, rotation of yards and the removal of all materials which will provide favourable environments for the growth of the intermediate hosts will considerably help in the control of taeniasis. THE NEMATODES OR ROUND-WORMS Birds usually harbour a very large number of different species of round- worms in various parts of their body. Nematodes may cause considerable loss to the poultry farmer annually. One of the commonest nematodes of birds is the large intestinal round-worm, belonging to the genus Ascaridia. These parasites enjoy a world-wide distribution and occur in the fowl, duck, goose, guinea-fowl, turkey and a number of wild birds. The worms usually occur in the intestine, but, occasionally in heavy infestations, they may be found in the gizzard and caecum or they may migrate into the crop and oesopha- gus. The adult female worms lay large numbers of eggs in the intestine of the host. A mature female may contain 1,500 eggs at a time and in its life-time it may lay more than 50,000,000 eggs. The eggs pass out with the droppings and develop in the open. Under suitable conditions of temperature and moisture, the eggs become infective in about eight days and contain the second stage larvæ. The infective eggs are particularly resistant to inclemencies of weather. They gain access to the host through contaminated food or water. Though a few eggs may hatch in either the crop, glandular stomach or gizzard, most of them hatch in the small intestine, a few centimeters posterior to the entrance of the bile duct. For the first five days, the larvæ live free in the lumen of the intestine or in the intervillar spaces. From
400 Important Helminth Parasites of Poultry the tenth to the nineteenth day they attack the intestinal wall. The majority make their way into the crypts of Lieberkuhn, burying into the tissues, with the rest of the body hanging in the lumen. A few of the larvæ, specially when present in large number, may burrow more deeply into the wall or may com- pletely penetrate it, and through the circulation eventually reach the liver and lungs. Some are arrested in these organs while others return to the intestine through the bronchi, trachea, pharynx and oesophagus. In normal cases, the larvæ withdraw from the intestinal wall after the 19th day and are found in the lumen where they grow into adults. The pathogenic effects are very marked during the first three weeks. The symptoms appear in the first week and become more pronounced during the second and third weeks, and the loss in weight is also marked. From a consideration of the life-history of the parasite, it is obvious that its pathogeni- city during the first week is solely due to the presence of the larvæ in the lumen of the gut and that the more marked effects during the second and third weeks are associated with the period when the larvæ attack the intestinal tissueInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX Part IV ] PLATE XXXIV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A. Photograph of parasitized chick (with Ascaridia lineata); fourteenth day of parasitism; fed embryonated eggs at age of fourteen days; typical of fatal cases ; heavily infested. B. Control chick from the same hatch ; eight grams heavier at beginning of experiment, 68 grams heavier two weeks later when picture was taken (After Ackert and Herrick) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Section of chicken intestine showing larva of A. lineata destroying Brunner's glands between villi (After Ackert)
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 401 with the large intestinal round-worm. This age resistance is so marked that the chickens, which are kept worm-free for the first three or four months of life, can be safely run on infected ground with little danger of subsequent ill- effects. In such birds the parasite experiences great difficulty in establishing itself. The age resistance appears to be associated with certain growth in- hibiting factors in the serum of the chicken, the nature of which is not definitely understood. This resistance in the bird is further assisted by the development of an acquired resistance in fighting the infestation. The latter resistance develops as a result of the larvæ attacking the intestinal wall which produces a marked eosinophilia and a concentration of the blood leucocytes and the cells of the reticulo-endothelial system in the intestinal wall. From the above, it appears that few worms will survive to the adult stage in aged birds, which have been exposed to repeated infestations with the parasite. But, in reality, serious infestations in such birds are by no means uncommon. This is due to the fact that the age and acquired resistance of the host to infestation breaks down in some way or other. It has been demonstrated that the factors affect- ing the general well being of the host, such as a diet deficient in vitamin-A and-B and in animal protein, loss of blood, bacterial, protozoan and other diseases, etc. break down the age and acquired resistance of the bird and render it susceptible to infestation with these parasites. The infestation with these worms is diagnosed by the finding of the eggs in the faeces or of the parasite in a selected case on autopsy. The eggs of this parasite should be distinguished from those of the caecum worm, which are comparatively more rounded at either end with their sides less convex. There are two methods of treating ascaridiasis in poultry: individual and flock treatments. In the individual treatment, each bird receives the required full dose of the drug, which ensures greater success ; while in the flock treatment a number of birds are treated simultaneously by means of a vermi- fuge which is mixed with the mash. Obviously the efficiency of the latter method of treatment is comparatively low, for it is impossible to ensure the intake of a requisite amount of the treated mash by each bird. Moreover, an impaired appetite and the unpleasant taste of the treated mash render the intake of a proper amount of it by each bird difficult. A number of drugs have been used for the treatment of ascaridiasis in poultry. For the indivi- dual treatment, the important drugs are a solution of nicotine sulphate (40 per cent nicotine), Iodine Vermicide, oil of chenopodium, carbon tetrachloride and tetrachlorethylene. In addition to these, a large number of others have been employed with varying degrees of success. In the treatment of ascaridiasis, several workers have obtained highly satisfactory results with Blackleaf 40, which is a proprietary nicotine sulphate compound containing 40 per cent nicotine. This drug, when given in sufficient quantity to be effective, is toxic to the host and hence is used with Lloyd's alkaloid reagent402 Important Helminth Parasites of Poultry fasting. Though nicotine sulphate in doses of 2.5 minims to 0.3 c. c. is effec- tive and reasonably safe, its two serious demerits are: its depressing action on laying birds and the toxic symptoms which follow its use in birds in poor condition. The use of ' Iodine Vermicide' has already been indicated in the treat- ment of taeniasis in poultry. It is highly effective both against tapeworms and the intestinal round-worms and is also lethal to their eggs. It has been found to possess a hundred per cent efficiency against ascaridia. The drug is not only harmless but is definitely beneficial and safe for birds in poor condition. Repeated treatments with this drug result in improvement in health and rate of production. The drug is introduced directly into the gizzard. Another organic compound of iodine, the glycerine-ester of 9-10 di-iodo-12 oxy.-octade- cylic acid has also been found to be safe and 100 per cent effective against these parasites. Carbon tetrachloride is also very effective against ascaridiasis in poultry. It is given at the rate of 0.75 c. c. per pound body-weight with a maximum dose of 2 c. c. by means of a syringe and rubber tubing or preferably in capsules. Starvation overnight is necessary. Following the administration of carbon tetrachloride, the birds may suffer from diarrhH. D. SRIVASTAVA 403 birds in various parts of the world. They are usually found in the distal two- thirds of the caeca but occasionally may be evenly scattered in the caecal con- tent. The number of these parasites in a single host may vary from one to over two thousand. Their life-cycle is direct like that of the large intestinal round-worms and does not involve any extra-intestinal migration (Plate XXXV, fig. 1). The eggs develop in the open and under optimum conditions (33° C.) reach the infective stage in five days. If the eggs containing the infective larvæ are ingested by a suitable bird, they hatch in its intestine and within 24 hours the worms migrate into the caeca and immediately invade the caecal mucosa. During the first two days, few larvæ are found in the lumen of the caeca but after the second day they begin to reappear in the lumen ; their close association with the tissues, however, persists, though in a much less pronounced form, till the fifth day. The worms attain maturity and the female starts laying eggs after 24 days or more. It is only during the first four days of the parasitic life that the worm invades the epithelium of the glandular crypts. Opinions regarding the pathogenicity of the caecum worm vary a good deal. Some consider that, far from being harmful in any way to the host, its presence is necessary for the efficient functioning of the caeca. Others think that, though the worms are not beneficial to the host, they are also not harmful. Still others consider that these parasites are responsible for typhli- tis, resulting in diarrh404 Important Helminth Parasites of Poultry pigeon, turkey, duck, fowl, pheasant and several other related wild birds. Mainly the crop and oesophagus are involved and the stomach is seldom affected. The worms usually live buried in the wall and may penetrate as deep as the boundary of the muscularis. The eggs are voided with the faeces and under favourable conditions, they develop to the infective stage in three to four weeks' time. Though ordinarily a bird becomes infested with capil- larids directly through contaminated feed or water, in certain cases earth- worms are known to serve as facultative hosts, as in the case of the gape- worm. Mild infestations produce no marked symptoms. Fowls appear to possess a certain degree of inherent immunity to the effects of these parasites. Chickens up to four months of age are fairly susceptible to infection and the immunity of the older birds may occasionally break down due to lowered resistance of one kind or other. Avitaminosis in chickens may be responsible for heavy infestations with these worms. Turkeys, ducks and pheasants are specially susceptible to the harmful effects of the capillarids, in which severe tissue damage and high mortality may be produced. The principal symptoms in the affected birds are the refusal of grain, but acceptance of soft feed, unnatural position of the head, arching or stretching of neck, droopiness, anaemia, emacia- tion and lameness. The worms cause overloading of the crop resulting in ' indigestion ingluviale ', which in ducks may produce dyspnoea by pressing on the vagus nerve. The walls of the affected parts of the digestive tract may show catarrhal inflammation, thickening and loss of elasticity, enlarg- ment of the lymph follicles, necrosis and sloughing of mucosa and the presence of pseudo-membranes, composed of necrotic substances with fibrin and poly- nuclear leucocytes. Diagnosis is made by the finding of the typical lemon-shaped, double operculated eggs in the faeces ; or in the scrapings of the necrotic membranes on autopsy of a typical case. On account of their position in galleries within the wall of the digestive tract of the bird, the removal of these worms with medicinal treatment is difficult. However, carbon tetrachloride in doses of 1 c. c. a week or iodine capsules may be tried. Proper feeding and stringent preventive measures alone can help in fighting the infestation. The birds should be given soft and easily digestible feed and the young birds should be isolated from the adult and infected ones. The ' gapes ' in poultry is caused by a strongyle nematodeH. D. SRIVASTAVA 405 bursa of the male, into the lumen of the trachea and bronchi. In their appear- ance, the eggs differ from those of other strongyles in the presence of a thicken- ed operculum at either end. From the trachea they are coughed up into the mouth and swallowed and are eventually voided with the droppings. Under suitable conditions of temperature and moisture, the eggs usually hatch in seven to ten days. The larva undergoes two moults inside the egg- shell and the third stage larva is infective. It is, however, not necessary for the larva to hatch and an infection may result by the ingestion of the egg containing fully developed larva. Although the intercolation of an invertebrate intermediate host, such as earth-worms, snails and slugs in the life-cycle of this parasite, is not necessary, they often act as reservoirs for the larvæ and serve as facultative hosts. When larvæ and mature eggs are ingested along with soil by earth-worms, they migrate from the gut to their muscular parts and remain alive there for over three years. The earth-worm thus plays an important rôle in the collection of larvæ from the soil, in carrying over the infection from season to season and in transferring them to the final host. On being swallowed by the final host, the larvæ quickly migrate to the lungs where they undergo a further moult and sex differentiation and pairing take place. After pairing, the worms leave the smaller air-passages and work their way into the larger windpipes. Sexual maturity is attained in 10 days after the worms reach the trachea. The entire life-cycle is completed within a month or so. Chicks, turkey poults and young pheasants are particularly susceptible to ' gapes' and may die in large numbers. However, chickens invariably develop a very definite immunity against this parasite when eight or nine weeks' old, and, once this age immunity has developed, any worms which may be present die or are expelled and a re-infection is impossible. The turkey on the other hand does not develop any age immunity and may remain infected throughout life. Turkeys do not show any symptoms, unless very heavily infested, and hence may serve as carriers for the parasite. The ' gape ' disease in young birds is probably mainly due to the mechanical blockage of the trachea, which is brought about by the presence of the parasite, local oedema of the mucosa and the formation of nodule at the seat of attachment and the accumulation of mucus. The migration of the larvæ through the lungs does not appear to have any serious effect. Though the worms are blood suckers, the actual loss of blood is probably negligible. The symptoms are mainly those of suffocation. There is a peculiar cough or sneeze, the bird tosses its head, the neck is stretched forward with open beak in an attempt to take in more air. The death is usually due to suffocation, though progressive emaciation is undoubtedly a contributory factor. In the absence of any satisfactory treatment, the practice of mechanically dislodging the worm with or without the aid of chemicals is widespread. A loop of horse hair is introduced into the trachea, twisted to entangle the worms and then withdrawn. The tip of a feather moistened with clove oil or turpentine is also often used in dislodging the parasite. In cases of
406 Important Helminth Parasites of Poultry valuable birds, intra-tracheal injection of 1 c. c. Lugol's iodine or 5 per cent aquous salicylic acid, garlic oil, creosote and sodium salicylate are tried. Fumigation of such substances as heated carbolic acid, camphor, asafoetida, tobacco smoke, or burning sulphur is of little value and may be even dangerous. Sodium salicylate at the rate of three drm. to every quart of drinking water or pounded garlic in the proportion of one bulb per day added to the food of ten birds may result in the expulsion of the worm. However, none of these methods is entirely satisfactory. Recently, treatment by the inhalation of Barium Antimony Tartrate suspended in the air has been reported to be over 98 per cent efficacious. The bird or birds to be treated are placed in a glass jar. A small amount of the powdered substance is sprinkled on the head of each bird, and some put at the bottom of the jar, which is then covered with a towel. The birds are usually exposed to the drug for 10 minutes, and, during this time, the powder at the bottom of the jar is blown forcibly in the air two to four times, by means of a large rubber bulb fitted to a glass tube inserted into the jar. The treated birds manifest symptoms of increased coughing or gaping and mild depression for a few hours, but these are soon followed by improvement in their condition. Prevention is much more important than treatment. Infested birds should be killed and the heads, and respiratory and digestive organs burnt. Chickens acquire infection from turkeys, wild birds or from eggs and larvæ carried over in the soil from previous infection. For about four to six weeks chicks should be raised on board floors and the droppings should be removed at regular intervals. They should never be kept on the same ground with turkeys. Moist localities, where earth-worms, snails and slugs are likely to occur, should be avoided. New chicks should be purchased out of clean flock and quarantined. Infection from wild birds should be avoided. Another related wormInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX Part IV ] PLATE XXXV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Life-cycle of the caecal worm (After Reis and Nobrega) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Life-cycle of Tetrameres sp. (After Reis and Nobrega)
H. D. SRIVASTAVA 407 is in the fundus of the gland, to facilitate feeding. The eggs are passed out with the faeces and, on being ingested by a suitable intermediate host, the larvæ reach the infective stage inside its body cavity in about nine to twenty, eight days (Plate XXXV, fig. 2). A number of invertebrates are known to serve as its intermediate hosts, such as, ' water flea ', ' sand flea ', several species of grasshoppers and cockroaches and two species of earth-worms. When an infested intermediate host is eaten by a bird, the infective larvæ are freed in the proventriculus and enter the glands of Lieberkuhn. The larvæ attain maturity in about 90 days. The worms suck blood, but the greatest damage is done when the young worms penetrate into the wall of the proventriculus, setting up marked irritation and inflammation, which may prove fatal. The stomach wall becomes greatly thickened and inelastic from congestion. Con- siderable emaciation and anaemia are observed in heavily parasitized birds. Another genus of round-worms408 Important Helminth Parasites of Poultry in the musculature of the gizzard and thereby weaken it. They have also some toxic effect on the host. In heavy infestations they produce emaciation, droopiness, weakness and anaemia. The gizzard lining may be haemorrhagic and necrotic and the wall flabby. Sometimes the gizzard is weakened to such an extent that a rupture in the form of a large sac occurs. Infestations with the above stomach worms are serious, as on account of the location of the parasites in the final host and the migratory habits of the intermediate hosts, treatments and prophylaxis are obviously difficult. General hygienic measures and the keeping the birds off stagnant waters and swampy places may help control the infestations. A small, strongyle wormH. D. SRIVASTAVA 409 A few species of thorny headed wormsA TECHNIQUE FOR CUTTING SERIAL SECTIONS OF CHITINOUS OBJECTS* BY S. N. SAPRE, B.Sc., G.B.V.C. Research Scholar, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 15th June 1939) (With one text-figure) THE cutting of serial sections of chitinous objects has been called by Guyer [1936] the ' microtomist's despair', while Bolles Lee [1928] regards it as a ' grim business'. Likewise, Eltringham [1930] refers to the ' evil tendencies' of the chitin which is ' liable to defeat almost every known method of section-cutting'. For some time past, the author has been working on the anatomy and histology of Ornithodorus papillipes Birula (O. crossi Brumpt) and, by the application of a method which he has developed as a result of extensive ex- perimentation has succeeded in obtaining satisfactory serial sections of these ticks without injuring the internal parts. Fifteen fixatives recommended by various workers were tested in this connexion and the two main conclusions that emerged out of these tests were that fluids containing formaldehyde were not suitable for fixing chitinous objects and that the addition of nitric acid improved the action of the fixa- tive. The formula of the fixative used by the author is as follows : Mercuric chloride, saturated solution in absolute alcohol . 30 c. c. Chloroform . . . . . . . . . 25 c. c. Acetic acid . . . . . . . . . 15 c. c. Picric acid, a saturated solution in 90 per cent alcohol . . 25 c. c. Nitric acid . . . . . . . . . 5 c. c. The material is fixed for half to one hour and then placed in ' diaphanol' (otherwise known as chlorodioxydacetic acid) for softening the chitin further. The diaphanol is obtainable from firms in England but it can also be prepared in the laboratory as follows [Schmidt, 1921] :412 Cutting Serial Sections of Chitinous Objects inside a container and surrounded with ice and salt. After the liberation of the gas is complete, the bottle is removed and to its contents are added 4 gm. of potassium chlorate and 750 c. c. of 50 per cent acetic acid. The bottle is now stoppered and kept in a refrigerator for at least 24 hours and the result- ing preparation is called ' diaphanol'. With diaphanol it takes nearly two and a half to three days to soften the chitin of ticks (O. papillipes) with one change of the fluid after the first 24 hours. For insects four hours may possibly suffice. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1 B.S. N. SAPRE 413 part of dioxan and kept at a temperature of 55° to 60° C. for about an hour and in melted paraffin only for an equal amount of time, with one change of the paraffin. It is then embedded and cut in the usual manner. If the double embedding method is to be used, the following points should be noted:THE RÔLE OF MINERAL DEFICIENCY IN EQUINE ABORTION * BY V. R. RAJAGOPALAN, G.M.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 6th February 1939) THIS article is based on an investigation into an outbreak of abortion in the Army Stud Farm at Ahmednagar. The first abortion in the outbreak now reported occurred on the 5th March 1936 when a mare (Courteous) slipped a nine-month foetu . At the time the case was thought to be traumatic in origin as the mare had been observed galloping about in the paddock, but soon after more abortions occurred in the same stud, four during March, six in April, and one in May 1936. As a rule, there was no premonitory symptom of approaching abortion. The animals were simply discovered to have dropp- ed or about to drop the foetus. The expulsion of the foetus was usually accomplished very easily without any apparent discomfort on the part of the mare. The mares also simultaneously came into milk. Systematic recording of temperature revealed no pyrexia prior to abortion. No clinical or patho- logical symptoms were observed as a sequelae to the abortions, except in two instances in which slight metritis and laminities were present. The aborted foetuses were of apparently normal development. Post mortem examination of these foetuses usually revealed no abnormality, except for the presence of large quantities of pleural, pericardial and peritoneal exudates, which were constant and very marked. In some cases the intestines were congested in patches and in others the cortex of the kidneys was congested. The possible causes that lead to abortion were examined in detail. Thus, the incidence of micro-organisms commonly associated with equine abortion, toxic factors in food, dietetic errors in food with reference to proteins, minerals and vitamins and certain other factors were taken into consideration. The farm occupies a considerable area, measuring roughly about one mile and five furlongs at the longest part and one mile and a half at the broadest part. It has about sixty paddocks divided into two lots by a public road. The paddocks adjoining the public road have a double line of fencing, so that animals in the farm cannot come into contact with any stray animals that may be passing along the road. Paddocks intended for mares with foals at foot are provided with a roofed shelter, but all other paddocks are open except for a few stray trees. It will thus be noted that maximum advantage is taken of the natural disinfecting power of the sun. Arrangements for foaling are fairly satisfactory. There are two lines of five foaling-boxes. One set of five foaling-boxes is used every alternate year. * Read at the Indian Science Congress, Calcutta, 1938. (415)
416 Mineral Deficiency in Equine Abortion The foaling-boxes have permanent roofs eight feet high at the edges and twelve feet high at the centre. Ordinarily the sides are all kept open so that the sun penetrates all over the ground surface. When in use the sides are tempora- rily covered. After use, the sides are removed and the ground cleaned and sprinkled with a disinfectant. Mares which abort are brought to the hospital for care and treatment. The hospital stables are carefully disinfected after occupation by such patients. Although the general level of hygiene and management were sufficiently effective to prevent the spread of bacterial infection, a careful examination was made to ascertain the presence of various micro-organisms that are known to cause abortion. Material was examined from twelve mares that had aborted. The results are tabulated below :V. R . RAJAGOPALAN 417 No. and name of mare Material examined Organisms isolated 328. Amazement . Serum from mare . . Negative by agglutination test for S. abortus equi. Uterine discharge . . Str. ignavus. Heart blood of foetus . . Str. pyogenes. Pleural fluid of foetus . . Micrococcus Abdominal fluid of foetus . Str. faecalis. 393. Mosul . . Heart blood of foetus . . Alcaligenes faecalis. Serum from mare . . Negative by agglutination test for S. abortus equi. 337. Affable . . Serum from mare . . Negative by agglutination test for S. abortus equi. Uterine discharge . . Sterile. Lung of foetus . Haemolytic Esch. coli. and Str. pyogenes. Stomach fluid foetus . . Str. ignavus. Foal of Venus . Died soon afterbirth. Heart blood. Sterile. Stomach contents Esch. coli. haemolytic. Kidney . . . . Sterile. Rectum . . . . Esch. coli. low haemolytic. 375. mare . . Uterine discharge . . Esch. coli. Str. anhaemolyticus. 392. Ishbel . . Serum from mare . . Negative by agglutination test for S. abortus equi. Vaginal discharge . . Str. faecalis. Heart blood of foetus. . Esch. coli. (Titre for mares' serum was 500). Abdominal fluid of foetus . Ditto. Pleural cavity . . . Str. faecalis. In addition, samples of sera obtained from all the adult animals in the stud submitted to an agglutination test against antigens made from S. abortus equi and the coliform organism isolated from the foetus of mare Affable (Ap- pendix 1). Of the 72 animals so tested, none gave a positive reaction against S. abortus equi. Five of these, however, gave a suspicious titre against the coliform organism, showing a titre of 500. However, none of the aborted animals were among those giving this suspicious reaction. To sum up the results of the bacteriological examinations, in no instance was S . abortus equi associated as an etiological' factor. Out of twelve lots of material examined, only three were positive for Streptococcus pyogenes, and
418 Mineral Deficiency in Equine Abortion five positive for Escherichia coli. Some of these coliform organisms were found to be very virulent for the rabbit, producing haemorrhagic enteritis and nephritis. Even killed cultures produced death showing that this organism produced a potent toxin. But these five coliform organisms were not identi- cal. They fell into three distinct groups biochemically. On account of this fact, and also because these organisms were not associated with all, or even a majority of cases, it was not possible to attach a primary etiological signifi- cance to either of them. They may have played a secondary role in those cases in which they occurred, but this aspect of the matter will be discussed later. Dimock and Edwards [1936] claimed to have demonstrated the presence of a virus in connection with epizootic abortion in mares and as the nature of the outbreak and the post mortem findings in the aborted foetuses were similar in this case to the cases reported by them, an attempt was made to ascertain if a virus were present. As there was no point in inoculating stock from the same farm, two pregnant guinea-pigs were obtained from Poona. These were inoculated with material from ' Affable ' which had just aborted and from its foetus. The material consisted of blood and vaginal material from the mare and peritoneal and pleural fluids from the aborted foetus. These guinea- pigs did not abort. According to Calavrias [1930] cold very often leads to abortion in mares. This is said to be brought about by the congestion of the internal capillaries including that of the uterus, consequent on the constriction of the cutaneous capillary blood vessels. The greater the humidity of the atmosphere, the more pronounced will be the effect of cold. Attention was therefore paid to this point. Examination of meteorological data showed that weather condi- tions were not unfavourable. The question of imbalanced rations was also examined but as the same schedule of rations had been in use for several years, and they were always obtained from the same source, it was deemed likely that the composition of the diet, as far as proteins, carbohydrates or fats were concerned, had nothing to do with this outbreak. Calavrias (loc cit.) states that beetroot and silage that has undergone diastatic fermentation may lead to abortion. Silage and beetroot were not fed to mares at Ahmednagar so there was no chance of intoxication on this account. On the other hand, the kirby that was fed to the mares was found to be infected with smut (Ustilago hordei). But this smut could not have been the cause of abortion as a month and half after this source was suspected and withheld, abortions still continued to take place ; in addition pregnant guinea- pigs fed with the food materials (including the kirby), that had been consumed by the mares, did not abort. On a superficial examination, it appeared that most of the abortions had taken place in the mares that had been covered by a particular stallion, namely, Ragazzo. This appeared to be significant, because this stallion was
V. R. RAJAGOPALAN 419 introduced into the stud farm. Therefore, the parentage of the various brood mares was examined as well as that of the stallions used for covering. It was found that there was no definitely constant factor which appeared to be responsible for these abortions. But of twelve mares that had aborted, seven had been covered by Ragazzo. The records of service show that this stallion was most frequently used during the previous season (40 per cent. of the services), and the incidence of abortions with the increased use of ' Ra- gazzo ' introduces a factor of some importance which is dealt with later. There are reports in literature [Magnusson, 1935] that abortion may be due to deficiency of minerals particularly calcium. The normal rate of abortion in the farm prior to 1929 was from four to seven per year. In 1929 the autho- rities introduced the " churn " brand of mineral flour with a view to improve the bone of their young stock. This product is issued by the Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd., and is said to contain iron, calcium, sodium chloride, phosphorus, sulphur, potassium and iodine. During 1930, the abortions were reduced to two. During 1931, 1932 and 1933 there were no abortions and in 1934 there was one abortion. This mineral supplement was stopped in March 1934. In 1935 there were two abortions and in 1936 twelve abortions up to the month of May. The introduction and withdrawal of mineral supplement in this stud coincided exactly with the disappearance and reap- pearance of abortions in this herd. Citrated blood and blood sera were therefore collected for mineral estimation, and a calcium deficiency was detect- ed. Whereas the normal calcium content of the serum of mares should be from 11 to 13 mgm. per 100 c. c., the calcium content of the serum of the mares at Ahmednagar ranged from 7.7 to 8.7 mgm. per 100 c. c. There is recorded experimental evidence to show that a total deficiency in vitamin E may lead to sterility. Recently, Moussu [1935] has claimed to have demonstrated that deficiency in vitamin E predisposes animals to abor- tion due to infection with Brucella abortus, although Gillain [1937] has failed to substantiate this claim. This dietetic factor is said to be available in abundance in the green plants of the graminaciae. As these animals were getting oats, which is also rich in vitamin E, deficiency in this vitamin can presumably be ruled out in this case and as the animals were given fifteen pounds of lucerne daily there could be no deficiency in vitamin A. DISCUSSION From the above record, it is evident that S. abortus equi, the common cause of contagious abortion in mares, has not been involved in this outbreak of abortion. On the other hand, Str. pyogenes and Esch. coli were recoverable from a certain percentage of cases. Although some strains of these have been found to be virulent in the laboratory for small animals, it has not been possible to assign to them a role of primary significance as they were not met with in the majority of cases [Miessner and Koser 1934, Dimock and Edwards 1932]. It is, however, possible that in those cases in which they occurred they may have had a secondary pathological significance. A strong case, M
420 Mineral Deficiency in Equine Abortion however, exists for mineral deficiency, particularly of calcium as the cause of these abortions. On an average four to seven abortions used to take place in this farm prior to 1929. The authorities introduced the " churn " flour in 1929 for the purpose of improving the bone of their young stock. Abortions disappeared almost simultaneously. Finding that there was no real improvement in the bone of the progeny, the authorities discontinued the use of "churn" from March 1934. Abortions began to reappear. There were two cases in 1935 and twelve cases in 1936. The case that has been made out for calcium deficiency is also supported by the determination of the serum calcium of the brood mares. At Mukteswar, the normal calcium content of equines has been found, on an average, to be 12.3 mgms. per 100 c.c. of blood serum. The normal variation has ranged between 11 and 13 mgms. and the extreme variations ranged from 10 to 15 mgms. These figures are generally in agreement with those of Errington [1937] who found that the mean figures are 12.67±0.048 mgms. per 100 c.c. and that the variation ranges from 11.50 to 13.70 mgms. But the cal- cium content of mares at Ahmednagar ranged from 7.71 mgms. to 8.7 mgms. This finding of hypocalcaemia coupled with the history of appearance and disappearance of abortions coincident with the withholding and introduction of the mineral supplement seems to leave no doubt that these abortions were due to calcium deficiency. In the first instance coincident with the intro- duction of the mineral supplement and the disappearance of abortion, the calcium level of the blood serum also recovered to normal as may be seen from the statement at Appendix II. The few cases of infection with Str. pyogenes and Esch. coli had perhaps occurred as sequelae to the calcium de- ficiency. (' Ragazzo ' was known as a good " bone-getter " in his progeny and this has perhaps made great demands for calcium with consequent in- creased deficiency and greater frequency of abortions in mares covered by this stallion.) These views receive support from similar findings in other farm animals. Meigs [1926] has found that deficiency in calcium predisposes cows to infection with Brucella abortus and thus leads to abortion. Protracted deficiency in the ration of breeding cows was found to lead to a considerably increased number of abortions [Davidson, 1930]. Kossmag [1931], Fraser [1933] and Hart [1930] have made similar observations with reference to calcium deficiency. With reference to equines, Wall [1936] describes an outbreak of abortions among mares in which a deficiency of calcium was found to be the main cause. The possibility of infection with micro-organisms and of intoxication with food stuffs were eliminated after a proper examination, but a deficiency of calcium in the diet and hypocalcaemia in some of the mares were demonstrated. There is another suggestive experience with reference to equines. In a certain stud in Burma odd cases of abortions have been occurring for some years past. Prof. Pfaff, writing of this on 19th August 1933 says : ' In 1932 up to 28th of May no live foals were born. Abortions occurred on the 28th March, 30th April, 1st May and 25th May. On the 1st June cod-liver oil and bone meal were started. Between 28th May and 1st August no abortions have taken place, but fifteen full term live
V. R. RAJAGOPALAN 421 foals were born'. Here again is an indication that deficiency in minerals was perhaps mainly responsible for these cases of abortions. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS My thanks are due to Capt. Mc'Donald, Officer Commanding, and Mr. Shende, Veterinary Inspector, Stud Farm, Ahmednagar, for the facility offered for conducting this investigation, which was conducted under the guidance of Mr. J. R. Haddow, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., I.V.S., Offg. Director, Imperial Vetinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. I am also grateful to Dr. N. D. Kehar, Biochemist, and Mr. Das Gupta, Offg. Biochemist, who carried out the mineral estimations. I am also indebted to Mr. V. R. Gopalakrishnan, Veterinary Inspector, for his help in carrying out the agglutination tests and in the bacteriological examination of the material. REFERENCES Calavrias, G. (1930). Contribution to the etiology of abortions in the mare. Rec. Med. Vet. 106, 613 Davidson, H. R. (1930). J. Agri. Sc. 20, 233 Dimock, W. W. and Edwards, P. R. (1932). Infections of foetuses and foals. Vet. Bull. (1934)4, 174 422 Mineral Deficiency in Equine Abortion APPENDIX (I) The result of agglutination test of the blood sera of the brood mares and stallions against S. abortus equi and Esch. coli. No. or name of the animal Titre against S. abortus equi Each, coli 316 . . . . . . . . 50 100 342 . . . . . . . . 10 50 30 . . . . . . . . 10 50 394 . . . . . . . . 50 50 383 . . . . . . . . 50 500 23 . . . . . . . . 100 100 Abbot's Jock . . . . . . . . 100 50 27 . . . . . . . . Nil 100 364 . . . . . . . . 10 50 28 . . . . . . . . 100 500 Amsel . . . . . . . . Nil 50 388 . . . . . . . . 100 50 385 . . . . . . . . 50 10 24 . . . . . . . . 50 100 346 . . . . . . . . 50 500 Alicia . . . . . . . . 50 100 373 . . . . . . . . 100 50 Allswell . . . . . . . . 100 100 360 . . . . . . . . 100 10 32 . . . . . . . . 50 50 359 . . . . . . . . 100 100 377 . . . . . . . . 100 100 Mountain dancer . . . . . . . . 100 100 31 . . . . . . . . 50 50 Mattimol . . . . . . . . 100 10 35 . . . . . . . . 100 50 Tearful . . . . . . . . 10 10 374 . . . . . . . . 100 100 367 . . . . . . . . 5000 500 391 . . . . . . . . 100 10 368 . . . . . . . . 100 50 Fabulus . . . . . . . . 100 50 Sweety . . . . . . . . 100 100 358 . . . . . . . . 50 100 375 . . . . . . . . 50 50 381 . . . . . . . . 50 50 332 . . . . . . . . 100 50 341 . . . . . . . . 100 100 395 . . . . . . . . 50 50 301 . . . . . . . . 100 50 Situna . . . . . . . . 50 100 22 . . . . . . . . 100 500 379 . . . . . . . . 50 10
V. R. RAJAGOPALAN 423 No. or name of the animal Titre against S. abortus equi Esch. coli 294 . . . . . . . . 100 50 313 . . . . . . . . 50 10 Skysign . . . . . . . . 50 10 Skysign . . . . . . . . 100 50 Rarewine . . . . . . . . 50 100 29 . . . . . . . . . 50 10 25 . . . . . . . . . 100 50 387 . . . . . . . . 10 10 Spanish . . . . . . . . 50 50 354 . . . . . . . . 50 10 351 . . . . . . . . 50 10 346 . . . . . . . . 100 50 378 . . . . . . . . 10 50 Truro . . . . . . . . 10 10 361 . . . . . . . . 50 10 392 . . . . . . . . 50 50 363 . . . . . . . . 10 10 365 . . . . . . . . 50 10 382 . . . . . . . . 10 50 390 . . . . . . . . 10 10 387 . . . . . . . . 50 10 244 . . . . . . . . 100 50 343 . . . . . . . . 10 50 NOTE.424 Mineral Deficiency in Equine Abortion APPENDIX (II) The calcium level of some of the mares that aborted at about the time of abortion and the calcium level of the same mares about two years after the introduction of mineral supplement when they had ceased to abort No. or name of the mare Date of abortion Blood calcium in mgm. per 100 c. c. at the time of abortion Blood calcium and phospho- rus on 15th February 1938 after they have been on a mineral supplement for one year and nine months and when abortion had ceased Calcium Phosphorus 392 . . . . 14-4-36 10.0 11.55 2.55 382 . . . . 6-3-36 8.0 13.7 3.25 344 . . . . 15-4-36 8.5 15.4 3.78 361 . . . . 8-3-36 8.7 13.2 2.47 351 . . . . 15-3-36 9.0 14.0 3.27 365 . . . . 9-3-36 8.6 13.1 2.9 387 . . . . aborted 9.0 15.0 3.46 363 . . . . 8.1 13.0 2.56 378 . . . . 8.3 15.0 2.21 390 . . . . in foal 9.7 13.2 3.59 346 . . . . 8.57 13.8 3.13 343 . . . . 7.71 14.5 4.06 Truro . . . . 7.9 14.4 3.38
INTESTINAL PARAMPHISTOMIASIS OF SHEEP IN SIND (A PRELIMINARY REPORT) BY H. S. BAWA, M. R. C. V. S. Veterinary Investigation Officer, Sind and Ajmer-Merwara, Karachi-Saddar (Received for publication on 24th January 1939) INTRODUCTION IN January 1938, a report was received by the Director of Veterinary Services, Sind, from the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Tatta, saying that the treatment with solution of copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate has given no good results in a flock of sheep numbering 500 supposed to be suffering from parasitic gastritis and the mortality continued at the rate of two or three sheep a day. The routine treatment carried out by the Civil Veterinary Department, Sind, for parasitic gastritis is drenching sheep with a solution of copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate and this gives good results, as has been seen by the writer during investigations for parasitic gastritis. It was, therefore, considered expedient that the outbreak be investigated, the disease con- firmed and the cause of the failure of the treatment determined. The site of outbreak was visited during February 1938 and the flock of sheep on examination showed all the clinical symptoms of parasitic gastritis. On inquiry from the herdsmen, it was found that they had never noticed any worms in the stomach or intestines of the dead sheep. The writer was in- formed by the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon that before starting the treatment he never had an opportunity of making a post mortem examination to ascertain whether the trouble was due to worms as the herdsmen were unwilling to sac- rifice even a single sheep for this purpose. As there was no dead sheep available that morning, it was decided to purchase one sheep for post mortem examina- tion. The post mortem evidence and naked eye examination of faeces revealed the presence of minute whitish bodies, which, when pressed between two slides and examined under a microscope, were found to be immature forms of amphistomes. These numerous forms were found attached to the mucous coat of the duodenum and other portions of small intestines and a small number was found in the large intestines. Few Stilesia globipunctata were also present in the small intestines. No nematodes were found in the abomasum, caecum and the intestines. It is generally considered that Paramphistomes are harm- less parasites; it may be true in the case of adult parasites, but immature forms appear to be pathogenic. Losses in sheep due to immature forms of (425)
426 Intestinal Paramphistomiasis of Sheep in Sind Cotylophoron cotylophorum are known in South Africa, where the condition has been investigated by Le Roux [1930]. In Sind, deaths in sheep were recorded by Haji [1935] due to immature forms of P. cervi. Recently in Assam, Pande [1935] recorded deaths in cattle due to immature forms of P. cervi. These immature forms cause more harm than it is realized at present. SYMPTOMATOLOGY Affected sheep become dull, weak and anaemic with pallor of visible mucous membranes. In advanced cases Oedema of the sub-maxillary space was present, which attained its greatest prominence in the evening but subsided or was consider- ably reduced during the day. This symptom has also been recorded by Walker [1906] and Shahi [1936-37]. This was a very characteristic clinical symptom The oedema of the abdomen has also been noticed. Later on persistent foetid. diarrhoea developed. In some cases, traces of blood were also found in faeces, showing evidence of haemorrhage in the small intestines. When liquid faeces were examined closely with the naked eye or under the microscope, numerous young forms of Paramphistomes were observed. There was no rise in temperature. The animals died mainly of exhaustion resulting from diarrhoea within a period varying from 10 to 15 days. During the investigation, the grazing grounds were also examined, but no snails were seen. On inquiry it was found that the sheep contracted the infection in some other parts of the country, which was said to be inundated, low-lying and marshy. The herdsmen in Sind have no permanent abode, but they move about from place to place, wherever good grazing is available. POST MORTEM FINDINGS The carcase was emaciated and the anal region was soiled with faeces. The consistence of the adipose tissue of the whole carcase was whitish and cheesy. This was a very striking lesion which was noticed as soon as the skin of the carcase was removed. The abdominal cavity contained about 400 c.c. of clear fluid, which was odourless. Muscles were found atrophied and anaemic in appearance. Abo- masum was slightly congested and only three Haemonchus contortus were collected. Liver was soft, friable and fatty changes were noticed, and no liver-flukes were encountered. Gall-bladder was slightly enlarged and con- tained about 40 c.c. of normal bile. Mouth, tongue, pharynx, oesophagus, larynx, lungs, heart, spleen, pancreas and kidneys were normal. A few adult P. cervi were present in the rumen and no adult forms of Cotylophoron cotylophorum were found. Caecum was slightly congested, and free from nematode worms. Main changes were noticed in the entire length of duodenum and small intestines. Numerous immature amphistomes were found embedded in the mucous coat of the duodenum and the small intestines,
H. S. BAWA 427 setting up varying degree of inflammation and pin-head haemorrhages. In- testinal contents were fluid, foetid and mixed with mucous and blood. In the small intestines Stilesia globipunctata were also found. Pieces of duode- num and intestines showed lesions of chronic verminous enteritis on histo- pathological examination. There was a pronounced thickening of the intestinal mucosa and conges- tion of blood vessels. Colon and rectum showed no abnormality. As only few adult parasites were found in the rumen and reticulum, it shows that animals must have swallowed the encysted cercaria sometime during the months of September and October. On being swallowed by the sheep the encysted cercaria is liberated in the intestines and settles down there by attaching itself to the mucosa in part of small and large intestines for the first part of its life in the host. It takes six to ten weeks [Le Roux, 1930] before the imma- ture flukes migrate forward from the intestines to the rumen and recticulum, where they grow into adults from two to four months. TREATMENT Little evidence is available at the present moment as to the effective treat- ment against these immature forms of amphistomes. Danistol capsules are said to give good results, but were not tried on account of the prohibitive cost of the drug. Le Roux [1930] recommended carbon tetrachloride in doses of 8-10 c.c. for sheep. It was therefore decided to try this drug. Before giving such a large dose of this drug, i.e. 8 c.c. a sheep, three sheep were selected for trial dosing and were given 5 c.c., 7 c.c. and 8 c.c. of carbon tetrachloride in 15, 13 and 12 c. c. of sweet oil respectively. The sheep which received 8 c.c. had a fit of severe coughing and immediately after drenching had staggering gait and then unable to move. Calcium lactate was not given just to see how the sheep behaved to the toxic effects of the drug. After three hours, it regained the normal gait and looked apparently well. On the third day this sheep was very dull and was not keen to graze. This shows that the dose of 8 c.c. of carbon tetrachloride is not absolutely safe for Indian sheep ; so the dose of 7 c.c. in 13 c.c. of sweet oil was decided upon and 63 sheep were drenched with it. Maldars were not prepared to get their entire flock treated. Only those individuals which were badly infected were treated. After 6 to 12 hours, half of the sheep so drenched passed liquid motions, intermixed with mucous and numerous immature forms of amphi- stomes. On visiting the place again after 24 hours, it was seen that three sheep developed tympany and these were treated with oil of turpentine with good results. One sheep died on the third day and another one on the sixth day after the treatment; the deaths may be due to toxic action of carbon tetrachloride or through the disease itself. This could not be ascertained with certainty as the animals were not available for post mortem. The remaining 61 animals improved greatly after this treatment. It is therefore evident that N
428 Intestinal Paramphistomiasis of Sheep in Sind in carbon tetrachloride we have an effective drug against this disease. How- ever, before mass treatment is undertaken, it seems advisable to select a few animals at random in different flocks to test the effects of the drug, as there are reasons to think that the tolerance to this drug may vary in different flocks. Montgomerie [1937] recorded serious effect, even death in certain cases, after so small a dose as 1 c.c. of carbon tetrachloride in sheep in the treat- ment of liver rot. Observations in America have shown that sheep there well tolerated this drug and it was evident that the mountain sheep seriously affected with liver rot showed no toxic effects even after the administration of 50 c.c. of the drug. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. An outbreak of disease amongst sheep was investigated and found to be associated with immature forms of amphistomes. 2. The disease occurs after rains and floods and in inundated areas. 3. General unthriftiness, diarrhoea and swelling of sub-maxillary space, which attains its greatest prominence in the evening, present the main clinical picture of the disease, the death rate being 80 to 90 per cent. 4. The essential lesions on post mortem were :H. S. BAWA 429 REFERENCES Haji, C. S. G. (1935). Ind. Vet. J. 12, 18-21 Le Roux. P. L. (1930). 16th Rept. Dir. Vet. Serv. & Anim. Ind., Union S. Africa. 243-253 Montgomerie, R F. (1937). J. Comp. Path. & Ther. 1-4, 314-6 Pande, P. G. (1935). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 5, 364 Shahi, H. B. (1936-37). Ann. Adm. Rept. Vet. Invest. Officer, U. P. 7 Walker, G. K. (1906). J. Trop. Vet. Sci. 4, 410-3
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE BIONOMICS OF THE OX WARBLE-FLY (HYPODERMA LINEATUM DE VILLERS) IN INDIA * BY B. N. SONI, B.Sc. (PB.), B.Sc. AGRI. (EDIN.) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 26th January 1939) (With Plate XXXVI and one text-figure) INTRODUCTION 432 Bionomics of the Ox Warble-fly the earliest emergence of the larvae from the backs of cattle occurs sharply- after the middle of January, and that the last batch of larvae drop off by the end of March (fig. 1) and the schedule of dressing operations will therefore have to be drawn up accordingly. On the other hand, at Hissar in the Punjab, as already recorded by the present writer [ 1938 ], the larvae begin to mature in the back by the end of November and all larvae drop off by the middle of the following January. In the North-West Frontier Province, again, the earliest mature larvae were observed in the middle of February in a cattle fair at Serai Naurang. In the hills of the same province this was observed about a fortnight later. It would thus appear necessary to draw up seasonal occurrence calendars for the different warble-fly-infested localities in India in order to be able to lay out a scheme of systematic campaign of control against the pest. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Calendar regarding Hypoderma lineatum in the round of the year at Mukteswar (Kumaun Hills).
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. IX Part IV ] PLATE XXXVI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Young larva inside the neural canal [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Young larva in the oesophagus of goat [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Stenosis and haemorrahage of the bull's gullet-wall caused by young larva [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Blood clots in. the alimentary canal of young larva [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Dissected subcutaneous larva showing a large quantity of blood in its alimentary canal [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. Subcutaneous fascia of a sheep showing warble larvae in situ [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7. 'Licked' beef. Larva and a pus cavity caused by it in the flesh of a bull
B. N. SONI 433 LARVAE IN THE ANIMAL'S BODY The exact route taken by the larvae during their migration inside the animal's body has been a matter for speculation for workers both in Europe and America, although the occurrence' of young larvae attached to various organs in the body cavity throws some light on the subject. Mote [ 1928 ] cites an instance in which ' 8 larvae were observed in the pillars of the diaphragm, indicating their probable route after leaving the oesophagus'. Again, Bishopp and others [ 1926 ] record the finding of larvae along the ribs, on the diaphragm and in the neural canal, and according to them this indicates that the larvae ' pass from the gullet across the diaphragm to the ventral ends of the ribs and thence follow the connective tissue beneath the pleura up to the back'. The present writer has been able to locate the presence of young larval forms of H. lineatum at the following parts of the animal's body:434 Bionomics of the Ox Warble-fly presence of these cavities imparts a very repulsive appearance to the meat, and this necessitates the trimming off of the affected parts, frequently resulting in the loss of a fair amount of meat and leaving the carcase unattractive and hence less saleable. This condition was given prominence during the war by the Ministry of Food in England as ' causing serious loss of meat'. OCCURRENCE OF H. LINEATUM IN GOATS AND SHEEP Patton [ 1924 ], in a note on the occurrence of H. lineatum in the Punjab, has mentioned ' Hypoderma lineatum, though mainly a parasite of cattle in its larval stages, is also found in the skins of goats'. Bishopp and others [ 1926 ] have recorded the details of several tests to determine the possibility of infesting goats with Hypoderma (H. bovis and H. lineatum) larvae. In some of these tests, the flies were made to lay eggs on goats' heels and in others the larvae were taken from the gullets of cattle and placed under incisions made in the skin of goats. In a few cases, the larvae reached the skin of the back in the lumbar region, but in no case was it possible to record the occur- rence of larvae under the submucosa of the oesophagus. The present writer, however, encountered H. lineatum larvae in the gullets of goats in the course of routine examination of carcases in the post mortem room at Mukteswar (Plate XXXVI, fig. 2). This would appear to be the first record of the occurrence of the oesophageal forms of H. lineatum larvae in goats, whether in India or abroad. The observation is indicative of the possibility that the life-history of this pest is similar in the two types of hosts (cattle and goats). In connexion with the occurrence of hypoderma in sheep, Bishopp and others [ 1926 ] have remarked : ' The writers have never observed a larva of Hypoderma on a sheep in nature, nor have they seen any indication of the attack of sheep by heel flies.' Cross [ 1926 ], working on the bot-flies of the Punjab, has stated : ' The Hypoderma of sheep may be the same species as that infecting goats but may not develop well in the sheep or it may be a different species. Further observations are necessary before definite con- clusions can be arrived at'. The present author, during his surveys in the Punjab, observed a few cases of warble infection in sheep in Jhelum district. Some specimens of mature larvae were collected in the local abattoirs during December from under the subcutaneous tissues of the back of affected animals. A piece of subcutaneous fascia taken from the back of one of these, measuring 6 "×3 " in size, contained 54 larvae (Plate XXXVI, fig. 6). On examination, these larvae proved to be examples of H. lineatum. SUMMARY The seasonal occurrence of Hypoderma lineatum in India differs markedly from that recorded for the British Isles. Even in India it shows a considerable range of variation, probably depending upon the variation both in climatic and topographical factors. Due regard will obviously have to be paid to this fact in organizing control measures against the pest for various localities in India.
B. N. SONI 435 The occurrence of young larvae of H. lineatum in the animal's body has been recorded at Mukteswar from the oesophagus trachea, aorta, pleural membrane, diaphragm, rumen, intercostal muscles, muscular tissues of the vertebral column and the neural canal. The oesophageal larvae are capable of causing stenosis and haemorrhage in the gullet walls and blood ingestion has been observed in such forms and also in those encountered under the subcutaneous tissues of the animal's back. The oesophageal forms of H. lineatum have been recorded in goats at Mukteswar and larvae of the same species have also been observed infesting sheep in the Salt Range Area of the Punjab. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The guidance and valuable suggestions given by Mr. S. K. Sen, En- tomologist, in this study are gratefully acknowledged. The illustrations have been prepared with the assistance of Mr. Sen Roy, Artist, to whom the writer is much indebted. REFERENCES 1. Bishopp, F. C. and others (1926). U.S.Dept. Agric. Bull, 1369 2. Cross, H. E. (1926). Agric. Res. Inst. Pusa Bull. 160 3. MacDougall, R. S. (1935). Vet. J. 91, 469-472 4. Mote, Don. C.(1928). Ohio Agric. Expt.Sta. Bull. 428 5. Patton, W. S. (1923-24). Ind. J. Med. Res., 961-2 6.A CHECK-LIST OF THE ECTOPARASITES OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN BURMA BY J. BHATTACHARJEE, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., F.C.S. Veterinary Research Officer, Insein, Burma (Received for publication on 9th April 1938.) INTRODUCTION THIS article is an attempt to give a systematic and an up to date record of the ectoparasites of the domesticated animals in Burma. All the parasites listed in this article were identified by the author from the collections of the Veterinary Research Laboratory, Insein, Burma. The host animals considered in this article are the following : Elephant (Elephas indicus) , cattle (Bos indicus) , buffalo (Bos bubalus) , sheep (Ovis aries) , goat (Capra hircus) , horse (Equus caballus) , dog (Canis familiaris) , cat (Felis catus var. domesticus) , pig (Sus cristatus) and fowl (Gallus gallus domesticus) . Class INSECTA Order ANOPLURA Sub-order MALLOPHAGA Family PHILOPTERIDAE Genus Lipeurus Nitzsch Lipeurus caponis Linné. Host. Fowl. Locality. Insein district. Genus Goniodes Nitzsch. Goniodes sp. Host. Fowl. Locality. Insein district. Genus Goniocotes Burmeister. Goniocotes gigas Taschenberg. Host. Fowl. Locality. Insein district. (437)
438 Ectoparasites of Domesticated Animals in Burma Family TRICHODECTIDAE Genus Bovicola Ewing Bovicola bovis (Linné). Host. Cattle. Locality. Insein district. Bovicola caprae (Gurlt). Host. Goat. Locality. Amherst, Insein, Kyaukpyu and Thaton districts. Bovicola equi (Linné). Host. Horse. Locality. Insein district. Bovicola ovis (Linné). Host. Sheep. Locality. Insein district. Genus Trichodectes Nitzsch Trichodectes canis (De Geer). Host. Dog (rare). Locality. Thaton district. Family MENOPONIDAE Genus Menopon Nitszch Menopon biseriatum Piaget. Host. Fowl. Locality. Insein district. Genus Heterodoxus Le Souëf and Bullen Heterodoxus longitarsus (Piaget). Host. Dog (very common). Locality. Akyab, Amherst, Bassein, Insein, Kyaukse, Maubin, Myit- kyina, Pegu and Thaton districts. Plomley and Thompson [1937] state that ' the biting-louse, Hetero- doxus longitarsus (Piaget) is primarily a parasite of certain didelphian mammals (Macropodidae), but it has been found also upon non-didelphian hosts'.
J. BHATTACHARJEE 439 Sub-order RHYNCOPHTHIRINA Family HAEMATOMYZIDAE Genus Haematomyzus Piaget Haematomyzus elephantis Piaget. Host. Elephant. Locality. Tharrawaddy and Yamethin districts. Recorded previously by Evans [1910]. Gaiger [1910, 1915]. Smith [1933]. Sub-order SIPHUNCULATA Family HAEMATOPINIDAE Genus Linognathus Enderlein Linognathus stenopsis (Burmeister). Host. Goat. Locality. Amherst, Insein and Thaton districts. Linognathus vituli (Linné). Host. Cattle. Locality. Akyab, Amherst, Katha and Pyapon districts. Genus Haematopinus Leach Haematopinus eurysternus (Nitzsch). Host. Cattle. Locality. Amherst, Bassein, Hanthawaddy, Insein, Kyaukpyu, Kyaukse, Maubin, Myaungmya, Myitkyina, Pegu, Pyapon, Tavoy, Tharra- waddy, Thaton and Toungoo districts. Haematopinus suis (Linnaeus). Host. Pig. Locality. Rangoon Town district. Haematopinus tuberculatus Giebel. Host. Buffalo. Locality. Amherst, Bassein, Bhamo, Chindwin (Upper), Hanthawaddy, Insein, Katha, Magwe, Mandalay, Maubin, Meiktila, Mergui, Myaungmya, Myitkyina, Pakokku, Pegu, Prome, Pyapon, Salween, Tharrawaddy, Thaton and Toungoo districts. Order SIPHONAPTERA Family TUNGIDAE Genus Echidnophaga Olliff Echidnophaga gallinacea (Westwood). Host. Fowl and dog (rare). Locality. Chindwin (Lower) and Insein districts.
440 Ectoparasites of Domesticated Animals in Burma Family PULICIDAE Genus Ctenocephalides Stiles and Collins Ctenocephalides canis (Curtis). Host. Dog and goat (very rare). Locality. Akyab, Amherst, Bassein, Chindwin (Upper and Lower), Hanthawaddy, Henzada, Insein, Kyaukpyu, Kyaukse, Magwe, Maubin, Myingyan, Myitkyina, Pegu, Prome, Salween and Thaton districts. Ctenocephalides felis (Bouché). Host. Cat and dog. Locality. Amherst, Bassein, Insein, Maubin, Myitkyina and Salween districts. Class ARACHNIDA Order ACARIDA Super-family IXODOIDEA Family IXODIDAE Genus Boophilus Curtice Boophilus microplus (Canestrini). Host. Cattle and buffalo (very common). Dog (very rare). Locality. Akyab, Amherst, Bassein, Chindwin (Upper and Lower), Hanthawaddy, Henzada, Insein, Katha, Kyaukpyu, Magwe, Maubin, Mergui, Mayungmya, Myingyan, Myitkyina, Pegu, Prome, Pyapon, Sagaing, Salween, Shwebo, Tavoy, Tharrawaddy, Thaton, Thayet- myo, Toungoo and Yamethin districts. Genus Haemaphysalis Koch Haemaphysalis bispinosa Neumann. Host. Cattle and goat. Locality. Amherst, Bassein, Hanthawaddy, Henzada, Insein, Katha, Myitkyina, Pyapon and Thaton districts. Recorded previously by Nuttall, Warburton, Cooper and Robinson [1915]. Genus Rhipicephalus Koch Rhipicephalus haemaphysaloides. Host. Cattle, buffalo and dog. Locality. Hanthawaddy, Katha, Kyaukpyu, Magwe, Shan States (Northern), Thayetmyo and Toungoo districts. Recorded previously by Patton and Cragg [1913].
J. BHATTACHARJEE 441 Rhipicephalus sanguineus (Latreille). Host. Dog (very common), cattle (very rare). Locality. Amherst, Bassein, Chindwin (Upper and Lower), Henzada, Insein, Kyaukse, Magwe, Minbu, Myingyan, Myitkyina, Pegu, Prome and Sagaing districts. Genus Hyalomma Koch Hyalomma aegyptium aegyptium (Linnaeus). Host. Cattle and buffalo (very common). Dog and goat (very rare). Locality. Amherst, Bassein, Chindwin (Lower), Hanthawaddy, Magwe, Myitkyina, Sagaing, Shwebo and Thayetmyo districts. Genus Amblyomma Koch Amblyomma testudinarium Koch. Host. Cattle, buffalo and elephant. Locality. Bhamo and Myitkyina districts. Recorded previously by Robinson [1926]. Super-family SARCOPTOIDEA Family SARCOPTIDAE Genus Sarcoptes Latreille Sarcoptes scabei canis Gerlach. Host. Dog. Locality. Insein district. Super-family PARASITOIDEA Family DERMANYSSIDAE Genus Liponyssus Kolenati Liponyssus bursa Berlese. Host. Fowl. Locality. Amherst, Insein and Tharrawaddy districts. Super-family DEMODICOIDEA Family DEMODICIDAE Genus Demodex Owen Demodex bovis Stiles. Host. Cattle. Locality. Sagaing district. Demodex canis Leydig. Host. Dog. Locality. Insein district.
442 Ectoparasites of Domesticated Animals in Burma ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author wishes to thank the Director of Veterinary Services, Burma, Rangoon, and the Veterinary Research Officer, Insein, Burma, for providing facilities for carrying out this work. He also wishes to thank all those who assisted in the collection of parasites. REFERENCES Bedford, G. A. H. (1932). Rept. Dir. Vet. Services, Un. S. Afr. 18, 223- Evans, G. H. (1910). Elephants and their diseases. Rangoon, xiv+343 pp. Gaiger, S. H. (1910). J. Trop. Vet. Sc. 5, 70 SELECTED ARTICLES THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING THE IMMUNIZATION OF ANIMALS AGAINST BACTERIAL DISEASE* BY REGINALD LOVELL Research Institute in Animal Pathology, Royal Veterinary College, London (Reprinted from the Veterinary Record, Vol. 51, No. 20, May 20, 1939) INTRODUCTION IT has been known for hundreds of years that human beings and animals do not often suffer from some diseases more than once and there is a written record of this observation in ' De Contagione', which was published in Venice in 1546. In it, Fracastorius tells us that it is rare for people who have had variola and measles to have them again [Bulloch, 1938]. More than 200 years later, Jenner artificially produced this increased resistance to a disease by taking virus from a cow-pox lesion on the hand of a milkmaid, Sarah Newlme, vaccinating a child with it and showing that the attack of cow-pox protected the child from small-pox. His reasoning was based on the belief that cow-pox was a form of small-pox modified by passage through the cow. Nearly a century later, Pasteur found that an old culture of Pasteurella444 Immunization of Animals Against Bacterial Disease sheep and a goat died from anthrax and four control cows were febrile and developed large REGINALD LOVELL 445 than the animal body. Blackleg, lamb dysentery and braxy are diseases of particular areas and the causal bacteria are found in the soil. There is little hope of exercising adequate control of these diseases by the elimination of in- fected animals as in tuberculosis, contagious bovine abortion and bacillary white diarrh446 Immunization of Animals Against Bacterial Disease that the capsule is frequently associated with virulence and hence with immuno- logical problems. Pneumococci, which are responsible for lobar pneumonia in the human subject, are capsulated and there are many antigenic types. These capsules are of a polysaccharide nature and they determine the antigenic behaviour of the organism and are therefore of prime importance [Avery and Goebel, 1933]. The capsule of the anthrax bacillus is also of importonce but is protein in nature [Tomcsik and Ivanovics, 1936]. A large amount of chemical investigation is involved in recent work on bacterial antigens and the corresponding immunity. Chemical fractions capable of inducing an active immunity have been isolated from some of the enteric group of bacteria [Boivin and Mesrobeanu, 1935, 1936 ; Raistrick and Topley, 1934 ; Topley et al., 1937], from some streptococci [Stamp and Hendry, 1937] and from the bacillus of whooping cough [Cruickshank and Freeman, 1937]. An important advance even on these is announced by Goebel [1939] who has produced a synthetic antigen capable of inducing immunity to Type III pneumococci. As knowledge extends, the crude immunological reagents now used will be replaced by purer products and there should follow an increasing control over infective diseases. One of the crudest products is the ' living vaccine ' which is used in swine erysipelas, anthrax and Brucella infections. Such vaccines are used where fundamental knowledge of the pathogenesis of bacteria is vague or lacking and such vaccines should not be used if they can be avoided. In addition to the possible danger to the animal injected, there is the probability of perpetuating a disease, by increasing the number of carriers, and all freshly introduced stock have to be protected by similar means. In some cases there is a potential danger to the human subject and in addition there is no control of a ' living vaccine ' after it has been introduced into an animal. Some years ago, Ramon noted that horses which were being immunized produced a better product when an abscess was formed at the site of inocula- tion. He and his colleagues introduced tapioca [Ramon and Descombey, 1927, Nattan Larrier et al., 1927] or some chemical substance such as trypar- samide into their vaccines because a local reaction was formed, absorption was slower and a better immunity resulted. Tapioca is still used in Poland as an addition to tetanus toxoid for the immunization of army horses, but in some countries other substances such as saponin, lanolin and alum have been incor- porated. A well-known method is to add potash alum and the toxoid becomes loosely attached to the aluminium hyroxide precipitated [Glenny et al., 1926]. Alum-precipitated diphtheria toxoid is widely used in the active immunization of children and alum-precipitated tetanus toxoid in man and animals. The foot-and-mouth disease vaccine recently described by Waldmann [1938] in Germany has an addition of aluminium hydroxide for a similar purpose. THE ASSAY OF BACTERIAL PROPHYLACTICS Before any vaccine is issued for use it is of course essential that it be tested for its safety and efficacy. Although vaccines may be assayed by in vitro methods such as the number of bacterial bodies in a
REGINALD LOVELL 447 given quantity of suspension or, in the case of a toxoid, as the number of doses estimated by a precipitation test, it is essential to test it by animal experimentation. One way is to immunize a series of animals448 Immunization of Animals Against Bacterical Disease Glenny, A. T., Pope, C. G., Waddington, H. and Wallace, U. (1926). J. Path. Bact. 29, 31 Goebel, W. F. (1939). Nature, Lond., 14 Jan., 77 Greenwood, M., Hill, A. B., Topley, W. W. C., and Wilson, J. (1936), Spec. Rept. Ser. Med. Res. Comm. 209 Lovell, R. 1937. F. Path. Bact. 45, 339 Minett, F. C. (1937), .Vet. Rec. 49, 179 Nattan-Larrier, L., Ramon, G., and Grasset, E. (1927). Ann. Inst. Pasteur 41, 848 Raistrick, H., and Topley, W. W. C. (1934). Brit. F. Exp. Path. 15, 113 Ramon, G., and Descombey, P. (1927). Ann. Inst. Pasteur 41, 834 Stamp, T. C. and Hendry, E. B. (1937). Lancet. 30 Jan., 257 Tomcsik, J. and Ivanovics, G. (1936). Int. Congr. Microbiol, 2, 358 Topley, W. W. C., Raistrick, H., Wilson, J. Stacey, M., Challinor, S. W. and Clark, R. O. J. (1937). Lancet. 30 Jan., 252 Vallery-Radot, R. (1919). The Life of Pasteur. Eng. Trans. R. L. Devonshire. Constable, Lond. Waldmann, O. (1938). Dtsch. tier ar ztl. Wschr. 46, 569.
NATIONAL NUTRITION CONFERENCE* VETERINARY ASPECTS OF NATIONAL NUTRITION BY WM. C. MILLER, M.R.C.V.S, F.R.S.E. Royal Veterinary College, London (Reprinted from the Veterinary Record, Vol. 51, No. 23, June 10, 1939) I WOULD like in just a word to compliment the British Medical Asso- ciation, and the Organization Committee of this Conference, for the great wisdom of their decision to hold a series of meetings dealing with the much neglected subject of nutrition. I would also thank them for the honour they have done me in extending an invitation to speak. INTRODUCTORY In all probability, the first quarter of this century will be registered in the archives of history as a period when the major attention was devoted to the elucidation of disease causation upon a purely bacteriological basis. Subsequently, and to some extent concurrently, we have seen a phase of intensive investigation of diseases of plants, animals and men due to viruses : a phase, the end of which has not yet been reached. Slowly during this time it has become very clear that neither the bacterium nor the virus is the complete answer to the question, ' What causes disease?' Minerals have enjoyed a phase of popularity ; vitamins are fashionable, but though both are important, neither of them is more than one factor in the cause of disease. I think we may reasonably assume that a further contribution to the solution of the general problem is being made and will continue to be made by intensive study of the nutrition of the organizm, viewed as a whole. Considerable progress is being made on the frontiers of this newer knowledge, and although the horizons are as yet by no means clear, various avenues are being opened up to give a far more lucid conception of the situation. In the forefront of this endeavour there is a body of aca- demic research workers in the realms of pure science450 National Nutrition Conference Neither in human nor in veterinary medicine is the organisation perfect but the structure is already loosely something along these lines. It is my duty to outline (and it must be an outline only) the field of activity of the veterinarian in relation to the health of the people, and to sug- gest for your consideration what further functions he, whether independently or as an integral unit in a coordinated plan, might usefully perform. The activities of the veterinarian as a factor in human nutrition schemes fall into five main categories. ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASE The health of the public in Britiain is safeguarded to a very consider- able extent by the control of certain diseases of animals exercised by the Veterinary Staff of the Animal Health Division of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, together with members of panels of part-time officers chosen from among veterinary practitioners who perform local duties under the direc- tion of an area official. This organization has recently been reconstituted into a unified veterinary service. It is well known to you that it is only during comparatively recent years that a concerted effort has been made to reduce the incidence of certain major diseases among animals which may be contracted by the human being, and although much progress has been made, there is still much to do. By the operation of the Agriculture Act a beginning has been made to eradicate tuberculosis from dairy and other cattle stocks. Some 5,000 herds are already attested free from tuberculosis and many more are in active process of being cleared. Although the health of the animals themselves is the primary consi- deration, 'pari passu a reduction in the amount of tuberculosis infected milk available to the consumer will follow, and a reduction in human tuberculosis of bovine origin will result. I would wish here to disarm possible criticism by stating that while I fully appreciate and agree with the logic of the argu- ments in favour of pasteurization of all milk for human consumption, it would be deplorable if pasteurisation should ever become a substitute policy for disease eradication. The two aspects are each of primary and should be of complementary importance. From the aspect of livestock health, it is now well authenticated that in the tubercle-free herd the incidence of intercurrent and sporadic diseases and illnesses has markedly diminished. Further, the efficiency of the herd as a milk producing unit is increased by approximately 25 per cent. This means that 20 cows free from tuberculosis can constitute a herd equal in efficiency to one of 25 cows which contains some reactors. The eradication of bovine tuberculosis would enable approximately 200 million gallons of extra milk to be produced annually without increasing the total number of cows in the country above present levels. Put in another way, there would be avail- able about two oz. more milk per head of the whole population daily without any extra cost of production.
WM. C. MILLER 451 Since the same system of eradicating tuberculosis is now being extended to beef breeding herds, the butcher buying from such a tubercle-free herd has no risks to run of condemnation of carcase meat from tuberculosis. I do not know the annual loss to the country occassioned by condemnation for tuberculosis, but it is tremendous. Some of the animal diseases, apart from tuberculosis, which can cause illness in man include brucellosis, mastitis, some forms of mange and ringworm, and of lesser frequence, anthrax, psittacosis, salmonellosis, glanders and rabies. Fortunately, glanders and rabies, owing to the vigorous policy pursued in past years, are no longer indigenous in Britain. Apart from the direct protection of public health afforded by this type of control, however, the veterinary staff of the Ministry of Agriculture is res- ponsible for indirect conservation of animal health in that control is exercised over such diseases as swine fever, foot-and-mouth disease, sheep scab, sheep pox, etc. The net result is that a quantity of sound animal food products452 National Nutrition Conference CONTROL AND TREATMENT OF SPORADIC AND OTHER ANIMAL DISEASE UPON PRODUCERS PREMISES The functions of the local veterinary practitioner, in so far as treatment of disease amongst food producing animals is concerned, are similarly well known. The field is a wide one and under the present system it is impossible to estimate the full importance of this work. The Loveday Committee recently estimated that some £19,000,000 are lost annually to livestock owners, and so to agriculture, on account of animal disease. The potential loss pre- vented by the activities of local practitioners is probably at least another £19,000,000 : this assumes only a 50 per cent efficiency figure in the treatment of animal disease. (I feel sure that many of my colleagues would take me to task for accusing them of only 50 per cent efficiency, and the saving they effect may well be greater). By securing the confidence of his clients, the veterinary practitioner in breeding and rearing districts plays an increasing part in securing a better, healthier, and more efficient livestock population. He is in a position to act as guide, philosopher, and friend to those who seek his help in matters of animal management, breeding, feeding and along other lines not directly concerned with animal disease. In this way he plays a not inconsiderable part in ensuring a healthier human population, especially in so far as animal foods are concerned. He is capable of contributing a far greater service when called upon to do so. COLONIAL WORK I would like to summarize very briefly the part played in many of the colonies by the veterinary officer, since the work there not only upon disease control but also upon animal husbandry, and all that this entails, has an important bearing upon nutrition and well-being of the native races, upon the industrial efficiency of the colony and therefore indirectly upon the population of Britain so far as it is affected by colonial enterprise, and resulting national wealth, employment, trade, etc. The work has gradually developed from the control of the major devastating epizoötics which formerly brought famine and havoc in their trail, through the stages of investigation and control of more local diseases, until now progressive colonies are pursuing an active policy of improvement of livestock by the encouragement of proper systems of grazing, conservation of forage and other crops for use during droughts and periods of shortage, improved methods of management, breed selection, use of imported sires for grading up scrub stock, and better processing of meat and milk products. The whole of this work must be under constant expert supervision so that the reactions of stock to differing environmental conditions can be watched and any necessary measures immediately taken, and so that epizootics, which are still liable to recrudesce, may be controlled and eradicated promptly and efficiently. The veterinary officer is the indispensible keystone to the success
WM. C. MILLER 453 of this work, and though cooperation with medical, educational, agricultural and administrative departments, is eminently desirable, no other service can play such an impressive and important function. The above policy actively pursued is calculated to make possible a higher standard of living for the native. He pays his tax, purchases implements, grows better garden produce ; by using more animal manure he increases soil fertility, and is thereby encouraged to adopt settled instead of nomadic farm- ing systems, is better nourished, happy and contented; these factors acting together provide a powerful insurance against social unrest. POSITIVE POLICY OF DISEASE PREVENTION Many of the veterinary functions outlined earlier are best described as being of a negative nature, in that each is concerned with the limitation of disease in one form or another after it has already occurred. There is, how- ever, a far more important part to be played by those with a veterinary train- ing and an adequate knowledge of livestock. There is the positive policy, far more comprehensive and important, of disease prevention. The study of health, as an end in itself and of the measures and methods to achieve and maintain health must be carried on as a complementary but fundamental study by those whose work may be mainly concerned with disease. The training of the veterinarian has until recent years been along lines concerned wholly or mainly with the diseases of animals. Doubtless this type of educational structure was adequate in the earlier and more spacious years of this and a former century. The power of the infective agent and its action upon the tissues were regarded as all important. The farmer was content so long as his animals could be treated when suffering from this or that active diseased process. To a large extent among the older members of the community this view is perhaps still held. There is, however, an acute realization both by farmers and veterinarians that more is needed. Eminent men in medicine, whose names are familiar to you all, biologists, sociologists, and others, are doing much to make the public aware that mere freedom from obvious disease is not enough. And so during recent years, revolutionary developments relating to human health have been seen454 National Nutrition Conference time in advising upon the achievement and maintenance of health and upon the prevention of disease, cannot regard himself as other than archaic. It is necessary to state categorically that if this country is to make the most of its peculiar agricultural advantages so far as livestock is concerned, its farmers must take a far more active interest in health than they have hitherto. We are entitled to regard home-produced animal products as a superior asset in national health, but the facts are that owing to individual economic insecurity, faulty planning of farm policy whereby animals cannot receive adequate feeding, droughts and shortage of grazing, and various other factors, a proportion of the home-fed beef cattle, fat sheep and lambs, and sometimes even bacon pigs, reaches the market in a wasteful unfinished condition, and it is equally certain that much of the home-produced beef, mutton and bacon could be produced possessing far higher nutritive values than is the case at present. What then are the steps necessary to improve the supply of good quality and safe food of animal origin to the public ? Farm Buildings.WM. C. MILLER 455 production of milk, meat, eggs, etc. and far too little is paid to the less specta, cular but basically more important characters of stamina, fertility, longevity and disease resistance. Those who point to the success of the individual 3,000 gallon cow or the 300 or 320 egg hen, neglect to consider the repercussions which such excessive production has upon the system or upon the progeny if any. (3,000 gallons of milk = 13½ tons : 300 eggs = 48 lb. nearly ½ cwt.). It is significant to note that many individual animals, perhaps cows especially, which have achieved high production records, become barren subsequently. High production is an expensive phenomenon to the animal system: reproduction is also expensive, and the tissues cannot withstand a double strain. However attractive the ephemeral fame of breaking or holding a production record may be, it is more than cancelled by the consequential harm that readily follows. Some of the breed societies and associations are alive to the dangers and have already taken steps to concentrate attention upon the risks of such a one-sided selection, but the temptation to break a record, ignorance of the dangers which may follow, or a lack of lively appreciation of the consequences, tend to continue and encourage such practices. Rearing.456 National Nutrition Conference Unwise and faulty animal feeding leads not only to a lowered general resistance against disease, but it results in the production of a human food substance of less than perfect nutritional value. Further study is needed regarding the influence of foods upon amount and quality of the animal product, especially in relation to fattening pigs, dairy cows and both table and egg-laying poultry. Such subjects as flavour, development of taints and rancidity, discoloration, texture, variations in vitamin and mineral contents, etc. of meat and meat products, etc. as influenced by the feeding of animals are not fully appreciated, much less exhaustively studied. So far as the feeding of sheep, cattle, and poultry and to a less extent of pigs is concerned, however, the greatest need is for a drastic division of grass management and grassland policy on the majority of farms. Grass and hay form more than 66 per cent of the food consumed as dry matter by cattle and sheep and under British conditions the soil is capable of growing grass better than most other crops. There is a lack of knowledge of many of the funda- mental details of grassland management which farmers should possess. Further work is needed on such aspects as the effects of different types of management, stocking, resting, rotational grazing, etc. on parasite population, on the sur- vival of pathogenic bacterial flora, on variations in the mineral contents of cereals and legumes (Ca, P4, Mg, Mn, Fe, etc.) on the prevention or avoidance of ' sickness ' in grasslands (sheep-sick, poultry-sick, horse-sick and so on). The work entails the cooperation of botanist, plant geneticist, soil expert, agriculturist and veterinarian, and the improvements possible would amply repay the sums needed to finance adequate research. It is impossible to over-estimate the importance of grass and grazing on animal health. No method of artificial indoor feeding ever gives results which are comparable with those obtained by proper use of good grazings, and there is adequate evidence to show that correctly managed grassland is one of Britain's richest natural resources for the production of healthy fer- tile stock yielding products of the highest nutritive quality. Exercise and General Management.WM. C. MILLER 457 foolish but very common. Many old-established pastures are long overdue for ploughing, cropping for one or two years, and re-sowing with proper grass seed strains and mixtures. Training and Education.ABSTRACTS Studies on the control of the poultry cestode Davainea proglottina (Dav.) P. P. LEVINE (1938) Cornell Vet, XXVIII, 220-227 SEVERAL drugs have been claimed by various workers in the past to have anthel- mintic efficacy against the poultry tapeworm (Davainea proglottina) , but in many cases the results obtained by two or more workers are decidedly different. This lack of agree ment is obviously due, in many instances, to the employment of inadequate and inaccu. rate techniques. The author has carried out, under well-controlled conditions, anthel- mintic studies with a number of drugs and proprietary preparations. In addition, some studies on the resistance of infected slugs (the intermediate hosts) to winter conditions and refrigeration temperatures are reported. During the course of experiments, the author has made a very important observation, viz., under optimum conditions, each tapeworm produces, every 24 hours, no more than one gravid segment which is voided in the fæces. This information was utilized in the anthelmintic studies. The number ofscolices discharged was used as an index of the anthelmintic efficacy. This was also verified by killing the birds after treatment and counting the number of worms that were unaffected. The drugs and the proprietary preparations used in the experiments were Kamala, Oleoresin-aspidii, Rotenone, Hexyl-resorcinol, Santonin, Turpentine and Paraffin oil, Pelletierine-tannate, Betanapthol, Carbon-tetrachloride, Tetra-chlorethylene, Arecoline-hydrobromide, Oil of Chenopodium and Paraffin oil, Areca Nut, Jen-sal worm powder, Iodine Vermicide (Merck), Thymol Nicotine tablets, Kamala Nicotine tablets and Rosa Caps. As a result of this careful experimentation it was found that the only drug that has some value against Davainea proglottina is arecanut. All other reputed drugs and proprietary preparations were found to be ineffective against this worm. The slug (Agriolimax agrestis) infected with cysticercoids of the tapeworm survived the severe winter of 1935-36 in the United States of America, where in February the temperature was sub-zero for seven days. The infected slugs survived eight days at 3°C. to 5°C. and proved infective to chickens. Subsequent exposure to460 ABSTRACTS The following requirements of animals in relation to reproduction have been dis- cussed. (1) ENERGY REQUIREMENTS The additional requirements for pregnancy are trivial in the early stages of gestation but a 15 per cent addition to the basic maintenance is required in the closing weeks of the gestation. (2) PROTEIN REQUIREMENTS In quickly growing animals, i.e., sow, the additional requirement for food protein imposed by pregnancy is no less than 32 per cent on the average of the whole period and 70 per cent in the closing stage of gestation, but if the rate of development is slower as in the case of the cow, the maintenance requirement may be increased during gestation by an average of 17 per cent over the whole period or 40 per cent in the closing stage. (3) VITAMIN REQUIREMENTS The author considers that only for vitamins A and E there seems to be a clear case for postulating that the maternal diet must include extra amounts to cover any specific re- quirements for reproduction. The simplest practical safeguard against deficiency of vitamin A lies in the supply of leafy green-stuff. Where this is not available the inclu- sion of yellow maize in the ration will be helpful. Although the basic need of vitamin E for reproductive efficiency has been demons- trated, there is little evidence as yet that breeding trouble due to deficiency of this factor are met with more than rarely in farm animals. Nor indeed, is it to be expected that this type of trouble would be often met with in view of the supply of the vitamin in green- stuffs or the germ of cereal grains. The specific requirement of vitamin D for reproduction would seem probable, but conclusive evidence has not yet been obtained especially as regards farm animals. (4) MINERAL REQUIREMENTS Taking a minimum requirement of 0.10 per cent each of calcium and phosphorus in the dry matter of the food for the ' empty ' dry cow, an increase by 0.07 per cent for dry in calf cow and a further addition of 0.07 per cent for each gallon of milk has been recommended. The other minerals that may be required in breeding practice are iron, iodine and salt, but nothing has been suggested with regard to their quantitative requirements. (N.D.K.). Rinderpest: The immunizing value of frozen desiccated goat spleen, PFAFF, G. (1938), J. S. Afr. Vet. Med. Assn., 9, (4) 188.9 THE author describes the preparation of the vaccine by killing infected goats on the fourth day, several spleens are removed asceptically and pooled so as to have a fair concentration of virus. They are then ground in a Latapie pulper, dried in vacuo over calcium chloride and stored at 42°F.
ABSTRACTS 461 Vaccine is sent to the field in a thermos jar of ice, the ice is replenished after every three days and it can be used for 30 days. At 97° F. the vaccine deteriorates rapidly after three days. The powder is to be emulsified in normal saline and one gram can be used for 400 cattle or 2,400 buffaloes. Serviceable immunity is conferred in 24 hours but is absolute in 48 hours and this immunity lasts for at least 2½ years. No breakdowns in immunity have been reported. Cost of vaccine is 4 s. per 1,000 doses. From 1935 to 1938, 759,792 cattle and 62,472 buffaloes have been vaccinated in Burma with 0.124 per cent and 2.216 per cent mortality respectively as a prophylactic measure and in actual outbreaks. The author claims this vaccine to be cheap, safe and effective. (B. S.). Investigations on Johne's disease of sheep, MCEWEN, A. D. (1939), J. Comp. Path. Ther., 52, 1, 69-87 IN the spring of 1932, Johne's disease was diagnosed in a flock of over 300 South- down sheep. The losses due to the disease continually decreased but as the infection was widespread in the entire flock, the shepherd decided to stop breeding and prepare the animals for slaughter. Cases occurred at all times of the year but most of them were observed among suckling sheep and, naturally, their lambs. Although home-bred cattle also grazed on the same Downs, no case among them had been known for years, and it was impossible to trace the infection in the flock. Double intradermal tests with johnin prepared from a bovine strain of the bacillus were unreliable as they gave results which were not always consistent with post mortem findings. From the symptomatological standpoint the disease in sheep differed little from parasitic gastro-enteritis, but in advanced cases the diagnosis could be clinched by the demonstration of clumps of acid-fast bacilli in fæces. A greater or less tendency for easy shedding of fleece on handling is, however, stated to be a feature absent from animals suffering from verminous infestation. At autopsy, depletion or ' gelatinization' of fat, thickening of the walls of the jejunum, ileum and cæcum, corrugation of the mucosa of these parts, and tenseness of the lymphatics draining the thickened portion of the bowel were the main features of the disease. Enlargement of the small lymphatic glands adjacent to the colon was frequently noticed. Only exceptionally abomasum and duodenum were affected with the disease and showed clumps of acid-fast bacilli. The bacilli were usually demonstrable in the affected bowel and in the associated lymph glands except at times in those draining only moderately affected portions of the intestine. Judging by the absence of bacteria from regional lymph glands, other organs of the body were free from infection. Microscopically, Johne's disease in sheep is associated with accumulations of the macrophage or large epithelioid cell type in the bowel. The intensity of accumulation varies directly with that of infection and the bacteria are seen to lie, and perhaps multiply,
462 ABSTRACTS in the epithelioid cells which may in time replace the normal cells of the part. Syncytium - formation, and rarely giant-cells, may also be seen. Necrosis is absent from the bowel lesions but is present in the mass of lymphocytes, bacteria and disintegrating epithelioid cells, which occludes the distended, and at times thickened, lymphatics that drain the affected part of intestine. In one instance clinical diagnosis of Johne's disease was confirmed after death on the strength of histo-pathological changes alone, despite the absence of demonstrable acid-fast bacilli. The author is of opinion that cases of this type are likely to be over- looked. Attempts to cultivate the ovins strain of Johne's bacillus on glycerinized liver broth egg mixture with the addition of M. phlei or M. tuberculosis (bovine or avian) proved futile even after six months' incubation. Experimental infection with suitably washed material from affected ovine bowel failed in rabbits by the intravenous route. Similar results were obtained by feeding guineapigs and one day old chicks repeatedly with infected mucosa. The disease was however, produced in sucking lambs, but not in adult sheep, by the feeding method, ndicating thereby that young ovines were highly susceptible whereas the adult was resistant. The ovine strain of the organism was also pathogenic to calves by the oral route. Certain discrepancies were noticed in the reaction shown by some of the ex- perimentally infected calves and by one control bovine to the double intradermal test with johnin. It is concluded on available evidence that the disease is not so common in sheep as in cattle. It is thought, however, that on account of the indefinite symptoms cases among ovines are likely to be overlooked. Unlike this condition in bovines, the dissemina- tion of the disease is restricted in sheep on account of the limited movements of animals from flock to flock. In both species, however, the disease is more likely to be notice- able soon after parturition. Naturally, the risk of spread of infection would exist through- out the year in cattle, but would be almost confined to the lambing season in sheep. Yet, as the adult cattle are resistant to the infection and the calves are usually removed from the dams soon after birth, the disease spreads only slowly in a herd of cattle. This is not so with sheep which carry their lambs at foot. It is possible that the bovine bacillus is capable of infecting sheep but when the organism from the latter is found to be difficult to cultivate the inference should be in favour of the ovine strain of M. paratuberculosis. Speaking of the dependability of diagnosis by clinical symptoms, assisted by fæcal examination, the author states : ' The diagnosis without the aid of johnin, therefore, gave more consistent results than would have been the case had reliance been placed on johnin alone '. (M. Y. M.)
NOTE The Dentition of Fishes and Reptiles with special reference to the replacement of teeth*INDEX TO AUTHORS A PAGE ANANT NARAYAN RAO, M., " Arthrocephalus gambiensis Ortlepp, 1925 " . 37 ii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE CHADHA, S. R. and SONI, B.N.," Regional and Seasonal Distribution of Warble Fly (Hypoderma lineatum) and its Economic Importance in the North-West Frontier Province " . . . . . . 101 CHATTERJEE, R. C, " Report on two Unrecorded Nematode Parasites from Domesticated Animals of India or Burma" . . . . 323 CONVERSE, H. T. and MEIGS, E. B., " Carotene Requirements of Dairy Cows : I. The Carotene Requirements for Normal Reproduc- tion " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . . 337 CROWTHER, C, " Nutrition and Reproduction " (Abstract) . . . 459 D DAS GUPTA, S. M., " The Influence of Dietary Carotene upon the Carotene and Vitamin-A Contents and Reichert and Iodine Value of Butter- fat with special reference to Seasonal Variations " . . . 249 DOCTOR, N. S. (KOTHAVALLA, Z. R. and) . . . . . . 151 DU TOIT, P. J. (THEILER, A. and) . . . . . . 105 INDEX TO AUTHORS iii K PAGE KARAM CHAND, " The Effect of certain Drugs and Mineral Deficiencies on Helminthiasis of Ruminants " . . . . . . 267 KARNAD, R., " Aroma in Dahiiv THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY N PAGE NAIR, K. S., NILAKANTA AYYAR, D. and MADHUSUDAN, A. R., " Relation- ship between the Degree of Reaction and Immunity in Serum Simul- taneous Inoculation in Rinderpest " . . . . . . 385 NEITZ, W. O. and DU TOIT, P. J., " Tick Borne Diseases " (Abstract) . 336 NILAKANTA AYYAR, D. (NAIR, K. S. and) . . . . . . 385 P PFAFF, G., " Rinderpest : the Immunizing Value of Frozen Desiccated Goat Spleen " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 460 R RAJAGOPALAN, V. R. and GOPALAKRISHNAN, V. R., " Pasteurellosis in White Mice" . . . . . . . . . . 299 INDEX TO AUTHORS V PAGE SRIVASTAVA, H. D., " The Morphology and Systematic Relationship of two New Distomes of the Family Haplosplanchnidae Poche, 1926, from Indian Marine Food-fishes " . . . . . . . . . . 67 vi THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY T PAGE THEILER, A., DU TOIT, P. J. and MALAN, A. I., " Studies in Mineral Meta- bolism XXXVIIINDEX TO SUBJECTS A PAGE Acanthocolpus indicum, n. sp. . . . . . . . . 214 Acanthocolpus luhei, n. sp. . . . . . . . . 213 Acanthocolpus orientalis, n. sp. . . . . . . . . 215 Acuaria (Cheilospirura) hamulosa . . . . . . . . 323 Aponurus bengalensis, n. sp. . . . . . . . . 33 Aponurus breviformis, n. sp. . . . . . . . . 31 Aroma in dahi . . . . . . . . . . 349 Arthrocephalus gambiensis Ortlepp, 1925 . . . . . . 37 Assam, contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia in . . . . . 139 B Bacterial disease, immunization of animals against . . . 443 Bionomics of the ox warble-fly in India . . . . . . 431 Bovine pleuro-pneumonia (contagious) in British India . . . 139 viii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. Cattle diseases and pests- PAGE Bacterial disease, immunization of animals against . . . 443 Bovine pleuro-pneumonia, experimental reproduction of . . 241 INDEX TO SUBJECTS ix PAGE Cattle foods (Indian), nutritive values of, and the feeding of animals . 115 X THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. PAGE Domesticated animals, two unrecorded nematode parasites from . . 323 INDEX TO SUBJECTS xi G PAGE Gallus domesticus, Cotugnia brotugerys from . . . . . 333 Glenfield Veterinary Research Station, forced feeding of suspected poison plants at . . . . . . . . . 237 Goat blood virus, effect of trypanblue on . . . . . . 17 xii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. J Johne's disease of sheep, investigations on . . . . . 461 Joyeuxia, species of, from a cat . . . . . . . . 377 L Laruea caudatum, gen. et. sp. nov. . . . . . . . 67 Linseed plant, toxicology of . . . . . . . . 61 Linum usitatissimum, toxicology of . . . . . . . 61 Liverfluke (Fasciola gigantica) in the lungs of goats . . . . 223 Livestock diseases, feeding in relation to . . . . . . . 244 M Mehrailla ovocaudatum, a parasite from an Indian marine food-fish . 209 Mehratrema dollfusi, morphology and systematic relationship of . . 97 Mendelian factor : white flanks in Sahiwal cattle . . . . 1 Mesocestoides lineatus, a common tapeworm of dogs and cats . . 187 Mice (white), pasteurellosis in . . . . . . . . 299 Microbiology of the caecum of the horse . . . . . . 335 Microfilariasis (cutaneous) in Indian Cattle . . . . . . 389 Milk cultures, aroma in . . . . . . . . . 349 Milk of naturally infected cows, excretion of Streptococcus pyogenes in . 335 Milk yields, inheritance of, in three herds of dairy Shorthorn cattle . 338 Mineral deficiencies, effect of, on helminthiasis of ruminants . . . 267 INDEX TO SUBJECTS xiii P PAGE Paralysis in a pigeon due to Doyle's (Ranikhet) disease virus . . 379 Paramphistomiasis (intestinal) of sheep in Sind . . . . . 425 Paratuberculous enteritis in sheep . . . . . . . 106 Pasteurellosis in white mice . . . . . . . . 299 Pigeon, paralysis due to Doyle's disease virus in . . . . . 379 xiv THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. S PAGE Sahiwal cattle, white flanks in . . . . . . . . 1 Salting pastures, effect of, on the incidence of stomach worms in sheep . 106 Schistosomes (adult), sites of . . . . . . . . 87 Serum simultaneous inoculation in rinderpest . . . . . 385 Setaria bernardi . . . . . . . . . . 327 Sheep, active immunisation against rinderpest with goat tissue virus in . 195 INDEX TO SUBJECTS XV U PAGE Undulant fever in France . . . . . . . . . 247 V Vaccination against foot-and-mouth disease . . . . . 116 Variola in goats, successful transmission of . . . . . . 383 Veterinary medicines