ICAR. 15. X / 600 Vol. X 1940 THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science AND Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. Rs. 2 or 3 s. 6 d. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI 1941 Price annas 5 or 6d.
List of Agents in India and Burma from whom Government of India Publications are available. ABBOTTABADThe Indian Joural of Veterinary Sciece and Animal Husbandry EDITORIAL COMMITTEE P. M. KHAREGAT, C.I.E., I.C.S ., Vice-Chairman, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. W. BURNS, C.I.E., D.Sc., I.A.S., Agricultural Commissioner with the Government of India. F. WARE, C.I.E., F.R.C.V.S., F.N.I., I.V.S. , Animal Husbandry Commissioner with the Government of India. RAO BAHADUR B. VISWANATH, F.I.C., F.C.S. , Director, Imperial Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. F. C. MINETT, D.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. J. N. MUKHERJEE, D.SC ., Ghosh Professor of Chemistry, University College of Science and Technology, Calcutta. JAMES N. WARNER, M.SC ., Professor of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad. S. BASU, I.C.S. , Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. EDITOR F. M. DE MELLO, B.A., B.Sc. (ECON.) The Editorial Committee, in its work of examining papers received for publica- tion, is assisted in an honorary capacity by a large number of scientists working in various parts of India. Contributions and books and periodicals for review should be addressed to the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, Publication Section, New Delhi. Communications regarding subscription and advertisements should be addressed to the Manager of Publications, Civil Lines, Delhi.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES. A SHORT HISTORY OF AYURVEDIC VETERINARY LITERATURE BY LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW, B.A. (HONS.) (LOND.) (Received for publication on 17 January 1940) I. INTRODUCTION THE work of the would-be chronicler of India's remoter past is greatly- complicated by an entire absence of exact literary chronology ; and the conscientious historian must endeavour to strike a middle course between the over-ardent claim of some Hindus to a fabulous antiquity for their culture, and the disinclination of European scholars to admit the very great age of any book, thought or institution that is not Greek. Bhandar- kar himself warns his fellow countrymen against the ' most uncritical spirit that had come over us of praising ourselves and our ancestors indiscriminately, seeing nothing but good in our own institutions and in our ancient literature, asserting that the Ancient Hindus had made very great progress in all the sciences......greater even by far than Europe has made hitherto', and finding ' in the Rigveda an allusion to X-rays, railways and what-not '. But, while this is not the place to discuss the relationship between the Indian and Greek systems of medicine, it is important to note that the greatest authorities on the subject [Wise, Royle, Dietz, Hoernle and Macdonnell] are unanimous in ascribing a pre-Hippocratian date to the Golden Age of Hindu medicine, and that there is considerable justification for the contention that Egyptian, Greek and Arab, and, consequently, modern European medicine owe more than is generally recognized to the early inhabitants of India. Though it is reasonable to suppose that the ancient peoples of India practised a primitive kind of veterinary surgery, performing such operations upon their more valuable animals as they did upon each other, the writer is inclined to disagree with Drs. Mitra and Iyer in their contention that veterinary medicine developed contemporaneously with human medicine. Indian fables and writings point to primitive medicine as having been originally learnt from observation of the behaviour of the lower animals in disease. It is known that dogs eat grass to excite vomiting, that the bear cures his stomach disorders with leaves of arum ; that the deer applies leaves of dictamnus to his wounds ; and that the licking of salt is natural to buffaloes, horses and camels. There is an Indian fable that the mongoose poisoned by a snake applied Mimosa octandra as an antidote. The medicinal use of hellebore was believed in ancient times to have been revealed to man by the goat. One verse of an Atharvavedic hymn runs :2 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature It is likely, in fact, that in the early days of the Aryan settlement in India, veterinary surgery alone was practised. War was then the order of the day and the extraction of arrows and the binding of wounds would then be the main operations performed by the veterinarian upon the chariot horses of the army. Later, as India settled down to a more peaceful existence, veterinary medicine must have had more chance to develop, as with the increase in prosperity (domestic animals constituting at that date the main criterion of wealth), the health of livestock became a question of paramount importance. The first literary evidence of the existence of a veterinary cult in India is to be found in the Rigveda (2000-1400 B.C.). There is proof that, at that date, medicine was already a recognized art and it is probable that at this time the physician attended upon humans and animals indiscriminately. The medical and surgical skill of these early doctors must indeed have been most primitive. Their knowledge of anatomy was gravely inaccurate, and much of this em- bryonic medicine might equally well be designated witchcraft, yet the begin- nings of the art are undoubtedly visible at this remote period. Lack of reliable chronology makes it difficult to trace the historical deve- lopment of veterinary science thereafter, but the writer is of the opinion that from Vedic times onwards there was a steady increase of knowledge, surgery keeping the lead right up to the sixth century B.C. After this time religious forces led to its decline, while Ayurvedic medical knowledge continued to improve for some centuries thereafter, when it, in its turn, felt the atrophying grip of caste. It will be argued that the Atharvaveda (circa 1000 B.C.), a considerably later production than the R igveda, already shows signs of a deterioration in medical science. The writer considers that altogether too much importance has been attached to this book in the history of Indian medicine. Countless writers have proclaimed it a repository of medical knowledge, a claim which makes it difficult to believe that they can ever have read the work itself. It is predominantly a collection of incantations, spells and charms ; and the writer has been led to the conclusion that it represented the superstitions and beliefs of the lower orders of society, adhered to even while scientific medicine was being developed by the intelligentsia. It is noteworthy that Charaka him- self states that his hospitals and knowledge were available only to the rich ; while we ourselves know how, even today,' old wives ' remedies remain current among the uneducated. The contention that the development of surgery in India occurred in pre- Buddhist times is based on the following historical facts. Up to the times of Buddha (sixth century B.C.), the prevailing ethical code was based on the Laws of Manu (900 B.C. ?), which say that by mere ' bathing a man may purify himself after touching a dead body'. This made the study of anatomy permissible to the intellectual castes. Animal sacrifices, also, were general, and the teacher was wont to lecture on comparative anatomy to his students on these occasions, and the students to practise 'evacuation on the urinary or- gans of the dead animals, scarification on their hides, venesection on their vessels and extraction by the removing of their teeth '. Thus it was possible to acquire the necessary basic knowledge for the practice of surgery. Buddha, however, forbade the killing of animals for any purpose whatever, prohibited any form
LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 3 of dissection and frowned upon the majority of surgical operations, announcing them ' improper, indecent and not allowable '. The Buddhists did, however, encourage the practice of medicine, and built many hospitals for man and beast, and established several medical schools, notably that of Taxila. On the ruins of Buddhism in India, the Brahmans climbed to omnipotence, (circa 4th century A.D.). To enhance their own power, they forbade the shed- ding of blood and the touching of corpses, and introduced the treatment of disease by mantras and incantations, known only to themselves. These Brahmans held the doctrine that all action is a positive evil and thus the study of human or animal medicine could offer them no attraction. Having pronounced the medical writings of their predecessors sacrosanct and any one tampering with them guilty of Brahmanicide, they sank back into their meditations upon the infinite. Consequently such surgery as was practised fell into the hands of the lower castes. As Elphinstone says ' Physi- cians followed the practice of their instructors without inquiry and surgery was so far neglected that bleeding was left to the barber, bone setting to the herdsman and every one was ready to administer a blister ', while the term ' go-vaidya ' (cow doctor) became one of reproach levelled at any person in- competent at his job. ' The intellectual portion of the community being withdrawn from cooperation in the art, the how and why of phenomena.... were lost sight of . . . . Among a people ridden by caste and hidebound by the authorities . . . . and having their intellect thus cramped and paralysed, no Boyle could arise'. [Ray]. As for the early medical writings, they became the prey of innumerable commentators, whose work may be compared with that of the mediæval scho- lastics of Europe, pedants whose total divorce from practice made their notes and additions mere ignorant and useless encumbrances. In human medicine, Su4 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature originals as we can unearth from the later débris are not to be despised but rather to be marvelled at, when we allow for their high antiquity, and do not forget how comparatively recently our own medicine has been cleared of many absurdities. As Hayne says, ' the medical works of the Hindus are neither to be regarded as miraculous productions of wisdom nor as repositories of non- sense ', and their interest to us lies in the possibility of their having provided the first stepping stones to modern scientific medicine. ' Recent research has shown that the genius of the Greeks drew its sap from PhLESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 5 pupil's head in case of any infringement of the compact. The A6 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature The Hastiayurveda has a somewhat similar tale to tell of elephants, who were deprived of their wings by the curse of the angry saint, Dirghatapa, who was pestered by their tumbling down upon him from the trees around his hermitage, on which they used to perch in order to graze on the leaves. The wild and wingless elephants thereafter caused so much havoc in the King- dom of King Romapada, of Campa (modern Bhagalpur), that he appealed to the learned Palakapya to tame them. Palakapya was reputed to be the son of Samagayanakhya Muni by a pious female elephant, which had drunk his urine containing his seminal discharge. His mixed parentage apparently gave him insight into the treatment of elephants, and when, owing to the change in environment, disease broke out among the captive elephants, he condescended to remain at Ramapada's court to teach the science of Hastiayurveda. III. THE BEGINNINGS OF A VETERINARY ART The historian is at long last beginning to realize the important part played by disease in shaping the destinies of mankind, and to recognize that cattle plagues may, in prehistoric times, have influenced the migrations of people at least equally with the necessity for finding pasturage ; and it is quite possible that the Indo-Aryans endeavoured, in leaving Central Asia, to escape from enzootic areas of disease. Certain it is that they entered India bringing with them their flocks and herds, and elementary theories of veterinary medicine. It is, indeed, probable that many of the actual charms of the Atharvaveda date from Indo-European times. They breathe the spirit of a prehistoric age and show some similarity with old German, Lettic and Russian spells (Macdonell). The Vedas were the principal repositories of this early medicine. Although the Rig and Yajurvedas contain many prayers for the health of domestic animals, such as the following :LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 7 because these occurred most frequently during the monsoon ; and in one place it is described as a ' cow-killing weapon '. By Atharvavedic times, it is evident that phyisicans were using their knowledge of the curative powers of certain herbs in veterinary practice, as well as in human ; and it is common to find the use of a particular herb re- commended along with a charm as a cure for some specific disease. It is diffi- cult in many cases to identify the medicinal plants used but it is certain that in India, as throughout the whole range of folk medicine, the doctrine that ' similia similibus curantur ' prevailed. Thus, for example, turmeric was prescribed for jaundice, while even to the name importance appears to have been attached. Achyrantes aspera (Sansk. 8 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature the demons of disease. Consequently there are numerous prayers for the protection of the wombs of female animals, and for the re-establishment of the secretion of milk in cows. These early inhabitants of India seem to have had some knowledge of helminthology, though the term ' worms ' included snakes and reptiles as well, and to them were ascribed not only intestinal diseases but pains in the head, the eyes and the teeth, and we find them described as ' worms that creep around the eyes, worms that crawl about the nose, worms that get between the teeth ' and also as living ' within the ribs, within the bowels '. The charms they used against them are very little different from those used against demons and many hymns are addressed to ' worms that live. . . . in kine ', ' blind worms in the large intestines ' and ' bots that infest cows ', while more detailed des- criptions of those living in cattle mention ' the four-eyed worm (i.e. with a spot above each eye), worms of every shape, the variegated and the white ', ' worms that are white about the sides, those that are black with black- hued arms ' (Atharvaveda) . Generally they were merely conjured to remove themselves, though the suppliant is apparently occasionally prepared to assist, as when he says, ' I break and crush the creature's ribs and bear away its head besides ', ' I break in pieces both thy horns wherewith thou pushest here and there. I cleave and rend the bag which holds the venom which is stored in thee ', or again ' I crush thy head to pieces with a stone '. Mukhopadhya identifies a few of the worms mentioned as follows : LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 9 a swelling in his mouth, which will however rapidly pass away without doing any injury. An operation upon the swelling is then performed with ' a splinter' which Griffeths identifies as a ' tent or probe made of a pointed slip of bamboo used in surgery '. The writer has met with no other references to animal surgery in these early works. IV. THE CATTLE DOCTOR The status of the veterinary practitioner about this time may be gauged by quotation of the Parasara Samhita,' If a cow is kept confined for treatment, or for the rectification of any abnormal presentation during delivery, and not- withstanding all possible precautions taken for its prevention the cow dies, then no expiation would be necessary. But if a number of diseased cows are kept under control, and if one of them dies, after being treated by a cattle doctor, who is not proficient in his art, an expiatory ceremony must be per- formed ', while ' all physicians and surgeons acting unskilfully, must pay for injury to brute animals the lowest (i.e. 250 panas) , but for human beings the highest amercement ' (Code of Manu). The assailant of any animal guilty of ' hurting the limb, of wounding or of fetching blood ' had to ' pay the expenses of a perfect cure ' (Manu). ' If a cow is killed by any man, the blood of the dead cow must be examined, for it becomes necessary to know whether the cow was diseased or weak before her death ; for the ceremony of expiation would vary according to the state of health or disease of the cow ' (Parasara Samhita). This examination of the blood can hardly be paralleled, as suggested by Mukhopadhya, with the modern Coroner's Inquest, since the method employed was as follows :10 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature Hindu art shows no knowledge of anatomy whatever, though this is not sur- prising in a country where specialization of study is based on religious injunction. Throughout the earliest Hindu writings descriptions of sacrificial dis- sections of animals are frequent. Specially trained men performed the opera- tions and specific rules were set out for their guidance in the quartering. ' Cut up this skin with the grey knife, Dissector ' Dividing joint from joint and mangle nothing. Do him no injury, limb by limb arrange him. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Let him not break the victim's bones. (Atharvaveda). ' Those who (made) the division otherwise (were regarded) as scoundrels and miscreants ', though the officiating priest was empowered to remove all evil consequences ' from those who suffocate the animal and those who butcher it, in all that they might transgress the rule by cutting one piece too soon, the other too late, or by cutting a too large or a too small piece ' (Aitareya Brahmana) . Descriptions of these performances are to be found in the Atharvaveda, the two Yajurvedas, the Aitareya Brahmana, the Taittiriya Brahmana, the Satapatha Brahmana, the VLESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 11 state of society and unsupported by their oldest and most authentic civil and moral, as well as medical institutes', and, however we may criticize this system of anatomy, calling it ' fanciful and fallacious ', we must at least recognize it for the first scientific approach to the practical study of anatomy, antedating that of the Greeks by several centuries. VI. VETERINARY AUTHORITIES As has already been pointed out, there was, in post-Vedic times, a decided advance in veterinary knowledge and during this period Sanskrit literature abounds in allusions to veterinary science, while individual authorities are numerous. Kings were beginning to realize the vital importance of domestic animals to the state. Horses and elephants provided two important ' arms ' of the military forces, oxen and camels were the chief means of transport, while the entire prosperity of the country was dependent on its cattle. It is, therefore, during this period, that we find State Departments of Livestock formed and veterinary officers appointed. To provide these latter with the knowledge necessary for a proper performance of their duties, much was written by masters of the art for their guidance, while veterinary science was actually included in the curriculum of the medical schools of that period. In the C haraka Samhita, we find the medical students, sitting under Atreya, asking how to make clisters for animals and the sage replying in detail. The first mention of a highly organized Department of Livestock to be met with in Indian history is that described by Kautalya in his ' Arthasastra ', where he gives a detailed and vivid review of the excellent organization of this department under Chandergupta Maurya (322-298 B.C.). Asoka (273- 232 B. C.) founded hospitals and dispensaries for both men and animals through- out his kingdom. In 161 B.C., Dutha Gamani of Ceylon appointed physicians whose duties were to care for the troops and also the army elephants and horses, a practice which was continued by his successors, not entirely from disinterested benevolence, since the king claimed a percentage on the sale of these animals. Léclainche states that during the reign of Kaniska (120-162 A.D.), a veterinary book was published by an anonymous doctor which represented the sum total of Hindu veterinary knowledge gleaned during the previous thousand years, and shows that though veterinary medicine was mainly concerned with religious ritual some surgery was practised and strict rules of hygiene were observed. In the Sukraniti (circa 9th century A.D.) there are described Super- intendents in charge of each variety of state domestic animal, under each of whom a specially qualified veterinary officer was appointed. While in the 13th century A.D., the Jain, Hamsadeva, wrote a natural history of animals, called ' Mriga Pakshi Sastra ', at the order of Raja Saudadeva of Jinapura. By the eighth century A.D., the fame of Indian medical science had spread far, carried from India by the Arab conquerors of Sind, but its great days were already long past, and the Hindu Scholars who flocked to the courts of the Caliphs Haroun-al-Rashid and Mansur, were mere redactors, commentators and translators of their country's heritage. The numerous translations of early medical works, both direct from the Sanskrit and from still earlier Persian translations, carried out in Baghdad under this royal patronage, played, how- ever, an important part in the history of medicine. It was not only Greek
12 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature medicine that was preserved by the Arabs during the ' dark ages ', but that of the Indians as well, and the Materia Medica that returned to Europe at the time of the Renaissance was consequently enriched by ancient Hindu know- ledge. Ibn Abu Usaibiâh, in his ' Fountains of Information ', speaks of the work of one Shanak on veterinary matters. The manuscript of the Arab transla- tion of this work is to be found in the Bodlean Library (Pocock 360) called [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Wilson suggests the name of this author to be a corruption of Chanakya (Kau- talya), who, however, is known to the Indians only as a writer on statecraft. Extracts from another Arabic translation of a veterinary work by an author named Jannah, carried out by ' Mannah the Indian ' are also in the Bodlean (Pocock 129) under the title [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]. . . . . . In this, Jannah is said to have lived during the reign of the Indian king, Ibn Kamanasthe, but, since there has never been a king in India bearing this name, Jannah is, unfortunately, unidentifiable. Apart from actual veterinary works, other Sanskrit writings are rich in animal lore. The Brihat Samhita has several chapters on the features of cows, oxen, dogs, cocks, goats, horses and elephants. The Agni Purana quotes largely from recognized veterinary authorities. The Parasara Samhita, the Atri Samhita the Linga Purana, the Kavi Kalpalata, the Grihya Sutras, the Garura Purana, the Basanatraja, the Panchatantra, the Hitopadesa and the Buddhist Jatakas make constant references to the characteristics of animals and frequently of their care and treatment in disease. With such a wealth of information available on our subject, it is impossible to consider it here in detail and the best method of approach would seem to be under the three heads of horse, elephant and cattle medicine, which divisions are those that were adopted by the Indian veterinarians themselves at this period. (A) HORSE MEDICINE (i) S'álihotra The earliest and most important Hindu authority in this science is S'álihotra. He, it is, who gave his name to veterinary medicine in India (saluteri) and to the horse doctor (Saluter) . It is in fact this identification of his name with the art itself that has led to much confusion regarding the authorship of numerous different writings bearing the title ' S'áloter '. S'álihotra is generally believed to have been a native of S'álatura, near ancient Taxila, though some people, on somewhat meagre evidence, have claim- ed Lahore as his birth place. The famous grammarian Panini also came from Sálatura, as indicated by the name sometimes given him of S'álaturiya. There is, however, no justification for the assumption, occasionally made on this evidence, that these two men were in reality one and the same ; nor for the claim that S'álihotra may be identified with Dhanavantari. In ancient India, it was a common practice, and one most confusing for the historian, to flatter a contemporary sage by calling him by the name of some great ' rishi ' of the past. Thus we find S'álihotra's admirers calling him ' Dhanavantari ', while in later ages his own name was constantly bestowed upon his successors as the reward for veterinary distinction.
LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 13 Unfortunately, the originals of S'álihotra's works have been lost and it is now almost impossible to discover the period to which he belonged. Nakula states that S'álihotra was the son of one Hayaghosa. Mukhopadhya argues from this that S'álihotra must have lived in the first century A.D. because the words ' H aya ' and ' Asva ' have an identical meaning, and there was a celebrated Buddhist preacher called ' Asvaghosa ' at the Indo-Scythian court of Peshawar in that century. This seems to the writer a somewhat ' far- fetched ' argument and presupposes also that no two Indians ever bore the same name. Moreover, S'álihotra is supposed to have addressed his lectures to the famous surgeon, Susrutha, who, according to the authorities, must have lived about the seventh century B.C. This, allowing for S'álihotra to antedate him by about a quarter of a century, would place the veterinarian in what, the writer maintains, was the Golden Age of Hindu medicine. S'álihotra is, moreover, known to have been a Brahman, and not a Buddhist, and, as pre- viously pointed out, already by the first century A.D. medicine had come to be regarded as a degrading occupation for the priestly caste. It is also known that S'álihotra lectured to his students at his retreat in the forest of Campaka at the foot of the Himalayas in Maghada (modern U. P. and Bengal) and it appears unlikely that he would have moved into another kingdom, had he been brought up, as claimed, under the patronage of Kaniska. It is also noteworthy that Ayurvedic medicine is believed to have originated in Bengal and not in those areas that were touched by Greek influence. S'álihotra lectured to his disciples on the history, training, feeding, stabl- ing and grooming of and on how to buy, to keep and to treat a horse in health and disease, claiming to have acquired this knowledge from Brahma himself. These lectures, presumably, comprised the original S'álihotra Sastra, which was divided into eight parts:14 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature Other works also exist under the name of ' Sáloter '. Baroda actually claims to have the entire manuscript of S'álihotra's work. As this work has not yet been published, it is impossible to say how far this claim may be justified. Aufrecht describes a manuscript entitled ' Sálihotra', in the Library of East India House, another is stated to be in the Berlin Library (No. 944) and yet another (MS. No. 581) in the Oriental Research Library, Poona. In the Catalogue of the Library of the late Pandit Radhakrishna of Lahore, the title of one of the books is given as ' S'àlihotrasara'. In the Tanjore Palace Library, there is an illustrated manuscript called ' Sáluter ' from which several chapters are missing, but, judged by its style, and language, it appears a fairly recent compilation. Burnell mentions another called ' S'álihotronnaya ' in his Catalogue of this Library, while Stein in his list of Kashmir manuscripts writes :LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 15 (mustard), and others from lac, resin and triphata (the three Myrobalans) and prescriptions to prolong life and to stimulate sexual power. It continues with advice for the manage- ment and nursing of foals, the correct burdens to be carried by horses, the yoking of them to chariots, their use in cavalry in wartime and the management of stables. And finally the manuscript closes with a list of beneficial mantras, charms and incantations. In 1788, an Englishman, of the name of Earles, published a treatise on horses entitled S'áloter or A complete system of Indian Farriery in two parts ' the first containing a particular Description of the Different Colours and Marks of Horses &c. The second, a Description of all the Disorders they are subject to &c. Compiled originally by a Society of Learned Pandits in the Sanskrit Language ; Translated thence into Persian (under the name of Kitab- ul-Vaitart or Baitarat) in the reign of the Emperor Shah Jehan by Abdallah Khan Feroze, an Emeer of his Court '. The Persian translator in his preface says ' this devoted servant, Syed Abdallah Khan Feroz Jung. . . . was appointed to command the expedition against the infidels of the dominion of Rana Omer Singh (of Chitor) . . . . . . several chests of Indian books fell into the hands of the victorious warriors of the faith among which was the Salooter . . . . compiled originally, in time past, in the Sanskrit language in 19,000 Shlooks . . . .which dialect not being understood now by any one ' he had translated it into Persian and ' most of the former Treatise on this subject corresponds herewith . . . . '. The manuscript of Earle's English translation is now in the British Museum and the Chapter heads are as follows :16 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature Neck are stiffened by Wind. (Tuberculosis ?) On the Cure of a Horse having his Back stiffened by Wind. (Slack in the back ?). On the Cure of the Wind which seizes the Hind part of a Horse. (Kumri ?). On the Cure of a Horse being seized by the Deu Wind. (Mad Staggers ?). On the Cure of a Horse having his Yard and Testicles affected to the Extremity of the Anus by the Wind called Ban. (Phimosis ?). On the cure of the Wind called Wauthour (Colic) . On the Cure of the Wind called in Indian Arwett (Stomatitis ?). On the Cure of the Wind called in Indian Diaunk (Colic) . Chapter 6.LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 17 Sir Henry Elliot noticed two other Persian translations bearing the name ' S'áluteri ' but he suggests that these may be later recensions. In the cele- brated Tibetan encyclopædia, the Tangyur, is a section which claims to be a translation of S'álihotra's work. A Bengali book by Nidhiram Mukerjee called ' S'álihotra Asvacikitsa S18 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature Presidency, Buhler's List of Private Libraries and in those of Sanskrit MSS found in Oudh, Sind and the N. W. F. P. Finally, Aufrecht mentions it as having been published as Volume 27 of the Zeitschrift of the German Oriental Society. (iii) Ippocras the Indian In the sixth century A.D., there lived another Indian veterinarian, who has achieved European fame without apparently exciting the slightest notice among his own countrymen. This may have been due to his having assumed a European name, by which he is always known, that of Ippocras or Hippo- crates, while his Indian name is buried in the mists of history. His original writings have been lost but many manuscripts purporting to be from his pen, most of them undoubtedly spurious, still exist. A 15th century manuscript, now in the British Museum, (No. 27626) has, however, been accepted by Del- prato as a genuine though incomplete copy. In this work, he describes himself as a ' doctor and native of India from Scind '. He entered the service of Chosroes of Persia (531-579 A.D.), a renowned patron of learning, by whom he was granted a licence to practise and was commissioned to produce a veterinary work dealing with the horse. In the ninth century, a certain John of Damascus was apparently employed by Haroun-al-Rashid to translate this work from the Sanskrit (or Persian ?) into Arabic. In the 12th century, Moses of Palermo re-translated it into Latin and so presented it to Europe at a time when vete- rinary literature in almost any form was urgently required. The work of ' Ippocras, the Indian ' is of more interest as a link between East and West, than as an addition to Veterinary knowledge. The 15th century manuscript deals with ' strangles, catarrh, glanders, pustules on the face, diseases of the eye, laminitis and other subjects all in a superficial man- ner, the most prominent feature being ' the cures ' (Smith). In the 25 chapters of the original manuscript, there are said to be, in addition to the above, sec- tions on the telling of the age from the teeth, vices, and defects, treatment and care after work ; also on broken wind, bit injuries, fever, cough, enlargement of the glands of the throat, fractured coronet, oedema, splints, mallanders, wounds on the feet, intestinal worms, lice, scabies, injuries from collision, fistula and wounds,' chesel ' (i.e. an operation on the tushes and corner incisors in order to improve the mouth for the bit), as well as on how to cure pains, to cure horses which will neither eat nor drink (tetanus ?) and to fatten and invigorate them. This list appears to conform in some degree with other Indian veterinary writings and lends support to the argument that Ippocras, the Indian, was a genuine historical figure and not, as contended by some European authorities, a ' mere figment of the imagination of some unscrupulous scholar ' or, as others claim, ' in reality, Damascius of Athens '. (iv) Jayadatta Suri A later work on equine medicine, more famous than the above in the country of its origin, is that of Mamasmant Jayadatta Suri called ' ALESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 19 chapters has been recorded by Mitra from Nepal. In this Jayadatta is said to be the son of one Srimat Vijayadatta. The ' A20 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature onger extant; Gana who was the son of Durlatha and wrote the ' ALESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 21 (f) Bhattacharjee in the Introduction to his translation of the ' Ghora Nidan ' mentions :22 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature. Part 3 deals with surgery, describing the several kinds of wounds, abscesses and ulcers and their treatment by the six kinds of surgical procedure. It continues with a description of pregnancy and the development of the foetus ; it details the anatomy of the elephant and the 107 vital parts ; and the instruments used in surgery, which are set forth after the manner of Susrutha, with the method of using them. The actual operations described are extraction of foreign bodies, operations on fistulae and sinuses, venesection of 700 vessels, the use of caustics, the treatment of fractures and the extrac- tion of teeth. The poisonous nature of bites of dogs, spiders and snakes is commented upon, the treatment of burns by means of fomentations and unguents described and also how to deal with difficult labour. Part 4 deals with hygiene, diet and Materia Medica, including oleaginous medicines, enemas, snuffs, collyrium, salts, wine, lac, guggulu, garlic, pepper and ginger. It conti- nues with a description of the way in which elephant stables should be constructed, on the bathing of elephants and their being massaged with oil, with the artificial preparation of their teeth for war, with the use of leaches and finally ends with a description of the ceremony of the sprinkling of water performed in honour of Vishnu for the protection of elephants. Manuscripts of the ' Hastiayurveda' are to be found in the Bikaner Palace Library (No. 1395), in the Library of the Maharajah of Ulwar, in the Library of the Sanskrit College, Benares, in the Government Oriental Library of Madras, and in that of the Asiatic Society of Bengal and at Adyar. Other copies are reported by Kielhorn in his Search for Sanskrit MSS in Bombay Presidency and among the Sanskrit MSS in Private Libraries in the North West Provinces (1877), while a copy entitled ' Gajyurveda ' is to be found in the Library of the Maharajah of Mysore. In the Tanjore Palace Library Catalogue, Burnell writes of Ms No. IX. 75 : ' The name appears to be not very certain ; it consists of dialogues between a king of Anga and a muni called Palakapya. It contains a great deal of mythological matter...The rest refers to the points of animals, as usual very fanciful; their castes and dispositions ; the way of taming them ; their diseases and the way of treating and curing them. The number of diseases appears to be put at 106. There can be no doubt that this is a very modern compilation.....Some of the verses, however, which are found here, occur in Garangadhara as by Pala- kapya '. This work, edited by Pandit Sivadatta of Jaipur has recently been printed in the Anandasran Series (Poona) under the title ' Gajayurveda '. It is based on four manuscripts, two said to be from Jaipur, one from Poona and one from Calcutta. It is a voluminous treatise of 727 octavo pages. A few chapters have been translated into Bengali by Maharaja Soshikanta Acharya Chaudhury of Mymensingh. Palakapya is quoted by Ksciaswamin on ' Amurakosa ', Hemadri in his ' Vratakhand ', in the Sarangadhara-padhati, in Mallinatha and in the Agni Purana. (ii) Other writers on elephantology In ancient Buddhist records, Jivaka, the famous physician to King Bimbisara (582-554 B. C.), is described as having a knowledge of veterinary as well as human medicine. There is a long description of how he recog- nized by an elephant's tracks, that the animal was a ' female, blind in the right eye and about to bring forth male young '. Jivaka was the son of a rajah and the records relate how he learnt the science of elephants in his earliest youth, this being an essential part of the training of every prince.
LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 23 Among the fragments of Megasthenes' ' Indica ' (fourth century B. c.) still extant, is a detailed description of the ' manner of hunting the elephant ', of its taming and training and of the ' many distempers to which it is liable.' He describes how diseases of the eye were washed with cow's milk and most other diseases cured by the administration of draughts of black wine or warm urine. ' For the cure of wounds they are made to swallow butter, for this draws out the iron. Their sores are fomented with swine's flesh '. Kataulya makes mention of the state care of elephants by qualified veterinarians, of special rules of hygiene and sanitation, but concentrates mainly on the numerous ceremonies to be performed for their protection, describing these after the manner of Palakapya. The Sukraniti points out the good and bad types of elephants, how to tell their age from their teeth, states that special elephant doctors were employed by the government, but says little regarding the actual treatment of disease. Tradition ascribes treatises on elephants to several other sages ; to Virasena, who wrote the ' Hasti-vaidyaka ', which is quoted by Bhattotpala on ' Brihajjataka '; to Brihaspati, the author of ' Gajalahsana ' (Characteris- tics of Elephants), copies of which may be found in the Bikaner Palace Library, in one of the Private Libraries of Southern India catalogued by Oppert and in one of the Oudh Libraries listed by Pandit Deviprasad ; to Nil-kantha whose book on the capturing of elephant and their diseases, the ' Mathanga Lila' has been translated by Professor Edgerton and published in the Tri- vandrum Sanskrit Series ; to Vyasa whose work is to be found at Tanjore, and to Sukumar Kaith, who wrote a sister volume to the ' Ghora nidan ' called ' Hastividyarnarva '. This treatise was written at the order of Queen Madamvika of Assam in 1734. It was produced for the use of the officers of the Hati-Barua of the Ahom Government, profusely illustrated by the court painters of the day, and makes clearly apparent the richness of the Assamese pharmacopoeia. Other works on elephantology no longer extant are said to have been written by Gautama, Narada, Mriga Charma and Rajaputra. Mention is made of other manuscripts on the subject in the following catalogues :24 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature (vii) Hemadri and Dinakara quote respectively; (a) Gajadarpana, (b) Gajasastra. (viii) And Alberuni in his ' Indica' speaks of a treatise on elephant medicine, without, however, mentioning its name. The subject is also dealt with in the Agni Purana, the Brihat Samhita, the Kavi Kalpalata, in the Yukti-Kalpataru, in Kamandaka's ' Nitisara', by Varahamihira and in the Ayeen Akbari. This last, though a Mohammedan production, is recognized as a mixture of Ayurvedic and Yunani knowledge, and it may safely be assumed that the section on the habits and feeding of elephants is Hindu in origin, since the Muslims had not met with elephants before their arrival in India. (C) CATTLE MEDICINE It is a curious fact that in a country where the cow has throughout history been of enormous economic and religious importance, there is only a very limited indigenous literature on bovine medicine and no authority on the subject in any way comparable in importance to the masters of ALESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 25 and ammonia; as well as animal products such as human bones, female and goat milk, urine, sheep and cattle excreta and feathers. Each drug is called by a number. The Agni Purana contains several sections on the treatment of diseases in bovines, with advice on the precautions to be taken to prevent their out- break. In the Krsi Samgraha may be found specific rules regarding the con- struction and sanitation of cow stalls, the keeping and employment of cattle, with a descr ption of their diseases and treatment. The Parasara and Atri Samhitas detail the proper uses to which cattle should be put, while the former also deals with their care in disease and pregnancy. The Sukranti tells of how to judge a bull's age from its teeth. The Grihya Sutras describe the ceremonies to be performed when a cow is sick and also the Sulagava sacrifice for averting cattle plagues. The Matsya Purana describes the proper type of bull to be used for the Brsotsarga ceremony (i.e. the bull to be set loose for impregnating the village cows). Charaka states that, for his model hospital, a ' cow should be also kept, yielding copious milk, of quiet disposition, healthy, having all her calves living, well tended with food and drink and kept in a fold that is properly cleaned '. If a cow lost a calf, it is taken as an indication of ill health. It is interesting to note that Susrutha advocates the boiling of milk to free it from ' injurious traits '. Among Asoka's edicts is one regulating the branding and castrating of bulls. These operations were not to be performed on religious holidays, from which it is obvious that he regarded these acts as unholy but neces- sary. He forbids castration absolutely only in the case of cocks which were merely mutilated to improve their flavour as food. The Katyayana Sranta Sutra states that the castration of draught animals was usual. Kataulya remarks on the care of cows and stud bulls ; on the keeping of special cattle registers in which the cows were divided into different classes and their birth and manner of death recorded ; and on the government regulations regarding their fodder. One class of cows comprised ' those with diseased limbs, those who could not be milked and those that killed their calves '. As the tending of these was difficult, special cowherds were appointed, who were rewarded by a share in the turn-out of the herd. The duties of the herdsman included the application of medicines to diseased animals. They were fined for failure to cure the cattle in their charge. No mention is made of actual diseases and their treatment. From all this, it would appear that the herdsmen per- formed the veterinary services required by their charges. In fact, it seems probable that the knowledge of cattle medicine was traditional among the hereditary herdsman class, and that this class, being illiterate, handed it down by word of mouth. This would account for the lack of literature on the subject, and the argument is supported by a passage in the Sukraniti, which runs, ' Only such persons are to be appointed (in charge of cows, etc.) as are skilful in tending them '. (D) THE CARE OF SHEEP, GOATS, CAMELS, ETC. Very little has been written on the veterinary care of animals other than the horse, elephant and cow. This is remarkable since sheep and goats have always held an important place in the Indian economy, not only as providers
26 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature of food and wool but also as baggage animals in the hills ; while the camel corps was an indispensable branch of the army transport service. There is evidence of the early domestication of dogs, cats, pigs, hens and hawks, but all, save the hawk, were apparently so numerous that disease and death were regarded merely as a convenient way of keeping down numbers, in a country where the killing of animals is anathema. Hawking, however, has been a favourite sport of India from time im- memorial. It is mentioned by Ktesias and even Asoka appears to have countenanced it, though he did forbid the ' feeding of the living with the living ', which has been taken to mean the feeding of hawks with the blood of living pigeons. In the Bibliolheca Indica has been printed a book on hawking by the royal poet, Rudradeva of Kumaon, called ' Syainika Sastra ', wherein he describes the kind and quality of food to be given to hawks, their tending during the different seasons and their treatment in disease. Dogs do not appear to have attracted veterinary attention, save in their character as transmitters of rabies. Susruta mentions the bites of dogs as causing disease and says, ' If a patient sees the image of the animal that bit him in the water or a mirror he is sure to die '. This is interesting in that it conforms nearly to European superstition. Wise quotes an ancient Hindu medical work which runs :LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 27 (E) PLAGUES IN ANCIENT INDIA Curiously little is to be discovered in ancient Indian history regarding widespread cattle epidemics, though the existence of special ceremonies for the prevention of cattle plagues indicates that they can have been by no means uncommon. In the Charaka and Su28 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature are the most interesting to the modern student. It may here be mentioned that the old Indian method of measuring elephants was by throw- ing a rope over the animal with both ends brought to the ground on either side. The length of the rope was then halved and this measure regarded as the animal's height, not that from the shoulder, as today. This accounts for the extraordinary height attributed to elephants in the past in India. (ii) Breeding Areas It is, unfortunately, not possible here to trace the origins of Indian domestic animals, though the study, which should be one of vital interest to the modern stock breeder, has received a minimum of attention, in spite of an abundance of material available on the subject. It is, however, of interest to note that, as early as 3000 B. C., the cow, the buffalo, the elephant, the ass, the goat, the sheep, the pig, the camel, the cat and, possibly, the horse and the dog had been domesticated. It is, of course, well known that the common domestic humped cattle of India, Bos indicus, belong to an entirely different species from the tame animals of Europe and Northern Asia, Bos taurus. Already, by the Indus Valley period, two varieties of cattle were known, the massive, long-horned humped form and a smaller form with short horns, which may possibly have been humpless. This latter variety is only found in the upper strata of the Mohenjodaro site but there are abund- ant remains of humped bulls in every stratum, which indicates that at that time ' the Indus valley must have been specially rich in this fine breed of cattle, which is closely allied, if not identical with, the magnificent white and grey breed still common in Sind, Northern Gujarat and Rajputana but wholly different from the small humped cattle of central India '. (Sir John Marshall). The fact that this grey-white breed existed in Sind before the Aryan invasion, contradicts Sir Arthur Olver's contention that it was introduced into India by the Rig Vedic invaders. Later the Rig Veda describes the river Gomal, a tributary of the Indus, as ' possessing kine ': while Mathura, the land of Krishna and his milkmaids must, undoubtedly, at one time have been famous for its milch cows. Huien T'sang writes of ' numerous oxen ' in Parayatra (or Bairat), while the ' in- habitants of Sind ' he says ' supported themselves by rearing cattle '. Much later, Marco Polo came across, on the eastern shores of the Persian Gulf, a type of cattle then unfamiliar to him, which he describes as '........a species of large white oxen, with smooth coats.... horns thick and obtuse and having between the shoulders a gibbous rising or hump.... They are beautiful animals and very strong.' These, one may legitimately infer to have been descendants of Indian breeds, possibly those with which Alexander the Great started on his return home from India. In Masulipatam, the same writer remarks, ' they have cattle enough '. Nicolo Conti, in the 15th century, des- cribes wild cattle with manes and long horns as still found in great abundance in the neighbourhood of Calicut. Abul Fazl wrote ' Every part of the empire produces good oxen but those of Gujarat are esteemed the best..... There are also abundance of fine oxen in Bengal and the Deccan ..... Many cows at Delhi give daily 20 quarts of milk each ... In the neighbourhood .. of Kashmir are the Katars,
LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 29 which are of a very extraordinary appearance..... There is also a species of small oxen called gaynee, which are well limbed and very beautiful'. Modern Indian horses are of many breeds ; but Lydekker maintains that the so-called ' country-bred ' is almost certainly a descent of the Siwalik fossil horse. It is possible that the Aryans were the first to domesticate this animal in India. It appears certain that it was only known in its wild state to the Dravidians. The Rig Vedic invaders, however, were quick to find and utilize existing breeding grounds and their earliest writings describe the regions about the rivers Sindhu and Sarasvati as famous for horses ; they also speak of horses of Bahlika (Balkh). Selective breeding was, also, evidently practised. In the Yajurvedas, a race horse is addressed as ' mighty through thy dam, eminent through thy sire'. The Epics tell of horses introduced from Tartary and the Kalmuc country, but also mention local varieties from Sind, Kambooha on the North West Frontier and Panchala in the Upper Ganges valley. Bala describes the countries of Kamvoja, Vahlika, Vanayu, Gandhara and Pragyotisapura as producing fine horses. The Artha30 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature. Gurh; Haryegurh; the subah of Behar on the borders of the Rohtas ; at Tharkhend; in the subahs of Bengal and Orissa, particularly at Satgong, there are great numbers. The best elephants are those of Tipperah.' In the Rigveda, the Indus valley is called 'rich in sheep'; the regions settled by the Gandhari, on the banks of the river Kubha up to its junction with the Indus and for some distance down the eastern side of the Indus itself, producing the best wool. Huien T'sang tells of vast herds in Paryatra and Sind and describes the people of the Indus lowlands as ' sheep rearers '. Later, Marco Polo describes the sheep of Masulipatam as ' the largest in the world '. The western regions of India have always been the natural breeding areas of camels and are so described by Bala and Huien T'sang. According to the Ayeen Akbari, they were ' bred in the following places : Ajmeer, Judehpoor, Nagore, Beyganur, Jalmeer, Hetinda and Tahnesir ; and in the subah of Gujrat, near the province of Ketch are the greatest numbers and very fine. But in Sind is the greatest abundance..... The swiftest camels are those of Ajmeer, the best for burden are bred in Tatah (Jang in the Punjab)'. Bala speaks of the best asses coming from Mathura, while Abul Fazl says ' Mules are not bred in Hindostan, excepting in Pakely and its vicinity ', though Huien T'sang mentions the mules of Sind. Other animals, possibly because, in their case, good stock was unimportant, appear to have had no particular location. (iii) Age judged by the teeth The chapter on the age of horses in the ' Saloter ' commences with the following rhyme :LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 31 1 tula of pulp of fruits, 1 drona (4-4/5 chattacks) of barley, 1 adhaka of curd, 1 drona of milk, 1/2 adhaka of liquor, 1 prastha of ghee, 10 palas of molasses and 1 pala of ginger. The Ayeen Akbari describes elephants as ' fed with any kind of grain wrapped up in grass '. ' Most of them have, moreover, 5 seers of sugar, 4 seers of ghee and 1/2 maund of rice with round and long pepper, and some have 1-1/2 maunds of milk mixed with their rice'. In the Hastiayurveda, their diet is detailed as including grasses, barley, pulses, wheat, rice, treacle, ghee, wine, milk and ' the natural food of the forest '. Kautilya gives a detailed list which runs as follows :32 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature however, that it was customary to leave most of the cattle out in the Gostha (open pasture) at night, only taking home to the Sala (cow shed) cows in milk. ' There are royal stables for horses and elephants..... The size of each stable should be determined by the number of horses to be kept therein. The length of each room of the stable should be twice that of the horse. It should have four doors, one on each side, and an open space in the middle for the horse to roll. The breadth of the stall must be four times the width of the horse and the floor should be paved with smooth wooden planks. There must be a trough for food and an aperture for the removal of excreta should be provided. Rooms facing north and east are to be preferred. Horses, mares and colts must have separate compartments ' (ArthaLESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 33 trainers, grooms, cooks, grass suppliers, guards, night watchmen, ' those who put the fetters round the feet' of the elephants, and, for the horses' hair- dressers. Special rules were laid down regarding animal husbandry. For instance, the Atri Sanhita ordains that ' plough oxen may be employed for the whole day when they are eight strong per plough. If the number of oxen yoked to one plough is six, they should not be engaged for more than three-quarters of the day etc....' Draught horses, it was stated, ' should traverse six, nine or twelve yoganas a day according to their quality' (1 yogana=6/11 miles). Cows were milked once or twice a day according to the season. Sheep and goats were shorn every six months. A horse was not to be made to carry a burden ' just after taking food and drink ', or it would ' soon get a cough, breathless- ness and other diseases.' If any one violated these rules, he was visited with the cruel penalty of having his thumb cut off. After work, according to the Sukraniti, a horse ' should be given a slight stroll', then it' should be given gur and salt.... before the saddle and fittings are taken off. Then, when the sweat has disappeared, and it has stood calm and quiet, a horse should be relieved of its reins and fittings___after its limbs have been rubbed and carefully tended with baths.... (and it) has been fed upon sugar and powdered grains mixed with water.... (it) should be made to stroll in the dust.' Horses were allowed by the Government 1½ siki of oil or ghee a day for rubbing over the nose. They were regularly washed, bedaubed with sandal and even garlanded twice a day. Elephants had the whole of their body massaged, for which they were allowed ¾ prastha of oil. It has been claimed that a passage in the Rigveda ('His feet are of iron') refers to the shoeing of horses ; though S'álihotra does not appear to have known of this practice. By Mohammedan times, however, it was the custom and Abul Fazl states that a horse was shoed twice a year. Cows have been branded throughout historic times in India. The Rigveda mentions cows ' with pierced ears'. This mark was called a ' laksman ' and was made with a copper knife. (vii) Diseases of Antiquity34 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature voice and sound he hears and looks wildly about him ; he will start and tremble, fall down and swoon ; and rest of every sort will entirely forsake him; his yard will hang out of the sheath, also, nor will he be able to draw it in.' Dourine may, perhaps, be diagnosed from the following symptoms :LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 35 It is to be noted that in nearly all cases diseases are ascribed to the exces- sive predominance of one of the humours or of heat or cold ; though some diseases are said to be due to improper feeding, such as too much ' dry pro- vider ' ; to overwork; to ' worms in the belly ' ; ' to neglected wounds'; to ' variations in the temperature', or even more simply, ' to Karma '. (viii) Materia Medica36 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature For abscesses, the following ointment is suggested :LESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 37 the edges should be keen enough to divide the hairs of the skin, well-shaped and capable of a firm grasp. Copper needles were used in operations on cataract. Blunt instruments were generally made of tin, but included, also, tubes of lead for fumigation, animal horns for suction work, wooden tubes (probably of bamboo) for inspection and stone collyrium probes. Neverthe- less, though no less than 120 surgical instruments are described in ancient Hindu surgical works, they all declare that ' the first, best and most important of all implements is the hand. Finally, it might be salutary for us all to take to heart Sursutha's dictum with regard to surgery :38 A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature Commerce & Navigation of the Eryth- raean Sea trans McCrindle. Fhankht Vaalaj Aspan . . . J. Hussain. Ghora Nidan . . . . . ed. Bhattacharjee. Indica of Alberuni . . . . ed. Sachau. Indica of Megasthenes (fragments) . trans. McCrindle. Ippocras the Indian's Writings trans. Delprato. Jatakas . . . . . ed. Rhys Davids. Krsi-Samgraha. Mahabharata . . . . . trans. Tarkaratna. Mahavansa . . . . . trans. Upham. Manu Dharma Shastra . trans. Jones. Marco Polo's Travels. Mriga Pakshi Shastra . . . trans. Sundaracharya. Panchatantra. Parasara Samhita. Questions of King Melinda . . trans. Rhys Davids. Raja Ratnacari . . . . trans. Upham. Rajavali . . . . . trans. Upham. Ramayana . . . . . trans. Griffeths. Rigveda . . . . . trans. M. N. Dutta. Sukraniti. Saloter . . . . . . trans. Earles. SuLESLIE HAMILTON SHIRLAW 39 Kirtikar & Basu . . . . . . Indian Medicinal Plants. Laufer, H. . . . . . . Berträge zur Kenntnis der Tibetischen Medicin. Law, N. . . . . . . Studies in Hindu Polity. Léclainche, E. . . . . . . Histoirè de la Médicine Vétérinaire. Lydekker . . . . . . Geographical History of Mammals. Macdonell . . . . . . Vedic Mythology. Macdonell . . . . . . History of Sanskrit Literature. Macdonell & Keith . . . . . . Vedic Index. Manning, Mrs. . . . . . . Ancient and Medieval India. Marshall, Sir, J. . . . . . . Mohenjodaro and the Indus Civilization. Mazumdar . . . . . . Medical Science in Ancient India (Calc. Rev.). McCrindle . . . . . . Ancient India as described by Megasthenes. McCrindle . . . . . . Ancient India as described by Arrian. Mittra, R. . . . . . . Ancient Hindu Veterinary Art (J. A. S. B. 1885). Mool Singh . . . . . . . Use of Indigenous Drugs in Veterinary Practice. Muir . . . . . . Original Sanskrit Texts. Mukhopadhyaya, G. N. . . . . . . History of Indian Medicine. Mukhopadhyaya, G. N. . . . . . . Surgical Instruments of the Hindus. Mukhopadhyaya, G. N. . . . . . . Human Parasites in the Atharvaveda. Olver, Sir, A. . . . . . . Brief Survey of some of the Important Breeds of cattle in India (Misc. Bull. I. C. A. R. 17). Osborn . . . . . . . Age of Mammals. Prashad, B. . . . . . . . Animal Remains from Harappa. Rawlinson . . . . . . India and the Western World. Ray, S. K. . . . . . . . Surgery of the Ancient Hindus. Ray, P. C. . . . . . . . History of Hindu Chemistry. Royle . . . . . . . Antiquity of Hindu Medicine. Rhys Davids . . . . . . . Buddhist India. " R. R. " . . . . . . India's Age Old system of Medicine. Sarkar, B. K. . . . . . . Positive Background of Hindu Sociology. Smith, Sir F. . . . . . . . Early History of Veterinary Literature. Smith, V. . . . . . . Early History of India. Watters. . . . . . . Huien T'sang's Travels in India. Webb . . . . . . . Historical Relationship of Ancient Hindu with Greek Medicine. Weber . . . . . . . History of Indian Literature. Wilson . . . . . . . Indian physicians at Bagdad (J. R. A. S.), Winternitz . . . . . . Folk Medicine in Ancient India. Wise . . . . . . Commentary on Hindu System of Medicine. Wise . . . . . . History of Medicine among the Asiatics.
PARATUBERCULOSIS (JOHNE'S DISEASE) OF CATTLE IN ASSAM 1. ITS INCIDENCE AND EPIZOOTOLOGY BY P. G. PANDE, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. Veterinary Investigation Officer, Assam (Received for publication on 10 December 1938) INTRODUCTION IN almost every country in which the incidence of Johne's disease has been investigated, economic losses accruing from this condition have often been estimated to be high, and although during recent years, methods of its diagnosis aiming at the proper control of the disease have received much impetus at the hands of research workers all over the world, the disease still constitutes to be one of the major problems for the stock-breeding and the dairy industries. In India also the growing menace of this chronic condition is being real- ized, and although precise information relating to its incidence is not available from any of the provinces or states, the disease is known to exist in several parts of the country, particularly Bihar, the United Provinces, Bengal, Madras, Bombay, Mysore and Assam. In Assam the first case of Johne's disease was detected in January 1933 in a Sindhi bull at the Government Cattle Farm, Khanapara, and within two years the incidence recorded was so high that early in 1935 the provincial Government called an expert committee under Mr F. Ware, the then Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, to advise means for its control. The committee remarked that the proper control of the disease could be achieved only when its actual incidence amongst the farm animals was known, and with this object in view it recommended, inter alia, periodical testing of the whole herd with avian tuberculin for about two years. The testing of the herd at the Khanapara farm was started in the year 1933, and by the year 1937, considerable data had been accumulated on the inci- dence of the disease involving practically every district in the province. This line of inquiry was inevitable, since the disease had primarily involved valu- able animals of the Government cattle-breeding farms in the province, and subsequently it was suspected in several localities amongst the farm animals issued or sold out to several private stock-breeders and breeding centres operating under the supervision of the Livestock section of the Department of Agriculture. The gravity of the problem was further aggravated on account of advanced clinical cases of the disease being recognized in increasing numbers in these animals. In some of these animals the diagnosis was obtained on the result of autopsy and microscopical examination of the entrail 40
P. G. PANDE 41 smears, and in others it was based on the result of bowel-washing examination only. Not only was the disease limited to Government farm animals, but its presence was later confirmed in individual private farms where Government bulls had been placed for some time. Similarly, the disease, as a result of the avian tuberculin test, was later detected amongst the indigenous cattle of some of the villages where Government bulls were issued for breeding operations. In view of the observations that the disease had its origin amongst animals issued or sold from the Government farms, and that it was detected amongst indigenous cattle herded with the farm-bred animals, it appeared certain that further progress of the disease in the province could be checked only by resorting to its proper diagnosis amongst farm animals, in and outside the farm premises. The incidence of the disease in Assam, as revealed by our investigation extending over a period of four years, is not likely to reveal the state of affairs with regard to this disease in other parts of India, for it should be realized that the climatic and topographical conditions, peculiar to this province, have to a certain extent determined the course and the progress of the disease in Assam. TOPOGRAPHICAL AND CLIMATIC CONDITIONS These factors are mainly to be considered in the light of effects they are likely to produce on the normal life and the health of cattle of the province. Assam is essentially a hilly tract, comprising an area of about 53,015 square miles intersected with numerous rivers, streams and natural water reservoirs of various sizes, locally called bheels. On the map it is roughly triangular in shape, the apex of the triangle being formed by the North-eastern Frontier Tract. The main body of land has a slope towards Bengal as is indicated by the flow of the Brahamaputra which forms the northern boundary of Assam. The central part of Assam is occupied by ranges of Khasi and Jaintia hills, and the part of the plains lying south of these hills is interspersed with several small rivers, the principal of them being the Surma river. Thus the province could be divided into three distinct tracts : (1) In the north the Brahamaputra Valley consisting of six districts which may be called Assam proper, (2) the Surma Valley in the south consisting of two districts, and (3) the hills. Further it is a land of heavy rainfall and annual floods. Vast areas of land which have not yet come under cultivation constitute the main grazing reserves to which might be added such lands as get inundated during the mon- soon, but are open for grazing during the winter period. The grasses, which are wild and perennial in nature in the grazing reserves, and coarse and rank in areas exposed to flood, do not usually contain much food value. The soils in the plains of the Brahamaputra and the Surma Valley districts consist mainly of clay suitable for rice cultivation, and may be divided into new and old alluviums and the foot-hills. The old alluvium is composed of a light layer of clay underlaid by beds of sand which in higher areas are more conso- lidated and are closer and heavier in texture. The foot-hills are characterized
42 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam by sand, clay and gravels arising from large areas of savannahs interspersed here and there by homesteads. The soils of old alluvial deposits and most of the hills and the highlands show distinct acid reactions. The most import- ant characteristic of Assam soils is their acidity which does not usually favour the growth of some of the crops and the best types of nutritious grasses. In Assam Valley, soil acidity increases with the rainfall and the heaviness of the soil. As stated above, the most important feature of the Assam climate is its heavy rainfall during the monsoon which breaks in as early as the latter part of April and continues till September. There is a short winter and hardly any period of dry summer. Severe dewfall is another important feature during the non-monsoon period, which at certain places could be compared to a mild shower of rain. These climatic factors, which are res- ponsible for the perpetual humidity, exert a deleterious effect on the animal economy in general, and along with the soil factors account for the degenerate type of cattle and their poor size and vigour. Thus, on the one hand, the coarse fodder growing on a poor soil rarely supplies all the essentials of a balanced diet and, on the other, the heavy rainfall and resultant humidity turn the pastures and the farm-lands into suitable breeding grounds for parasites to which the bovine species are particularly susceptible. In the present section the climatic and the soil factors have been consi- dered in the light of their bearing on the normal health of cattle, and the manner in which these factors can possibly influence the course of the disease under reference are given in some detail in the section dealing with the epi- zootology of the disease. METHODS AND SCOPE OF INVESTIGATION Though, as already stated, the data collected as a result of the present survey do not provide an index to the incidence of the disease amongst the cattle population of this country as a whole, they have, however, as far as they are concerned, formed the basis for devising the methods of control of this disease in Assam. This survey has been carried out mainly by the applica- tion of the double intra-dermal test in all the farm animals over six months old using avian tuberculin supplied by the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, and in certain number of animals by simultaneous adop- tion of the bowel-washing method advocated by Krishnamurti Ayyar [ 1929 ]. It has been considered desirable to avoid any reference in this paper relating to the relative value of avian tuberculin in the detection of Johne's infec- tion, but it must be observed that an absolutely reliable agent capable of pro- ducing an allergic response in every positive case of this disease is still not available. Considering the fact that avian tuberculin fails at times to register the characteristic response indicative of Johne's infection, positive reactors at the Government farms and certain jail dairies were frequently subjected to two or three tests with a view to confirming the positive diagnosis. By this procedure, animals showing positive reaction at least in two tests were placed in the category of diseased animals. On different occasions and on more than a thousand animals, these tests were performed by the writer himself, so that the variation in human factor, so often stated to influence
P. G. PANDE 43 the result of a test of this nature, was obviously excluded. Several cases of debility and diarrhoea showing no response to avian tuberculin were ulti- mately diagnosed as Johne's disease on the basis of post-mortem examination. The bowel-washing method of diagnosis was adopted in respect of animals at all stages of the disease, but its use has been found of limited value in con- firming the presence of the disease either in known positive reactors, or in those non-reactors in which the clinical symptoms were fairly advanced. In the present investigation the avian tuberculin test was adopted in respect of all the animals in different centres of outbreak, but the bowel-washing method could be followed only in respect of animals of the Government farms and the jail dairies. The animals included in the sphere of the present investigation were derived from several sources, principally the Government cattle breeding and agricultural farms and the jail dairies, municipalities and the local boards. Besides, the tests were conducted on cattle of private owners on whose pre- mises the disease was positively diagnosed in some of their own farm-bred animals or those purchased from the Government farms. The animals of certain tea estates and some villages where Government bulls were reported to have died of Johne's disease were also subjected to the test on the assump- tion that the infection might have been contracted by these animals. At the Government farms and the jail dairies where valuable animals were maintained for breeding and issue to different breeding centres in the province, the tests were undertaken several times during the years 1933-37 (as shown in Table I) with the object of controlling its further spread. In other localities where the Government farm bulls were issued, the tests were performed with a view to ascertaining the extent to which the infection had spread amongst the cattle of indigenous breed. INVESTIGATION A. Incidence on the basis of avian tuberculin test 1. Khanapara Farm.44 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam TABLE I Names of the places and number of times the Avian Tuberculin tests were performed on animals at each of these places Years Localities where the tests were made Govt. farms Jails Mental hospital Tea estates Municipali- ties and local boards Private farms and individual herds Village herds 1933 . . . . X .. .. .. .. .. .. 1934 . . . . X X X .. .. .. .. .. .. 1935 . . . . X X X X X X X .. .. .. .. .. 1936 . . . . x x x x x x x x X X X X X .. .. X X X .. X X X X X X X X X .. 1937 . . . .. .. .. .. .. X X X X
P. G. PANDE 45 of cattle with a mixture of copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate had con- siderably reduced the incidence of helminthic infestation with the consequent improvement in the general health of cattle, cases of Johne's disease, as ascertained by the avian tuberculin test, continued to occur. During the period between January 1930 and April 1935, 96 young bulls having passed the avian tuberculin test, were issued to several local boards and municipalities, private herds, Goshalas, tea estates and breeding reserves in the Assam Valley districts. During the same period 142 animals of all kinds were sold out to the public of the same valley in and around the town of Gauhati. Table II contains the results of the tests of animals at this farm which reveals that the extent of infection is fairly well distributed amongst all classes of animals. Second testing of the positive reactors confirmed the result of the previous tests in about 90 per cent of cases. 2. Sylhet Farm.46 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam TABLE II Number of cattle of different classes and ages, submitted to Avian Tuberculin test, and the number of positive reactors during the period from 1933-36, at the Government Cattle Breeding Farm, Khanapara Serial No. Year and date of tests Adult cows and bulls Young stock 1 to 2 years Calves 6 to 12 months Bullocks Buffaloes Total Remarks Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Per cent 1 9-12-33 to 13-12-33 2 1 17 3 ... ... 1 0 ... ... 20 4 20 The positive reactor cow was destroyed, post-mortem was psiotive for Johne's disease 2 3-1-34 to 29-1-34 75 6 93 13 ... ... 24 4 ... ... 212 23 10.8 The first general test excluding buffaloes and calves 3 17-12-34 to 24-12-34. 15 3 10 0 ... ... 4 0 ... ... 29 3 10.4 4 16-1-35 to 21-3-35 . 56 7 73 8 ... ... 2 0 ... ... 131 17 10.1 The second general test 5 16-4-35 to 28-4-35 . 10 1 62 8 ... ... 22 1 18 0 112 11 8.9 The third general test including buffaloes 6 14-9-35 to 19-9-35 . 14 1 33 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 47 7 14.9 7 6-2-36 to 27-2-36 . 55 24 117 35 15 10 24 6 20 7 231 81 35.1 The fourth general test including buffaloes and calves 8 10-6-36 to 18-6-36 . 24 14 27 21 2 2 4 4 6 6 65 47 64.1 These animals were positive reac- tors in a previous test performed in February 1936. Out of 81 only 65 were left for another test 9 10-9-36 to 25-9-36 . 30 9 71 16 36 11 25 14 14 3 176 53 32.1 10 13-10-36 to 16-10-36 14 14 4 2 2 2 ... ... 4 4 24 22 91.6 These animals were positive reac- tors in two previous tests per- formed in February and June, 1936
P. G. PANDE 47 TABLE III Number of cattle of different classes and ages, submitted to Avian Tuberculin test, and the number of positive reactors during the period 1935-36, at the Government Cattle Breeding Farm, Sylhet Year and date of tests Adult cows and bulls Young stock 1 to 2 years Calves 6 to 12 months Bullocks Buffaloes Total Remarks Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Per cent 24-11-35 to 27-11-35 6 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 0 7 1 14.2 The buffalo was a clinical case and the bowel washing examina- tion of this case gave positive result 7-4-36 to 22-4-36 45 12 98 33 17 8 24 3 16 4 200 60 30.0 The first general test including all kinds of animals 18-8-36 to 21-8-36 . 8 5 11 9 1 1 ... ... 2 2 22 17 68.1 These 22 animals were out of 60 positive reactors of the previous test 19-5-36 to 22-5-36 . 1 1 ... ... ... ... 3 1 ... ... 4 2 50.0 These were the doubtful reactors of the first general test 23-8-36 to 30-8-36 . 21 11 56 17 11 9 17 10 11 5 116 52 47.1 The second general test of the non-reactor animals of the first general test
48 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam bullocks. At the Jorhat farm, however, a separate section of cattle breeding and dairying contained a fair number of cows and young stock, and the Titabar farm, besides the plough bullocks, had a few young stock brought over from the Jorhat farm for rearing. The principal breeds of cattle at the Jorhat farm were Mourangia, Rang- pur, Tharparkar, Sindhi and Bihari. In the first preliminary test of eight animals of this farm, one animal (a cow) was found as positive reactor, but on examination of the rectal scrapings the disease was positively diagnosed in a Sindhi bull transferred to this farm from Khanapara. From Table IV which contains the result of subsequent tests on this farm positive reactors would be found amongst the plough bullocks also, since they were allowed access on the same pastures as the dairy animals. At the Karimgunj farm the class of animals involved in the test were the plough bullocks of Bihari and Manipuri breed. The source of infection at this farm has been attributed to a Sindhi bullock transferred to this farm from Khanapara. This animal, during its stay at the Karimgunj farm, had passed through several attacks of diarrhoea, and at the time of the test, although diarrhoea had subsided, general emaciation and fading of the colour of the coat was discernible. In the subsequent test in which 34 bullocks were included, a fair number of them were found positive reactors (as shown in Table IV). The principal class of animals at the Titabar farm were the plough bullocks and a certain number of young bulls drawn from the Jorhat farm. The test revealed no reaction amongst the young stock brought over from the Jorhat farm where the infection had already existed, but a number of reac- tors were found amongst the plough bullocks for which no source of infection could be ascertained. The disease was, however, definitely diagnosed on this farm on the result of bowel-washing examination of two positive reacting bullocks. 4. Jail Dairies.P. G. PANDE 49 TABLE IV Number of cattle of different classes and ages, submitted to Avian Tuberculin tests, and the number of positive reactors during the period 1934-36, at Jorhat, Titabar and Karimganj Agricultural farms Name of the farms Year and date of tests Adult cows and bulls Young stock 1 to 2 years Calves 6 to 12 months Bullocks Total Remarks Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Per cent Jorhat farm . . . 15-4-34 to 18-4-34 . 5 1 2 0 1 0 ... ... 8 1 12.5 An adult bull, a clinical case gave no reaction, but was found diseased on the result of rectal smear examination Ditto . . . 14-7-36 to 22-7-36 . 19 3 31 4 19 11 12 4 81 22 27.1 The first general test Titabar farm . . . 22-11-36 to 25-11-36 ... ... 5 0 ... ... 38 6 43 6 13.9 The disease was confirmed in 2 out of 6 reacting bullocks on the result of bowel-washing examination Karimgunj farm . . 14-3-36 to 17-3-36 . ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 1 100 This was the first preliminary test on a suspicious case Ditto . . . 29-4-36 to 2-5-36 . ... ... 2 1 ... ... 34 8 36 9 25
50 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam TABLE V Number of cattle of different classes and ages, submitted to Avian Tuberculin test, and the number of positive reactors during 1936 at several Jail Dairies of the province Names of the Jail Dairies Year and the date of tests Adult cows and bulls Young stock 1 to 2 years Calves 6 to 12 months Bullocks Total Remarks Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Per cent Gauhati Jail Dairy . . 8-1-36 to 11-1-36 . 11 5 6 3 ... ... ... ... 17 9 52.9 These five animals were posi- tive reactors in the pre- ceding test 8-6-36 to 11-6-36 . 5 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 3 60 3-8-36 to 6-8-36 .. 3 2 2 0 ... ... ... ... 5 2 40 Sylhet Jail Dairy . . 1-5-36 to 4-5-36 . 2 1 4 0 ... ... ... ... 6 1 16.6 Nowgong Jail Dairy . . 7-11-35 to 11-11-35 7 5 12 3 ... ... ... ... 19 8 42.1 29-3-36 to 1-4-36 . 6 2 11 3 ... ... ... ... 17 5 29.4 1-12-36 to 4-12-36 . 1 0 9 5 ... ... ... ... 10 5 50 Jorhat Jail Dairy . . 15-7-36 to 18-7-36 . 7 1 1 0 6 2 3 1 17 4 23.5 Dibrugarh Jail Dairy . . 26-11-36 to 29-11-36 2 1 5 2 1 0 ... ... 8 3 37.5
P. G. PANDE 51 5. Farm animals outside the farm premises.52 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam TABLE VI Number of animals of all classes and ages, submitted to Avian Tuberculin tests, and the number found positive reactors amongst the Government farm animals outside the farm premises Localities Farms where purchased Year and date of test Adult cows and bulls Young stock 1 to 2 years Calves 6 to 12 months Bullocks Total Remarks Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Test- ed Posi- tive Per cent Gauhati town and suburb Khanapara farm. 9-6-36 to 12-6-36 14 8 3 0 3 2 2 0 22 10 45.4 Sylhet town . . Sylhet farm 7-5-36 to 10-5-36 4 2 2 1 ... ... ... ... 6 3 50 Chatlapar Tea Estate Do . 15-5-36 to 18-5-36 4 1 ... ... 1 1 ... ... 5 2 40 Beanibazar . . Do . 9-5-36 to 12-5-36 ... ... 2 0 ... ... ... ... 2 0 Nil Bowel-washings from both the cases showed positive evi- dence of infection Chiknagool Tea Estate . Do . 19-4-36 to 22-4-36 4 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 50 Bhatpara . . . Do . 7-5-36 to 10-5-36 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 100 Gutatikar . . . Do . 21-8-36 to 24-8-36 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 100 Hoogrijan Tea Estate . Shillong farm 10-8-36 to 13-8-36 1 1 1 0 ... ... ... ... 2 1 50 The positive cow died two months after the test with symptoms of Johne's disease.
P. G. PANDE 53 TABLE VII Number of cattle of indigenous breed, submitted to Avian Tuberculin test, and the number found positive, doubtful and negative reactors at two private farms and three villages in Assam Localities Number of cattle tested Date and year of test Positive Doubtful Negative Remarks Gauhati town . . 15 6-8-36 to 9-8-36 9 .. 6 The owner had lost all his cattle purchased from Khanapara farm Lalbagh farm . . 15 27-8-36 to 29-8-36 6 .. 9 Three cows purchased by the owner of this farm from Sylhet farm had died of Johne's disease Batarhat village . . 17 11-4-37 to 14-4-37 11 .. 6 At this village the farm bull died of Johne's ; post-mortem positive for Johne's disease Bholapara village . . 17 11-4-37 to 14-4-37 11 1 5 A Government farm bull placed in this village had suffered from diarrhoea and emaciation. The animal was later tested with Avian Tuberculin and reacted Parakushi village . . 17 11-4-37 to 14-4-37 7 2 8 A Government farm bull placed in this village had died of symptoms suggestive of Johne's disease H
54 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam infection in this herd was obtained on the result of bowel-washing examination of one of the heifers. The Avian Tuberculin test on 15 local cows of this herd revealed nine of them as reactors (as shown in Table VII). 7. Age and breed incidence.P. G. PANDE 55 some previous date. It is also to be noted that the same young animals later improved in condition, and remained in apparent normal health for a consi- derable period, but on more than one occasion, during the subsequent intervals when the Avian Tuberculin tests were applied, they had shown a positive res- ponse. By the time these animals were two years old, they were definitely diagnosed as cases of Johne's disease either on the result of autopsy or bowel- washing examination. Clinical symptoms in calves below one year have not been recognized in the course of our investigation, though the lack of symptoms in such young animals did not necessarily mean that they were not infected. Tables II to VI contain the results of the tests performed on a number of calves ranging in age from six months to a year, from which it will be seen that a fairly large number of them showed the reaction. Post-mortem evidence of infection could not, however, be obtained in such young animals. B. Epizootology Although Johne's disease is now known to exist in several parts of India the seriousness with which it has been viewed in Assam would seem to find a justification in the extent to which the condition had involved valuable animals of the Government farms and the jail dairies, and in the frequency with which clinical cases amongst animals issued out and sold to the public were brought to the notice of, and detected by, the Civil Veterinary Depart- ment of the province. The possible explanation regarding its unusual incidence in Assam would have to be sought in factors connected with the climatic and soil conditions of the province on the one hand, and the farm and the jail dairy conditions under which the animals were maintained, on the other. For convenience of description, factors connected with the epizootology of the disease could be grouped under the following headings : 1. Introduction of infected animals in a clean herd, 2. Overcrowding of available pastures, 3. General climatic factors, 4. Concomitant diseases, and 5. Nutrition. 1. Introduction of infected animals in a clean herd.56 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam maintained on these farms and the areas of land available for grazing (as shown in Table IX), it would be seen that every year in which investigation of this disease was undertaken, the areas of land allotted for grazing was found very limited in proportion to the number of animals maintained. This factor also seemed to exercise a powerful influence on the course of intestinal helminthiasis to which several adult and young stock had succumbed during these few years. 3. General climatic factors.P. G. PANDE 57 TABLE IX Degree of overstocking of the pastures at the two principal Government cattle farms with the accompaniment of transmissible diseases, including Johne's disease Khanapara farm Sylhet farm Year Total number of cattle Total area in acres Area under grazing Acres Total number of deaths Number of deaths due to worms Number of deaths due to Johne's disease Year Total number of cattle Total area in acres Area under grazing Acres Total Deaths number due to of deaths worms Deaths due to Johne's diseas 1930-31 210 197 118 20 8 ... 1930-31 16, farm just started 228 pro- posed, 14 cleared 7 ... ... ... 1931-32 182 exclud- ing bul- locks 197 97 14 7(?) ... 1931-32 38 50 acres cleared 40 ... ... ... 1932-33 247 197 92 11 7(?) One case of Johne's diagnosed post- mortem 1932-33 111 75 acres cleared 50 7 ... ... 1933-34 273 197 92 44 ... 25 1933-34 154 97 acres cleared 53 8 ... ... 1934-35 259 207 68 50 ... 13 1934-35 212 152 acres cleared 108 8 ... ... 1935-36 229 207 140 76 ... 63 5 died and 58 des- troyed 1935-36 197 exclud- ing bullocks 228 acres cleared 172 37 ... 15, 2 died and 13 destroyed 1936-37 425 exclud- ing bul- locks 207 141 215 ... 210 2 died and 208 des- troyed 1936-37 138 228 acres cleared 172 35 ... 29 destroyed for Johne's disease
58 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam and acute course, the question presented itself whether a previous or simul- taneous infestation with the helminth parasites in these animals had not had the effects of lowering their normal resistance, rendering them more vul- nerable to the pathogenic effects of the bacilli of Johne's disease. During the year 1933-34, out of 44 animals which died at the Khanapara farm, 25 were diagnosed as Johne's disease although heavily parasitized with the common helminth parasites of the alimentary canal. These parasites were Mecistocirrus digitatus, Cooperia sp., Oesophagostomum columbianum and Moneizia expansa. TABLE X Result of examination of dung samples of cattle of the Government farm at Khana- para Year No. of dung samples examined No. found positive for worm ova Percentage 1930-31 . . . . . 2032 1145 56 1931-32 . . . . . 667 387 58 1932-33 . . . . . 711 391 54 1933-34 . . . . . 966 430 44 1934-35 . . . . . 667 262 39 1935-36 . . . . . 690 204 29 1936-37 . . . . . 446 71 15 1937-38 . . . . . 686 90 13 Table X contains the result of microscopical examination of dung specimens of the Khanapara farm cattle for the years 1930 to 1937, which shows that the extent of infestation with these parasites during the earlier years had reached about 50 per cent, but later it decreased continuously as a result of anthelmintic treatment with copper and nicotine sulphates. Although during the latter period the degree of parasitic infestation was found greatly reduced, cases of Johne's disease, as ascertained by the Avian Tuber- culin test, continued to appear in increasing numbers. The question of simultaneous he minthic infestation in cases of Johne's disease in sheep has been considered in England [ Watkins, 1935 ] and the opinion has been expressed tentatively [ Taylor, 1935 ] that Johne's disease tends to lower the vitality of sheep to parasitic infestation which would be considered as the cause of death of these animals. In India, however, where the sum total of the effects of helminthic infestation in cattle is represented
P. G. PANDE 59 in general degeneration, stunted growth, defective nutrition and susceptibility to various diseases, the reverse possibility appears more plausible. 5. Nutrition.60 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam infestation or lack of proper diet, was the underlying factor. About a year after purchase of Government animals at these farms they were reported to have died of Johne's disease, and the presence of the disease was detected in a majority of the indigenous stock at these farms. The effects of Churn Brand Complete Mineral Feeding Flour in checking the progress of the disease amongst known infected animals have been deter- mined in the case of 15 positive reactors which were also known to have yielded Johne's bacilli in their excreta from time to time. These animals declared as positive reactors in March 1934 were kept under segregation, and fed on this mineral product for about ten months during which they showed consi- derable improvement in condition. Three to four oz. of this mixture were given to each animal with the usual concentrate ration. On this mineral- supplement diet the animals had not only improved in condition, but also had shown an increase in their live-weight. In December, 1934 they were again tested with Avian Tuberculin (as shown in Table XI) and all except two passed the test. After the second test, repeated microscopical examination of bowel-washings of these animals had proved negative for the organisms of Johne's disease. With a view to ascertaining the response of the lesion to the mineral feed, four healthy animals of this lot were slaughtered for post-mortem examination which revealed gross microscopic lesions typical of Johne's disease involving the entire length of the alimentary tract. Smears prepared from several parts of the involved gut and the mesenteric lymph glands, when examined under the microscope after Ziel-Neelsen's staining, showed no bacilli of Johne's disease. Pieces of intestines and the associated lymph glands from all the four cases were sent to the Mukteswar laboratory for cultural and histopathological examination. It was reported that the organisms were cultured from the materials of three cases only, and in respect of the fourth, no growth of the organisms was obtained and the bacilli of the disease were not seen in sections prepared from several parts of the intestines, although the histopathology of the involved tissues was typical of Johne's disease. A tentative conclusion of this experiment is that the extra mineral feeding provided a greater resistance and tended to retard the progress of the disease in an infected animal which, as a result of the disease processes being more or less completely arrested, failed to show the characteristic allergic response to Avian Tuberculin. Further evidence on the restorative and the prophylactic value of the mineral-supplement diet was obtained in another experiment of a similar nature at the Sylhet farm with 47 positive reactors (some of which were confirmed cases) and 25 untested animals exposed to infection since calfhood. To each adult animal 3 oz. and to each young stock 2 oz. of the minerals were supplied per day. To the milch cows, which were 14 in number, an extra ounce was given per day. After about nine months of this special treat- ment these animals were tested with Avian Tuberculin, and the test revealed 14 reactors only amongst 47 old reactors and known infected cases. Out of 25 animals which had never been previously tested only three showed positive reaction. In a farm in which during each test of the non-reactors and the untested animals the incidence has been recorded as over 30 per
P . G. PANDE 61 TABLE XI Result of mineral feeding on the development and progress of Johne's disease amongst the positive reactors and known infected animals of the Government farm at Khanapara Serial No. Brand No. Date of test Remarks March 1934 17 December 1934 Nature of the reaction Measurement of skin Result Nature of the reaction Measuremen of skin Result 1st 2nd 1st 2nd 1 132 Oedematous, hot and painful 6 14 P Nodular and painless . 9 15 N 2 122 Ditto . 7 15 P Ditto . 8 11 N 3 123 Ditto . 7 18 P Ditto . 8 15 N 4 73 Ditto . 10 20 P Ditto . 9 13 N 5 112 Ditto . 10 30 P Ditto . 13 19 N 6 2 Ditto . 6 18 P Ditto . 6 10 N 7 66 Ditto . 8 20 P Ditto . 9 15 N 8 64 Ditto . 8 17 P Ditto . 10 14 N 9 130 Ditto . 12 25 P Ditto . 13 18 N 10 118 Ditto . 9 22 P Ditto . .. .. .. The test re- mained in- complete 11 128 Ditto . 11 26 P Hot and painful . 12 27 P 12 110 Ditto . 11 25 P Nodular and painless . 11 18 N 13 92 Ditto . 10 24 P Ditto . 9 15 N 14 46 Ditto . 9 30 P Hot and painful . 7 16 P 15 19 Ditto . 9 27 P Nodular and painless 11 19 N
62 Paratuberculosis of Cattle in Assam cent, the result of the test of these two groups of animals speaks well in favour of the special mineral feed. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. The incidence of Johne's disease in Assam amongst Government farm animals, in and outside the farm premises, has been investigated and the percentage of infection recorded. 2. This survey was conducted mainly with the use of Avian Tuberculin test which, in case of animals at the Government farms and the jail dairies, was checked by the method of bowel-washing examination. 3. All classes and breeds of animals and cross-breds have been found equally susceptible to the disease. An unusually high incidence has been found amongst calves, but post-mortem evidence of the disease in such young animals has not been obtained. 4. Introduction of infected animals in a clean herd, overcrowding of pastures, climatic and soil conditions, helminthiasis and nutritional defi- ciencies have all been found to determine the spread and the development of the disease in Assam. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author wishes to acknowledge the help and cooperation of Rai Sahib Srish Chandra Ghose, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Assam, in the preparation of this report, and also to the Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for supplying certain publications referred to in this paper. REFERENCES Assam, (1930-37). Ann. Repts. Dept. Agric., Assam. Ayyar, V. Krishnamurti (1929). Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong., Madras, quoted by H. Cooper and M. K. Srinivasan Dryerre, H. (1934). Vet. Rec. 29, 1558 Edwards, J. T. (1926). (Quoted by Larson and others in the Vet. J. 88, 380) Mitra, S. K. and Sen Gupta, D. M. (1934). Dept. Agric. Assam Bull. 9 Mitra, S. K. Analysis of Manurial Experiments in India, Supplement to Volume 1, 18 Mukteswar, (1934). Ann. Rept. Imp. Vet. Res. Inst. 23 Sheather, A. L. (1918). Agri. J. Ind., 13, 23-31 Spicer, A. (1932). Vet. Rec. 28, 603-5 Taylor, E. L. (1935). Vet. Rec. 10, 919 Watkins, C. V. (1935). Vet. Rec. 10, 918
STUDIES ON SOME FACTORS AFFECTING THE PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CONSTANTS OF GHEE BY N. S. DOCTOR, M.Sc., A.I.I.Sc., AND B. N. BANERJEE, M.Sc. (Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore) AND ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA, B. AG. ANI. HUS. (BOM.), B.Sc. AGRI. (EDIN.), N.D.D. (SCOT.) (Imperial Dairy Institute, Bangalore) (Received for publication on 27 November 1939) GHEE forms one of the main items of our Indian dietary and the importance of this product can be judged from the fact that about 55 per cent of the total milk produced in India (690 million pounds) is used for making ghee [Wright, 1937]. Generally, the solidity, grain structure, colour, taste and aroma form the criteria of quality in ghee. But the introduction of the present day oil and fat refining and hydrogenation processes in preparing artificially blended ghee substitutes has greatly discounted the value of these properties. This, together with the wide natural variation of the physical and chemical constants of ghee, has brought the food analyst into the uncomfortable and unscientific position of having to fix limits of variation in dealing with ghee. The interpretation of results of analysis in such cases is unsatisfactory and in the absence of reliable evidence for distinguishing genuine from adulterated ghee by means of physical and chemical constants, this state of affairs will continue. Accordingly, in 1937 the Central Government of India (Rept. Ghee Conference, Agriculture and Marketing in India, Sept. 1937, p. 5) fixed certain specific standards for the grading of cow and buffalo ghee, to check the malpractice of adulteration of ghee and the sale of artificially blended products under the name of genuine ghee. Strong objections were raised from various quarters against the above standards of grading as an all-India standard since analytical constants for ghee are variable and depend on such factors as food, breed, lactation period, care and treatment of the animal, seasonal variations and methods of prepa- ration of ghee. The analytical constants of ghee are variable. They, however, vary only within certain limits except in some abnormal cases. It was therefore necessary to study the effect of various factors on the range of variation of the physical and chemical constants of ghee. In the present investigation the effect of the method of preparation of ghee, the breed and the food of the animal on the physical and chemical constants of ghee have been investigated with the view to studying the range of variation of these constants, 63
64 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee EFFECT OF THE METHOD OF PREPARATION ON THE CHEMICAL AND THE PHYSICAL CONSTANTS OF GHEE In this country butter is prepared by the cream process and the curd process. Generally, in the creamery process, the cream is separated from milk, ripened with or without a starter and the butter churned in a barrel churn. In the curd process the milk is curdled with an inoculum of the previous batch and the butter churned in an indigenous churn (paddle churn). On account of tropical climate and temperature butter is not stored in India but is melted into ghee. Ghee can be prepared from butter (i) by the decan- tation method and (ii) by the method of boiling off the moisture. (i) Decantation process.N. S. DOCTOR, B. N. BANERJEE AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 65 The sample of butter prepared after 24 hours' souring was stored in an open glass vessel just as is done in practice. Samples were taken out at the end of 11 and 15 days' storage and melted into ghee and analysed (samples 5 and 6). The butter progressively lost flavour, developed patches of mould and acquired an undesirable flavour during storage. Butter which had been stored for 15 days was melted into ghee by the boiling-off method and analysed (sample 7). The results are given in Table I. TABLE I The cream process butter fat Sample No. Reicliert value Polensko value Saponification value 1 33.0 1.9 238 2 31.3 1.9 239 3 31.2 1.8 239 4 31.2 1.8 238 5 31.0 1.8 238 6 31.1 1.7 239 7 31.0 1.8 239 The indigenous process curd after 24 hours' souring was churned into butter (paddle churn) and analysed. Butter prepared by the curd process was deeper in colour than that from the cream process and possessed a richer and characteristic flavour. Immediately after preparation a portion of butter was melted into ghee (decantation process) and analysed (A). This sample was also stored in the same manner as the cream process butter and samples were taken at the end of 2, 4, 7 and 15 days (B, C, D and F). Samples of butter after 7 (E) and 15 (G) days' storage were clarified into ghee by the boiling off method and analysed. This butter on storage deteriorated in flavour much quicker than the creamery butter. The results are given in Table II. TABLE II The curd process butter fat Sample No. Reicliert value Polensko value Saponification value A 31.7 1.8 238 B 31.1 2.0 239 C 30.6 1.9 239 D 31.1 1.7 238 E 31.1 1.7 239 F 30.8 1.7 239 G 30.6 1.7 239
66 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee The results show that there is no appreciable change in Reichert, Polenske and saponification values of ghee prepared by different methods and condi- tions. The Reichert value of fresh milk ghee is slightly higher than that of sour-cream or curd-process ghee. Curd-process butter and ghee were found to be richer in colour and flavour than cream-process butter and ghee. Again curd-process ghee was firmer in texture than cream-process ghee. Ghee prepared by the decantation method compared with the boiling-off method of clarification of butter into ghee, was firmer in texture. The flavour of curd butter disappeared more quickly than that of creamery butter. Taken as a whole, however, curd (desi) process ghee was better in flavour, colour and texture than cream (dairy) process ghee. Soured milk or soured cream ghee is better than un- soured milk or cream ghee. In the clarification of butter into ghee, when the moisture is removed either by the decantation method or by the boiling-off method, the Reichert value is not affected. There is no significant decrease in Reichert value on storage for 15 days in the form of butter before clarification. Prepared in a clean and proper way, very little lipolytic changes take place in the souring process during storage as butter in both the cream and curd processes of ghee manufacture. However, it cannot be said to apply in all cases as Imperial Dairy Institute milk is very rich in carotenes, vitamins and other natural anti-oxidants ; the average temperature at Bangalore is also only 22°C. It may be concluded, therefore, that if the ghee be prepared hygienically from the milk, the method of preparation has no appreciable effect on its chemical constants. EFFECT OF BREED ON CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL CONSTANTS OF GHEE This investigation was conducted under controlled conditions with the milk of four breeds of cows, viz. Ayrshire, Cross-bred, Sindhi and Gir, and with that of the Murrah buffalo. The animals were maintained at the Imperial Dairy Institute Farm, Bangalore, under similar conditions of feeding manage- ment. As the Ayrshire stock available at the Farm was limited, two animals of each breed only were selected for the experiment. All animals were kept on the same ration for four weeks before the experimental samples were collected. Six lots of butter from the milk of each breed were prepared under con- trolled conditions at intervals of a week and the butterfats were immediately analysed. Sampling of butterfat.N. S. DOCTOR, B. N. BANERJEE AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 67 was determined by the method recommended by Mohr [1925] and adopted by Lyons [1936]. Refractive index measurements were taken on an Abbé refractometer at 40°C. and converted to butyro-refractometer readings at 40°C. The carotene content was determined by the method of Ferguson and Bishop [1936]. Vitamin A determinations were made colorimetrically using the B. D. H. Lovibond tintometer with Carr and Price reagent (SbCl3, saturated solution in CHC13) on the unsaponifiable matter. The other physical and chemical constants were determined by standard methods. The averages of the results of the various determinations for each sample of butterfat were calculated and are given in Table III. The results obtained also represent the individual variation. While the individuals of different breeds do not show any appreciable change in the various constants of their butterfat, the variation due to different breeds of animals is remarkable. The foreign breeds of cows show the remarkable property of transferring more carotene from the food to the fat than Indian breeds of cows. Buffalo ghee is always characterized by its higher content of butyric acid and very low content of carotene. In all these cases a close correlation has been observed between the refractive index and iodine value. A high refractive index corresponds to a high iodine value. The refractive index, however, does not vary between such wide limits as the iodine value. EFFECT OF FEEDING OIL CAKES ON CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL CONSTANTS OF GHEE The concentrates available for feeding the dairy cattle in this country depend on the oil seed or grain grown in different areas. Thus, in Gujarat, Kathiawar and other areas where cotton is extensively grown, only cotton seed is fed ; in certain areas in the South, only coconut cake is fed. In other parts gingili, linseed, or groundnut cake is fed. The effect of feeding such rations high in vegetable fat on the composition of butterfat has been much studied and it is now well known that feeding different oils and fats does to some extent change the chemical composition of the butterfat, the modification depending on the composition of the oils and fats fed [Holland et al., 1918, 1923 ; Cranfield, 1911, 1916; Channon et al., 1924; Hilditch, et al., 1930, 1931; Eckles and Palmer, 1917 and others]. This has caused difficulties in fixing an all-India standard for grading and marketing of ghee (Rept. Ghee Conference II, Agriculture Marketing, Jan. 1938). Therefore, an experiment was conducted under conditions similar to those practised in the villages, where free use of oil cake is made, with the view to studying the effect of oil cakes on the analytical constants of ghee. A number of Sindhi cows were selected from the Imperial Dairy Institute herd and were kept on a general ration for periods sufficiently long (four weeks) to cause the butterfat to approach constant composition before col- lecting the experimental samples. Particulars of the cows used.68 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee TABLE III Breed Variation and Constants of Ghee Butter Butter Fat Moisture per cent Fat per cent Curd per cent M. P. 0°C. R. Index at 40°C. B. R. reading at 40°C. Reichert value Polenske value Kirscliner value Saponification value. Iodine value Percentage of free fatty acids cal- culated as oleic acid. Carotene mg. per 100 gm. Vitamin A. B.V. per gm. Ayrshire Sample 1 15.1 84.5 0.4 36.2 1.4558 23.6 2.0 19.2 220 39.0 0.50 0.83 19.8 2 15.3 84.3 0.4 36.0 1.4558 23.2 1.9 19.0 220 39.2 0.60 0.80 19.6 3 14.0 85.4 0.6 35.8 1.4558 23.0 2.0 19.0 221 39.6 0.36 0.76 18.8 4 18.3 81.2 0.5 36.2 1.4558 45.0 23.3 2.0 19.1 220 39.4 0.60 0.73 19.0 5 17.6 82.0 0.4 36.0 1.4558 23.4 2.0 19.1 220 39.2 0.50 0.75 18.7 6 14.1 85.6 0.3 36.0 1.4558 23.2 1.9 19.2 222 39.2 0.54 0.76 19.5 Cross-bred Sample 1 15.2 84.5 0.3 36.2 1.4555 26.0 2.0 21.5 224 38.6 0.62 0.66 18.8 2 14.8 84.8 0.4 36.6 1.4555 26.0 2.0 21.2 225 38.5 0.67 0.62 18.2 3 15.3 84.3 0.4 36.4 1.4555 26.2 2.0 20.0 225 38.0 0.82 0.68 18.0 4 14.9 84.7 0.4 36.4 1.4555 44.5 26.5 2.2 21.6 225 38.2 0.71 0.70 18.8 5 15.1 84.6 0.3 36.2 1.4555 26.2 2.0 21.0 224 38.4 0.60 0.60 17.8 6 14.7 85.0 0.3 36.2 1.4555 26.1 2.1 21.0 225 38.3 0.72 0.64 17.6
N. S. DOCTOR, B. N. BANERJEE AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 69 Sindhi Sample 1 15.6 84.0 0.4 37.0 1.4556 25.6 2.3 20.0 225 39.0 0.91 0.52 16.4 2 14.9 84.8 0.3 37.2 1.4556 26.0 2.2 20.2 223 39.1 0.90 0.50 15.0 3 15.1 84.6 0.3 37.2 1.4556 44.6 26.4 2.2 20.3 225 39.0 0.83 0.48 15.8 4 16.7 82.8 0.5 37.4 1.4556 25.8 2.3 20.0 223 39.0 0.85 0.52 16.0 5 14.0 85.6 0.4 37.2 1.4556 25.6 2.3 20.0 223 38.8 0.83 0.46 15.6 6 13.2 86.4 0.4 37.0 1.4556 26.0 2.3 20.0 224 38.8 0.92 0.48 15.2 Gir Sample 1 15.8 83.9 0.3 36.0 1.4553 26.8 2.2 21.6 227 39.3 0.35 0.48 16.0 2 14.9 84.7 0.4 36.2 1.4553 27.0 2.2 22.0 227 38.9 0.40 0.40 15.4 3 14.2 85.3 0.5 36.4 1.4553 44.1 27.4 2.3 22.0 227 39.0 0.42 0.38 150 4 18.3 81.2 0.5 36.2 1.4553 28.0 2.3 22.2 227 39.2 0.37 0.48 15.2 5 16.4 83.4 0.2 36.2 1.4553 27.8 2.3 22.0 227 39.2 0.34 0.38 14.8 6 15.1 84.6 0.3 36.2 1.4553 28.2 2.3 22.4 226 39.0 0.48 0.33 14.6 Murrah buffalo Sample 1 14.3 85.4 0.3 36.8 1.4549 30.4 1.5 26.7 231 31.5 0.80 0.05 14.0 2 13.9 85.9 0.2 37.0 1.4549 30.6 1.5 26.7 232 30.8 0.70 005 14.8 3 14.7 85.0 0.3 370 1.4549 43.6 30.8 1.5 26.7 232 31.0 0.65 0.05 14.2 4 13.5 86.2 0.3 36.8 1.4549 31.0 1.5 26.8 232 31.4 0.52 0.05 14.0 5 13.2 86.8 0.2 37.0 1.4549 30.2 1.5 26.6 231 31.2 0.67 0.05 14.6 6 12.6 87.1 0.3 37.0 1.4549 30.4 1.5 26.6 231 31.4 0.50 0.05 14.2 K
70 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee Mixture before commencing the experimental feeding :N. S. DOCTOR, B. N. BANERJEE AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 71 The milk of each animal at eack milking was weighed and recorded but for the purpose of simplicity daily average milk yields for each period are given in Table V(a). Composite samples of milk were taken for determination of butter fat and the data collected are given in Table V (b). The body weight of each animal before and at the end of each period, are recorded in Table V (c). The cows took readily to the changed feed. They maintained their live weight but they did not appear as lively and active during the experimental period as before the experiment. Although the milk yields in all cases fell considerably, there was no increase in fat percentage. TABLE V (a) Milk yield Groups I II III IV V Herd No. of cow 251 275 279 291 280 290 265 270 289 294 lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz Control Daily yield average 29 0 21 0 21 0 23 0 20 0 19 0 16 0 23 0 18 0 16 0 After 10 days oil feed- ing Daily average (1st period) 24 0 18 4 19 12 22 12 16 15 16 8 15 3 19 9 14 3 13 10 After 20 days Daily average (2nd period) 23 0 18 6 19 13 22 0 13 7 10 8 14 3 17 15 13 10 13 TABLE V (b) Average percentage of fat Groups I II III IV V Herd No. of cow 251 275 279 291 280 290 265 270 289 294 Control 4.80 4.90 4.80 4.40 4.70 4.85 4.90 4.90 4.60 5.00 1st period 4.80 4.80 4.70 4.50 4.40 4.90 5.00 5.00 4.70 5.50 2nd period 4.30 4.80 4.30 4.10 4.20 4.90 4.60 5.10 4.20 5.70 TABLE V (c) Body weight Herd No. of cow 251 275 279 291 280 290 265 270 289 294 lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. Control 724 740 666 780 592 698 773 650 713 686 1st period 699 723 683 735 572 700 776 651 702 690 2nd period 723 737 685 751 603 702 800 652 710 696
72 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee Quality of butter and ghee after 20 days oil feeding :N. S. DOCTOR, B. N. BANERJEE AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 73 TABLE VI (b) Judging of ghee samples Body Texture Colour Flavour Re- marks Place Group I Satisfactory, medium hard Good Fair yellow Satisfactory ghee flavour II Group II soft and leaky Oily Same as in I Ditto III Group III Very soft and leaky Oily Lighter than in II Giving out indication of linseed oil V Group IV Quite firm Very satisfac- tory grains Fair yellow Good ghee flavour I Group V Quite attractive and hard Satisfactory grains smaller than in IV Ditto Giving out indication of coconut oil IV The grading order of the butters was not retained when they were melted into ghee. Group No. V was placed first in butter judging but, when melted, gave a coconut oil flavour. The marked effect of feeding oil cakes can be observed in Group III. The melting point was the lowest in the case of Group III. Groups IV and V showed remarkable firmness in body and texture. The average of the results of various determinations for each sample of butterfat are given in Table VII. TABLE VII Dil cakes feeding and constants of ghee R. Index at 40°C B. R. reading at 40°C. Reichert value Polenske value Kirschner value Saponification value Iodine value (Wij's) Percentage of free fatty acids calculated as oleic acid Percentage of moisture Carotene in mg. per 100 gm. Vitamin A in B. V. per gm. I. Groundnut Cake Control 1.4540 42.3 30.0 2.3 23.3 229 36.0 0.14 less than 0.52 16.4 1st period 1.4540 43.7 25.2 2.0 17.0 223 42.2 0.28 0.1% 0.36 11.1 2nd period 1.4559 45.0 25.8 2.1 17.2 224 37.0 0.30 74 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee After 20 days of oil-cake feeding all animals returned to their original ration as given before the experiment. Milk yield was found to return to the previous figure. For comparison, another experiment was performed wherein oil cakes from the concentrates mixture were replaced by carbohydrate foods and green grass. The animals of the first group were selected and fifteen days after the end of the previous experiment the following ration was given at the rate of 1 lb. for every 2 lb. of milk produced. Wheat bran 40 per cent Oats crushed 20 per cent Wheat crashed 20 per cent Barley 20 per cent In addition to the concentrates each cow was given 10 lb. of lucerene and 1 oz. of salt. Roughage (guinea grass) and water were allowed in ad lib. Milking, preparation of butter and ghee, and the determination of physical and chemical constants were done in the same manner as in the previous experi- ment. Milk yield Cow No. 251 275 Control Daily average 25.5 lb. 20 lb. After 10 days Daily average 24.3 N. S. DOCTOR, B. N. BANERJEE AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 75 TABLE VIII Constants of ghee76 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee those of butterfat from the feeding of cod iver oil. They also observed that the analytical values varied markedly in the direction indicating a consider- able passage of the oil or some of its constituents into milk fat. Hilditch and Thompson [1936] conclusively showed that the change in composition of milk fat on feeding cod liver, linseed and other oils in addition to normal rations consists in an increase in unsaturated acids together with a decrease in butyric and stearic acids content. In this experiment the increase or decrease in the lower saturated fatty acids (Reichert value) and unsaturated acids (iodine value) obtained by feeding oil cakes showed a marked relation to the composition of the fat fed. This, and the findings of other workers, explain the characteristic values obtained in the case of coconut cake. Hilditch and Sleightholme [1930, 1931] have shown that when liberal amounts of coconut cake were fed to cows, the butterfat showed a rise in saturated acids (myristic and a minor rise in lauric) but for the most part, the composi- tion of the unsaturated glycerides was normal. The results obtained in this experiment, while showing no appreciable change in Reichert value and rise in Polenske value showed a definite fall in iodine value. In their experiment, Hilditch and Sleightholme fed coconut cake in addition to a normal ration while in this case coconut cake formed the main part of the concentrates in the ration. It is possible, therefore, that the effect of coconut cake in their case was counteracted by other components of the balanced ration. Siegfeld [1907] observed similar effects with coconut cake feeding. He found that feeding coconut cake up to 4 lb. per head per day increased the Polenske value from 2.5 to 3.8 whilst the Reichert value was not appreciably changed. Cranfield [1911] also reported similar results and concluded that coconut cake produced a better quality butter than linseed or cotton cakes. The body, texture, colour, and flavour of butter and ghee depend largely on the nature of the food of the animal. As a general rule, foods which cause an increase in oleic acid content of butterfat produce a fat of low melting point and those which cause an increase in palmitic and stearic acid produce a fat of firm consistency and high melting point. The oleic acid content of butterfat increases with the progress of lactation, age of the animal and also when animals are fed on green grass [Dean and Hilditch, 1933 ; Brouwer, 1931]. The results obtained show that the feeding of gingili and groundnut cake produces a butter and ghee of unsatisfactory body and of oily texture. In feeding coconut and linseed cake, the quality of butter improves to a great extent but that of ghee deteriorates due to an oily flavour. Cotton seed is an exception as compared with other oil cakes, since an increase in the per- centage of oleic acid is counteracted by the decrease in percentage of butyric acid. Also, the adverse effect of cotton seed feeding can be counteracted by including green grass in the ration [Neasham and Gelpi, 1934]. This explains the better results obtained by feeding cotton seed meal in this experiment. Corn silage, oats, molasses and beets are known to increase the butyric acid content of milk fat [Hunziker, Mills and Spitzer, 1912 ; Platon et al., 1935]. Our results also indicate a rise in the Reichert value of butter fat of animals kept on green grass and cereal diet without oil cakes. In both these cases, a few days feeding produced its effect on the butter- fat and the milk yield of animals. The milk yield in all cases fell considerably.
N. S. DOCTOR, B. N. BANERJEE AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 77 but there was no increase in fat content. This effect, though marked and characteristic, may not be very pronounced as a number of other factors such as breed, season and lactation period also influence the composition of the milk fat. The effect of feeding oil cakes on the nutritive value of ghee, as measured from its carotene and vitamin A content, is also marked. The feeding of linseed cake decreases the vitamin A and carotene content considerably but both increase with foods rich in carbohydrates and with green grass. In studying the effect on ghee, the results obtained show that cows of different breeds exhibit differences in their abilities to transfer carotene from the food into their butterfat. The butterfat of the foreign breeds con- tains more carotene than that of Indian breeds. Even the butterfats from individuals of the same breed of cow fed on the same rations show marked differences in carotene and vitamin A content. Buffalo butterfat differs in this respect from cow butterfat. The physiological mechanism of the buffalo appears to cause very little secretion of carotene into its milk fat. From these results, it is evident therefore that the excessive feeding of oil seed and cakes must affect the composition, texture and flavour of butterfat. The results indicate that the composition of the milk fat of animals fed on a particular oil seed or cake tends to become similar to that of the oil. How- ever, the results of a short period experiment, while indicating the way the quality of butter and ghee is affected, cannot be taken strictly to represent any herd, seasonal or regional variation without limitations. Standards for grading of ghee.78 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee The most debatable constant in the grading standard is the Reichert value of ghee. The Reichert value indicates the extent to which the steam- volatile, water-soluble fatty acids (low molecular weight acids mostly butyric to caproic) are present in fat. Butterfat or ghee contains much higher amounts of these acids than any other fat from which it might be desirable to distinguish it. Hence the fixing of this value requires very careful and accurate data. Further, in view of the results obtained with regard to feeding oil seeds and cakes, the importance of the iodine value should not be over- looked. Smith and Dastur [1938] have recorded a marked fall and rise in the Reichert and iodine values respectively in the milk fat of fasting cows. In the first two days of fasting the Reichert value fell from 26 to 14.5 and the iodine value rose from 36 to 47 .1. Various workers have observed a correlation beween the iodine value and refractive index of ghee. The figures tabulated by Elsdon [1926], those obtained by Kothavalla and Doctor [1939] and in this experiment are conspicuous in this respect. Hence the iodine value should also be incorporated in the specified standards for testing purity and the grading of ghee. The results obtained in the present investigation and from the data obtained by other workers [Bhattacharya and Hilditch, 1931 ; Elsdon, Taylor and Smith 1931 ; Bolton and Revis, 1911 ; Sunawalla and Kothavalla, 1935; Trieman, 1913 ; Ghosh, 1920 ; Kothavalla and Doctor, 1939] for the analytical values of cow and buffalo ghee show the range of variation for the various constants as follows :N. S. DOCTOR, B. N. BANERJEE AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 79 Different breeds of cattle and even individuals of the same breed differ in their ability to transfer carotene in the milk from the food into their butter- fat. The composition of the milk fat of animals fed on oil cakes tends to become similar to that of the oil. Groundnut, linseed, gingili cake and cotton seed have been shown to increase the iodine value and decrease the Reichert value while coconut cake decreases the amount of unsaturated acids but has no effect on the Reichert value. The quality of butter produced by feeding linseed and coconut cake has been shown to be improved while that of ghee to be deteriorated because of the oily flavour imparted by the cakes. The feeding of oil cakes has a marked effect on the body and texture of butter and ghee. Gingili cake produces a soggy soft butter and ghee. The carotene and vitamin A contents of butterfat decrease slightly on feeding oil cakes, and increase with food rich in carbohydrates and on green grass. Foods rich in carotenes appear to give a higher carotene content in the milk fat. The effect of feeding oil cakes, breed, and method of preparation on the composition of ghee has been discussed, and the range of variation of its physical and chemical constants has been defined. REFERENCES Banerjee, B. N., and Doctor, N. S. (1938). Agric. & Livestock in Ind. 8 , 158 Bhattacharya, R., and Hilditch, T. P. (1931). Analyst 56, 161 Bolton, E. R.. and Revis, C. (1911). Analyst 36, 372 British Standard Methods for the Chemical Analysis of Butter, 1938, Brit. Standards Inst. 769 Brouwer, E. (1931). Vereen Exploit. Proefzuvelboerd. Hoorn. Ann. Rept. 113 Channon, H. J., Drummond, J. C., and Golding, J. (1924). Analyst 49, 311 Cranfield, H. T. (1911). Analyst 36, 445 80 Factors affecting Physical & Chemical Constants of Ghee Lyons, J. (1936). Economic Proc. Royal Dublin Soc. 3, 2, 17 Mohr, W. (1925). Milchw. Forsch. 2, 24 Neasham, E. W., and Gelpi, A. J. (1934). Nat. Butter & Cheese J. 12 Platon, B., et al, (1935). Rept. Centr. Agric. Res. Inst., Stockholm 451 Report of the Analytical Methods Committee, (1936). Analyst 61, 404 Siegfeld.M. (1907). Analyst 32, 256 Smith, J. A. N., and Dastur, N. N. (1938). Biochem. J. 32, 1868 Sunawalla, S. D., and Kothavalla, Z. R. (1935). Agric. & Livestock in Ind. 5, 480 Trieman, S. H. (1913). Analyst 38, 247 Wright, N. C. (1937). Rept, on the development of Cattle and Dairy Industry in India, 159
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE VIABILITY OF DOYLE'S DISEASE VIRUS OF FOWLS UNDER DIFFERENT CONDITIONS* BY S. GANAPATHY IYER, G.M.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 10 February 1939) INTRODUCTION DOYLE'S disease is an acute, highly contagious and infectious disease of poultry, known to the veterinary profession since 1926. It is caused by a filterable virus. This disease was observed in England, Dutch East Indies, Philippine Islands, India, Ceylon, Korea, Japan and Australia, but little information as regards the source from whence the disease was introduced has been forthcoming. The nomenclature of this disease has caused some confusion, various names having been given during recent years for the same disease. For convenience, the disease has been termed Doyle's disease in this paper. A knowledge of the survival of the virus outside the animal body is a necessity in the control of epizootics. This paper records the results of experi- ments conducted with reference to the viability of the virus under labora- tory conditions as well as a review of the available literature on the subject. The laboratory where this work was done is situated in the Kumaun hills of the United Provinces, at an altitude of 7,500 ft. and the climate is temperate. It is believed that the virus, under climatic conditions such as obtain in the plains of India, will seldom remain alive for periods longer than those recorded in this paper. Only scattered information on the subject is avail- able from literature. Doyle [1927] in his first paper on the discovery of a new virus causing this disease among fowls, ' Newcastle Disease ', recorded that the virus in dried tissues was mostly viable by the 100th day. Virus in saline was active up to 86 days but inactive at the 100th day. Spleen virus as kept in a petri-dish was viable after 80 days but dead after 150 days. While studying the effects of heat, in the only experiment carried out, the virus was viable after 48 hours at 37° C., but was inert after 72 hours. The same author [1935] considers that the virus will remain alive for at least six months in the muscles and bone marrow of carcases under ' trade chilling conditions '. Picard [1928] found that indirect contact by placing eight healthy fowls in a small coop in which ten fowls had previously died successively and no cleaning was done, resulted in the death of three fowls and the above experi- ment was repeated on a smaller scale. The fowls were left in a cage soiled with faeces and discharges of a few sick fowls that died 14 days pre- viously. Nothing happened to the fowls for six weeks, thus indicating that *Paper read at the Indian Science Congress, 1939. (81)
82 Viability of Doyle's Disease Virus of Fowls the virus had died out. Saliva from sick fowls, diluted 1: 10, was stored in a tube plugged by cotton wool and after exposure to full day-light, it was shown that the virus was dead after 24 hours. Brain substance dried at 27° C. over quick lime was active for 35 days. Farinas [1930] stated that direct sunlight killed the virus after one-hour exposure. Spleen and liver in a petri-dish covered with earth and stored at room temperature for 12 days, when fed to chickens, produced no disease. Virulent crop contents absorbed by cotton wool and allowed to dry at room temperature became a virulent in five days. Virus in dilute crop contents by storing at 37.5°C. was also rendered aviable after three days. Virus in garden soil under experimental conditions after exposure for four days to diffused sunlight did not produce infection by feeding to chickens. The virus was suspended in stagnant water and after four days the virus was found to be dead. This writer also found that active virus could be recovered from a bird seven days after death. Kylasamier [1931] reports that cotton wool swabs charged with throat material by officers in the field and sent by mail to Madras, the journey period being two to three days, were invariably active on animal inoculation. MATERIALS AND METHODS Liver and spleen tissues from fowls that died of Doyle's disease after experimental inoculation with passaged virus was used for the different tests except where otherwise stated. The virus had undergone over 70 fortnightly passages in fowls with no material alteration in virulence. About 1 gm of liver and spleen tissues was put into 2 c. c. test tubes plugged by cotton wool. When due for animal inoculation, after the prescribed period, the whole tissue from one tube was pulped and emulsified with 10 c. c. saline Susceptible fowls were inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c. c. of emulsion which roughly contained 0.1 gm of the tissue pulp. The fowls were kept in separate iron cages during the period of observation. The cages were kept in a shed away from the one used for routine Doyle's disease work, with separate attendants and every possible care was taken to prevent accidental infection. The aging of the virus was effected by storing the tubes containing the tissue virus inside a glass cupboard and in the incubator at 37°C. as the experiment required. The temperature of the room was recorded twice a day, once at 9-30A.M. and again at 4-30 P.M. The maxi- mum average daily temperature every month during the period when the experiment was in progress, has been noted. TABLE I Average daily maximum temperature for each month during the course of the experiment July 1936. . . . . . . . . .21° C. August 1936. . . . . . . . . .21° C. September 1936 . . . . . . . . .20° C. October 1936 . . . . . . . . .17° C. November 1936 . . . . . . . . .15° C.
S. GANAPATHY IYER 83 Viability of the virus after aging at room temperature.84 Viability of Doyle's Disease Virus of Fowls Results of bird inoculation with virus after aging at room temperatureS. GANAPATHY IYER 85 As will be seen from Table III, the virus was active after 24 days but apparently died out after 31 days when stored at 37°C. In this connexion mention must be made of the appearance of the tissue at the time of removal from the incubator. The tissue containing the virus had lost much of its moisture content from the third day onwards. It seems that the virus in desiccated tissues will remain viable for longer periods than in saliva and crop contents where the virus was found to die out after three days at 37.5°C. Farinas (loc. cit.) experiments with saline emulsions of buccal washings from fowls dead of experimental Doyle's disease, stored at 37°C., showed that the virus remained viable after three days but was dead after four days (not shown in Table III). TABLE III Effect of heat (37° C.) on the virus Virus stored for (Days) Date of inoculation Test fowl No. Result of inoculation Remarks Original Subsequent immunity test with fresh virus Died or survived Time taken to die (Days) 3 4-9-1936 . 182 Died . 13 ... 5 6-9-1936 . 181 Do. . 10 ... 7 8-9-1936 . 183 Do. . 7 ... 7 29-10-1936 278 Survived ... Died 279 Died . 1½ ... Other causes 9 10-9-1936 . 185 Survived .... ... Reacted and survived. 9 31-10-1936 280 Do. ... Died 281 Died . 12 ... 11 12-9-1936 . 204 Do. . 9 ... 11 2-11-1936 . 283 Survived ... Died 284 Died . 11 ... 13 14-9-1936 . 221 Survived ... Died 13 4-11-1936 . 288 Died . 12 ... 287 Do. . 8 ... 17 28-12-1936 480 Do. . 6 ... 21 27-12-1936 488 Do. . 23 ... 24 30-12-1936 489 Do. . 18 ... 31 6-1-1937 492 Reacted and survived ... Survived Viability of the virus exposed to sunlight.86. Viability of Doyle's Disease Virus of Fowls was poured into a sterile petri-dish (4 in. diameter) and exposed to direct sun- light. Healthy fowls were injected with this virus soon after the scheduled time and the syringe barrel was covered with actinic paper during injection. The work could not be extended on account of lack of sunlight. The virus contained in organ emulsion seems to be unaffected in virulence after one hour exposure to sunlight (Table IV). Longer periods seem necessary to kill the virus, unlike the finding of Farinas (loc. cit.). This may perhaps be due to geographical differences. TABLE IV Viability of the virus exposed to sunlight Virus exposed to sunlight for minutes Date of inoculation Test fowl No. Result of Inoculation Remarks Original Subsequent immunity test with fresh virus Died or survived Time taken to die (Days) 16 24-10-1936 254 Died .... 8 ... 255 Reacted, paralysis sur- vived ... Survived . Immune 20 27-10-1936 272 Reacted and survived.. ... Do Do. 276 Died . 10 ... 30 Do. . 269 268 Do. . Do. . 20 13 ... 40 Do. . 275 277 Do. Do. . 13 17 ... 50 Do. . 273 274 Do. . Do. . 8 12 ... 60 Do. . 154 Do. . 18 ... 270 Very late reaction sur- vived ... Died SUMMARY The paper records the results of experiments conducted with reference to the viability of the virus under laboratory condition as well as a review of the past literature on the subject. The virus used for the different tests was mostly contained in organs such as liver and spleen. Ioyle's disease virus after aging at room tempera- ture (about 17°C.) remained viable for 21 days. At 37° C. the virus d d not die after 24 days but was inert after 31 days.
S. GANAPATHY IYER 87 Saline emulsion of buccal swabs from fowls dead of experimental Doyle's disease gave variable results. It remained viable at 37°C. for three days but was found to be dead after four days. Exposure to direct sunlight for one hour had no lethal effect on the virus. REFERENCES Doyle, T. M. (1927). J. Comp. Path. Ther. 40, 144-69 OBSERVATIONS ON THE PHYSIOLOGICAL CONSTITUENTS OF EQUINE BLOOD* BY N. D. KEHAR, M.Sc., Sc.D. Acting Officer-in-Charge, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar MOHAN SINGH, B.A., L.V.P. Research Scholar, Government of the Punjab AND GOVIND RAO, B.A., G.B.V.C. Serology Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 25 August 1939) THE lack of physiological data appears to be keenly felt in formulating a scientific basis in modern therapy. It is believed that a sound knowledge of the amount of the normal constituents of blood will be of incalculable value in the diagnosis and treatment of several hitherto baffling diseased conditions as a standard of comparison with samples from pathological cases. The importance, therefore, of ascertaining the normal physiological standards of the blood of domestic animals cannot be overemphasized as a fundamental to our knowledge of pathology. A considerable amount of work has been done in other countries on the blood chemistry of domestic animals including horses, but a critical examina- tion of the available literature reveals that no attempts have been made so far in establishing these standards in India. Since heredity, diet, climate and topography, besides other factors, are likely to introduce variations in the blood constituents of animals in different parts of the globe as has been observed in human beings [Sokhey, 1936], it was considered advisable to attempt an investigation into the amount of sugar, creatine, creatinine, calcium, inorganic phosphorus, chlorides, cholesterol and different protein fractions of the blood of normal horses. Fourteen apparently healthy and good-sized horses were selected for this investigation. All of these animals were in a satisfactory condition of health. Blood samples were collected by jugular puncture, unless otherwise stated, in the morning after about 12 hours' fasting. All observations were made in duplicate and the average values of two observations are given in Tables I and II. Table III shows the maximum, minimum and the mean of the average values. * This work was carried out at the Physiological Laboratory (Serology Section), Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. (88)
KEHAR, MOHAN SINGH AND GOVIND RAO 89 TABLE I Different constituents of blood and serum Animal No. Milligrams per 100 c.c. blood Milligrams per 100 c.c. serum Sugar Chlorides Preformed creatinine Creatinine + Creatine Calcium Inorganic phosphorus Total Cholesterol 1 . . 80.5 316 1.79 4.15 13.60 2.98 178.7 200 . . 75.5 320 1.50 4.14 12.00 3.22 145.6 265 . . 74.5 301 1.44 4.22 13.75 3.22 122.4 266 . . 67.5 298 1.47 4.02 14.20 3.10 120.3 267 . . 83.5 311 1.46 4.15 12.20 2.73 123.2 268 . . 75.5 312 1.75 4.37 14.10 3.00 195.2 269 . . 74.5 308 1.55 4.46 15.20 2.30 137.12 272 . . 74.0 309 1.45 4.26 13.25 2.12 128.4 346 . . 83.5 308 1.42 4.50 14.45 3.75 185.6 348 . . 66.5 307 1.45 4.62 14.50 3.68 148.0 352 . . 69.0 293 1.62 4.28 13.75 3.80 156.8 359 . . 73.0 304 ... ... 14.30 3.24 ... 405 . . ... 290 1.50 4.69 16.00 2.58 142.4 425 . . ... 310 1.50 4.62 15.70 2.45 139.2 Maximun . . 83.5 320 1.79 4.69 16.00 3.80 195.2 Minimum . . 66.5 290 1.42 4.02 12.00 2.12 120.3 Average . . 74.8 306 1.53 4.34 14.07 3.01 147.9 TABLE II Different constituents of blood Animal No. Grams per 100 c.c. serum Total protein Euglobulin Pseudo- globulin I Pseudo- globulin II Total globulins Albumin Albumin globulin ratio 352 . . 8.805 0.930 1.400 1.575 3.905 4.900 1.25 267 . . 7.430 0.780 1.400 0.970 3.150 4.280 1.35 1 . . 7.875 1.204 1.093 1.050 3.347 4.528 1.35 272 . . 7.995 0.786 1.695 0.983 3.566 4.429 1.24 200 . . 7.350 1.116 1.368 1.148 3.632 3.718 1.02 405 . . 7.962 1.072 1.422 1.093 3.587 4.375 1.21 269 . . 8.172 1.282 1.378 1.028 3.688 4.484 1.21 265 . . 9.056 1.181 1.750 0.875 3.806 5.250 1.37 266 . . 9.208 0.983 1.711 1.114 3.808 5.400 1.42 268 . . 8.532 1.032 1.628 1.242 3.900 4.632 1.18 359 . . 8.735 0.935 1.905 1.008 3.848 4.887 1.26 338 . . 8.450 0.950 1.660 1.028 3.638 4.812 1.32 Maximum . 9.208 1.282 1.905 1.575 3.905 4.900 1.42 Minimum . 7.350 0.780 1.093 0.970 3.150 3.718 1.02 Average . . 8.297 1.020 1.534 1.093 3.656 4.641 1.26
90 Physiological Constituents of Equine Blood TABLE III Maximum, minimum and average values of the constituents Maximum Minimum Average Blood sugar ..... 83.5 66.5 74.8 mg. Chlorides ..... 320.0 290.0 306.0 KEHAR, MOHAN SINGH AND GOVIND RAO 91 equine blood were Kintner and Holt [ 1932 ] and found it to be 451 mg. per 100 ml. of blood in American horses. Creatinine (preformed) and total creatinine.92 Physiological Constituents of Equine Blood TABLE IV Comparison of the average values of blood constituents by different workers Name of the constituents of equine blood Names of workers Kehar, Mohan Singh and Govind Rao Hayden and Tubangui Holt and Reynolds Hayden and Fish Kintner and Holt Dukes Ledingham Hiss and A tkinson Joachim Blood sugar . . 74.8 106.00 109.0 102.9 92 71.5 . . . . . . Chlorides . . 306.0 . . . . . . 451 290.4 . . . . . . Creatinine (preformed). 1.53 1.80 1.4 1.81 1.80 1.55 . . . . . . Total creatinine . 4.34 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Total cholesterol . 147.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Calcium . .. 14.07 . . . . . . 11.2 11.1 . . . . . . Inorganic phosphorus . 3.01 . . . . . . 3.55 6.4 . . . . . . Total protein . . 8.297 . . . . . . . . 6.1 8.266 . . . . Total globulin . . 3.656 . . . . . . . . . . 5.7 3.65 3.89 Euglobulin . . 1.020 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.274 Pseudoglobulin I. . 1.534 . . . . . . . . . . . . . }3.704 Pseudoglobulin II . 1.093 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Albumin . . . 4.641 . . . . . . . . . . 4.365 3.96 5.021
KEHAR, MOHAN SINGH AND GOVIND RAO 93 If the above average values of different constituents of blood are com- pared with those obtained by other workers as shown in Table IV, it will be observed that some of the constituents show considerable variation between the observations recorded in U. S. A., England, Philippines and India. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are grateful to Mr. J. R. Haddow, Officiating Director and Mr. R. L. Kaura, Officiating Serologist, for their continuous help and en- couragement. REFERENCES Campbell, W. R. and Hanna, M. I. (1937). J. Biol. Chem. 119, 15 Clark, E. P. and Collip, J. B. (1925). J. Biol. Chem. 63, 461 Dukes, H. H. (1937). The Physiology of Domestic Animals, Baillire Tindall and Cox, London. Fiske, C. H. and Subbarow, Y. (1925). J. Biol. Chem. 66, 375 Folin, O. and Wu, H. (1919). J. Biol. Chem. 38, 81 Hagedorn, H. C and Jenson, B. N. (1923). [Quoted by Peters and Van Slyke, Quanti- tative Clinical Chemistry II, (1932), 471] Haydon, C.E. (1923). J. Biol. Chem. 56, 469 OBSERVATIONS ON THE ANATOMY OF ACANTHOSTO- MUM BURMINIS (BHALERAO, 1926)* BY G. D. BHALERAO, D.Sc., PH.D. (LOND.), F.Z.S., F.R.M.S., F.A.Sc. Helminthologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (With two text figures) (Received for publication on 3 June 1939) THE species Acanthochasmus burminis was originally described by Bhalerao [1926] from the intestine of the river snake, Natrix piscator, in Burma. Subsequently Thapar and Ali [1929] recorded this parasite from the intestine of the same host in Lucknow. In 1930 the writer obtained this species at Nagpur from the same host. It appears therefore that this parasite has a fairly wide distribution in India and Burma. The writer [Bhalerao, 1936] has already pointed out that since the genus Acanthochasmus is a synonym of Acanthostomum, the specific name Acanthochasmus burminis must neces- sarily be a synonym of Acanthostomum burminis. The gross anatomy of the parasite has already been described by the writer [Bhalerao, 1926] and although the additional material collected pre- sents some deviations, these fall within the range of variations that usually occur within a species. It is not intended therefore to present a detailed account of the anatomy of the parasite, but to confine the remarks to the alimentary system which has not yet been adequately described. The mouth is terminal, being situated at the extreme anterior end. It is surrounded by an oral sucker which is more or less cup-shaped and mea- sures 0. 16×0.13 mm. Slightly behind its periphery, it bears a single row of spines varying from 24 to 27 in number. These spines measure 0.028G. D. BHALERAO 95 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. A.96 Anatomy of Acanthostomum burminis of the body. Before opening to the exterior, however, they show a constant spindle-shaped swelling, which, in the case of the larger cæcum, measure 0. 060 mm. in thickness and in that of the atrophied one only 0. 012 mm. DISCUSSION There exists among the digenetic Trematoda a great diversity of intestinal cæca. In a typical form the cæca are simple, pass posteriorly along the sides of the body and terminate blindly at varying distances from the posterior extremity of the body. The cæca may be branched, either only externally or both externally and internally. In some cases the two cæca may unite and form a common cæcum. Various instances of the modifications of the typical condition may be cited, but these will not be elaborated at present. Recent investigations have shown that cæca, instead of terminating blindly, as in the typical case, may communicate with the exterior. In this latter case also there are three different varieties. Leiper [1908] was the first to detect, in Balfouria monogama, that the intestinal cæca open into the excre- tory bladder and. thus communicate with the exterior. This observation was confirmed by Odhner [1910] in the case of the genus Chaunocephalus and by the same author [Odhner, 1911] in that of Haplocladus. Looss [1912] described such a communication in TetrochG. D. BHALERAO. 97 left intestinal cæcum is normal while the right one is very much atrophied. So far as the writer is aware, such cases have not been previously recorded. The present example provides a very important missing link between the normal condition of having both the cæca well developed and a condition in which there is only one cæcum. This character, in the opinion of the writer, is of such great taxonomic value and evolutionary importance that it is neces- sary to assign the species Acanthostomum burminis to a new genus of the family Acanthostomidæ for which the name AtrophecNYMPHOMANIA WITH SEX REVERSAL IN A PEDIGREE SAHIWAL HEIFER TREATED BACK TO FERTILITY BY N. P. FERNANDEZ, G.B.V.C. Cattle Research Assistant, Imperial Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi (Received for publication on 15 April 1939) (With Plates I and II) INTRODUCTION NYMPHOMANIA in cows and heifers is often associated in advanced cases with the assumption of male characteristics, including very marked physical changes and mental aberration. The affected females assume a great degree of masculinity. The voice becomes deep, closely simulating that of the male and there is a transformation of the feminine expressions of face and head to masculine. The musculature, particularly of neck, dewlap, hump and hind quarters bear striking resemblance to those of a bull, and the rump is pitched high over the topline. The changes in the temperament are particularly noticeable. The affected females exhibit considerable excitement when in presence of females in oestrus, select them out, mount them just like a bull in action, follow them with head held low in the fashion of a bull and roar like a bull on the approach of other animals and persons, and even make attempts to attack them. The association of corpus luteum is a factor in maintaining the female character of the individual. Destruction of corpus luteum tissue by cystic invasion or its degeneration due to other causes is the aetiology of nympho- mania. Cattle of high class pedigree, excellence and high production are generally the likely victims to this malady. The affected females become permanently sterile (Plate I, Fig. 1). HISTORY The case under report is the pedigree heifer No. 769 (Jeswant ×Chansuri). She was born on the 18th of March, 1936, and is the second daughter of our champion cow, Chansuri, who holds a heifer record yield of 7,846 lb. as well as merit of performance of 10,119 lb. in her second lactation and 10,223 lb. in the third lactation of 304 days. The heifer is also a daughter of a sire whose dam's performance is over 8,000 lb. It would appear from the pedigree and performances of her progenitors what a potential heifer she is to the herd. When such pedigree heifers are affected with such incurable form of sterility, it is, no doubt, a great loss to the breeder who endeavours to improve his stock. The heifer was brought up under early maturity treatment, and as a result she came in heat for the first time at the age of one year, five months and four days. She was at this time normally developed for breeding, but (98)
Ind. Jour. Vety, Sci & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part I] PLATE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A typical nymphomania cow [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Nymphomanic heifer No. 769 before treatment
PLATE II [ Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Nymphomanic heifer No. 769 after treatment [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Heifer No. 769 with her calf
N. P. FERNANDEZ 99 she was not covered as she was not at the standard early mating age of twenty months. Thereafter, she never came on heat, but began to develop typical nymphomanic characters, such as masculine appearance of head, face, neck and hump ; marked rise in tail-head ; roaring, mounting all the animals on heat, attacking those animals which try to mount other animals on heat. At that stage she had no desire for grazing except to wander with the animals on heat in a frenzy of sexual excitement akin to that of a bull. TREATMENT On the 28th September, 1937, after examining her genital organs, the author found a well developed muscular ring of hymen in the vagina, the uterus shrunk and rigid with a pinhole os, the left ovary small and atrophied, the right ovary contained a persistent corpus luteum. The muscular ring of hymen was then snipped off, corpus luteum was pressed out, uterus was massaged and the genital organs were douched with a lotion of tincture of iodine (1 in 20) for five consecutive days. On the 31st October, 1937, the heifer came on heat and was served by the stud bull Narayan, but she reverted on 22nd November, exactly 21 days after the last service. She was again covered by the same bull. When she did not show any signs of heat for over a month after her second service and at the same time she did not show any abatement in her nymphomanic temperament, she was examined for pregnancy and was found empty. At this time her uterus was normal and was free from rigidity, and also the os-uterus well opened. There was slight improvement in her left ovary, but her right one this time contained a cyst as big as a walnut. The former was massaged and the latter pressed out with hand. The uterus was again massaged and douched with a lotion of tincture of iodine once a day for fifteen consecutive days. When she did not come on heat after the above treatment, she was examined again on the 28th February, 1938, and the vagina, os-uterus, uterus and fallopian tubes were found in normal condition ; her right ovary was free from cyst, but smaller than the normal size and the left one in a well developed condition. The ovaries were massaged, the uterus was douched with a lotion of tincture of iodine as before, and internally five grains of potash iodide per day was pres- cribed. In spite of these treatments, the heifer did not show the least improvement. When the author failed to bring her to normal condition, the only alter- native left was to stimulate her to milk. The secretion of milk can be set up by the reflex stimulation of the pituitary gland through the elaboration of the prolactin hormone. The reflex stimulation of the pituitary gland for this purpose can be brought about by massaging the ovaries. Moreover, the massaging of the ovaries stimulates the ovarian tissue to elaborate an ovarian hormone which not only controls the functional activity of the uterus, but has also to do with the development of mammary glands and other sexual characteristics of the female. On this basis, the ovaries were massaged at frequent and repeated inter- vals. As a result, the heifer began to show a rapid development of her udder. On the 17th March, 1938, her udder was found engorged with milk. On milking her, she yielded three pounds of thick yellowish milk of colostrum
100 Nymphomania with sex reversal in a Sahiwal Heifer quality. Thereafter, the heifer was milked freely every day with the ex- press purpose of helping her to develop all the qualities of a normal cow, and she yielded an average of three pounds of milk on a bare ration of roughage only. Since the day, she began yielding milk, a remarkable change took place in her masculine characters. She was found to be quiet, more temperate in her general behaviour and free from perverted habits. She stopped roaring and showed no desire to hunt after cows on heat. Still she showed no signs of oestrum. To start the oestrus cycle, she was subcutaneously injected on the 18th March, 1938, with 82 c.c. of a detoxicated mixed urine from a cow and a heifer in advanced pregnancy, for four consecutive days. When she did not come on heat even after this treatment, she was examined on the 27th April, 1938, and her genital organs were found normal and the ovary treated for cyst had now grown to the size of pigeon egg and was quite sound. The ovaries were again massaged and the uterus was douched as before. On the following day she started roaring like a bull, but after two days she was quite normal again, on putting her under a course of potash iodide. At this stage she was yielding four pounds of milk per day. On the 7th May, 1938, she came on heat and when she was put to the bull, she was accommodative just like other heifers under normal conditions and allowed herself to be followed by the bull without the least resistance, but the bull did not cover her. Evidently, she was passing through a feeble heat of very short duration. On the 29th May, she was again on heat (exactly twenty-one days after the last heat) and was served by the stud bullN. P. FERNANDEZ 101 SUMMARY 1. Atrophy or degeneration of ovarian tissue causes nymphomania in females by disfunctioning the oestrus cycle. 2. Massaging of the ovaries causes (a) regeneration of the ovarian tissue, (b) secretion of ovarian hormone for the development of udder, (c) reflex stimulation of the pituitary gland elaborating prolactin which induces the secretion of milk, and (d) re-starting of oestrus cycle. 3. Nymphomania is a form of sterility. It is curable, if properly handled before it becomes chronic. APPENDIX A CHANSURI HEIFER No. 769 Pre-milk yield as an uncovered heifer Lb. Days March 1938... 29¾ 16 Milked twice a day April... 113 30 Ditto. May.... 123 31 Ditto. June... 98 30 Milked twice a day up to 11th and then once a day July... 75 31 Once a day August (up to4th). 10½ 4 Ditto (covered on 4th August 1938) Total 449¼ 142 Pre-milk yield as a covered heifer Lb. Days From 5th August 1938 . 70½ 27 Milked once a day September . . . 59 30 Ditto. October (up to 19th) . . 23¾ 19 Ditto. Total 153¼ 76 GRAND TOTAL 602½ 218 O
102 Nymphomania with sex reversal in a Sahiwal Heifer APPENDIX B Comparison between pre-milk and normal milk * Composi- tion Pre-milk of the uncovered heifer No.769 Average Pre-milk of a covered heifer Pre-milk of a 2nd calver Adult cow Date Three months before calving Two days before calving Two days before calving Two days before calving Nor- mal milk 21st March 1938 24th March 1938 25th March 1938 8th April 1938 12th April 1938 Blood . Traces Traces Traces Traces Traces ... ... ... ... ... ... Fat . 3.0 4.0 3.8 4.2 4.8 3.9 4.8 5.5 2.7 1.5 4.2 Protein . 5.4 4.5 4.4 3.5 3.8 4.3 2.9 4.6 4.6 7.3 3.5 Total solids 13.2 14.3 13.8 14.1 14.4 13.9 14.4 15.4 13.4 14.4 13.8 * These analyses were done by the Imperial Agricultural Chemist to whom the author's acknowledgments are due.
RINDERPEST IN SHEEP AND GOATS IN AJMER- MERWARA* BY H. S. BAWA, M.R.C.V.S. Veterinary Investigation Officer, Sind and Ajmer-Merwara, Karachi (Received for publication on 24 January 1939) (With Plate III and four text figures) INTRODUCTION DISEASES of sheep and goats in India have not received the attention they deserve. Only recently, under a research scheme sanctioned by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, has it been made possible to in- vestigate the disease of these animals. Variola and mange are commonly met with and at times account for high mortality. Diseases due to internal parasites are not common in this part of the country. Rinderpest, which is usually met with in cattle and buffaloes, is not uncommon in sheep and goats. Paucity of literature appears to be due to the fact that this condition is rarely brought to the notice of veterinary authorities and to the difficulties of correct diagnosis. In Ajmer-Merwara sheep and goat breeding is a very important industry among poor people who have no other means of livelihood. During April 1938, an outbreak of contagious disease among sheep and goats causing heavy mortality was reported by the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Kekri sub-division, Ajmer-Merwara. The symptoms observed in the affected animals, which succumbed after a short illness of three to five days, were high temperature (105° to 106 .5° F.), diarrh104 Rinderpest in Sheep and Goats in Ajmer-Merwara with a muco-purulent discharge from the nostrils. The anal region and the hind legs were soiled with liquid fæces, which in some cases contained large quantities of mucus and blood. As the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon re- ported that in some cases there was enlargement of the spleen, blood smears from a sheep which had just died were examined but proved negative for anthrax. Further post mortem examination was conducted on two dead sheep, in which the lungs appeared pneumonic and the gastro-intestinal tract congested. Smears prepared from heart blood, liver, spleen and lungs were negative for hæmorrhagic septicæmia and piroplasmosis. In a few more autopsies conducted subsequently, pneumonic changes in the lungs were not a constant feature, and the probability of the disease being contagious pleuro-pneumonia was, to some extent, ruled out. On the con- trary, typical lesions of rinderpest, such as ulceration and congestion en- countered in bovines, were observed in the gastro-intestinal tract. In about 20 per cent of cases small ulcers were noticed on the lips and tongue. From the clinical symptoms and post mortem findings recorded above, the disease showed a very close resemblance to rinderpest. The puzzling thing, however, was that cattle and buffaloes of the same and adjoining villages were not affected, although some of them were housed at night with the affected sheep and grazed with them during the day. The outbreaks of rinderpest among sheep and goats in the hills and plains reported by D'Costa [1936] were usually connected with outbreaks of rinderpest among cattle of the same village and the mortality among sheep and goats was not heavy. With a view to confirming my provisional diagnosis of rinderpest, it was decided to carry out blood sub-inoculation. For this purpose a sheep show ing a temperature of 105.5° F. was selected and 8 c. c. of blood was withdrawn under sterile precautions from its jugular vein and mixed with a 4 per cent solution of sodium citrate. A buffalo-calf, a goat and a sheep were inoculated subcutaneously with the citrated blood in doses of 3 c. c, 2 c. c. and 1.5 c. c. respectively. The buffalo-calf showed a thermal reaction on the fourth day and on the fifth and the sixth registered a temperature of 107° F. with lachrymation, vesicles on the lips and soft fæces. In the goat only a thermal reaction was noticed on the third day. In the sheep the reaction was mild and the temperature rose to 103° F. but there were no other symptoms. A cow-calf which was also inoculated with 5 c. c. of citrated blood showed a thermal reaction and no other symptoms on the third day and registered 105° F. on the sixth day. The temperature of experimental subjects are given in text-figures 1 to 4. For additional confirmation of the diagnosis, a piece of spleen was re- moved with strict sterile precautions from the sheep used for blood sub- inoculations, and was despatched to the Imperial Veterinary Research Insti- tute, Mukteswar, for biological test. The disease was confirmed as rinder- pest. Galambos [1861] established with certainty a disease in sheep identical with rinderpest and he also succeeded in transmitting it artificially to sheep. Since then the susceptibility of sheep as well as goats has been repeatedly confirmed
H. S. BAWA 105 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Buffalo Calf106 Rinderpest in Sheep and Goats in Ajmer-Merwara [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. SheepH. S. BAWA 107 The actual number of deaths recorded in Ajmer-Merwara outbreaks are shown in the following statement:108 Rinderpest in Sheep and Goats in Ajmer-Merwara Koch's experiments [1897] of artificially infecting Merino and Cape sheep with bull virus showed that the sheep became severely infected and the virus more active when passed from sheep to cattle. From the investigation made by the author it appears that the virus after passage through sheep and goats, got exalted in virulence for these animals and became attenuated for cattle and buffaloes. REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION Nearly the whole of Ajmer-Merwara and some of the native states of Rajputana were affected, but it was not possible to collect the correct figures as the villagers often did not report the disease. SEASONAL INCIDENCE From the experience of the last two years, it has been seen that the disease runs a definite course. Outbreaks generally start during March and continue till the monsoon sets in. SYMPTOMS The first symptom of the disease, which usually preceded the other manifestations by one or two days, was the rise in temperature from 105° to 106.5°F. At the same time animals showed marked depression, dullness and shivering. They refused to graze and were disinclined to move. Respiration and pulse were accelerated. Visible mucous membranes were congested. Many of the affected animals coughed frequently. There was thick nasal discharge (Plate III, fig. 1). As a result of the affection of the intestinal tract there was constipation during the first two days of the disease and fæces were hard and dry. Later on, profuse diarrhInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part I ] PLATE III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Showing Muco-purulent discharge from the nose [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Showing the anal region and hind legs soiled with liquid faeces [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Showing fatal stage due to exhaustion
H. S. BAWA 109 the lungs showed only acute hyperemia. The heart was flabby and of dull greyish brown colour and pin head hæmorrhages were seen in 40 per cent of cases under the epicardium and endocardium. The liver was considerably enlarged, fragile to the touch and discoloured. The gall-bladder was dis- tended and contained thin, dirty green bile, in some cases amounting to four ounces. No necrosis of the mucous membrane of the gall-bladder was seen. The spleen, kidney and pancreas were normal in appearance. The chief lesions were found in the gastro-intestinal tract. The abomasum was highly congested, severely ulcerated and studded with hæmorrhages, especially in the region of the pylorus. The cæcum was also severely ulcerated and con- gested. The intestinal canal contained dirty grey or darkish brown, very liquid f110 Rinderpest in Sheep and Goats in Ajmer-Merward TABLE I Anti-rinderpest serum alone inoculations in sheep and goats Village Date on which disease commenced Date of inocula- tion No. of animals in village No. died before inocula- tion No. inocu- lated Number died after inoculation Dose of serum Remarks Inoculated animals Un- inoculated animals KEKRI . . . 10-3-38 . 27-4-38 . 3,000 Sheep and goats Sh. Gt. 280 40 Sh. Gt. 135 30 Sh. Gt. 25 4 Sh. Gt. 58 5 5 c. c. 110 Sh. 20 Gt. Cent per cent pro- tection. 320 165 29 63 10 c. c. 25 Sh. 10 Gt. 8.2 per cent cures. Infected ones were given 10 c. c. serum. GUJARWADA . 25-4-38 . 7-5-38 . 800 Sheep and goats Sh. Gt. 75 5 Sh. Gt. 80 14 Sh. Gt. 23 2 Sh. Gt. 50 5 5 c. c. 74 Sh. 14 Gt. 21.6 per cent Morta- lity. Temperature of the flock was not taken before inocu- lation. 80 94 25 55 10 c. c. 6 Sh. In infected ones cent per cent deaths were reported. KHERIA . . 15-4-38 . 19-5-38 . 800 Sheep and goats 396 92 Sh. Gt. 6 ... Sh. Gt. 15 7 7 c. c. 65 Sh. 15 Gt. 6 22 5 c. c. 12 Kids 6.5 per cent Morta- lity. SAIDRIA . . 15-2-38 . 3-6-38 . Sh. 500 Gt. 100 Sh. Gt. 290 30 Sh. 23 ... ... 10 c. c. 12 Sh. 5 c. c. 11 Sh. Results could not be collected. 600 320 KANNI-KHEDA . 2-5-38 . 27-5-38 . Sh. 300 Gt. 80 Sh. Gt. 137 19 Sh. Gt. 104 20 Sh. Gt. 13 4 Whole herd was inocu- lated. 10 c. c. 104 Sh. 20 c. c. 20 Gt. 13.7 per cent Morta- lity. Out of 17 deaths 15 animals were in incubative stage showing tem- perature between 103H. S. BAWA 111 TABLE II Simultaneous anti-rinderpest serum and G. T. V. inoculations at Kanni-Kheda Species Temperature Date of inoculation Dose of serum Dose of G. T. V. Results on 31-5-38, i.e. on 4th day Results on 5-6-38, i.e. on 9th day Results on 15-6-38, i.e. on 20th day Remarks 5 sheep . 101.5° to 102.5° 27-5-38 . 20 c. c. each 1 c. c. . Temp. 102° to 103.5° Normal appearance. No diarrh112 Rinderpest in Sheep and Goats in Ajmer-Merwara REFERENCES Ann. Rept. Civil Vet. Dept. Bombay and Sind (1931-32) AN UNRECORDED SPIRURID WORM, R ICTULARIA CAHIRENSIS JAGERSKIOLD, 1904, FROM THE INTESTINE OF AN INDIAN CAT BY H. D. SRIVASTAVA, M.Sc., D.Sc. Helminthologist (On Special Duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 4 May 1939) FROLICH [1802] created the genus Rictularia with R. cristata from Mus sylvaticus as the type species. Hall [1913] accepted it as the type genus of anew sub-family Rictulariinae, which was raised three years later to the status of a family by Railliet. Though presenting some unmistakable points of resemblance with the Thelaziinae, the systematic relationships of this genus are still very uncertain. Representatives of the genus are parasitic in the small intestine of mammals114 An unrecorded Spirurid Worm, Rictularia Cahirensis The common occurrence of R. cahirensis and Mesocestoides lineatus in one and the same host is explained by the fact that the worms have a common second intermediate host. REFERENCES Frolich, J. A. Van. (1802). Naturforscher, Halle, 29, p. 5 Hall, M. C. (1913). Proc. U. S. Nat. Mas. Wash. 46, p. 73 Jagerskiold, L. A. (1909). Results Swedish Zool. Exped. to Egypt and White Nile, 1901 No. 25, Upsala Srivastava, H. D. (1937). Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong. Sect. VIII, Absts. Nos. 45 and 53 Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part I ] PLATE IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Test for osteoprosis [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Tost for osteoprosis
A SIMPLE AND PRACTICAL TEST FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF OSTEOPROSIS IN HORSES BY V. D. RATNAM, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon on Glanders Duty, Madras (Received for publication on 27 June 1939) (With Plate IV) THE test was first invented by Dr. Akio Iizuko of Japan and subsequently tried by A. K. Gomus and Arcadio, C. Gonzagia, College of Veterinary Science, University of the Philippines. After seeing the article by the above- mentioned Philippine authors in the Journal of American Veterinary Medical Association for October 1938, the writer of this article tested 70 horses in H. E. the Governor's Bodyguard of Madras during the month of January 1939. As a result he was able to detect 22 cases of Osteoprosis in an early and incipient stage of the disease without any clinical manifestations and also confirmed one advanced case of Osteoprosis showing clinical symptoms. The author of this article made an instrument consisting of a pointed iron needle measuring about 2 mm. in diameter and 2 cm. in length mounted on a wooden handle measuring about four inches in length with a diameter of ¾ inch. The test is applied by inserting the pointed needle with a steady and moderate pressure into the region over the frontal sinus. The proper point for inserting is near the middle of an imaginary line drawn connecting the inner canthi of the eyes. If the case is a positive one, the needle can be inserted into the bone easily; the animal keeps quiet without showing any symptoms of pain and the needle with its wooden handle stands perpendicular to the face as shown in Plate IV fig. 1. In negative cases, the needle cannot be inserted into the bone and the needle simply hangs on to the skin as shown in Plate IV fig 2. The test should be applied on the left side of the median line but not on the right side, as it gives, at times, negative results even though the horse may be positive for Osteoprosis. The degree of softness of the bone can be very safely divided into two classes as (1) soft, (2) very soft. Out of 22 positive cases detected by this test, one was in advanced stage, showing clinical symptoms of Osteoprosis, while the other 21 horses did not show any clinical symptoms of Osteoprosis. Most of them, however, had been lame for some complaint or other. As recommended in the Journal of American Veterinary Medical Association, these positive cases were treated with one table-spoonful of calcium carbonate daily in feed for nearly two months. Along with this treatment, the Philippine authors recommend the subcutaneous and intravenus injections of colloidal magnesium hydrate 1 per cent solution from 50 to 100 c.c. to help the retention of calcium in the bones and to hasten the recovery. (115)
116 Test for the diagnosis of Osteoprosis in horses As this drug was not available anywhere in India, only calcium carbonate was tried for two months and then the animals which had given a positive test before were retested after two months. Ten cases gave complete negative results and in the remaining 12, the bone was not so very soft as it was before the treatment. These horses were aged and it was thought the absorption of calcium was very slow. The calcium treatment is therefore being continued for another two months for further observation. All the four young remounts gave negative test after the treatment. This shows that in young horses the recovery is quicker than in older ones. CONCLUSION It is the opinion of the writer of this article that Osteoprosis is fairly common in horses in Madras and that a horse should be tested at least twice or thrice in a year so that the disease can be detected in its early stage and treated suc- cessfully. The test is based upon the observation that the bones of the skull, particularly the frontal bones, are the parts of the skeleton which are affected first. This simple test is harmless and can be very easily performed periodi- cally on all horses in a stable to pick out animals which are in need of calcium treatment. This will arrest further progress of the disease.
VERMINOUS PNEUMONIA IN INDIAN BUFFALOES- BOS BUBALIS (PRELIMINARY REPORT) BY H. D. SRIVASTAVA, M.Sc., D.Sc. Helminthologist (On Special Duty) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 4 May 1939) VERMINOUS pneumonia in domestic animals is one of the most serious of parasitic diseases for which no satisfactory method of treatment or preven- tion is known. Apart from the larvae of certain round-worms which inhabit the pulmonary tissue only temporarily during their wanderings in the bodies of their hosts and then leave quickly for their seat of predilection, there are several round-worms which parasitise the lungs, pulmonary connective tissue, bronchi, bronchioles and trachea in their adult stage. Among the herbivora representatives of four genera of lung-worms118 Verminous Pneumonia in Indian BuffaloesA CHECK-LIST OF THE NEMATODE PARASITES OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN BURMA. II. BY J. BHATTACHARJEE, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.T.V.M., M.R.SAN.I, F.C.S., F.Z.S. Deputy Director of Veterinary Services, Central Charge and Cattle Breeding, Yamethin, Burma (Received for publication on 7 August 1939) INTRODUCTION THIS article is a continuation of the Check-list previously published by the author [ Bhattacharjee, 1937 ]. All the parasites listed in this article were identified by the author from the collections of the Veterinary Research Laboratory, Insein, Burma. The host animals considered in this article are the following: elephant (Elephas indicus) , horse (Equus caballus) , goat (Capra hircus) , dog (Canis familiaris) , fowl (Gallus gallus domesticus) , and pigeon (Columba livia domestica). Ascaridia columbae (Gmelin, 1790) Travassos, 1913. Host. Pigeon. Situation. Intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Ascaridia galli (Schrank, 1788) Freeborn, 1923. Host. Fowl. Situation. Intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Strongylus edentatus (Looss, 1900) Railliet and Henry, 1909. Host. Horse. Situation. Large intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Strongylus vulgaris (Looss, 1900) Railliet and Henry, 1909. Host. Horse. Situation. Large intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Gyalocephalus capitatus Looss, 1900. Host. Horse. Situation. Caecum. First record of this parasite from Burma. According to Baylis [ 1929 ] this is a comparatively rare species. Poteriostomum imparidentatum Quiel, 1919. Host. Horse. Situation. Intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. (119)
120 Nematode Parasites of the Domesticated Animals in Burma Trichonema longibursatum (Yorke and Macfie, 1918). Host. Horse. Situation. Large intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Khalilia pileata (Railliet, Henry and Bauché, 1914). Host. Elephant. Situation. Large intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Gaigeria pachysalis Railliet and Henry, 1910. Host. Goat. Situation. Small intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Parabronema indicum Baylis, 1921. Host. Elephant. Situation. Gastric tumour. First record of this parasite from Burma. Oxyspirura mansoni Cobbold, 1879. Host. Fowl. Situation. Under nictitating membrane of eye. First record of this parasite from Burma. Gnathostoma spinigerum Owen, 1836. Host. Dog. Situation. Stomach wall. First record of this parasite, in dog, from Burma. Recorded previously in cat, by Bhattacharjee [ 1937 ]. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author wishes to thank the Director of Veterinary Services, Burma, Rangoon, and the Veterinary Research Officer, Insein, Burma, for providing facilities for carrying out this work. He also wishes to thank all those who assisted in the collection of parasites. REFERENCES Baylis, H. A. (1929). A Manual of Helminthology, London, p. 156 Bhattacharjee, J. (1937). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 7, 87-96 ABSTRACTS How to make grass silage. C. B. BENDER and E. S. SAVAGE (1939), Hoard's Dairyman, 84, No. 11, 337 and 352 THE question regarding the use of grasses for legumes122 ABSTRACTS silo should be sealed with one foot of wet weeds,straw, sawdust, or other waste material. Spoilage may, however, be reduced to a minimum by levelling the fodder on top, tramp- ing extremely well and wetting the surface down several times during the first week. [J. N. W.] A study of factors concerning herd management and herd production. LYNN COPELAND (1939), Jour. Dairy Sci. 22, 229-39 THE values of official production records were given as follows: (1) indicate economic wealth of a cow, (2) furnish some information as to her transmitting ability, (3) assist in proving both her sire and dam, (4) fat percentage and persistency of production records are valuable for increasing the average herd test and persistency, and (5) good records possess advertising value. Additional information obtained from the herd average is of great value in constructive breeding work. A study of 1046 Jersey herds under a herd test (including 27,364 cows, 12,274 of which completed their lactations for one year), was made. Although the term ' breed- ing efficiency ' is often used to mean the number of calves per cow per year, in this paper the term is used in reference to the ' fraction of the year which a cow is in milk or in- versely the percentage of the herd dry during the year '. Breeding efficiency was found to be directly related to average production. Two figures regarding any particular herd, it is suggested, are important: (1) average number of cows in the herd, and (2) average number of cows in milk throughout the year. The difference between the two gives the number of days an animal was dry during the year. The percentage of dry cows in a herd was found to be inversely proportional to the herd average, as indicated by a coefficient or correlation of - 0.57 ± 0.014. The average percentage of dry cows in all herds was 14.48 per cent. The author recommends this figure as a good measure of the comparative breeding efficiency of different herds. It was found to be easier to maintain the breeding efficiency of small herds than large ones. Disease control became more difficult as the size of herd increased. Regard- less, however, of the average production of the herd, rigid culling was usually advan- tageous. Turner's statement that persistency of production tends to decline gradually with age was substantiated in this study. For cows under five years, 84 per cent completed lactations of more than 270 days. For cows from five to eight years and past nine years the figures were 81 per cent and 77 per cent respectively. The average age of 1,582 heifers at first calving was found to be 26.49 months. This was, however, felt by Jersey breeders to be higher than the ideal. The herd average was based on the average num- ber (daily average for the year) of cows in the herd and not on the average number in milk, and heifers freshening during the year milk to the end of the year, as a rule, thus eliminating the dry period. Therefore, heifers calving for the first time during the year did not handicap the herd average; in this study they actually helped it. [J. N. W.] Rearing the calf. A. T. (1939), Jour. Jamaica Agric. Soc. 43 (4 & 5), 208-11 COWS which calve in the open select for themselves a sheltered dry place and have very little difficulty except for abnormal presentation. Cows which calve in stalls must be provided with ample bedding and both bedding and stall must be disinfected. The cow is broken to milk most easily if the calf is removed immediately. There is a difference of opinion as to how long the calf might stay with the cow. If the calf is valuable, it is best to leave it up to four or five days, otherwise it may be removed at birth. The navel cord should be disinfected immediately after birth to prevent infection. A good mixture for this purpose is one part of carbolic acid and 19 parts raw linseed oil. The cow should be milked regularly to prevent udder conges- tion. Feeding the young calf.ABSTRACTS 123 A substitute for colostrum, should the dam die, may be : whip one egg in one-half pint warm water, add one-half teaspoonful of castor oil and stir in one pint of milk for each feeding. Hand feeding.124 ABSTRACTS The only streptococcal disease of bovines is the common chronic mastitis caused by Group B haemolytic streptococci (Str. agalactiae) . Other streptococci, viz. Str. dysgalactiae and Str. Uberis (Diernhofer) designated respectively as Group II and III of mastitis streptococci, have been isolated from acute and sporadic cases of mastitis. Group A haemolytic streptococci (Str. pyogenes) and those of Group C have also, though rarely, caused mastitis in cows and the former, through contaminated milk, is mainly respon- sible for epidemics of scarlet fever and septic sore throat in man. In equines, the haemolytic streptococci are commonly associated with strangles, pneumonia, nasal sinus infections, joint ill, metritis, abortion and various wound in- fections. So far all equine strains have fallen into one serological group (Group C), and streptococci from infections other than strangles forming a sub-group distinct from the streptococci of strangles. A variety of canine affections have been shown to be caused by haemolytic strepto- cocci, namely septicaemia, tonsillitis, adenitis, otitis media, sterility, puerperal fever and cellulitis. Most canine strains have fallen into Group G and some into Group C. Whilst it is presumed that streptococci are responsible for some disease conditions in other animals, there is as yet little evidence of their nature and incidence. Apart from symptomatic and palliative measures, the control and treatment of streptococcal diseases lie in segregation, vaccination and chemotherapy. Segregation has proved a measure of decided value in dealing with chronic Str. agalactiae mastitis of dairy cows, but much information is required before it can be regarded as a sound means of control of streptococcal infections of other animals. Vaccines on the whole have been disappointing. Acridine dyes (rivanol, entozon) and the flavines (acriflavine, euflavine, and proflavine) have been found to exercise a marked bactericidal action against strepto- cocci when used locally, especially in mastitis. Substances of the prontosil-sulphanilamide type, which have given strikingly encouraging results in combating human infections caused by Group A streptococci, have proved beneficial against Group C when used orally or parentally. Clinical reports suggest the use of sulphanilamide in streptococcal diseases of dogs due to streptococci of Group G. The drug is well tolerated by all animals (J. A. I. A new prophylaxis for wound myiasis in domestic animals. M. A. STEWART (1939), J. Econ. Ent. 32, 404-7 THE author reports that the annual loss from the screw-worm in Texas alone has been estimated at from $4,000,000 to $10,000,000 and that some more millions of dollars can be added to this on account of loss caused through the attacks of other myiasis- producers. Various substances have been recommended for the prevention of wound myiasis in domestic animals ; tannic acid followed by an application of pine tar or some of the cresol dips ; one part furfural and four parts pine tar oil; acid-free, dehydrated pine tar oil with a specific gravity of 1.065 to 1.085 ; and bone oil. Of these, the acid-free dehydrated pine tar oil has been the most efficient. However, this material has not been particularly satisfactory in the interior valleys of California and similar places where high temperatures and low atmospheric humidities prevail during the periods of maximum fly activity. The author, therefore, undertook an investigation into the possibility of finding out a more efficient and economical substance which would repel flies from wounds, stimulate wound repair and successfully withstand high temperatures, low atmospheric humidities and relatively low temperatures and heavy rains. The last was necessary, because in California there is no season of the year when one can be certain that myiasis will not occur. After a series of experiments with different combinations of various chemicals and also with bone oil alone, the author obtained satisfactory results with a mixture of pine tar oil, paraffin and viscous oil. The proportions and specifications of these chemicals were as follows :ABSTRACTS 125 The viscous oil had a flash point Cleveland 540°F. maximum; viscosity at 100°F. Saybolt Universal 2,900-3,200; pour point + 50°F. maximum ; colour A. S. T. M. 2.0 maximum ; carbon conradson 0.5 per cent maximum ; and sulphur bomb 0.5 per cent maximum. (B. C. B.) The influence of frequency of cutting on yield, chemical composition, digestibility and nutritive value of some grass species. J. G. Louw (1938), Onderstepoort J., 2, 163-244 INVESTIGATIONS were carried out on five indigenous grasses grown under natural conditions of soil and climate. The experiment covered two successive growing seasons 1935-36, 1936-37. The following frequency of cutting was applied : 1. Cutting at monthly intervals, 2. cutting at two months' intervals, 3. cutting at three months' intervals, 4. cutting after four months' growth, followed by an aftermath cut of two months' growth, and 5. cutting once only towards the end of the growing season, usually a six-monthly cut. To test the digestibility, nine trials were conducted on three adult Merino Wethers. Six-monthly and four-monthly cuttings yielded more dry matter than two and three- monthly cuttings. Monthly cuttings produced the lowest dry matter. Furthermore, the amount of dry matter obtainable under a two-months' system of cutting may not differ materially from that of one cut at the end of the season or two cuts as represented by a four-monthly cut followed by an aftermath cut two months later. Phosphorus, potassium and chlorine, crude protein, and silica free ash contents, decreased with the decreasing frequency of cutting. Calcium and magnesium contents did not show appreciable variations with stage of growth. Sodium content decreased with age in the plant. Crude fibre content varied inversely with the crude protein content. Nitrogen-free extract content varied very little and showed no definite tendency. Ether soluble extract content indicated irregular fluctuations. The highest yield of crude protein and phosphorus was obtained when grasses were cut at intervals of two months during the growing season. The digestion coefficients for crude protein, crude fibre, nitrogen-free extract, and to a lesser extent, ether extract decreased with the decreasing frequency of cutting. The apparent digestibility of the crude protein appeared to be influenced to a greater extent than the other constituents. The nutritive ratio remained extremely wide in most cases but was profoundly in- fluenced by the stages of growth. During 1935-36 it decreased from 18.6 to the medium value of 7.8 in the monthly cuts, while in 1936-37 it remained wide for all treatments but nevertheless decreased from 29.6 in the oldest to 10.6 in the youngest herbage. It is concluded that a system of cutting natural veld grasses at intervals of two months during the growing season will result in the optimum utilization of such pastures. (S. A. Q.)
ORIGINAL ARTICLES CONTAGIOUS PLEURO-PNEUMONIA OF GOATS BY E. O. LONGLEY, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. Lecturer in Pathology and Bacteriology, Madras Veterinary College (With Plates V to XV and two text-figures) (Received for publication on 27th February 1940) INTRODUCTION A. Historical and geographical aspects HUTYRA and Marek [1938] assign one and a half pages of their fourth edi- tion to caprine contagious pleuro-pneumonia, which they describe as a pneumonia of lobar distribution with, commonly, sero-fibrinous pleuritis and profuse effusion. Splenomegaly and petechial haemorrhages on the serous and mucous surfaces, are also described. According to them the disease was first described in Algeria by Thomas in 1873 and has since been reported from the Pyrenees in Germany, in Italy, in the eastern European countries and also in East Africa and India, in most instances in epizootic form. Orr [1937] gives a description of a condition of goats in the Malay States which closely accords with that occurring in the Madras Province. The existence of a pneumonic disease of goats in epizootic form in India was first recognised some 20 years ago, and quoting Shirlaw [1939] : ' Inten- sive research on this problem dates from 1919. Between the years 1919-23, Muktesar was approached by the Provinces of Bombay (including Sind), Punjab and N.-W. F. Province and the United Provinces for help in the elucidation and control of goat and sheep diseases. Pneumonia of rather a peculiar type was stated to be the most serious problem affecting breeders and was said to occur most severely in the sub-montane tracts, although not confined to them. In 1923, the disease reached such dimensions in Garhwal (U. P.) as practically to exterminate certain herds, and losses were generally so great that goats had to be imported from China.' It thus appears that this disease is wide-spread, occurring in Europe, the near East and East and can assume panzootic proportions. Sporadic research had proceeded at the Madras College from the year 1932, with a view to transmitting the disease, using material preserved in glycerine and saline received from field outbreaks, but no consistent results attended the work either in Madras, or elsewhere. In 1937, a scheme for intensive research was drawn up and a Government grant obtained for its execution. Before proceeding to the experimental work, it is proposed to describe briefly the clinical picture, course, and post mortem appearances in the specific condition. (127)
128 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats B. Symptomatology, course and pathology Symptoms.E. O. LONGLEY 129 Chart II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] It is characteristic of the Indian goat that the appetite is unimpaired and the animals usually take food readily up to the agonal stage. Constant symptoms are loss of condition, weakness and staring coat, while in the experimental pneumonias, sudden dullness and listlessness is a common and valuable sign. Dyspnoea is sometimes marked, particularly on exertion and in the latest stages, when the bleat also becomes weak and assumes a peculiar timbre. Percussion gives a definite indication in advance cases, particularly if the pneumonia is unilateral, but if the lesions are early or involve the apical lobe only, presents obvious difficulties and cannot detect specific from non- specific consolidation. Summarising, it may be stated that no pathognomonic symptoms can be described and that diagnosis by clinical inspection of individuals is by no means easy. Course.130 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats In healthy goats insufflated experimentally for purposes of passage, (108) 81, or 75.0 per cent have been infected. Including with these all healthy con- trols to experiments, 104 out of 139 or 74.8 per cent developed the disease. Pathology.Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE V [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Typical post-mortem appearance of affected lungs. The right hand arrow indicates.
E. O. LONGLEY 131 TABLE III Lobar distribution* Apical Cardiac Diaphragmatic All three 34 42 56 12 It will be seen (Table II) that bilateral involvement is twice as common as unilateral, though usually the lesions are not equally extensive on the two sides. The apparent predilection for the right lung in unilateral involve- ment (q. v.) is off-set by the asterisked figures for bilateral involvement, where the more advanced lesions were predominantly on the left side. Thus the totals for the two sides are : left lung 20, right lung 21. Table III indicates that the diaphragmatic lobe is the most frequently affected (63.0 per cent) the apical the least (42.5 per cent), with the cardiac lobe intermediate (50.0 per cent). This is not in accordance with Orr (op. cit.) who reports the most advanced and presumably most frequent lesions in the apical lobe. Entire lungs have been involved in 12 of the 54 cases concerned. Lungs.132 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats both of the alveoli and of the interlobular septa. The lesion is resiliant to the touch, usually in continuity with a hepatised area and on incision exudes clear, straw-coloured fluid, which is highly virulent. The lesion is red in colour, and histopathologically presents a picture of oedema of the alveoli, with marked dilatation and congestion of the capillaries of the alveolar walls, and oedematous infiltration of the inter-alveolar septa. Macroscopically this infiltration is readily discernible, but is never as gross as in the bovine disease. In both the figures in Plate V, this type of lesion is well depicted, in- volving both the apical and cardiac lobes of both lungs. The septal in- filtration is particularly clear and the lesion is well contrasted with the true hepatisation of the diaphragmatic lobe. With this type of lesion, the method of spread is definitely via the inter- lobular septa. The septa at the periphery of the lesion are invariably dilated with lymph and radiate out from the focus of infection well into the surround- ing healthy lung. The focal type of lesion, however, appears to spread by a progressive, non-selective involvement of all surrounding healthy lung tissue and is so spreading in the lungs here depicted. The usual picture at autopsy is pleurisy with effusion, as described ; and partial or complete hepatisation of lobes, with varying extension by means of one or the other of the types of early lesion described. The hepatisation is either red or grey in colour, but on histological grounds it can be stated that the traditional ' red hepatisation ', with rupture of capillaries and the accumulation of erythrocytes in the alveoli, the prelude to ' grey hepatisa- tion ', does not occur. In no sections has true red hepatisation been observed. This point is discussed further under ' Histopathology '. In extensive and late lesions, the main portions are extremely friable and dry, and the central portions are frankly necrotic. In a few instances, inextensive but unmistakably specific lesions have been found, undergoing fibrosis and encapsulation. The above description is of typical specific lesions. Other lesions which have been observed have been : (1) A nodular or diffuse fibrosis, with, in the former, marked contrac- tion. This has been observed several times (Experiments 1 and 11). In one instance it was in association with multiple abscesses and in one other, with a marked eosinophilia. The others have definitely been cases of post-pneumonic fibrosis, in respect of which no further expression of opinion is justified. (2) Small areas of collapse, red in colour and involving a few conti- guous lobules. This type of lesion has been by no means rare, and in one instance was observed in a three months old in- contact kid born on the premises in association with a bron- chiolitis. No success attended attempts at transmission from any of these lesions, however, and their significance is not known. A ' marbled' appearance of the lungs, resembling the typical bovine lesion, has been observed on very rare occasions only and is in no way charac- teristic of the caprine disease. Other lesions.E. O. LONGLEY 133 been present in only one instance. The petechial haemorrhages described by Hutyra and Marek have never been observed and it is not unlikely that such have been cases of haemorrhagic septicaemia, not of the specific pneu- monia. No lesions other than those in the thorax are present, and no parenchy- matous changes are found in the susceptible organs. Pericarditis as a complication One case of sero-fibrinous pericarditis, indistinguishable in character from the typical serosal involvement in the specific pleurisy, has been observed. The goat in question, No. 298, died 13 days p. ins. with an experimental pneu- monia involving the cardiac lobe of the right lung and a severe pleurisy with coagulated effusion covering most of the lung. The pericardium was much thickened, oedematous and contained a considerable quantity of coagulated effusion. The myocardium was unaffected, but there was marked oedema over the coronary grooves. In two other cases, very oedematous thicken- ing of the epicardium has been observed, but with no evident involvement of the serosal surfaces, or abnormal effusion. Pericardial involvement is also recorded as a complication in the bovine disease. The histo-pathology of the lesions is described separately. EXPERIMENTAL WORK A. Technique Donors.134 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats the absence of any evidence of the pneumonia at autopsy in any experimental animals (apart from those infected by insufflation). In the light of this finding, it was considered undesirable, rather than otherwise, to maintain large numbers of healthy goats on hand on premises where the disease did exist, as tending to increase the possibility of accidental infection. Preparation of inocula.E. O. LONGLEY 135 Parasites.136 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats The doses were : I/Tr. 1.0 c.c., I/Thor. 2.5 c.c. The dose of 1 c.c. of the emulsion intra-venously killed its recipient immediately, as did also the reduced dose of 0.5 c.c. The dose was therefore further reduced and it was found that no more than 0.3 c.c. could be tolerated. On cutting the throats of these goats immediately after their death, it was found that the blood of both was completely coagulated, and their deaths and subsequent similar deaths were attributable to intra-vascular clotting, as a result of the inoculation of the lung emulsion. This intra-vascular clotting is a serious objection to inoculations by this route of any but small quantities of lung emulsions. Attempts to render the blood incoagulable by injections of Witte' peptone (0.3 g. per kilo body weight) were unsuccessful. The goat does not appear to react in the same manner as the dog. Tentative experiments with a preparation of hirudin indicated that the coagulative effect of the lung emulsion, at least in vitro, was much too strong, and the quantity and cost of the hirudin neces- sary to prevent intra-vascular coagulation would have been prohibitive. It was ultimately found that the dosage of emulsion could be increased to 1 c.c. or more with comparative safety, by the simple expedient of diluting freely in saline and injecting very slowly, but different emulsions appear to vary widely in their activity in this respect. Results.E. O. LONGLEY 137 registered 105°F., and it was decided to slaughter it for transmission purposes that day. At autopsy, the typical pleuro-pneumonia was found with complete consolidation of the right diaphragmatic lobe, and partial consolidation of the apical lobe, and of the left diaphragmatic lobe. Bilateral pleuritis with 30 c.c. of serous effusion was also present. The inoculum was prepared as described. As controls, a group of four goats was given the same dosage by the same routes of the pneumonic lung emulsion after heating it at 55°-60°C. for 40 minutes, this procedure providing a proper control, and simultaneously a test of the thermostability of any infective agent. Moreover, it promised a pre- liminary test at a later date of any antigenic properties of a ' heated vaccine '. Owing to the previous experience with intra-venous injections, it was decided to use a 1 : 3 emulsion well diluted in saline, to inject slowly, and to increase the dosage to the maximum that could be tolerated. Procedure.138 Contagious Pleuro-pneumonia of Goats All animals evidenced profound depression after the inoculations. Sterility tests.E. O. LONGLEY 139 respectively of the local effusion from this goat survived 21 days and presented no lesions at autopsy. None of the goats had any pulmonary lesions at their ultimate autopsy. (1) Five healthy goats, each injected by various routes with fresh strained pneumonic lung emulsion, all died within five days with massive oedema and necrosis of muscle tissue at the sites of both the intra-muscular and the sub- cutaneous inoculations. (2) Four control goats receiving similar doses by the same routes of a portion of the pneumonic lung emulsion subjected to heat at 55°-60°C. for 40 minutes, showed no reaction. (3) No pulmonary lesions were present at autopsy in either the experi- mental or control groups. (4) The pneumonic lung tissue, pleuritic and pericardial effusion of the donor goat, and the inocula, proved sterile on both aerobic and anaerobic culture media, and the pleuritic effusion was negative to biological tests in guinea-pigs and rabbits. Discussion and conclusions.140 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats Experiment 4.Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. FIGS. 1 and 2 show typical clinical appearance at 3 and 4 days p.i.
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II] PLATE VII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Showing shoulder reaction following subcutaneous inoculation at the 6th day p. ins.
E. O. LONGLEY 141 Results.142 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats TABLE VII Date Goat No. Route Inoculum Result Remarks Survival days p. ins. 12 February 1939 . 112 I/M Muscle effusion ex goat 95.5 c. c. + + Receded by 21 February 1939. E. O. LONGLEY 143 TABLE VIII Goat No. Date Inoculum Route Dose Lesions Remarks Survival days p. ins. Local Thoracic 128 14 February 1939. P. L. E. in Tyrodes (1:1) ex 42 and 46. I/M Supracostally. 10 c. c. + + + + Unilateral pleuritis and pneu- monia. Died on 20 February 1939. 6 129 Do. Do. Do. 144 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats Infarcts were found at autopsy in the controls, and in two of the four experi- mental ' infarcted ' goats, the typical pleuro-pneumonia resulted. The experi- ment is not recorded in detail, as the subsequent finding that the pneumonia could be readily transmitted by insufflationE. O. LONGLEY 145 TABLE IX Goat No. Date Inoculum Route Results Remarks Survival days p. ins. Lungs Local reaction 124 15 February 1939. P. I. E. ex 42/46 at 24 hours cold stor- age. Dose 5 c. c. I/Nasal. + + + + 146 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats TABLE X Intra-nasal insufflation Group Goat No. Date Inoculum Results (Lung) Remarks Survival days p. ins. I. a. 187 3 March 1939 Fresh P. L. E. ex Experimental Donor No. 124. 5-6 c. c. I/Nas. ± Slaughtered on April 1939. 29 188 E. O. LONGLEY 147 Results.148 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats Results.E. O. LONGLEY 149 TABLE XIII Intra-nasal insufflation of emulsion of reacting muscle Goat No. Date Material Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p. ins. 231 30 April 1939 Muscle emulsion ex goats 222 to 224. I/Nasal 20 c.c. + + + + Died on 12 May 1939 12 232 Do. 150 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats Procedure.E. O. LONGLEY 151 Results.152 Contagious Pleuro-pneumonia of Goats 42/46. Over the ensuing six weeks these five goats were continuously maintained in similar contact with three further reacting groups, the details of which are tabulated below. TABLE XVII ' Donors ' at contact Contact No. Goat No. 42/46 Strain Passage Inoculation date Pulmonary lesions at death on Period of contact in days 1st in-contact { 2 June 1939. 256 9th passage 23 May 1939 + + + + 3 June 1939 1 257 Do. Do. + + + + 7 June 1939 5 258 Do. Do. + + + + 6 June 1939 4 259 Do. Do. + + + + 2 June 1939 6 hours. 260 Do. Do. E. O. LONGLEY 153 contact with individual reactors varied from six hours (just prior to death) to 12 days, and thus covered the entire course of the infection (at this time very acute) many times over, and all stages of the disease. On the 13th of July 1939, at the conclusion of the total six weeks of contact, all the five goats received inoculations of virulent pneumonic lung emulsion, as a test of their susceptibility. The results are shown below. TABLE XVIII Goat No. Test Result Remarks Survival days p. ins. Date Route and dose Material Local lesion Lung 268 13 July 1939 S/C 5 c. c. }P. L. E. in Tyrode'a (1:1) ex goat 387. + + + + 154 Contagious Pleuro-pneumonia of Goats Results.E. O. LONGLEY 155 TABLE XX156 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats TABLE XXI Primary virulence controls Goat No. Date of insufflation Material Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p. ins. 461 13 July 1939. P. L. E. ex goat 387. I c. c. I/Nas. + + + + Destroyed on 27 July 1939 14 462 E. O. LONGLEY 157 B. In glycerine Goat No. Date of insufflation Period of storage Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p. ins. 475 14 July 1939 24 hours 158 Contagious Pleuro-pneumonia of Goats Results.E. O. LONGLEY 159 Donors.160 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats intramuscularly into six ewes. Two healthy control goats received the same dose by the same route. Two guinea-pigs and two rabbits were injected intramuscularly with 1.5 c. c. and 2.5 c. c. of effusion respectively, without effect. The details and the results are tabulated below : TABLE XXIV Animal No. Date Inoculum Results Remarks Survival days p. ins. Ewe . . 3 6 March 1939 Muscle effusion ex goat No. 177. 10 c. c. 1/M . + + + + Died on 11 March 1939 5 4 E. O. LONGLEY 161 Animal No. Date Material Route and dose Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p. ins. Ewe 9 27 April 1939 Fresh P. L. E. ex goats 209 and 212. heated to 65°162 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats Experiment 24.E. O. LONGLEY 163 D. Immunity (1) Experiment 26.164 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats TABLE XXVII Goat No. Date Material Date and Interval in days Material Date and Interval in days Material Date and Interval in days Material Result (Local lesion) Date and interval in days Material Result (local lesion) Remarks Survi- val days p.ins. 249 10 May 1939. I/Nasal 20 c . c. P. L. E. ex 235. 11 May 1939 (1 day). I/Nasal 20 c. c. P. L. E. ex 233. 12 May 1939 (1 day). I/Nasal 20 c. c. P. L. E. ex 234. 29 June 1939 (5 days). I/M & S/C 10 c. c. P. L. E. ex 281, 283 and 284. E.O.LONGLEY 165 (2) Active immunisation It was decided to plan experiments to try out the following as immunis- ing agents:166 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats The vaccine, prepared as described, was administered on the 24th of June 1939, after 48 hours cold storage, to a group of 30 goats, subcutaneously in 10 c. c. doses. Slight local induration resulted. On the 4th of July 1939, ten days later, ten of the goats (Group II) received a further inoculation, intra- muscular in the thigh, of 5 c. c. of pneumonic lung emulsion ex goats 287 and 294, (of the virulence control group) and five healthy controls were similarly inoculated. In all cases some degree of reaction resulted. In two instances in the experimental group, these progressed to full and fatal local reactions with deaths at the 6th and 8th days p. ins. The local lesions in both were typical. No fatal reaction was recorded in the control group. Immunity test.E. O. LONGLEY 167 TABLE XXIX. Group II.168 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats Group III.E. O. LONGLEY 169 TABLE XXX Controls to 1st test insufflation Goat No. 1st insufflation 2nd insufflation Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p. ins. Date Material Date Material 531 27 July 1939. P. L. E. in Tyrode's (2 in 5) ex goats 461, 462 & 467 15 c. c. I/Nasal 28 July 1939. P. L. E. in Tyrode's (1:1) ex goats 463, 466, 468 & 470. 15 c. c. 1/Nasal + + + + Died on 12 August 1939. 16 532 Do. 170 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats TABLE XXXII Goat No. Vaccination 1st Test insufflation 2nd Test insufflation Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p. ins. Date Material Date Material Date Material 371 24 June 1939. Formalised vaccine 10 c. c. S/C. 27 July 1939. P. L. B. in Tyrode's (2 in 5) ex goats 461, 462 & 467. 15 c. c. I/Nasal. 28 July 1939. P. L. E. in Tyrode's (1: 1) ex goats 463, 466 468 & 470. 15 c. c. I/Nasal. + + Destroyed on 24 August 1939 28 372 Do. Do. E. O. LONGLEY. 171 TABLE XXXIII Goat No. 1st vaccination 2nd vaccination Immunity test Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p.ins. Date Material Date Material Date Material 549 29 July 1939. Formalised vaccine (0.25 per cent) ex goats 461, 402 and 467 in cold store for 48 hours. 10 c.c. S/C. 30 July 1939. Formalised vaccine (0.25 per cent) ex goats 463, 466, 468 and 470 in cold store for 48 hours. 10 c.c. S/C. 12 August 1939. P. L. E. in Tyrode's (1 : 1) ex 505, 529 and 531 15 c.c. I/Nasal. 172 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats doses on the shoulder on opposite sides of the body on successive days. No significant reactions resulted. The controls to the virulence of each preparation were the two groups of five healthy goats, serving as controls to the test insufflations in the preceding experiment. As already detailed, each such group was insufflated with 15 c. c. of the fresh emulsion on the day of its preparation. On the 12th of August 1939, 14 days p. i., the vaccinated goats were tested by the intra-nasal insufflation of 15 c. c. of pneumonic lung emulsion (1:1) pooled from three reactor goats. Five healthy controls received a simulta- neous test insufflation. The results are shown in table XXXIII. As shown in the table, four of the five healthy controls had the typical pneumonia at autopsy, in two cases after natural deaths at the 13th and 16th days p. ins. respectively, in the other two at slaughter 14 and 23 days p. ins. All of the vaccinated group survived 23 days, when they were slaughtered and autopsied. No pulmonary lesions were found in any. Experiment 30.E. O. LONGLEY 173 TABLE XXXIV 174 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats It is thus evident that the morbidity in the controls under discussion (73.3 per cent) was indicative of an average virulence of the test strains and average susceptibility in the particular groups. The 17.6 per cent morbidity in the vaccinated groups is clearly significant (3.2 E. O. LONGLEY 175 TABLE XXXVII Goat No. 1st vaccination 2nd vaccination Immunity test Results Remarks Survival days p. ins. Date Material Date Material Date Material 556 29 July 1939 Phenolised vaccine (0.5 per cent) ex goats 461, 462 and 467 in cold store for 48 hours. 10 c.c. S/C. 30 July 1939 Phenolised vaccine (0.5 per cent) ex goats 463, 466, 468 and 470 in cold store for 48 hours. 10 c.c. S/C. 12 August 1939 P. L. E. in Tyrodes (1:1) ex goats 505, 529 and 531. 15 c.c. I/Nasal. + + + + Destroyed on 1 September 1939. 20 557 Do 176 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats B. Active immunisation with living ' Virus.' Experiment 32.E.O.LONGLEY 177 It was further proposed in a proportion of goats to reinforce the inoculations with a second subcutaneous inoculation on the trunk, which would test for any immunity to inoculation at the same time as it reinforced any acquired im- munity, as in Experiment 27. The sites selected for the inoculations were : Group A.178 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats Procedure.E.O. LONGLEY 179 TABLE XXXVIII Immunity test after one inoculation of pneumonic lung emulsion. (14 days p. ins.) Group Goat No. Date Inoculum Seat Test Result (Lungs) Remarks Sur- vival days p. ins. Date Material and route A1 453 11 July 1939. P. L. E. in Tyrode's (1: 1) ex goats 381, 383 and 384. 5 c. c. S/C Tail 25 July 1939. P. L. E. in Tyrode's (1: 1) ex goats 311,424 and 426. 10 c.c. I/Nasal. 180 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats TABLE XL Immunity test after two inoculations of pneumonic lung emulsionE. O. LONGLEY 181 TABLE XLI Immunity test after two inoculations of pneumonic lung emulsion 182 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats TABLE XLII Control.E. O. LONGLEY 183 TABLE XLIV Healthy controls to 1st test insufflation Group Goat No. Date Route and dose Material Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p. ins. H 571 9 August 1939 15 c.c. I/Nasal P. L. E. in Tyrode's (1:1) ex goats 299, 484, 499, 522, 534 and 548 184 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats Of the five controls to the 2nd test insufflation, four proved positive at autopsy, with natural deaths in two cases at 13 and 16 days p. ins. ; in the others at slaughter on the 14th and 23rd days p. ins. In all but the last mentioned the lesions were typical and extensive. In this, however, the lesions were confined to the cardiac lobe of the right lung, and evidenced retrogression with fibrosis. Experiment 33.E. O. LONGLEY 185 Immunity test.186 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats TABLE XLVIII Goat No. Immunisation active 1st test insufflation 2nd test insufflation Result (Lungs) Remarks Survival days p. ins. Date Route and dose Inoculum Date Material Date Material 516 25 July 1939 S/C Ear 5c.c. P. L. E. in Tyrode's (1:1) ex-goats 311, 424 and 426. 9 Aug. 1939 P. L E. in Tyrode's (1 : 1) ex-goats 298, 484, 499, 522, 534 and 548. I/Nasal 15 c.c. 12 Aug. 1939 P. L. E in Tyrode's (1 : 1) ex-goats 505, 529 and 531. I/Nasal 15 c.c. E. O. LONGLEY 187 It will be seen that all vaccinated goats were negative at autopsy on the 21st and 26th days p. ins., respectively. As already described, eight of the total of eleven controls were positive. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION The results in these three experiments are condensed in the table below :188 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats THE HISTOPATHOLOGY OF THE LESIONS Histopathologically, the lesions in the lungs present a very wide variety of picture, some or all of which may be present in one affected lung. Pleura.Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE VIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5 FIG. 1. Oedematous and cellular infiltration of the pleura and interlobular septa. Alveoli hepatised FIG. 2. Early oedema of alveoli and pleura with cellular infiltration, and severe congestion of capillaries and larger vessels FIG. 3. Showing the oedema extending into the surrounding healthy lung FIG. 4. A later stage than that depicted in Fig. 2. All the intra-alveolar cells are leucocytes, and scrutiny will reveal the persistence of the capil- lary congestion referred to in the text FIG. 5. A similar stage to the above, showing severe c a t a r r h a l inflammation of two bronchioles filled with mucopurulent exudate All sections stained with haemotoxylin and eosin. × 70
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE IX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5 FIG. 1. Alveoli in advanc- ed grey hepatisation in direct contiguity with alveoli in the same lobule in the oedematous stage. Infiltration of the septa is also evident FIG. 2. Infiltrated inter- lobular septa separat- ing three lobules at different stages. Note emphysema FIG. 3. Advanced grey hepatisation. N o t e severe persistent con- gestion of two venules FIG. 4. Necrosis with fibrosis of adjacent pleura FIG. 5. Fibrosis of lung around a bronchiole
E. O. LONGLEY 189 all resemblance to muscle is lost, only the oedematous fluid, leucocytes, and isolated fragments of unlysed degenerated muscle fibres remaining. (Plate X, Fig. 5). THE ETIOLOGICAL AGENT (i) The cultivability of the etiological agent As already indicated, no growth has been obtained by sowing any of the many samples of material on any of the ordinary laboratory media, nor on the special media prepared with goat's flesh and goat blood and serum, nor on Soparker's medium. Attempts were made to cultivate the organism on the special ' V. F., S ' digest medium recommended and used by Turner (1936) in his studies on the bovine organism, using bovine and goat serum, but the results were inconclusive. Inoculating tubes of the broth with increasing quantities of sterile exudate resulted in 3-4 days, and in two instances in the development of a corres- ponding turbidity in the respective tubes. Dark ground observations of the turbid fluid revealed in both instances very numerous coccoid bodies, with no such change in the incubated controls. The ordinary sterility of the inoculum was established by control inoculations of the usual media. Primary subculture was, however, negative. This was effected only at the culmina- tion of the work, when no further attempts could be made, and no retrans- mission to goats was practicable. It is suggested that a study of the culti- vability of the organism on this medium, or on slight modifications of it, is indicated. Through the kindness of Dr C. G. Pandit, Director of the King Institute, Madras, it was possible to inoculate a number of eggs with the fresh sterile exudate. Reactions resulted in a proportion of cases, and passage was attempted, but a progressively increased mortality in the embryos resulted in failure at the 2nd and 3rd passages respectively in the two attempts made. Bacterial sterility was in all instances properly controlled. Macroscopically the reactions were diffuse and revealed on section ecto-dermal necrosis, cell-nest formation, and endo-dermal proliferation (Plate XI, Fig. 1). No quantitative work, and no reinfection of goats from the embryos, could be attempted. (ii) Morphology of the etiological agent 1. Tang (1935) and his co-workers, and Turner (1935) in their extensive dark-ground studies of the morphology of the organism of bovine pleuro- pneumonia, describe five principal phases in its life-cycle, though the classi- fications of the two workers have slight points of divergence. For these phases Turner has proposed the term ' genethodes ' The time available for the study of the morphology of the organism of the caprine disease has been insufficient for an exhaustive survey, and the study has been somewhat handicapped by the failure to effect satisfactory cultivation on artificial media. Sufficient evidence has been adduced, how- ever, to justify the inclusion of the caprine organism in the same genus as
190 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats the bovine, for which the generic name Borrelomyces has been suggested by- Turner (op. cit). (2) In sections of muscular tissue affected with local oedema, fixed in formol-saline and stained with haematoxylin and eosin, minute bodies mostly coccoid were detectable. It was presumed that this was an artifact, probably a precipitate from the stain employed. Subsequent work, with control sections of healthy muscle, and every care in respect of the dyes used, has fully con- firmed that there are such bodies regularly present in all but advanced muscle lesions, occupying the oedematous spaces, and in enormous numbers. According to Hutyra and Marek (op. cit.) Schellhase has recorded the presence of coccoid bodies in smears from the lung lesions. While we have observed granules in such smears, then specificity could never be decided. Intra-leucocytic streptococcoidal forms as described by Mori, have not been observed. In sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin the organism is not usually well defined, and it is not demonstrable with gram. It stains well, however, with the Romanowsky dyes, best with carbolthionin. The average size of the coccoidal forms in stained preparations, estimated by comparison with staphylococci superimposed from culture over sections (Plate XI, fig. 2) is 0.3Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE X [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5 FIG. 1. Early muscle lesion showing oedematous and cellular infiltration of interfascicular connec- tive tissue FIG . 2. Extension of the oedema to the inter- fibrillar connective tissues with ' hyaline ' degeneration of muscle fibres FIG. 3. Showing massive infiltration of inter- fascicular connective tissues, early inter- fibrillar infiltration and degeneration of muscle fibres FIG. 4. Later stage with the focal accumulations of leucocytes referred to in the text FIG. 5. Final stage. Muscle fibres almost disappeared
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE XI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. FIG. 1. Section of chorio- allantoic membrane of 14 day chick embryo 4 days after inoculation of fresh sterile pneumonic effusion. FIG. 2. Photo-micrograph of the organism in a section of reacting muscle, with staphylococci from culture superimposed on the section for compari- son. Note non-coccoid forms, similar to those revealed by dark-ground. Stained Carbol-thionin. ×1260 FIG. 3. Cluster of the organism in oedematons connective tissue in alveolar wall. St. Carbol- thionin. ×630 FIG. 4 & 5. Typical dis- tribution and appearance of the organism in pul- monary lesions.
E. O. LONGLEY 191 experienced. The technique described by Turner of placing the slide between several layers of blotting paper, and exerting firm pressure on the coverslip with a roller to the extent of Newtonian ring formation, constantly resulted in either stationary fields devoid of all but the coccoid forms, or slightly thicker fields including the variants, but with these retaining some degree of Brownian movement. This, though so slight as to be barely perceptible to the eye, quite precludes effective photography. It was ultimately found that if the drop of effusion was so small that with very firm pressure as des- cribed the film of fluid did not extend to the edge of the coverslip, the escape of the bodies on to the blotting paper was prevented, and perfectly rigid preparations rich in the specific bodies could be prepared. Zeiss optical equipment has been used throughout.* The camera was the Zeiss Miflex, used with the Kodak Panatomic-X roll film (4.0×6.5 cm.). The source of light has been the Zeiss 100-watt Pointolite lamp, used with the Cardioid condensor. Exposures have varied from 2-15 minutes, but with the Contax, 5 minutes has usually proved the most satisfactory. Unfortunately, no apochromatic objective was available, and it was necessary to make the most of the Zeiss achromatic dark-ground objective, N. A. 1.25 (0.85), with the × 5 or × 7 ocular, giving magnifications of ×450 or × 630. The subsequent enlargement of films up to × 3 has given magni- fications up to × 1890. This is demanding rather too much of the lens em- ployed, and such enlargement is more or less ' empty '. Variants observed in preparations unsuitable for photography by reason of Brownian movement have been recorded by drawing. (4) The dark ground examination of the normal pleuritic and pericardial effusion in goats reveals coccoid bodies, varying in size, and numerous short, straight, and very delicate filaments, of different lengths but of uniform thickness, presumably fibres of fibrin. The numbers of these present in any preparation depends on its thickness, but is never great. In pneumonic material, innumerable coccoid bodies are present, all in active Brownian movement, and many indisputably motile. These vary in size from the limit of visibility to that of a small staphylococcus, but average about 0.3192 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats of solid spherules from which radiate one or more delicate filaments, with usually, but not necessarily, an attached terminal ' daughter ' spherule. The same diagram includes a further phase which seems to combine features of the variants of the stellate forms with the ' conidioid ' production just described. Figs. 10 to 13 of Plate XII depict peculiar complex forms common in all preparations. Figs. 1, 2 and 3 of Plate XIII are three enlargements of a typical field, which depicts many of the forms described. The preparation is relatively thick, and the results of Brownian movement are evident in places (15 minutes exposure), but for some reason many of the bodies in this field were stationary, and could thus be photographed. The explanation is probably that they were adherent to the glass surface as the result of some electrical pheno- menon. Diagram 4, Plate XV represents a phase which has been observed in two separate preparations. When first observed the body had the appearance shown at (a). Ten minutes later the original filament had grown out and bi- furcated, and two other long and two short filaments had developed (b). The filaments were all in very active movement, and discernably growing. Ten minutes later the original filament was observed to break away as shown in the diagram (c), together with another growing filament. Two minutes later all but two of the filaments had broken away. In a further five minutes there was evidence of further growth of the longer of the two, with the develop- ment of a small granule at its tip, and of the development of two further filaments. The field then presented the appearance shown at (d). Similar forms were numerous in both preparations, and are represented in figs, e to h. In fig. g the filaments were too numerous to count, but exceeded 20. In fig. h the filament was found by measurement with the eyepiece micrometer to be approximately 22 µ long (exact measurement was impossible owing to the active movements of the filament.) The size of the parent rings was approximately 4 µ . Numerous ' rings ' with no attached filaments were present in both preparations. (Fig. i). In some, minute granules were evident on the circumference (Figs. j and k) and are perhaps the sites of the origin of the filaments. It is noteworthy that within one such ring a small coccoid body, in very active Brownian movement, was observed, obviously trapped between the two glass surfaces and the ring itself, against which it was in constant impact. There can thus be no doubt that the structure of such forms is a true ring. Two such have been recorded photographically in Plate XII figs. 3 and 14. The phase represented in Diagram 5 of Plate XV has been observed in only one preparation, and figs. a to d of the diagram show the variations in form observed over a period of 65 minutes. The phase was reminiscent, of that just described, but differed in three clear respects :Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE XII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIGS. 1-15. Dark-ground photo-micrographs of variations of the organism in pulmonary effusions. × 1890. Fig. 15. × 630 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 16. Phase corresponding to genethode IV. × 675
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE XIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. FIGS. 1, 2 & 3. Typical field with pulmonary effusion under dark- ground illumination. The coccoid, stellate, filamentous and many other forms are evident. ×945, ×1890 and × 3780 respectively
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II] PLATE XIV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Diagram 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Diagram 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Diagram 3.
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part II ] PLATE XV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Diagram 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Diagram 5.
E. O. LONGLEY 193 during the afternoon. The sun-glare in Madras during the day is inimical to acute microscopic vision. After nightfall, when critical observation was possible, all filaments were clearly resolvable as ' streptococcoidal' in struc- ture, as shown in Figs. i and j of diagram 5. Fig 15 of Plate XII is a photo- micrograph of one specimen of the phase. The outline of the parent ' ring ' can be clearly seen ; the blurring is produced by short filaments in active movement throughout the exposure (5 minutes). Figs. 16 of Plate XII depicts a phase which we were fortunate enough on one occasion not only to find but to photograph. There can be no doubt that it corresponds with the genethode IV described by Turner, which was observed by him once only in cultures of the bovine organism. The body was composed of a central granular mass, to which were adherent numerous ' rings ', which were visibly increasing in size. Owing to a technical hitch no further photo- graph is available, but the observed evolution of the body was similar to that described by Turner, namely, expansion of the rings, and fusion of adjacent rings, followed by dispersion. 45 minutes after the photograph was taken only one large ring was still adherent. Four feature of the phase as photographed merit mention, viz. (1) The circular conformation of the peripheral bodies, as compared with the elliptical conformation of those in Turner's specimen. (2) The opacity of the centre of five of the associated rings, as compared with the remainder, which are clear. (3) The apparent dissociation of four of the rings form the parent mass. (4) The presence of a well defined dot on the circumference of two of the rings. This appearance has been not infrequently observed in isolated ring forms in other preparations. Other forms have been observed which are not recorded. In material examined after 48-72 hours storage at either room temperature or zero, only coccoid forms are evident. This change is probably associated with the loss of virulence. GENERAL DISCUSSION The absence of continuous fever in the pneumonia is very remarkable, and makes it unique, not excluding the specific bovine disease. What is perhaps still more remarkable is that in no instance in goats with local reactions, as severe as depicted in the plates and ordinarily fatal, has there been any febrile reaction whatsoever. If fever is a defence mechanism this feature conforms with the extraordinarily high mortality. The pathogenesis of the disease is of peculiar interest. There is clear evidence that it is acquired by absorption of the infective agent through the naso-pharynx. Its subsequent course is not known, but the ' multiple focus ' type of early lesions strongly suggests a blood-borne infection. Both the local reactions and the early pulmonary lesions have oedema as their principal feature, and it is thought that this ' oeclematogenic ' pro- perty of the infective agent is the main factor in the pathogenesis of the disease. The organism, once lodged, causes a disturbance in the balance of the body fluids at that site, which results in the local accumulation of lymph. This provides the pabulum for the organism, and the processs is accordingly progressive, and combined with leucocytic and fibroblastic reactions, accounts
194 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats for all the local and pulmonary phenomena. Capillary thrombosis probably plays a large part in the necrosis. The mode of action of the organism in this ' oedematogenesis ' is peculiar. Capillary dilatation, which is always a marked feature, is undoubtedly a con- tributory factor, and is almost certainly the result of toxic action on the nerve endings, but toxic action on the capillary endothelium, increasing its per- meability, is also indicated. Bacterial toxins with this property are almost invariably pyretic, and the diseases associated with them febrile, in contrast with this disease. The type of bacterial toxin in question also causes severe direct damage to endothe- lial cells, with consequent rupture of capillaries and the escape of erythrocytes at any site of inflammation. As already stated, no such phenomenon charac- terises either the local or pulmonary lesions caused by this organism. Its toxic action is clearly peculiar, and worth study. One is vaguely reminded of the action of histamine. In one severe local reactor weighing 21 kilos, both hind legs were removed post mortem and weighed. The normal limb registered 1.75 kilos ; the reacting limb no less than 4.5 kilos, or more than one fifth of the entire body-weight. The difference in weight of the two limbs, 2.75 kilos, is attributable only to the oedema. The blood volume of the goat, according to Dukes (1937), is 6.2 per cent of the body-weight, and in this goat would be about 1.3 litres. In other words a volume of fluid more than twice that of the animal's blood had been deviated from the tissue fluids, by a process of dehydration into the effect- ed areaE. O. LONGLEY 195 new order, the Borrelomycetalcs, should be recognised seems fully justified. It is accordingly suggested that the organism of caprine pleuro-pneumonia should be grouped with that of the bovine disease and of agalactia, and designated Borrebmyces peripneumoniae capri. GENERAL SUMMARY (1) Contagious pleuro-pneumonia of goats occurs as a specific epizootic in the Madras Presidency, and is transmissible experimentally. (2) The symptoms, course, pathology, and histopathology of the disease are described. (3) The etiological agent is a highly pleomorphic organism, which, in fresh material examined by dark ground illumination, bears close resemblance to the organism of contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia. (4) At least the micrococcal forms of the organism are demonstrable in formol-fixed sections of both the local lesions arising by inoculation, and early lung lesions. It is Gram negative, but stains well with Leishman and Geimsa, best with carbol-thionine. Its average estimated size is 0.3196 Contagious Pleuro-Pneumonia of Goats (15) Bullocks and buffaloes do not appear to be susceptible to the inocula- tions. (16) Guinea-pigs, rabbits, and mice have in no instance evidenced any reaction to inoculation. (17) In 12 goats subjected to close contact with both natural and experi- mental cases, one case only of the pneumonia was recorded. Six of these goats were fully susceptible to the inoculation of virulent material, at the termi- nation of their period of contact. No explanation can be offered for this peculiarity of the disease. (18) Immunisation with a formalised vaccine reduces the morbidity at subsequent test by insufflation to 25 per cent or less. (19) Similar protection is probably afforded by a carbolised vaccine. (20) The morbidity is reduced to approximately five per cent by the subcutaneous inoculation of fresh pneumonic emulsion. The immunity is fully developed by the 14th day p. i, and is induced with non-lethal as well as lethal inocula. (21) The ear is a convenient and safe site for such inoculations. (22) The designation Borrelomyces peripneumoniae capri is proposed for the etiological agent. I wish to express my particular appreciation of the willingness and conscien- tiousness, of all members of the laboratory staff, of which I cannot speak too highly and without which the work could never have been accom- plished. My thanks are also due to Rao Sahib M. Anant Narayan Rao, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, for the identification of parasites and help in other respects ; to Dr C. G. Pandit, Director of the King Institute of Preven- tive Medicine, Guindy, for helpful criticisms, and his generous loans of appara- tus and facilities ; and to Mr. Chandy, B.A., to whom I am indebted for much personal help and advice in respect of the photomicrography ; to Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Sri V. Gurumurti, G.M.V.C., deputed as special assistant for the work, for his able and zealous aid and to Sri G. R. Viswanathan, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Madras for supplying diseased goats. REFERENCES Campbell, A. D. (1938). J. Coun. Sci. Indus. Res. Aust. 11, 103. Curasson. quoted by Hutyra and Marek. (op. cit.) . Daubney, R. (1935). J. Comp. Path and Therap. 48, 2. Dukes, H. H. (1937). The Physiology of Domestic Animals. Hutyra. Marek, and Manninger, (1938). Special Pathology and Therapeutics. 4th Edition. Vol. I. Page 471. Mettam, R. W. M. and Ford, J. (1939). J. Comp. and Path and Therap. 52, Part I. Mills, C. A. and Guest. G. M. (1921). Am. J. Physiol. 75, 395. Orr, W. (1937). Annual Administration Report, Malay States. Pyjper, A. (1938). J. Path. Back. 47, 1. Shirlaw, J. F. (1939). Proceedings, 3rd Anim. Husb. Wing, Meeting, New Delhi. Tang, F. F. Wei. H. Me. Whirter. DL. and Edgar, J. (1935) J. Path. Bact. 40, 391. Turner, W. W. (1935). J. Path. Bact. 41, 391. Turner, A. W. and Campbell. A. D. (1936). J.Coun. Sci. Industr.Res. Aust. 97,74. Viswanathan, G. R. (1936-37). Annual Administration Report of the Veterinary Investi- gation Officer, Madras.
E. O. LONGLEY 197 APPENDIX Animals. Ticks Lice Fleas Cysts Nemetodes Cestodes Proto- zoon. Trematodes Margavopus annulatus Haemophysalis bispinosa Bovicola caprae Linognathus stenopsis Haematopinus species Otenocephalus species Tennuicollis Hydatid Larvae of oestrus ovis Haemonchus contortus Oesophagostomum columblanum Oesophagostomum venulosum Bunostomum trigonoccphalum and species. Trichostrogyles axei Trichostrogylus colubdiformis Trichuris ovis Monezia expansa Avittellina centripunctata and species. Stilesia vittata Coccidiosis Paramphistomum species Fischoederius clongatus Fasciola gigantica Donors 2 6 5 ... ... ... 37 2 39 36 21 8 1 3 ... 15 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 62 Ewes ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 1 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 5 Experimental goats. ... 5 2 3 ... 1 91 2 84 117 83 18 6 16 1 96 ... 2 5 6 1 1 6 177 NOTE :STUDIES ON THE RELATION OF MINERALS TO LIVE WEIGHT* 1. THE CALCIUM REQUIREMENT OF ADULT ANIMALS AND THE BASIS OF ITS ASSESSMENT BY INDU BHUSAN CHATTERJEE, L. AG. Physiological Chemist, Bengal (Received for publication on 24 September 1938) IN the case of adults, the skeletal growth is assumed to be complete and the requirement should logically be associated with the loss or withdrawal that the system will undergo through the metabolic processes. This, of course, refers to the absolute amount. The actual amount might or might not be same, possibly varying with the nature of the feed. For instance, it has been found by Carbery, Chatterjee and Talapatra [1937] that under the condition of rice straw feeding in Bengal the lime requirement of cattle is definitely higher. In a similar experiment at Bangalore by Iyer and Krishna Ayyar [1934] it was found that jowar hay was able to strike a positive balance with an intake of 14 to 18 gm. CaO, while rice straw with 22 to 27 gm. CaO failed to do so. Earlier experiments of Warth, Iyer and Krishna Ayyar [1932] show that in the case of Bolarum hay the balance was negative even with an intake of 40 gm. CaO, whereas with ragi straw the negative tendency was noticeable up to about 58 gm. CaO intake. Albu and Neuberg [1906] state that the cal- cium from plant foods, in which it is more abundant is less readily absorbed than from meat. Kochmann and Potzsch [1911] carried out extensive studies on dogs and concluded that the amount of calcium necessary for maintaining a positive balance depends upon the character of the diet and ' should be speci- fically determined for different kinds of food intake '. The work of Hart and his co-workers [1922] also emphasizes the importance of diet as a factor influencing calcium assimilation. Sherman and Hawley [1922] found that vegetables represented by carrot, celery and canned spinach were a much poorer source of calcium than milk. Fincke and Sherman's later work [1935] shows that the calcium of milk was well utilized, that of kale almost as well, while the calcium of spinach was utilized to only a very slight extent if at all. Garry and Steven [1936] state that ' there is some evidence that the utiliza- tion of Ca and P from milk is better than from other feeds '. Mitchell and McClure [1937] remark that ' certain of the organic consti- tuents of the feeds and rations other than vitamins have been suspected of influencing the utilization of mineral components or of added mineral supple- ments ', and much work has been concerned ' with the possible effect of the roughage constituents of the diets, especially with reference to explaining the *Under the grant of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India (198)
I. B. CHATTERJEE 199 poorer utilization of vegetable calcium than of milk calcium in human nutri- tion '. They further remark (p. 45) that ' the trend of modern research is towards the view that with the exception of sulphur, minerals in inorganic combination are in general more readily absorbed and more completely assimi- lated by animals than minerals in organic complexes'. Meigs and his co- workers' investigations [1926] indicate that the calcium of carefully cured alfalfa hay seems to be better utilized than of poorly cured hay. Turner and his co-workers [1927] have found that the Ca and P of alfalfa hay were better utilized than the same of clover hay while Miller's work [1926] indicates that the Ca of clover hay is better utilized than the same of timothy hay. Some of these investigations are not probably fully conclusive but taken all together it may be stated without doubt that the nature and composition of the diet exerts a profound influence on the assimilation of lime and possibly of other minerals. The utilization of dietary calcium is, therefore, likely to be in- fluenced by (a) the nature of the feed (b) amount and proportion of lime content, (c) amount of food consumption (d) to some extent ratio of Ca and P and (e) presence or absence of vitamin D. If these be the main factors governing the utilization and absorption it will naturally follow that the requirement in terms of absolute amount and the requirement in relation to a particular feed may or may not be the same. The absolute requirement may possibly be estimated by measuring the lime excretion during a calcium free diet ; but in such circumstances there is some probability of a compensatory attempt on the part of the system, and in consequence the output might be depressed below the real amount. At any rate in instances where there was a marked deficiency of calcium supply such a tendency has been noticeable. This might possibly be obviated by adding an integrated dose of lime compound. Here also there may be other unde- tectable factors influencing the final output. The next course, viz. the esti- mation of actual output in reference to the kind and quality of feeding is therefore more convenient and has in addition the merit of practical utility. The present paper relates to this aspect under rice straw feeding. It is not known if any working procedure has been developed to estimate the requirement of calcium for cattle or for other adult animals. With reference to the requirement for human adults, however, two references can be cited200 Studies on the Relation of Minerals to Live Weight On the other hand Mitchell and McClure (loc. cit.) remark (p. 53, foot note) that ' such heterogenous data cannot be analysed statistically in a satisfac- tory way by the simple methods used by Sherman '. Nevertheless his values appear to have been in some cases tacitly accepted for application not only for human adults but also for other animals. Thus in the text and tables given by Mitchell and McClure (loc. cit.) the requirement seems to have been assessed on the basis of Sherman's method of lime and phosphorus require- ment related to the corresponding amount of protein requirement (vide equa- tion p. 62). The other notable work viz. that of Leitch refers to a linear relation with output and intake. She first analysed the total available experimental data for women but rejected a large part because as she states, ' the calcium intake has been planned as so much per kg. of body weight and hence the requirement deduced by Sherman's method would be closely correlated with body weight'. She divided the remaining data under three sets of body weights viz. 50I. B. CHATTERJEE 201 Leaving these, there were 26 animals of which 19 recorded positive balance and seven negative. One of the negative data was almost on the border line. At Dacca nine animals were taken. Out of these, two gave negative balance and seven positive. The total admissible data from both places were 35 in all out of which 26 were clearly positive, one just on the negative side (border line) and six clearly negative. In the statistical analysis of these data the first question that requires to be settled is whether the positive and negative data should be validly taken as representing the results under identical condition. There can be little doubt that when the balance figures exhibit a pronounced tendency of a negative output the behaviour is the expression of a deficient supply or of a condition definitely against a positive balance. There is thus every possibility of such values to deviate from the normal. They are at any rate the product of condi- tion quite distinct from those yielding positive values. Unless, therefore, it is established that numerically the intake output relation under both posi- tive and negative balances follow the same process, their inclusion or combina- tion is likely to introduce complication which should preferably be avoided, specially in developing a method or hypothesis where it is of primary importance to eliminate any data which might leave room for doubt or controversy. Ex- ception may however be permissible in such cases where the results lie virtually on the border line. Bearing these facts in mind the test for final computation was carried out with a total number of 27 individual data out of which (as al- ready stated) 26 were clearly positive and one on the border line. Considering the time and labour involved in the work with heavier animals like cattle the number of data was fairly large and sufficiently representative to provide a reasonable indication of the nature of lime assimilation under the condition of experiment. It should be noted here that like Sherman and Leitch the output in the present case has been assumed as the measure of requirement. The rest of the procedure was different from either. The former, as already stated converted the average (positive and negative) on a fixed live weight, while Leitch's method carries with it the implication that whatever might be the live weight a single expression would seem to represent the requirement of both heavier or lighter animals. The best course has been considered to subject the intake, the output, and the live weight under a test of statistical analysis and then include or reject one or the other according as they conform to or fall below the re- quired standard. For this purpose the output, the intake and the live weight have been fitted together into a multiple regression equation of the following order : y=b1x1+b2x2+c .......... (1) Where y = output or requirement of CaO in gm. x1= intake of CaO in gm. x2=live weight in lb. and b1 and b2 are constants.
202 Studies on the Relation of Minerals to Live Weight By solving the equation with the 27 data finally selected (Appendix I) the equation assumed the following form :I. B. CHATTERJEE 203 TABLE II Coefficients of correlation Observed Expected Remarks ryx1...... 0.8912 0.381 Significant ryx2...... 0.8558 0.381 Do. rx1x2 ...... 0.7266 0.381 Do. rx2y.x1 ...... 0.6683 0.388 Do. rx1y.x2 ...... 0.7580 0.388 Do. rx2x1.y...... 204 Studies on the Relation of Minerals to Live Weight Bearing these facts in mind it is noted from equations (2) and (3) that y in- crease swith live weight, and y also increases with intake for a given live weight. For the normal requirement for a given live weight it is necessary to obtain its normal intake. It has just been stated that since the total feed intake varies as a power function of live weight, the mineral intake forming a component part of same will necessarily vary in the same way. The lime intake (x1) may therefore be expressed in term of live weight (x2) as follows : x1=I. B. CHATTERJEE 205 Here the data could be independently fitted into equations (9) and (10) and then x1 substituted from equation (10). But here again the method of least square would evolve out of equation (10) an equation in p which will again be numerically insoluble and as such of little use from the statistical point of view. There is a third course which has been actually adopted in this paper, and which though only approximate from the theoretical point of view is perhaps in actual practice the most that could be made of the data if one chose to fit something like a multiple regression equation. Whatever loss of rigour is involved in such a course is more or less inherent partly in the mass of data themselves, (for if there is any clear indication of a relation like equation (4) it cannot of course be ignored), and partly in the very attempt to fit a multiple regression to the data on the basis of least square. What has been actually done is to have used the method of least squares to fit to the data independently two regression equations like y=b1x1 + b2x2 + c.......(11)or(1) log x1=log206 Studies on the Relation of Minerals to Live Weight TABLE III Live weight lb. CaO requirement (value of y) By equation (7) By equation (13) gm. gm. 400 . . . . . 20.08 19.98 500 . . . . . 25.25 25.04 600 . . . . . 30.35 30.10 700 . . . . . 35.39 35.16 800 . . . . . 40.48 40.22 900 . . . . . 45.34 45.28 1000 . . . . . 50.26 50.34 It will be noted that the values obtained by both methods are in very close agreement ; and it would appear that no serious error is likely to follow if this simplified equation (13) is adopted for all practical purposes. An interesting point to note here is that it was noticed by Carbery, Chatterjee and Talapatra (loc. cit) that under the condition of rice straw feed- ing positive balance for lime could not be attained until the ingestion was near about 24 gm. CaO per 500 lb. live weight. The data were then too meagre to work out a mathematical relation. The formula now developed shows a satisfactory agreement between the observed and prediction values. The values of the constants however refer to the condition of aus rice straw feeding. Under other conditions of feeding they are not likely to be same but the principle of the equations appears to be applicable to them also. This point will of course require confirmation and can at present be only stated as tentative. It is to be further noted that since live weight plays an important part in the ultimate consumption and assimilation of the required quantity of a nutrient, the lime requirement can be more satisfactorily assessed when com- puted in relation to live weight. SUMMARY It has been shown from various references including those of the author that the lime requirement appears to be very closely related with the nature of the feed. The work of Sherman and Leitch has been discussed and evidences have been adduced from the author's own work that the lime requirement (possibly
I. B. CHATTERJEE 207 other mineral requirements) is assessable in relative values, in which intake, output and live weight all come into play. An equation has been developed and worked out. This has been statisti- cally examined and has been found to give a good fit. It is suggested that the relative requirement under different feeds can be worked out for any live weight on the basis of this equation. A more simplified equation has also been suggest- ed for practical use. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The first acknowledgement is due to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research in India for providing the grant for this work. The author places on record his sincere thanks to Professor P. C. Mahala- nobis and members of the Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. Here it is necessary to make a special mention of the late Mr. S. S. Bose who rendered invaluable help even while he was ailing. The author also wishes to record his grateful acknowledgement to his other fellow workers, specially Messrs. R. C. Bose, S. Roy and K. R. Nair who rendered invaluable help by way of discussion and valuable suggestions. Mr. J. M. Sen Gupta did a good deal of computation under the direction of late Mr. Bose. The author begs to express his sincere gratitude to Mr. Carbery, Director of Agriculture, Bengal whose encouragement and guidance were of invaluable help in the successful completion of the work. The author also records his thanks to Mr. F. J. Gossip, Livestock Expert, Bengal, who took a lively interest in the work and contributed materially in the formation of the experimental scheme and its working. Thanks are also due to Mr. G. B. Pal, Agricultural Chemist, Bengal for his helpful criticism and laboratory facilities, to Messrs. S. N. Sarkar and S. Tala- patra for the help on the analytical side, to Mr. Sayed Ali for computation and to Mr Abdul Aziz Talukder for conducting the digestion and metabolic tests. REFERENCES Albu, A. and Neuberg, C. (1906). Wechsel, Berlin. (Cited by McClugoge and Mendel, 1918,) J. Biol. Chem. 35, 366 Carbery, M., Chatterjee, I. and Talapatra, S. K. (1937). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 7, 155-211 Fincke, M. L. and Sherman, H. C. (1935). J. Biol. Chem. 110, 421-8 Garry, R. C. and Steven, D. (1936). Nut. Abstr. & Rev. 5, 871 Gray, H. and Fraby, F. (1926). Amr. J. Dis. Child. 32, 554. (Cited by Leitch) Henry W. A. & Morrison F. B. (1928). 274 Hesse, E. (1931). Klin Wochenschr, 10, 1067-8. (Abstract in Nut. Abstr. & Rev. I, 1932, 192) Hart, E. B., Steenbok H., and Hoppert C. A. (1922). J. Biol. Chem. 53, 21-30 ; 54, 75-89 Iyer, A. V. and Krishna Ayyar, N. (1934). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 4, 108-113 Kochmann, M. and Petzsch, E. (1911). (Cited by McClugoge and Mendel) J. Biol. Chem. 35, 366 Leitch, I. (1937). Nut. Abstr. Rev. 6, 553-78 McClugage H. B. and Mendel L. B. (1918) J. Biol. Chem. 35, 366 Meigs, E. B., Turner, W. A., Harding, T. S., Hartman, A. M. and Grant, F. M. (1926). J. Agr. Res. 32, 833-60 Miller, R. C. (1926). J. Dairy Sc. 9, 78-92
208 Studies on the Relation of Minerals to Live Weight Mitchell, H. H. and McClure, F. J. (1937). National Research Council, Bull. 99 Sherman, H. C. (1920). J. Biol. Chem. 44, 21-7 Sherman, H. C. and Hawley, E. (1922) J. Biol. Chem. 53, 375-399 Sherman, H. C. and MacLeod, F. L. (1925). J. Biol. Chem. 64, 443 Sherman, H. C., Wheeler L. and Yates, A. B. (1920). J. Biol. Chem. 386 Turner, W. A., Harding, T. S. and Hartman, A. M. (1927). J. Agr. Res. 35, 625-35 Warth, F. J., Iyer, A. V., Krishna Ayyar, N. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 2, 325-32
I.B. CHATTERJEE 209 APPENDIX I Data used in the equations Particulars Animal No. Live weight lb. Intake gm. Output gm. ½ lb. cake Combinations K5 533 25.81 24.30 K9 414 24.20 21.08 1 lb. cake STUDIES ON THE RELATION OF MINERALS TO LIVE WEIGHT* II. THE RELATION OF LIVE WEIGHT TO THE CALCIUM CONTENT AND CALCIUM REQUIREMENT OF ADULT ANIMALS BY INDU BHUSAN CHATTERJEE, L. AG. Physiological Chemist, Bengal AND SUBODH KUMAR TALAPATRA, B.Sc. Late Research Assistant (Received for publication on 12 November 1938) IN a previous article in this series [Chatterjee, 1940] an attempt has been made to evolve a method by which it appears to be possible to assess the relative calcium requirements of adult animals. The results indicate that the requirement is intimately associated with live weight. This can be normally anticipated as the requirements of heavier or lighter animals cannot be ex- pected to be the same. The question needing elucidation is whether the re- quirement and quantity of lime and other minerals is governed by the same law as is operative in the case of organic nutrients. It is well known that in the case of the latter the requirement at any rate is not proportional to body weight but is influenced by body surface which is proportionately greater in smaller animals. It remained for Rubner [1883] to make a quantitative in- vestigation and enunciate what has since been termed as surface law. Accord- ing to Armsby and Moulton [1925], Bergman [1848] had suggested it many years before and Miintz [1878] had called attention to it a few years previously. Other investigators also devoted attention to it. But Meeh [1879] was the first to make accurate observations on the relation of surface to weight in man. For beef cattle Trowbridge, Moulton and Haigh [1915] have presented data on body weight, surface area, blood weight and volume and total body nitrogen for a number of individuals. Moulton [1916] made a more critical study of these data. In all these the initial idea originated from the fact that since body surfaces of solids of same shape (in other words of similar geometri- cal form) vary as a power function of their volumes, it was assumed that when solids are of same density their body surfaces would be proportional to their weights. This procedure found favour because the accurate measurement of body surface involved greater complication. This is how the energy requirement was calculated on the presumed basis of 2/3rd power of body weights. But up till recently the protein requirement was not included in this mode of calculation as it was assumed to vary in direct proportion to live weight. The recent investigation of Brody and his associates [1935] shows that the basal metabolism and endogenous nitrogen appear to work on a 0.73 power of body weight. This has also been the finding of Smuts [1935]. *Under the grant of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India. (210)
I. B. CHATTERJEE AND S. K. TALAPATRA 211 While a good deal of work has been done on the aspect of organic compo- nents very little appears to be known with respect to the quota either of mineral content or its requirement. On the other hand it has been tacitly assumed that the mineral requirement is in direct proportion to live weight. Similarly very little is known as to whether the total lime or other mineral contents vary directly or as a power function of live weight. Mitchell [1928] however gives some values worked out from Missouri data on the basis of dif- ferentiating equations ' of the rate of deposition of each of the body consti- tuents at different times and at different weights'. The estimates thus ob- tained of the percentage composition of ash at different weights are repro- duced below : TABLE I Estimated percentage composition of ash* Body weight lb. Group (i) I p.c. Group(ii) II p.c. Group (iii) III p.c. 300 . . . . 2.90 3.97 4.15 400 . . . . 3.28 4.08 4.35 500 . . . . 3.44 4.12 4.42 600 . . . . 3.45 4.17 4.46 700 . . . . 3.43 4.20 4.45 800 . . . . 3.41 4.24 4.43 900 . . . . 3.39 4.27 4.38 1,000 . . . . 3.65 4.28 . . 1,100 . . . . 3.32 4.31 . . 1,200 . . . . 3.28 4.34 . . 1,300 . . . . 3.24 . . . . 1,400 . . . . 3.19 . . . . 1,500 . . . . 3.16 . . . . 1,600 . . . . 3.11 . . . . 1,700 . . . . 3.06 . . . . 1,800 . . . . 3.01 . . . . 1,900 . . . . 2.95 . . . . *Reproduced from table 15 of Mitchell's Bulletin. (i) fed grain mixture and alfafa hay as much as they could consume. (ii) fed as (i) but to secure ' maximum growth without the storage of surplus fat'. (iii) fed to induce a distinctly retarded growth at about half the rate of Group II.
212 Studies on the Relation of Minerals to Live Weight As these estimates are not actual values any inference from it can only be possible on a qualified basis ; but they are capable of giving an indication of the probable nature of the ash content. The closeness of the percentage values under each group suggests a direct proportion with live weight. In order, however, to work on actual values it is necessary to obtain a sufficient number of slaughter data. Such data are generally limited, and they are still more so in the case of bigger animals like cattle. Some data on smaller animals were, however, available from Sherman and MacLeod's work on rats [1925]. These have been statistically analysed by the present authors and have formed the material for assessing the relation of calcium content of adult animals. The relevant points of Sherman and MacLeod's experiments are as follows : The animals were killed by chloroform, the alimentary tracts removed and the bodies then ashed in silica dishes. Their previous investigation had shown that of the total calcium in the rat's body 99 per cent was in the skeleton and that the amount contained in the walls of the alimentary tract was entire- ly negligible so that according to them the rejection of the walls of the tract could have ' no appreciable effect upon the determination of the total calcium content of the body '. The entire rat minus the alimentary tract was first charred slowly over a small flame and then ashed at a low temperature in the muffle. The ash was dissolved in hydrochloric acid and the calcium deter- mined by McCrudden's gravimetric method [1909-10]. The rats were raised on a diet consisting essentially of a dry food mixture of which one-third was whole milk powder and two-third ground whole wheat or in a few cases white flour. In some cases definitely known limited amounts of fresh meat or fresh vegetables were fed in addition, which in the quantities here fed, were found, according to the authors ' not to influence the results so far as concern the calcium content of the body '. Further a few of the rats indicated by asterisks (Appendix I) had received a larger proportion of milk powder, viz. one-half of dry food mixture and the authors state that this increased calcium intake ' did not prove to have any appreciable effect upon the calcium content of the animals '. The animals were all adult male rats and their age in the majority of cases varied from 179 to 309 days while four of them ranged from 416 to 603 days and one 849 days. The authors have given three sets of live weights, viz. the last live weight, the net live weight and the maximum live weight. The last live weight have been used here since they represented the weights at the time of slaughter. The basis of calculation has been as follows : The calcium content of adult animals.I. B. CHATTERJEE AND S. K. TALAPATRA 213 where y=Ca content w=live weight p=power function 214 Studies on the Relation of Minerals to Live Weight difference in the behaviour of results from Krishnagar and Dacca, the calcu- lations were worked out first with Krishnagar data only and then again with combined Krishnagar and Dacca data. The equations were of similar form as under (1) and (2), except that y here represents the requirement of CaO in gram and w represents body weight in pounds. The final forms of equation with their analysis of variance are shown below :I. B. CHATTERJEE AND S. K. TALAPATRA 215 We started by assuming that y varies as wp and ultimately found that the best fit is obtained when the value of p is not far from unity. In other words the relation between y and w is of the form y=w, since the value of p becomes unity. The CaO requirement thus seems to vary directly with live weight. The separate calculations of Krishnagar values only, and then again with combined values of Dacca and Krishnagar do not exhibit any appreciable difference in the value of p, thereby showing that the behaviour at Dacca and Krishnagar were more or less similar. We have thus the statistical analysis of the calcium content of adult rats and the calcium requirement of adult bullocks ; and in both cases they exhibit a direct variation with live weight. They can therefore be more conveniently worked out with the simple form of linear equation, viz. y =mx+ c. The other form of the equation with power function has been used to verify the point. It need hardly be stated that as more data accumulate the validity of the equation can be tested more satisfactorily. But so far the results suggest that the requirement of lime (and possibly other minerals) is governed by different law from that of energy requirement. SUMMARY Statistical analysis of calcium content of adult rats and calcium require- ment of adult bullocks seems to suggest that they vary directly with live weight and are probably governed by conditions different from that of energy requirement. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The first acknowledgement is due to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for providing the grant. Grateful acknowledgement is made of help received on the statistical side from Prof. P. C. Mohalonobis and late Mr. S. Bose of the Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. The authors also record their sincere thanks to Mr. M. Carbery, Director of Agriculture, Bengal for advice, encouragement and guidance, to Mr. G. B. Pal, for helpful criticism, to Dr. S. N. Sarkar for a great part of analytical figures, to Mr Sayed Ali for computation, and to Mr Abdul Aziz Talukder for conducting the digestion and metabolic tests. REFERENCES Armsby, H. P. and Moulton, C. R. (1925). The animal as a convertor of matter and energy, 179-80 Bergman. (1848).' Wärme konomia der Thiere ' Gottingen 9 ;* Bergman. (1852). ' Anatomisch-physiol. Uebersicht des Thier216 Studies on the Relation of Minerals to Live Weight Moulton, C. R. (1916). J. Biol. Chem. 24, 299 Müntz. (1878). Ann. Inst. Agron, 3, 59* Rubner, M. (1883). Ztschr. F. Biol., 19, 545* Sherman, H. C. and MacLeod, F. L. (1925). J. Biol. Chem. 64, 429-59 Smuts, D. B. (1935).. J. Nut. 9, 403-33 Trowbridge P. F. Moulton C. R. and Haigh L. D. (1915). Mo. Agri. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 18 *Cited by Armsby and Moulton.
I.B. CHATTERJEE AND S. K. TALAPATRA 217 APPENDIX I Calcium content of adult male rats (From the Journal of Biological Chemistry, 64, 438, By H. C. Sherman and F. L. MacLeod) Rat No. Age Last live weight Days gm. *1239 179 282 *1054 185 322 *1055 185 323 1063 185 271 1064 185 260 259 206 367 627 245 365 628 245 344 6118 245 244 6116 245 303 667 241 342 816 241 346 *817 241 347 *818 241 371 *1573 245 313 164 309 330 666 416 358 40 485 365 570 522 313 740 603 292 7 849 339 *These were animals from a slightly different diet as explained in the text.
A NOTE ON SOME ECTOPARASITES OF POULTRY AND THEIR CONTROL BY PURNENDU SEN, M.Sc.(CAL.), PH.D. (LOND.), D.I.C. (LOND.) Lately Offg. Entomologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 31 July 1939) (With six text-figures) INTRODUCTION ALTHOUGH a good deal of work has been done in other countries on the ectoparasites of poultry, such as lice and mites, very little seems to be on record as to the nature of these arthropod infestations in poultry in India. A very good opportunity of studying two species of these parasites arose owing to a severe outbreak of lice during early March 1938, on the poultry farm at Latoli at the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. The in- tensity of infestation was so severe that one bird died within two hours of its arrival at the laboratory before any treatment could be given. The bird was greatly emaciated and dull. Soon afterwards the farm was inspected, and it was found that almost every bird in the poultry house was infested with lice and that these were prevalent in all stages of development. Moreover, some of the birds had scaly legs, the scales coming off in lumps on rubbing with the fingers. LICE The lice collected from these birds were identified as Menopon stramineum Nitzsch. These are swift runners. The eggs are laid in compact batches on the base of feathers, several hundred being matted together in one place. The nits are somewhat elongate and transparent, measuring about 0.8 mm. The nymphs (first stage) emerging from these are very minute, being hardly larger than the nits. The author has observed at least three nymphal stages, as judged mainly from the size and respiratory system. The adult differs from the nymph not only in having the external genitalia well-developed but also in the intense chitinization of the body with a dense coat of setae. The different stages are described below: First stage (Fig. 1).P. SEN 219 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Menopon stramineum220 Ectoparasites of Poultry and Their Control. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Cnemidocoptes mutansP. SEN 221 Adult (Fig. 3).222 Ectoparasites of Poultry and Their Control pair of characteristic chitinous bars at the anterior end. The anus is situated at the posterior end in the form of an elliptical slit. The larva (Fig. 5) has a similar appearance to the adult but the chitinous structures are absent. It has a pair of slender hairs at the posterior end, the length of which equals or exceeds that of the body of the mite. On post-mortem examination of bird dead of lousiness, some examples of air-sac mites, Cytoleichus nudus (Vizioli), were encountered. These are minute mites, somewhat oblong in shape with the anterior end narrowed (Fig. 6). The body is devoid of any hairs or spines and the legs are fairly long with knob-like pedicels at tips. These mites have been reported to infest air-passages and several other internal structures. [Kaura and Gana pathy Iyer, 1937.] CONTROL MEASURES As an immediate remedy towards delousing the poultry at Latoli farm was needed, the dipping method with commercial sodium fluoride was adopted. Sodium fluoride was made into a solution of 0.5 per cent in a tub large enough to immerse a fowl. One and a half ounce of the chemical dissolved in two gallons of tepid water were found to be sufficient for the treatment of a flock of seven birds. The birds were dipped in the solution one after the other, care being taken to hold their heads out of the solution, and they were rinsed thoroughly in the bath for about two minutes each. The birds were then wiped on a towel and kept in the sun for proper drying *. After this single treatment they have been freed not only of the lice but also the scaly-leg mites and at least two hens in the flock have laid eggs regularly since. The yard of the poultry house was cleaned by burning hay over it, and the poultry house was properly cleaned and washed with phenyl. These simple sanitary methods, if followed scrupulously, would go a long way to keeping poultry houses and their inmates free from lice and, possibly, also mites. SUMMARY The paper records a severe outbreak of lice (Menopon stramineum) associated with scaly-leg mites (Cnemidocoptes mutans) and air-sac mite, (Cytoleichus nudus), on a poultry farm attached to the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. The outbreak was successfully brought under control by dipping all the birds of the flock in a 0.5 per cent solution of commercial sodium fluoride. The different stages of M. stramineum are des- cribed in detail. REFERENCES Kaura, R. L. and Ganapathy Iyer, S. (1937). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 7, 299-301 * One bird out of the lot however died the same night after the sodium fluoride bath, probably owing to cold, as the day turned up cloudy unexpectedly after we gave them the requisite bath, and this bird being particularly weak succumbed. It should be borne in mind that the birds should not be given a bath unless there is sun to dry them.
SERUM PROTEIN FRACTIONS OF NORAMAL AND VITAMIN A, CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS DEFICIENT CATTLE* BY N. D. KEHAR, M. Sc., Sc.D. Acting Officer-in-charge, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 25 August 1939) MCCOLLUM [1917] pointed out that animals fed on a diet deficient in vitamin A show increased susceptibility to infections. McCollum (loc. cit.) and Cramer [1930] found that feeding of vitamin A rich substances consideraby increased their body resistance. Since McCollum's first observation, evidence has accumulated to show that vitamin A exercises an effective control in maintaining the physiological defences of the mucous membranes which are the portals of entry of most infections in animals. Cramer and Kingsbury [1924] observed that deficiency of vitamin A brings about a breakdown of local defences, and Turner [1928] and Turner et al [1929, 1930] remarked that organisms gain a pathogenic hold during the depressed state of their host from vitamin A deficiency. So far as the author is aware, no observations on vitamin A deficient cattle have so far been reported to indicate any relationship of the various factors connected with maintaining the integrity of the host resistance to different infections. Since proteins play an important role in all immunologi- cal reactions, it is attempted in this investigation to examine critically the various fractions of serum proteins of the normal and vitamin A deficient cattle and to find out which fraction is most affected under these conditions. Furthermore, because utilization of proteins by the body is related to mineral metabolism [McCollum and Simmonds, 1929 ; Peters and Van Slyke, 1931 ; and McCance, 1936], it was considered advisable to incorporate similar observations on animals kept on an imbalanced ration so far as calcium and phosphorus are concerned. METHODS AND MATERIAL Serum protein fractions were estimated by the method devised by Camp- bell and Hanna [1937]. This method claims an advantage in accuracy and * This investigation was carried out at the Physiological Laboratory (Serology Section), Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. (223)
224 Serum Protein Fractions of Normal & Deficiency Diet Cattle convenience over the previously known ' salting out', ' refractometric' and colorimetric' methods. By this technique, euglobulin is precipitated by 15 per cent, pseudoglobulin 1 by 18 per cent, and total globulin and pseudo- globulin 11 by 21 per cent aqueous solution of anhydrous sodium sulphite. The mixture of serum and sodium sulphite is allowed to stand in a water bath at 37° C. for ten minutes. Duplicate observations have, however, been found to agree very satisfactorily if the serum and sodium sulphite solutions are thoroughly well shaken together and left at room temperature for about 15 minutes, and then filtered through a double layer of Whatman filter paper No. 42. This process economizes a considerable amount of time as compared with Howe's [1921, 1923] method where precipitation and filtra- tion are carried out in an oven at 37° C. The first few ml. of the filtrate are refiltered. The nitrogen estimation of the filtrates is made by the Kjeldhal- Gunning method and the results calculated by difference. It may be pointed out that none of the previous methods involving separation of proteins by salting out techniques and determination of the nitrogen content of the precipitate, takes account of the fact that nitrogen containing lipids are carried down in the precipitate. This is, of course, eliminated when proteins are estimated from the filtrates. The animals for control observations were drawn from the Institute dairy herd, and were apparently in normal health. These animals were kept on an adequate and well-balanced ration. The vitamin A deficient animals were kept on a carotene poor ration to deplete their vitamin A body reserves. One of these experimental animals was a cow which was kept on this ration since 18 October 1936 and the other a calf born on 23 June 1935 to a cow which was maintained on such a ration since 1 March 1931. This calf was congenitally blind and had been kept on carotene poor ration since birth. The other two batches of two each were maintained at a lower level of intake of calcium and phosphorus for a period of about four years. Blood was obtained by puncturing the jugular vein before giving any feed to the animals. The serum was separated from the cells by centrifuga- lization, and only those sera which did not show any trace of hemolysis were utilized. All estimations were made in duplicate. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Table I shows the results of the estimation of the protein fractions of normal cows and Tables II, III and IV of animals kept on a vitamin A, calcium and phosphorus deficient rations respectively. These tables, giving results of the protein fractions of animals on different deficiency diets, show several points of interest when compared with those of the control animals. It will be observed from Table V, which compares average value of various protein fractions of the normal and the deficiency diet animals, that the total protein, euglobulin and total globulin contents of the serum of vitamin A, calcium and phosphorus deficient animals are considerably decreased as compared with the normal. The amount of pseudoglobulin I is also
N. D. KEHAR 225 TABLE I Serum protein fractions of normal cows. (The values are given in gm. per cent) Protein fractions No. of the dairy cows Average 210 214 230 74 187 246 Total protein . 9.4 9.34 9.6 9.3 9.23 9.38 9.34 Non-protein nitrogen 0.7 0.875 0.82 0.79 0.73 0.81 0.79 Euglobulin . . 2.23 2.69 2.67 2.45 2.31 2.51 2.47 Pseudoglobulin I . 2.34 1.68 1.63 1.73 1.95 1.89 1.87 Pseudoglobulin II . 0.74 0.70 0.93 0.87 0.79 0.72 0.79 Total globulin . 5.31 5.07 5.23 5.20 5.18 5.23 5.22 Albumin . . 4.09 4.27 4.37 4.21 4.21 4.30 4.31 Albumin/globulin . 0.81 0.84 0.83 0.80 0.81 0.82 0.82 TABLE II Serum protein fractions of Vitamin A deficient animals. (The values are given in gm. per cent) Protein fractions Calf No. 13 Cow No. 205 Average Total protein . . . . . 7.48 8.09 7.79 Non-protein nitrogen . . . 1.13 0.70 0.91 Euglobulin . . . . . 0.48 0.67 0.58 Pseudoglobulin I . . . . 1.40 1.32 1.36 Pseudoglobulin II . . . . 0.46 1.22 0.84 Total globulin . . . . . 2.34 3.22 2.78 Albumin . . . . . 5.14 4.87 5.00 Albumin/globulin . . . . 2.20 1.50 1.88
226 Serum Protein Fractions of Normal & Deficiency Diet Cattle TABLE III Serum protein fractions of animals on a low calcium diet. (The values are given in gm. per cent) Protein fractions Cow No. 207 Cow No. 117 Average Total protein . . . . . 7.87 8.53 8.20 Non-protein nitrogen . . . . . . . . . Euglobulin . . . . . 0.94 0.66 0.80 Pseudoglobulin I . . . . 1.26 1.85 1.55 Pseudoglobulin II . . . . 0.42 0.42 0.42 Total globulin . . . . . 2.62 2.93 2.72 Albumin . . . . . 5.25 5.60 5.42 Albumin/globulin . . . . 2.00 1.98 1.99 TABLE IV Serum protein fractions of animals on a low phosphorus diet. (The values are given in gm. per cent) Protein fractions Cow No. 232 Cow No. 203 Average Total proteins . . . . . 8.35 8.79 8.52 Non-protein nitrogen . . . 0.735 0.789 0.761 Euglobulin . . . . . 1.00 1.20 1.10 Pseudoglobulin I . . . . 1.75 1.99 1.87 Pseudoglobulin II . . . . 0.70 0.63 0.66 Total globulin . . . . . 3.45 3.82 3.63 Albumin . . . . . 4.90 4.97 4.93 Albumin/globulin . . . . 1.10 1.20 1.15 comparatively less in the vitamin A and calcium deficient animals than in the controls, though the phosphorus deficient animals show this constituent of the same magnitude.
N. D. KEHAR 227 TABLE V Average results of serum protein fractions of the normal and vitamin A, calcium and phosphorus deficient animals. (The values are given in gm. per cent) Total protein Non-protein nitrogen Euglobulin. Pseudo- globulin I Pseudo- globulin II Total globulin Albumin Albumin/ globulin Normal cows . . . 9.34 0.79 2.47 1.87 0.79 5.22 4.31 0.82 Vitamin A deficient cow and calf. 7.79 0.91 0.58 1.36 0.84 2.78 5.00 1.88 Calcium deficient cows . 8.20 .. 0.80 1.55 0.42 2.72 5.42 1.99 Phosphorus deficient cows . 8.52 0.761 1.10 1.81 0.66 3.63 4.93 1.15 Von Hosselen [1919] pointed out that the malnourished animals can use to advantage only a limited quantity of protein. Any increment above the minimum nitrogen equilibrium is less economically utilized. Bruckman, D'Esopo and Peters [1930] found that malnourished patients indicated low serum proteins. Rowe [1917] observed that excessive protein feeding does not seem to increase the protein content of the serum of malnourished animals. Prolonged under-nutrition can, however, produce a protein deficit in the blood plasma. Although the number of animals tried by us in this investigation is too small to warrant any authentic statement, observations made at different occasions, however, indicate that the malnourished animals show a signi- ficant decrease in total proteins especially in total globulins in spite of the ration being adequate with regard to protein sufficiency. Since globulin fractions are associated with the antibody forming capacity of the animal, it may be that the significant decrease in the amount of euglobulin and pseudoglobulin I in the case of vitamin A deficient animals is probably res- ponsible for making them more susceptible to infections. Tables III, IV and V show that the total protein, euglobulin and total globulin contents of the serum proteins of calcium and phosphorus deficient animals is considerably less than the control animals, indicating that a deficiency of calcium and phosphorus also leads to reduced nitrogen equilibrium. It has been shown by McCance [1936, 1 and 2] that in man salt deficiency leads to a disordered nitrogen balance. Peters and Van Slyke [1931] summarize the views of various workers to indicate that other 228 Serum Protein Fractions of Normal & Deficiency Diet Cattle absorption and assimilation of the other constituents. As has been pointed out in the case of vitamin A deficient animals that decreased amount of immunologically active protein fractions lead to increased susceptibility of the host to infections, the deficiency of calcium and phosphorus in a ration over prolonged periods also appears to exercise a similar influence on the globulin fractions and consequently on the body resistance of the host. SUMMARY In this investigation, total protein, total non-protein nitrogen, euglobulin, pseudoglobulin I, pseudoglobulin II, total globulin and albumin of the sera of normal cattle and also of those kept on vitamin A, calcium and phosphorus deficient rations were estimated and it was found that the total protein, euglobulin and total globulin fractions of serum of vitamin A, calcium and phosphorus deficient animals are considerably decreased as compared to the normal. Since the globulin fractions are associated with the antibody forming capacity of the organism, it may be that the significant decrease in the amount of euglobulin and pseudoglobulin I in the case of vitamin A deficient animals is probably responsible for making them more susceptible to infections. A similar condition, but to a lesser degree, was observed in the case of animals maintained on calcium and phosphorus deficient rations. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author wishes to express his gratitude to Mr J. R. Haddow, and Mr R. L. Kaura, for their keen interest and valuable suggestions in the development of this problem. The technical assistance rendered by Mr Govind Rao, is highly appreciated. REFERENCES Bruckman, F. S., D'Esopo, L. M. and Peters, J. P. (1930). J. Clin. Invest. 8, 577 Campbell, W. R. and Hanna, M. I. (1937). J. Biol. Chem. 119, 15 Cramer, W. (1930). Lancet, 1153-4 SELECTED ARTICLE THE CONCEPT OF INSTINCT BY Dr. J.A.LOESER (Formerly Professor of Psychology, University of Berlin) (Reprinted from the Nature, Vol. 143, 27 May 1939) WHEN a hen has laid eggs for the first time in her life she immediately sits on them. She does not know why she does this for she does not consciously know what an egg is, nor what incubation is, nor can she take any interest in the hatching of the future brood. Hitherto science has called this a typical example of animal instinct. Without any consciousness of the biological purpose, it is said the animal finds the right thing to do because it was born with a mysterious instinct, which is inherited from the experience gained by its ancestors in primeval times. THE CONCEPT OF INSTINCT What is the real truth of the matter ? Careful investigation has proved that the animal certainly has personal motives for sitting, but they are not biological ones. Shortly before the beginning of hatching time the animal's breast shows the so-called hatching spot. Here the feathers fall out and there is a bald spot which feels hot, as if from inflammation (probably caused by hormones). This evidently causes the animal pain, for it seeks cooling sub- stances, which must necessarily have a curved shape to be effective. After the eggs have been laid, these offer what is required. But we may just as well give the hen stones or billiard balls to sit upon; she will hatch them in exactly the same way, because all she wants is to soothe the discomfort of her body. It is also possible to soothe the' hatching irritation' in an entirely different way, that is, by holding the animal's breast in cold water. These are experiments which even the peasant knows and often makes for practical reasons. Only a bird which has these ' spots ' sits on the eggs, and with many species frequently it is the cock. Similarly, the bird takes no more interest in its own eggs than in those of another bird, if these are put into its nest soon enough to become familiar. There is, therefore, no such thing as purposeful hatching. The hen only sits on her eggs while the irritation from the ' hatch- ing spot' lasts. When the eggs have been hatched, others may be substituted, and she will continue to sit on them. But when the irritation has ceased, the hen does not continue to sit but forsakes the eggs, which decay. Usually, however, this subjective conduct on the part of the bird serves a purpose, for the consequence generally is that the eggs are hatched. The hen turns the eggs so that she may sit on the cool parts, and without meaning to do so she thus causes all parts of the egg to be equally warmed. This example shows animal behaviour in an entirely new light. The conclusions to be drawn from it are the following:230 The Concept of Instinct (2) The means to do this may vary a great deal; they are fundamentally variable. It is a matter of indifference to the hen whether she sits on eggs or on other subjects, or whether cold water is used for satisfying her needs. (3) Biological purposes are not aimed at, either consciously or un- consciously, that is, instinctively. The ' personally ' motivated behaviour is often biologically useless or harmful. The hen is indifferent to the fate of the eggs. Frequently, however, subjective (psychological) aims and objective (biological) pur- poses coincide. The theory of the psychological autonomy of action in all living creatures, which I evolved on these lines a few years ago, cast doubt on all mechanistic conceptions of human and animal behaviour and therefore to the ancient conception of instinct, which had persisted for more than two thousand years. This conception had completely dominated the theory of organic behaviour. All actions were traced to fundamental instincts, even the actions of the apparently free will, for at long last the motives for these too were believed to consist in vital impulses. In opposition to this conception, the new theory postulates the funda- mental ' uniformity of all organic action' from the simplest reaction of the Protozoa to the voluntary action of man. The prototype of all reaction, indeed, is this voluntary action. Its principle is variability in the choice of the means to obtain its ends. The aim of voluntary action is always a personal motive, a psychological experience, which represents the subjective reason for the reaction. The motives themselves may be of an inferior or of a superior nature, that is at present theoretically unimportant. Every organic action, therefore, is merely the satisfaction of an impulse, without regard to the question as to how far self-preservation and race-preservation, the two impulses generally recognized in biology as the only influential ones, are guaranteed. These two great unconscious motives in the theory of instinct and all biological psychology must be eliminated ; they do not exist; they are neither conscious nor unconscious impulses of organic behaviour. If then there is no instinct as the imaginary basis of action, neither is there instinctive action or reaction, in short no unconsciously suitable action (that is, no action for the purpose of self-preservation or race-preservation); there is no pre-formed reaction which intervenes, as an inherited factor, between the sensation and its expression. Only in a certain percentage of cases do self-preservation and race- preservation occur in nature as the consequence of purely individual action. VOLUNTARY AND REFLECTIVE ACTION The first and fundamental question here is the transition of ideas in the line which leads from true voluntary action (or action of the free will) by way of rigid instinct, occasionally modifiable, it is true, yet essentially and funda- mentally invariable, to true reflex action. If this continuous line cannot be sharply divided, the result will always be : instinct is in the end a reflex- chain and the action of the will is only a relaxed action of the instinct; this
J. A. LOESER 231 was how it was described even in the most recent publications. Instinct is actually only an ' extended organ'232 The Concept of Instinct. One of the chief examples of instinct, the piercing reaction of the lanneret (Lanius collurio L.) has since been proved, in complete agreement with my theory, to be the result of suitable actions according to the principle of trial and error, knowledge of the thorn being only acquired after long investiga- tion (Lorenz). Another pillar of the instinct theory has therefore fallen. It is therefore evident that there is always a personal reason for the action, and that nothing takes place without such a motive. The second decisive point is the reaction to emotion, Every action is always and only the response to an emotion. Where the psychological basis is very narrow and slight and the physical possibilities very unmistakably re-formed, the response may be of an exceedingly sterotyped nature. In such cases the impression gained from superficial observation will be that the actions are really mechanical. It is well known that ichneumon flies sting strange caterpillars or grubs which they find beneath the bark of a tree. The explanation of this mystery was found by means of an experiment which once more proved the exclusive effect of personal impulse. In this case, the impulse was provided by the smell of the victims. It was proved that the ichneumon flies also stung small paper cornets filled with the blood of the caterpillars or grubs, this blood providing the characteristic smell. If there were an instinct or some complete reaction unconsciously serving a vital purpose, it would necessarily include the strange insect as the object of the action, for without this insect as its object the action itself would be useless. It is therefore clear that here too the stimulus merely leads to its own satisfaction irrespective of any object or purpose, whereupon a true inner organic reflex action takes place, which causes the laying apparatus to function. The well-known experiment made in Germany a few years ago with young storks in order to submit their instinct to an experimentum crucis ended in a real catastrophe for this conception. The birds, which had been brought from east Prussia to the Rhine and which had not hitherto migrated, should have moved in a south-easterly direction, according to the instinct theory. This is usual with storks the home of which is in eastern Germany, a fact hitherto explained by the ' instinct of direction ', that is, a south-easterly in- stinct. The result, however, was that the storks scattered in all directions. Some were sighted in the Alps, some in France, but not a single one in the east. The reason for this is that all the storks in eastern Germany, being, ' water birds', must naturally move along the river valleys, etc., where they find their food, and finally in the direction of the Black Sea, and the Bosphorus, whereas when taken to western Germany they pursue the opposite course, that is, like the west-German storks, they fly along the Rhine-Rhone valley to the western Mediterranean and North Africa. In this case, however, the most natural thing was for them to scatter, as storks, traditional flyers, mostly migrate under the leadership of old ones, and this leadership was lacking. THE PROBLEM OF PURPOSE In all these occurrences in Nature as well as in all experiments, we have repeated evidence of the uncertainty with which biological aims are achieved. A glance at' fundamental instincts ' will prove this ; for example, the important and decisive food instinct, where the fundamental divergence between the
J. A. LOESER 233 significant reaction to stimuli (taste and smell) and the biological utility of this procedure is clearly evident. Every living creature, from the protozoon to man, directs its actions primarily and exclusively according to such sub- jective stimuli; only in the second place does the problem arise as to how far satisfaction of the stimulus is conducive to health. Even in the animal kingdom this problem may become a momentous one, as when certain tribes of ants cause the downfall of their community through excessive consump- tion of the intoxicating secretion of the plant-louse. It must be remembered that there is no question here of abnormal behaviour. On the contrary, it is in such extreme cases that the fundamental law is most clearly evident, the law of reaction to a sensation. The frequently destructive behaviour in the animal's care of its young is perhaps the most striking example of all. The fact that with many species the devouring of eggs and off-spring is not an abnormality, but almost a normal procedure, as with ants, bees, bumble-bees, also with some kinds of fish, is clearly in favour of the exclusive principle of the subjective satisfaction of impulse, a principle which rules even in opposition to elementary biological purposes. On the other hand, I have already given a detailed description of cases in which ' genuine ' care of the brood, that is the care of the young animal itself, as well as genuine friendship and love in animals, are found. With regard to the problem of the so-called instinctive goal, migration of birds of passage is of special interest. It used to be said that the true migratory instinct determined both the passage and its destination. But there is scarcely another instance which proves so unmistakably that all is variable. At most it can be said that the impulse of flying is constant, the impulse which is the fundamental phenomenon of the migration, and which I have already described in detail elsewhere. This impulse signifies the be- ginning or breaking forth of a completely undirected storm of motion234 The Concept of Instinct. For it is those individuals who have been most favourably predisposed from the beginning which automatically survive through the process of selection. There can scarcely be any question of a real stuggle). The theory which I have propounded, that of the risk of organic life, is something fundamentally different. For every organism, from the lowest to the highest, acts in con- formity with it, according to the same principle of adaptation to circum- stances under the aegis of subjective impulses and experiences. Thus we have genuine reflection and genuine risk. We also have error as a necessary ingredient of life, not as the abnormal breaking down of an automatic machine. A real risk, and in consequence a real struggle worthy of the name, are only possible where there is that which in its highest sense is called free will. It always rests on the same principleABSTRACTS Selecting dairy cattle. W. B. NEVENS AND A. F. KUHLMAN (1938) Illinois, Agr. Exp. Sta. Cir. 486. CONSTANT improvement in the quality of a herd is every breeder's goal. Ability to judge good type and interpret production records and pedigrees is therefore essential. Lack of this ability causes disappointment to the man purchasing animals as well as to the man selecting animals from his own herd for breeding purposes. Such ability comes only after years of experience. The sooner such experience is acquired the better. Pure-bred breeders selling breeding stock must know what others think are the accepted types. Pedigrees, blood lines and families should be familiar to him. Such knowledge, plus the ability to recognize how closely his own cattle approach this ideal (accepted type), is the only means by which he can supply the animals desired by the purchaser. Dairy animals are generally selected alone on their type or the fact that they are from excellent dams. Selection should always be made on the basis of both these considerations. The animal's own production record, if any, and those of its nearest relatives should be included. Breeders should be satisfied with no less236 ABSTRACTS production. Here again the ideal type must be well known. The use of a score card or thorough familiarity with it is a very good aid in type selection. In heifers the first essential is health. An unhealthy, slow growing heifer of weak constitution will not develop into a good milking cow. Good dairy form, feeding capa- city, refinement and symmetry are essential. Faults in constitution and general con- formation cannot easily be corrected and should be avoided for this reason. Masculine features are of the greatest importance in type for a dairy bull. Good feeding capacity, good size and good style characterize a good bull. The mature weight of a bull makes good straight bones and strong feet very essential. Many faults may be detected in a young bull which may cause him to become useless in mature life. These should be detected early and such animals not used for breeding purposes. (J. N. W.). Inadequacy of a whole milk ration for dairy calves as manifested in changes of blood composition and in other physiological disorders. G. H. WISE, W. E. PETERSEN AND T. W. GULLICKSON (1939), Jour. Dy. Sci. 22, 559-72. THIS study was made for the purpose of obtaining further information as to the symptomatology of prolonged feeding of whole milk as a sole diet of calves, which earlier work has shown to be detrimental. Twelve calves from normal dams were placed on experiment shortly after birth. All but one received colostrum the first two or three days and then whole milk twice daily from a pail. The milk was produced by animals on ' medium quality alfalfa hay, corn silage and a grain mixture of 250 lb. yellow corn, 250 lb. barley, 250 lb. oats, 100 lb. bran, 100 lb. linseed meal, 50 lb. cottonseed meal and 15 lb. common salt.' Access of the calves to water was restricted. Commercial iodized salt was supplied ad lib. Calves were observed, for the effects of their diet upon 1. general health, 2. growth, 3. blood analysis, and 4. post-mortem examinations. All calves seemed healthy and vigorous at first but soon developed a gross symptom- atology in somewhat the following order : depraved appetite with desire to gnaw boards, long rough coat, dry skin, paleness of unpigmented areas, emaciation, sluggish- ness, occasional nervousness and anorexia, colds and digestive disturbances were fre- quent. Symptoms varied in kind and degree with individuals. Many symptoms were restricted to individuals, such as paresis, rachitic -like condition, edema of joints, excessive salivation, tonic clonic convulsions, retarded growth, cachexia, etc. The milk intake varied from day to day for erratic appetites ; with good appetite the daily intake increased with age, although on a body weight basis it was actually a decrease. Extremes were probably due to genetic heterogeneity of experimental animals and variation in nutrient intake. Anæmia and low hæmatocrit values were pronounced in advanced stages. Of seven calves studied, within the first ten days only two had normal hæmoglobin values. Blood sugar values were high and variable. Plasma fat content seemed to follow the general condition of the calves. Plasma calcium was normal in all but two calves. Inorganic phosphorus of the plasma varied. A general decrease in plasma magnesium occurred during the first three or four months, the rate of reduction being further evidence of variable response to apparently the same treatment. Post-mortem examination of five calves of 55 to 270 days of age revealed under- developed rumens in three cases. Debris made up the rumen contents, while lumps of undigested curd were in the abomasum. Pyloric ulceration occurred in some cases. The heart was atonic and petechial hemorrhage on the external surface of the auri- cular region was frequent. Atrophied spleens, enlarged adrenals, anæmic livers and bones osteoporotic on the articulating surface were other symptoms revealed by autopsy. Many results cannot be assessed because of the variable and complex symptomato- logy. In some instances the findings of other workers were confirmed, whereas in other instances questions remain. Iron and copper deficiencies were pronouncedly manifest by anæmia. The data shows that calves cannot tolerate hæmoglobin values of less than 3.00 gm. per 100 mls. of blood. The Mg content of the milk suggests hypomagnesemia, a result of faulty untiliza- tion, and it is hardly conceiveable that the Ca : Mg ratio of the milk is a factor in Mg utilization. Absorption or retention of P was apparently affected by diarrhoea, as changes in this element followed this condition.
ABSTRACTS 237 Correlation of any one symptom with changes in one constituent are difficult. Tetany of Mg deprivation is not due to Ca content of the blood although tonic-clonic convulsions in two calves involved hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia. The many conditions indicate the complexity of the symptomatology. It was possible to contribute the cause of ' spotted kidneys ', in three cases, to either vitamin A or magnesium deficiency. The dysfunction of one or more organs may have been responsible for the sudden change in plasma colour. Superficial evidence might indicate that liver and/or kidney disturbances were responsible for this colour variation. It is easily evident that the symptomatology of prolonged feeding of calves on a whole milk diet is extremely complex and the prognosis in such cases appears unfavour- able. (J. N. W.) Value of various vitamins and inorganic salts for overcoming symptoms manifest in calves restricted to a whole milk ration.G. H. WISE, T. W. GULLICKSON AND W. E. PETERSON (1939), Jour. Dy. Sci. 22, 573-82. THE response of malnourished calves, resulting from prolonged feeding on only whole milk, to the addition of vitamins A and D and the minerals: iron, copper and magnesium to the diet was studied. A concentrated cod liver oil preparation was used to supply the vitamins, whereas Fe2Cl3, CuSO4, and MgCO3, MgCl2 or MgSO4 were used to supply the minerals. Fe and Cu were provided in amounts suggested by Knoop, Krauss and Washburn and Mg in an amount sufficient to maintain the plasma Mg between 2.0 and 2.5 mg per 100 mls. Five mls. of 1.3 per cent KI solution were fed daily to all calves. Blood samples were taken bi-weekly. Lack of uniformity in the experimental animals resulted in various reactions. Two calves received only Mg supplements. In one a previously acquired swallowing diffi- culty was noticeably eased and the vigour oft he calf increased. Death ensued following anorexia, constipation, dyspnoea and abdominal distention due to a migration of fluids into the alimentary canal. In. the other the syndrome included dysphagia, stiffness, enlarged joints and paresis. A semi-paralytic state and dysphagia were relieved, but other symptoms continued to progress. Diarrhoea and bloat appeared to be the direct cause of death. Another calf responded to cod liver oil, MgCO3 and FeCl3 plus CuSO4 (Fe : Cu= 10 : 1), administered in the order given, and conceived on second breeding during normal oestrus. A fourth calf receiving the same supplements, only in a reverse order, responded similarly, but did not conceive. In this case, however, a very depraved appetite was integral to the ingestion of large amounts of sand, gravel and cinders. These brought on rumenitis, acute gastritis and enteritis which caused death. The remaining three calves returned to normal. Their treatments were : 1. FeCl3 plus CuSO4, followed by MgCO3 plus cod liver oil; plus glucose; 2. FeCl3 plus CuSO4, followed by MgCO3 plus cod liver oil; and 3. cod liver oil followed by MgCO3 after which FeCl3 plus CuSO4 was also given. In the consideration of the many constituents studied in this milk syndrome of calves it was further indicated that magnesium needs considerable study. In general it seems that calves on an unsupplemented whole milk ration develop hypomagnesemia, the cause of which seemingly lies in the etiology of the lowering of the plasma Mg. It seems that calves need more Mg than is generally supposed, but whether the nephritic condition associated with hypomagnesemia in calves is the cause or effect of decreased Mg should be determined by metabolism trials. However, the addition of MgCO3 to the whole milk ration of calves in this study effected a normal Mg level. All abnormalities in these calves were partially or wholly overcome by the treat- ment given, except depraved and erratic appetite. The evidence, however, of the response in other cases being such as would unquestionably enhance the favourability of prognosis in cases of such deficiencies not necessarily due to a whole milk diet, makes further study desirable. The physical nature of this ration may be important. (J.N.W.).
238 ABSTRACTS Etude experimentale du Plasmodium gallinaceum parasite de la poule domestique. Transmissino de ce germe par Stegomyia fasciata et Stegomyia albopicta. E. BRUMPT (1936). Ann. de Parasit. Human. e. Compar. 14. 597-620. PROFESSOR Brumpt described in 1935 a new malarial infection in the domestic fowls of Ceylon and named this parasite Plasmodium gallinaceum. It seems to have been seen for the first time by Prowazek (1912) who encountered plasmodial infec- tion in three domestic fowls of Deli (Sumatra). The next original reference to this para- site is by Crawford (1933) who in the annual report of the Director of Veterinary Ser- vices, Ceylon, observed that Plasmodium relictum (=Praecox) had been found in the blood of several imported fowls usually causing their death. One strain of the parasite, obtained from Ceylon was transmitted in the course of 23 passages. Chicken, goose and pheasant are very susceptible to this fatal infection, the mortality rate among the infected birds being about 80 per cent. The turkey when inoculated shows only scanty infection. The infection in the peacock and the partridge is very mild and probably temporary. The duck, guinea-fowl, pigeon, turtle-dove, quail, canary, henhawk, the sparrow (common), calker, finch and the heron (Bubulcus ibis ibis) of Morocco are re- fractory to inoculation even with heavy doses of this parasite. Contrary to what is observed in avian spirochaetosis there is no rise of temperature, even after intense infection with this parasite. The canary is susceptible to most of the other species of bird malaria but it is refractory to this infection, whereas the chicken is refractory to most of the other avian plasmodia but is very susceptible to this infection. This is how this new identification is made. The sporogony cycle of Plasmodium gallinaceum develops rapidly in the cosmopolitian mosquito Aedes aegypti (Stegomyia fasciata). The rate of infec- tivity in these mosquitoes has been observed to be as heavy as 100% and the intensity of infection is so great that as many as 1650 öocysts have been seen on the stomach of a single mosquito. Aedes albopicta (Stegomyia albopicta=S. varigatta) is equally sus- ceptible to this infection and transmits the disease by biting. Culex fatigans (originally obtained by the author from India) does not transmit the disease. The specimens of a strain of C ulex pipiens obtained by continuous breed- ing up to the 27th generation are not capable of transmitting the disease. The fact of the strict localization of the chicken to areas considered with the wide distribution of the vector-mosquito seems to indicate that the chicken may be only an accidental host of the parasite harboured by wild animals of limited geographical dis- tribution. The laws of parasitic specificity are very curious. The chicken and the goose which are zoologically separated from each other are susceptible to infection with P. gallinaceum but the guinea-fowl and the domestic duck which are very near in their systematic position to the above birds are refractory to inoculation. [B. C. B.] Immunisation of birds against fowl pox and pigeon pox respectively with viruses propagated on the chorio-allantoic membrane of the developing egg. R. E. GLOVER (1939). J. Comp. Path. & Ther. 52, 29. OBSERVATIONS are recorded on the propagation and behaviour of fowl pox and pigeon pox viruses in the developing egg. Material from several passages was tested for virulence by inoculations into fowls and pigeons. The reactions produced with the pigeon pox virus after 50 passages revealed that the strain had become slightly attenuated for the pigeon but produced well marked purely local reaction in fowls. With regard to the fowl strain which had undergone 38 passages it was observed that it re- mained innocuous for the pigeon and there was evidence of decrease in its virulence for fowls. Viability tests of egg passaged virus kept in the refrigerator in various substrates showed that the pigeon pox virus stored in broth was capable of propagation on egg
ABSTRACTS 239 membrane after 380 days, although a gradual loss in its infectivity was noticed. In other fluids the virus completely lost its potency between 93 and 297 days. Vaccines prepared from egg propagated virus were tested for efficiency and im- munity. Pigeons vaccinated with a single dose of one per cent saline broth suspen- sion of 3-5 days egg membrane virus by the intradermal, intraperitoneal or intravenous routes showed a fairly durable immunity. The subcutaneous route proved less effec- tive. As an immunising agent for fowls the pigeon virus applied over feather follicles conferred immunity lasting for about six months. In those birds which were given a second dose of either pigeon or fowl pox virus intravenously or intraperitoneally a last- ing immunity could be imparted. [J. A. I.] I240 ABSTRACTS only two of five vaccinated cows aborted against nine abortion among ten controls. With the 100-fold dosage as many as four of five vaccinated animals aborted against seven abortions among nine controls. The author concludes : ' It is apparent that vaccination had altered the reactivity of the animals showing an increased resistance to the smaller infective dose. The resistance of the vaccinated cattle was, however, insufficient to differentiate them from control animals when the size of the infective dose was increased one hundred fold. The experiment provides evidence showing that cattle inoculated with living cultures of a non-virulent strain of Br. abortus that causes no infection, possess an increased resistance to infection that can be demonstrated by test- ing with an infective dose that is not too severe '. [ V. R. R.]
REVIEWS Anatomy of the Sheep's Brain--A Laboratory Atlas for students of Zoology, BY E. A. BRIGGS, D.Sc., Assistant Professor of Zoology in the University of Sydney, 1939. With four text-figures and eight plates. Pp. 43 (ANGUS AND ROBERTSON, LIMITED, SYDNEY). Price 6 s. THE descriptions of the various structures of the sheep's brain contained in this book, though very concise, are well arranged and just sufficient for zoology students preparing for examinations. As the various structures in the sheep's brain are frequently compared with the corresponding ones in the human brain, the information furnished in this book will be particularly helpful to the medical students who wish to begin the study of the human brain with a background of comparative anatomy. Further the student of comparative anatomy may also use this book with advantage, as it will then enable him to make use of the excellent text-books of human anatomy. The text-figures and plates are few but along with these the dissection guides furnished at various stages, offer enough help to students in the dissection and study of the sheep's brain. The author merely refers to the recent discovery of a thirteenth pair of cranial nerve242 Review using it as a medium for the publication of entomological articles relating not only to agriculture but also to forestry and medicine. The Journal should be specially welcome to workers on Veterinary Entomology in India, as affording them an opportunity, in the early stages of the development of this branch, for consolidating their contributions before they have been scattered away in a diversity of periodicals, such as has been in the past the fate of General Ento- mology in this country. Veterinary Entomology has made what may be re- garded as almost its debut in the arena of science and the problems that immediately confront it are therefore both varied and numerous. Some of the problems that are at present being actually worked out and might appro- priately find a place in a journal of this kind relate to the morphology and bionomics of insects and ticks of veterinary importance, the ecology of the insect pests of cattle and to the systematic side of Veterinary Entomology ; whilst contributions on disease transmission by arthropods should obviously be reserved for publication in veterinary journals. The original articles in the present number of the Journal cover a wide range of subjects, such as the ecology of the spotted bollworms of cotton ; the migrations and transformation of locusts ; the opening of the well-known Lloyd Barrage as a possible factor in causing a change in the status of the mango-hopper in Sind ; tropic responses in a species of Dermestid beete ' and the insect fauna of a hot spring ; whilst Systematic Entomology is re- presented by two articles, one on hymenopterous parasites and the other on the variants of the fruit-fly, Dacus ferrugineus. A notable feature of the JournalERRATA [ INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, VOL. X, PT. I ] P. 14 line 22 from bottom for ' kdtuka ' read ' katuka ' P. 46 Table 11. Remarks column, 3rd line for ' psiotive read ' positive ' P. 73 Heading of Table VII for ' Dil cakes read ' Oil cakes '
ORIGINAL ARTICLES THE ANALYSIS OF MINERAL CONSTITUENTS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIALS PART I. ESTIMATION OF PHOSPHORUS, CHLORINE, CALCIUM, MAGNESIUM, SODIUM AND POTASSIUM IN FOOD-STUFFS BY S. K. TALAPATRA, B.Sc. S. C. RAY, M.Sc., PH.D., A.I.C. AND K. C. SEN, D.Sc. Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 21 August 1939) INTRODUCTION IN view of the important bearing of different minerals on the health and productive power of various animals, the accurate estimation of many inorganic constituents of feeding stuffs is of great interest. It is now well known that minute quantities of several minerals such as iodine, manganese, copper, cobalt etc. exert a powerful effect on the general metabolism of the animal body. There are certain other substances such as phosphorus, calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, chlorine, etc. which are required in much greater quantities, and are indispensable not only individually but in a well balanced mixture for the proper functioning of the animal body. As all these materials are supplied to the animals in their food, it is often discovered that animals suffer from malnutrition due either to the deficiency of some of these materials or due to their unbalanced distribution in the ordinary food-stuffs available. It is necessary, therefore, to know exactly the amount of various minerals present in the diets of animals and with a view to study these aspects of the nutritional problem in this country, the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research has been financing several schemes for the study of the composition of animal food-stuffs in different parts of India. A difficulty, however, arose in the interpretation of the data supplied by different workers in that the method used for analysis varied considerably from place to place and, probably due to this reason, the results of analysis of identical samples in different places did not agree well. Recently the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, having considered the position, has made tentative recommendations for some methods of analysis to be followed by workers in this country. These methods are based on (1) official and tentative methods of analysis of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists, U. S. A. (A. O. A. C.), (2) Technical Communication No. 9 of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition (Rowett method) and (3) the experience of some of the Indian laboratories including our own. (243)
244 Analysis of Mineral Constituents in Biological Materials While the above recommendation was in circulation, we had already under- taken an investigation to determine which of the methods in the literature were suitable for our requirements. We have now completed a comparative study of the analysis of agricultural food-stuffs by several methods in use in various places, including those given in the above-mentioned bulletins, and we have come to the conclusion that a number of modifications are necessary before we can get good results under our local conditions. The object of this communication is to give an account of this investigation and suggest a scheme for the analysis of some of the commoner mineral constituents of feeding stuffs. It may be stated that these methods are not in any sense new but we have introduced modifications to some of the existing methods in order to increase the accuracy of the results. PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS After the material has been properly sampled, the first step in the mineral analysis of a feeding stuff is the ashing of the material in order to destroy the organic matter. Although this appears to be a simple procedure, a large amount of work has been carried out in various laboratories to determine the best method of ashing without any appreciable loss of the mineral to be esti- mated. For example, decarbonising at a high temperature leads to a loss of chlorine and some lime is therefore usually added to the material before ashing in order to fix the chlorine. Ashton [1936] found that at 800°C losses of phos- phates occur in the absence of magnesium nitrate. In the case of grass, the material can be ashed without loss of phosphoric acid if the temperature is kept below 600°C. In the Rowett method, calcium acetate is used as the fixing material for phosphate. Husband [1937] recommends the use of calcium car- bonate as a fixing material for both phosphoric acid and chlorine. In view of these observations, we have carried out a fairly large number of experiments to determine whether a fixing agent should be used, or whether the material may be ashed as such at a comparatively low temperature and we have reached the conclusion that with phosphorus-rich substances, where the percentage of lime and magnesia is comparatively low, it is advisable to use a fixing agent, and we have found precipitated lime (CaO) to be a suitable fixing agent for both P205 and chlorine. For the determination of Ca, Mg, Na and K, however, no fixing material is required so that when an analysis of these constituents is also required, it is necessary to have two samples of the same food-stuffs ashed for the two groups of analysis. ESTIMATION OF PHOSPHORIC ACID There are numerous methods, both gravimetric and volumetric given in the literature, for the determination of phosphorus in biological materials, but for routine work, the volumetric method is found most suitable. The original volumetric method of Pemberton [1893, 1894] has been con- siderably modified from time to time. The various factors that have been taken into consideration are :S. K. TALAPATRA, S. C. RAY AND K. C. SEN 245 (d) The course of chemical reaction following the solution of the preci- pitate in an excess of standard alkali. Pemberton precipitated the phosphate at a temperature of 100°C. Accord- ing to Kilgore [1894], at this high temperature there is danger of the deposi- tion of molybdic acid and he suggested a temperature between 55° and 60°C as the ideal for precipitation. Subsequent workers like Neumann [1902-03] and Richard and Godden [1924], however, preferred to precipitate between 70° to 80°C when the precipitation is done in the presence of excess of nitric acid. The official A. 0. A. C. method now advocates a temperature between 25°C to 30°C. In the original method of Pemberton as also in the subsequent modification of Neumann and, Richard and Godden, the precipitation was done in a medium containing not only an excess of HNO3 but also 7 to 12 per cent of NH4NO3. According to Hundeshagen [1924], when ammonium molybdate is added to a nitric acid solution of an ortho-phosphate the yellow precipitate of ammo- nium phospho-molybdate has a composition (NH4)3PO4, 12MoO3, 2HNO3, H2O. The acid and water are probably in loose combination and are quickly and completely removed by heating at 150°C. As the calculation of the amount of phosphate in the unknown solution is based on the assumption that the ratio of (PO4): (MoO3) = 1 : 12, in the volumetric method of estimating phosphate it is essential that the conditions of precipitation be so adjusted that the precipitate must correspond to the formula of Hundeshagen. The subse- quent washing of the precipitate has a dual aim. Firstly, to remove the acid that is superficially adhering to the precipitate and secondly to remove the acid which is in combination with the precipitate. Richard and Godden have removed the entire acid, i.e. the portion adhering to the precipitate and the other in combination with it, by washing with neutral aqueous ammonium nitrate followed by washing with cold water. According to these authors the resulting precipitate left in the filter paper has the composition (NH4)3PO4, 12MoO3. Kolthoff and Sandell [1937] advocates that the precipitate of ideal composition, i.e. one in which the ratio of PO4 to MoO3 246 Analysis of Mineral Constituents in Biological Materials (2) (NH4)3PO4. 12MoO3 + 23 NaOH = HNa2MoO4 + (NH4)2MoO4 + NaNH4 HPO4+ 11 H2O (Kolthoff). (3) 2(NH4)3PO4. 24MoO3 + 52NaOH = 24Na2MoO4 + 2 Na2HPO4 + 6NH3+ 28 H2O (Richard and Godden). In calculating the factor it is apparent that neither Pemberton nor Kol- thoff took into consideration the alkali necessary to replace the ammonia, as it was not removed by boiling. Richard and Godden on the other hand provid- ed sufficient alkali to replace the ammonia which was removed by boiling. Thus according to the first two authors, the molecular ratio of P2O5 : NaOH is as 1 : 46, i.e. 1 c.c. of 0.5 N NaOH. is equivalent to 0.001543 gram of P2O5, whereas according to the latter authors the molecular ratio of P2O5 : NaOH is 1 : 52 and the factor, 1 c.c. of 0.5 N NaOH = 0.001365 gram of P2O5. Richard and Godden further advocate that after boiling with standard alkali, a slight excess of standard acid should be added and the boiling should continue for another half hour to expel CO2, the solution being finally titrated back when cold, with the standard alkali. PROPOSED METHOD The method which has been exhaustively studied in this laboratory is based on the following principles :S. K. TALAPATRA, S. C. RAY AND K. C. SEN 247 filtered off after two hours without affecting the result.) The yellow precipi- tate is filtered off through a disc of filter paper in a Gooch crucible by suction. As far as possible the precipitate is not transferred to the crucible, the super- natant liquid alone is passed through. The precipitate is washed twice with two per cent HNO3 (by decantation) and then with three per cent solution of KNO3 until the wash water is acid free (tested by litmus). The precipitate with the filter paper is then transferred back to the beaker with CO2 free water and dissolved completely in a sufficient known volume of N/7 NaOH. A few drops (not more than five) of a one per cent alcoholic solution of phenolpthalein are added and the solution is titrated back with N/7 HNO3 adding a few drops in excess. The titration is completed finally by adding standard alkali to the first faint pink colour. The ammonium molybdate solution to be used for the analysis.248 Analysis of Mineral Constituents in Biological Materials TABLE I Estimation of phosphate (1) in the acid extracts of the ash of grass and mustard cake and (2) in the standard solution of KH2PO4. Grass solution Mustard cake solution No. 1. Mustard cake solution No. 2. Standard phosphate solution Aliquot taken Amount of P2O5 (mgm) found Aliquot taken A mount of P2O5 (mgm) found Aliquot taken Amount of P2O5 (mgm) found Aliquot taken Amount of P2O5 (mgm) found 25 c.c. . . 7.36 13.03 9.08 13.27 7.36 25 c. c. 13.01 20 c. c. 9.13 25 c. c. 13.24 7.35 12.97 9.08 13.24 20 c.c. . . 5.90 4.59 10.65 5.95 ... ... 10 c. c. 4.56 20 c. c. 10.65 5.90 4.56 10.61 10 c.c. . . 2.90 2.29 5.30 2.90 ... ... 5 c.c. 2.25 10 c.c. 5.35 5.30 TABLE II Percentage recoveries of added P2O5 Grass solution Mustard cake solution P2O5 (mgm) present in the acid extract P2O5 (mgm) added to the acid extract Total P2O5 (mgm) observed Per cent re- covery of added P2O5 P2O5 (mgm.) present in the acid extract P2O5 (mgm) added to the acid extract Total P2O5 (mgm) observed Per cent re- covery of added P2O5 7.35 2.64 10.00 100.40 13.00 2.64 15.65 100.40 7.35 5.28 12.66 100.57 13.00 5.28 18.40 102.27 7.35 7.92 15.22 99.37 13.00 7.92 21.08 102.02 7.35 10.56 17.99 100.76 13.00 10.56 23.89 103.12 It may be noted (Table III) that the introduction of ammonium nit- rate before the precipitation of phosphate definitely introduces an error. While washing the precipitate by decantation with KNO3 it is also noticed that the supernatant liquid is not clear and a little turbidity always persists throughout the column of the liquid. No such difficulty is encountered when the addition of ammonium nitrate is omitted. Addition of NH4 NO3, however, hastens the precipitation of ammonium-phospho-molybdate.
S. K. TALAPATRA, S. C. RAY AND K. C. SEN 249 TABLE III The effect of the addition of 25 c.c. of 50 per cent solution of ammonium nitrate on the precipitation of ammonium-phospho-molybdate Analysis of the standard phosphate solution Without ammonium nitrate With ammonium nitrate Observed mgm Calculated mgm Error Observed mg Calculated mg Error 10.65 10.56 +0.85 10.74 10.56 +1.70 10.65 10.56 +0.85 10.65 10.56 +0.85 10.61 10.56 +0.57 10.65 10.56 +0.85 13.28 13.20 +0.60 10.68 10.56 +1.13 13.28 13.20 +0.60 10.68 10.56 +1.13 13.28 13.20 +0.60 10.68 10.56 +1.13 In the Rowett method the precipitate can be filtered off within an hour which is a distinct advantage. In our proposed method the precipitate can be filtered off within two hours without affecting the results as can be seen from the data recorded in Table IV. TABLE IV Time interval for complete precipitation of ammonium-phospho-molybdate Filtered after two hours Filtered after keeping overnight P2O5 (mgm) present in the acid extract P2O5 (mgm) added to the acid extract Total P2O5 (mgm) observed Per cent recovery of the added P2O5 P2O5 (mgm) present in the acid extract P2O5 (mgm) added to the acid extract Total P2O5 (mgm) observed Percent recovery of the added 2.28 5.81 8.47 99.66 2.28 5.81 8.05 99.31 4.56 5.81 10.36 99.83 4.56 5.81 10.41 100.69 9.13 5.81 14.95 100.17 9.13 5.81 14.95 100.17 9.13 11.61 20.77 100.25 9.13 11.61 20.79 100.25 9.13 17.42 26.42 99.28 9.13 17.42 26.42 99.28 It may be noticed from the results recorded in Tables I to IV that by following the identical course of procedure it is possible to estimate P2O5 within such wide range as 2.27 mgm. to 26.42 mgm. Unlike the A. O A. C. method there is moreover no prejudice regarding the amount of molybdate
250 Analysis of_ Mineral Constituents in Biological Materials mixture to be added. The same volume of molybdate mixture has been used between 2.27 mgm. of P2O5 to 26.42 mgm. of P2O5 without affecting the accuracy of the result. ESTIMATION OF CHLORINE There is practically no disagreement in the standard method (Technical Communication No. 9 of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition) of estimating chlorine in biological materials. However Caldwell and Moyer [1935] give a method in which the silver chloride need not be filtered off before titrating the excess of silver nitrate with thiocyanate, if 1 c.c. of nitrobenzene for each 0.5 gram Cl-ion is added. This modification thus has a distinct advantage as the filtration of the AgCl precipitate can be avoided. Experimental.S. K. TALAPATRA, S. C. RAY AND K. C. SEN 251 ESTIMATION OF CALCIUM This mineral is generally estimated by precipitating it as an oxalate salt. The oxalate is subsequently dissolved in H2SO4 and the oxalic acid liberated is titrated against the standard KMnO4 solution. There are, however, several interfering factors which must be eliminated before calcium can be precipi- tated quantitatively as oxalate. In soil this mineral is generally estimated after removing iron, aluminium etc. but in biological samples like fodders and concentrate, the concentration of iron, aluminium, manganese etc. are so low that calcium can be precipitated quantitatively even in their presence. The phosphate-ion on the other hand can hinder complete precipitation of oxalate if the pH of the precipitating medium is not properly controlled. Numerous experiments [Britton, 1929] have shown that the medium becomes favourable for the formation of calcium phosphate whenever its pH exceeds five. This point should specially be recognised in the case of samples in which the phos- phate contents are relatively much higher than the calcium content. The next important point to be considered is that magnesium is sometimes co-precipi- tated with calcium [Kolthoff and Sandell, 1937]. The pH which is favourable for the precipitation of calcium oxalate is favourable also for precipitation of magnesium oxalate when magnesium is present in relatively large amount. This co-precipitation of magnesium oxalate however can be prevented when the concentration of NH4C1 in the precipitating medium is increased. NH4C1 has a great solvent action on magnesium oxalate but practically no such action is observable on calcium oxalate. Having these theoretical con- siderations in mind, the following modification of Chapman's method [1928] has been evolved in this laboratory. METHOD A suitable aliquot from the HCl extract is taken in a beaker which is then diluted to nearly 100 c.c. To this are added 5-10 c.c. of strong HCl. Generally 5 c.c. of HCl will be enough but to samples which contain a very large excess of magnesium 10 c.c. of HCl should be added. To this acid solution 10 c.c. of saturated solution of ammonium oxalate and two or three drops of alcoholic solution of methyl-red are added. The solution is then tho- roughly mixed and gradually neutralised with concentrated ammonia added from a dropping pipette. As soon as the precipitate begins to appear, the pH of the liquid is next adjusted with dilute ammonia (1:4) until a faint pink colour appears. The content of the beaker is then boiled for a few minu- tes in order to allow the precipitate to become granular and is then left over- night. On the next day, it is filtered through a 9 cm. Whatman No. 40, leav- ing as much of the precipitate as possible in the beaker. The precipitate can be filtered four hours after the precipitation. The precipitate in the beaker is then washed several times. The wash water every time is passed through the filter paper. After three or four such washings the filter paper is also washed once with hot water. The filter paper is then unfolded and transferred to the beaker. 100 c.c. of water are now added to the beaker and 10 c.c. of strong H2SO4 are carefully poured into the mixture. The solution is then warmed to 70°C and is titrated with N/20 KMnO4. During the final stage of titration, the wall of the beaker is washed with hot water and the end point of the
252 Analysis of Mineral Constituents in Biological Materials titration is reached as soon as the solution becomes faintly pink. The con- version factor is :S. K. TALAPATRA, S. C. RAY AND K. C. SEN 253 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The results of the experiments conducted according to the schemes (a), (b) and (c) are recorded in Tables VII, VIII and IX. The data in Tables VII, VIII and IX definitely establish the fact that the method is accurate, even under varied composition of the interfering substances in the solution for test. TABLE VII Estimation of calcium in the acid extract of the ash of grass and mustard cake and in standard solution of calspar Grass solution Mustard cake solution Standard calspar solution Aliquot taken Amount of CaO (mgm) found Aliquot taken Amount of CaO (mgm) found Aliquot taken Amount of CaO (mgm) found 100 c.c. (1)43.26 100 c. c. (1) 43.96 20 c. c. (1)28.00 (2)42.98 (2) 43.96 (2)28.00 (3)42.98 (3) 43.82 (3)27.93 50 c.c. (1)21.56 50 c c. (1)21.84 10 c. c. (1)14.00 (2)21.28 (2)21.84 (2)13.93 (3)14.00 25 c.c. (1) 10.64 25 c. c (1)10.78 . . . . (2) 10.85 (2)10.64 . . . . (3) 10.85 (3)10.78 . . . . TABLE VIII Percentage recoveries of added CaO Grass solution Cake solution CaO (mgm) present in the acid extract CaO (mgm) added to the acid extract Total CaO (mgm) observed Per cent recovery of the added CaO CaO (mgm) present in the acid extract CaO (mgm) added to the acid extract Total CaO (mgm) observed Per cent recovery of the added CaO 21.42 14.0 35.30 99.11 21.84 14.0 35.8O 100.00 21.42 35.0 56.00 99.00 21.84 14.0 35.70 99.09 21.42 28.0 40.28 99.50 21.84 28.0 50.04 100.71
254 Analysis of Mineral Constituents in Biological Materials TABLE IX Estimation of calcium in synthetic solutions Samples CaO present mgm CaO found mgm Error per cent Synthetic solution No. 1 56.1 56.3 + 0.4 Synthetic solution No. 2 50.1 50.3 +0.4 Synthetic solution No. 3 98.0 98.4 + 0.4 Synthetic solution No. 4 56.1 56.6 + 0.9 Synthetic solution No. 5 14.0 13.83 S. K. TALAPATRA, S. C. RAY AND K. C. SEN 255 case of rice bran and certain cattle urine), the first precipitate of calcium oxalate (contaminated with some magnesium oxalate) should be again dissolved in HCl and re-precipitated according to our procedure. ESTIMATION OF MAGNESIUM The combined filtrate and washing from the calcium determination are evaporated to dryness on water bath. If NH4C1, equivalent to 5 c.c. of strong HCl, is present then 30 c.c. of concentrated HNO3 should be used but if more, then 40 c.c. of HNO3 might be necessary to drive off the ammonium salts. The remaining procedure is the same as that of A. O. A. C. excepting that 10 c.c. sodium citrate should be used instead of 5 c.c., otherwise the magnesium ammonium phosphate precipitate will be contaminated with iron, and a brownish tint is always invariably found. ESTIMATION OF SODIUM The routine analysis of sodium in the ash of food-stuff is generally made indirectly from the weight of mixed chloride or sulphate of sodium and potassium obtained after a thorough separation and purification process. The success of an indirect method of estimating sodium naturally depends upon the rapidity and at the same time the efficiency with which the method can lead to the complete removal of the foreign elements, so that finally sodium and potassium alone in the unknown solution can be weighed as mixed chloride or sulphate. The indirect method as advocated by A. O. A. C. is not only a lengthy procedure but also the efficiency of the method as regards the complete removal of all the heavy metals and alkaline-earth metals has been questioned by Wright [1938]. Husband and Godden [1927] have undoubtedly shortened the procedure by using the alcoholic ammonium carbonate of Gooch and Eddy [1908] for the removal of the alkaline-earth metals, but it is felt that the conver- sion of the mixed chloride into sulphate and the subsequent removal of free H2SO4 are not only tedious but superfluous as well. Instead of weighing the alkali metals as sulphate, they can be weighed as chloride with some manipu- lative care. Moreover from the mixed chloride, it is easily possible to estimate potassium by the simple perchloric acid method. It has already been pointed out that the indirect method will only give reliable results when all the foreign elements could completely be removed. In the proposed method we have achieved this by successfully utilising some of the procedures outlined in the Technical Communication No. 9 of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition and the A. O. A. C. method. The important points which have been considered are as follows :256 Analysis of Mineral Constituents in Biological Materials METHOD A sufficient volume of the acid extract (prepared for CaO estimations), which would give at least 0.2000 gram of mixed chlorides, was taken in 100 c. c. beakers and evaporated to dryness on water bath. The dry residue is moisten- ed with a drop of HC1 and a little water. Clear baryta water is next added until the mixture just turns blue to litmus paper. It is then boiled for a few seconds and filtered hot (the precipitate is not allowed to settle) and washed with hot water without allowing the precipitate to clot on the filter paper. Four to five washings with hot water are quite enough to make it chloride-free. The filtrate which is received in beaker is then evaporated just to dryness. When cold, alcoholic (NH4)2CO3 prepared according to the indication given in the Rowett bulletin is then added, well stirred and the emulsified liquid is transferred quantitatively to 100 c.c. graduated flasks and made up to the mark with the same reagent. The mixture is shaken vigorously a number of times and then allowed to stand overnight. On the next day it is filtered through a dry funnel and filter paper into a dry beaker. 50 c.c. of the filtrate which should give 0.1000 gram of mixed chloride are pipetted into a weighed vitreosil basin and completely evaporated to dryness on a water bath. The alcoholic mixture is found to evaporate very rapidly. It is necessary to attend the evaporation at this stage to avoid the danger of spurting. A small amount of distilled water and 5 c.c. of strong HCl are now added and the solution is evaporated to complete dryness on the water bath. The perfectly dried residue of the mixed chloride is then subjected to careful heating over the Bunsen burner until thick white fumes of NH4 salts no longer appear. The heating is very cautiously continued by holding the basin with pair of tongs and gently rotating over the flame till the residue left on the basin is absolutely white. In no case should the residue be allowed to melt. It is then cooled and weighed as NaCl + KCl. From this mixed chloride, potassium is subsequently estimated by the perchloric acid method. By subtracting the estimated potassium as chloride from the original NaCl + KCl, the amount of sodium present in the unknown solution can be calculated. ESTIMATION OF POTASSIUM For the routine estimation of potassium, we have found that the British official method (as described by Wright 1938) by the perchloric acid method is very suitable. The shortness of the procedure and the low cost of pure per- chloric acid are points in favour of the adoption of the method for routine analysis. METHOD The pure NaCl + KCl after being weighed is dissolved in a small quantity of hot water and completely transferred into a glass basin. 5 c.c. of HClO4 is then added and the basin is placed on the water bath, kept inside a fume cupboard. As the content in the basin gets heated up, copious fumes of HClO4 start to evolve and the liquid gradually assumes a syrupy consistency. The basin is removed from the bath, allowed to cool, 10 c.c. of 95 per cent by weight of alcohol are added, and the content is well stirred with a thin rod. The rod is washed inside the basin with a small amount of alcohol and the contents of the basin are allowed to settle for sometime. The supernatant
S. K. TALAPATRA, S. C. RAY AND K. C. SEN 257 liquid is then decanted off through a 7 cm. dry filter paper. Again 10 c.c. alcohol are added and the above procedure is repeated. The KClO4 is then transferred to the filter paper with a fine jet of 95 per cent alcohol and washed with 95 per cent alcohol saturated with KClO4. The solid KClO4 in the filter paper is then dissolved in hot H2O, received in a weighed basin evaporated to dryness in a water bath and finally the basin is carefully heated in a naked flame without allowing the KClO4 to melt. It is then cooled and weighed. From the weight of KClO4 the amount of potassium can be calculated. Experimental.258 Analysis of Mineral Constituents in Biological Materials TABLE XI Percentage recoveries of added NaCl and KCl Present in the acid extract of the ash of grass Added to the acid extract Weight of NaCL + KCl (mgm) found Weight of KCl (mgm) found Weight of NaCl (mgm) found Per cent recovery of added NaCl (mgm) KCl (mgm) NaCl (mgm) KCl (mgm) NaCl + KC1 KCl NaCl 0.76 52.37 20.00 30.02 104.00 82.60 21.40 101.0 100.3 103.0 0.76 52.37 20.00 30.02 103.70 82.87 20.83 100.5 100.6 100.3 0.76 52.37 20.00 30.02 103.50 83.41 20.09 100.3 101.2 97.0 1.52 104.34 10.00 . . . 115.60 . . . 11.50 100.0 . . . 100.0 1.52 104.34 20.00 . . . 126.00 . . . 21.90 100.0 . . . 102.0 In our opinion the present method for the estimation of sodium and potassium in the feeding stuff is one of the quickest and at the same time reasonably accurate. The utilization of alcoholic (NH4)2CO3 for the removal of heavy metals is a distinct advantage and is the chief contributory factor to the success of the method. REFERENCES Ashton, F. L. (1936). Jour. Chem. Industry 35, 106. Britton, H. T. S. (1929). H- ion concentration. Caldwell, J. R. and Moyer, H. V. (1935). Indust. Eng. Chem. Anal. Ed. 7, 38. Chapman, H. D. (1928). Soil science 26, 479. Gooch, F. A. and Eddy, E. A. (1908). Zeit. anorg Chem. 58, 427. Hundeshagen, F. (1924). As cited by Richard and Godden. Husband, A. D. (1937). As cited in the Technical Communication No. 9 of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition. Husband, A. D. and Godden, W. (1927). Analyst 52, 12. Kilgore (1894.) As cited by Willey in Principles and Practice of Agricultural Analysis Vol. II. Kolthoff, I. M. and Sandell, E. B. (1937). Text-book of Quantitative Inorganic Analysis. Neuman (1902-3). As cited by Richard and Godden. Pemberton, H. (1893). Jour. Amer. Chem. Soc. 15, 382. Pemerton, H. (1894). Ibid 16, 298. Richard, M. B. and Godden, W. (1924). Analyst 49, 5. Wright, C. H. (1938). Agricultural Analysis.
OBSERVATIONS ON BARTONELLOSIS IN DOGS IN INDIA* BY H. N. RAY, M.Sc., PH.D. (LOND.) AND J. A. IDNANI, G.B.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 11 March 1940) (With Plate XVI and one text-figure) INTRODUCTION IN a preliminary note published in 1937, the authors [Ray and Idnani, 1937] recorded for the first time the presence of Bartonella canis in Indian dogs and described the pathological effects incited by the parasite. In this article it is proposed to deal more fully with the morphology of the parasite and the clinical symptoms that are produced by the inoculation of infected blood into healthy, non-splenectomized dogs, kept on a diet of bread, milk and meat. Incidentally, it is hoped, that this paper may direct the attention of field workers towards this particular canine disease, since one of the many types of obscure canine fever prevalent in India may possibly be due to Bar- tonella canis infection. For the information of such workers, the available literature on the subject of bartonellosis is briefly reviewed below. It will be observed that an outstanding fact which emerges from this review is the frequency with which the infection has been reported from splenectomized dogs and, in a few instances, from splenectomized rats. This has naturally led to the assumption that spleen exerts a protective action, and Kikuth [1934] postulates that ' the latent infection in dogs is held in check by the reticulo-endothelial system and that if this system is interfered with in any way by the removal of any great part of it, such as by the excision of the spleen, its protective power is lost'. HlSTORICAL The minute slender rods and granules in the erythrocytes of man suffer- ing from Oroya fever were, as quoted by Bayon [1928], first seen by Biffi and Gastiaburu in 1903, but the original description of the organism was attempted by Barton in 1905. Although another malady, called Peruvian disease, or ' Verruga' warts, affecting the skin of human beings was known for centuries, its etiological factor remained a matter of conjecture until Odriozolla [1896] as quoted by Bayon [1928], Hercelles [1927] and Ribeyro [1927] pointed out that both Oroya and ' Verruga ' were manifestations of a similar infection with a common etiology. Bartonella were demonstrated * Paper read at the 25th (Jubilee) Session of the Indian Science Congress held at Calcutta in January 1938. Rewritten to include certain points which arose out of dis- cussion at that meeting. (259)
260 Bartonellosis in Dogs in both the diseases. A point of great historical interest is that in 1885 a Peruvian medical student Daniele Carrion, inoculated himself experimentally with the serum from a Verruga nodule, developed Oroya fever and died within 39 days. Hence the disease is also known as Carrion's disease. The principal feature of Oroya fever is described as a progressive and frequently fatal anaemia while that of Verruga (Verruga peruana) as the development of warty excrescences, often, but not always, accompanied by fever. Pinkerton and Weinman [1937, 1,2] studied the behaviour of this organism in vitro and noted the intracellular cytoplasmic clustering of uniform type. These authors also came to the conclusion that Oroya fever and Verruga peruana had a common etiological agent, Bartonella bacilliformis. Further, they were of the opinion that the asymptomatic cases were the reservoirs of ' virus ' and therefore played an important role in the natural transmission of the disease [1937]. The Harvard Commission studied this disease in Peru in 1913, and gave the causal organism the generic title of Bartonella Strong, Tyzzer, Brues, Sellards, and Gastiaburu [1915], as quoted by Wenyon [1926]. The causative agent of the two above-mentioned diseases has since been known as Bartonella bacilliformis. Parasitic organisms ascribed to the genus Bartonella have also been recorded from many lower animals and in most instances the presence of these organisms in the erythrocytes of their hosts is known to produce anaemia. Mayer [1921] described B. muris from laboratory rats and a guinea-pig affected with trypanosomes, and observed that with the appearance of Bar- tonella in rats a deadly pernicious anaemia followed. Mayer, Brochardt and Kikuth [1927] also observed the same parasite in the blood of rats, but only after splenectomy. Bayon [1928] made further studies on B. muris in splenectomized rats and observed that external symptoms of anaemia were comparatively easily noticed in albinos ; the fauches of the eyes, tip of the nose and the visible mucous membrane became exceptionally pale, and the blood was found to be pale and watery ; the haemoglobin content dropped to 15-20 on Sahli scale against 90-95. Zuelzer [1927] described B. arvicolae from the field mouse (Arvicola arvalis) as chronic infection. The organism was not inoculable to rats, white mice and hamsters but was infective to dogs, and she believed these to be definite organisms and not a product of some sort of degeneration, as held by certain workers (see below). Lauda [1929] succeeded in transmitting the anaemia of splenectomized rats to normal individuals. Jaffe and Willis [1927] encountered B. muris in young rats apparently contracted from their infected parents. Lwoff and Provost [1929] separated a strain of B. muris from a normal rat which was experimentally infected with Trypanosoma cruzi and were suc- cessful in carrying Bartonella through several passages in non-splenectomized or normal rats. Lwoff and Vaugel [1931] also successfully transmitted B. muris of a normal rat to a series of non-splenectomized white mice. The result of the infection
H. N. RAY AND J. A. IDNANI 261 varied from either negative or slight malaise to actual death. Besides B. muris they also found Eperythrozoon coccoides in the erythrocytes of certain rats. Gomes and Pinto [1926] described B. rocha-limai from the blood of Hemi- derma bovicauda. Gomes and Cruz [1927] as quoted by Bayon [1928], pointed out that what was described by Carini as Grahamella muris was identical with B. muris and that the organisms were found in liver, lungs and sometimes within the macrophages in the lungs. Mello, Fernandes, Correia and Lobo [1928] found B. melloi in the ant- eater (Manes pentadactyli). Yakimoff [1927] described B. nicollei from a fish (Esox lucius). Regendanz and Kikuth [1928] described B. opossum from the splenecto- mized opossum (Metanirus opossum). Schilling [1929] came across another variety of Bartonella in the blood of white mice which he called B. muris musculi var albinus. Schwetz [1934] found B. muris ratti in the erythrocytes of guinea-pigs. According to his observations, this parasite, very rarely produced any anaemia or other clinical symptoms. Splenectomy had no obvious influence on these inclusion bodies, which he believes, were nothing but nuclear remnants, though he admits that they very much resembled B. muris. According to him the infection in splenectomized rodent is not in any way different from that in non-splenectomized ones. Nauck [1927] described a new species of Bartonella from the squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris). Cunha and Munz [1927] described B. ranarum from the blood of a frog. Kikuth [1928-29] described a new anaemia producing organism in dogs which he called B. canis. Ordinarily, he says, the infection remained in a latent condition in normal dogs and became active only on splenectomy. Splenectomized dogs showing the infection, were found to develop progressive anaemia which either passed on to a chronic stage or manifested an acute phase leading to death. This organism could not be cultivated on artificial media and his transmission experiments through the agency of the dog flea also failed. According to him, Bartonella canis is filtrable through Berkefeld filter N, and Neosalvarsan in therapeutic doses can clear the blood of the parasites within 24 hours. Knutti and Hawkins [1935] demonstrated in three out of four splenecto- mized bile fistula dogs, which consistently exhibited periods of anaemia associated with excessive bile pigment production, the presence of Bartonella canis. According to their experience simple splenectomized dogs did not show any such spontaneous periods of anaemia. Two splenectomized dogs when inoculated with blood containing Bartonella developed the typical symp- toms and the parasites in their blood. Injection of such blood into a splen- ectomized biliary renal fistula dog also presented a similar picture. They failed to cultivate Bartonella on artificial culture media. Neosalvarsan is stated to have a specific sterilizing effect in this malady. It is further men- tioned that when fed on spleen extract the periods of anaemia and bile pig- ment overproduction is inhibited. Bartonella canis is stated to be associated with blood destruction which yields a large excess of the pigments in bile fistula dogs.
262 Bartonellosis in Dogs While studying the association of Bartonella with induced anaemia in dogs, Rhoads and Miller [1935] came to the conclusion that when splenecto- mized dogs were kept on a diet which produces black tongue, they developed severe anaemia associated with the presence of small bodies in or on the ery- throcytes, and the bodies were morphologically similar to B. muris and B. canis. The addition of lean beef to the diet, recognized as a prophylactic measure against black tongue, improved the conditions and caused the dis- appearance of Bartonella from the blood. Bartonella was also found to produce similar conditions when injected into splenectomized dogs, kept on a normal or black tongue producing diet. Bartonella bodies appeared in the blood and severe anaemia soon followed. But similar injections into non- splenectomized dogs fed in the same way resulted in anaemia only. It is further stated that ' injections into normal animals fed on normal diet caused not even anaemia '. [This finding is important because our experience at this Institute with B. canis is quite the contrary.] McNaught, Woods and Scott [1935] demonstrated the presence of B . canis in the erythrocytes of non-splenectomized dogs kept on a vitamin- adequate basal diet. The Bartonella infection was also transmitted to splenectomized dogs by intravenous injection of whole blood. One injection of neoarsphenamine equivalent to 15 mg. per kiloweight was found sufficient for sterilizing the infected tissues. They hypothesised that possibly the spleen liberated certain substances in the blood stream, which had an inhibitory effect upon the latent Bartonella infection. In the course of their plasmapherisis experiment, which involved many bleedings, this protective substance associated with the plasma protein was reduced, while in the inoculated splenectomized dog it was completely lacking. While examining the haematology of splenectomized dogs and making a study of the effect of splenectomy on the gastric secretion, Goyanes [1936] came across a case of Bartonella infection which ended fatally. Goyanes believes that the ring-like phase of this parasite described by Regendanz and Reichenow [1932] has an earlier stage in which the filamentous and granular forms appeared to possess zones similar to undulating membrane. He further states that these extensions formed the ' violin-bow ' described by Kikuth (loc. cit.) and the coccoid-like forms were produced by the fragmenta- tion of filaments. Wills and Mehta [1930] produced severe anaemia in normal rats by feeding them on a diet deficient in vitamins A and C and also demonstrated Bartonella muris in their erythrocytes in great numbers. Yakimoff and Rastegaieff [1931] made attempts to demonstrate Barto- nella in the dogs of Leningrad, and in splenectomized dogs they came across certain bodies, which they interpreted as Jolly-Howell bodies, although, according to their own estimate, they resembled Bartonella. Regendanz and Reichenow [1932] have studied the morphology of B. canis Kikuth, encountered in or on the red blood corpuscles of splenectomized dogs. Different phases in the development of the parasite have been described in detail by these authors. They however failed to confirm Kikuth's observa- tions in respect of the filtrable nature of this parasite. Weiss and Muzzo [1936] as quoted by Weinman and Pinkerton [1937] came across Bartonella canis in splenectomized dogs of Peru.
H. N. RAY AND J. A. IDNANI 263 In addition to finding a new Eperythrozoon, E. wenyoni, in the reythrocytes of a calf, Adler and Ellenbogen [1934], encountered a new Bartonella, B. sergenti in a calf, which was inoculated with Theileria annulata, but no note- worthy symptoms could be ascribed to the appearance of the Bartonella in the blood. Donatien and Lestoquard [1934] discovered Bartonella bovis in splenecto- mized bovines harbouring Theileria mutans. When inoculated into other cattle the Bartonella infection was found to be very heavy to begin with, but later on the parasite became rare in the blood. One injection of 1 gr. of Gonacrine resulted in the disappearance of the parasite from the circulation. According to their observation there is a preimmunity against Bartonellosis in bovines. Neitz [1939] has recorded cases of latent infection of Bartonella canis in non-splenectomized dogs which according to his observation may be acti- vated by Babesia canis, B. gibsoni or Rickettsia canis. Epstein [1935] described a species of Bartonella pavlovskii from lamprey, Petromyzon marinus. MATERIAL AND METHODS Bartonella was first seen in 1934, in dogs experimentally infected with Babesia gibsoni at this Institute, and its morphological identity was establish- ed in November 1936. Attention has since been directed towards obtain- ing a strain of Bartonella free from B. gibsoni. To achieve this end 10-20 c.c. of citrated blood containing both Babesia and Bartonella was given sub- cutaneously to healthy dogs, and in several of these Bartonella appeared in the blood earlier than the accompanying piroplasm. Pariah dogs were em- ployed in this work, and a latent piroplasm infection existed in some of these animals. Though we succeeded in running a pure strain of Bartonella through several passages, complications due to piroplasm interfered from time to time with the progress of the experiments. Experience has shown that in cases where the infected blood is administered intravenously the piroplasm appears much earlier than when the subcutaneous route is chosen. For examination, the routine blood smears from the affected dogs were stained with Giemsa. Some of the dogs showing acute symptoms were des- troyed and pieces of internal organs were fixed overnight in Bouin-Duboscq and Brasil's fluid for studying the parasite in section. The sections were cut 6µ thick and subsequently stained in Heidenhain's iron-alum haematoxylin, Giemsa, haematoxylin and Van Giesonstain and Ehrlich's haematoxylin and eosin. Sections stained with the iron-alum haematoxylin were counter- stained with either light green or alcoholic eosin. Careful camera lucida drawings were made of the different stages of the parasite encountered in the smear preparation. OBSERVATIONS (a) Morphology of the parasite.264 Bartonellosis in Dogs early stage in which the filamentous and granular forms appear to possess zones similar to an undulating membrane. According to his statement it is these extensions which represent the ' violin bow ' described by Kikuth and the coccoid forms are produced by the fragmentation of the filamentous forms. The parasites are either found on the surface or in the body of the red blood cell and in this respect our observations are quite in agreement with those of Regendanz and Reichenow (loc. cit.) and others. According to our observations the coccoid forms are the earliest to appear either on the surface or inside the erythrocytes (Plate XVI fig. 2, a, b). For the first few days after the appearance of the parasite in the blood these forms usually occurred singly, but as the disease advanced, their number was greatly increased. When they appeared on the surface of the corpuscle, they were found to be arranged in a row on the boundry wall of the cell ; when in the cell they appeared like small dots grouped together in a row of two, four or more coccoids. At this stage they measured 0.5µ or slightly less in diameter. On careful examination a single coccoid form before division is found to elon- gate into a bacillary form and has a deeply staining chromatinic structure along one of its edges (Plate XVI, fig. 2 c). Later on by a constriction in the middle two coccoid-like bodies are formed (Plate XVI, fig. 2 d). In this way by a repeated fission the length of the coccoid chain is increased, each chain containing four to twelve or more coccoid-like bodies. Some of the coccoid forms also show a ring phase and in this condition a chromatinic dot is very prominent at one end of the ring. Coccoids in a chain also assume a ring phase ; two rings at two ends of the chain are the smallest, one in the centre is the largest in diameter, while the intermediate ones show varying gradations in size. These are the forms which have been given the name of ' violin bow ' by Kikuth (Plate XVI, fig. 2 e). These rings are sometimes seen to separate from each other and to divide in the usual manner, that is, the chromatinic dot becomes elongated and subsequently by a constric- tion in the middle coccoid-like bodies are formed. When more than one chain are present in a corpuscle, their arrangement is variable. The most usual type of arrangement that we have encountered in our preparations is y-shaped (Plate XVI, fig. 2 f). In acute cases the coccoid and bacillary forms are also found free in the plasma (Plate XVI, fig. 2 g). The parasitised corpuscles in acute cases appear to stick to each other and consequently in dry film prepa- rations they mostly appear in groups (Plate XVI, fig. 1 and fig. 2 h). Smears made from the various internal organs revealed the presence of this organism and the parasite manifested the same relation to the blood corpuscle as in the peripheral blood. But a feature worthy of note was that the spleen smears never showed the parasite, although this organ was in most cases, hypertrophied during the course of the disease. (b) Course of the disease.EXPLANATION OF PLATE Bartonella canis Kikuth. FIG. 1. Photomicrograph of a blood film stained with Giemsa. × 750; Note the agglomeration of infected red cells. FIG. 2. Representative field of infected red blood cells, collected from different fields. ×1500. (a) Early coccoid forms on the periphery of a red cell. (b) Early coccoid forms in the red cell. (c) Elongated coccoid form. (d) Dividing coccoid form. (e) 'Violin' bow form, note the arrangement of the ring forms. (f) Y-shaped arrangement of the parasites. (g) Parasites in the plasma. (h) Agglomeration of the parasitised corpuscles. 1. Neutrophil. 2. Large monocyte 3. Normoblast. 4. Basophils.
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part III ] plate XVI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2
H. N. RAY AND J. A. IDNANI 265 at this stage the general condition of the animal gave no indication of its being so rapidly fatal ; for, experience had shown that B. gibsoni usually runs a chronic course in pariah dogs, the mortality being 20-30 per cent. Blood smears from this dog were found on examination to be crowded with small granular bodies (later on identified as Bartonella canis) in association with a small number of B. gibsoni. Heart blood was immediately drawn for passage, and the strain has since been continuously maintained by a series of passages. Early in 1937 attention was concentrated upon the possibility of separating the two parasites for studying the clinical symptoms caused by Bartonella canis alone. (c) Incubation period.266 Bartonellosis in Dogs TABLE I Appearance of anaemic changes and the parasites in two dogs after being inoculated subcutaneously with blood containing Bartonella canis and Babesia gibsoni Dog No. 55 Days Anaemic changes Bartonella canis Babesia gibsoni Remarks 1H. N. RAY AND J. A. IDNANI 267 TABLE II Appearance of anaemic changes and the parasite in three dogs after being inoculated with blood containing Bartonella canis Dog No. 75 Method of inoculation Days Anaemic changes Bartonella canis Remarks Subcutaneous 1 Negative Negative Feeds well 2268 Bartonellosis in Dogs [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 Chart of three dogs artificially infected with Bartonella canis.
H. N. RAY AND J. A. IDNANI 269 from the normal blood count before being submitted to the infective inoculation. It was observed that, whereas the red cell count under normal condition in dogs ranged between six to eight million per c. mm., it dropped in the infected dogs to between 1.5 to 2.5 millions, and in one case this was observed to be as low as 80,000 on the day the animal died. The haemo- globin content of the blood which normally averaged 60 (after Sahli) dropped to 15 in the case mentioned above, while in other cases it progressively de- clined to 30 or 25. The blood was thin and watery and coagulation was re- tarded. Blood films under the microscope presented evidence of pernicious anaemia. The leucocytes appeared to be preponderant owing to the small number of the erythrocytes, the latter showing achromatia, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis and basophilia. Nucleated red cells were a common feature of the films made from Bartonella infected dogs. (f) Post-mortem appearances.270 Bartonellosis in Dogs Hercelles, O. (1927). Bull. Soc. Path. Expt., 20, 559 Jaffe, R. H. and Willis, D. (1927). Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. & Med., 25, 242 Kikuth, W. (1928). Klin. Wochensch., 1729, 2 TUBERCULOSIS IN THE MONKEY CAUSED BY BACILLI OF THE BOVINE TYPE BY P. R. KRISHNA IYER, G.M.V.C. Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 27 November 1939) (With Plates XVII and XVIII) IN this article an account is given of the isolation of tubercle bacilli of the bovine type from a monkey, together with a description of the type of lesions encountered. Before proceeding to the subject, it would be well to consider the sus- ceptibility to tuberculosis of monkeys and other wild animals both in their natural state and in captivity. It is doubtful whether tuberculosis exists among monkeys and other wild animals under natural conditions, since tuber- culosis is a disease of civilization ; while the rare occurrence of tuberculosis in sheep and goats is attributed to the fact that these species are maintained in an environment which approximates more or less to that enjoyed by wild animals. This, however, is not the case when wild animals are kept in captivity under which condition all species of animals are susceptible to this disease. Not having been previously in contact with tuberculous infection, they possess very feeble powers of resistance and, when attacked, fall ready victims. If many such susceptible animals are kept in close contact, the disease may easily acquire an epidemic character. Liston and Soparkar [1924] have recorded a small but severe outbreak of tuberculosis which occurred among animals in the Bombay Zoological Gardens, the disease having been introduced into the susceptible herd by llamas imported from Germany. For the same reason, the disease runs a more rapid course in captive animals and dissemination of the organisms from the infected focus takes place so early that at death, in spite of the short period of illness, the lesions are often found to be very wide- spread and of a generalized nature. In all zoological gardens, animals from different countries are kept con- fined in limited spaces for exhibition. They are constantly disturbed and frequently overfed by the visiting public. These factors, together with lack of sufficient exercise and change of diet, predispose them, especially the monkeys, to infectious diseases, in particular to tuberculosis. It is generally accepted that primates are susceptible to both the human and the bovine types of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and that infection by either type, whether occurring naturally or induced experimentally, is always followed by generalization of the lesions and by death ; few cases of spontaneous tuber- culosis in primates, however, have actually been studied. Lovell [1930] records the case of two primates, an Orang-utan and a Chimpanzee, both of which died of tuberculosis following infection with the human type of bacillus. Cob- bett [1917] states that the greater proportion of tuberculous infections acquired (271) C
272 Tuberculosis in the Monkey naturally by monkeys are caused by the human type of bacillus, although experimental evidence has been produced to show that every variety of monkey is susceptible to the bovine as well as the human type of organism. Griffiths [1928] records that out of 30 primates which died of tuberculosis, 22 were affected with tubercle bacilli of the human type and eight with the bovine type. No primates were included in the investigations of Liston and Soparkar [1924] carried out in India. In fact, no study of tubercle bacilli affecting primates in captivity in this country has yet been undertaken. The writer recently came across a few cases of tuberculosis in monkeys received for post-mortem examination from the Lahore Zoological Gardens and proceeded to study the organisms isolated from an interesting case of this disease in a baboon. HISTORY Subject.Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part III ] plate XVII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Lung and spleen Note 'nodular' tubercles on the spleen and caseating tubercles in the lung [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Lungs and spleen of rabbit showing miliary tubercles. The rabbit died 43 days after subcutaneous inoculation
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part III ] PLATE XVIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Cut surfaceP. R. KRISHNA IYER 273 both on the surface as well as in the cortical and medullary portions of the parenchyma. Two of the mesenteric lymph glands were completely caseated and three others showed a few tuberculous foci though they were not sensibly enlarged. The alimentary tract was examined throughout the whole of ts length and two elongated tuberculous ulcers surrounded by raised borders were found on the mucosa of the m ddle ileum. The pharyngeal lymph glands were normal. The etiological diagnosis made was, therefore, generalized tuberculosis and pneumonia. Microscopical examination of smears from the lesions in the different or- gans showed fairly numerous acid-fast bacilli, morphologically indistinguish- able from Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Tubercle bacilli in the smears from liver and spleen were not so numerous as those n the lung lesions, while smears from the intestinal ulcers showed very few tubercle bacilli. ANIMAL INOCULATIONS Microscopical examination of smears from the affected bronchial lymph gland showed no evidence of secondary infection. A piece of this gland was thoroughly ground up in a mortar with sterile saline and inoculated subcuta- neously into the left thighs of a rabbit and of a guinea-pig on the 12th of January, 1938. The guinea-pig died 26 days later and numerous minute tubercles were found in the lungs, liver, spleen and kidneys as well as a local caseating lesion at the seat of inoculation. The precrural lymph gland on the left side was enlarged and caseated. The rabbit died 43 days after inoculation. At the time of death, the con- d'tion of the animal was poor. At the seat of inoculation, a caseating, yellow- ish white, necrotic mass was found surrounded by about half a dozen tubercles ranging in size from a pin-head to a millet-seed. The precrural lymph gland on the inoculated side was observed to be highly enlarged and entirely caseated. Both lungs were studded with numerous caseating tubercles, varying in size from a pin-head to a pea. The spleen showed a fair y large number of tuber- cles on the surface and in the parenchyma (Plate XVII, fig. 2). The liver and kidneys also showed minute caseating tubercles. Smears from the lesions showed a large number of tubercle bacilli. CULTURAL EXAMINATION Cultures from the lung lesions were put upon Dorset 's egg and Petroff 's gentian violet media, but without success on account of secondary bacterial contamination. With ant-forminized material, however, growths were ob- tained on a few tubes. Cultures were also obtained from the affected precrural lymph glands of the rabbit and the guinea-pig. Aseptically removed precrural glands were cut into two halves and the cut surface was gently rubbed on the surface of the media. Growth occurred slowly in the form of a few discrete minute colonies in Dorset's egg and Petroff's gentian violet media. Sub-cultures on glycerine egg med a did not enhance the type of growth ; on the contrary a distinct in- hibition of the growth was observed and after five weeks' incubation at 37°C. a slight film only was present on the surface. Sub-cultures on Dorset's egg media showed a typically dysgonic flat dry growth. C 2
274 Tuberculosis in the Monkey No further virulence tests could be carried out with the cultures on account of the hot climatic conditions. From the cultural characteristics and the results of animal inoculations, therefore, it would appear that this organism is of the bovine type. The female baboon died of tuberculosis on 5 March 1938, having evident- ly contracted the infection by cohabitation with her tuberculous mate. Post-mortem examination revealed essentially the same type of lesions in the lungs, spleen and liver, together with the presence of numerous acid-fast organisms in the smears from the lesions. In the female, however, there was no evidence of intestinal ulceration, nor were any of the mesenteric lymph glands found to be tuberculous ; but all the bronchial and mediastinal lymph glands were enlarged and entirely caseated. It is regretted that it was impossible to carry out cultural and biological tests with the infected material from the female baboon. But from analogy of what was observed with the material from the male baboon and from the history o cohabitation, it would appear that she also succumbed to tubercu- losis caused by the bacilli of the bovine type. HISTOLOGICAL EXAMINATION A histo-pathological examination of sections of lung, presented a picture of massive caseation and caseous pneumonia. In the caseated area a large amount of chromatin debris was present and this was surrounded by a zone of epithelioid cells. A characteristic histological feature of the lesions in these baboons, which deserves mention, was the entire absence of giant-cells, though in some places the ep thelioid cells had passed into the symplasma stage. There was no microscopical evidence of calcification in any of the lesions. DISCUSSION Though tuberculosis in the domestic animals other than bovines is not of great economic importance, it is of academic interest to the pathologist to determine the exact character of the infecting organism and the nature and distribution of the lesions met with in various species of animals. The finding of tubercle bacilli of the bovine type from the tuberculous lesions of this baboon supports the theory of infection from cattle. It is assumed that the male baboon contracted the infection when, under the circus management, it was fed with raw infected milk. It is also possible that the female baboon contracted the infection from the male by cohabitation during the last few days of the latter's existence when he was coughing and thus dis- seminating the infecting agent. But as no history of their being fed with raw milk is available, it is impossible to assert that this was the actual cause of the infection in the male baboon. It is possible that the infection reached the baboons from another group of animals through the agency of rats, mice or birds. The fact that the causal organism entered the body of the male baboon by way of the alimentary tract is amply demonstrated by the finding of tuber- culous ulcers in the intestinal mucosa and lesions in the mesenteric glands. Moreover, in this animal, the thoracic lymph glands with the exception of one bronchial gland did not show much evidence of tuberculosis.
P. R. KRISHNA IYER 275 In the female monkey, however, the extensive affection of all the bronchial and mediastinal lymph glands and an entire absence of esions in the intestines and the mesenteric lymph glands shows that the thoracic organs were the pri- mary seat of infection, presumably by inhalation of infective spray coughed out by her tuberculous mate. The absence of giant cells in the lesions, noticed on histo-pathological examination indicates the acute course the disease had taken in these baboons whose ready susceptibility allowed no time for the defensive mechanism of the body to produce giant cells around the lesions. This fact, together with the history that each of the baboons was noticed to be sick for about ten days only before its death, ends further support to the theory that wild animals, which have not previously been in contact with tuberculous infection, possess but feeble powers of resistance. The absence of calcification in the lesions can also be attributed to the same causes as those accounting for the absence of giant cells. SUMMARY Details are given of two cases of spontaneous tuberculosis in Abyssinian Baboons (Cynocephalus babouin). The type of infecting bacillus was ascer- tained in one instance to be bovine. The lesions were characterized by an entire absence of giant cells. The type and location of the lesions suggested that one of the animals was infected through the alimentary tract by ingest on and the other by inhalation. REFERENCES Cobbett, L. (1917). The Causes of Tuberculosis (Cambridge University Press) Griffiths, A. S. (1928). J. Hyg. 28, 198 Liston, W. G., and Soparkar, M. B. (1924), Ind. J. Med. Res. 11, 671-80 Lovell, R. (1930). J. Comp. Path. Ther. 43, 205
PARATUBERCULOUS ENTERITIS OF SHEEP AT THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM BY P. N. NANDA, M.R.C.V.S. Assistant Superintendent (Stock) AND GURBAX SINGH, L.V.P. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar (Received for publication on 8 February 1940) UNFORTUNATELY, diseases of sheep have, so far, attracted comparatively little attention in this country. Whatever the cause of this lack of in- terest, it must be admitted that for an enterprising breeder, each animal con- stitutes a valuable productive unit which he can ill afford to lose. Generally it has been observed that parasitic diseases are responsible for the greater proportion of the total losses in sheep, but apart from these, some unknown diseases also claim a number of victims. The initiative taken by the Punjab Government for the improvement of the indigenous sheep with the help of a grant-in-aid from the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research has offered ideal opportunities for the study of some of the hitherto unknown diseases of sheep in India. Johne's disease in sheep seems to have been first recorded by Stockman [1911] in Scotland and later by various workers, including Lange and Berge [1915], McFadyean and Sheather [1916], Howarth [1932], Johnstone [1934], Thiery and Getas [1935] and McEwen [1939] in other countries. Recently some cases of this disease have also been detected in India at the Hosur Cattle Farm by Rahimuddin [1940]. During the course of the last two years, a few cases of this disease have been further recorded amongst the Bikaner flock of sheep at the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar. It might be of interest to the profession in general and the sheep breeders in particular to record here details of the observations made at Hissar. HISTORY AND SYMPTOMS In 1937, three young ewes were noticed to show very marked unthriftiness which persisted in spite of good feeding. In the later stages a persistent watery diarrhP. N. NANDA AND GURBAX SINGH 277 Again, in the early part of the year 1939, three more ewes, Nos. 490, 812 and 330, started exhibiting a similar train of symptoms. Opportunity was then taken to study the disease in greater detail and the progressive syndrome was watched more carefully. The animals registered a gradual loss in body weight and a restricted growth of wool and harshness of the coat. The loss in condition continued till about the middle of June when after the first rain little or no further deterioration in condition was noticed. During all this period the appetite was normal. A peculiar feature not described by any other worker was the appearance of 278 Paratuberculous Enteritis of Sheep whitish opaque and firm tubercles of more or less a solid consistency. The mesenteric lymph glands and those lying adjacent to the colon were enlarged and on sectioning exhibited a soft dark grey surface without any caseous material. LABORATORY FINDINGS The material from ewe No. 490 was examined at the farm veterinary hospital laboratory and the material from ewe No. 812 was despatched to the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar for examination. Four smears prepared from the mucous membrane of the ileum, colon, and rectum were stained with Ziehl-Neelson method and examined. Small groups of acid fast bacilli, which were indistinguishable from paratubercle bacilli, were detected. The bacilli were short, slender and straight or slightly bent. Club like forms, frequently showing a beaded appearance as described by Howarth [1937], were not observed. Smears made from the enlarged lymph glands also showed acid fast bacilli of similar nature. The report received from the Pathological Section of the Imperial Veterin- ary Research Institute, Mukteswar, in respect of the material from ewe No. 812, which is reproduced below, confirmed our findings : ' Microscopical examination of smears from intestinal mucosa and mesenteric glands revealed the presence of numerous acid fast organisms morphologically indistinguishable from Mycobacterium paratuberculosis. Histological examination of the intestines revealed lesions associated with advanced Johne's disease '. DISCUSSION Johne's disease in sheep has been recorded but it is too early to say any- thing about its actual incidence among flocks in India. It is also difficult at this stage to attempt to judge the mortality from this disease but if the figure of 5 per cent, as mentioned by McEwen [1939], holds true for India also, it would mean that the disease must have a wider distribution than hitherto believed. The possibility of sheep becoming infected from cattle has been recognised but most workers, e.g. McFadyean and Sheather [1916] recorded cases amongst sheep in farms where very few cattle were maintained and where no history pointing to the occurrence of a case of Johne's disease amongst cattle existed. Howarth [1932] cultivated the micro-organism from sheep in California which had never come in contact with cattle. The inability of McEwen [1939] to cultivate the bacillus from sheep as in the case of cattle further justifies the probability that there are two different strains. At the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, however, both sheep and cattle are main- tained and the occurrence of Johne's disease amongst cattle has been recorded from time to time. Since the ovine strain has been found to be infective for calves [McEwen, 1939], the detection of disease in the early stages before the clinical symptoms become too apparent is of paramount importance for the prevention and control of the disease. McEwen [1939] has been able to demonstrate Johne's disease bacilli in the fæcal material but according to Howarth [1937] fæcal samples from animals without diarrhP. N. NANDA AND GURBAX SINGH 279 rectum and examining it microscopically has been found quite useless in the early stages of the disease in cattle. According to McEwen [1939] the use of Johnin of bovine origin, in the detection of Johne's disease amongst sheep and calves has proved unsatisfactory although Houthuis [1932] claims to have obtained good results with Johnin of high potency for the diagnosis of the disease in cattle. Howarth [1937] reports good results with the use of Avian Tuberculin and Johnin for the detection of the disease in sheep. The failure to set up infection in adult sheep by McEwen [1939] indicates an age resistence to infection as pointed out by Meyer [1913] and Hagan [1938] amongst cattle and in this connexion it may be interesting to record that the ewes in the present instance were three years and six years old at the time of death. REFERENCES Dunkin, G. W. and Balfour-Jones, S.E.B. (1935). J. Comp. Path. and Ther. 48, 236 Hagan, W. A. (1938). [quoted by McEwen, A. D. (1939) J. Comp. Path. & Ther. 52, 69] Houthuis, M. J. J. (1932). Vet. Rec. 12, 1488-92 Howarth, J. A. (1932). J. Amer. Vety. Med. Assoc. 81, 383 PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS ON THE BIONOMICS OF THE GOAT WARBLE FLY (HYPODERMA CROSSII PATTON)* BY B. N. SONI, B.Sc. (PB.), B.Sc. AGRI. (EDIN.) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 25 March 1940) (With Plate XIX and one text-figure) INTRODUCTION APART from recording for the first time the occurrence of Hypoderma crossii in goats in the Punjab, Patton [1922-23] has also mentioned two salient facts in regard to the bionomics of this pest. Firstly, it is observed that though Hypoderma crossii is most commonly found in the skins of goats it also occurs in the skins of cattle ; and secondly that it is possible that H. crossii lays her eggs directly on the long hair on the sides of the goats, and that the larvae enter the underlying skin and remain there, and that there is no migration as in the case of H. bovis and H. lineatum. Hypoderma crossii has not been recorded from any other country outside India. The only other species of Hypoderma known to parasitise goats is Hypoderma aeratum in Cyprus [Austen, 1931]. Although a detailed morphological account of H. aeratum is available [Austen, 1931], very little is known about the bionomics of this species. Similarly, Patton [1922-23, 1923-24] and Soni [1939] have confined their studies mainly to the morphology of H. crossii. In this paper it is proposed to discuss the above two points and also to record a few original observations concerning the bionomics of the pest. The observations recorded in this paper were made by the writer in the course of a series of warble fly surveys carried out by him in certain heavily infested localitiesInd. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part III ] plate XIX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Portion of goat-skin showing warble holes [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Goats of Kaugani breed which are heavily infested
B. N. SONI 281 appear to be very prevalent in the North-West Frontier Province, and Chadda and Soni [1939] have published a map showing the regional distribution and the incidence of Hypoderma crossii in that province. It would appear that the pest is particularly wide spread in the dry and hilly tracts of the North- West Frontier Province, and the writers just cited, observed that' the highest percentage of infestation in goats is in Kohat district where in some villages it is hardly possible to pick out a single goat free from warbles. The per- centage of infestation is fairly heavy in hilly districts like Hazara and Waziris- tan.' A piece of goat-skin obtained by the present author from that province measured 18 " × 6 " and contained 179 warble punctures (Plate XIX, fig. 1). In Kashmir and Kulu valleys, goats of the ' Kaugani' and ' Gadhairun' breeds were found heavily infested. These goats are of a short stature and possess long hair and drooping ears (Plate XIX, fig. 2). SEASONAL OCCURRENCE The result of a series of surveys carried out by the writer in the Punjab and North-West Frontier Province would appear to indicate that the seasonal occurrence of H. crossii differs from that of H. lineatum. All the available information and the result of examination of material collected in the field point to the conclusion that the period from pupation to egg laying in H. crossii ranges from the middle of March till the middle of August, this being about two months late than in the case of H. lineatum [Soni, 1939]. Very young or the first-stage larvae of H. crossii have been found in the subcutane- ous fascia of the goat's back as early as the third week of August. From the same localities second-stage larvae have been encountered between early October and the middle of November. The full-grown or the ultimate-stage larvae keep appearing in tumours in the back of the host till the middle of March, so that the total period for which the larvae occur on the back is nearly seven months. From the point of view of the formulation of combative measures, the importance of this observation is obvious. The seasonal occurrence of H. crossii in the round of the year is diagrammatically repre- sented in Fig. 1. HOST PREFERENCE IN H. CROSSII Austen [1931], in referring to H. crossii, remarks as follows : 232 Bionomics of Goat Warble Fly [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A seasonal occurrence calendar regarding Hypoderma crossii larvae in the round of the year, (Punjab & N. W. F. P.). As Patton [1922-23] has already suggested, H. crossii in all probability lays its eggs directly on the long hairs on the sides of the goats and the larvae enter the skin below and remain there. The whole of the larval development is accomplished in the subcutaneous tissues of the host without the occurrence of a stage of migration between any of the successive instars and this accounts for the occurrence of warble tumours in goats during a con- tinuous period of nearly seven months as against four months in the case of cattle. Under field conditions it may prove to be of actual advantage to have to deal with protracted infestations, for this would make it possible to carry out the dressing operations with a small staff in relatively large herds or in a succession of infested localities widely separated from one another. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Hypoderma crossii Patton, a parasite of goats and sheep in India, has so far been studied only morphologically, first by Patton [1922-23, 1923-24] and later by Soni [1939]. The present article deals exclusively with some observations made by the author on the bionomics of H. crossii during his surveys in North-West India where, the pest is most prevalent in the Salt Range Area of the Punjab, hilly tracts of the North-West Frontier and the
B. N. SONI 283 valleys of Kashmir and Kulu. A point of considerable interest that has emerged in the course of these surveys is the occurrence of warble tumours in goats during a continuous period of nearly seven months (as against four months in the case of H. lineatum in cattle), and this, it would appear, is due to the fact that, in the case of H. crossii, the whole of the larval development is accomplished in the subcutaneous tissues of the host without the occurrence of a stage of migration between any of the successive instars. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS It is my pleasant duty to express my grateful thanks to Mr J. R. Haddow' Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for the keen interest with which he has watched the progress of this investigation. Mr S. K. Sen, Entomologist, h s greatly obliged the author with his constant guidance. The illustrations were prepared with the assistance of Mr S. Sen Roy, Artist, and for this thanks are due to him. REFERENCES Austen, E. (1931). Bull. Entom. Res. 22, 426-429 Chadda, S. R. and Soni, B. N. (1939). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 9, 101-103 Davenport, C. (1930). Trans. Soci. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 23, 425-426 Patton, W. S. (1922-23). Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 573-578 WITHANIA COAGULANS AS A VEGETABLE RENNET. BY ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA, B.AG. ANI. HUS. (BOM.), B.Sc. AGRI. (EDIN.), N. D. D. (SCOT.) AND PRITO G. KHUBCHANDANI, B.Sc. Imperial Dairy Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 15 April 1940) INTRODUCTION DURING the past few years cheddar cheese and soft cheeses have grown in popularity in India. Cheese is steadily gaining favour with non- vegetarians. One reason for the slow growth of the cheese industry in India is that cheese is made with the help of animal rennet and therefore vegetarians do not eat it. If a rennet of vegetable origin could be used in the manufac- ture of cheese, the difficulty could be overcome. To extract vegetable rennet from the berries of Withania coagulans and study its use was the work done by the present writers. Withania coagulans is a common plant found in the North-West Frontier Province, the Punjab and Sind. It belongs to the natural order Solanacea. Lea [1883] working on this rennet suggests that the extract could be used in the manufacture of cheese. In the present work a preliminary study has been made of the use of the berries (supplied by the Director of Agriculture, North-West Frontier Province) in the manufacture of cheddar cheese and soft (surati) cheese. EXPERIMENTAL The extract was made from the fruit by means of glycerine, common salt solution and water. The extraction was made by grinding ten grams of berries and allowing them to remain in 100 c.c. of the solution for 24 hours. Solu- tions of strength from 5 to 30 per cent were tried. It was found that five per cent salt solution extract gave the best results. Hence further work was done with five per cent salt solution only. The milk coagulating property of the extract was destroyed by boiling it; filtering through filter paper also reduced its coagulating power consider- ably. To study the use of this vegetable rennet for the manufacture of cheddar cheese and soft cheeses, it was thought best first to find the optimum tempera- ture for its action and also its action at different acidities. Ten grams of berries were ground and allowed to remain in 50 c.c. of five per cent salt solution for 24 hours. The extract was filtered through double muslin cloth. Five c.c. of this was used for coagulating 100 c.c. of milk at different temperatures. It was found that the optimum temperature for the action of the rennet was between 155°F and 160°F. Table I gives the time taken at different tem- peratures for acidity 0.2 per cent lactic acid. (284)
ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND PRITO G. KHUBCHANDANI 285 TABLE I The variation of time of coagulation with temperature Temperature Time Temperature Time 110°F 10 minutes. 145°F 35 seconds 110°F 5 286 Withania Coagulans as a Vegetable Rennet. CURD FOR CHEDDAR CHEESE Before starting the work on cheddar cheese it was necessary to select a suitable temperature for adding the rennet. Milk was coagulated and cut. The curd was cooked on a waterbath. It was found that at a temperature of 100°F the curd obtained was soft and when cut it resulted in a heavy loss of fat in whey and also took more time to attain the texture required for cheddar cheese. Temperatures higher than 110° F caused more fat to rise to the top during the time of coagulation and also caused a partial coagulation of the albumin. A temperature of 105°F gave a curd which compared favour- ably with the one obtained with animal rennet at 86°F. CHEDDAR CHEESE MAKING Thirty grams of berries were ground and the rennet extracted with 200 c.c. of 5 per cent common salt solution. The whole quantity of the extract coagulated 50 lb. of milk with acidity 0.2 per cent lactic acid and temperature 105°F, giving a suitable curd in 50 minutes. Cheddar cheese was made by the usual process except with one modification. Since the cooking tempera- ture for cheese is 104° to 106°F, the curd was cooled before cutting to 90°F by passing chilled water through the vat. It was then cut and cooked as usual. Table II gives a full description of the cheese made. After pressing and band- aging the samples were cured at 55°F, the bandages were removed after six weeks and all the samples were paraffined on the same day. No extra moulds or growths were observed at this stage. The samples of cheese were examined after three months. The cheese was found normal except that all the samples had a little open texture. Sam ple 5 had developed excess acidity. Sample 1 was the best of the lot. No appreciable difference was found in the flavour of the final product as compared with the cheese prepared with animal rennet.
ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND PRITO G. KHUBCHANDANI 287 TABLE II Details of manufacture of cheese No. Time started Acidity of mixed milk Colour added Quantity of starter Acidity of starter Time starter added Acidity at the time of adding rennet Time when rennet was added Time of coagu- lation Time cooled Time cut Acidity after cutting Tempe- rature of cooking Time at drawing of whey Acidity at drawing of whey Time milled Acidity at milling A.M. A.M. A.M. Min. Min. A.M. A.M. P.M. 1 7.00 0.18 ... ½ lb. 0.80 7.25 0.22 7.45 50 20 8.55 0.14 105°F 11.00 0.26 12.30 0.80 2 6.55 0.18 ... ½ lb. 0.75 7.00 0.22 7.25 50 20 8.35 0.14 105°F 11.15 0.28 12.30 0.70 3 6.30 0.18 ... ½ lb. 0.75 6.50 0.22 7.10 50 20 8.20 0.15 105°F 11.00 0.26 12.15 0.70 4 7.30 0.18 ... ¼ lb. 0.80 7.40 0.22 8.50 50 15 9.10 0.14 105°F 11.45 0.26 12.50 0.80 5 7.00 0.18 5 c.c. ¼ lb. 0.80 7.30 0.20 7.50 50 15 8.55 0.14 105°F 11.00 0.27 12.15 0.60 6 7.15 0.18 5 c.c. ¼ lb. 0.75 7.30 0.20 7.55 50 15 9.00 0.16 105°F 11.15 0.28 12.15 0.60 D
288 Withania Coagulans as a Vegetable Rennet The cheese samples were analysed for moisture and fat. The figures for the six samples are given in Table III. It will be seen that the cheese contain- ed less fat than the average sample prepared with animal rennet. This could be easily ccounted for because the fat rose and formed a layer on the surface of the milk. TABLE III Moisture and fat content of the six samples No. Fat per cent Moisture per cent 1 24.2 29.2 2 21.5 27.3 3 23.2 28.1 4 22.5 26.1 5 20.9 29.0 6 22.1 27.3 GENERAL REMARKS A higher temperature of 105°F used in this experiment resulted in a partial rise of the fat layer in the milk, which mixed itself with the whey. The whey when tested for fat contained 0.3 to 0.5 per cent fat. The average figure for ordinary cheese is 0.2 per cent fat in whey. The curd is ordinarily examined for perfect coagulation by pressing with the fingers and noting that nothing sticks to the fingers on withdrawing. But the fat layer did not permit this. Hence the curd was examined by cutting a small portion of it in one corner of the vat by a spoon or a knife and examin- ing its hardness. The curd took more time during cooking to attain the requisite texture, hence it had to be kept stirred vigorously to prevent quick rise in acidity. SUMMARY 1. Use of the extract of the berries of Withania coagulans as a vegetable rennet for soft (surati) cheese and cheddar cheese making has been studied. The rennet is promising for the manufacture of cheddar cheese and soft cheese. 2. Some modification of the ordinary method of manufacture has been suggested. REFERENCE Lea, S. (1883). Proc. Roy. Soc. 36, 55-8
A CHEAP METHOD OF OXYGENATION IN FISH CULTURE BY H. K. MOOKERJEE, D.Sc. (LOND.), D.I.C, F.N.I. University Professor and Head of the Department of Zoology, Calcutta University (Received for publication on 26 February 1940) THE need for oxygenation or aeration of fishes at all stages from fry to the adult is a universally accepted fact. The cause of mortality may vary superficially but all such causes ultimately lead to the want of oxygen, such as, asphyxia, low pH or bacterial infection etc. The mortality at differ- ent stages and at the time of transport is colossal and the net result is a tremen- dous amount of financial loss. In the province of Bengal alone the loss may be estimated to be several lakhs of rupees every year. The total amount of fish population (fry and adult) in our country is more than enough to satisfy our need but the pity is that it is unevenly distributed. An even distribution of fishes is practically impossible for want of a proper method of oxygenation during transport to distant places in their living state. Now the question is how to render this oxygen or air available in required quantity, at a very low cost, at all stages and in rural areas and also during transport to remote distances ? This problem attracted the attention of many scientists and persons interested in pisciculture and they have suggested either some expensive contrivances, such as, electric-air-pump which can be available only in cities, or inexpensive agents such as, putting aquatic plants in tanks (big or small), as these plants liberate oxygen during their photosynthesis. American scientists have suggested a method for the transport of fishes in double walled chambers with a little space in between. In this device inner chamber has numerous perforations and due to jerks during transport, water splashes through these perforations, thus causing the atmospheric air to rush inside the water in the form of bubbles. Another method is the usual splashing of water by means of hand paddling done by our fishermen when they generally carry fries in earthen ' hundies '. None of the above suggestions can be of universal use and satisfy all conditions, such as, simplicity, cost, efficiency and durability. This problem also attracted my attention during my study of fresh water fish culture in connection with a scheme financed by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, which is being worked under my supervision, and re- cently I have found out a solution which will satisfy all the above needs at all times and at all places. The solution is very simple but none suggested or recorded it uptil now. The contrivance is simple, universally obtainable and the cost is very low. We all know that at the present moment the whole of India has motor transport facility and this facility is increasing every day. This means an increase of out-put of worn-out tyres and tubes in great numbers. The old second-hand used rubber inner tube having patches on it could be had in all places at a low price, In Calcutta the price varies from 4 to 10 annas each. (289) D 2
290 Oxygenation in Fish Culture These inner rubber tubes can serve the purpose of the so called 'oxygen cylinder' for fishes. The actual procedure is pretty simple. The valve of the inner tube of a motor tyre (or of a cycle tube for less quantity of air) is removed and air is pumped in the tube by means of a hand pump. The cost of a second-hand pump is about Re. 1-4. Now the connection of the hand pump with the nozzle of the tube is quickly removed and with the nozzle is fixed one end of a piece of thin rubber tubing having a pinch-cock tightly fitted before-hand at a little distance from the other end. By manipulating the pinch-cock and immersing the free end of the rubber tubing inside water continuous bubbling of air can be obtained. The filling up of air in a balloon rubber tube takes two or three minutes and a continuous aeration will last for more than 6 hours. The capital expenditure amounts to about Rs. 2 or utmost Rs. 2-8 and if there are a number of such rubber tubes operating in big tanks the cost will be propor- tionately less. This method of aeration can be used in tanks and aquaria to satisfy the hobby of amateurs and by businessmen for transport in trains, motor, bullock- carts, boats, or by fishermen using earthen ' hundies ' and finally in markets to keep alive the fishes specially the ' Jeol fishes '. There is another advantage to those who have no space exposed to sun. to keep their so called aquaria with aquatic plants. This sort of aeration is the only salvation to them. The detailed estimation of loss and gain, time and duration and other statistical data will be published at a later stage.
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part III PLATE XX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Hypoderma lineatum. Cephalo- pharyngeal skeleton of young larvae. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Hypoderma bovis. Cephalo- pharyngeal skeleton of young larvae. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Hypoderma crossii. Cephalo- pharyngeal skeleton of young larvae. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Second stage larva of H. crossii. Cephalo- pharyngeal skeleton of second-stage larvae. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Full-grown larva of H. crossii. Cephalopharyngeal skeleton of full-grown larva.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE MOUTH-PARTS OF YOUNG LARVAL FORMS OF HYPODERMA CROSSII PATTON* BY B. N. SONI, B.Sc. (PB.), B.Sc. AGRI. (EDIN.) Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 25 March 1940) (With Plate XX) PATTON [1922-23] published a brief description of the adult fly and the full-grown larva of Hypoderma crossii. During the following year he [Patton, 1923-24] described what he believed to be the second-stage larvae of the same species. In 1939 the present writer published a fuller account of the morphological characters of H. crossii larvae. Unfortunately, in none of these accounts was any attention given to the larval mouth-parts. Subsequent studies carried out by the writer have shown them to be of considerable value for differentiating the young forms of larval H. crossii from those of H. lineatum and H. bovis. The specimens on which the present description of the larval mouth-parts is based, were collected by the writer from the sub- cutaneous fascia of the back of goats at Jhelum (Punjab). From a perusal of the available literature on the subject it was recognised that these were the youngest forms of H. crossii larvae obtained so far. Their size varies from 5 to 7 mm. in length by 0.5 to 0.7 mm. in the greatest breadth, the average length of the second-stage larvae collected by Patton (1. c.) being 7.59 mm. They were glossy and semi-transparent, cylindrical in form and tapered slightly at both ends. To the naked eye these larvae looked very similar to the young oesophageal forms of H. lineatum. In these larvae, the mouth-hooks are plainly visible in the uncleaned specimens under a medium power of the microscope. As is well known, the anterior end of the mouth hook in H. bovis is forked and the rear end blunt. This feature enables the species to be readily differentiated from H. lineatum in which the anterior end of the mouth hook is sharply pointed with a well formed notch at some distance below, while the rear end is also slightly pointed (Plate XX, figs. 1 and 2). In the case of H. crossii, on the other hand, the hook is plain and blunt at both ends and is devoid of either a fork or a notch (Plate XX, fig. 3). The posterior end of the hook in this species is more thickly set than the anterior end and the median spear is smaller than in the first two species. Two in- verted comma-shaped structures placed parallel and lying close to the median spear constitute an additional differentiating character in the cephalo- pharyngeal skeleton of H. crossii. A study of the cephalo-pharyngeal skeleton and mouth hooks of the later larval stages of H. lineatum and H. crossii has shown that as the larvae develop, the mouth-parts undergo a progressive degeneration until in the fullgrown larvae, they appear as a mass of chitinous, signet-shaped structure, * Presented at the Indian Science Congress, held at Madras in January 1940 (291)
292 Mouth-Parts of Young Larval Forms of Hypoderma crossii which to all appearance is non-functioning as a cutting and piercing organ. These changes are represented in Plate XX, figs. 4 and 5. SUMMARY The mouth-hooks of young larval forms of H. crossii can be differentiated from those of H. bovis and H. lineatum by the absence of a fork and a notch respectively. The two ends of the hook in H. crossii are blunt, the posterior end being more so than the anterior end, while the presence of a double comma- shaped structure at the top of the median spear is an additional differentiating feature. As the larvae develop, the mouth-parts undergo progressive degenera- tion until, in the full-grown larvae they appear as a mass of non-functioning, signet-shaped, chitinous structure. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The writer expresses his thanks to Mr J. R. Haddow, Imperial Veteri- nary Research Institute, for his keen interest during the progress of this in- vestigation. Microscopic preparations were examined and the observations confirmed by Mr S. K. Sen, Entomologist, to whom the writer is highly grateful. The assistance rendered by Mr S. Sen Roy, artist of the Institute is acknowledged. REFERENCES Patton, S. W. (1922-23). Ind. J. Med. Res. 10, 573-578 ------------------(1923-24). Ind. J. Med. Res. 11, 962-963 Soni, B. N. (1939). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 9, 367-369
INFECTION OF ADULT FOWLS WITH SYNGAMUS TRACHEALIS BY M. CRAWFORD, M.R.C.V.S. Government Veterinary Surgeon, Ceylon (Received for publication on 7 February 1940) IN many text books on helminthology and on diseases of poultry it is stated that the susceptibility of fowls to infection with Syngamus trachealis is definitely limited to the first few months of their life. The exact period is given variously as from 8 to 13 weeks. Fowls over that age are stated to develop an absolute immunity and re-infection is stated to be impossible. This theory has again been put forward by Srivastava [1939] in the follow- ing words 'However, chickens invariably develop a very definite immunity against this parasite when 8 or 9 weeks' old, and, once this age immunity has developed, any worms which may be present die or are expelled and a re- infection is impossible'. The importance of this theory lies in the bearing it has on the measures to be adopted to control the disease. If the theory be accepted as true, then the adult fowl can be ignored as a source of infection. The poultry breeder is informed in the text books that the adult turkey is capable of acting as a carrier of infection, but that the adult fowl cannot do so and he is advised not to keep turkeys on the same ground as he keeps chickens. The object of this short note is to record that so far as Ceylon at least is concerned the theory is not correct. ' Gapes ' in poultry is a very common and widespread disease in Ceylon. The parasite responsible appears to be identical with Syngamus trachealis. It is of course possible that it may be of a different type or strain than Syngamus trachealis as it occurs in Europe and America; morphologically, however, it appears to be identical. In Ceylon in the course of routine post-mortem examinations of fowls at the Veterinary Laboratory of the Department of Agriculture we have for many years and on very many occasions found Syngamus trachealis in the trachea of fowls of all ages even in three year old hens. The number of pairs of worms found in the trachea of adult fowls is generally small, as a rule not more than two or three pairs, but not infrequently adult hens have been seen on poultry farms exhibiting typical clinical symptoms, namely a short cough or sneeze and gaping for breath. These symptoms ceased on removal of the gapeworms from the trachea by means of a feather. We know of several poultry farms on which one would have no difficulty at any time in finding a number of adult fowls infected with Syngamus trachealis. This is indeed so common in Ceylon that we consider the adult fowl to be a most important factor in maintaining and spreading infection. (293)
294 Infection of Adult Fowls with Syngamus trachealis The theory that an absolute age immunity develops in fowls at about three months of age is certainly not true in Ceylon. Possibly this is so in other countries as well. Our experience in Ceylon is supported by a statement attri- buted to Lerche in the latest edition of Hutyra and Marek's standard text- book, namely that ' In poultry farms the principal carriers are young brood hens of 13½ months of 'age.' REFERENCES Cameron, T. W. M. (1934). Internal Parasites of Domestic Animals, 91 Hutyra and Marek (1938). Special Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic Animals, 533 Leiper, R. T. (1930). Proc. 4th World Poultry Congress, 473 Monnig, H. O. (1934). Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology, 175 Srivastava, H. D. (1939). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 9, 405
SEX-DIMORPHISM IN MACRONES GULIO (HAM. BUCH) BY H. K. MOOKERJEE, D.Sc. (LOND.), D.I.C., F.N.I., S. R. MAZUMDAR, M.Sc. AND B. DAS GUPTA, M.Sc. Department of Zoology, Calcutta University (Received for publication on 11 March 1940) (With two text-figures) IN course of our observation on sex-dimorphism of fresh water fishes of Bengal we have observed certain peculiar structures behind the anal opening of Macrones gulio (Ham. Buch). We found that behind the anal opening there is a protuberance with a free tapering end lying further back to the body. This so-called ' penis ' can only be found in case of male specimens. In case of Macrones gulio the so- called ' penis ' is situated far behind the anal opening (Fig. 1). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 (Male) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 (Female) Ventral view of Macrones gulio (Ham. Buch) showing the anal and generative apertures. Fig.296 Sex-Dimorphism in Macrones gulio We have dissected a number of specimens to examine their gonads and we have been able to confirm our observation regarding their sexes and we are in a position to say definitely that in each and every male, the so-called ' penis ' can be found. Regarding females, we have observed that there is an additional aperture behind the anal opening. On dissection we have found that the generative opening terminates on to the so-called ' penis' and not to the common aperture, or to a separate aperture as in other fishes. In case of females the generative openings terminate to the aperture behind the anal opening and this probably represents the ' vagina ' (Fig. 2). It should be mentioned here that in case of the female, the generative aperture is far behind the anal opening and is simple. The sex dimorphism in these cases is interesting and on referring to the literature we could only find a reference to some such organs in Glyptosternum reticulatum McClelland by Mukerji [1936] in which he reports ' In males there is a sharp, conical and well defined papilla projecting behind the anal opening. In the female there is no papilla but the vent is broadened by prominent fleshy lips. The secondary sexual characters noted above are well marked in the specimens under report '. Mukerji's specimen belongs to the family, Sisoridæ which is akin to Silu- roid and it is interesting to note that the two families of a closer range have these generative organs showing their closer relationship. We referred to Dr S. L. Hora of the Zoological Survey of India who has mentioned in his letter, ' I may say that I am not aware of the occurrence of copulatory organs in Cat-fishes of any continent '. We take this opportunity of expressing our thanks to Dr S. L. Hora for his kind remarks. REFERENCES Mukerji (1936). Mem. Conn. Acad. 10, Art. XVIII.
THE DENTITION OF FISHES AND REPTILES WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE REPLACEMENT OF TEETH* BY F. GORDON CAWSTON, M.D. (CANTAB.) (Received for publication on 2 September 1939) (With Plates XXI and XXII) MOST species of fish have a front row of erect teeth for cutting through food. To prevent slipping, the hinder rows of teeth are hinged anchylosed or embedded in sockets [Peake, 1915]. Teeth on the palate and throat and loose on the tongue direct food inwards, usually head-first because of the scales. The palatine and vomerine teeth, as in rock cods, are mostly recurved, but are not so strong as the premaxillary. Trichiurus haumela (Forsk.) has specially strong recurved teeth. The single row of teeth in the lower jaw of some fishes, e.g. Sphyraena, fit between the premaxillary and palatine, as they do in some snakes. The hinder teeth are not symmetrical and it is not easy to count the number of rows when there are more than three. Only vertical succession occurs in fishes. The rate of succession varies in different species and is evident in both premaxillary and palatine rows, as in the wrasse, Lepidaplois hirsutus (Laceps.), for example. It is well seen where tooth-roots extend deep into the jaw, as in Glyphidodon saxatilis Linn. X-ray examination shows new teeth developing in the jaw of Pagrus nasutus (Cast.) before they erupt into empty alveoli. In this species vertical succession has been seen by both dissection and X-ray examination, even with the deeply-set front teeth. These teeth increase in size with the jaw and there is no approximation to close empty spaces. They would be too heavy, if not partially hollow. Replacement of piscine teeth, which are easily lost unless firmly anchy- losed, takes place near the base of alveoli, but it is a slower process than what occurs in the crocodile. New teeth were observed undermining the erupte d teeth of Crocodilus niloticus Laurenti, but prolonged search failed to revea such at the base of the teeth of Salmo fario and Salmo iridens. In Pagrus, the alveolus of a shed tooth remains empty for a while before a new tooth erupts. Once in use, the tooth becomes firmly anchylosed. In some species there are small teeth in front of a row of large teeth. In others, e.g. Atractoscion aequidens (C. & V.), the foremost and hindermost teeth are the biggest thus removing the likelihood of lateral revolving of the tooth- bearing surface [Cawston, 1938], and diagonal placing of teeth [Vorstman, 1922], is no evidence of it. The hinder teeth of some species of Serranidae are not repressible [Barnard, 1927], but Dentex, e.g. Dentex praeorbitalis (Gnthr.) and Dentex undulosus * Comimmicated to Section D at 37th Annual Meeting of the South African Associa- tion for the Advancement of Science, East London, July 3-8, 1939. (297)
298 Dentition of Fishes and Reptiles Regan, have seven to ten rows of hinged teeth. Elagatis bipinnnulatus (Q. & G.) has numerous upper and lower villiform teeth but is provided with about 20 well-developed gill filters. GILL FILTERS Teeth of fishes do not come away with the gum as in Elasmobranchids or as gill filters (rakers) may be removed with the covering of an arch. Gill filters are added to at the extremities of the arches. They might be replaced from the scattered clusters of denticles [Payne, 1938], but injury must be rare. Denticles in all stages of growth have been noted on the covering of gill arches in two species of Carcharhinus (the black-fin and the grey shark), in Sphyrna zygaena (Linn.) and in the black bass, Micropterus salmoides. In the former one sees (1) flat, fan-like denticles with merely an indication of a median keel at the centre of its apical margin, (2) the three-keeled denticle with tooth-like projections from the exposed border, set on a wide pedicle growing from the centre of a rhomboidal base, and (3) the fully developed five- keeled denticles at right angles to the pedicles, as described for American sharks [Radcliffe, 1914]. Occasionally I have seen seven-keeled denticles in the three species of shark I have examined. In Micropterus salmoides I have noted the denticles in all stages of growth from the buds, lying in clusters on the gill arch. I have also seen its palatine teeth in all stages of development from tooth-buds. REPTILES Reptilian teeth are sharp and recurved, being well adapted for holding prey. X-ray examination of a young specimen of Crocodilus niloticus Laurenti showed 18 erupted teeth on each side of the upper jaw and 15 on each side of the lower. The third and tenth of the upper and the first, fourth and tenth of the lower jaw were the biggest, the first mandibular fitting into a deep notch in the upper jaw. Successional teeth at the base of erupted teeth were re- vealed by dissection and tooth-buds, apparently representing the undeveloped rows of lizards and snakes, were visible in the gum microscopically. Toads, e.g. Bufo regularis Reuss, are edentulous, but vertical succession was seen in the upper jaw of the frog, Rana grayi Smith. In the jaw of the so called Iguana or Monitor lizard, Varanus niloticus Linn., I counted nine upper teeth on each side besides 10 premaxillary, and 10 on each side of the mandible. The twelfth upper tooth was the largest on each side. The teeth were pleurodont, i.e. growing on the inner side of a ridge of bone, becoming anchylosed in course of use. They had no sockets and shed teeth from an old jaw left merely empty spaces. There was nothing to show that the small loose teeth in the gum on the inner side of the maxillary were successional. No sign of replacement was noted of the deeply embedded front teeth of izards, but new teeth were seen growing among the roots of those set in rows. These success onal teeth are visible in Mabuya capensis Grey, Pachydactylus bibroni Smith and Corodylus (Zonurus) corodylus, but not in Agama atra rudis which has no provision for loss of its shallow acrodont teeth.
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part III ] PLATE XXI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Naja nivea Boie 4. Causus rhombeatus Lichts 2. Sepedon haemachates Lacep 5. Psaonmaphis sibilans 3. Dendroaspis angusticeps Smith 6. Dispholidus typus
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part III ] PLATE XXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Pagrus nosutus 2. Epinephelus albomarginatus 3. Sphyracena commersoni 4. Atractocion, aequidens 5. Sarda sarda 6. Epinelephelus lauvona 7. Dentex paracorbitalis
F. GORDON CAWSTON 299 There are approximately the same number of upper and lower teeth in these lizards. New teeth between the roots of their teeth can hardly justify the designation ' endless ' succession. It would be interesting to know how far new teeth may grow in very old lizards and crocodiles. I have noted an incom- plete set in the jaw of an old crocodile. Mr. J. W. Bell Marley reports that a complete set is seldom found in old crocodiles from Zululand and that the jaws of some old fishes show impaired replacement. SNAKES Besides maxillary teeth some snakes, e.g. Python sebae Gmel., C rotap- hopeltis hotamboeia Laur. and Pseudaspis cana Linn., have well-formed palatine teeth. This enables them to seize fast-moving prey without relying on a strong or easily injected venom, for the mandibular come to lie between two upper rows when these snakes bite. Replacement of teeth is not effected by revolving of the gum for the teeth are set in the jaw, neither are empty sockets filled by the small loose teeth in the gums, as occurs in pythons. The teeth of pythons are said to be polyphodont [Widdowson, 1915], the successional teeth erupting vertically. But X-ray examination of adult jaws does not show new teeth in the area of tooth development, so that replace- ment must be limited, possibly to immature specimens. Whilst examining teeth, they are easily displaced and a prone position may suggest immaturity, though all are vertical in the adult. X-ray exami- nation of a mature jaw of several species, with or without removal of the gum, shows no vertical succession. This indicates that shed teeth are not replaced in adult snakes. Teeth in serial deve opment in the vagina dentis of Crota-phopeltis hotam- boeia Laur. illustrates how back fangs and, perhaps, the palatine rows may be added to. Forty-three successional teeth were counted in a specimen of this relatively harmless snake which was 22 in. long [Fitzsimons, 1919]. Each maxillary row had about fifteen erupted teeth. No sign of succession of maxillary or other erupted teeth could be determined. SUMMARY Besides their erect cutting teeth, fish are provided with numerous teeth as well as the gill filters for directing food down the throat. Lost teeth are replaced by others developing vertically. Lateral displace- ment of rows never occurs. Vertical succession is readily seen in our local Barracuda and Bonito fishes and occurs in premaxillary and palatine teeth. X-ray examination shows that replacement is slower in the mussel-crusher than in many fishes of this class. Replacement of gill filters has not been seen, but development of denticles has been studied, especially on the gill arches, and these are also attached to the gill filters. Reptilian teeth are recurved. Both the crocodile and some lizards have small accessory teeth, as found on the nner side of the maxillary in some snakes. Vertical succession occurs in the crocodile and has been observed in the South African frog.
300 Dentition of Fishes and Reptiles Succession has been observed in lizards with deeply-set teeth. Species with shallow teeth do not exhibit it. It is not possible to say how frequently shed teeth can be replaced. Further invest gation is needed to decide if it persists throughout life. The small supplementary teeth in the gum of some reptiles would not appear to be success onal any more than the hinder rows of teeth in fishes. The palatine teeth of snakes with little or no venom afford extra power for their bites. Though numerous successional teeth have been seen in the vagina dentis, such teeth have not been observed in the maxillary rows. ACKNOWLEDMENTS Valuable assistance from the Albany Museum (Grahamstown), the Port Elizabeth, Durban and Botha's Hill Snake Parks and from the Natal Estates has enabled me to include illustrations of all reptiles mentioned in this paper. Most of the fishes were identified by Mr J. W. Bell Marley, some were sent me by Mr C. Scott, Inland Fisheries Officer for Natal and Doctor J. W. E. Graham, L. D. S., of Durban kindly prepared the X-ray photographs. The diagrams have been drawn by aid of the camera lucida. REFERENCES Albany Museum (1937). A Guide to the Vertebrate Fauna of the Eastern Cape Province of South Africa. Grahamstown Barnard, K. H. (1925, 1927). Ann. S. Afric. Mus. 21 Cawston, F. G. (1938). S. Afric. J. Sci. 35, 321-6 SELECTED ARTICLES CHRONIC FLUORINE INTOXICATION IN DOMESTIC ANIMALS BY A. W. PEIRCE Division of Animal Health and Nutrition, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (Australia), Animal Nutrition Laboratory University of Adelaide, South Australia (Reprinted from the Nutrition Abstracts and Reviews, Vol. 9, No. 2, October 1939) ALTHOUGH symptoms which are now recognised to be the result of ex- cessive ingestion of fluorine have been recorded for at least 800 years, it is only within the last two or three decades that the subject has attracted especial attention. The recent wide and active interest in fluorine poisoning has been inspired by the recognition that certain functional disabilities suffer- ed by stock and also by human beings are due to chance ingestion of fluorine. A voluminous literature has resulted, which is, for the most part, devoted to the description and study of the symptoms, the relative toxicities of different fluorine compounds and the quantities which bring about chronic changes in different animals. The physiological mechanisms involved have received less attention. Several reviews have appeared dealing with various phases of chronic fluorine poisoning (32, 34, 81, 101), but only in Roholm's admirable mono- graph (101) have the effects on domestic animals been accorded more than passing consideration. In preparing the following short review of the subject, the author has been guided by several years experience with experimentally induced fluorosis in sheep. It is not possible here to consider all relevant publications and with little doubt some important contributions have been overlooked during the perusal of the extensive and widely dispersed literature of the subject. A discussion of chronic fluorosis of domestic animals may be divided into a consideration of the disease as it occurs under natural conditions and a consideration of the changes which have been induced experimentally in an endeavour to interpret further the extent to which fluorine contributes to the natural malady. A large proportion of these latter investigations have been initiated in an attempt to overcome the troubles encountered when farm stock are fed with phosphatic supplements that are manufactured from raw materials which contain fluorine. OBSERVATIONS IN REGIONS WHERE FLUORINE POISONING IS ENDEMIC Outbreaks of chronic fluorine intoxication have been described in flocks and herds grazing in many parts of the world and at times these have assumed considerable economic importance. Naturally occurring chronic fluorosis, seemingly, has not been observed in domestic animals in Australia nor in Asia, although mottled enamel of human teeth, which is now a recognised (301)
302 Chronic Fluorine Intoxication in Domestic Animals. symptom of chronic fluorosis, has been reported to be endemic in India, China and Japan. These latter indications have occurred after local volcanic erup- tions, or in the neighbourhood of chemical industries which utilise materials containing fluorine ; at times the water supply has been incriminated. In very early records, dated 1,100 A.D., attention was called to a disease of domestic animals, particularly of grazing sheep, which generally appeared after the periodic volcanic eruptions that have been an important feature of the history of Iceland (99). This disease has been more fully described in the records of an outbreak subsequent to the 1845 eruption of Hekla. While many animals died of acute poisoning with a few weeks of this disturbance, the majority suffered no apparent trouble until the following year, when symptoms of emaciation, decreased milk yield, weakness and impairment of the use of the limbs, thick- ening of the joints and the development of exostoses of the long bones and of the jaws became apparent. Young animals suffered most. Mottling of the teeth with selective abrasion of the molars and pitting of the incisors, were also described. All but the dental symptoms were reported to subside if the animals were confined in barns and fed on hay produced prior to the erup- tion. The skeletal changes, which are now generally accepted to be typical of chronic fluorine poisoning, have since been recongised by Roholm in museum collections of material preserved since the 1845 outbreak (99). Mottling of the enamel of the teeth of domestic animals is also common in certain areas both in North and South America (30, 31, 40), and amongst the human population in regions of the U. S. A. where the drinking water contains relatively large quantities of fluorine (30, 31). In districts in the Argentine, where the drinking water contains approximately 10 mg. fluorine per litre, a high incidence of dental abnormality both in human beings and in horses has been described, and while the molars of cattle in these areas ap- peared sound, they are reported to show histological lesions similar to those associated with macroscopic mottling (40). Mottled enamel of the incisors an excessive wear of the molars have also been described in man, cattle and horses in Modoc County, California (57). The malady, Darmous, which occurs among human beings, horses, cattle and sheep in places in Algeria, Morocco and Tunis has been shown to be due to poisoning by fluorine (48, 115). The most obvious manifestations are the dental abnormalities which occur in animals which have lived conti- nuously in the affected regions. Bone lesions are also apparent. The mandible becomes thickened either by isolated exostoses or by a diffuse covering of periosteal bone (14), and spontaneous bone fractures occur among affected horses and mules (115). The teeth of affected animals are modified in colour, size, orientation, shape and structure. Reduction in hardness results in pit- ting of the incisors and selective abrasion of the molars. In horses, the tem- porary teeth are at times affected (117). The growth of cattle horses and mules in these areas is seriously impaired, but sheep seemingly are not seriously affected in this way (118). Velu (115) has demonstrated that all symptoms of the malady may be induced in rats and sheep either by giving Algerian or Moroccan rock phosphate or calcium fluoride, or by supplying the animals with drinking water in which the fine rock phosphate dust con- taining fluorine had been suspended or which had been in contact with the
A. W. PEIRCE. 303 phosphatic deposits for a period. Degenerative changes observed in the livers of these animals were considered to be indistinguishable from those associated with heavy metal poisoning (119). This symptom rarely, if ever, occurs, however, in natural Darmous. Chemical investigation of the soils of the vegetation and of the bones of animals in affected areas indicates that the fluorine content may be ten times that of similar materials from healthy areas. The disease does not occur in localities where the soils contain less than 20 mg. fluorine per 100 g. (48.) OBSERVATIONS IN AREAS IN PROXIMITY TO FACTORIES WHICH DISCHARGE FLUOLRINE The occurrence of a similar disease among animals grazing in the neigh- bourhood of various factories appears to have been first ascribed to fluorine in 1912 (8). The industries principally incriminated are those producing superphosphate (80, 83), hydrofluoric acid (47, 83), glazed bricks (122) copper (103), aluminium (7), glass and enamel (5, 58, 59, 84). All such factories either emit effluents of hydrogen or silicon fluoride or give rise to dust containing fluorine. These papers are, for the most part, concerned with injury, to vegetation, in one only a description of the disabilities, suffered by animals occurs and this refers to the impairment of gait and the occurrence of spontaneous frac- tures of the long bones of cattle grazing in the neighbourhood of a metallurgical industry in Freiburg, Saxony (59) which utilised fluorspar as a flux. The trouble was first ascribed to the combined effect of sulphuric acid and arsenic ingestion, but this was disputed later (84). The danger from hydrogen fluoride and silicon fluoride is enhanced by the capacity of these compounds to form fogs which in the absence of winds, do not readily dispurse and so allow relatively high concentrations to remain in one locality for a considerable period. Such an effect was considered (64) (100) to have been responsible for the fatalities associated with the disastrous fog of 1930 in the Meuse Valley, Belgium, in which sixty human beings and many stock perished. The affected area contained many industries utilising materials containing fluorine and the symptoms suffered were those of acute fluorine poisoning. Abnormal bone development was common among cattle after the catestrophe. Illness among animals grazing in the vicinity of superphosphate works has been observed in France (104), in Germany (64) and in Italy (8, 9), and near aluminium factories in Italy (7) in Norway (107) and in Switzerland (16, 26, 27). The symptoms reported are similar. Difficulty of locomotion emaciation, raggedness of coat, reduction of milk yield and especially abnormal skeletal development manifested by swollen joints and exostoses of the long bones and jaws have been described in cattle and sheep frequently these areas. Fractures were observed to be a common feature of the disease in Norway. Selective abrasion of the molars, with consequent excessive wear of some teeth in one jaw and corresponding overgrowth in the teeth of the opposite jaw, has been reported. Anaemia and conjunctival irritation have also been described. Damage to the surrounding vegetation and an increase in its fluorine content have been described in several localities (7, 25, 28, 43 64, 107, 121), and greatly increased concentrations of fluorine in the bones E
304 Chronic Fluorine Intoxication in Domestic Animals. of affected animals have been observed (7, 18, 101). Similar symptoms were induced by administering fluorine compounds to goats and cows (7, 19) or by feeding lambs on hay grown in the vicinity of an aluminium factory uti- lising cryolite as a flus (107). A condition of the bones resembling osteoma- lacia has been reported in these last animals (73) . Giving fluorine compounds or hay from affected regions to guineapigs has been reported to result in the development of most of the symptoms of the disease (20, 21, 22, 23, 24). Apart from the reduction in breaking strength of the bones (17, 104) the characteristic skeletal changes were not apparent. Histological examination of the bones from animals grazing in the vicinity of a Swiss aluminium factory has revealed a condition which has been described to be typical of osteomalacia (6). Affected animals are reported to recover when confined in byres and fed on hay produced elsewhere (64) or when the water supply contaminated with an effluent containing fluorine was replaced by one from an adjacent source (8). While most observers seem agreed that fluorine plays the major role either directly or indirectly in the etiology of these maladies, it has been suggested (65) that the effect of these effluents is due to the acid they contain causing the mobilisation of calcium for its neutralisation. This contention, however, leaves unexplained the well-defined specific effects which are usually apparent, and the belief (104) that the symptoms are due to a general acid intoxication is not supported by a number of investigators (35, 61, 110). The effects which result from giving excess of minerals acids to herbivora differ from the symptoms described which resemble very closely those of experimentally induced chronic fluorosis. It is not improbable, however, that the simul- taneous ingestion of excess of uncompensated acid may accentuate the changes brought about by the ingestion of fluorine, and this more particularly in her- bivora. Some attempts to produce characteristic bone lesions by feeding cattle with sodium fluoride (10) sodium bifluoride and sodium fluorsilicate (62) or by flue dust from a superphosphate factory (74, 112) have not been successful, but it would seem that these failures may be ascribed to the brief duration of the experiments, none of which was continued for longer than three months. A malady which appears to be the result of fluorine ingestion occurs among cattle fed with lees from distilleries which use hydrofluoric acid or alkaline fluorides to limit the growth of extraneous organisms during fermen- tation. There seems to be no general agreement however as to the harmful effects. Some authors (52, 75) consider that the lees exert no toxic effects while others (71) claim that continual ingestion is followed by thickening of the joints and other skeletal changes in cattle. The use of alkaline fluorides to control fermentation is discouraged in Germany mainly because farmers refuse to use the lees, believing them to be injurious (114). Such materials contain about 0.06 g. sodium fluoride per litre which would imply that a 500 kg. cow consuming 70 litres a day would ingest 4 mg. of fluorine per kg. body-weight, an amount which has been demonstrated experimentally to exert harmful effects in cattle when mixed in the food (92, 101). Further- more, as the toxicity of fluorine compounds appears to be increased when in- gested in solution (41, 115) the possibility of chronic fluorosis arising in cattle fed on lees containing fluorine is apparent.
A. W. PEIRCE. 305 EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS ON POISONING BY FLUORINE The effects of continual ingestion of fluorine from a variety of sources have been investigated in cattle (13, 36, 37, 39,76, 87, 91, 92, 93, 95, 101, 112) in sheep (85, 99, 113) in goats, (15) in pigs, 2, 3, 4, 44, 46 55, 56, 68, 70, 82, 101, 113, 120) and in poultry (11, 12, 53, 54, 60, 67, 68, 88, 89, 94). In all experiments the animals seem to have suffered from reduced ap- petite and less efficient utilisation of food when the ingestion of sublethal amounts of fluorine was continued. This results in less rapid growth in the young and loss of weight in mature animals. Unthriftiness anorexia and death follow the ingestion of relatively large amounts of fluorine. Specific chemical and morphological changes are manifested in the bones and in the teeth. The normal ivory colour of the bones becomes changed to a chalky white, and the diameter of the cross section of the long bones is increased, due in part to an enlargement of the marrow cavity, but mainly to an increase in the thickness of the bone substance. Exostoses of the long bones and of the jaws are a common feature. These take the form either of isolated out- growths or of a complete superficial covering of porous white bone of high fluorine content. The changes in the mandibles of sheep and cattle are readily detected by palpation. In pigs, the width of the dental arch is increased (68). The bones of animals given fluorine are, as a rule, much softer than normal (3, 4, 46, 53, 68, 82, 101, 103) but owing to overgrowth the breaking strength of the whole borne may be increased (92). The teeth particularly the incisors, become pitted and eroded. The molars become abraided and the uneven wear seriously hinders mastication. In some cases the pulp cavities are exposed (68, 92) and this leads to reluctance by the affected animals to drink cold water (68, 92, 95, 111). Few, if any, dental changes occur if the teeth have been fully developed prior to the ingestion of fluorine, although bone changes may be induced at any age (85). The fluorine content of the bones and teeth increases in proportion to the amount and duration of the intake. Since most food stuffs contain traces of fluorine, all animal bones which have been examined have been found to contain this element. While the amount of fluorine immobilised in this way increases with the age of animal (38, 42, 50), the concentration found in normal bones' is generally between 0.01 and 0.15 per cent of the bone ash (7, 13, 18, 48, 50, 54, 68, 69, 85, 101, 102). This is slightly more than is found in the ash of whole teeth (13, 68, 85, 91, 102), the dentine of which contains more than is found in the enamel (13, 101). Ingestion of quantities of fluorine which apparently exert no untoward effects on the general health of the animal or which bring about no obvious morphological change in its skeleton, may, nevertheless, increase ten to fifteenfold the fluorine content of the bones and teeth (13, 54, 68, 85). Intakes sufficiently large to bring about general toxic effects may enhance the fluorine concentration in the bones and teeth from fifteen to thirty times that of normal (13, 54, 68, 85) and occasionally as much as seventy times the normal fluorine content has been observed in these organs (101). Under such conditions the bone ash may contain up to 2 per cent of fluorine and the ash of the teeth approxi- mately half this amount. The highest concentrations of fluorine occur in the exostoses which contain up to 2.7 per cent; the epiphyses contain less and the compact shaft least of all (85). Cancellous bones may contain from E2
306 Chronic Fluorine Intoxication in Domestic Animals. 20 to 50 per cent more fluorine per unit weight than compact bones (85, 101). While different animals consuming the same diet vary in their capacity to store fluorine, the greater proportion of the fluorine which is retained ap- pears to be laid down in the bones. The long latent period, a year or more in herbivora, during which the animal suffers no apparent untoward effects while steadily ingesting each day an amount of fluorine which eventually proves seriously toxic, may no doubt be explained by a gradual saturation of the skeleton until a stage is reached when its buffering effect is no longer capable of immobilising the greater part of the absorbed fluorine, which is then free to exert general toxic effects (85, 92, 93, 111, 115). There is no general agreement as to the influence of continual ingestion of small amounts of fluorine on the actual percentage of ash in the bones and the teeth. Some investigators have detected no change (11, 53, 60, 68), others have suggested an increase (55, 85), and some an actual decrease (46). An increase in the percentage of magnesium and a decrease in the carbon dioxide in the bones has been reported (68), the latter apparently being due to the conversion of the carbonate-apatite of the bone substance to fluora- patite. The fluorine content of the other organs increases also after continual ingestion of materials containing fluorine. The fluorine concentration in the tissues of hens and cows has been reported to increase from two to five times over that found in normal tissues, which is usually between 0.5 and 1 mg. fluorine per 100 g. dry matter (13, 54). The thyroid of a cow has been report- ed to contain 160 mg. fluorine per 100 g., two hundred and forty times the amount found in normal animals (13). The fluorine content of the blood of cows has been reported to increase from 0.2 to 0.6 mg. per 100 ml. as a result of fluorine feeding (37), and a similar increase from 0 to 0. 15 mg. per 100 ml. has been described in hens under similar conditions (94). Eggs-produced by hens receiving abnormal amounts of fluorine in their diet have been reported to contain from 0.05 to 0.2 mg. per 100 g. (89, 94), most of it being concen- trated in the lipoid fraction of the yolk (89). The milk of cows ingesting re- latively large quantities of fluorine has been found by one observer (91) to be normal and by another (63) to contain an abnormal amount of fluorine. Atrophy of the spongiousa, defective and irregular calcification of the newly formed osseous tissue, and active periosteal bone formation, which is considered to resemble the histological picture of osteomalacia, has been described in the bones of pigs, of cattle and of sheep suffering from the chronic effects of ingestion of fluorine (68, 73, 92, 101). Hypoplasia of both the enamel and the dentine of the teeth of cattle (92) and of pigs (68, 101) has been des- cribed. Changes of a degenerative type have frequently been reported in the kidneys (68, 92, 101, 107) and in the livers (82, 92, 101, 119) of pigs, cattle and sheep, and in the suprarenals, heart muscle and central nervous system of cattle (92, 101). Other effects of fluorine poisoning which have been described are reduced milk production in cows and goats (15, 64, 92, 95), and reduced egg produc- tion in poultry (12, '60, 94). These, no doubt are correlated with lessened food consumption. Diuresis (68, 101) and increased water consumption (44, 68, 82, 101) have been observed to occur in pigs, and diarrhA. W. PEIRCE. 307 frequent symptom in cattle, sheep and hens, (10, 12, 99, 101). An apparent increase of the vitamin C content of the various organs of the cow has been reported (93). Sheep and calves have been observed to become anæmic and to exhibit photophobia (101, 107). Transitory glycosuria has been ob- served in lambs (51), the coagulation time of the blood is believed to be in- creased in the cow (92), decreased in poultry (68), and to remain unchanged in pigs (101). The plasma phosphatase is considered to be increased in cows (87), but the results of other observations with cows (37) and with sheep (86) seem to be too variable to allow any generalization. Calcium retention is reported to be increased in cattle (37), and to decrease (46, 82) or remain stationery (56) in pigs. Phosphorus retention is considered to be unfavour- ably influenced in cattle (37). Serum calcium has been reported to be lowered in young chicks but not in mature poultry (60), and serum calcium and phos- phorus have been found to remain unchanged in cows (37). Earlier eruption of the permanent incisors has been observed in sheep (85) although the con- trary has been noted in children (1, 72). Ingestion of fluorine has been found to exert no effect on the kidney phosphates of chickens (60). Wool production in sheep is not seriously affected (85). Chronic fluorosis has not so far been found to have any specific effect on the reproduction of cows (39, 92, 95) or of pigs (44, 45, 68). The results of feeding hens with rock phosphate containing fluoride on the hatchability of their eggs were uncertain (53). TOXICITY OF FLUORINE FOR DIFFERENT ANIMALS The amount of fluoride necessary to bring about toxic symptoms depends on a number of factors, of which the nature of the compound, the duration and mode of intake, the nature and amount of other dietary, constituents and the species and age of the animal, are important. Many authors have neither stated the daily fluorine intake of their experimental animals nor reported data from which this may be computed, but it would seem that the approximate minimum amount of fluorine as sodium fluoride or as rock phosphate, which when ingested over a considerable period, will result in the syndrome of chronic fluorosis, is, for the hen 70 mg. for the pig 10 mg. for the cow 3 mg. and for the sheep 3 mg. fluorine per kg. body-weight each day. Amounts too small to affect general health and productivity may, nevertheless, induce dental symptoms and result in an increased fluorine con- tent of the skeleton (13, 39, 85, 92). General symptoms appear in the rat after the addition of 20 mg. fluorine per kg. per day, while dental changes are brought about by as little as 1 mg. per kg. per day (108). Experiments with pigs, calves and chickens (68, 82, 101) indicate that, for the production of general symptoms, sodium fluoride and sodium fluorsilicate are the most toxic source of fluorine ; rock phosphate and phosphatic limestone ; are slightly less, while cryolite and calcium fluoride are the least toxic. A similar grading of toxicity has been observed in laboratory animals (68, 108). From the results of experiments with chickens, it would seem that the toxicity of a definite concentration of fluorine in the ration decreases with increasing age (11, 60). The toxicity of fluorine ingested in solution appears to be greater than when it is consumed in a solid state. Water containing about 0.5 mg. fluorine has been found to be as toxic for sheep as rock phosphate mixed with the ration
308 Chronic Fluorine Intoxication in Domestic Animals. in sufficient quantity to supply 20 mg. per kg. per day (115). This high toxici- ty of dissolved fluorides has also been observed in the rat (33, 77). In man, a steady intake of 01 to 0.15 mg. per kg. body-weight per day in the drinking water has occasioned mottling of the enamel of the teeth (34). An insuffi- cient supply or an imbalance of other inorganic constituents of the food has been observed to influence the toxicity of ingested fluorine, while the addi- tion of extra calcium phosphate to the rations has been reported to reduce the toxicity of calcium fluoride for sheep (116). Simultaneous ingestion of green grass has been shown to reduce the toxi- city of fluorine for pigs (44, 45) and this was confirmed by experiments on rats (41). With the latter animals neither vitamin A, vitamin C nor the minerals in the grass were responsible. Storage of fluorine in the bones was not diminished. Simultaneous administration of aluminium chloride reduces the toxicity of fluorine for rats (48, 90, 105). The effect exerted by fluorine is seemingly enhanced in poorly nourished sheep (86). A relatively low final concentra- tion of fluorine in the diet after cooking with water containing fluorine has been observed to be more toxic for rats than an equal amount of fluorine sup- plied in the drinking water (77). Simultaneous ingestion of desiccated thyroid has been observed to increase the toxicity of fluorine for chicks (88). The toxic effects of fluorine may be less if the intake is intermittent (85, 101). Grazing animals which, as a rule, consume licks spasmodically accord- ing to the season are thus less liable to untoward effects than if the fluorine- containing-phosphate in supplements were regularly ingested. It has been observed (85) that the food consumption and the weight of a sheep decreased or increased according to whether fluorine was or was not given. In a like manner, a decrease in the fluorine intake was observed to lead to the dis- appearance of the symptoms of diarrhA. W. PEIRCE. 309 of long continued secondary chemical changes. Similarly, the fluorine con- tent of phosphatic rock cannot be attributed solely to that originally present in the bird guano or the animal remains which have played a part in the for- mation of the deposits. It is apparent that the fluorine in the rock phosphates, like that in fossil bones and teeth, results from long contact with fluorine- bearing waters which transform the hydroxy-and carbonate-apatites par- tially or wholly into fluorapatite. In the geologically older continental deposits, this transformation is more or less complete, while in the more recent insular deposits the inter action is, as yet only partial (66). The low fluorine to phosphorus ratio of high grade rocks from Curacao Island and from Christmas Island, which contain 0.7 and 1.3 per cent of fluorine, respectively, suggests that calcium phosphate from these sources should be utilised for compounding phosphatic supplements for stock (79). If it were economically possible, the large scale adoption of calcination by steam (29, 79, 96, 97, 98, 109) whereby the fluorine content of rock phos- phate is reduced almost to zero, would remove entirely the risk of chronic fluorosis arising from the ingestion of phosphatic supplements over long periods. Dairy cows have been fed for a period of six years on a mineral supplement containing 2 mg. fluoride per kg. body weight per day and have been reported to have suffered no reduction in performance (39). The fact that the requirements of grazing cattle for phosphatic supplements is seasonal reduces still further the possibility of the untoward effects of chronic fluorosis. Where poisoning is the result of contamination of the air, grazing sites and of water supplied with materials containing fluorine discharged from factories, careful disposal of the gaseous emanations, dust and liquid effluents will overcome the trouble. In regions permeated with fluorine, control of chronic fluorosis appears to be impracticable. REFERENCES (1) Ainsworth, N. J. Brit. Dent. J., 1933, 55, 233 (2) Anonymous. Ann. Rep. Kentucky Agri. Exp. Stat., 1924, 21 (3) Anonymous. Arkansas Agric. Exp. Stat. Bull., 215, 1926, 23. (4) Anonymous. Rep. Indiana Agric. Exp. Stat., 1930, 64 (5) Arbeiten Deutsch, Landwirtsch.310 Chronic Fluorine Intoxication in Domestic Animals. (16) Cristiani, H. Chim. et. Indust., 1927, 17, Special No. p.158. Quoted by Velu Arch. Inst. Pasteur Algerie, 1932, 10, 41 (17) Cristiani, H. Schweiz. med. Wochenscher, 1929, 59, 63 Abstracted in Biol. Abst., 1930, 4, 2611 (18) Cristiani, H. C. R. Soc. Biol, 1930, 103, 292 (19) Cristiani, H. Ibid., 1931, 106, 1108 (20) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ibid, 1925, 92, 139 (21) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ibid, 1925, 92, 946 (22) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ibid, 1925, 92, 1276 (23) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ibid., 1925, 93, 911 (24) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ibid., 1925, 93, 912 (25) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ann. Hyg., 1925, 3, 49 (26) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ann. Hyg., 1925, 3, 210. Quoted by Roholm, Fluo- rine Intoxication (1937) (27) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ann. Méd. Légale, 1926, 6, 336. Quoted by De Eds, Medicine, 1933, 12, 1 (28) Cristiani, H. and Gautier, R. Ann. Hyg. pub. Paris, 1926, 4, 141. Abstracted in Biol. Abst., 1926, 3, 680 (29) Curtins, H. A. Copson, R. L. Brown, E. H. and Pole, G. R. Indust. Eng. Chem., 1937, 29, 766 (30) Dean, H. T. Pub. Health Rep. Washington, 1933, 48, 703 (31) Dean, H. T. Ibid., 1935, 50, 206 (32) Dean, H. T. J. Amer. Med. Assoc., 1936, 107, 1269 (33) Dean, H. T. Sebrell, H. W. Breauk, R. P. and Elvove, E. pub. Health Rep. Washing- ton, 1934, 49, 1075 (34) De Eds. F. Mredicine, 1933, 12, 1 (35) De Nito, G. Riv. Patol. sper., 1928, 3, 36 (36) Du Toit, P. J., Malan, A. I. Groenewald, J. W. and De Kock, G. v. d. W. 18th Rep. Dir. Vet. Serv., Union of S. Africa, 1932, p. 805 (37) Du Toit, P. J., Smuts, D. B. and Malan, A. I. Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci., 1937, 8, 359 (38) Ellis, G. and Maynard, L. A. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 1936, 35, 12 (39) Elmslie, W. P. Proc. Amer, Soc., Animal Prod., 1936, 44 (40) Erausquin, R. Rev. Odont. Buenos Aires, 1934, 22, 430 (41) Evans, R. J. and Phillips, P. H. Private Communication, 1939 (42) Evans, R. J., Phillips, P. H. and Hart, E. B. J. Dairy Sci., 1938, 21, 81 (43) Faes, H. Les Dommages Causes aux Cultures parles Usines Electro chiniques, Paris, 1921. Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxication (1937) (44) Fargo, J. M. Bohstedt G., Hart, E. B. and Phillips, P. H. Proc. Amer. Soc Animal Prod., 1933 (1934), 138 (45) Fargo, J. M., Bohstedt, G., Phillips, P. H. and Hart, E. B. Proc. Amer. Soc Animal Prod., 1938, 122 (46) Forbes, E. B. et al. Ohio Agric. Exp. Stat. Bull. No. 347, 1921 (47) Fresenius, W. Ztschr. Untersuch, Nahr. Genussmittel., 1902, 5, 1035 (48) Gaud, M., Charnot, A. and Langlais, M. Bull. Inst. Hyg. Maroc, 1934, Nos. 1 and 2 (49) Gautier, A. C. R. Acad. Sci., 1914, 158, 159 (50) Gautier, A. and Clausmann, P. C. R. Acad. Sci., 1913, 156, 1425 (51) Goldenberg, L. J. Physiol, Pathol, gén., 1928, 26, 426 (52) Gruber, M. Ost. Sanitatsw., 1900, 12, 53. Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxica- tion (1937) (53) Halpin, J. G., and Lamb, A. R. Poultry Sci. 1932, 11, 5 (54) Haman, K., Phillips, P. H. and Halpin, J. G. Poultry Sci., 1936, 15, 154 (55) Hart, E. B. McCollum, E. V. and Fuller, J. G. Wisconsin Agri. Exp. Stat. Res. Bull., 1, 1909 (56) Hart, E. B., Steenbock, H. and Fuller, J. G. Wisconsin Agri. Exp. Stat. Res. Bull. 30, 1914 (57) Hart, G. H. Calfornia Cattleman, 1936, 1, 14 (58) Haselhoff, F., and Lindau, G. Die Beschadigung der Vegetation durch Rauch, Berlin, 1903, 257. Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxication (1937)
A. W. PEIRCE. 311 (59) Haubner. Arch. wiss. prakt. Tierheik., 1878, 4, 97. Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxication (1937) (60) Hauck, H. M., Steenbock, H., Lows, J. T. and Halpin, J. G. Poultry Sci., 1933, 12, 242 (61) Heiss, E. Ztschr. Biol, 1876, 12, 151 (62) Hennemann, W. Diss. Hannover, 1931. Abstracted in Munch, tierarztl. Wochen- schr., 1934, 85, 349 (63) Huffman, C. F. Quoted by Evans et al. J. Dairy Sci., 1938, 21, 81 (64) Hupka, E. and Gotze. Deutsch. tieraztl. Wochenschr., 1931, 39, 203 (65) Hupka, E. and Luy. P. Arch. wiss, prakt. Tierheilk., 1929, 60, 21, Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxication (1937) (66) Jacob, K. D., Hill, W. L. Marshall, H. L. and Reynolds, D. S. U. S. Dept. Agric. Tech. Bull. 364, 1933 (67) Kennard, D. C. and White, P. S. Ohio Agric. Exp. Stat. Monthly Bull 1922, 7, 171 (68) Kick, C. H. et al. Ohio Agric. Exp. Stat. Bull. 558, 1935 (69) Klement, R. Ber. deutsch. Chem. Gesellsch., 1935, 68, 2012 (70) Konantz, W. A. Moorman Mineral Exp. Stat. Bull. 5, 1924. Quoted by Kick. et al., Ohio Agric. Exp. Stat. Bull., 558, 1935 (71) Kotz. A. Abegg's Handb. anorg. Chem., Leipzig. 1913, Vol. iv (2), p. 25 (72) Lemmon, J. R. Texas State J. Med., 1934, 30, 332 (73) Lilleegen, K. Norsk Vet., 1934, 46, 68 (74) Luy. P. and Thormahlen, E. Arch. wiss. prakt. Tierheilk., 1931, 64, 144. Abs- tracted in Nutrit. Abst. Rev., 1932, 1, 763 (75) Maercker, M. Das Flussaureverfahren in der Spiritus-fabrikation. Berlin 1891. Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxication (1937) (76) Malan, A. I. and Du Toit, P. J. 18th Rep. Dir. Vet. Serv. Union of S. Africa, 1932, 677 (77) Marcovitch, S., Shuey, G. A. and Stanley, W. W. Tennessee Agric. Exp. Stat. Bull. 162, 1937 (78) Marshall, H. L. Reynolds, D. S. Jacob, K. D. and Rader, L. F. (Jr) Indust. Eng. Chem., 1935, 27, 205 (79) Marston, H. R. J. Counc. Sci. Indust, Res. Austral, 1935, 8, 293 (80) Mayrhoffer, J. Ber. 10. Versamml. Bayr. Vertreter angew. Chem. Augsburg, 1891, 127 (81) McClure, F. J. Physiol, Rev., 1933, 13, 277 (82) McClure, F. J. and Mitchell, H. H. J. Agric. Res., 1931, 42, 363 (83) Ost. H. C hem, Zeitung, 1896, 20, 165 (84) Ost. H. Ztschr. angew. Chem., 1907, 20, 1689 (85) Peirce, A. W. Commonwealth Counc. Sci. Indust. Res. Austral, Bull. 121, 1938 (86) Peirce, A. W. Unpublished data (1938) (87) Phillips, P. H. Science, 1932, 76, 239 (88) Phillips, P. H. English, H. E. and Hart. E. B. J. Nutrition, 1935, 10, 399 (89) Phillips, P. H. Halpin, J. G. and Hart, E. B. Ibid, 1935, 10, 93 (90) Phillips, P. H. and Hart E. B. Wisconsin Agric. Exp. Stat. Bull 438, 1937, 141 (91) Phillips, P. H. Hart, E. B. and Bohstedt, G. J. Biol. Chem., 1934, 105, 123 (92) Phillips, P. H. Hart, E. B. and Bhostedt. G. Wiscosin Agric. Exp. Stat. Res. Bull., 123 (93) Phillips, P. H. and Stare, F. J. Biol. Chem., 1934, 104, 351 (94) Purjesz, B. Berkessy, L., Gonczi, K. and Kovacs-Oskolas, M. Arch. exp. Pathol. Pharmakol., 1934, 176, 578 (95) Reed, O. E. and Huffman, C. F. Michigan Agric. Exp. Stat. Bull. 105, 1030 (96) Reynolds, D. S. Jacob, K. D. and Rader, L. F. (Jr.) Indust. Eng. Chem., 1934, 26, 406 (97) Reynolds, D. S. Jacob, K. D. Marshall, H. L. and Rader, L. F. (Jr.). Ibid, 1935, 27, 87 (98) Reynolds, D. S. Marshall, H. L., Jacob, K. D. and Rader, L. F. (Jr.). Ibid., 1936, 28, 678 (99) Roholm, K. Arch, wiss, prakt. Tierheilk, 1934, 67, 420
312 Chronic Fluorine Intoxication in Domestic Animals. (100) Roholm, K. J. Indust, Hyg., 1937, 19, 126 (101) Roholm, K. Fluorine Intoxication, London 1937, H. K. Lewis (102) Salinas Y Ferrer T. Thesis, Madrid, 1934. Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxica- tion (1937) (103) Schroder, J. V. and Reuss, C. Die, Beschadigung der Vegetation durch Rauch, Berlin, 1883, 98, and 171. Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxication (1937) (104) Sette, N. C. R. Soc. Biol, 1928, 98, 1094 (105) Sharpless, G. R. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 1936, 34, 562 (106) Sharpless G. R. and McCollum, E. V. J. Nutrition, 1933, 6, 163 (107) Slagsvold, L. Norsk Vet., 1934, 46, 2. Quoted by Roholm, Fluorine Intoxication (1937) (108) Smith, M. C. and Leverton, R. M. Indus. Eng. Chem., 1934, 26, 791 (109) St. Jacques, C. Indust, Eng. Chem. News. Ed., 1937, 15, 29 (110) StTHE PARASITIC ENVIRONMENT AND PLAN OF CONTROL BY T. W. M. CAMERONDirector, Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Macdonald College, P.Q. (Reprinted from the Canadian Journal of Comparative Medicine, Vol. 3, No. 8, August, 1939) THE parasitic existence of a parasite is dependent on its finding a suitable environment in which it can mature and reproduce. FOUR SETS OF FACTORS ARE NECESSARY TO ENSURE THIS (a) Successful Admission to the Host.314 Parasitic Environment and Plan of Control. extent may stop short at full maturity; the parasite may never be able to reproduce. On the other hand, it may become mature but not fully so; the adults may be small, the egg output reduced and so on. To enable these to be distinguished from each other, the first is called ' partial incompatibility ', the second ' partial compatibility '. None of these conditions has any con- nexion with a host reaction; they merely define the type of environment that the helminth finds in the host. In complete incompatibility and complete compatibility, no host reaction can occur, but in both partial incompatibility and partial compatibility, a reaction may or may not be present, and this reaction may be directed towards the effects of the parasite or towards the presence of the parasite. The reaction of the host to the presence of the parasite is termed ' re- sistance '. When the resistance is sufficiently high to prevent the parasite from reproducing (i.e. producing eggs or larvae) it is termed ' absolute re- sistance '. This may act at any part of the parasite's life, prior to the actual production of eggs or larvae and it is possible to conceive of it being so pro- nounced as to destroy the parasite immediately on entry. This theoretical conception, which may be referred to as ' virtual resistance', has the same result as complete incompatibility, but differs from it in that it assumes a reaction on the part of the host; complete incompatibility on the other hand, assumes an unsuitability of environment, not necessarily inimical to the para- siteT. W. M. CAMERON 315 theoretical concepts . However, any particular state is true absolutely, not comparatively, for any individual worm. This scheme accordingly proposes the recognition of five concepts in the relation between host and helminth parasite. Compatibility and incompatibility, which refer to the environment as it exists before the invasion by the parasite; resistance, which refers to the reaction of the environment to the presence of the helminth ; and tolerance and intolerance, which refer to the reaction of the environment to the effects of the helminth. The intricate host-parasite relationship which exists is one of fundamental importance in pathology and medicine. From the point of view of control and prevention, however, the most important fact is that there is, in nature, a host specificity which, because of unsuitability of the host or the resistance of the host, renders many species of animals incapable of infection with certain parasites. So far as our present conception of the internal parasites of domesticated animals is concerned it is probably true to say that the ideal of control is their complete extermination. This implies a degree of knowledge which we do not yet possess as well as a whole-hearted and complete cooperation between all interested parties. Accordingly, our present aim must be the reduction in numbers to such an extent that the parasites do not cause any appreciable economic loss. Simultaneously, of course, laboratory and field investigations on the details of life-cycles and bionomics of these parasites must be prose- cuted with the utmost vigour and an intensive educational campaign carried out among all those interested in the health of domestic animals. There are signs that both of these aims will be kept well in sight in the future ; it is regrettably true that neither has received its due attention in the past. It is true also that our real knowledge is still extremely meagre. We do know that various animals parasites cause application of what little knowledge we do have, could even now produce results of incalculable value to farmers and to all who depend, directly or indirectly on animal husbandry. Before the application of control measures can be discussed, it is desirable to recall several fundamental principles. I. Under natural conditions, parasites are more or less specific to a single species or a group of closely related species of animals. In general, it may be taken that parasites of ruminants are not transmissible to horses, pigs and poultry nor those of the latter to each other. However, many parasites of wild ruminants are transmissible to domesticated ruminants, of wild carnivores to dogs, cats and foxes, of wild birds to domestic ones, and so on. The important exceptions to this generalization include the flukes (many of which inhabit a wide variety of hosts), the Trichina, some members of the genus Trichostrongylus and some of the larval stages of the cestodes of carnivores. II. Metazoan parasites cannot complete their entire life-cycle within the same animal, any more than they can live a free independent existence. At one stage or another they must leave the host to undergo some form of development outside of it316 Parasitic Environment and Plan of Control. groups, disease depends on numbers, but whereas the entrance of a single bacterium into the body may cause disease, the entrance of a single larval worm usually does not. Parasitic disease depends, therefore, on actual numbers entering the body. III. The stages which leave the body, are never immediately infective. Some essential development must take place before they are ready to re- enter and this development takes a definite period of time and requires a definite set of favourable conditionsT. W. M. CAMERON 317 rather than to confine oneself to a single method. Control may be nation- wide or it may be individual. Individual control is at best a palliative, and compaigns directed over a wide area are infinitely more satisfactory. This not only involves cooperation between veterinarians, agriculturists, adminis- trators, and parasitologists, but it involves careful coordination as well. A central authority and enabling legislation are almost essential, but the legislation to be successful must come as the result of a demand from the majority of the farmers involved. A central laboratory with a good informa- tion service is also desirable, with adequately staffed branch or associate laboratories throughout the country. Control measures consist in breaking at some point or another, the es- sential life-cycle of the parasite. If more than one point be attacked, the chances of successful results are increased. These measures may be discussed conveniently in several groups, although, it must be understood that such a hard and fast division as is here adopted, does not occur in nature and that methods described under one may be equally applicable under another. The parasite may be attacked at one or other of the following points in its life-cycle: A. While in the ovum or as a young developing larva. B. During the developed infective stage, which does not grow and ' rests ' until it enters the host. C. Before entrance of this larva into the host. D. Within the intermediate host or vector, within which A. and B. may be found and which may be the means of entry to the host. E. During the parasitic stages in the host. These methods aim at the elimination of the parasite entirely. How- ever, we know that disease depends on numbers and other factors and it is well also to discuss what these are and how the numbers or the effects of the parasite may be reduced. A. METHODS OF DESTROYING THE EGGS OR PRE-INFECTIVE LARVAE These are those stages of the parasites passed in the faeces as well as the subsequent stages which develop therein. (In a small minority of cases the larvae are not passed in the faeces, but may leave by the mouth or the urinary system or be abstracted from the blood by blood-sucking animals, or may come to rest in the host's muscles). As we know of no efficient method of destroying the eggs in the host (except in the case of some of the trematodes) this division is accordingly mainly concerned with manure and its treatment. It is not a new subject, having been advocated for years in connexion with human hookworm disease, but curiously enough very little indeed has been done about it in connexion with parasites of animals in which it is infinitely more important. There are two ways of treating manure. The first is to disregard its parasite content and concentrate on its dispersal in such a way as to keep it out of harm's way. The second is to treat it in such a way that its parasite content is destroyed. Some twenty years ago, the late Dr Maurice C. Hall stated that this subject offered a field for a large amount of investigation but this investigation had not been done,
318 Parasitic Environment and Plan of Control. ' Broadly speaking ', he said, ' one would have to determine how long the larvae and eggs of the various species of worms involved live in manure piles, in spread manure, in closely packed manure ; the effect of sunlight, of moisture, of various chemicals, the chemicals in turn being of a nature not to injure the fertilizer value of the manure. There are practically no data on this and little could be surmised without such data'. Since that was written a considerable amount of investigation has been carried out on this subjectT. W. M. CAMERON 319 is now almost routine practice. Dry quarters for any species of animal will always assist in reducing internal parasitism. In the open, short grass assists drying and is frequently of value in re- ducing the infectivity of pastures, as of course, is drainage. Very wet pas- tures, however, are not suitable environments for the development of most nematodes (except Dictyocaulus of horses, sheep, and oxen). Damp pastures are more generally favourable for parasitism and every effort should be made to render them unsuitable for the development of eggs into larvae. (d) Chemical treatment.FLEECE DENSITY AND THE HISTOLOGY OF THE MERINO SKIN* BY H. B. CARTER, B.V.Sc. Division of Animal Health and Nutrition, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (Reprinted from the Australian Veterinary Journal, Vol. XV, No. 5, October 1939) INTRODUCTION THE study of morphological variations in the fleeces of the important breeds of domestic sheep has in general been made without reference to the fundamental histology of the skin within which the fibres are formed and by which they are maintained, normally, in a state of active growth. The literature relating to the histology of ovine skin is very limited, and the observations recorded are mainly of a general academic nature for the purposes of comparative zoology. Such studies scarcely bear any direct relation to specific problems of sheep husbandry and economic wool production. The trend of histological work has seldom passed beyond the general observation of the individual fibre and follicle with the associated sudoriferous and sebace- ous glands, though a small series of studies has been made of the embryology of these structures. The specific and detailed histology of the skin of any single breed has only once been recorded [Tänzer, 1926] in such a manner that the facts can be considered a valuable aid to the solution of problems which face the practical breeder. The Merino has been comparatively neglected in this respect, and the relative absence of useful detail regarding skin structure and its variations in this breed constitutes one of the present most serious handicaps to progress in biological research on many problems of wool pro- duction, particularly in the field of genetics. It is the aim of this brief paper to draw attention to the potential value of histological studies of the Merino skin in leading to a more complete under- standing of the fleece and its constituent fibres. It is believed that the direct study of skin structure when properly related to the appropriate fleece charac- ters will provide one of the most valuable aids to research in progressive breeding for the improvement of Merino wool that is available to the scientific investigator. As an illustration it is proposed to consider some fundamental aspects of the follicle population in the skin and to indicate their significance in relation to fleece density in the Merino. It must, however, be accepted that for the purpose of this paper the cardinal fact on which the measurement of fleece density depends and in terms of which the widest variations may occur in the Merino, is the number of fibres per unit area of skin. It is to this aspect of fleece density alone that reference will be made here. Nor will the specific economic importance of this character of the Merino fleece be considered beyond stating that it has always been one of the most important aims of the Australian breeders to improve the density of the Merino fleece and by so doing to increase the total amount of wool produced by their flocks. * Paper presented at Annual General Meeting A. V. A., August, 1939, (320)
H. B. CARTER 321 FOLLICLE TYPES IN THE MERINO SKIN No special attention has been drawn to the existence of more than one type of follicle in the skin of the Merino, though the fact is well known as a general feature in all mammals. The classical description of a wool follicle in available works of reference depicts this structure as being characteristically associated with two accessory glands, the sebaceous and the sudoriferous and with a small involuntary muscle, the m. arrector pili. However, in the Merino such follicles, provided with the full complement of accessory structures, con- stitute in fact only a small fraction of the total number even in animals whose skin carries an extremely sparse population. The majority of follicles con- tributing wool fibres to the Merino fleece, though seldom lacking a sebaceous gland, are not provided with either a sudoriferous gland or a m. arrector pili. These different anatomical relationships make possible a fundamental classifica- tion of follicle types into : (i) primary follicles, which are distinguished by their association with (a) a simple coiled tubular sudoriferous gland, (b) a well- defined bilobar acinous sebaceous gland, and (c) a double band of involuntary muscle, the m. arrector pili ; and (ii) secondary follicles, with which are typically, but not invariably, associated only the smaller sebaceous glands, irregular in size and shape, though generally of the simple acinous type. Differential counts of these follicles are readily made in tangential sections of skin at the appropriate level that is, in a region which usually lies within 100 to 300 microns of the epithelial surface, the variation occurring according to the average depth of follicle implantation. In the adult Merino skin the secondary follicles in the more superficial layers of the dermis are gathered into compact clusters of irregular size sur- rounded by clearly defined trabeculae of dermal connective tissue. Toward the epithelial surface in the region of the sebaceous glands the primary follicles are invariably found slightly removed into the connective tissue stream and consistently to one side of the aggregation of secondaries. This typical relationship is lost in the deepest levels of the dermis surrounding the papilae of the follicles which are dispersed more widely in the available space, with only the faintest suggestion of the clustering so apparent toward the surface. In order to observe the characteristic distribution of the follicle population and to make a satisfactory differentiation, it is necessary to use sections no deeper than the level of the sebaceous glands. Here the primaries may be readily detected as much by their relative position as by their structural associations and cytology. The method of charting the follicular arrangement has been noted elsewhere [Carter, 1939], but it is important to refer to the sys- tem of recording. It was observed in the course of collateral studies on the development of the follicle population that the relative numbers of primary and secondary follicles were of the greatest importance. The relationship may be conveniently summarized as a ratio in the equation : P: (P+S) = l:x, where P = number of primary follicles per unit area and S = number of secondary follicles per unit area. To appreciate the importance of this simple relation some elementary facts in the ontogeny of the Merino require to be noted. Primary follicles F 2
322 Fleece Density and the Histology of the Merino Skin in this breed are the first to differentiate from the basal layer of the embryonic epidermis and appear during a comparatively restricted phase of fleece deve- lopment in foetus, In the Merino lamb primary follicles appear to produce almost the entire population of birth-coat kemp fibres, which are gradually shed at varying intervals after birth. These are replaced ultimately by true wool fibres, though in some individuals and in some regions of the skin more than others they may be followed by a second generation of large persistent hairy fibres often marked by the presence of a fragmentary medulla. Even when not distinguished by some degree of medullation, mature primary fibres may often be recognized not only by their position in the groups, but also as the largest fibres of the population. Secondary follicles, on the other hand, are initiated at a later stage in foetal development. They increase relatively more slowly in number, the period during which they are differentiated extending roughly over the last third of the gestation period, terminating usually at or perhaps shortly after birth, secondary follicles never appear to produce anything other than the true non-medullated wool fibre in the Merino. Broadly speaking, therefore, the primary follicles tend to contribute the coarsest fibres to the population and secondary fibres the finest. DISCUSSION From what has been briefly stated here, the general significance of the descriptive terms ' primary ' and' secondary ' is apparent. It becomes clearer, also, that a simple variation in the relative numbers of primary and secondary follicles may have a profound influence on the gross characteristics of the Merino fleece. The significance of the P : (P+S) ratio may therefore be con- siderable. The observation of type differences in the follicle population adds much to the importance and value of using the skin itself in the study of fleece characteristics, but especially of fleece density. A ready differentiation of fibre types into primary and secondary populations would be quite impossible in the Merino if fleece samples alone provided the material. One of the most useful consequences of follicle classification is the element of precision which it introduces into the comparison of individuals. Where, by previous methods of fleece analysis, it was only possible to make density comparisons on the basis of the total population per unit area, now by using skin sections it is possible to apply three principal criteria : (i) The absolute density of the total population of follicles. (ii) The absolute densities of primary and secondary follicles separately. (iii) The relative densities of primary and secondary follicles expressed by the ratio P : (P+S).For example, two animals were shown to have equal absolute densities, at comparable points on the body, of the order of 78 fibres per square milli- meter. By ordinary methods of fleece analysis these two animals would be declared identical in the fibre population density. Examination of the skin, however, revealed that in one case the mean number of primary fibres was 5.25 per square millimeter and in the other 2.75 per square millimeter. Thus the two populations were differently constituted, the former having a P : (P+S) ratio of 1:15.0, the latter a ratio of 1:28.4. By these additional criteria,
H. B. CARTER 323 then, the two sheep were by no means similar. Without the use of histologi- cal methods these differences would have been concealed. Further more, variations were also noted in the arrangement of the population. In the animal with the wider ratio the follicles were arranged in neatly cir- cumscribed clusters, whereas in the skin of the animal with the narrower ratio the follicles were relatively more scattered and the grouping ill- defined. Observation of the arrangement and grouping of follicles therefore may provide a fourth criterion for comparative studies. Within the limits of a single flock considerable variation occurs in these four aspects of the follicle population. No animals have so far been encounter- ed that are even approximately comparable in all respects, though several instances have been noted where a fair degree of similarity was apparent. It must be admitted, however, that sufficiently large numbers have not been examined yet for such individual differences to be adequately classified. In spite of this, there is much to suggest that these histological determinations will provide most useful criteria for genetical experiments. The value of Merino skin as experimental material will be considerably enhanced when studies have been made to define in detail the relationship between skin structure and the fibres of the growing fleece. For instance, it is very probable, though by no means proved that the degree of uniformity in fibre length and fineness could be to some extent anticipated by a considera- tion of the P : (P+S) ratio. From this point of view the ratio may be regarded as indicating the degree of blending of two distinct fibre populations, viz. a coarse fraction consisting mainly of primaries, and a fine fraction consisting of secondary fibres. Furthermore, since primary follicles alone have sudoriferous glands associated with them and possess also the largest and most obvious sebaceous glands, it is conceivable that variations in the absolute and relative numbers of the follicle types would influence appreci- ably the quantity and chemical characteristics of the ' yolk '. If these and other probable relationships between different types of skin and fleece structure can be established on a proper basis, then the study of Merino skin histology must come to occupy an important place in research aiming to effect an improvement not only in quantity, but also in the quality of our wool. REFERENCES Tänzer, E. (1926) : ' Haut und Haar beim Karakul in rassenanalytischen Vergleich'. Otto Thiele : Halle Carter, H. B. (1939): ' A Histological Technique for the Estimation of Follicle Popu- lation per Unit Area in the Sheep ' (unpublished).
ABSTRACTS La Nature de l'Atavisme. J. LEÔP. FRATEUR. (Emeritus Professor, University of Louvain) (1939). Annales de Medecine Veterinaire 11, 461-476. ATAVISM is the reappearance of an ancestral character when that character, though present, is not manifested directly by the parents (i.e. is latent). This latency can be (a) geno typic, i.e. resulting from the inactivity of actual hereditary characters, or (b) phenotypic, i.e. due to the absence of environmental conditions suitable to the mani- festation of that particular character. Real hereditary characters, as distinguished from acquired characters, are permanent and, though they can be modified by environ- ment, they will continue to be transmitted from generation to generation through the process of reproduction. Hereditary character is nearly always composed of a certain number of components of which it is the result. These components are as old as the species to which the indivi- dual manifesting them belongs and cannot be spontaneously generated. The gametes alone are capable of transmitting hereditary characters and. the substratum of these, which represents the hereditary character, is an integral part of the germ cells of new individuals. Hereditary characters are transmitted (a) jointly by the ovum and sper- matazoon (homozygous characters, duplex or pure) or (b) through only one of these re- productive organisms (heterozygous characters, simple or impure). A character mani- festing itself as a result of the foreign element in the reproductive cells is not hereditary and will persist no longer than the foreign element which causes it (e.g. the transmission of a contagious or parasitic disease.) There are two types of acquired characters which are frequently confused (a) pheno- typic modifications and (b) acquired characters proper. Phenotypic modifications are variations of characters dependent upon environment. Acquired characters proper, however, appear anew in any given generation and disappear at the end of it without leaving a trace. They are acquired from without, hereditary characters come from within. There is, however, in creatures which evince these acquired characters, a heredi- tary aptitude which permits of their acquisition (e.g. man is hereditarily articulate but the ability to talk in any particular language is acquired) All hereditary characters are the result of a well defined invariable chain of biochemi- cal reactions, the final results of which vary only according to the environment in which they take place. Each hereditary character is independent of other hereditary characters and has its own structure which is nearly always complex, composed of a number of primary components. Once dissociated, they are capable of recombining themselves in all conceivable variat ons, thus producing a series of new, secondary characters, but whatever may be the combination in which the components are engaged, they never lose their individuality. When two heterozygous individuals unite a certain percentage of their descendants present a common character. Genotypical short termed atavism is the phenomenon of the reappearance in a des- cendant or a recessive character which manifested itself previously in some ancestor, without being apparent in the immediate parents. A character is recessive when it com- prises fewer of the primary components than another character of the same species. A dominant character is one which completely conceals other characters which are present. It should be noted that some characters assume complete dominance (qualitative) and others only a partial dominance (quantitative). A dominant qualitative character (simple or double) can entirely obscure a recessive character with which it is associated. A quantitative character on the other hand, only dominates the character on which it super- imposes itself, if it is double or homozygous. In the single state, the other character is partially manifested (e.g. the white quantitative character of an Andulasian fowl super- imposed on a black colour is white when it is homozygous or double, and grey when it is heterozygous or simple.) Genotypical long term atavism is the phenomenon caused by the combination of pri- mary characters into the ancient hereditary character (e.g. the reappearance of characters existing in the species). Primitive character (always complex and formed of a large number of primary components) disappears following dissociation of the components (324)
ABSTRACTS 325 and these, as a result of heterozygosis, produce a very considerable number of secondary characters. This is responsible for the multiple characters of our domestic animals, as well as the genotypical varieties of wild animals. When, however, by chance, two in- dividuals, possessing between them every one of the original components, unite, they reproduce the primitive character (e.g. the appearance of the characteristic coat of the wild rabbit following crossing between two subjects, neither of which showed in themselves any wild characters). Real atavism is only manifes ed through hereditary characters, maintained through generations of beings more or less heterozygous. Atavism of acquired characters (non- genotypical) is transitory and ceases to exist when the possibility of acquiring them dis- appears. [J. F. S.] Differentiation between the sheep and the goat in supervised Senegalese Abattoirs (Differenciation de la Chevre at du Mouton dans les Abattoirs surveilles du Senegal). R-. LARRAT and LAMINE DIAGNE (DAKAR). Bull. Ser. Zoo. et Epizoo. de l'Afrique Occident 2, iv pp. 19-23. THE anatomical and physical distinctions between sheep and goats is commercially less important in French East Africa than in other countries. Lack of selective breeding has led to convergence towards a single intermediate type of animal. This complicates the work of meat inspectors. The complete carcass provides an insufficient basis for differentiation and frequent errors are made, even when a comparative study is made of sheep and goat carcasses placed side by side. The problem commonly resolves itself, not into differentiation between the two species, but into distinguishing between the two morphologically comparable long bodied kinds of sheep and goats [(a) the sheep of the Mauritanian and Soudanese Sahel, (b) the ' Maure ' goat] and the two medium bodied varieties [(a) the short, thickset sheep, (b) the goat of the Senegalese and Soudanese Savanna]. Anatomical signs, described in classic treatises for determining the differences between the two species of animals, are only of limited value here, since there is displayed the whole gamut of intermediate signs between the two species. Physical characteristics such as the flesh, fat, smell and skin equally provide an uncertain basis for distinction. The only certain indication upon which the meat inspector can, and should, depend, in Senegal, to distinguish sheep from goats is the presence or absence of the supracostal scalene. In the case of medium bodied sheep and goats, one may also add the curvature of the sternum. All other characters said to be distinctive have only a relative value [J. F. S.]. Comparative value of Napier and Sudan grass when used as soiling crops for dairy cows. L. H. HENKE and G. W. H. Goo (1939). J. Dairy. Sci. 22, 1007-1010. IN regions remote from Honolulu, cattle graze the year around; near the city, how- ever, they receive their roughage from soiling crops fed green. Concentrates are added. Napier grass (Pennisetum purpureum) and Sudan grass (Sorghum vulgare suda- nense) are commonly used. This study compares them as soiling crops for milking cows. A four week reversal system of feeding was used in four 12-week trials, three with six and one with eight cows ; two lots were made in each case on the basis of milk production, body weight, age, days after calving and expected freshing date. Advanced pregnancy was avoided. Data from the first week in each of three 4-week periods within each trial were not considered ; this week was allowed for changes of feed. In the first two trials the roughage was fed without chopping, whereas it was put through a silage cutter before being fed in the last two. Daily samples of green fodder and orts were taken and moisture was determined. Composites for each three week experimental period were used for crude protein, ether extract, nitrogen-free extract, fibre and ash determinations. On the basis of the Morrison Standard ample protein and total nutrients were provided to all animals whether Napier or Sudan grass was fed. The animals were kept in small paddocks.
326 ABSTRACTS Roughages were provided in racks and orts were determined every 24 hours. Con- centrates were allowed twice daily according to production during the first two 4-week periods ; during the last 4-week period the amount was adjusted to equal the average of the first two, on a daily basis. Live weights and 48-hour composite milk samples for butter fat determinations were taken weekly. Milk production averaged 8.66 per cent higher with Sudan grass than with Napier grass. This was a very significant difference statistically, since for a probability of one per cent with 25 degrees of freedom a value of 2.7 for t was necessary, whereas these data give a value of 8.8 for t. Butter fat percentage showed a mean gain of 0.11 ±0.0453 per cent with Napier grass over Sudan. Significance at the 5 per cent probability level was indicated by a calculated t value of 2.4. Sudan grass was more palatable, as indicated by an average daily consumption of 58 . 2 lb. as compared to 54.3 lb. of Napier grass. The former is probably a better grass for milk production for this reason. Lower palatability of Napier grass effected lower production because of a smaller intake of protein and total nutrients. [J. N. W.] The formation of a dairy type in native carabacs with a preliminary study on physical measurements. TOMAS V. RIGOR (1939). Philipp. J. Anim. Ind. 6 (3), 277-282. THE carabao is established in the economic life of Filipino farmers as a beast of burden and a producer of meat and milk. The animals are quiet, docile and milk quite well. They supply much of the milk on the Island. A relationship between : ype and production in dairy cattle is known to exist. There- fore, by breeding solely for one of these the attainment of ideals in the other is presupposed. The development of the carabao will closely simulate that of other domestic milking animals ; ideals will be approached by breeding and selection until they are fixed. Such work was suggested by a special committee of the Bureau of Animal Industry in 1933. In 1937 funds were set aside for the purchase of 20 caraballas and one bull. Others were purchased late in 1938. Past attempts at improvement of the native carabao have shown that cross-breeding with the Indian buffalo for dairy and draft purposes has given very encouraging results. A part of this work has been a special study of the relationship between different body measurements in the hope that the evolution of dairy conforma- tion might be facilitated. Measurements which were taken gave the following correlation results : length of body and height, +0.2230±0.1470 ; height and depth of chest,ABSTRACTS 327 Mineral deficiencies cause unthriftiness, poor health, emaciation and disease. Early maturing animals, because of lack of minerals in the blood, fall prey to pneumonia. Ca and P build bone ; the former is especially important in pregnant and high producing cows. As the foetus develops great quantities of this mineral are used in skeleton forma- tion ; in milk secretion Ca is drawn in large amounts from the blood. A milking, preg- nant and growing heifer is especially in need of this mineral. Early maturity is valuable in that a heifer begins to milk as much as a year sooner; she must, however, be well grown to prevent a shorter producing life. Cl produces hydrochloric acid which aids greatly in digestion. Minerals not only build hardier stock, but when added to pastures produce a more luxuriant growth. Ca is stored in the bones. If, therefore, a high producer does not get extra Ca during her dry period there will be little or no reserve at parturition. Such an animal may get milk fever at parturition or her bones may later weaken so as to break easily. Mineral deficiencies in the soil are caused by selling stock, selling milk or improper conservation of manure. A 1000 lb. stear contains 39 .5 to 42 lb. of minerals ; the sale of 100 head of such animals a year removes about 4000 lb. of minerals from the farm. Milk contains nearly 1% minerals. On a farm selling 400 quarts of milk daily nearly 3600 lb. of minerals, therefore, are removed each year. For every 30 cows, nearly 1000 lb. of phos- phoric acid and potash are lost yearly in the manure. There are other losses as minerals leach from the pastures. Mineral deficiencies may be corrected in two possible ways :328 ABSTRACTS The amount of ration, the protein content and its quality must all be considered, there- fore, by the dairymen. Fats, carbohydrates and minerals.ABSTRACTS 329 Besides the 17 ante and 31 post-mortem items and the thoracic measurements, 13 supplementary values were calculated from the two main sets of data. Several obser- vations were also made and recorded. Of 19 measured and calculated items, 17 of which were largely skeletal measurements, of the ante mortem data the arithmetic mean and median were almost identical, showing representative sampling. Thickness of hide and live weight had the highest co-efficients of variation with length of loin next ; the smallest co-efficients of this group were height at withers, depth of chest and length from withers to pin bones respectively. Measure- ments affected by the condition of the animal showed the greatest variations ; those in connexion with body height and length showed the least. In 22 post-mortem items again the arithmetic mean and median were nearly identical. The weights of the pancreas, abdominal fat and thoracic fat gave the highest correlation co-efficients ; the depth length and width measurements of the thoracic cavity the lowest. Correlation co-efficients for groups of organs were of the following order : viceral-fats, digestion system and nervous system, with the highest named first. Weights of live animal, heart and lungs and length of intestines were used in correla- tion studies, over 40 correlations being made. The highest with heart weight were : circumference of heart (+ 0.538±0.031), live weight (+ 0.509 ± 0.031) and body-sur- face area (+ 0.503 ± 0.031); the lowest with wedge shape : width ratio (+ 0.022 ± 0.042). The three named can be considered high and 27 others, which were 0.300 or above, but less than 0.500, can be considered moderate or better than moderate. In the case, of weight of lungs the highest correlation co-efficient was with volume of barrel (+ 0.444±0.035) ; 22 others were 0.300 or above. These were, as a whole, lower than the co-efficients with heart weight. Those with length of intestines were even lower, the highest being with weight of empty intestines (+ 0.387 ± 0.035). Only five others in this case were moderately significant, that is above 0.300 ; the lowest being with rear chest index (+0.004±0.039). In the case of correlation co-efficients with live weight only 12 out of 44 were below 0.300. The highest was body surface area (+ 0.939 ±0.004) followed by volume of barrel (+ 0.838 ± 0.011) and then circumference of fore chest (+ 0.821 ± 0.012). The lowest in this group was weight of brain (+ 0.066 ±0.038). The high correlation co-efficient of live weight with body surface area would be expected since the former has been used in calculating the body surface area for several years. After grouping the ante mortem items into eight groups and the post-mortem items into five, the correlation co-efficients of each group with the weights of live animal, heart and lungs and length of intestine were determined. The high ones in each case were as follows : live weight 0.509, body lengths 0.430, body size group 0.287 and calculated body-bulk values 0.801 with heart weight, lung weight, intestine length and live weight respectively; the highest for all groups combined was 0.502 with live weight followed by 0.335 with heart weight. In comparing the same groups of ante and post-mortem items with depth of chest and width of chest the highest correlation co-efficients were found in each case to be with body circumference (at fore chest only), i.e. (+ 0.796 ± 0.013) and (+0.659 ± 0.020) respectively. However, with all groups combined the co-efficients became + 0.587 and + 0.322 for depth and width of chest respectively. Animals which could be identified as to breed were considered under three heads, viz. Holstein, Shorthorn and Ayrshire-Guernsey-Jersey. Correlation co-efficients of weight of heart and weight of lungs with depth of fore chest and width of fore chest were determined in each case. The higher co-efficient in all cases was with weight of heart, except width of fore chest for the Shorthorn breed when it was higher with weight of lungs. The data were very similar whether based on all or separate breeds. [J. N. W.] Carotene balance and blood-carotene levels in heifers and lactating cows, and their relation to the production of off-flavor milk. C. H. WHITNAH, W. J. PETERSON, F. W. ATKESON and H. W. CANE (1939). Jour. Agric. Res. 58, (5) 343-355. IN a previous study four cows were found (1) to excrete more carotene in the faeces than they ingested and (2) to respond quickly with improved flavour of the milk when a carotene concentrate was added to the ration. The present study, therefore, is
330 ABSTRACTS cerned with the ' relationships of the excretion of carotene in the faeces of cows to carotene intake and to the concentration of carotene in the blood serum'. An earlier study showed that 0.086 per cent of the daily carotene intake of cows stall-fed green rye only was deposited in the butter as carotene and 0.154 per cent as vitamin A ; another with vitamin C showed excretion of body stores. Together they suggested this latter con- dition may also be true in the case of carotene. Six yearling heifers and 17 lactating cows were used. Experimental rations provided from 0.0028 to 2.51 mg. carotene daily per kg. body weight. Winter supplemented rations included atlas sorgo silage, dehydrated fresh green oats or a carotene concentrate. A summer ration including green grass was suddenly changed to beet pulp and grain, an almost carotene-free ration. Spectrophotometric determinations by a modified Guilbert method were made on separate parts of each ration, 24-hour faeces samples and blood taken daily from the juglar vein. Large variations of faecal and blood carotene levels were typical. Averages for three- successive days are used in every case. The amount of carotene excreted by heifers that received cottonseed meal, straw sprinkled with molasses and silage was 3.2 times as much as those getting all but the silage, although the intake was nearly five times as much. When large quantities of the carotene concentrate were suddenly added the low carotene intake group responded much better than the group getting silage. The blood - carotene value of cows on the low protein intake was nearly twice as large as that of heifers on the same ration. Alfalfa fed for 40 days preceding the shorter experimental period in the case of the cows (six weeks for cows and five months for heifers) may have had a residual effect that would have accounted for this. The response in blood carotene to the addition of the carotene concentrate was of the same order in both cows and heifers on low carotene ration. Feeding histories in carotene metabolism are, there- fore, quite important. Substitution of alfalfa, corn and bran for cottonseed meal, straw and molasses increased the carotene intake three times, had little effect on the carotene output: input ratio increased the blood-carotene level more than twice and improved milk flavour. On further increasing the carotene intake by the addition of dehydrated oats, the carotene utilization increased, but this effect gradually disappeared. The authors found that even prolonged feeding of the highest carotene level of winter feeding would not increase the blood-carotene level to that under pasture conditions ; they suggest that there may be other factors in green grass responsible for the higher assimilation of carotene. Animals on grass, yellow corn, bran, alfalfa and silage were suddenly changed to linseed meal, molasses and beet pulp. Carotene output in the faeces dropped 98 per cent and the blood-carotene 42 per cent the first week. After two weeks, however, the latter value was still above that of animals on alfalfa and grain for six weeks. This is further evidence of residual effect or the value of feeding histories in such studies. Classification of lactating cows on the basis of ration usually classified them on the basis of milk that would or would not produce oxidised flavour. With intakes of below 0.075 mg. carotene per kg. body weight the milk developed this defect. In such cases excretion of carotene was usually over 130 per cent of intake. With intakes of above 0.300 mg. per kg. body weight the milk did not develop an oxidised flavour and the out- put of carotene was 100 per cent or less of the intake. The data indicate that at intake levels of 0.306 and 0.266 mg. per kg. body weight the maintenance of high blood-carotene level may compete with the production of milk of a good flavour. The fact, however, that the five lowest carotene intakes were among cows producing good flavoured milk suggests that other causes are also responsible for this flavour defect in milk. Some animals may care for the needs of their own body first, or those with higher blood carotene levels, producing at the same time off-flavoured milk, are less able to convert carotene into vitamin A. [J. N. W.] A consideration of the life-cycle of Fasciola in South Africa. F. G. CAWSTON. (1940). S. A. Med. J. 14, 84. THE author has confirmed the observations of Dr Annie Porter that Lymnæa nata- lensis harbours Cercaria pigmentosa which are the larval stages of Fasciola gigantica, but he found that this infection is very rare in these molluscs. He did not, however, succeed in infecting these molluscs with the miracidia of F. hepatica. Lymnæa trun- Catula occurs in the Union of South Africa, but it is very rare. The author has found only
ABSTRACTS 331 once cerceriæ resembling those of Fasciola from Physopsis africana. The author found that the miracidia of Fasciola escapes from the eggs in water in a test-tube on the 21st day, this finding is in contravention to the observations of Mönnig who observed that in Fasciola the miracidia emerge out of the egg on the 14th day. The author has observed that it is not necessary for the eggs to pass through the gut in order to attain maturity. They can do so even in bile-ducts. The author is of the opinion that molluscs are not infected simply by devouring Fasciola ova which have not had the opportunity of reaching maturity in water. The author concludes with the remarks that Lymnæa natalensis is only an occasional carrier of Fasciola disease in S. Africa and that a search should be made for another intermediate host which may not necessarily be a fresh-water mollusc. [G.D. B.] Mouldy hay a cause of broken wind in horses and abortion in cows and mares. E. MORGAN (1940). Vet. J. 96, 51-53 IN the experience of the author, extending to thirty years in Cardiganshire (Venezuela) the occurrence of broken wind in horses is rare as compared with that in former years. The lower incidence at present is attributed to the better system of storing hay in up-to-date buildings. Previously farmers used to store in badly ventilated mud wall buildings in which the hay bordering on the wall was covered with grey coloured mould. Feeding on mouldy hay resulted in larger number of cases of broken wind. The opinion of several farmers in the locality strongly supported this view. The author states of having observed numerous cases of abortion in mares and cows fed on mouldy hay. He refers to literature on the subject and points out the difference in the clinical manifestation as noticed by him. He also observes that the knowledge of the fungus on hay is meagre and briefly reviews some of the diseases in animals caused by moulds or fungi. [V. R. G.] Fertility in farm animals. A. WALTON, J. EDWARDS and J. HAMOND. (1940). J. Roy. Agric. Soc. Eng. 100, Pt. III, 1-12. THE causes of infertility may be physiological or pathological. Physiological causes may be due to inherent functional or genetical or to environmental factors. Genetical analysis is not possible at present owing to lack of exact methods of measuring fertility. The main physiological factors common to all animals are : fertility in the female, fertility in the male, and the fertility of mating. The lowering of fertility from pathological causes is either direct, due to invasion of the reproductive organs by special micro-organisms, or indirectly due to debilitating diseases. The (primary) fertility of the female or its fecundity depends on the egg-producing capacity of the ovaries. Ovarian activity has two phases which alternate, viz., oestrum, the " heat " period, when the eggs are produced, and dioeslrum, when the corpus luteum is active. Mating rarely occurs in dioestrum, and if so, is not fertile. A state of total inactivity of the reproductive system, anoestrum, can also occur. Fecundity is improved by good nutritional conditions. Secondary fertility, or number of young born, depends on the successful maintenance of the embryo during pregnancy, and foetal atrophy is due to many factors, genetic, physiological and nutritional. Male fertility depends upon the intensity of sperm production in the testis, which is continuous during sexual maturity. Nutritional factors slightly affect this intensity whilst exposure of the scrotum to high temperatures will cause spermatogensis to cease. The sperm ripens to maximum activity in the epididymis. The success of mating depends on the coordination of the many different processes and normal functioning of both male and female reproductive organs, and the reproductive act culminates in the entry of one spermatozoon into the ovum. The chances of fertilization depend on the time interval between mating and ovulation, the length of time the ovum remains fertilizable in the female tract, the number of sper- matozoa which reach the Fallopian tubes and the time taken to make the ascent, and the length of time the spermatozoa can remain in the Fallopian tubes and still be able to fertilize the ovum. Physiological infertility in mares is common ; 40 per cent of Heavy and 33 per cent of Thoroughbreds fail to produce foals after service. This infertility is due to inapprop- riate time of mating during heat, irregularities of the oestrous cycle and using a stallion
332 ABSTRACTS of low fertility (due to low concentrations of spermatozoa in the semen). The diagnosis of pregnancy by the blood serum and the urine tests are described. In cattle, fertility is influenced to a far greater extent by disease such as infection by Brucellus and Trichomonas and other causes and it is difficult to define physiological infertility. The fertility (breeding efficiency) of a herd can best be measured by calculat- ing the ' service record ' or the number of services to produce one pregnancy. This averages 1.7 for normal herds. Temporary sterility may be due to failure of ovarian functioning ; this can usually be overcome by pinching the corpus luteum or punchuring the ovarian cysts. Low fertility in bulls can be overcome by feeding of animal protein or injection of anterior pituitary hormones. Artificial insemination has contributed greatly to the raising of fertility and productivity of farm animals. Semen from bulls collected in an artificial vagina is sufficient for 15 cows and the service records are 1.6-1.7. Deficiency in sperm production has been observed in rams ; the ewe is anoestrus (in temperate zones) from March to July. Too frequent a service by boars reduces the vitality of the sperm, but in the sow, prenatal mortality due to as yet unknown causes is the main factor in defining fertility. [W. L. D.]. The phosphatase test for control of efficiency of rasteurization. H. D. KAY, R. ASCHAFFENBURG AND F. K. NEAVE. Technical Communication No. 1 of the Imperial Bureau of Dairy Science, Shinfield, Reading. October 1939, pp. 53. THE original phosphatase test of Kay and Graham is now six years old and the modified test, four years old. Some later modifications of the test originating from the "United States of America have also been introduced. This monograph describes the progress made with the test during this period. It may be said that the test is by far the most satisfactory test yet devised for control- ling milk pasteurization and this is accepted by health authorities and dairy scientists. The test depends on the destruction by heat of the enzyme, phosphatase, in milk at time- temperature combinations somewhat similar to those recognised in official commercial pasteurization (30 minutes at 145°F); the test is linked up with the aims of pasteuriza- tion in that a 96 per cent destruction of phosphatase takes slightly longer heat treatment than the complete destruction of a pathogene such as Myco. tuberculosis. The test depends on the measurement of phosphatase activity. The enzyme is allowed to react in a buffered solution for a definite length of time on di-sodium pheny phosphate (sodium pREVIEW The Breeding of Herbage Plants in Scandinavia and Finland. Joint Publication No. 3 of the Imperial Agricultural Bureaux, Great Britain, 1940. Price 4s. ARRANGEMENTS have been made between the various Imperial Agricultural Bureaux whereby any publication upon the preparation of which two or more Bureaux collaborate shall be included in a new series entitled Joint Publications. It has been decided to regard the earlier Joint Publications on " Vernalization and phasic development of plants " and " Erosion and soil conservation ", as Nos. 1 and 2 in this series. Other Joint Publications produced in recent years but already out of print have not been given numbers in the series. The Imperial Bureau of Plant Breeding and Genetics and the Imperial Bureau of Pastures and Forage Crops have now produced Joint Publication No. 3, entitled " The breeding of herbage plants in Scandinavia and Finland ". It is a symposium consisting of a series of articles by acknowledged specialists in the respective countries. G. Nilsson-Leissner, F. Nilsson, E. Akerberg and R. Torssell contribute articles on work in Sweden, H. N. Frandsen, H. Wexelsen and O. Pohjakallio on Denmark, Norway and Finland respectively. Each article reviews recent developments in the countries concerned, including details of the most recent improved strains of grasses, clovers and lucerne, and the methods used in producing them, as well as a contribution on the application of cytology to herbage plant breeding. The articles vary from 5 to 35 pages in length and are mostly quite detailed, each being provided with a mass of tabular data and selected bibliographies. The Scandinavian countries are recognized authorities on grassland and breeding problems and the bulletin provides an invaluable outline of achievements up to date. This is made specially clear by a useful summary of the entire contents of the bulle- tin which appears at the beginning, before the presentation of the individual articles. Another useful feature is the provision of a list of addresses of the research stations concerned and of maps illustrating their locality. The bulletin covers some 125 pages and is obtainable from either Bureau at the moderate price of 4s. Standing orders for Joint Publications should be placed with the Secretary, Imperial Agricultural Bureaux, 2 Queen Anne's Gate Buildings, London, S. W. 1. (333)
THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE STREPTOCOCCI OF BOVINE MASTITIS THE following note by Dr F. C. Minett *, Director of the Research Institution in Animal Pathology, Royal Veterinary College, Camden Town, London, N. W. 1, and Dr. R. B. Little, of the Rockefeller Institute of Medical Research, Department of Animal and Plant Pathology, Princeton, New Jersey, U. S. A., is reproduced from the Australian Veterinary Journal, Vol. XV, No. 3, June 1939. It is being published simultaneously in several scientific journals throughout the world in an endeavour to bring about a very desirable standardization in the methods of identifying the streptococci of bovine mastitis. ' The purpose of this note is to call the attention of workers who are interested to a project initiated by one of us (R. B. L.). The necessity for trying to get some orderly arrangement of the streptococci which may be associated with bovine mastitis has long been obvious. Not only is this so on the grounds of bacteriological nomenclature, but, unless investigations in different parts of the world use the same designations, it is difficult or impossible to make those comparisons which are essential for a proper understanding of the subject and in consequence scientific progress is impeded. To give an example. The term ' Streptococcus mastitidis' has been used in the past for more than one kind of mastitis streptococcus, whereas in fact it is now known that there are several kinds of streptococci recognized by experienced workers as capable of causing different forms of the disease. Moreover, only one of these forms is known to spread easily in a herd. The subject of classification, therefore, has a clear relation to preventive and clinical veterinary medicine. ' Briefly, we have decided to ask those who are studying mastitis to communicate with us. Persons resident in the American continent and Japan should write to Dr. Little, while those in Europe and the British Empire are requested to get into touch with Dr. Minett *. Persons who are interested would then be requested to re-examine their cultures (1) by means of a group B standard serum which would be issued, (2) by certain relatively simple cultural and biochemical methods. Mimeographed copies of suggested methods for carrying out these tests and forms for recording the results would be sent out at the same time, to be returned as soon as possible to Princeton or to Camden Town as the case may be. Cultures giving ' atypical' reactions should be sent for re-examination to one or other of these centres. Type strains would be issued on request for purposes of comparison. Later on, the results of the enquiry would be circulated to all concerned, and then, if the majority of workers agreed, they could be published in summary form, with particular reference to ' atypical' strains.' * At present Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, India. (334)
ERRATA [THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, VOL. X, PART II, JUNE 1940] Page 141, line 10 from bottom, for 'above' read 'in Table VII' Page 144, line 15 from bottom, for 'above' read 'in Table IX'. Page 145, last line, for 'Table X' read 'Tables X and XI'. Page 146, Table X, Group I.a., Remarks column, for 'Slaughtered on April 1939' read 'Slaughtered on 1 April 1939'. Page 148, line 5 from bottom, for 'Table XXIII' read 'Table XIII'. Page 149, Table XIII, Goat No. 237, Material column, for 'Do. heated 50-60°C for 45 minutes' read ' Do. heated 55-60 °C for 45 minutes'. Page 178, line 9 from bottom, after the word 'respectively' add 'Tables XXXVIII and XXXIX'. Page 212. last line, for ' y = ORIGINAL ARTICLES VITAMIN A STUDY OF GHEE* PART IX. RECOVERY OF REVERSIBLY OXIDISED VITAMIN A BY TREATMENT WITH HYDROGEN UNDER PRESSURE BY S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEEDepartment of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore (Received for publication on 4 March 1940) (With Plate XXIII) IT has been observed that the vitamin A of butterfat is fairly resistant to heat, and that it is not completely destroyed until a considerable period of time has elapsed [Osborne and Mendel, 1920 ; Banerjee and Dastur, 1937]. That the vitamin is protected by antioxidants in the fat is well recognised [Mattillm, 1931]. The rate of destruction of these antioxidants and of the vitamin depends on the temperature of heating, the acidity of the ghee, and other factors. Temperatures higher than 115°C and free acidity above 0.5 per cent (oleic acid) cause rapid loss of vitamin A in ghee. When ghee is heated in air for a certain period of time (the induction period) there is little or no decrease in the vitamin content, but subsequent to this period, the destruction is rapid due to oxidation changes. Banerjee [1938] records that when hydrogen gas is bubbled through ghee at such a stage, a gradual rise in vitamin content to nearly the original value occurs and the vitamin level remains steady during subsequent heating. Since the oxidation changes are rapidly brought about by heating, similar changes might be the cause of vitamin losses observed during storage. This recovery of vitamin activity after bubbling in hydrogen suggests that the same change could be brought about by applying the treatment to old ghee samples. In the ordinary way bubbling in hydrogen at atmospheric pressure needs 10-15 hours to effect the change and this long period of heating is bound to affect the flavour disadvantageously. The present work was undertaken in order to investigate the effect of hydrogen under pressure on the vitamin content. The apparatus consisted of a steel autoclave (Gallenkamp No. 1606) provided with an outer jacket containing oil heated to any desired temperature. The ghee was kept inside the pressure chamber in a stainless steel vessel, and hydrogen under pressure * The previous parts of this series have appeared in Agriculture and Livestock in India.336 Vitamin A Study of Ghee was bubbled into it through a tinned brass tube which thus stirred the liquid ghee thoroughly. The autoclave was fitted with a safety valve and pressure gauge and the temperature inside could be read on a thermometer suitably placed in the lid. Samples of ghee were drawn off at intervals via the gas inlet tube by opening the cock. The changes taking place during the treat- ment with hydrogen were followed without disturbing the closed system. Any fall in pressure subsequent to the drawing of a sample was made good by passing in more gas through the same inlet tube. The vitamin A measurements were made colorimetrically on the blue colour formed by the unsaponifiable fraction with antimony trichloride reagent, and expressed as blue units per gram of butterfat. The yellow values were obtained by qualifying the yellow colour of the chloroform solution of the unsaponifiable matter in Lovibond units. The results are given in Table I. TABLE I Regeneration of vitamin A at different temperatures and pressures on treatment with hydrogen Source of sample Temp. Pressure Time of reaction Lovibond °C atmos. hr. Blue value Yellow value (per gram of butterfat) Imperial Dairy Institute .. .. 0 27.5 1.6 110 20 0.5 34.1 1.6 S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 337 TABLE I338 Vitamin A Study of Ghee TABLE II Effect of treatment with hydrogen at 100°C and 10 atmospheres pressure Source of ghee sample Time of reaction Acid value as oleic acid Peroxide value (ml. 0.002 N thio. sulphate) Lovibond Blue value Yellow value hr. per cent per gram of butterfat Tiruppur . . . . 0 3.53 11.2 4.4 0.5 1 3.53 8.9 7.7 0.5 2 3.46 7.4 7.7 0.6 3 3.40 6.1 5.5 0.5 Gujarat . . . . 0 2.77 9.9 19.8 0.3 1 2.64 8.4 11.0 0.3 3 2.64 7.3 13.2 0.4 4 2.70 7.0 15.4 0.3 6 2.64 5.8 16.5 0.3 Tiruppur (free acids neu- tralised). 0 .. 10.8 4.4 0.3 1 .. 9.1 5.5 0.2 2 .. 8.0 4.4 0.2 4 .. 6.7 2.2 traces Kathiawar . . 1 0.95 3.1 14.3 0.7 S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 339 Table II shows that the peroxide value was reduced by the hydrogen treat- ment. The reduction of the amount of active oxygen and hence the decrease of pro-oxygenic factors in ghee can only be advantageous from the point of improving and keeping up the quality of ghee. The acid value is not altered ; heat and treatment with hydrogen do not break down the glycerides. In ghee samples showing high acid values and low vitamin contents, the hydrogen did not increase the vitamin values. In the presence of large amounts of free acid, a great part of the vitamin A is oxidised probably to compounds which cannot be reverted to vitamin A by the action of hydrogen. But with ghee samples where the acid values had been artificially increased by the addition of oleic acid, and with a short period of contact with the acid, there was no difficulty in regenerating the vitamin which had previously been rendered inactive. If the same samples of ghee were left in contact with free acid for a prolonged period and subsequently treated with hydrogen under pressure, the vitamin recovery in no case approached the amount lost during storage in contact with acid. These experiments (Table III) confirm the previous statement that the presence of free acid helps to oxidize the vitamin into inactive compounds. TABLE III Vitamin content of ghee left in contact with free acid, examined at the end of three weeks, before and after hydrogen treatment Source of sample Acid value per cent Lovibond Blue values per gram Initial 3 weeks After treat- ment with hydrogen after 3 weeks storage Imperial Dairy Institute (untreated). 0.38 27.5 26.4 34.1 340 Vitamin A Study of Ghee Treatment of ghee with hydrogen in the presence of platinum catalyst.S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 341 Effect of adding carotene to ghee before treating with hydrogen.342 Vitamin A Study of Ghee Effect of reducing the acidity of high-acid ghee before hydrogen treatment.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. X, Part IV ] [ PLATE XXIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2
S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 343 TABLE VII Regeneration of vitamin A in ghee heated for different periods Samples of ghee (Jersey) heated in oxygen Vitamin recovery on subsequent hydrogen treatment under pressure of same sample Time in hr. Vitamin values Peroxide value Blue value Yellow value Peroxide value Blue Yellow 0 48.4 24.0 4.6 .. .. .. 2 41.8 22.0 5.5 46.2 20.0 3.1 5 33.0 18.0 6.2 41.8 18.0 4.2 10 26.0 12.0 7.2 40.7 14.0 5.4 20 0.0 (Red units 2.2) 0.1 28.4 0.0 (Red units 1.1) 0.1 13.1 In a period of 12 hours of heating the destruction of vitamin A is not extensive, but all the vitamin is destroyed in 20 hours. In every sample where some vitamin remained, it was possible to recover the vitamin by hydrogen treatment but where all was destroyed, it was not possible to regenerate any of the vitamin. The antioxidants of butterfat prevent autocatalytic oxidation of fat only as long as they are not inactivated ; as soon as they are destroyed, vitamin A is rapidly attacked. The presence of active antioxidants in ghee is a guarantee that all the vitamin is not inactiva- ted or oxidised to such an extent that it cannot be regenerated by treating with hydrogen. Resistance of vitamin A in ghee to destruction by heat after hydrogen treat- ment.344 Vitamin A Study of Ghee A or some closely related substances. S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 345 By careful chromatographic separation vitamin A has been separated into the predominant THE LIFE-HISTORY OF BOOPHILUS AUSTRALIS (FULLER)* BY S. N. SAPRE, B.Sc., G.B.V.C. Research Scholar, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 9 May 1940) MATERIAL for the following observations, starting from September 1937, was collected from various sheds and outkraals at Mukteswar. An adequate supply of replete females is available in this locality from the end of September to the beginning of November. The observations were made under laboratory conditions, and also in the field whenever possible. The original intention of the author was to work out the life-histories of the com- monest Indian ticks, under ordinary Indian field-conditions, but this intention had to be modified and the work to be carried out at Mukteswar, the altitude of which is 7,500 ft. above sea level. Consequently these observations may not be wholly applicable to the conditions obtaining in the plains. ECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS Boophilus australis would appear to be sufficiently adaptable to overcome the adverse atmospheric conditions existing at Mukteswar. The eggs of these ticks are known to be very resistant to changes in temperature and humidity, being capable of withstanding the effects of as low a temperature as 15°F. It is noteworthy that normally in this locality no other species of tick is found to infest cattle. The parasite completes two generations in one year. The first generation of the year is hatched in April and survives to the end of June. This generation is numerically small as compared with the succeeding one, for the following probable reasons. Firstly, the eggs of the first generation have to withstand winter conditions, and, owing to the excessive cold, com- paratively few of them remain viable ; secondly, the summer climate at Muktes- war is not very suitable for these ticks on account of the comparative lack of humidity. This generation, however, serves the purpose of maintaining the local tick population during winter and early summer. The writer's experience shows that the gravid females of this generation, at the end of June or there- about, drop off the host and seek refuge in crevices where they oviposit. The second batch of eggs hatch out by the middle or end of July. It has been observed that, during August and early September, cattle, returning from grazing, harbour actively feeding seed ticks. These larvae reach the adult stage during October and November and the fertilised females then drop off for oviposition. The period of oviposition extends up to a month-and-a-half. The larvae from these eggs constituting the first generation of the year hatch out during March and April, but they are numerically very few in comparison with the enormous number of eggs produced. * Paper presented at the twenty-seventh session of the Indian Science Congress, Madras. (346)
S. N. SAPRE 347 EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS As already stated, studies upon the life-history of B. australis under laboratory conditions were undertaken in the latter part of September, when a large number of replete females become available. Three batches of ticks, numbering sixty in all, were maintained in an incubator at 22°C together with a glass of water to provide the necessary humidity. Individual ticks were kept separately in tubes with strips of filter paper to provide sufficient hiding place and darkness. The eggs laid by individual ticks were counted with the help of apparatus specially prepared for the purpose in the laboratory on the lines given by Nuttall [1913]. Nuttall used glass strips cut with a diamond pencil. In using such strips, even edges are essential and the writer has found that ordinary microscopical slides are much simpler to use for improving the count- ing apparatus. The counting was done along the two sides of the rectangle and the product of the two figures thus obtained gave a fairly accurate indica- tion of the total number of eggs. The calculation was always made to the nearest round number. OVIPOSITION Batch No. 1 comprising sixteen ticks collected on the 24th of October 1937 Serial No. of tick Period between dropping and oviposition Duration of oviposition Period of survival after oviposition Number of eggs laid Period between commencement of oviposition and hatching Days Days Days Days 1 4 24 6 2430 32 2 3 23 8 2690 37 3 5 23 7 2565 41 4 6 22 6 2430 39 5 5 21 6 2565 35 6 4 17 8 2025 35 7 5 14 5 1275 32 8 4 15 4 2160 43 9 3 7 2 200 Not viable 10 6 14 5 2295 39 11 3 14 3 1080 41 12 4 18 3 2430 37 13 4 17 2 2025 35 14 3 19 5 4555 33 15 4 16 3 3200 36 16 6 17 3 3375 39 Aver- age 4.2 17.4 4.75 2338 37 NOTE.348 Life-history of Boophilus australis Batch No. 2 comprising twenty-five ticks collected on the 26th of October 1937 Serial No. of tick Period between dropping and oviposition Duration of oviposition Period of survival after oviposition Number of eggs laid Period between commencement of oviposition and hatching Days Days Days Days 1 5 16 5 3375 42 2 4 15 5 2565 37 3 4 16 5 2700 39 4 7 16 6 1620 43 5 6 20 2 2600 47 Hatched few 6 4 19 3 2700 41 7 5 20 4 2430 36 8 7 20 5 4050 37 9 6 19 4 4725 39 10 4 18 5 2970 42 11 4 18 6 2700 45 12 4 16 5 1620 39 13 4 24 3 2700 41 14 3 23 3 2000 38 15 4 22 5 1300 39 16 4 21 6 1100 Not viable 17 4 15 3 2500 42 18 4 16 6 2565 37 19 5 16 4 1755 32 20 5 17 4 2970 35 21 5 14 8 1215 40 22 6 18 4 1485 39 23 6 16 5 1890 43 24 4 20 2 2600 43 25 6 15 4 1465 39 Average 4.2 18 4.5 2300 39.7
S. N. SAPRE 349 Batch No. 3 comprising nineteen ticks collected on the 27th of October 1937 Serial No. of tick Period between dropping and oviposition Duration of oviposition Period of survival after oviposition Number of eggs laid Period between commencement of oviposition and hatching Days Days Days Days 1 3 16 4 2575 41 2 5 16 2 2250 37 3 3 18 5 2430 39 4 4 20 2 3775 32 6 5 19 4 2565 41 6 7 17 3 2160 42 7 5 18 4 2690 39 8 5 16 5 2025 35 9 Died without laying eggs 10 4 24 5 4725 37 11 3 22 4 4050 37 12 3 17 3 2970 39 13 2 19 5 2430 41 14 6 20 2 2700 39 15 5 23 4 4050 36 16 4 21 3 2970 34 17 3 14 6 1200 Not viable 18 7 15 5 1620 43 19 5 17 4 2565 39 Average 4.43 18 4.4 2451.7 38.57 B
350 Life-history of Boophilus australis LARVAL STAGE B. australis, being a continuous feeder, remains attached to the host even while it undergoes metamorphosis, and hence it is easy to study the changes which the tick undergoes during the entire course of its life-cycle, without the employment of any special method for feeding and recovering the parasites. The larvae were put on the back of the host and left there to seek a suitable place for attachment. They scattered themselves and crawled excitedly over the hair of the host, and most of them were found to be attached within ten minutes. In selecting a site for attachment, they show a remarkable predilec- tion for relatively soft and vascular parts of the body, such as the skin of the neck, dewlap and escutcheon. Three days after attachment, the larvae change their colour from dark red to reddish yellow, and experience has shown that this may be regarded as an indication of the fact that the engorgement of the parasites is complete and that they are about to undergo metamorphosis, which they complete, as already mentioned, while remaining attached to the host. From the fourth day onward, the colour gradually changes from reddish yellow to dull white. This change commences at the abdomen and later extends to the anterior end. On the seventh day, the change is complete and the nymphs begin to emerge, leaving the larval skins attached to the body of the host. NYMPHAL STAGE Immediately on emergence, the nymphs fix themselves to an adjacent area on the skin and commence feeding. To start with they are of a dark brown colour, and this gradually changes to dark grey by the fifth day, indicat- ing that the nymphs have been fed to repletion. On the sixth day, the nym- phs again show change of colour from dark grey to papery white. The change commences at the hind end and gradually extends to the anterior. On the seventh day, the nymphs begin to moult as adults, and by the ninth day all the nymphs are found to have moulted. Thus it is seen that the nymphal stage lasts from seven to nine days, the first four of which are spent in feeding and the remainder in undergoing metamorphosis. ADULT STAGEThe adults, like the nymphs, commence feeding immediately after the moult, and select for this purpose a site adjacent to that to which they had been attached in the nymphal stage. The males are invariably fewer in number and, as is well known, also much smaller in size, than the females. The male is almost always seen to fix itself near the female in such a manner that their ventral surfaces are in apposition to one another. The male feeds for one or two days and is then seen in copula with the nearest female. While in this act, it clasps the female by means of its legs, and, as Sharif [1924] has observed in the case of Hylomma ægyptium, the legs of the male are always behind those of the female. On the sixth day, that is, shortly after fertiliza- tion, a very noticeable increase occurs in the size of the female, which now feeds and grows vigorously. Unfertilized females do not attain even half of this size and do not, as a rule, lay eggs. From the ninth to the eleventh day, the engorged females drop off to seek refuge in such cracks and crevices in the
S. N. SAPRE 351 stalls as are readily accessible to them and oviposition soon follows. It has been observed that gravid females usually drop off at a time when the host is sitting down or standing quiet, as this largely precludes the possibility of their being crushed under the feet of the host. It was observed that, on particular occasion, such as when a green feed was being given to the host, a large number than usual of the gravid females dropped off. Observations on the duration of the parasitic stages of B. australis, in- cluding the period required for the metamorphosis to take place, are summaris- ed in the following tables. For these observations two batches of approxi- mately 110 and 60 larvae were used. The larvae of the first batch were fed by means of ear bags, while those of the second batch were applied to the skin under the tail where they attached themselves immediately, without wandering about in search of a more suitable place for attachment. Batch No. 1 Host Date of attachment to host Date of engorgement Date of issue of next stage Larvæ Bullock 10th August 1938 9 A.M.-10-30 A.M. 13-8-38 17-8-1938352 Life-history of Boophilus australis Batch No. 2 Host Date of attachment to the host Date of engorgement Date on which next stage issued Larvæ. Bullock 17th August 1938 noon 20thS. N. SAPRE 353 ranges from two to seven days (average 4.4 days). The oviposition period ranges from 14 to 24 days (average 18 days). The female tick survives after oviposition for two to eight days (average 4.4 days). The number of eggs laid by an individual tick varies from 200 to 4725 (average 2551.7). The egg stage at 22°C lasts for 32 to 45 days, as reckoned from the commencement of the oviposition to the emergence of the first larva (average 38.57 days). ACKNOWLEDGEMENT I am grateful to Rai Bahadur S. K. Sen, F.R.E.S., for his kind assistance in this work. REFERENCES Nuttall, G. H. F. (1913). Parasitology 6, 73-74. Sharif, M. (1924). Imp. Inst. Agric. Res. Pusa. Bul. No. 152.
TRANSMISSION OF FOWL SPIROCHAETOSIS THROUGH AGENTS OTHER THAN ARGAS PERSICUS BY H. R. KAPUR, M. R. C. V. S. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 1 April 1940) INTRODUCTION THE earliest record of transmission of fowl spirochaetosis through arthropods is that of Marchoux and Salimbeni [1903], who incriminated A. persicus as the vector of the disease. The findings of Marchoux and Salimbeni were later confirmed by Neufeld and Prowazek [1907]. Ficker and Rosenblat [1907] succeeded in transmitting the disease through the bite of infected A. miniatus but failed to do so through the progeny of these infected ticks. They concluded that all members of the Argas family, except A. miniatus, could transmit infection through the egg. Balfour [1909] suspected lice of the Menopon genus as probable transmitters of the disease. He failed, however, to transmit the disease to a healthy chick through the lice harboured by a bird showing acute infection. In 1914, this worker found two undoubted spiro- chaetes in the eggs of Hyalomma aegyptium, although he believed that the ticks concerned could not have fed on any bird affected with spirochaetosis. Fulleborn and Mayer [1908] and Shellack [1908] found that the disease could be transmitted through A. reflexus and Ornithodoros moubata, the incubation period being eight to eighteen days. The ticks were infective up to the sixty- fourth day. This opinion was simultaneously supported by Brumpt [1908]. Knowles, Das Gupta and Basu [1932] confirmed that infection is hereditarily transmitted in the female line of A. persicus. They were of opinion, however, that poultry mitesH. R. KAPUR 355 That A. persicus is a common vector is now a well established fact. In view of the prevalence of fowl spirochaetosis throughout India and the economic loss caused by this disease, an effort has been made to determine whether other species of ticks, and possibly mosquitoes, can be incriminated as vectors. These species comprised O. papillipes, O. savignyi and the mosquito Aedes (Stegomyia) albopicta. A series of experiments was also carried out to obtain confirmation of the finding that the disease can be produced in susceptible fowls through the unbroken skin without the intermediary of an arthropod vector. MATERIAL AND METHODS The fowls that were selected for transmission work were all in good con- dition, locally bred and had no previous history of spirochaetosis. They were maintained in isolated chappars; their morning and evening temperatures were recorded and blood examined daily for two weeks before work was com- menced. The same procedure was rigidly followed throughout the actual experiments. Those birds that did not develop infection were subsequently tested for immunity with 1 c.c. of virulent blood subcutaneously. Blood smears from infected fowls were examined and those showing heavy infection were selected for initial feeding of ticks and mosquitoes. The ticks used were laboratory-bred. In all experiments nymphs alone were used. Different methods for feeding were employed for different species. In the first batch of experiments a number of O. savignyi, which is a quick feeder, were placed directly on an area of denuded skin. When the feed was complete, the ticks were collected in glass tubes in which pieces of filter paper had been placed. The ticks were maintained for further transmissions in an incubator. In the case of O. papillipes a special method was employed to keep the ticks in position. An area of about two inches in diameter was prepared on one side of the breast. This was covered with a piece of muslin of the same dimensions as the denuded area and the edges of the cloth were fixed to it with collodion solution, making a pocket in which were enclosed a number of ticks which were left there for three hours. The muslin was then removed, the ticks examined, and those engorged separated from the rest and placed in the incubator. A. persicus being a nocturnal feeder, the process of feeding in this case was accomplished during the night. The fowl, with its head in a muslin bag, was enclosed in a large glass jar and a known number of ticks were then dropped into the jar, which was covered and left overnight. The following morning, the ticks were collected and those engorged placed in the incubator. For the experiments dealing with mosquito transmission, larvae of A. (S.) albopicta were obtained from tree holes harbouring rain water. These were then kept in glass jars connected with mosquito netting cages to receive the adults. The females were transferred to glass tubes about three inches in length and one inch in diameter, covered with mosquito netting at both ends. These tubes were then inverted over a moist piece of lint and the mosquitoes starved for three to five days. They were fed by means of these tubes first on an infected, and three days later on a healthy, fowl. Feed- ing in the cage was also attempted. In endeavouring to transmit infection through unbroken skin, two differ- ent sites were selected for the purpose, viz. the comb and the skin over the
356 Transmission of Fowl Spirochaetosis breast. The areas were thoroughly examined with a hand lens for the pre- sence of any abrasions and then painted with citrated virulent blood. EXPERIMENTS Ninety O. papillipes in the third nymphal stage were fed upon an infected fowl. On moulting into the fourth nymphal stage after ten days, the ticks were divided into three batches, each batch being fed separately on a healthy fowl (Table I). Forty O. savignyi, in their third nymphal stage, were first given an infective feed and on reaching their next moult after twelve days were fed, fifteen on one fowl and twenty-five on the other. Transmission experi- ments with A. persicus were carried out in a similar manner. The results were as follows :H. R. KAPUR 357 TABLE II Species of ticks Infect- ed fowl No. Number of clean ticks fed Healthy fowl No. Number of infective ticks fed Interval between feeds Results O. papillipes } Days 62 80 273 18 28 Negative 272 22 29 271 33 30 O. savignyi } 58 50 270 19 28 Negative 268 13 29 264 16 30 A. persicus 61 10 288 8 30 Positive on the 6th day. Fowls that had infective O. papillipes fed on them were tested with a dose of virulent blood on the fiftieth day and those of the O. savignyi group on the fifty-first day. The fowls tested developed spirochaetosis in 24 to 72 hours. It is concluded, therefore, that O. papillipes and O. savignyi do not transmit the disease under ordinary conditions. As for A. (S.) albopicta, 12 mosquitoes of this species were fed after being starved for three days, first on an infected fowl and three days later ten of these were fed on a healthy fowl. No reaction was observed for 39 days. When the immunity test was carried out, this fowl was found susceptible. The succeeding set of experiments was carried out to determine whether infection takes place through the unbroken skin, using virulent blood on the comb (Table III). TABLE III Fowl No. Results Incubation period Days. 57 Negative .. 58 Positive 6 59 Do. 5 61 Do. 5 62 Do. 6 Control No. 60 Negative Tested for immunity after 30 days and found susceptible.
358 Transmission of Fowl Spirochaetosis From the foregoing table it is seen that in four out of five cases the disease was transmitted by application of virulent blood over the combs. The breasts of another six healthy fowls were then painted with citrated virulent blood. The fowls showed no reaction for thirty-one days. They were then given 1 c.c. of virulent blood subcutaneously and all were found immune. TABLE IV Fowl No. Results Reaction to immu- nity test 120 Negative Immune 121 Do. Do. 122 Do. Do. 123 Do. Do. 124 Do. Do. 125 Do. Do. In order to confirm the above findings the experiment was repeated on a fresh batch of six fowls using in this case a larger quantity of blood. Curiously, in all cases except one in this batch a virulent disease was produced (Table V). TABLE V Fowl No. Incubation period Results Days 208 2 Positive 209 2 Do. 210 3 Do. 211 2 Do. 213 .. Immunity testH. R. KAPUR 359 These latter experiments, as opposed to the former, indicate that the organism of fowl spirochaetosis is capable of passing through the unbroken skin with the production of the disease in an acute form. Two possible explanations may be advanced for the negative results summarized in Table IV : firstly, the birds were immune prior to their being brought under experiment and secondly, the infection produced was so mild, owing to a larger dilution of blood, that no clinical syndrome capable of detec- tion under the microscope was induced. This probably explains their sub- sequent immunity. These birds, along with others maintained for strain propagation, were selected at random from one batch of the main stock. Since all those remaining proved susceptible, the possibility of those used in this experiment being immune appears to be remote. The feasibility of the second explanation is, however, supported by Marchoux and Couvy [1913], who evolved a method for counting the number of spirochaetes suffi- cient to produce infection or immunity. These workers found that when given subcutaneously 20,000 spirochaetes produce infection, 1,700 produce immunity and 700 produce neither infection nor immunity. While conducting these experiments, a very interesting observation was made in the case of those fowls that were given infection either through the bites of infected A. persicus or by blood inoculation. In most of these cases there was no appreciable rise in the temperature synchronizing with the ap- pearance of spirochaetes in the peripheral blood, though, in fact, in some in- stances the blood was teeming with the parasites. The data collected in this respect from the charts of sixteen infected fowls are detailed in Table VI. TABLE VI Fowl No. Normal range of temperature Temperature when spirochaetes appeared °F °F 206 105.6-107 105.4 208 105.4-106.7 106.4 213 105.8-107.2 106.4 227 105.0-108.0 105.4 229 106.4-108.8 106.8 230 105.4-107.4 107.0 *248 105.4-108.2 109.4 249 106.2-107.2 106.4 265 105.8-107.4 106.8 266 105.8-107.6 106.2 287 105.8-108.4 107.0 289 106.0-108.2 107.8 *260 106.4-107.8 108.6 *210 106.6-107.6 109.2 *211 105.4-106.8 108.0 *214 105.0-108.2 109.2
360 Transmission of Fowl Spirochaetosis Literature on avian spirochaetosis invariably lays stress on the high temperature recorded in this disease, whereas it would appear from the above records, that in only five (marked *) out of 16 fowls was a distinct rise in tem- perature noted. SUMMARY A series of experiments was carried out to see if fowl spirochaetosis could be transmitted through the agency of Ornithodoros papillipes and O. savignyi. Ticks were infected in their third nymphal stage and used on healthy fowls in their fourth and fifth nymphal stages. About 159 infective O. papillipes were fed on six healthy fowls and 88 O. savignyi on five healthy fowls and the result was negative in each case, whereas two controls on which only 27 infec- tive Argas persicus were fed showed a severe reaction after an incubation period of six days. In another series of experiments, mosquitoes belonging to the species Aedes (Stegomyia) albopiota were used. These could be made to feed on fowls readily, but failed to transmit the disease. A third series of experiments carried out on three batches of fowls showed that the disease could be successfully transmitted to healthy fowls by smearing the infective material either on the unbroken skin of the comb or the breast. Incubation period in such cases was two to six days. Pyrexia was found to be an inconstant symptom in the experimentally induced disease. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS In carrying out these experiments much help and encouragement was given by Mr. J. R. Haddow. I have also to thank Mrs. J. B. Polding for her translation of German and French literature and Mr. S. K. Sen for his guidance, REFERENCES Balfour, A. (1909). J. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 12, 285 *ANTI-OXIDANTS OF GHEE BY S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore (Received for publication on 8 June 1940) (With two text-figures) THE deterioration of oils and fats generally involves a process of oxida- tion and the conditions governing these reactions have been extensively studied [Dastur and Banerjee, 1936]. It has been found that exposure of fats to heat [Bevis, 1923], light [Greenbank and Holm, 1930], air (oxidation) [Holm, Greenbank and Deysher, 1927], presence of free acids [Holm and Green- bank, 1924] and other factors [Davies, 1928, Pennington and Hepburn, 1912, King et al., 1933] are conducive to rapid deterioration. Since the changes involved necessitate absorption of oxygen by the fat, attention has been principally directed to the study of the problem from this standpoint. The work of Holm, Greenbank and Deysher [1927], French, Olcott and Mattill [1935], and others [Mattill and Crawford, 1930] show that fats exposed to oxygen exhibit the typical characteristics of an autocatalytic oxidation, viz. a latent or induction period of variable length during which the oxygen absorbed is very small, followed by a period of rapidly accelerating oxygen absorption. The length of the induction period is determined by the presence of promoters or inhibitors of oxidation, and as is now well recognised, even very small amounts of these inhibitors help to retard oxidation [Moureu and Dufraisse, 1927]. The onset of rancidity usually coincides with or follows shortly after the end of the induction period. Remarkable variations in the resistance of vita- min A in butter-fat to destruction by heat have been noticed [Steenbock, Boutwell and Kent, 1918, and Osborne and Mendel, 1920] and the resistance of ghee to rancidity and vitamin A destruction by heat and oxygen has been attributed to the presence of different amounts of the protective substances. Numerous methods have been used to determine the length of the induc- tion period and to follow the progress of the underlying reactions. Variations in the amount of organic peroxides have been considered significant [Taffel and Revis, 1931, and Wheeler, 1932]. Aldehyde or other products of oxida- tion develop colour in the presence of Kreis [1902] and Fellenberg [1924] reagents and with limitations such colour reactions are used to determine rancidity. More recently [Lea, 1934] the aldehyde value has been determined by determining the aldehyde-bisulphite compound. The exact significance of these and other tests is still uncertain, and doubts have been raised as re- gards the utility of the Kreis value, the peroxide value, etc. [Barnicoat, 1931, and Coe and LeClerc, 1934]. However, the organoleptic tests depend- ing upon taste and smell are still the final criteria for rancidity. The only direct method in addition to those mentioned above to study the oxidative reaction is to follow oxygen absorption by the fat. This method should serve well, because the main purpose of this work is to determine the factors influencing the prolongation of the induction period in butter-fat. (361)
362 Anti-oxidants of Ghee Methods of study.S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 363 and oxygen absorption in the fat. It is seen that at the higher temperatures the rate of absorption is greater for a 10°C rise in temperature than at the lower temperature, while the induction period is also considerably shortened. At 95°C this period is reduced to a short measurable period, and hence this temperature was chosen as being suitable. Influence of volume of fat on the rate of oxidation.364 Anti-oxidants of Ghee periods of time. Defective methods of fat separation, such as insufficient coagulation of curdy matter and high acidity, are known to cause rapid deterio- ration of the fat. It was considered of value to determine the induction period from the oxygen absorption of a variety of ghee samples with a view of as- certaining the conditions which affect this period. Table I gives the acid value, the peroxide value and the vitamin values of fats at the start of the experiment along with their induction period. The acidity is expressed as percentage of oleic acid. The peroxide values were determined according to Lea [1931] and expressed in terms of ml. of 0. 002N sodium thiosulphate per gram of fat. Vitamin A was measured in blue units per gram of fat given by the unsaponifiable matter with antimony trichloride in chloroform solution. Carotene was determined by measuring the yellow colour of the unsaponifiable matter in chloroform solution. The vitamin A and carotene values are express- ed in Lovibond Tintometer units per gram of fat. TABLE I Induction period of ghee from different sources (Temperature 95°C) Source Induction period hr. Acidity olcic acid per cent Peroxide value ml. 0.002 N thiosulphate solution per gram of fat Vitamin values Lovibond Blue units Yellow units per gram of fat Jersey . . . . 8.5 0.57 3.1 45.1 24.0 Gir . . . . 6.0 0.32 3.9 35.2 1.0 Imperial Dairy . . 5.0 0.38 1.8 27.5 2.4 Sindhi . . . . 5.5 0.56 1.0 40.7 2.9 Kathiawar [Agmark] . 2.0 0.95 1.2 8.8 0.4 Gujarat . . . 1.5 2.77 9.9 19.8 0.3 Tiruppur . . . 1.0 3.53 11.2 4.4 0.5 It can be observed that the samples with high initial vitamin values have low acid and peroxide values, and that .their induction periods are much greater than the samples showing high acid values. Effect of anti-oxidants on the induction period.S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 365 Hydroquinone in particular has been widely studied as an anti-oxidant of fats [Olcott, 1934, and Wagner and Brier, 1931] and has been used to protect the vitamin A of fish liver oils. Huston et al. [1928] have demonstrated by feeding experiments that hydroquinone has a protective value on the vitamin A con- tent of milk fats. Holm, Corbet, and Hartzler [1936] have found that mix- tures of lecithin and hydroquinone have superior anti-oxidative properties to either of them separately, and Evans [1935] has shown that lecithin exhibits a retarding effect on the formation of peroxides in fats when the oxidation is catalysed by cobalt oleate. It is thus seen that substances which help to retard the oxidation of fats have a protective action on vitamin A and also retard the formation of peroxides. Mattill and his coworkers [1930, 1931, 1934] demonstrated that the un- saponifiable lipoid fractions of vegetables and vegetable oils contain compounds which are active anti-oxidants in lard. They proposed the name inhibitol for these compounds to indicate their function as inhibitors, and also the occurrence in them of hydroxyl groups upon which their inhibiting action was found to depend. Whether the unsaponifiable matter obtained from vegetable oils had any anti-oxidative action towards ghee was studied by adding different amounts to ghee. The unsaponifiable matter obtained after saponification of the fat in the usual manner was dissolved in petrol ether. After addition to the ghee samples under test the solvent was completely evaporated before starting the experiment. Cotton seed, coconut and gingelly (til) oils were used as sources of the unsaponifiable matter, and the prolongation of the induction period (Table II) indicated that the added substances were capable also of protecting ghee from oxidation. TABLE II Protective action of the inhibitols of oils and ghee on Kathiawar ghee (10 gm.) (Temperature 95°C) Unsaponifiable fraction from Amount of unsaponifiable fraction from volume of fat (ml.) Induction period (hr.) Gingelly oil 10 20.0 Gingelly oil 20 26.0 Gingelly oil 30 38.0 Cotton seed oil 10 15.0 Cotton seed oil 20 17.5 Cotton seed oil 30 22.0 Coconut oil 10 9.5 Coconut oil 20 12.0 Coconut oil 30 17.0 Gir ghee 10 6.5 Gir ghee 30 8.0 Jersey ghee 10 3.5 Jersey ghee 30 4.5 Sindhi ghee 10 4.0 Sindhi ghee 30 6.0 C
366 Anti-oxidants of Ghee The protective action of the unsaponifiable matter from gingelly oil was found to be the greatest of the three oil samples used. Whether the un- saponifiable matter from ghee samples with long periods of induction had any effect on poor quality ghee was ascertained in a similar study. It is seen (Table II) that the unsaponifiable matter from ghee samples which showed better resistance to oxidation (Gir, Jersey and Sindhi) did have a small protec- tive action on other ghee samples. Though this effect is not considerable, it is evident that at least part of the anti-oxidative substances in ghee are of an unsaponifiable nature and to that extent resemble the inhibitols of the vege- table oils. Besides substances possessing phenolic groups, compounds which are easily oxidisable are also known to act as anti-oxidants [Moureu and Dufraisse, 1927]. The anti-oxidant properties of a few compounds which come under the latter type, along with a range of inhibitols coming under the two types defined by Olcott and Mattill [1936] referred to above, were studied on two typi- cal ghee samples. Most of these chemical compounds suffer from the dis- advantage that they are objectionable from points of taste and flavour except when used in low concentration. At concentrations of 0.01 per cent and under their protective action is not satisfactory. A search for a substance of vege- table origin which did not suffer from these disadvantages showed that Kamala dye served the purpose very well. A short note on the use of this dye has already been published [Govindarajan and Banerjee, 1939]. TABLE III Influence of anti-oxidants on the induction period in ghee in hours Inhibitor added per cent Substrate Kathiawar Tiruppur* Control With inhibitor added With inhibitor added 0.02 hydroquinone . . . 2.0 6.0 9 0.05 hydroquinone . . . 2.0 7.0 33 0.02 S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 367 Inhibitor added per cent Substrate Kathiawar Tiruppur* Control With inhibitor added With inhibitor added 0.05 phloroglucinol (solid added) . . . . 3.0 7.0 8 0.03 phloroglucinol (added in alcoholic solution) . 3.0 42.0 29 0.05 phloroglucinol (added in alcoholic solution) . 3.0 48.0 36 0.01 diphenyl oxide . . . . . . 2.5 11.0 .. 0.05 diphenyl oxide . . . . . . 2.5 14.0 .. 0.10 diphenyl oxide . . . . . . 2.5 13.0 .. 0.50 diphenyl oxide . . . . . . 2.5 24.5 .. 0.10 sodium citrate . . . . . . 3.0 3.5 2.5 0.20 sodium citrate . . . . . . 3.0 3.0 3.5 0.10 sodium tartrate . . . . . . 3.0 3.5 5.0 0.20 sodium tartrate . . . . . . 3.0 4.0 7.5 0.02 Na2HPO4 . . . . . . . 3.0 4.5 .. 0.05 Na2HPO4 . . . . . . . 3.0 4.0 .. 0.01 l-ascorbic acid . . . . . . 2.5 6.5 7.0 0.02 l-ascorbic acid . . . . . . 2.5 11.0 11.5 0.02 cystine . . . . . . . 2.5 3.0 .. 0.05 cystine . . . . . . . 2.5 4.5 .. * Induction period of Tiruppur ghee, 1 hour. Table III gives the values of the induction periods before and after the addition of anti-oxidants to the ghee. Phloroglucinol (added in solution of alcohol) was found to have inhibitive properties considerably more than that of hydroquinone. The addition of the solid as such to the fat caused little improvement in the induction period. In work on lard, Olcott and Mattill [1936] found hat phloroglucinol was not very efficient in protecting the fat. There is no published record of the anti-oxidant properties of l-ascorbic acid but the observation in this work has brought evidence for the existence of this c 2
368 Anti-oxidants of Ghee property. Cystine has little influence on the oxidation. The superior protec- tive property of Kamala dye is clearly seen, while the addition of salts like sodium citrate, tartrate and phosphate do not influence the oxidation. Addi- tion of organic acids like citric, tartaric, and lactic did not increase the induc- tion period, while oleic acid was found to shorten it (Table IV). Of the two ghee samples used in the above experiments, one had a fairly high acid value and its induction period was short. In spite of this, the addi- tion of hydroquinone and Kamala resulted in prolonging the induction period. Further investigation revealed that the addition of small amounts of acids particularly oleic acid together with the anti-oxidant had the effect of consider- ably increasing the inhibitive action of the latter. This behaviour resembles that observed by Olcott and Mattill [1936] who record that mixtures of orcinol and phosphoric acid prolong the induction period of lard to a far greater extent than either of them individually. Table IV shows the influence of organic acids on anti-oxidants when used together. TABLE IV Synergetic effect of organic acids and inhibitors Substrate : Kathiawar (Agmark) ghee Inhibitor per cent Induction period * hours Anti-oxi- dative index 0.02 citric acid . . . . . 2.0 1.0 0.20 citric acid . . . . . 4.5 2.25 0.02 tartaric acid . . . . 2.0 1.0 0.20 tartaric acid . . . . 3.5 1.75 0.20 lactic acid . . . . . 2.5 1.25 0.50 lactic acid . . . . . 1.5 0.75 0.20 oleic acid . . . . . 1.5 0.75 0.50 oleic acid . . . . . 1.0 0.50 0.2 oleic acid+0.02 hydroquinone . 23.0 11.5 0.5 oleic acid+0.02 hydroquinone . 36.0 18.0 0.2 oleic acid+0.02 Kamala . . 78.0 39.0 0.5 oleic acid+0.02 Kamala . . 86.0 43.0 0.20 tartaric acid+0.02 Kamala . . 26.0 13.0 0.20 citric acid+0.02 Kamala . . 19.5 9.75 0.1 oleic acid+0.02 phloroglucinol . 20.0S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 369 TABLE V Effect of oxidation with and without anti-oxidants on peroxide and vitamin values Substrate Treatment Time of heating in oxygen at 95°C hours Peroxide value ml. 0.002 N thiosul- phate per gram of fat Vitamin values Lovibond Blue units Yellow units per gram Kathiawar (Agmark) ghee Nil . . . 0 1.2 8.8 0.4 Nil . . . 3 3.4 4.4 0.2 Nil . . . 11 56.2 0.0 0.0 (Red units 0.3) + 0.02 per cent hydroquinone 3 1.9 4.4 0.3 +0.02 per cent hydroquinone 10 4.5 2.2 0.2 + 0.02 per cent Kamala 5 1.7 6.6 0.3 + 0.02 per cent Kamala 10 3.1 2.2 0.2 + 0.05 per cent Kamala 5 1.4 6.6 0.3 + 0.05 per cent Kamala 10 3.0 3.3 0.2 + 0.05 per cent Kamala 21 4.9 0.0 0.1 (Red units 0.2) + 0.1 per cent Kamala 5 1.7 7.7 0.3 +0.1 per cent Kamala 10 2.2 5.5 0.3 + 0.1 per cent Kamala 21 3.1 3.3 0.2 Jersey ghee Nil . . . 0 3.6 45.4 24.0 Nil . . . 5 4.2 33.0 18.0 Nil . . . 10 7.2 26.4 12.0 Nil . . . 22 29.5 0.0 0.1 (Red units 0.1) + 0.03 per cent hydroquinone 4 5.4 38.5 21.0 + 0.03 per cent hydroquinone 19 6.5 31.9 19.0 +0.03 per cent hydroquinone 32 7.9 29.7 16.0 +0.02 per cent Kamala 4 4.2 40.7 20.0 +0.02 per cent Kamala 19 5.9 34.1 20.0 +0.02 per cent Kamala 36 8.4 29.7 17.0 +0.02 per cent Kamala 44 10.1 22.0 15.0
370 Anti-oxidants of Ghee In the Jersey ghee, which had previously been found to have a long induction period (8.5 hours), the vitamin destruction with heat was slow. In the Kathiawar ghee, which had a comparatively short induction period, the vitamin destruction was complete in a few hours. This proved that the anti-oxidants which protect the fat from oxidation also protect the vitamin from destruction. Simultaneously with the commencement of the destruction of the vitamin during the period of heating in oxygen the peroxide value was found to increase rapidly. The addition of hydroquinone and Kamala was found to result in prolonging the period of vitamin destruction. Generally, in the crude methods adopted in the villages for the preparation of ghee, conditions are rendered favourable for the rapid oxidation of fat. This oxidation, which results in rancidity, is accompanied by the destruction of even the small amounts of vitamin A contained in them. The results of experiments described above clearly show the additional advantage of adding anti-oxidants to ghee either during or even after preparation on the oxidation of the fat and the destruction of the vitamin. SUMMARY The method of determining the rate of oxygen absorption has been used for ascertaining the natural resistance of butter-fat to oxidation. The induction period is taken as a measure of this resistance. A simple apparatus for the study by this method is described. The protective action of various anti-oxidants towards fat oxidation has been investigated and the use of the vegetable dye, Kamala, in small con- centrations for this purpose is described. The presence in small amounts of oleic acid is found to intensify the protective action of most of the anti- oxidants possessing one or more active hydroxyl groups. Anti-oxidants in inhibiting fat oxidation are found also to delay the des- truction of vitamin A in ghee. REFERENCES Barnicoat, C. R. (1931). J. Soc. Chem. Ind. 50, 361T Bevis, J. F. (1923). Ibid. 42, 417T Bradway, E. M. and Mattill, H. A. (1934). J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 56, 2405 Coe, M. R. and LeClerc, J. A. (1934). Ind. Eng. Chem. 26, 245 Dastur, N. N. and Banerjee, B. N. (1936). Current Sci. 5, 99 Davies, W. L. (1928). J. Soc. Chem. Ind. 47, 185T Evans, E. I. (1935). Ind. Eng. Chem. 27, 329 Fellenberg, T. (1924). Mitt. Lebensm. Hyg. 15, 198 French, R. B., Olcott, H. S. and Mattill, H. A. (1935). Ind. Eng. Chem. 27, 724 Govindarajan, S. V. and Banerjee, B. N. (1939). Current Sci. 8, 559 Greenbank, G. R. and Holm, G. E. (1930). Ind. Eng. Chem. Anal. Edn. 2, 9 Holm, H. N., Corbett, R. E. and Hartzler, E. R. (1936). Ibid. 28, 133 Holm, H. N. and Greenbank, G. R. (1924). Ibid. 16, 518 Holm, H. N., Greenbank, G. R. and Deysher, E. F. (1927). Ibid. 19, 156 Huston, R. C., et al. (1928). J. Biol. Chem. 79, 507 King et al. (1933). Oil and Soap 10, 204 Kreis (1902). Chem. Ztg. 26, 1014 Lea, C. H. (1931). Proc. Roy. Soc. 108 B., 175 S. V. GOVINDARAJAN AND B. N. BANERJEE 371 Milas, N. A. (1930). J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 52, 739 Moureu, C. and Dufraisse, C. (1927). Chem. Rev. 3, 113 Olcott, H. S. (1934). J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 56, 2492 Olcott, H. S. and Mattill, H. A. (1931). J. Biol. Chem. 93, 59, 65 OXYGEN REQUIREMENTS OF THE FINGERLINGS OF AN INDIAN CARP, CIRRHINA MRIGALA (HAMILTON) BY HAMID KHAN, M.Sc., LL.B. (PUNJAB), PH.D. (CANTAB), F.A.Sc. Fisheries Research Officer, Punjab, Lyallpur (Received for publication on 29 March 1940) FISHES, like all other animals, require oxygen for their respiration, and it is oxygen dissolved in water which is utilized by them. The amount of oxygen consumed by fresh-water fishes of different species varies consider- ably and the lower limit for dissolved oxygen in water up to which the fish can live also varies with the species of the fish. Kupzis [1901] states that in general the European roach (Leuciscus erythropthalmus) could live for sometime in water containing 0.7 c.c. of dis- solved oxygen per litre, but it died of asphyxia when the dissolved oxygen was reduced to 0.4 to 0.5 c.c. per litre. Plehn [1924] finds that the carp live well in water containing 5 c.c. dissolved oxygen per litre or lower. If the water be cold carp can live for short time in water containing only 0.5 c.c. per litre of dissolved oxygen. Thompson [1925] has found carp living in water carrying as little as 2.2 p.p.m. of dissolved oxygen. In America and on the continent good deal of work has been done on oxygen requirements of fishes and much of this literature has been summarized by Ellis [1937]. In India this aspect of fish culture has not received any atten- tion so far. In this article it is proposed to give the oxygen requirements of the indigenous species of fish in India. METHODS In order to determine the amount of oxygen consumed by fingerlings of Indian carp (Cyprinidae) such as Morakha (Cirrhina mrigala Hamilton) in a closed container the method adopted was one described by Keys [1930] and followed by Schuett [1933] and others. The method consists in merely determining the oxygen concentration in the medium before and after the ex- periment. The container is stoppered to avoid air contamination during the time of experimentation. This method has been criticised [Keys, 1930] specially when the period of duration of experiment is long because of the fact that oxygen is diminishing and carbon dioxide and nitrogenous excretions are accumulating in the water in which the animals are living during the period of investigation. In the present investigations the fingerlings were starved beforehand to avoid the possibility of contamination with excretory products having influenced the oxygen consumption, and the amount of carbon dioxide before and after the experiments was determined to find its accumula- tions during experiments of various durations. Determination of oxygen was done by Winkler's method as given by American Public Health Association [1933]. Amount of carbon dioxide was (372)
HAMID KHAN 373 determined by Seyler's method as described by Kemmerer, Bovard, and Boorman [1924] and pH values were found by Hellige Comparator. The capacity of all the glass containers used in these experiments was 8.17 litres each. Tap or clean tank water was used as medium. Carp fingerlings (Cirrhina mrigala) of the same age and of almost the same length were used in the experiment. The fingerlings measuring 5 to 5.6 inches from tip of the snout to the base of the caudal fin were selected for use. OXYGEN REQUIREMENTS (a) The lower limit for dissolved oxygen.374 Oxygen Requirements of Indian Carp (c) Oxygen requirements of four carp fingerlings.HAMID KHAN 375 SUMMARY 1. Oxygen requirements of the fingerlings of an Indian carp376 Oxygen Requirements of Indian Carp TABLE II Oxygen requirements of eight carp fingerlings in a closed container for one hour Temperature Dissolved oxygen in c.c. per litre Condition of fingerlings at end of experiment Control At end of experiment Available per fish at end of experiment Consumed by 8 fish Consumed per flsh 70° F 3.983 2.364 0.295 1.619 0.202 All in good condition 70° F 3.983 2.314 0.289 1.669 0.208 Ditto. 70° F 3.691 1.293 0.161 2.398 0.299 Ditto. 70° F 3.691 0.9784 0.1223 2.7126 0.339 Ditto. 71° F 3.969 1.763 0.22 2.206 0.275 Ditto. 72° F 3.656 0.924 0.115 2.732 0.341 Ditto. 73° F 4.432 1.642 0.205 2.79 0.348 Ditto. 73° F 4.432 1.666 0.208 2.766 0.346 Ditto. 73° F 3.498 1.872 0.234 1.626 0.203 Ditto. 74° F 4.206 1.895 0.237 2.311 0.288 Ditto. 74° F 4.206 1.827 0.228 2.379 0.297 Ditto. 74° F 3.87 1.375 0.172 2.495 0.312 Ditto. 74° F 3.87 0.6889 0.0861 3.1911 0.3988 Ditto. 74° F 3.601 1.153 0.144 2.448 0.306 Ditto. 74° F 2.932 0.7448 0.0931 2.1882 0.273 Ditto. 74° F 3.441 1.027 0.128 2.414 0.301 Ditto. 74° F 3.441 0.8621 0.1076 1.7243 0.3223 Ditto. 74° F 3.992 1.321 0.165 2.671 0.334 Ditto. 74° F 3.992 1.365 0.17 2.627 0.328 Ditto. 75° F 2.591 0.6519 0.0813 1.9391 0.2424 Ditto. 75° F 3.583 1.203 0.15 2.38 0.297 Ditto. 76° F 3.853 0.7065 0.0883 3.0425 0.3803 Ditto. 76° F 4.1147 1.799 0.225 2.3157 0.289 Ditto. 76° F 4.1147 1.068 0.133 3.0467 0.3808 Ditto. 77° F 3.911 0.7731 0.0966 3.2379 0.4047 Ditto. 77° F 3.911 0.5476 0.0684 3.3634 0.4204 Ditto.
HAMID KHAN 377 TABLE III Oxygen requirements of four carp fingerlings in a closed container Temperature Time Dissolved oxygen in c.c. per litre Condition of fish at end of experiment Control At end of experiment Available per fish Consumed by 4 fish Consumed per fish 64° F 3 hours 5.363 3.470 0.867 1.893 0.473 All fish in good condition 64° F 378 Oxygen Requirements of Indian Carp TABLE IV Oxygen requirement of one carp fingerling in a closed container Temperature Time Oxygen in c.c. per litre Condition of fish at end of experiment Control At end of experiment Consumed per fish 66° F 3 hours 3.966 3.114 0.852 All fish in good condition 66° F HAMID KHAN 379 TABLE V Amount of carbon dioxide present in the medium before and after the experi- ment with carp fingerlings in a closed container (Capacity 8.17 litres) No. of fish Tempe- rature Time Carbon dioxide in c.c. per litre pH Control At the end of experiment Free Half bound Fixed Free Half bound Fixed Control At end of experi- ment Hr. Min. 1 74° F 1 0 2.022 25.533 25.533 2.022 24.218 24.218 ... ... 1 74° F 1 0 1.686 28.325 28.325 1.686 27.176 27.176 ... ... 1 74° F 1 0 0.788 26.367 26.367 0.96 26.418 26.418 ... ... 1 75° F 1 0 1.264 26.291 26.291 1.264 26.291 26.291 ... ... 4 74° F 1 0 2.022 25.533 25.533 2.275 23.522 23.522 ... ... 4 74° F 1 0 1.686 28.325 28.325 2.528 24.268 24.268 ... ... 4 74° F 1 0 0.788 26.367 26.367 2.136 26.354 26.354 ... ... 4 75° F 1 0 1.264 26.291 26.291 1.833 26.291 26.291 ... ... 8 74° F 1 0 2.022 25.533 25.533 4.93 23.005 23.005 ... ... 8 75° F 1 0 1.264 26.291 26.291 2.427 26.038 26.038 ... ... 8 74° F 1 0 1.264 26.291 26.291 2.654 26.038 26.038 ... ... 8 74° F 1 0 0.788 26.367 26.367 2.579 26.797 26.797 ... ... 8 74° F 1 0 0.788 26.367 26.367 2.781 26.329 26.329 ... ... 8 74° F 1 0 1.686 28.325 28.325 3.413 25.821 25.821 ... ... 8 56° F 10 0 Neutral 13.449 21.286 3.665 20.186 20.186 8.2 7.4 8 56° F 8 31 Neutral 12.337 20.1734 3.223 21.564 21.564 8.2 7.4 12 55° F 4 10 Neutral 21.71 23.24 4.626 19.97 19.97 8.2 7.3 12 55° F 4 30 Neutral 18.86 20.28 4.247 19.33 19.33 8.2 7.3 12 55° F 4 12 Neutral 22.373 26.367 3.893 19.76 19.76 8.2 7.2 12 55° F 3 57 Neutral 17.949 21.488 3.248 20.42 20.42 8.2 7.2 12 57° F 2 47 Neutral 18.66 22.45 3.792 20.06 20.06 8.2 7.2 12 57° F 3 16 Neutral 18.25 21.34 4.98 19.77 19.77 8.2 7.2
380 Oxygen Requirements of Indian Carp TABLE VI Oxygen requirements of carp fingerlings in open container (capacity 8.17 litres) and amount of carbon dioxide present in the medium before and after the experiment No. of fish Tempe- rature Dura- tion of experi- ment Dissolved oxygen in c.c. per litre Carbon dioxide in c.c. per litre pH Remarks Control At end of experi- ment At end of experi- ment avail- able per fish Con- sumed by all fish Con- sumed per fish Control At end of experiment Control At end of ex- periment Condition of fish at end of ex- periment Free Half bound Fixed Free Half bound Fixed Hrs. Min. 8 56° F 10 4 8.385 0.7105 0.0888 7.6745 0.9593 Neutral 12.3366 20.2296 4.74 20.375 20.375 8.2 7.4 Fishes in good con- dition. 12 55° F 4 34 6.527 0.6325 0.0527 5.8945 0.4912 Neutral 19.01 20.93 3.135 19.26 19.26 8.2 7.3 Restless. 12 55° F 4 16 6.637 0.5401 0.045 6.0969 0.508 Neutral 18.454 21.7408 3.223 19.53 19.53 8.2 7.2 Do. 12 55° F 6 35 6.637 4.3993 ... ... ... Neutral 18.454 21.7408 3.085 19.79 19.79 8.2 7.4 Water was stirred at end of 4 hrs. 16 mins. for 2 hours 19 mins. 12 57° F 3 20 5.914 0.602 0.50 5.312 0.443 Neutral 16.15 19.95 3.947 19.61 19.61 8.2 7.2 Restless. 12 57° F 7 0 5.914 1.472 ... ... ... Neutral 16.15 19.95 4.601 20.53 20.53 8.2 7.2 Water was stirred at end of 3 hours 20 minutes for 3 hours 40 min.
HAMID KHAN 381 REFERENCES American Public Health Association (1933). Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Sewage. Ed. 7. New York. Ellis, M.M. (1937). Bull. U. S. Bur. Fish. 48, 22.375. Kemmerer, G., Bovard, J. F. and Boorman, W. R. (1924). Bull. U.S. Bur. Fish. 39, 51- 140. Keys, A. B. (1930). Bio. Bull. Woods Hole 59, 187-198. Kupzis, J. (1901). Zeitscrift für Untersuchen d. Nahrungs-und Genussmittel, sowie der Gebrauchs-gegenstande, 4, 631-668. Plehn, M. (1924). In Handbuch der Binnen fischerei Mittel-europas 1, 301-470. Schuett, F. (1933). Ecology 14, 106-122. Thompson, D. H. (1925). Bull. Nat. Hist. Sur. 15, 423-437. D
SELECTED ARTICLES THE TICKS OF EAST AFRICA I. SPECIES, DISTRIBUTION, INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE, HABITS AND LIFE-HISTORIES BY E. ANEURIN LEWIS Veterinary Research Laboratory, Kabete, Kenya Colony (Reprinted from the Empire Journal of Experimental Agriculture, Vol. VII, No. 27, July, 1939) TICKS have been referred to as 'the scourge of East Africa '. The phrase is rather exaggerated. Yet the abundance and vitality of the pests did not fail to impress the early travellers in East Africa : big-game hunters have written of the ' loathsome ' creatures on every species of wild animal; and the pioneer settler-farmers quickly discovered that ticks provided one of the most serious problems of stock-raising. Furthermore, the development of native reserves and native agriculture has been hindered by the ravages of ticks ; the improvement of indigenous stock has been impeded by difficulties in con- trolling the pests ; and the free movement of cattle has been restricted because ticks convey and transmit organisms of fatal diseases. Seventy-four known species of ticks have been collected and recorded from three British East African territories. In the report of the Veterinary De- partment, Uganda, Mettam listed 40 authentic species from Uganda, and the writer has added four more. Forty-seven species have been recorded from Tanganyika Territory, whereas 58 species (including sub-species) have been collected in Kenya ColonyE. ANEURIN LEWIS 383 Of the 74 species (shown in the following list), the life-history of 34 appears to be known. The larvae and nymphae of 46 have never been fully described ; and practically nothing beyond a record of the tick and the locality of its host is known in the case of many. Species and varieties of ticks in East Africa Argas pomposum Hyalomma* ugandanus splendens djaromensis aequalis tholloni anatolicum persicus variegatum dromedarii impressum Rhipicephalus Ornithodoros Aponomma transiens impressum appendiculatus megnini exornatum albiparmatum ayrei morbillosus laeve laeve planum armatus moubata laeve capensis savignyi dursa savignyi Boophilus impeltatum capensis Margaropus annulatus rufipes dux evertsi winthemi decoloratus falcatus kochi Amblyomma Dermacentor Hyalommina longicoxatus lunulatus cohaerens circumguttatus lewisi maculatus cuneatum rhinocerotis neavei eburneum Ixodes oculatus gemma Haemaphysalis pulchellus hebraeum brunneus sanguineus lepidum aciculifer cavipalpus simus marmoreum bipinosa daveyi sulcatus nuttalli calcarata nairobiensis supertritus paulopunctatum hoodi pilosus tricuspis personatum leachi rubicundus petersi parmata sehillingsi spinulosa ugandanus There is reason to believe that some of the species are invalid and the specimens described as such are variants of a previously known species. Several ticks are known only in their male, female, or immature phase of life ; and comparatively little is known of their adaptation to different hosts and the immunity of the hosts to infestation by different species of ticks. Larvae and nymphae of certain species are found naturally only on birds and rodents, whereas the adults are more often found on larger mammals. Other species usually infest reptilian hosts but may live equally well on warm-blood animals. The large wild game are infested with ticks that are rarely met with on farm animals, and also with species that frequently occur on domestic stock. DISTRIBUTION OF TICKS The general geographic distribution of the most common ticks and vectors of diseases in Kenya Colony has been determined in periodic surveys. The factors that influence the natural distribution of each species have not been fully investigated and there is no precise information on the limiting effect of the separate and combined environmental conditions. Field observations and laboratory experiments have revealed certain predilections on the part of different species, but the data do not warrant definite pronouncements. * The immature ticks of Schuize's species and sub-species for East Africa are being studied to test the validity of the revised classification. D 2
384 The Ticks of East Africa R. pulchellus (the zebra tick) thrives best on the plains, in Acacia-desert grass and Acacia-tall grass savannahs east of the Rift Valley in Kenya. It is more rarely found in the Rift and to the west of the Valley in the Colony, but occurs in Tanganyika and in Uganda. The tick is normally absent from dis- tricts higher than 6,600 ft. above sea-level and may be said to be a species of the lower highlands and, to a less extent, of the coastal zone. In the higher altitudes it prevails in the open or semi-open, dry and hot areas, but it cont- rives to maintain itself in the hot and less humid regions near the sea and the inland lakes. It seems to be fairly resistant to short periods of cold. R. maculatus is more of a lowland tick than R. pulchellus and is confined to country below 4,000 ft. It has not yet been found in the colder, moist highlands. B. annulatus decoloratus is pre-eminently a species of the moist regions, pre- fers the high plateaux, and is abundant in the cold districts of Kenya Colony where dipping has not eradicated it. The tick flourishes also in the highland forests and glades, but is seldom found in the open dry areas, such as on the plains of the Masai Reserve, the Yatta plateau, the semi-arid areas of Ukamba, and the more extensive scrub areas of the Northern Frontier Province. On the other hand, it abounds in the wooded areas of the Mau hills, in the high (8,000 ft.) country of Limuru ; and, in fact, throughout the European high- lands. Mettam [1932] records it from Uganda and the writer has received numerous specimens from that Protectorate and from Mpwapwa, which is relatively low (3,500 ft.) but sheltered by wooded hills. Its wide range in Kenya, from the coast to Lake Victoria Nyanza, indicates the adaptability of the species and its resistance to heat and cold, provided moisture is avail- able. The species and sub-species of Hyalomma find the conditions of the arid and desert areas most suitable. They occur most abundantly in the lower dry and sandy districts. H. planum is common in the Rift Valley, in the scrub- forest areas of Kitui district, and in the hinterland of the coastal zone. H. anatolicum and H. dromedarii are chiefly species of the Northern Frontier Pro- vince, but, as will be noted later, they have penetrated farther south in Kenya, in Uganda, and in Tanganyika. The other species are less frequently found ; and are scattered in very small numbers even in the highlands. H. leachi, the common dog-tick, is widespread. It occurs in all districts and at different altitudes. Yet, from numerous field observations, it seems to prefer the shel- ter of dense scrub and grassy woodlands as so many other species do. It has frequently been collected from the lairs of wild animals, in nesting places and houses of animalsE. ANEURIN LEWIS 385 The Amblyomma species seem, on the whole, to be less selective than other ticks, or they can tolerate better conditions of relatively wide differences. They are not often found in forests. A. variegatum thrives all over the ranching country of the Masai Reserve, throughout the cultivated areas of Kavirondo, Kikuyu, and Ukamba ; and in the semi-desert areas in the north and east of Kenya Colony. It is widely distributed over the European farms (where dipping has not eliminated the species), whether these are of the purely stock class or mainly concerned with crop-production. A. variegatum exists at 8,200 ft. at Timboroa, at 3,800 ft. around the shores of Lake Victoria, and at sea-level. A. gemma evidently prefers a warmer and drier climate than A. variegatum and is not so extensively distributed. A. lepidum prevails in typical desert country and is mostly found in the north-west of Kenya, in parts of Uganda, and farther south in Tanganyika. I. pilosus is a species of the hills and mountain or forest areas rather than of the lowlands. It infests cattle, sheep, and goats on the slopes of the es- carpments of the Great Rift, in the forested areas of the Aberdares, on the Mau hills, in the Thompson's Falls and Limuru districts. Wild animals are often infested with this ' paralysis ' tick. Other species are more frequently found on game and wild birds, I. rasus, in its larval phase, being common tick of small and large birds. R. appendiculatus is the most important tick as far as stock-farming in Kenya is concerned. Its distribution is better known than that of other species. Yet much remains to be done even with regard to this tick. Its normal distribution in most of the advanced European areas has been distur- bed by dipping and other methods of control that have been employed for many years. It persists in relatively small numbers where control has not been consistently maintained. The tick known as the common brown tick is usually found in greatest abundance at elevations between 4,800 ft. and 7,000 ft. ; but it extends into higher country where the vegetational cover reduces the more severe conditions of exposed pastures. It penetrates into lower country also, where the general environment is modified by the vegeta- tion and local climate. The most heavily infested, or enzootic, areas appear to be those where cultivation predominates and where the infestation of stock is not attended to, as on the majority of stock farms. The plains are usually free of this tick and it is not often found on the high plateaux or in desert areas. O. moubata and savignyi are generally looked upon as ticks of the dry, hot and sandy deserts. Their presence in Kenya seemed to be confined to the Northern Frontier Province (3,300 ft.) the eastern areas down the Tana river, and the coastal belt. At one time the former species was a common pest in the Kavirondo Reserves and on the lake shores (3,800 ft.). More recently, however, the writer has obtained large numbers of O. moubata from huts on the site of goat enclosures, 8,000 ft. above sea-level. Arges persicus occurs in isolated localities in Kenya. It is believed not to be indigenous, as the records indicate that it exists only in European areas. The true distribution of this tick may come to light with a growing interest in poultry and their parasites.
386 The Ticks of East Africa Reference has already been made to O. megnini and M. winthemi as species that have been collected only at Mombasa, so far as is known. These ticks arrived on stock from South Africa, and the usual veterinary inspection of imported animals revealed their presence before the animals were permitted to proceed inland. It may here be stated that one record of A. hebraeum from the Tana river area in Kenya has not been confirmed, nor has the species been found in the Colony within the last 10 years. There is a record of its presence in south Tanganyika, but this also awaits confirmation. Whereas it is not possible as yet to define with accuracy the areas and natural conditions most favourable to the separate species in East Africa, it has been observed that there are areas and localities where two or three species predominate over others, which again differ in numerical frequency. These areas are not always sharply defined, as there are extensions of ticks into neighbouring zones ; and there is frequent overlapping. A marked change may take place in the tick-fauna, as illustrated in the case of R. pulchellus in the Masai Reserve. This species is extremely common in the Ngong district of the Reserve as far as the Uaso Nyiro river that separates the Ngong from the Narok district. In the latter no R. pulchellus has been found except on an occasional animal that has crossed the river. R. appendiculatus also may cease abruptly. In the West Suk district, this tick is generally abundant on cattle in the Kapenguria area (5,500 to about 7,500 ft.) but is absent from the adjoining area of Kacheliba (3,000 to 4,500 ft.) although cattle from both areas use the common salt-licks in Kacheliba. Evidence from a few surveys and numerous collections enables most of the western part of the Colony to be classified according to the groups of domi- nant species of ticks. The south-eastern, or Ngong, district of the Masai Reserve is A. variega- tumE. ANEURIN LEWIS 387 appendiculatus infestation within, or adjoining, other larger, free areas. There are also farms or localities which are clean although surrounded by tick-in- fested country. These, of course, have been rendered tick-free by efficient control measures. CLIMATE AND ITS EFFECT ON TICKS In many countries outside the equatorial belt it has been shown that climate and other environmental conditions have a considerable influence on the distribution and activity of tick-life. In East Africa the weather seasons are essentially different ; and, apart from a few observations, there has been no proof of a correlation of fluctuations in tick-activity with climate or its factors. The climatic seasons are popularly classified according to the incidence of rain, which varies in total annual amount and in its monthly distribution over a vast area. Rainfall conditions over East Africa are somewhat complex ; but in general Tanganyika has one season of rainfall, whereas Kenya and Uganda have two. The Tanganyika rains extend from November to May, whilst those of Kenya and Uganda have their maxima abut April to May and Octo- ber to November. There are four areas in Kenya where the rainfall distribu- tion differs greatly ; the coast, the eastern highlands, the plateau, and the vicinity of Victoria Nyanza. Many farmers and others consider that ticks increase at the onset of, or during, the rains. Collections of different species of ticks off cattle in different parts of the Colony and at Mpwapwa in Tanganyika have been examined along with weekly and monthly rainfall records, but so far no correlation of tick abundance and fall of rain has been observed. Recorded outbreaks of East Coast fever for the years 1929 to 1938 in Kenya indicate that the disease exists throughout the year, but also that it is more prevalent from about April to August. It may tentatively be deduced from this evidence that R. appendi- culatus, the tick-vector of East Coast fever, is more or less active at all times, and that it increases in numbers or activity from April to August. Data on East Coast fever in enzootic areas are lacking, and, as has already been stated collected batches of the tick do not always support this deduction. There are pronounced differences in seasons according to temperature and conditions that affect temperature. Available information on the mean maxi- mum and mean minimum temperatures does not cover all the areas where series of tick-collections have been made. It may be stated, however, that the mean maximum reaches its highest from January to March, drops to its lowest point in July and August, rises to a secondary peak about October. There is a short drop in November and a rise again to January. The mean minimum sometimes coincides with the rise and fall of the mean maximum. Or it may be lowest from October to January, after which it rises in March to April, drops slightly in June to rise a little about July and August, and then falls towards the end of the year. Over a large part of Kenya the mean tempera- ture and its diurnal range are at a minimum during the cloudy period from
388 The Ticks of East Africa about May to August which, it will be observed, is approximately the time when East Coast fever records are generally high. It is in isolated localities, and only at very short periods, that the temperature falls as low as freezing-point. Maximum temperatures of over 90°F. (32°C.) are, however, quite common during the dry seasons up to altitudes of 5,000 ft. During all seasons of the year the maximum relative humidity rises above 90 per cent before sunrise ; during the rains the relative humidity in the after- noon rarely falls below 55 per cent and in the dry seasons it frequently drops lower than 20 per cent. Limited observations in the field indicate that R. appendiculatus thrives best when the mean maximum ranges between 60° and 80°F. (16° and 27°C.) and the mean minimum from 50° to 60°F. (10° to 16°C.) At Mpwapwa neither A. gemma nor A. variegatum showed numeral fluctuations correlated with rainfall and humidity. The former species, less abundant than the latter, occurred throughout 1935 and 1936 with no sharp differences except in May and June of 1935 and in August 1936. The mean maximum for these three months was 75°F. (24°C.) and the mean minimum about 60°F. (16°C.). A. variegatum, however, showed very distinct periodicities. It was abundant from September to March and absent from March to September. The ticks appeared with a rise to 80° to 90°F. (27° to 32°C.) and they disappeared when the mean maximum was from 73° to 77°F. (23° to 25°C.). Other localities in Kenya showed similar fluctuations of A. variegatum, though not for the same months, whilst others not many miles from them did not show the same rise and fall of numbers. Laboratory experimentation with temperatures and humidities has been confined to their influence on R. appendiculatus. Even these are incomplete. The observations made are, however, of interest. The replete female of the species is able to tolerate exposure to cold (0° to 4°C.) for not more than about 11 or 12 days. She will not oviposit when the temperature is below 6°C., but will proceed to lay eggs when returned to 19° to 20°C. after exposure to 0° to 4°C. for 10 days. The number of eggs is, then, usually small and the per- centage of hatchings low. The resultant larvae do not survive long even under good conditions of temperature and humidity. Oviposition is weak at a high (38°C.) temperature and the eggs soon shrivel up though the humidity may be high. Larvae moult in 5-9 (usually 6) days at 38°C., in 6-10 (usually 9) days at 20°C., in 19-21 days at 14° to 16°C., and in 23-25 days at 12° to 14°C. Unfed ticks succumb very quickly to high temperatures and low (50 per cent) relative humidity. They are much more resistant to cold but do not usually survive at 6°C. for continuous periods of over four weeks. Under less rigorous laboratory conditions, replete and unfed R. appendiculatus are able to live for some time ; and mortality is reduced. Larvae transferred every 24 hours for seven days from 38° to 14°C. moulted with a mortality as high as 60 per cent. When moved from 4° to 38°C., mortality was 48 per cent, from 4° to 27°C. the mortality was 35 per cent and from 6° to 20°C., 21 per cent. Still less severe treatment and more equable temperatures decrease the rate of mortality. Alternations of 12° to 16°C. and 12° to 20°C. effect a morta- lity of about 6 per cent.; exposure to 8°C. and 25°C. resulted in about 9 per cent deaths among engorged larvae.
E. ANEURIN LEWIS 389 HABITS AND LIFE- HISTORIES The adaptability of many of the East African ticks to different classes and species of hosts is astonishing. Only a few illustrations can be given here, but they show how the ticks can adopt a variety of hosts and thus keep up the infestation of a locality. A. marmoreum feeds readily on snakes, tortoises, lizards, rhinoceros, buffalo, and more rarely on the other large mammals and cattle. R. appendiculatus occurs commonly on horses, dogs, all game animals, goats, sheep, and cattle. R. sanguineus may be found on birds, hares, ant-bears, dogs, lions, on a few antelope, and on stock. R. simus prefers rodents and other small animals as hosts for larvae, but, as nym- phae and adults, it infests dogs, birds, horses, pigs, goats, sheep, cattle, and numerous species of game and vermin. Larvae of Ixodes, Hyalomma, and Amblyomma are frequently taken off small birds, ground fowl, and hares, whereas the nymphae and adults are found on many bush game and wild animals in the high country and on the plains. Most of the important species of ticks oviposit and moult on the ground in the tufted masses of grass, at the base of bushes, and in niches or hollows made in loose earth or sand. There are a few, like H. leachi, which prefer the debris and rubbish around a dog's kennel for development ; or like Argas persicus, which hides itself in cracks or fissures in the ground or among timber and under any structure that provides dark shelter. H. leachi may penetrate into rats' nests deep in the ground, where specimens in all stages of develop- ment have been collected. R. sanguineus behaves very differently in houses. The replete tick drops off a dog and often crawls up walls to seek shelter in the framework of wooden houses, behind cornices or immediately above the ceilings. The female lays her eggs in these situations, and engorged larvae and nymphae moult there. The writer has seen, several times, numerous ticks emerging from these hiding-places, spreading over the walls of a living-room or forming a live column marching, as it were, directly towards a corner where the housedog habitually rests and sleeps. In the case of Hyalomma species, the adults are extremely active. When a person or an animal rests on the ground in infested areas, the ticks can often be seen hurrying from all directions to the likely host. It is interesting, too, to watch R. pulchellus adults poised on blades of grass ready to cling to an animal that passes within range of its extended fore-legs ; or to observe a brown cluster of larvae at the tips of grasses. The life-histories are of the three-host type in the majority of ticks be- longing to Rhipicephalus, Amblyomma, Haemaphysalis, Ixodes, and Aponomma. A larva which hatches from an egg gains access to a host, feeds to repletion drops to the ground and moults. The nympha which emerges from the moult seeks another animal on which to feed. When engorged with blood, it leaves the animal, drops to the ground, where it moults to produce an adult. The male or female adult must now find a third host. The female will swell out with blood and then drop off to lay her eggs and die. The male may remain on the animal for several weeks ; he will feed more than once, but will not dis- tend like the female. B. annulatus decoloratus is a one-host tick. The larva feeds on a beast, moults after engorging and, as a nympha, attaches once again near the original spot. When the nympha is replete with blood, it casts its skin as the larva did,
390 The Ticks of East Africa without leaving the host. The resultant adults feed on the same animal and, in due course, the female drops to the ground to oviposit. R. bursa and R. evertsi are two-host ticks. In these cases again, the larva feeds and develops into a nympha on the host. The fully-fed nympha, how- ever, drops off and, after ecdysis, the adult that emerges has to find a second host. As in the previous instances, the female engorges and falls to the ground to lay eggs. All the known East African species of Hyalomma are either three-host ticks or they may be partially three-host ticks. A brood of larvae fed on a rodent will feed and drop off first as a batch of engorged larvae ; another lot of the same brood, put on the rodent at the same time, will feed and moult to nymphae without dropping off ; the engorged nymphae, however, will always leave the host to moult on the ground. The nymphae from the engorged larvae which dropped have to reach another host ; they will again fall off as engorged nymphae and undergo ecdysis. The adults, of course, require, in this case, a third host. When larvae of Hyalomma are fed on cattle, sheep, or poultry, they drop as engorged larvae and the life-history is continued as a three-host type. The larva of A. persicus is the only instar of that species which attaches itself to its avian host for several days. It feeds for five or more days, falls off and develops into a first nympha. The tick from now on, feeds only for about one or two hours at a time ; and preferably at night or in the dark. The first nympha feeds for this short period, leaves its host and, in a fortnight or so, casts its skin to emerge as a second nympha. It again takes a meal and creeps away to develop into an adult. The female feeds at intervals between which she deposits her batch of eggs in sheltered places. The Argas species differ from those already mentioned in that they have two or more nymphal instars, in their manner of feeding and in the intermittent way the female lays her eggs. The development of Ornithodoros species is still different. O. megnini may be classified as a one-host tick. The larva feeds deep inside the ears ; it moults to a nympha on the host. The replete nympha falls off and develops into an adult which, if a female, lays her eggs after fertilization. Neither the male nor the female is normally found on animals, for the nympha has ac- quired sufficient food to sustain the adults in their main function in life. Incidentally, the nympha usually remains on the host for about a week to a few days over a month ; but it may remain attached for several monthsE. ANEURIN LEWIS 391 and drop off in large numbers. This peculiarity cannot always be accounted for by an acquired immunity on the part of the host. Heavy infestation of hares by Hyalomma larvae is frequently followed by the death of the host. It has also been observed that females of R. appendiculatus will engorge on experimental animals and, for some unaccountable reason, a varying percent- age fails to oviposit and dies while others of the same batch will reproduce normally. Such species as R. pulchellus, A. variegatum, and A. gemma collec- ted in the field will, at times, oviposit, hatch, and feed well; at others, and under identical conditions, they fail. Another illustration is of the morphological changes, not only in size, but in superficial characters of ticks of one species collected from different localities. R. capensis shows a very wide range of variations whilst R. appendiculatus may often be difficult to recognize.
DIFFERENCES IN INCIDENCE OF ENCEPHALOMYELITIS IN HORSES* BY W. V. LAMBERT Senior Animal Husbandman, In-charge of Genetics, S. R. SPEELMAN Associate Animal Husbandman, Acting In-charge of Horse and Mule Investi- gations AND E. B. OSBORN Junior Animal Husbandman U. S. Range Livestock Experiment Station, Bureau of Animal Industry (Reprinted from The Journal of Heredity, 30, 349, August, 1939) INHERENT differences in resistance to certain types of diseases are known to exist in both animals and plants. Among animals, differences in resistance to bacterial and virus diseases have been shown by Hagedoorn-LaBrand and Hagedoorn2, Irwin3, Schott6, Lambert4, Webster7, Wright and Lewis8, Gowen and Schott1 and others. In plants such differences have been ex- tensively studied and the development of resistant strains has become an effective means for combating certain plant diseases. Such differences are relative rather than absolute, the degree of resistance depending upon such factors as the inborn qualities of the host, the virulence of the pathogenic agent, the environment, age, and physiological condition of the host, degree of infection, etc. In the larger animals, species differences in resistance to certain diseases are well known but few well-authenticated cases of such intra-species differences are known. In horses the opportunities for making such observations are rare and it is believed that the data reported herein, describing a differential resistance to encephalomyelitis, will be of definite interest to biologists, horsemen, and veterinarians alike. MATERIALS USED These records were obtained from the experimental stud maintained at the United States Range Livestock Experiment Station at Miles Ciy, Montana. The 221 horses in this stud represented several types of breeding but the largest percentage consisted of grade Belgians and grade Thoroughbreds. In addition, there were a few Morgans, Nonius, and some crosses from Nonius stallions, on grade Belgian and Thoroughbred mares. Horses of various ages were represented in most groups, the frequencies for each group and age being shown in Table I. *U. S. Department of Agriculture in cooperation with Montana Agricultural Experiment Station. (392)
W. V. LAMBERT, S. R. SPEELMAN AND E. B. OSBORN 393 TABLE I The incidence of encephalomyelitis by breeding and age groups resulting from an outbreak among horses at the United States Range Livestock Experiment Station in 1938. Breeding AGE GROUPS 3 years and over 2-3 years 1-2 years Foals Total Total No. No. affected Total No. No. affected Total No. No. affected Total No. No. affected No. animals No. affected Nonius . . 5 0 0 0 3 1 4 3 12 4 Nonius × Belgian 0 0 0 0 1 1 7 5 8 6 Nonius × Tho- roughbred. 0 0 0 0 0 0 11 8 11 8 Morgan . . 8 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 1 Belgian . . 60 1 9 1 9 2 9 1 87 5 Thoroughbred . 54 4 13 0 18 1 10 1 95 6 Total . 127 6 22 1 31 5 41 18 221 30 In July of 1938 a rather severe epizootic of encephalomyelitis occurred in this stud, 30 of the 221 animals being affected. It is on the basis of these cases that the conclusions reported herein are based. It is generally accepted that encephalomyelitis is transmitted by biting insects such as mosquitoes5 and not from direct contact with infected horses. No data are available on the source of or method of spread of the disease in this epizootic. Since the horses of the different breeding groups were distri- buted at random in the various pastures of the station, the opportunities for exposure to the disease were equal between the groups in which the in- cidence of the disease is compared. INCIDENCE OF DISEASE BY BREED GROUPS The incidence of encephalomyelitis for the various types of breeding and for the different age groups in each type are shown in Table I. Of the 221 horses in the stud 31 were either purebred Nonius or the result of crosses of Nonius stallions on the grade Belgian or Thoroughbred mares. Of this group, 18 developed encephalomyelitis this being 58.1 per cent of the animals of this breeding. Among the 190 animals of all other groups only 12, or 6.3 per cent of the total, were affected. However, a comparison on the basis of totals is somewhat misleading for, as is apparent from Table I, the higher incidence of the disease occurred among the younger animals (yearlings and foals). Since all animals with Nonius breeding were yearlings or foals, except five mature animals imported from Hungary in 1935, a comparison of
394 Differences in Incidence of Encephalomyelitis in Horses the incidence of the disease in these two age groups has been made. Among 41 foals 22 were of Nonius breeding and 19 of other breeding. Of the 22 foals of Nonius breeding 16, or 72.7 per cent, were affected, whereas only two out of 19, or 10.5 per cent, of the foals of other breeding were affected. This difference is highly significant, P being less than .01. Only four yearlings with Nonius breeding were in the stud but two of these were affected, while among 27 yearlings of other breeding only three were affected. Here also the trend in mortality was in the same direction as was observed in the foals. Thus it is apparent that in these two comparable age groups the horses with Nonius breeding were more susceptible to this strain of encephalomyelitis virus. Of the 30 animals affected seven died. Three died during the course of the disease and four died during the convalescent period. Of the latter cases one apparently recovered but was found dead in the pasture the latter part of September. Of the others, according to the veterinarian in charge, two died from the effects of the disease and one from septicemia resulting from bed sores acquired during paralysis. Six of the seven animals that died were of Nonius breeding, five of these being foals and one a yearling. The seventh animal, a yearling, was the one found in the pasture in late Sep- tember. The distribution of the affected animals in the various pastures both preceding and during the outbreak of the disease precludes the possibility of the differences in resistance observed in the various groups being due to their location on the station. The station comprises an area of approximately 50,000 acres and the various pastures are well scattered over most of this area. These pastures varied in size from about 400 acres to several thousand acres. The distribution of animals of the various groups in these pastures was largely at random so that all groups had similar chances of exposure to the disease. During the breeding season from June 1 to July 15, 70 head of mares (including the purebred Nonius) with 39 foals were rotated in pastures near the station headquarters. The density of the stocking in these pastures was greater than in the other pastures but since all mares with foals were included the opportunities for exposure in the various groups were equal. Twenty-four of the 30 cases of encephalomyelitis occurred in this group. The distribution of the cases of encephalomyelitis in the various pastures gives additional support to the above conclusion. Encephalomyelitis occurred in each of the several pastures and in most of the pastures animals from two or more of the different groups were affected. Fourteen mares of the grade Belgian stock, all sucking foals, were vacci- nated with brain emulsion vaccine on June 18 and June 26. Of these mares, one was affected with encephalomyelitis on July 13, this being the first case of encephalomyelitis in the 1938 epizootic. The foal of this mare likewise developed encephalomyelitis, as did the foals of three others of these mares. The incidence of infection in the vaccinated mares (one out of 14) was equally as high as that observed in the unvaccinated mature stock. Three of the four foals were from a cross with a Nonius stallion and one from a purebred Belgian stallion.
W. V. LAMBERT, S. R. SPEELMAN AND E. B. OSBORN 395 INCIDENCE IN VARIOUS AGE GROUPS The distribution of animals of the various ages in the stud is shown in Table I. It is apparent that the younger animals were somewhat more susceptible to the disease than the older animals. A fair comparison of the influence of age on susceptibility can be made only for the groups not in- volving Nonius or crossbred-Nonius breeding since, aside from the five pure- bred mature Nonius horses, only yearlings and foals of this breeding were represented. It would appear that the younger animals of other than Nonius breeding were somewhat more susceptible than the older ones, although the incidence of infection was so low in all of these groups that none of the differences are statistically significant. This is in line, however, with previously reported observations on age differences in resistance. No sex difference in the inci- dence of the disease was noted, as 16 of the animals affected were females and 14 males. PREVIOUS HISTORY AT THE EXPERIMENT STATION Only one other outbreak of encephalomyelitis has occurred at the Range Station. The disease first appeared in the summer of 1937, and five animals were affected between the dates of August 12 and September 5. One of these animals was a mature Nonius stallion, two were grade Belgians, one a grade Thoroughbred, and one was a purebred Belgian. Three of these animals died, one of them being the Nonius stallion, Longfellow. At that time only ten animals with Nonius ancestry were on hand. Nine of these were pure- bred Nonius and one by a Nonius stallion and out of a grade Belgian mare. Previous to the time of his death, Longfellow had bred a number of mares. He was the sire of ten horses with Nonius ancestry that were in the stud at the time of outbreak of the 1938 epizootic, and eight of these were affected. Sixteen of the other horses of Nonius breeding were sired by the stallion Shorty, and ten of these were affected. The other Nonius animals, all im- ported, were sired by several different stallions. DISCUSSION From the foregoing facts it would appear that susceptibility to encephalo- myelitis virus of the western type responsible for this outbreak is dominant to resistance, for the crossbred progeny from the Nonius stallions appeared about equally as susceptible as did the purebred Nonius of the same age groups. The reasons for the greater susceptibility of horses of Nonius an- cestry are not definitely known. Perhaps there has been some natural selec- tion for resistance in the horses that have been native to America for some generations for there is evidence pointing to the existence of virus-induced encephalomyelitis in this country for decades. The Nonius stock previous to its importation was not subjected to such selection for American type encephalomyelitis virus is non-existent in Europe. If resistance were recessive, natural selection would be favourable to the development of resistant strains, but the failure of horses in different vici- nities to be exposed to the disease might explain the failure for the complete
396 Differences in Incidence of Encephalomyelitis in Horses elimination of susceptibility from a stock. Whether there would be a differen- tial selection between the eastern and western type viruses is unknown. These data do not throw any light on this point because most of the horse in this stud were descendants of horses bred at this station or at other localities in the western part of the United States. Because of the limited data and the absence of critical tests designed to answer some of these specific questions, broad generalizations on the role of previous selection on resistance and sus- ceptibility, and on the dominance of susceptibility are unjustified. They do, however, point to the fact that a differential resistance to encephalomyelitis exists in horses. The fact that such differences exist should be of considerable interest and importance to the epizootiologist for such differences might account for a considerable part of the variation in mortality that is encountered in different outbreaks of the disease. Differential resistance of the type encountered here also might influence the response to treatment with vaccines, though no evidence to this effect now exists. It is hoped that these observations may stimulate others of a similar nature, for it is largely from such observations that a knowledge of the role of inheritance in relation to resistance or susceptibility to disease can be estab- lished in species such as the horse. SUMMARY Statistically significant group differences in resistance to encephalomye- litis that were observed in an epizootic occurring in 1938 in the stud of horses at the U. S. Range Livestock Experiment Station are reported. A greater percentage of horses of Nonius breeding were affected than those of other breeding. Among all yearlings 50.0 per cent of Nonius breeding were affected, whereas only 11.1 per cent of the yearlings of other breeding were affected. In the foals the corresponding percentages were 72.7 and 10.5. The differences observed were not attributable to the location of the horses on the station, their distribution being such that all groups had equal opportunity to be ex- posed to the disease. The data confirm previously reported observations on age differences in resistance, the younger animals being the more susceptible. No differences in resistence were observed between males and females. Possible reasons for the differences observed are discussed. LITERATURE CITED 1. Gowen, J. W. and R. G. Schott (1933). Genetic constitution in mice as differentiated by two diseases: pseudorabies and mouse typhoid. Amer. Jour. Hyg. 18, 674-87 2. Hagedoorn-LaBrand, A. C., and A. L. Hagedoorn (1920). Inherited predisposition for a bacterial disease. Amer. Nat. 54, 368-75 3. Irwin, M. R. (1929). The inheritance of resistance to the Danysz bacillus in the rat. Genetics 14, 337-65. 4. Lambart, W. V. (1932). Natural resistance to disease in the chicken. Jour. Immun. 23, 229-60 5. Schoening, H. W. (1938). Recent developments in equine encephalomyelitis. Ad- dress before 19th Annual Meeting Horse and Mule Association of America, Chicago. III, Leaflet 234, Horse and Mule Assoc. America, 3-13
W. V. LAMBERT, S. R. SPEELMAN AND E. B. OSBORN 397 6. Schott, R. G. (1932). The inheritance of resistance to Salmonella aertrycke in various strains of mice. Genetics 17, 203-29 7. Webster, L. T. (1937). Inheritance of resistance of mice to enteric bacterial and neurotropic infections. Jour. Exp. Med. 65, 261-86 8. Wright, Sewall, and Lewis, P. A. (1921). Factors in the resistance of the guinea pig to tuberculosis, with especial regard to inbreeding and heredity. Amer. Nat. 55, 20-50 E
A BRIEF SURVEY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF TREMATODE FAUNA OF INDIA, BURMA AND CEYLON BY G. D. BHALERAO, D.Sc., PH.D., F.Z.S., F.R.M.S., F.A.Sc. Helminthologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Reprinted from the Volumen Jubilare pro Professore Sadao Yoshida, Vol. 2, March, 1939) THE earliest reference to trematode of India is found in the book entitled A practical treatise on the diseases of elephants, camels, and horned cattle by Gilchrist [1841-46]. In this book two kinds of worms are described under the name ' Mussodee ', one of which is obviously Fasciola jacksoni and the other Pseudodiscus hawkesi. Another early record of an Indian trematode was made by Cobbold in 1859 when he referred to Parago- nimus westermanni in Vivera mungos. Subsequent to this date Carter in 1862 recorded Fasciola hepatica and Disiomum intestinale from a man in Dacca. Cobbold in a series of contributions dating from 1869 to 1882 recorded para- sites of the elephant, cattle, Gangetic dolphin and Orcaella brevirostris. Lewis in collaboration with Cunningham and McConnel in 1872 and 1876 respectively described Opistorchis noverca and Gastrodiscoides hominis of man. Bomford in 1887 recorded the presence of uncinate ova of Schistosoma indicum in the large intestine of the transport bullock in Calcutta. Giles in 1892 recorded Paramphistomum cervi and Gastrodiscus aegyptiacus from cattle and horse respectively. The same year Stossich recorded Fasciola hepatica from Portax picta, F. jacksoni, Dicrocoelium pallasii and Fasciolopsis rathousi. Buttle- Reepen in 1900 described Distomum ampullaceum from a cetacean in the Indian ocean. In 1901 Lühe recorded Pleurogenes gastroporus and Meso- coelium sociale from amphibians. Fischoeder in his valuable publications dating from 1901 to 1903 recorded several amphistoms of cattle, horses and elephants in India and Ceylon. Powel in 1903 recorded the presence of Schistosoma haematobium from a human host in this country. Shipley and Hornell in 1904 and 1905 recorded Probolitrema richiardii, Distomum palleni- sum, Muttua margaritferae, Musalia herdmani, Gymnophallus somateriae and Aspidogaster margaritifera. Stossich in 1904 reported Styphlodora horridum from a Boa constrictor. Other parasites recorded in 1905 by Lühe, Neumann and Lingard were Halipegus longispina, Pheumoneces copyristes, Pseudamphis- tomum truncatum, and Gastrodiscus aegyptiacus. The year 1906 was noted for the discovery from this Institute by Montgomery of several Schistosomes of domestic animals, viz. Schistosoma spindalis, S. indicum, S. bovis and Orniho- biharzia bomfordi. This year was also marked by the discovery of Fasciolopsis buski of man by Lyngdoh, and several parasites were recorded from Ceylon by Lühe and Linstow, viz. Gastris consors, Epibdella macrocolpa, Acanthosolus biodorus, Anaporrhutum largum, Schistorchis carneus, Tristomum magalocotyle, Stephanochasmus ceylonensis and Lyperosomum squamatum. Looss in 1907 described Gastrodiscus secundus from a mule in Assam and in 1908 Paradisto- mum ceratophorae from a reptile in Ceylon. The works of Evans and Rennie (398)
G. D. BHALERAO 399 in 1908 and 1910 on the parasites of the domestic animals in Burma also deserve a passing reference. In their memorable work Stiles and Goldberger in 1910 described several amphistomes of domestic animals in India and Ceylon. Mention must also be made of Gaiger's publication in 1910 of the check-list of the parasites of domestic animals in India and its subsequent revision in 1915. Mitter in 1912 recorded Homalogaster sp. and Nicoll described Styphlodora najae and Xenopharynx solus from the Indian cobra. Southwell in 1913 worked out the trematodes of the Pearl Banks of Ceylon and described Isoparochis hypselobagri from the air-bladder of Wallago attu. Polystomum kachugae and Styphlodora persimilis were recorded in 1914 by Stewart and Nicoll res- pectively. Lane in 1915 described Artyfechinostomum sufrartyfex from a girl in Assam. Opisthorchis noverca was recorded by Stephens in 1916. Agamodistomes in anophiline mosquitoes were demonstrated by Sinton and Soparkar in 1917. Southwell and Prashad in 1918 recorded a few trematodes of fishes in Bengal. Sewell in 1920 gave a detailed account of Mesocoelium sociale and in 1922 recorded Leucochloridium assamense. Jackson in 1921 described Fasciola gigantica from cattle in Burma. Vevers in 1923 described Paragonimus compactus from the Indian Mongoose. In his valuable monograph entitled A revision of the Amphistomata of Mammals Mapplestone dealt with several species of amphistomes from this country. Railliet in 1924 proposed the names Paramphistomum birmiense and P. microon for Amphistome numbers 2 and 3 of Evans and Rennie, 1908. Bhalerao in 1924 gave descriptions of Eurytrema dajii and Testifrondosa cristata from food mammals of Rangoon. Chandler in 1925 worked out the parasites of cats in Calcutta and recorded flukes from man which were identified by the writer as Isoparorchis hypsel- obagri. Since the year 1926 greater enthusiasm was displayed in the study of the trematode fauna of this country by several Indian workers. In a series of papers published in 1926 Bhalerao worked out the flukes of the house- crow, water-snake, bat and the frog in Burma and as a result of this several new forms were discovered. He also published a list of the trematodes from Burma. The same year Chandler discovered eggs of Schistosoma incognitum in human faeces. Mehra and Negi and Gulati described Tremiorchis ranarum and Paragonimus edwardsi respectively. In 1927 were described the species Opisthorchis pedicellata, O. dendriticum, Mesocoelium meggitti, Strigea annandali and Neodiplostomum kashmirensis by Verma, Morgan, Bhalerao and Faust. In 1928 Northup in Rangoon worked on the trematodes of Chiroptera and Mehra and Negi on those of the frog. Mehra also described Ommatobrephus lobatum. In 1929 Bhalerao studied the species of the genus Paradistomum in Burmese reptiles, Narain and Das recorded the species of the same genus from India and Phadke and Gulati described Pachytrema hewletti. In 1930 Baer, Nagaty, Jordan, Verma, Moghe and Thapar added in some measure to our knowledge of trematode parasites of this country. In 1931 Bhalerao and Mehra worked out the flukes of a few reptiles in India. Chatterji in Rangoon proved ex- perimentally that the adults of Cercariae indicae XXVI Sewell, 1922 are Paramphistomum sp., Bhalerao assigned the species Artyfechinostomum sufrar- tyfex Lane, 1915, to the genus Pryphostomum and thus finally settled the con- troversy in regard to the taxonomy of this fluke. He also pointed out that, E 2
400 Trematode Fauna like a few other parasites, this species also is common to both man and pig Those that contributed to our knowledge of trematoda in 1932 are Mehra, Moghe, Harshe, Gogate, Pande, Sinha and Fernando. The names of the first three deserve a special mention for they recorded the monostomes for the first time from this country. Bhalerao in 1932 gave an interesting account of the occurrence of Isoparorchis hypselobagri and offered a word of caution in regard to the infection of man and domestic carnivores by this fluke. Rao and Rao and Ayyar in 1933 made a very valuable addition to our knowledge of the schistosomes of dogs, pigs and cattle in this country, Schistosoma suis (S. incognitum) and S. nasalis were described, the latter of which causes snoring disease of cattle in this country. Chatterji and Srivastava added a good deal to our knowledge of the trematodes of frogs and fishes and Harshe, Thapar and Mehra to those of reptiles. Fernando described a few forms from Ceylon. Harshe in 1934 described three new species of Cotylophoron from goats and sheep. Gogate records a few new forms from birds in Rangoon. Bharelao re- corded the occurrence of Schistosoma japonicum from pigs in Calcutta. The year 1934 and the following three are remarkable for a very large output of work on trematoda from India. In a series of memoirs published during these years Bhalerao reported upon several parasites collected from the animals which died in Zoological Gardens, Calcutta. Kasauli, Poona, Nagpur and several other places in India. As a result of this several new forms have been des- cribed and many new records have been made. A large number of parasites from avian hosts have been recorded by Verma. He also recorded a few new parasites of fishes. During this period Mehra published an account of several new forms of Plagiorchidae, Spirorchidae and Lecithodendriidae. Srivastava continued his study of the parasites of fishes and amphibians, recording many new species. He also described Catatropis indicus from a fowl. In a number of published memoirs Pande added to our knowledge of Lecithodendriidae, Gorgoderidae, and Allocreadiidae. Monostomes and Schistosomes were studied by Lal, Strigeids by Vidyarthi and Patwardhan, the genus Cyclocoelum by Khan. Notable contribution to the knowledge of the trematoda of Indian porpoises was made by Ozaki in 1935. Other contributions of some signifi- cance during the last four years were made by Dayal, Chatterji, Harshe, Rao, Gogate, Sinha, Thapar and Dayal and Thapar and Lal. Mention has so far been made of the work on adult trematodes only. Se- well in 1922 published his memorable work on Cercariae indicae. This is regarded as the most comprehensive work so far produced on this group of larval forms. Others who contributed in some measure to the knowledge of this group are Rao, Soparkar, Chatterji and Faruqui. A few notable contributions to the knowledge of the life-histories of some flukes of domestic animals were made in the last two decades. Liston and Soparkar in 1918 elucidated the life-history of Schistosoma spindalis. Rao in 1932 obtained experimentally Paramphistomum cervi and Fischoederius elongatus. Bhalerao in 1933 worked out the life-history of Fasciola gigantica. Rao in 1933 raised experimentally Euparyphium malayanum from Cercariae indicae XXIII Sewell, 1922 and Schistosoma nasalis from Cercariae indicae XXX Sewell, 1922.
ABSTRACTS Protein standards for milk production. J. MACKINTOSH (1939). Agric. Progress 16, 195-201. THE paper describes the results obtained in a large-scale experiment on the protein standards for milk production. The experiment was conducted during the winter and spring periods of 1935-36 and 1936-37 on farms in the south of England. The author has drawn attention to the investigations carried out during the past few years in the United States as well as in some European countries, which have shown that equally good results could be obtained in practice by the use of ration supplying appre- ciably lower quantities of protein equivalent than the usually recommended 0.6 lb. for the production of 10 lb. of milk containing 3.7 per cent of fat. Having this consi- deration in mind he has studied the effect of two production mixtures, one designed to comply with the accepted English standard, the other supplying approximately 2/3rd of this amount. In order to avoid complications arising from the use of different food- stuffs, the protein mixtures in both ' high ' and ' low ' groups were made up of the same materials by varying the proportion of the constituents. The maintenance ration was adjusted as far as possible to comply with the usual standard, viz. 6 lb. of starch equi- valent and 0.6 lb. of protein equivalent per 1,000 lb. live-weight. During the first winter some 500 cows and in the second winter some 900 cows were under experiment. The cows in each farm were grouped in pairs, both animals in each pair being as similar as possible in breed, age, date of calving, milk-yield, etc. After pairing, one in each pair was allocated to a different production mixture. The effect of the high and low protein mixtures showed that the lower protein con- tent in the production mixture (a) had no detrimental effect on the fatness, handling properties or appearance of the cows, (b) was equally effective for milk production and (c) produced milk of almost identical composition. From the result of the experiment, the author concludes :402 ABSTRACTS Abortions in the vaccinated lot ranged from zero to 7.1 per cent in the different farms with an average of 3.3 per cent for all the farms taken together. Corresponding figures for the unvaccinated controls were 13 to 30 per cent in the different farms with an average of 25.1 per cent for the whole lot. These figures refer to actual abortions only and do not include normal deliveries with retention of after-births, premature calving, still-births, etc. The percentage of such uncertain calvings was twice as much in the control group as in the vaccinated group. The conclusion has, therefore, been reached that future vaccination against infectious abortion in cattle with employment of living culture ought to be applied to the calves. The experiment was not controlled by bacteriological examination. [V. R. R.] (1) The value of phenothiazine in the treatment of oesophagostomiasis in sheep. F. H. S. ROBERTS (1939). Aust. Vet. J. 15, 237. (2) The anthelmintic efficiency of phenothiazine. H. M. GORDON (1939), Aust. Vet. J. 15, 245. IN these two papers are given results of trials conducted at two different stations and directed principally against Oesophagostomum columbianum, the nodule worm of sheep, with phenothiazine (thiodiphenylamine), a drug that came into prominence recently on account of its extreme toxicity for certain insects and its apparent harmless- ness for man and animals. Roberts employed ' thiox', a commercial preparation containing 93 per cent phenothiazine and 5 per cent betanaphthol, marketed by the Imperial Chemical Indus- tries of Australia and New Zealand, and used 92 sheep and lambs for his experiments. With a view to ensure passage of the drug straight into the abomasum, reflex closure of the oesophageal groove was attempted by preliminary treatment with 2 ml. of 10 per cent copper sulphate. At a dose rate of 0.15 gm. per lb. body-weight administered in a watery suspension, following copper sulphate stimulation and after a starvation period of 24 hours, phenothiazine gave fairly good results as judged by the percentage of worms passed after treatment and those collected post-mortem. Nearly 72 per cent of 28 sheep thus treated passed from 60 to 100 per cent of the worms. With dose rates of 0.4 gm. and 0.5 gm. per lb. body-weight, without copper sulphate stimulation, the results, though somewhat less satisfactory in lambs, were efficient in grown sheep, only one of 19 six-tooth wethers thus treated giving a percentage efficiency of less than 75. The poor response of some sheep to treatment appeared to be associated with such factors as tendency to constipation and quantities, of ingesta present in the intestines of unstarved animals which delay the passage of the drug to the large bowel, thus per- mitting a high percentage of it to be broken down and absorbed. Phenothiazine was also found very efficient against H. contortus but had no anthel- mintic value against Trichuris spp. Gordon used both the commercial preparation and the pure drug and found them equally efficient. In his series of experiments conducted on 42 sheep, phenothiazine in doses of 0.5 to 0.6 gm. per kg. body-weight, proved an efficient anthelmintic for the treatment of oesophagostomiasis, removing from 60 to 100 per cent of worms in nearly 78 per cent of sheep treated irrespective of whether it was swallowed into the abomasum or into the rumen. The results obtained suggested that the dose might possibly be reduced, without lowering its anthelmintic efficiency, provided a preliminary dose of copper sulphate is used. In these investigations a 60 per cent removal of worms was accepted as a satisfactory treatment. In a special trial specifically designed to test the anthelmintic efficiency of this drug against H. contortus, doses of 0.3 to 0.75 gm. per kg. body-weight, repeated on three successive days, in capsules showed 100 per cent efficiency in all of 7 sheep treated. In a later trial against Trichostrongylus spp., a single dose of 0.6 gm. per kg. body-weight, administered in capsules, reduced egg counts by 90 per cent or more. The urine of treated animals took on a reddish colour on exposure to air, which is explained as due to the excretion by the kidneys of thionol, a phenothiazine derivative.
ABSTRACTS 403 No ill effects attributable to the toxic action of the drug were noticed, except the appearance of diarrhoea in one of Roberts' six-tooth wethers, which was emaciated and received a dose of 20.5 gm. (at the rate of 0.5 gm. per lb. body-weight). [R. N. M.] Studies on the trichomonad, parasitic in the reproductive organs of cattle. I. On the nomenclature and morphology. II. Biological characters. III. Serological study with special reference to agglomeration404 ABSTRACTS IV Various dyes were used to ascertain the effects of vital staining on T. foetus. The effect of individual dyes was determined against various mixtures. The cytoplasm of the organism showed twenty to thirty staining granules. The nucleus, blepharoplast, flagella and fibrillae were only seen to take up the stain at the stage when the protozoon was nearing death. The parabasal body, however, could not be dyed. The time required for the taking up of dyes and their excretion by the flagellate was found to be shortened as the temperature of the reaction was raised. The organism in old cultures reacted negatively to vital dyes, and this was ' not only due to the acidity of the medium but also to the functional inactivity of the protozoa '. V The power of oxidation and reduction possessed by T. foetus is stated by the author to depend upon the vitality of the organism, so that flagellates of vigour and vitality exhibit a more powerful oxidationABSTRACTS 405 Methylene blue as an antidote for poisoning by oat hay and other plants containing nitrates. W. B. BRADLEY, H. F. EPPSON AND O. A. BEATH (1940). J. Amer. Vet Med. Assoc. 96, 41-42. IN a number of states, sudden death of cattle fed on oat hay or straw had often been reported. The authors maintain that the cause of poisoning was due to the pre- sence of a high concentration of potassium nitrate in these roughages. Besides oat hay, they found very large amounts of nitrate in a number of other plants like pigweed, specimens of sorghum, etc. Nothing is known about the factors which are responsible for the development of such high concentration of potassium nitrate in these plants. When ingested by cattle, some of this potassium nitrate is reduced to nitrite which con- verts haemoglobin into methemoglobin. This methemoglobin is incapable of giving up its oxygen to the tissues and thus causes an anoxaemia and in severe cases death. In order to find out an antidote against this methemoglobinaemia produced in cattle by the ingestion of nitrates, the authors performed some feeding experiments. Three calves were given by means of stomach tube different amounts of potassium nitrate, the doses varying from 0.5 to 1.6 gm. per kg. body-weight. All the three animals died and it was found that 80-90 per cent of the haemoglobin of the blood had been converted into methemoglobin. Ten other calves were also given similar amounts of potassium nitrate. When the animals were showing typical symptoms of nitrate poisoning and had fallen down due to weakness, varying amounts of a 4 per cent solution of methylene blue were in- jected intravenously. All the animals thus treated were back on their feet within ten to twenty minutes, but the calves which received only 0.5-0.6 gm. of methylene blue had recurrence of the symptoms and died if allowed to go untreated any further. Two gm. of methylene blue was quite sufficient to protect an animal weighing up to 500 lb. against an ingestion of 14 lb. of plant materials containing about 5 per cent potassium nitrate. Further the animals treated with 2 gm. methylene blue did not show any recurrence of symptoms, provided any further feeding of a forage containing high per- centage of nitrate was stopped. [S. N. R.] Johne's disease infection in laboratory animals with aid of paraffin oil. W. M. MOHLER (1939). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc. 94, 590-594. IN this paper the author records experiments in connection with the reproduction of Mycobacterium paratuberculosis infection in small laboratory animals. It has always been possible to transmit the disease to cattle and sheep by feeding virulent cultures or ground up intestines taken from cattle immediately after death. Early attempts to infect rabbits and guinea-pigs either by feeding or by subcutaneous or intraperitoneal inoculations of aqueous or saline suspensions of the organism, had failed. A new method of infection is since claimed to have been tried with success. My. paratuberculosis was grown for one month in a liquid medium (details not given), filtered through paper and emulsified with 2 parts of paraffin oil. This emulsion when inoculated intraperitoneally in doses of 2 c.c. killed all guinea-pigs inoculated (7) within 32 days. P. M. lesions consisted of grayish-white foci and nodules of various size on the surface of the liver, spleen, diaphragm and lungs, with enlargement of lymph glands. The infection was reproduced in rabbits and guinea-pigs by using paraffin oil emulsions or even simple saline suspensions of material from these lesions. The nodules frequently attained some size and infiltrated deeply in those animals that lingered for some 4 to 5 months ; as a rule, the guinea-pigs thus infected died in 30 to 90 days. Intestinal scrapings from affected cattle, antiforminised and emulsified in paraffin oil, also killed rabbits and guinea-pigs within 6 weeks. Similar results were obtained by using faecal material from a herd of goats in which Johne's disease had been suspected. Rats, mice and pigeons were also found susceptible but chickens proved more re- fractory. An instance of prenatal infection in the guinea-pig is recorded. Smears of whole blood drawn directly from the heart of two infected guinea-pigs just before death showed acid-fast organisms. Attempts to vaccinate guinea-pigs with heat killed cultures of My. paratuberculosis proved unsuccessful. [R. N. M.]
406 ABSTRACTS Preliminary note on the growth of Trypanosoma equiperdum in the developing chick embryo. C. A. MITCHELL, R. V. L. WALKER, HEATH AND D. G. McKERCHER (1939). Canad. J. Comp. Med. 3, 223-224. Cultivation of various species of trypanosomes in the developing chick embryo. B. J. LONGLEY, N. M. CLAUSEN AND A. L. TATUM (1939). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. & Med. 41, 365-366. ATTEMPTS have repeatedly been made to cultivate these parasites upon artificial media but without success until very recently. The successful employment of deve- loping chick embryos for this purpose is therefore of considerable interest, and this may lead to the elucidation of some obscure points regarding the life-histories of trypanosomes. Mitchell et al. employed chick embryos at their 12th and 16th days of development. When infected rats showed teeming numbers of trypanosomes, their heart blood was collected, and immediately diluted with ten volumes of water. 0.1 c.c. of this diluted blood was placed on the chorio-allantoic membrane, and the eggs were kept under observation till they batched in the usual way on the 21st day. The chicks appeared normal and no trypanosomes were detected in their blood smears. Chick embryos infected early died in the shell, and their blood was infective to laboratory animals, though no trypanosomes were demonstrated microscopically. When infected late in embryonic life, the chicks hatched out normally, appeared to remain healthy till the 3rd day after hatching when they became drowsy and showed the presence of trypanosomes. Two days later the chicks died, and the presence of trypanosomes in their blood was revealed microscopically and by the biological test in rats and guinea-pigs, but adult fowls were not infected. Longley and coworkers attempted to correct the arsenic fastness of a strain of T. rhodesiense by repeated passage through various mammalian hosts. Having failed in this, cultivation in eggs already incubated for 8-10 days was tried. Infective rat blood was diluted with normal saline, and 0.5 c.c. of this was introduced aseptically into eggs. The embryos died in 4-5 days as a result of a heavy trypanosome infection, and the subinoculations into fresh incubated eggs were carried out every 5th day. The trypano- some strain was thus maintained in developing chick embryos for 8 generations lasting over 41 days. Its virulence and drug fastness remained unchanged over this period. T. equiperdum, T. brucci, T. evansi, and T. hippicum were also successfully cultivated but T. lewisi did not produce any satisfactory cultures. The trypanosome strains tested were not infective to the hatched chicks. [S. C. A. D.] Chronic fluorine intoxication in domestic animals. A. W. PEIRCE (1939). Nutrition Abstracts & Reviews 9, 253-261. THE subject has been reviewed with reference to (a) the occurrence of fluorosis under natural conditions, (b) the experimental production of the disease in animals with a view to elucidate questions arising from clinical observations and (c) the comparative toxicity of different compounds to various animals. Most of the literature on the sub- ject, of which the author cites 122 references, refers to the symptomatology of the malady, part of it to the physiological effects of the disease and a part to the quantitative aspects of requirement and disease production. Live volcanic regions and chemical factory tracts using fluorine compounds have been incriminated as contributing to the contamination of the atmosphere, vegetation and water supply of the neighbourhood. Chronic fluorine intoxication seems to be prevalent in North and South America and parts of Europe and Africa, both among humans and among cattle. Cases among cattle are not usually found in Australia or Asia, although human cases occur in India, China and Japan. Among the recorded clinical symptoms are the impairment of gait, difficulty of locomotion, raggedness of coat, reduction of milk yield and egg production, anaemia, conjunctival irritation, abnormal skeletal development by way of swollen joints, exos- toses of the long bone and jaws, spontaneous fractures, selective abrasion of the molars thickening of the mandible, mottling of the enamel of teeth, change of colour, size, orientation, shape and structure of the teeth, pitting of the incisors, etc. All these
ABSTRACTS 407 symptoms have been experimentally induced in animals such as rats, guinea-pigs and sheep under laboratory conditions by feeding them with varying doses of fluorine. Affect- ed animals recovered on changing the feed and thus stopping the fluorine intake. Some of the physiological reactions of a continued sublethal dosage of fluorine are reduced appetite, less utilization of food, loss of weight, reduced rate of growth, un- thriftiness, diarrhoea, diuresis, anaemia, photophobia, transitory glucosuria, anorexia, etc. Histological symptoms characteristic of osteomalacia, hypoplasia of the enamel and dentine and degenerative changes in the kidney, liver, suprarenals, heart, muscle and nervous system also occur. Chemically the bones and teeth are the most affected. The concentration of fluorine in normal bone ash is 0.01-0.15 per cent. In cases of fluorine intoxication, with no obvious symptoms, it is 10 to 15 times as much and in clinical cases, 15 to 30 times as much and in exceptional cases about 70 times more than in normal bones, the bone ash containing about 2 per cent fluorine and the teeth about 1 per cent. Highest concentrations up to 2.7 per cent are found in exostoses, the epiphysis, the cancellous bones and the compact shaft containing lesser quantities in descending order. Normal tissues of hens and cows contain 0.5 to 1.0 mg. fluorine per 100 gm. dry matter. Due to the ingestion an increase of 2 to 5 times has been noticed, while in one case a cow's thyroid had as much as 160 mg. fluorine per 100 gm. Under similar con- ditions of ingestion, the blood of cows shows an increase from 0.2 to 0.6 mg. per 100 c.c. and that of hens from 0.0 to 0.15 mg. In the egg an increase from 0.05 to 0.2 mg. per 100 gm. has been obtained, most of it being in the lipoid fraction of the yolk. Regarding milk, opinion is divided. Studies have also been made upon the effect of fluorosis on coagulation time of blood, the phosphatase content of kidney and plasma, the serum, calcium and phosphorus, the retention of calcium and phosphorus and the vitamin C content of various organs. The minimum quantities of fluorine that induce the syndrome of chronic fluorosis are 70 mg. per day per kg. body-weight for the hen, 10 mg. for the pig, 3 mg. for the cow and 3 mg. for the sheep. Dental changes are effected in rats with 1 mg. per day while 20 mg. were required for chronic symptoms to develop. Sodium fluoride and sodium fluosilicate are the most toxic, rock phosphate and phosphatic limestone slightly less toxic and cryolite and calcium fluoride are the least toxic. Toxicity decreases with age. It increases when ingested in solution, 20 mg. as solid and 0.5 mg. in solution being equal in effect. It is decreased by a simultaneous calcium phosphate, aluminium chloride or green grass supplement. It increases with an imbalanced food intake or undernourishment. Ingestion of desiccated thyroid in- creases the toxicity. Intermittent intake lessens toxicity. The author concludes by suggesting that care should be exercised in selecting the phosphate supplement for stock. Calcination by steam, if economical, would solve the problem better by reducing the fluorine content. Dairy cows fed at 2 mg. fluorine per kg. body-weight per day for 6 years showed no deleterious effects. Careful disposal of the emanations from chemical factories would avoid the contamination of the atmos- phere, vegetation and water supply of the localities. The disease does not occur in localities where the soil contains less than 20 mg. fluorine per 100 gm. [P. A. S.] Effect of temperature on size of eggs from pullets in different latitudes. D. C. WARREN (1939). J. Agric. Res. 59, 441-452. IN order to secure data for the construction of annual egg size curves for birds main- tained under various environmental conditions, records were obtained from scienti- fic workers in different parts of the United States of America, the Philippine Islands, Canada and Scotland. In all instances the records were selected from pullets which laid consistently throughout the year. Freak specimens such as double-yolked or yolk- less eggs were not included in the calculations. In each instance the egg weights were plotted against the maximum day temperature. A comparison of the various groups of annual egg size showed clearly that the temperature was a very important factor in determining the type of figure obtained. In most instances the egg size increased fairly rapidly during the first few months but at one station near the Equator where
408 ABSTRACTS the maximum temperatures were uniformly high, the increase in egg size was not nearly so pronounced. Very low temperatures seemed to have little effect on egg size but after the daily maximum temperatures exceeded 70°F for a few days, egg size fluctuations usually showed a close correlation with those of temperature. In localities where the summer temperatures were very high the summer egg size was greatly depressed and the birds were prevented from expressing their maximum potentialities for egg size unless the maximum temperature dropped below 70°F before the end of the laying year. Where the maximum temperatures seldom exceeded 70°F, the egg size tended to increase slightly during the summer months. The results obtained were consistent for various breeds and crosses. Over year birds also showed a marked reduction in egg size during hot weather. The fact that egg size is very materially reduced by high temperatures is of very considerable importance in interpreting the results obtained during breeding operations. In comparing the egg sizes of birds from different regions it is evident that in future some consideration should be given to climatic conditions. Further the effects of changes in temperature from year to year cannot be ignored in genetic studies where the daughter's records are compared with those of their ancestors. [A. J. M.]
NOTE RAW WOOL AND ITS MANUFACTURE410 NOTE Before leaving this brief survey of the geographical positions of wool pro- ducing areas, attention may be drawn to our own country which provides a very striking example of the influence of climatic conditions upon the type of wool grown. In the south of England, Down wools which are reasonably fine in quality, are produced and are used for hosiery. In the hilly districts the wools are longer and coarser, and under extreme conditions, as in the Lake District and the Scottish Highlands, the wools produced are low in quality and very variable. CHARACTERISTICS OF WOOL Wool is graded according to its quality. Wool quality is a vague term, rather difficult to define. Wool quality in reality sums up the physical and chemical properties of the wool fibre, and determines indirectly its field of application. Wool quality may be said to have two distinct meanings, both of which are of great significance when assessing its value. 1. Wool quality, its technical meaning This refers to the count of yarn to which it should spin ; for example, wool of 60's quality should spin to 60's, that is 60×560 yards per pound. This, however, does not hold true, as most wools will not spin to their quality numbers. The quality number was originally based upon the fibre diameter, and. today this is the main feature upon which we judge quality, though many other factors play an important part in the actual spinning pro- perty of the fibres. The technical meaning of wool quality is of great import- ance as it enables vendors to describe their wares in such a manner that others may visualise the characteristics of the materials and assess their value. The commercial value is decided not only upon the diameter of the fibres, but also on such properties as length, waviness, uniformity, strength, elasticity, etc. 2. Wool quality, relative meaning A wool may be said to be of good quality if it possesses to a marked extent the features of its type. Thus we may have a coarse diameter wool, which is relatively of good quality, whilst a fine diameter wool may be of relatively poor quality. In this respect the method of appraisement by the wool control is of interest. When submitting wool for appraisement the reputed quality must be stated. The appraisers then give the wool a value in accordance with their opinion as to its possession of the features of its reputed quality or otherwise. To summarise the term wool quality, one may say that the true quality of a wool is dependent upon its spinning property, which in turn is dependent upon the properties of the material. Briefly these properties may be des- cribed as follows :NOTE 411 the wool. As the wool becomes finer in diameter its quality increases, thus we have a 28's quality wool with an average diameter of 1/350", whilst a 64's quality wool will have an average diameter of 1/1200". ii. Length of fibre This again varies, and may be taken as an indication of quality, but some qualification of this statement is necessary. As wool becomes finer in diameter it normally becomes shorter. Thus a 28's quality wool will have an average length of 14" (maximum), whilst a 64 's quality wool will only have a maximum length of 4". Should the length of the fibres increase whilst the other features remain constant the value of the wool will increase, as its spinning property will be enhanced. iii. Waviness of fibre The waves or crimps per inch which the fibres possess are important in the estimation of the spinning property of the material. Generally speaking the finer the quality of the wools the more waves per inch in the fibre, with an increased spinning property. A 28's quality wool will be straight in fibre, whilst a 64's quality wool will have an average of 24 waves per inch. The for- mation of the wave must also be considered, regularity of the waves being necessary, if the maximum spinning property is required. iv. Surface structure of the fibre Wool is a multi-cellular fibre, the small cells overlapping to form what are called serrations protruding from the surface of the fibre, and giving to different wools their characteristic surface properties. Long coarse wools are composed of larger cells, firmly fastened to the core of the fibre, whilst the cells composing fine short wools are smaller, and give relatively more pronounced serrations. The old theory of spinning was based upon these serrations, but to-day, their importance is not minimised, it is realised that other factors are involved in spinning. There are on the average 80 serrations per mm. in low quality wools, and an average of 120 per mm. in the finer qualities of wool. v. The contour of the fibre The cross-sections of wool fibres vary from circles to ellipses in shape, and this variation, which is common to all qualities of wool, is relatively small. It is logical to assume that the more nearly circular the cross-section of the fibre the better its spinning property, due to the more regular movement and dis- placement of the fibre, during drafting and particularly twisting. vi. Strength of fibre The wool fibre possesses remarkable mechanical properties such as strength, elasticity and resilience. The stronger the fibre the more satisfactorily will it process, due to a decreased amount of fibre breakage, during its passage through the various machines. The strength of the wool fibre varies considerably with the amount of moisture present in the wool, and reaches the greatest value when the wool is dry. vii. Elasticity of the fibre Allied to the strength of the wool fibre is its elasticity. This plays a valu- able part in the processing of the material, and is a factor which is partly responsible for the durability of the wool fibre. Fibres which are elastic will
412 NOTE stretch during processing or wear, and will recover their normal length allowed to "rest" awhile afterwards. This factor is responsible for an all- wool garment retaining its shape for a longer period than a garment made from mixture of wool, and cotton. Moisture plays an important part in the elasticity of the wool fibre. viii. Other features of the fibre Wool possesses a number of properties, which have some little bearing upon its utility, and may be used as minor guides to wool quality. Among these are colour, lustre and handle. The last may be termed " the layman's quality indicator " for if a wool has a soft handle the layman will usually say it is of good quality, and generally speaking, he is correct. One must, however, mention the fact that wools which possess all the other attributes of quality may have a harsh handle. The preservation of this property of handle must be a consideration during the processing of the material. ix. The durability of wool The wool fibre possesses exceptional durability. This property makes it one of our cheapest fibres in the long run, a factor that has long been recognised. The durability of wool makes it ideal for the manufacture of articles of clothing, soft furnishing fabrics and carpets. With this durability there is also present the property of retaining its shape over a considerable period and recovering from deformation.
REVIEW Animal Breeding in the Light of Genetics414 REVIEW reported in the meeting on statistical considerations. Yates of England dis- cussed the statistical aspects of animal experimentation and emphasised the design of a genetic experiment. With reference to factorial design in such studies he suggested the possible use of discriminant function for dealing with various kinds of multiple measurements. Berge of Norway discussed size of sample and Lush of the United States considered methods of measuring the heredity of individual differences. Two papers dealt with the inheritance of lethal characters in horses and cattle. Addington and Cunningham of the United States considered an inherited di-mamilla in milk goats. From Germany, Abderhalden and Herre discussed the application of the protective proteinase reaction to problems of heredity. The authors say that the structure of the proteins is the end pro- duct of genetic phenomena, is affected by genes and is associated with body characters. This paper is somewhat bold and theoretical, but may ultimately throw light on the gap between the physical and biological sciences. The striking relationship between phenotypic characters and type of reaction in sheep mouflon hybrids and in pigs confirmed this genetic phenomenon. Of the three meetings on selection and performance, the first dealt with milk yield. Kruger of Germany considered the determination of performance value, genetic value, genes and genetic quanta. He suggested that perform- ance of dairy cows was an unsuitable basis for selection since it is an expression of the interreaction of inheritance and environment; he would prefer perform- ance in a standard environment, which he calls ' performance value'. Environ- ment can be standardised internationally. As genetic value is determined by parent-progeny comparisons, heredity grid is suitable for such analysis. To recognise individual genetic factors controlling milk yield and to trace their inheritance is not possible ; mode of inheritance of such quantitative charac- ters necessarily presupposes gene complexes which the author proposes to call ' genetic quanta '. He adds that investigations of the genetic basis and mode of inheritance must take into account the polymeric basis of milk yield. Lortscher of Switzerland, in an attempt to find causes of annual average variations, analysed the performance records, covering 24 years, of a herd of British-Friesian cattle. He attempted to assess variance due to non-heritable environmental influences and to make full use of genetic variance in selection. In this connection it might be emphasised that such a study of some of our herds in India, notably the Sahiwal herds at New Delhi and Ferozepur, would be of immense value in measuring the genetic improvement thus far obtained and the methods responsible for such progress. Csukas of Hungary discussed the genetics of the lactation curve and expressed the opinion that, standardised on certain principles, it was here- ditary and that homomeric genes are involved. Ward and Campbell reported on the sire survey work done in New Zealand. The report was based on the records of cows submitted to the Herd Recording Council in that country. Sex linkage in milk yield inheritance in cattle was considered by Marchlewski of Poland. The fact that the discussion on this paper revealed confusion of thought on this problem indicates that definite experimentation could throw more light on its solution than any purely analytical procedure,
REVIEW 415 Of all the problems considered at this Congress some are of interest pri- marily to the pure geneticist, whereas others are of great value to the actual breeder of farm animals. Much of the material discussed in this report is of considerable benefit to workers in India. It is noticed by the reviewers, however, that two new and very important matters were not discussed at the Congress : the inheritance of endocrine gland activity and breeding for produc- tion per unit live-weight instead of per animal. Whether this was due to the small amount of work that has been done on these problems or to the lack of time at the Congress is not known. [N. R. J. and J. N.W.]
ERRATA THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY Vol. X, Part III, September 1940 Page 331, line 12 from bottom, for ' spermatogenesis ' read ' spermatogenesis' Page 332, line 8, for ' punchuring ' read ' puncturing ' Vol. X, Part II, June 1940 Page 213, line 6, for ' Mitchell' read ' Sherman and MacLeod' Page 217, Appendix I, add the following figures in a fourth column under the heading ' Calcium content' gm. 2.819 3.412 3.167 2.763 2.697 3.914 3.876 3.708 2.684 3.185 3.831 4.034 4.012 4.087 3.134 3.891 4.066 4.122 3.274 4.040 4.068
INDEX TO AUTHORS PAGE A ANETTEIN LEWIS, E., "The Ticks of East Africa, I. Species, Distri- bution, Influence of Climate, Habits and Life-histories " . . 382 ASCHAFFENBUEG, R. (SEE KAY, H. D.) . . . . . . 332 ATKESON, F. W. (SEE WHITNAH, C. H.) . . . . . . 329 B BANERJEE, B. N. (see DOCTOR, N. S.) . . . . . 63 ii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE CLAUSEN, N. M. (see LONGLEY, B. J.) . . . . . . . 406 COPELAND, L., " A Study of Factors concerning Herd Management and Herd Production " (Abstract) . . . . . . . 122 CRAWFORD, M., " Infection of Adult Fowls with Syngamus trachealis " . 293 D DAS GUPTA, B. (see MOOKERJEE, H. K.) . . . . . . 295 DIAGNE, L. (see LARRAT, R.) . . . . . . . . 325 DOCTOR, N. S., BANERJEE, B. N. AND KOTHAVALLA, Z. R., " Studies on some Factors affecting the Physical and Chemical Constants of Ghee " 63 DOUGLAS,K. L. AND WALKER, R. V.L., "The Use of Neo-Prontosil in Strangles " (Abstract) . . . . . . . 123 E EDWARDS, J. (see WALTON, A.) . . . . . . . 331 EPPSON, H.F. (see BRADLEY, W. B.) . . . . . . 405 F FERNANDEZ, N. P., "Nymphomania with Sex Reversal in a Pedigree Sahiwal Heifer treated back to Fertility " . . . . . . 98 FRATEUR, J. L., " Atavism of the Nature " (Abstract) . . . . 324 G GANAPATHY IYER, S., " Some Observations on the Viability of Doyle's Disease Virus of Fowls under Different Conditions " . . . 81 GLOVER, R. E., " Immunisation of Birds against Fowl Pox and Pigeon Pox respectively with Viruses propagated on the Chorio-allantoic Membrane of the Developing Egg " (Abstract) . . . . 238 GOO, G. W. H. (see HENKE, L. H.) . . . . . . . 325 GORDON,H.M., "The Anthelmintic Efficiency of Phenothiazine " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . . . 402 GOVINDARAJAN, S. V. and BANERJEE, B. N., " Vitamin A Study of Ghee, Part IX. Recovery of Reversibly Oxidised Vitamin A by Treat- ment with Hydrogen under Pressure " . . . . . 335 INDEX TO AUTHORS iii PAGE I IDNANI, J. A. (SEE RAY, H. N.) . . . . . . . . 259 K KAPUR, H. R., " Transmission of Fowl Spirochaetosis through Agents other than Argas persicus ". . . . . . . . 354 KAY, H. D., ASCHAEFENBURG, R. AND NEAVE, F. K., " The Phosphatase Test for Control of Efficiency of Pasteurization '' (Abstract) . . 332 KEHAR,N.D., "Serum Protein Fractions of Normal and Vitamin A, Calcium and Phosphorus Deficient Cattle " . . . . . 223 IV THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE MCKERCHER, D. G. (SEE MITCHELL, C. A.) . . . . . . 406 MITCHELL, C. A., WALKER, R. V. L., HEATH AND MCKERCHER, C. A., " Preliminary Note on the Growth of Trypanosoma equiperdum in the Developing Chick Embryo " (Abstract) . . . . . . 406 MOHLER, W. M., " Johne's Disease Infection in Laboratory Animals with aid of Paraffin Oil " (Abstract) . . . . . . 405 MOOKERJEE, H. K., " A Cheap Method of Oxygenation in Fish Culture " 289 INDEX TO AUTHORS v PAGE RIDER, J. R., " The Relation between Skin Measurements and the Cha- racter of Swelling in Eleven Hundred Double Intradermal Tubercu- lin Tests " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 404 RIGOR, T. V., '' The Formation of a Dairy Type in Native Carabaos with a Preliminary Study on Physical Measurements " (Abstract). . . 326 ROBERTS, F. H. S., " The Value of Phenothiazine in the Treatment of Oesophagostomiasis in Sheep " (Abstract) . . . . . 402 S SAPRE, S. N., " The Life-history of Boophilus australis " (Fuller). . 346 SAVAGE, E. S. (see BENDER, C. B.) . . . . . . . 121 243 SEN, P., "A Note on some Ectoparasites of Poultry and their Control ". 218 SHIRLAW, L. H.,'' A Short History of Ayurvedic Veterinary Literature " 1 SINGH, G. (see NANDA, P. N.) . . . . . . . . 276 SINGH, M.(see KEHAR, N. D.) . . . . . . . . 88 SONI, B. N., '' Preliminary Observations on the Bionomics of the Goat Warble Fly (Hypoderma crossii Patton) " . . . . . . . . 280 vi THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE WALTON, A., EDWARDS, J. and HAMOND, J., "Fertility in Farm Animals " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 331 WARREN, D. C., " Effect of Temperature on Size of Eggs from Pullets in Different Latitudes " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 407 WISE, G. H., PETERSEN, W. E. and GULLICKSON, T. W., " Inadequacy of a Whole Milk Ration for Dairy Calves as manifested in changes of Blood Composition and in other Physiological Disorders " (Abstract) 236 INDEX TO SUBJECTS PAGE A Abattoirs in Senegal, differentiation between the sheep and the goat in . 325 Abortion in cows and mares, mouldy hay a cause of . . . . . . . . 331 Abortion (infectious), vaccination of calves against . . . . 401 Acanthostomum burminis, anatomy of . . . . . 94 Ajmer-Merwara, rinderpest in sheep and goats in . . . . 103 Anatomy and conformation of cows . . . . . . . 328 Anthelmintic efficiency of phenothiazine . . . . . . . . 402 Anti-oxidants of ghee . . . . . . . . 361 Argas persicus, transmission of fowl spirochaetosis through agents other than . . . . . . . . 354 Assam, paratuberculosis (Johne's disease) of cattle in . . . . . . . . 40 Atavism of the nature . . . . . . . . . 324 Ayurvedic veterinary literature . . . . . . . 1 B Bartonellosis in dogs . . . . . . . . 259 Bionomics of the goat warble fly . . . . . . . . 280 Birds, immunisation against fowl pox and pigeon pox. . . . . 238 Blood-carotene and carotene balance levels in heifers and lactating cows. 329 Blood (equine), physiological constituents of . . . . 88 Boophilus australis, life-history of . . . . . . . . 346 Broken wind in horses, mouldy hay a cause of . . . . . . . . 331 Br. abortus for immunization tests on cattle . . . . . 239 viii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Calves (dairy), inadequacy of whole milk ration for . . . . 236 CALVES restricted to a whole milk ration, value of vitamins and inorganic salts for overcoming symptoms manifest in . . . . 237 INDEX TO SUBJECTS ix PAGE Chronic fluorine intoxication in domestic animals . . . . 301, 406 Cirrhina mrigala, oxygen requirements of the fingerlings of . . . 372 Conformation and anatomy of cows . . . . . . . . 328 Contagious pleuro-pneumonia of goats . . . . . . 127 Cows, carotene balance and blood-carotene levels in . . . . . 329 X THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Egg (developing), immunisation of birds against fowl pox and pigeon pox with viruses propagated on the chorio-allantoic membrane of . 238 Eggs from pullets in different latitudes, effect of temperature on size of . 407 Encephalomyelitis in horses, differences in incidence of . . . 392 Equine blood, physiological constituents of . . . . 88 F Farm animals, fertility in . . . . . . . . 331 Fasciola in South Africa, life-cycle of . . . . . . 330 Feeding and feeding stuffsINDEX TO SUBJECTS xi PAGE G Ghee, anti-oxidants of . . . . . . . . 361 xii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE L Laboratory animals, Johne's disease infection in, with aid of paraffin oil 405 Life-history of Boophilus australis . . . . . . 346 Live-weight, relation of minerals to . . . . . . 198, 210 M Macrones gulio, sex-dimorphism in . . . . . . . . 295 Mares, mouldy hay a cause of abortion in . . . . . . 331 Merino skin, histology of . . . . . . . . . . 320 Methylene blue as an antidote for poisoning by oat hay and other plants containing nitrates . . . . . . . . . . 405 Milk (off-flavour), relation of carotene balance and blood-carotene to the production of . . . . . . . . . . 329 production, protein standards for . . . . . . . 401 INDEX TO SUBJECTS xiii PAGE P Paraffin oil, Johne's disease infection in laboratory animals with aid of . 405 Parasitic environment and plan of control . . . . . . . . . . 313 Paratuberculosis of cattle in Assam . . . . . . . . . . 40 Paratuberculous enteritis of sheep . . . . . . . . . . 276 Pasteurization, phosphatase test for control of efficiency of . . . 332 Phenothiazine, anthelmintic efficiency of . . . . . . 402 xiv THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Rictularia cahirensis from the intestine of an Indian cat . . . 113 Rinderpest in sheep and goats in Ajmer-Merwara . . . . 103 S Sahiwal heifer, nymphomania in . . . . . . . 98 Salts (inorganic), value of, for overcoming symptoms manifest in calves restricted to a whole milk ration . . . . . . . 237 Senegalese abattoirs, differentiation between the sheep and the goat in . 325 Serum protein fractions of normal and vitamin A, calcium and phospho- rus deficient cattle . . . . . . . . . . 223 Sex-dimorphism in Macrones gulio . . . . . . . 295 Sheep and goat in supervised Senegalese abattoirs, differentiation between 325 INDEX TO SUBJECTS XV PAGE Tuberculin tests (double intradermal), relation between skin measure- ments and the character of swelling in . . . . . . 404 Tuberculosis in the monkey . . . . . . . . 271 V Vaccination of calves against infectious abortion. . . . . 401 Vegetable rennet, Withania coagulans used as . . . . . . 284 Verminous pneumonia in Indian buffaloes . . . . . . 117 Veterinary literature, Ayurvedic, history of . . . . . . 1 Veterinary medicines