ICAR. 15.XI. / 600 Vol. XI 1941 THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science AND Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. Rs. 2 or 3 s. 6 d. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI 1942 Price annas 5 or 6d.
Editorial Committee P. M. KHAREGAT, C.I.E., I.C.S., Vice- Chairman, Imperial Council of Agri- cultural Research. W. BURNS, C.I.E., D.Sc., I.A.S., Agri- cultural Commissioner with the Gov- ernment of India. F. WARE, C.I.E., F.R.C.V.S., F.N.I., I.V.S., Animal Husbandry Commis- sioner with the Government of India. RAO BAHADUR B. VISWANATH, F.I.C., F. C. S., Director, Imperial Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. F. C. MINETT, D.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Direc- tor, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. Z. R. KOTHAVALLA, B.AG., B.Sc., N.D.D., Director of Dairy Research, Bangalore. BIRBAL SAHNI, M.A., Sc.D. (Cantab.), D.Sc. (Lond.), F.R.S., Professor of Botany, Lucknow University. J. N. MUKHERJEE, D.Sc., Ghosh Professor of Chemistry, University College of Science and Technology, Calcutta. JAMES N. WARNER, M.Sc., Professor of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad. S. KRISHNA, PH.D., D.Sc., F.I.C., F.N.I., Biochemist, Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun. BHAGWAN SAHAY, I.C.S., Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Re- search. Editor F. M. DE MELLO, B.A., B.Sc. (Econ.) The Editorial Committee, in its work of examining papers received for publica- tion, is assisted in an honorary capacity by a large number of scientists working in various parts of India. Contributions and books and periodi- cals for review should be addressed to the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricul- tural Research, Publication Section, New Delhi. Communications regarding subscrip- tion and advertisements should be ad- dressed to the Manager of Publications, Civil Lines, Delhi. Instructions to Authors Articles intended for publication in The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and. Animal Husbandry should be accompani- ed by short popular abstracts of about 300 words each. In the case of botanical and zoological names the International Rules of Botani- cal Nomenclature and the International Rules of Zoological Nomenclature should be followed. References to literature, arranged alphabetically according to authors' names, should be placed at the end of the article, the various references to each author being arranged chronologically. Each reference should contain the name of the author (with initials), the year of publication, title of the article, the abbreviated title of the publication, Volume and page. In the text, the reference should be indicated by the author's name, followed by the year of publication enclosed in brackets ; when the author's name occurs in the text, the year of publication only need be given in brackets. If the reference is made to several articles published by one author in a single year, these should be numbered in sequence and the number quoted after year both in the text and in the collected references. If a paper has not been seen in original then it is safe to state ' original not seen.' Sources of information should be speci- fically acknowledged. As the format of the Journals has been standardized, the size adopted being crown quarto (about 7¼ in. × 9¼ in. cut), no text-figure, when printed, should exceed 4½ × 5 in. Figures for plates should be so planned as to fill a crown quarto plate, the maximum space available for figures being 5¾ × 8 in. exclusive of that for letterpress printing. Copies of the detailed instructions can be had from the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research Publi- cation Section, New Delhi.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES OBSERVATIONS ON RINDERPEST IMMUNISATION WITH GOAT VIRUS BY R. L. CORNELL, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. AND RATANA OONYWONGSE, D.V.M. Veterinary Division, Department of Agriculture, Thailand (Siam) (Received for publication on 20 July 1940) INTRODUCTION SINCE Edwards first effected some modification in the virulence of rinder- pest virus by serial passage through goats, numerous investigators and field workers have devoted further study to the subject and such attenuated virus has now been employed in field immunisations for about the last five years. Saunders and Ayyar [1936] appear to have been among the first to have put the method to a critical and controlled test and their conclusions, working with virus which had undergone passage at Mukteswar and bovine virus adapted de novo, are:2 Rinderpest Immunisation with Goat Virus goat virus alone showed a slight drop in milk yield. There was no case of a pregnant cow aborting as a result of the goat virus although a number were inoculated when over seven months in calf. Buffaloes reacted more strongly than cattle, the attempt to control this by giving half the dose seems to have had an appreciable effect. The effect of work on buffaloes after inoculation was stated to enhance the reaction, but this does not appear to apply to ' plains ' buffaloes, and in bullocks it seems to have no ill effect. He concludes by saying that the results far exceeded expectations ; 100,000 animals have been inoculated by this method and after eliminating those animals which were obviously inoculated during the incubation period the loss worked out at half a per cent. Bachan Singh [1939] states that the reaction in the case of tissue virus (i.e. spleen) is milder than that of blood virus both in cattle and buffaloes and in old animals it is usually imperceptible. ' In such cases the duration of immunity is bound to be of short interval, which is decidedly a disadvantage of tissue virus when compared with blood virus which on account of its potent nature of reaction confers a more lasting immunity.' Among his conclusions are noted:R. L. CORNELL AND RATANA OONYWONGSE 3 In tropical Africa Daubney [1937, 1] has examined the method and records a mortality of approximately 18 per cent when the Mukteswar virus is inoculated into grade and native cattle alone. Reactions and mortality are, however, easily controlled by a small simultaneous dose of serum or a previous dose of vaccine. In his own series of passages for the attenuation of the virus he concludes that there was a gradual suppression of symptoms from the 85th passage. Subsequently [Daubney, 1937, 2] the same author describes how at the 160th passage the Kabete virus appeared to have reached a degree of attenuation for cattle similar to that of the Mukteswar strain which has been passaged in goats since 1929. Some uncertainty with regard to the reliability of the resultant immunity exists from these Kenya trials especially when serum has been combined with the method. It is further recorded from Kenya [Veterinary Department, Kenya, 1939] that a most important feature of the method is that the mild disease due to goat virus does not appear to be contagious either to cattle or to goats and there is thus less danger of the creation of foci of infection from immunisation. It is also stated that, like all methods of conferring an active immunity, goat virus must produce a reaction to produce a result. It is apparent from a perusal of the records of the employment of goat virus for immunisation that the inherent resistance to the disease of the animals to be immunised is a prime factor with regard to the safety of the procedure and it behoves all who contemplate its employment on a large scale to make every endeavour to assess this factor. Increasing experience of rinderpest and its control impresses on one the wide variations of such resistance that occur among susceptible species, breeds and races. THE VIRUS EMPLOYED The virus was obtained from the veterinary laboratory, Insein, Burma but had originated at Mukteswar. The exact number of passages since its first adaptation to goats could not be ascertained but the number must total many hundreds (290 passages had taken place in Burma before we obtained possession). We have maintained it by subcutaneous inoculation into locally procured goats and no special attempt has been made to pro- long the passage series to obtain greater attenuation. Infective spleens have been stored in the refrigerator and goats inoculated when fresh virus was required or to ensure survival and viability of the virus. Passage injec- tions have been carried out on an average once a month. On this account few goats have been left to recover or die and we cannot accordingly make adequate comparisons of mortality with series carried out elsewhere. Tem- perature reactions have been fairly constant up to a peak of 105°F (morning temperature) but other characteristic symptoms have not been striking. Dullness, falling off of appetite, a marked staring coat and a tendency to stand with legs tucked in and an arched back presenting an appearance of malaise and discomfort are apparent from the time that the temperature rises and for about a week afterwards. Diarrh4 Rinderpest Immunisation with Goat Virus TESTS OF VIRULENCE OF THE VIRUS CATTLE Class I. Cattle have been obtained for testing purposes from areas which are subject to frequently recurring outbreaks of rinderpest, their suscepti- bility is therefore unknown but if enquiries are made with regard to past history one can generally rely on young animals being susceptible. Class II. Animals from a part of the country which, from its situation and local stock contacts, has always enjoyed long periods of freedom from the disease and which is known to have been completely free for the last five years. Bovines from this district can be relied on to be at least 90 per cent susceptible. Class III. An area intermediate between Class I and Class II. It enjoys freedom from infection for variable periods and at the time that a test was carried out no outbreak had been reported for three years. Ten young bovines obtained from an area of Class I were injected with 1 c.c. of a 0.5 per cent saline suspension of fresh spleen from a reacting goat. Only one animal showed anything suggestive of a definite temperature re- action and in this case the peak temperature was only 102.8°F (fourth day). Another showed slight looseness of the bowels on the ninth day and a dis- inclination to feed on the eleventh day. None of the other animals showed any appreciable departure from the normal. Blood was drawn from two animals, neither of which had shown any definite reaction, on the seventh day following the injection of the goat virus and each sample was injected into two susceptible buffaloes in doses of 5 c.c. Infection occurred in every case, two of the test animals died of acute rinderpest and two recovered after severe clinical attacks. The ten young bovines were retested twenty-one days later with virulent buffalo blood and appeared to be completely im- mune. The experiment shows that at least four of the ten animals were sus- ceptible to rinderpest in the sense that they were not solidly immune as a result of previous infection and recovery. A second experiment was carried out with ten adult cattle from an area described as Class II, i.e. the most susceptible stock available in the country. Five were injected with 1 c.c. of citrated blood and five with 1 c.c. of 0.5 per cent saline spleen suspension of a reacting goat. All gave a typical tempera- ture curve, four showed some evidence of malaise and a little diarrhR . L. CORNELL AND RATANA OONYWONGSE 5 TESTS ON BUFFALOES All the buffaloes used for these tests have been those described as Class H, that is from an area which has been free from rinderpest for five years, and they can be depended upon to be at least 90 per cent susceptible. When infected with bovine or buffalo virus they develop very severe reactions and the mortality is at least 90 per cent. They are accordingly the most susceptible stock available and in their lack of resistance remind one of the Longhorn Ankole cattle of Central Africa though the syndrome developed after infection presents some differences. Temperature reactions may be erratic and often show little relation to the severity of other symptoms or to the chance of recovery and many fatal attacks have been observed which have been quite apyretic. A typical temperature curve is similar to that seen in cattle. Lachrymation often but not invariably occurs with the forma- tion of muco pus at the inner canthus ; as, however, our buffaloes when con- fined often develop a non-specific conjunctivitis this symptom is not very characteristic. Dullness and suspension of appetite and rumination set in about the fifth to seventh day following infection and this is followed by profuse diarrh6 Rinderpest Immunisation with Goat Virus be expected in field immunisations and that the virus is far too virulent for general use for our buffaloes without serum. Table IV shows an attempt to arrive at the minimum dose of serum necessary to protect buffaloes against goat virus. The serum used may be described as convalescent serum, that is serum drawn after recovery, from buffaloes injected simultaneously with buffalo virus and serum. No attempt at hyperimmunisation is carried out in the production of this serum. This table also illustrates the virulence of the virus for buffaloes and indicates that serum at the rate of 1 c.c. per 3 kilos to 5 kilos body-weight (80 c.c. to 120 c.c. for a buffalo weighing 350 to 400 kilos, our average test animal) was found necessary to control reactions adequately and that even with this dosage some diarrhR. L CORNELL AND RATANA OONYWONGSE 7 clear cut, the test buffalo which received 40 c.c. nasal washings from this calf showed no temperature rise until the fourteenth day when symptoms and fever developed simultaneously and the animal died on the eighteenth day following injection. Both symptoms and post mortem were indicative of rinderpest. We have experienced irregular reactions with a prolonged incubation period with other buffaloes employed for goat virus tests but have always realised that cross infection with buffalo virus subsequent to experimental inoculation cannot be ruled out with certainty when animals are maintained at a serum and vaccine institute where virus is perpetuated. Our conclusions are, however, that virus was present in the nasal secretion of calf XX and that it was probably present in the nasal secretion of calf XXI in a minimal amount. We have not deemed it necessary to test for the presence of virus in the copious nasal secretion or in faeces mixed with blood from animals which develop the severe and acute reactions so often resulting in death and we cannot but believe, that such animals are infective to other susceptible animals. Contact experiments in rinderpest infection may be so inconclusive that a long series of negative results would be unconvincing. We have, however, carried out a small controlled test in the nature of a field trial which we will record as well as some field experiences. Three buffaloes were tied up in close proximity to cattle which had been injected with goat virus and all used the same small stream for drinking. Temperatures were recorded and no infection resulted. This observation is of course entirely inconclusive and we merely record it. FIELD TRIAL In a district which was free from rinderpest and which, according to records, had been free for three years, all bovines employed for transport, carting or packing operations (pack bullocks are extensively employed in this region) involving movement about the area were injected with goat virus. The vaccinated animals were put out of work for fourteen days but strict control of movement was not and could not be enforced. The work was carried out from village to village and in all 2,870 bovines were vaccinated. The area about which we are speaking had provided trial bullocks for testing and the indications were that the stock was about fifty per cent susceptible. Buffaloes, female bovines and calves were not inoculated at this stage and contact between these and the vaccinated animals which used common grazings and water supply was fairly close, although the custom of the country to tether animals rather than to permit more extensive ranging does curtail contact to some extent. The whole district was carefully watched for two months and there was never any indication that any in contact animal had contracted infection. Among the 2,870 animals injected, two deaths were reported and fourteen reactions were more severe than desirable. It appears therefore, from all the evidence available, that animals infected with goat virus and which show little or very mild reactions are definitely less infective than animals infected with a more virulent virus (the experimental evidence of the absence of virus in the urine in two tests also supports such a contention). In view of the serious nature of the re-
8 Rinderpest Immunisation with Goat Virus actions in buffaloes, however, and the evidence that virus occurs in the blood and nasal secretion we feel that it would be dangerous to be unduly com- placent regarding this aspect of the problem. THE EFFECT OF THE SIZE OF THE DOSE OF VIRUS As indicated in the introduction many workers attach some importance to the size of the dose and endeavour to reduce the severity of the reaction in buffaloes by giving half the cattle dose. They often maintain that this purpose is effected by so doing. Instructions for use of the Burma desiccated goat spleen virus recommend greater dilution for use in buffaloes than in cattle. The idea is not entirely new as in 1917 Schein used a similar proceed- ing for the double inoculation of cattle and buffaloes in Indo-China to obtain if possible some regularity of reaction and to avoid undue severity or compli- cations. Schein used 1 c.c. of virulent blood diluted 1 in 100 with a variable dose of serum. The method, however, does not appear to have been generally accepted or utilised. Experience with experimental infection and double inoculation with bovine virus would not lead one to expect that as crude a variation of the infecting dose as 0.5 c.c. of blood or spleen suspensi n for buffaloes as opposed to 1 c.c. for cattle would have any regular effect on the resulting reaction. Our experiments have borne out this anticipation (Table II). Thus, of three buffaloes vaccinated with 0.25 c.c. spleen suspen- sion two died, while of three vaccinated with 0.5 c.c. again two died and in this case the third animal appeared to have been immune before the experi- ment. The tables in general bear out the contention that the size of the dose affects but little the course of the reaction. If, however, dilution is carried further and a dose bordering on the minimal infective dose is arrived at then some modification of the resultant reaction appears to occur. Some authors maintain that a dose approximating the M.I.D. will result in a lengthening of the incubation period and perhaps enhance the chances of recovery. Our experience supports this view but regularity of reaction can- not be relied on by this means and death from rinderpest has occurred with as small a dose as 0.001 c.c. of goats blood (Table II). The short series of buffaloes receiving 0.1 c.c., 0.01 c.c. and 0.001 c.c. may be worth recording in greater detail. There appeared to be some lengthening of the incubation period with the animal receiving a dose of 0.1 c.c. which showed no marked symptoms until the tenth day and with the animal which received 0.01 c.c. as he also showed little until the ninth day. In the case of the animal which received 0.001 c.c., however, symptoms commenced on the sixth day and death occurred on the nineteenth ; in fact the temperature chart of this animal is very closely parallel to the control animal which received 5 c.c. of the same goat's blood. Even if in the majority of cases a very small dose increases the length of the incubation period it is by no means assured that such a prolongation does make for a greater recovery rate or a happier convales- cence. There is also the disadvantage that failure to infect and so immunise may be the result of such an endeavour and the length of life or activity of a virus may be prejudiced under field conditions. A convenient working dose, many times the minimal, therefore appears best for field inoculations.
R. L. CORNELL AND RATANA OONYWONGSE 9 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. A goat virus strain of rinderpest of an indeterminate number of pas- sages through goats (which certainly number many hundreds) has been tested on cattle from various parts of Thailand and found to be safe for these animals. In a field trial involving 2,870 heads only two deaths were recorded and a number of cases which were described as reacting markedly and possibly more than desirable was only fourteen. 2. Controlled preliminary tests on trial lots of animals are described. 3. For the buffaloes of this country the virus is too virulent and tests indicated that a mortality up to fifty per cent might be expected. 4. Infectivity experiments are described and active virus has been shown to be present in the blood of susceptible animals, at periods between the fifth and fifteenth days after the virus injection, whether the animals react or not. 5. Virus has been demonstrated in the nasal secretion of calves during a symptomless reaction. Nevertheless a field trial indicated that the risk of infection spreading from vaccinated cattle to unprotected buffaloes is small. 6. The effect of the size of the infecting dose is discussed and it is con- cluded that no distinct advantage is effected in making this minute. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We have pleasure in recording our thanks to Nai Premun and Khun Athorn for assistance and for their careful records of the field trial and to Nai Viroud and Nai Sawai, for help with many of the controlled tests. To the Civil Veterinary Department, Burma we are indebted for supplying the virus strain, for samples of their desiccated vaccine and much help and infor- mation freely afforded. REFERENCES Bachan Singh (1939). Ind. J. Vet. Sci.& Anim. Husb. 9, 279 Burma, Ann. Rept. C. V. D., 1938 Daubney, R. (1937, 1). J. Comp. Path. 50, 405 10 Rinderpest Immunisation with Goat Virus TABLE I Virulence tests with goat virus on cattle Cattle employed Virus Dose Symptoms Result Retest virus Period after goat virus Result Ten young cattle from an area of recur- rent rinderpest. Class IR. L. CORNELL AND RATANA OONYWONGSE 11 16 Do. 1 c.c. of 0.5 per cent fresh spleen suspen- sion Typical temperature curve, 104.2° F on 5th day, diarrh12 Rinderpest Immunisation with Goat Virus TABLE II Virulence tests with goat virus on buffaloes. All buffaloes employed were from an area free from rinderpest for over five years (Class II) No. Virus Dose Symptoms Result 2002 Goat 3 0.25 c.c. of 0.5 per cent spleen sus- pension Temperature reaction 103.8°F, severe symptoms, bloody diarrhR. L. CORNELL AND RATANA OONYWONGSE 13 TABLE III Buffaloes infected with goat virus though the actual virus was obtained from a calf or buffalo, i.e. goat virus after one intermediate passage in bovine or buffalo No. Virus Dose Symptoms Result 0/2134 Goat 3 after passage through calf 2 5 c.c. blood Temperature reaction 102.2°F, severe symp- toms Died 9th day 0/2076 5 c.c. blood Temperature reaction 104.4°F, severe symp- toms Recovered convale- scence pro- tected 0/2182 Goat 8 after passage through calf 3 5 c.c. blood No temperature reaction, severe symptoms, bloody diarrh14 Rinderpest Immunisation with Goat Virus TABLE IV Buffaloes injected with goat virus and serum simultaneously (This table is included partly because some of these animals were bled during the reaction and the blood injected into buffaloes set out in Table III) No. Virus Dose Serum Symptoms Result Immunity test 1998 Goat 3 0.5 c.c. spleen sus- pension 20 c.c. Temperature reaction 103 .4°F, moderate symptoms, diarrhR L. CORNELL AND RATANA OONYWONGSE 15 TABLE V Infectivity experiments Animal under immunisation and its reactions Period when blood or fluid was tested and dose Animal injected with blood Result Calf No. 2 injected with goat virus alone, indefinite or symptomless reaction 7th day, temperature of calf 100.4°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 2134 Definite rinderpest, died 10th day Buffalo 2076 Definite rinderpest, recovered Calf No. 3 injected with goat virus alone, no appreci- able reaction 7th day, temperature of calf 97.6°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 2182 Definite rinderpest, died 19th day Buffalo 2114 Definite rinderpest, recovered Buffalo 0/1976 injected with goat virus+40 c.c. serum definite thermal and clinical reaction 6th day, temperature 101.4°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 1973 Definite rinderpest, died 12th day Buffalo 0/1998 injected with goat virus+ 20 c.c. serum definite thermal 103.8 mild clinical, recovered 6th day, temperature 100 .4°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 2049 Definite rinderpest, died 17th day 8th day, temperature 102.2°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 2031 Definite rinderpest, died 34th day Buffalo 0/1971 Injected with goat virus + 40 c.c. serum definite thermal and severe clinical, recovered 8th day, temperature 102.2°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 2075 Definite rinderpest, recovered Buffalo 0/2047 injected with goat virus+ 80 c.c. serum definite thermal and mild clinical, recovered 10th day, temperature 97.2°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 2037 Definite rinderpest, died 13th day 14th day, temperature 99.8°F. Dose 8 c.c. blood Buffalo 2088 Definite rinderpest, died 9th day Buffalo 1/72 Injected with goat virus+ 80 c.c. sernm definite thermal and mild clinical, recovered 15th day, temperature 98.6°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 1/305 Definite rinderpest, recovered Buffalo 1/69 injected with goat virus+120 c.c. serum typical thermal, moderate clinical, recovered 15th day, temperature 98°F. Dose 5 c.c. blood Buffalo 1/309 Definite rinderpest, recovered Buffalo 1/71 Injected with goat virus + 120 c.c. serum blocked out reaction, recovered 7th day, temperature 101°F. Dose 3 c.c. blood Buffalo 1/311 Definite rinderpest, recovered 9th day, temperature 101.2°F. Dose 5 c.c. urine Buffalo 1/301 No reaction, retested with buffalo virus, died 7th day rinderpest Buffalo 1/116 Injected with goat virus+ 120 c.c. serum doubtful thermal 10th day, temperature 100.6°F. Dose 5 c.c. urine Buffalo 486 No reaction, retested with buffalo virus, died 8th day rinderpest Calf XX injected with goat virus, no appreciable re- action ; retested with buffalo virus after 39 days 7th day temperature 100.2°F. Dose 40 c.c. saline nasal washings Buffalo 486 Definite rinderpest, recovered Calf XXI injected with goat virus, no appreciable reaction ; retested with buffalo virus after 39 days 7th day temperature 100.4°F. Dose 40 c.c. saline nasal washingsi Buffalo 479 Result uncertain, as symptoms did not occur until 13th day when diarrhA STUDY OF THE FACTORS GOVERNING THE PASSAGE OF FLUIDS THROUGH THE STOMACH OF SHEEP, PART I BY P. N. NANDA, M.R.C.V.S. Superintendent AND GURBAX SINGH, L.V.P. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon Government Cattle Farm, Hissar (Received for publication on 23 October 1940) INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE THE importance of study of the physiology of alimentary tract of domestic animals; as a guide to the treatment of their diseases by drug given per os, cannot be overestimated, particularly, as it seems to have a decisive effect on the therapeutic value of various pharmaceutical preparations. In equine and canine practice, due to simplicity of the stomachs of these animals and their close structural similarity to the human stomach, many of the principles of veterinary medicine followed are the same as in human prac- tice. In the case of ruminants, however, the structural complexity of the stomachs and an incomplete knowledge of their physiology has complicated matters a good deal. It is now known that whereas some drugs when adminis- tered to these animals by mouth are detained in the rumen or reticulum, others under favourable conditions, pass directly into the abomasum. This pheno- menon evokes special interest for the veterinarian and throws a new light on the probable efficacy of the various medicinal preparations. Quin and Vander Wath [1938] observed with the help of glass beads that substances passing into the abomasum are eliminated within 48 hours after dosing, whereas in the case of their passage into the rumen it takes 7-14 days for the substance to be passed out in small quantities. Naturally, the action of drugs passing through the rumen is delayed and they may become diluted with food or undergo other changes before reaching the intended spot. Ross [1931] in conclusion to a series of experiments on sheep states that, apart from the fundamental interest from a physiological standpoint of the course taken by fluids in traversing the ruminant stomach, it is not unlikely that such a course, whether direct to the abomasum or via the rumen, markedly influences the action of drugs in general taken by the mouth. The study of the course taken by drugs through the various divisions of the stomach attracted special attention in connection with the control of helminths in sheep, with a view to make the drenches more effective against the gastro-intestinal worms. In fact, the question of dosing direct into the 16
P. N. NANDA AND GURBAX SINGH 17 abomasum has been considered necessary and an effective method must there- fore be evolved before an attempt is made to work out a satisfactory chemo- therapy of gastro-intestinal worms. Ordinarily, all food and water when taken by bovines pass into the rumen unless, of course, as stated by Smith [1921] water is taken in excess, when the superfluous quantity may overflow from the rumen and reticulum to the abomasum. The ability of certain drugs in solu- tion to pass directly into the abomasum is said to be due to a reflex act in which the drug is supposed to cause a stimulation of the vagus nerve in the pharynx with the subsequent closure of the oesophageal groove. As to what extent the direct passage of the drugs into the abomasum affects their efficiency has not yet been definitely worked out. Although, Green [1918] and Veglia [1918] as a result of their studies on the chemotherapy of haemonchosis in sheep claim that it makes no difference whatever, if the drug employed reaches the abomasum in concentrated form or in small quantities from rumen ; yet it has been shown by Monnig [1935] that the efficacy of treatment depends not only on the drugs used but, to an equal degree, on the route taken by them. It appears from the work of Green and Veglia (loc. cit) which was undertaken in connection with the Government wire worm remedy* that the results were judged by the degree of concentration of arsenic reaching the abomasum. Since this remedy also contains a large proportion of copper sulphate which does not seem to have been taken into consideration, the interpretation cannot refute Monnig's [1935] observations. Other workers, like Ross [1934] and LeRoux [1932] also consider that the efficiency of copper sulphate against haemonchosis in sheep is due to the direct passage of this drug into the aboma- sum. Besides the advantage of enhancing the effectiveness of anthelmintics against gastro-intestinal worms, the dosing of drugs into the abomasum has three more points of interest in its favour, i.e. 1. The action of the undiluted drugs is speedy and effective. 2. The dose of the drug can effectively be reduced minimising the possibility of producing any toxic action. 3. There is less risk of causing tympanitis if volatile compounds are to be administered. Thus, it is apparent that a careful study of all the factors connected with the reflex closure of the oesophageal groove is likely to bring about a great deal of improvement in the veterinary therapy in general and anthelmintic medica- tion in particular. A review of the somewhat meagre literature on the subject, as summarised below, does not give adequate information to enable one to draw definite conclusions, as in many instances the results claimed are of a conflict- ing nature. Wester [1926] was perhaps the first to study the physiology of deglutition in cattle. He was able to prove that sodium salts were effective in causing the closure of the oesophageal groove in cattle and that the reflex action was more readily stimulated in thirsty animals. Daubney [1930] concluded that drugs administered to sheep as a drench were retained in bulk in the rumen and did not reach the abomasum and small intestine for some considerable time after digestion. He also noted that * Government wire worm remedy issued by the Director of Veterinary Services in the Union of South Africa for the control of haemonchosis of sheep.
18 Passage of Fluids through the Stomach of Sheep capsules remained in the rumen and drugs administered through the stomach tube also failed to pass through the rumen unless the tube was passed to its fullest extent. Sprehn [1931] records tests conducted by him with small (0.2 grm. each) tablets which he found were able to pass directly into the abomasum, but Oppermann Th. and Behrens [1932] were not able to confirm this result. In connection with the passage of fluids through the ruminant stomach, Ross [1931] has shown that the passage of fluids through various divisions of the stomach of sheep is determined, rather by the period over which the animal is deprived of water, than by the nature of the fluid given. He noted that water or drugs in solution, when administered after withholding water for 40 hours, passed in bulk into the omasum and abomasum. He failed to establish that the administration of certain mineral salts per se markedly influenced the passage of fluids to the abomasum. Further, his observations give no reliable indication as to whether the strength of the drugs used (sodium bicarb, sodium chloride and zinc sulphate) or the volume of fluid given influenced their passage to the various organs. In a later publication [Ross, 1934] the same author again records that the period of starvation greatly helps the passage of fluids to the abomasum and that the administration of copper sulphate has a marked effect in securing the passage of the whole or a considerable part, to the abomasum. LeRoux [1932] observed that tabloids or drugs in capsules invariably remained in the rumen, and bulky powders followed a similar course. Monnig and Quin [1933], while studying the physiology of deglutition in merino sheep, noted that without previous stimulation of the reflex act powders do not pass into the abomasum and the fluid consistence of the ruminal content had an influence in stimulating the reflex. Later [Monnig and Quin, 1935] the same authors made further studies and were able to conclude that copper sulphate solution stimulates the reflex closure of the oesophageal groove and under favourable conditions 0.25 per cent of the solution is able to induce the reflex. The unfavourable conditions in the authors' opinion are poor condi- tion and dryness of the ruminal contents. They further claimed that a 10 per cent solution is necessary to overcome these conditions. The authors do not consider that preliminary starvation has a favourable influence unless the sheep are starved for such a long period that the ruminal contents become fluid. The method of administration was noticed to be of no importance. Copper salts, other than the sulphate, also produced the reflex, but related metals such as zinc or silver failed to do so. Drugs in powder form and pills reached the abomasum within 15 seconds after previous stimulation of the reflex by copper sulphate solution. Quin and Vander Wath [1938] were able to observe that small doses (2 to 3 c.c.) of a 10 per cent solution of copper sulphate, as well as silver nitrate and nicotine when dosed on the back of the tongue, all caused very profound changes in the ruminal rythm due probably to vagal reflex. Swales [1939] records that a simple 2 per cent copper sulphate solution in 2 ounce doses is able to stimulate the reflex closure of the oesophageal groove. In order to study the problem in greater detail, investigations were started on sheep, at the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, in 1939. The study is being made with the help of some drenches under variable conditions and the
P. N. NANDA AND GURBAX SINGH 19 results are recorded after immediately slaughtering the animal. It is con- templated to make observations on a large number of sheep, but, as the required number cannot be spared in one year, trials will be carried on for a number of years. Any result of interest obtained will be published in a serial order every year. The present paper deals with the tests made during the winter season of 1939-40. EXPERIMENTAL WORK Results claimed so far by various workers indicate that fluids are more capable of stimulating the reflex and copper sulphate solution has unanimously been declared to influence the stimulation. These two findings will form the basis of our investigation and the plan of work will include the study of the effects on the stimulation mainly of :20 Passage of Fluids through the Stomach of Sheep The drench was dosed on the back of the tongue by a specially made, narrow, long-necked bottle. Conclusion.P. N. NANDA AND GURBAX SINGH 21 Number of sheep Breed Mode of administration Nature of ruminal contents Estimated percent- age of drench reaching Rumen and reticulum Abomasum 808 Bikaneri Back of tongue Semi-solid 95 5 65R Do. Front of tongue Semi-liquid 95 5 654 Do. Back of tongue Semi-solid 80 20 42 Hissar Front of tongue Do. 90 10 Conclusion.22 Passage of Fluids through the Stomach of Sheep Conclusion.P. N. NANDA AND GURBAX SINGH 23 Conclusion.24 Passage of Fluids through the Stomach of Sheep Test No. 8 Three young sheep were dosed with 2 ounces each of a 2 per cent copper sulphate solution. No water was allowed for 38-42 hours but green fodder was fed upto the time of dosing. Number of sheep Breed Indicator vised Nature of ruminal contents Estimated percent- age of drench reaching Rumen and reticulum Abomasum 215R Bikaneri Carbol fuchsine Solid 90 10 717 Do. Do. Liquid 40 60 958 Hissar Do. Solid 80 20 Conclusion.P. N. NANDA AND GURBAX SINGH 25 Conclusion.26 Passage of Fluids through the Stomach of Sheep the ruminal contents become fluid (Tests 9 and 10), but even then there is no definite indication of this condition favouring the reflex. It has been found therefore, that preliminary starvation is necessary for an effective stimulation of the reflex and it is for the same reason that from observations made by LeRoux [1932] and Ross [1934] in connection with the parasiticide action of drugs on gastro-intestinal worms, it was claimed that the operations were more successful in the case of sheep which had been starved for some hours. Considering the ill effects caused by prolonged starvation, Monnig [1929], however, does not favour this practice. It was also noticed by us that if sheep are allowed free grazing after prolonged starvation, cases of digestive troubles, such as tympany and impaction of the rumen, are not uncommon. An over- night fast (15-18 hours), however, is usually a routine practice and this period should not in any way produce any ill effects. There is, therefore, no harm if the sheep are fasted for 15-18 hours, and this period according to LeRoux [1932] is essential when maximum effect is to be obtained for the treatment of haemonchosis in sheep. Experiments carried out by us show that 2 ounces of a 2 per cent copper sulphate solution when dosed after this period of starvation will pass in bulk to the abomasum (Test 2). If starvation is prolonged for 38-42 hours, it is noted that the question of the stimulation of the reflex closure of the oesophageal groove is negligible as even simple water is able to pass, in part or as a whole (Test 5) into the abo- masum. When the sheep are kept away from water only for this period, the reflex fails even with a 2 per cent copper sulphate solution (Tests 7 and 8). This result confirms the findings of Ross [1934] who claims that water or drugs when given in solution, after withholding water for 40 hours, pass in bulk into the omasum and abomasum, but it is necessary that food should also be withheld for the same period. It appears that, for producing a favourable condition for the reflex, a suitable equilibrium of food and water in the rumen is essential, but further investigation must be carried out in this connection. When there is deficiency of water in the rumen, most of the water or fluid drugs, even with their ability to stimulate the reflex, are retained in the rumen (Tests 7 and 8). This confirms the findings of Monnig and Quin [1935] who observe that dryness of ruminal contents is an unfavourable condition for the stimulation of the reflex. It can, therefore, be summarised that after routine dosing of sheep for gastro-intestinal worms, the animals may be allowed to graze for some- time after dosing and then given water in small quantity, as most of it will then be retained in the rumen and there would be little possibility of the dilution of the drug in the abomasum. Under these circumstances there appears to be no necessity for starving the animal after dosing. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS From the experimental data recorded during the year 1939-40 it has been found that:P. N. NANDA AND GURBAX SINGH 27 3. Preliminary starvation is a favourable condition for the stimulation of the reflex, and the ability of copper sulphate solution to sti- mulate the reflex may be greatly retarded even with a 2 per cent solution, when the animal is not starved. 4. Water, probably, possesses a slight inherent property to pass into the abomasum which increases with the period of preliminary starvation to such an extent that 4 ounces of it when given after withholding food and water for 38-42 hours will pass as a whole or in bulk into the abomasum. 5. The stimulation of the reflex is not influenced by the mode of administration of fluids. 6. There is some indication that the equilibrium of food and water in the rumen is also a controlling factor in influencing the passage of watery fluids to the various divisions of the stomach of sheep. 7. There is no necessity to fast sheep after routine dosing for gastro- intestinal worms but access to water should be allowed to a limited extent, after allowing free grazing for sometime. REFERENCES Daubney, R. (1930). Vet. J. 86, 19. Green, H. H. (1918). Quoted by Monnig, H. O. (1933). Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Indus. 1, 67. Le Roux, P. L. (1932). Vet. J. 88, 205. Monnig, H. O. (.1929). Farming in S. Africa 4, 93. A NOTE ON TOXOPLASMA CANIS INFECTION IN A SPANIEL* BY H. N. RAY, M.Sc., PH.D. (LOND.) Systematic Protozoologist AND K. RAGHAVACHARI, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Inspector Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 23 September 1940) (With Plate I) APURE-BRED spaniel, which had spent its life in a tick-proof kennel, was subjected to the bites of ticks (Rhipicephalus sanguineus) which had been previously fed on a pariah dog showing acute infection with Babesia gibsoni. Having failed to imbibe the infection in this manner, the spaniel received intravenously 5 c.c. of blood heavily infected with Babesia gibsoni and was housed with pariah dogs in a separate kennel where it succumbed to Babesia gibsoni infection. It developed typical symptoms of the disease, though before death it showed very rare Babesia gibsoni in its peripheral circulation. Microscopical examination of smears from its internal organs revealed very rare Babesia gibsoni but fairly numerous Toxoplasma canis. While it is not possible to state definitely how the infection was acquired by this animal, the following possibilities suggest themselves : (a) the batch of ticks used in the feeding experiment may already have been infected; (b) these ticks in the process of feeding on the pariah dog infected with Babesia gibsoni may have imbibed also the Toxoplasma infection, although the latter alone was trans- mitted to the spaniel; (c) the infection may have been contracted as a result of contact with other pariah dogs ; or (d) the blood used for retest may have contained Toxoplasma parasites, although neither the microscopical examina- tion of the blood prior to inoculation nor the clinical symptoms gave any indication of this. Mello [1910] first described Toxoplasma canis from a dog in Turin and ascribed to its presence a pathogenic condition designated by him as toxo- plasmosis and characterized by the following symptoms : marked inappetence and progressive feebleness; skin and mucous membranes presenting an anæmic appearance ; body emaciation; muscles very much atrophied and abundant mucoid discharge from the orbit; elevated temperature (103.4° F) accompanied by shivering; pulse feeble and sometimes imperceptible and irregular ; respiration short, jerky and abdominal; cardiac murmur on thoracic *Paper presented to the 27th annual meeting of the Indian Science Congress, 1940. 28
H. N. RAY AND K. RAGHAVACHARI 29 ausculatation ; vomiting of mucus ; bloody diarrh30 Toxoplasma canis Infection in a Spaniel MacHattie [1938] has reported two fatal cases of spontaneous toxo- plasmosis in dogs in Baghdad. Dyspnoea and wasting appeared to be the chief symptoms. The lungs and liver, on post-mortem examination, showed lentil-sized necrotic areas. Toxoplasma was seen within the large endothelial cells. The necrotic areas exhibited much cellular degeneration and libera- tion of parasites. He also described the occurrence of large pear-shaped masses of parasites in the lungs and these, he believes, have a close resemblance to ' schizonts '. Wenyon [1939] exhibited to the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene various preparations illustrating the method of reproduction of Toxoplasma and remarked that ' reproduction in these parasites is invariably by binary fission and when appearances of schizogony occur this is due to masses of parasites being so pressed together in preparation of smears that the individuality of the parasites is lost. Similar appearances occur sometimes in smears of organs infected with leishmania. As schizogony does not occur in the case of Toxoplasma, the ex-erythrocytic schizonts of bird malarial parasites cannot have any connection with these parasites '. The object of this paper is to place on record the occurrence of Toxoplasma canis in a pure-bred spaniel, and to describe certain stages in its development which indicate that schizogony is absent in the case of this parasite and that the only method of reproduction is by binary fission, as already stated by Wenyon. The writers would like to draw the attention of field workers to this disease, and it is hoped that the brief resumé of the literature given above will be of use to them in diagnosing the condition. MATERIAL AND METHODS As already mentioned, the material which formed the subject of this study was obtained from the internal organs and bone marrow of a pure-bred spaniel that had succumbed to experimental infection with Babesia gibsoni. The organs comprised the lungs, liver, spleen and kidney. Impression prepa- rations from the different organs were stained with May Grunwald-Giemsa. For studying the parasite in the tissues, the different organs were fixed over- night in Bouin-Duboscq and Brasil's fluid and sections were cut 5µ thick. These were stained with Heidenhain's iron-alum haematoxylin and counter- stained with chromotrop 2 R in absolute alcohol. Careful camera lucida drawings were made of the various stages encountered in the preparations. OBSERVATIONS The spaniel in question had been originally subjected to bites of ticks that had been fed on dogs artificially infected with Babesia gibsoni. Fifteen weeks after the dog was discontinued from these experiments, it was inoculated intravenously with 5 c.c. of blood containing B. gibsoni parasites. From Table I it will be seen that the animal reacted as early as the third day after the infective inoculation.
PLATE I [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
EXPLANATION OF PLATE All figures were drawn with the aid of a camera lucida. Figs. 1-6 were made from air-dried smears, stained with May Grunwald-Giemsa, and figs. 7-9 were drawn from sections of spleen which were stained with Heidenhain's iron-haematoxylin and chromotrop 2 R. In fig. 8 the nucleus of the host cell is omitted. The figures are 2300 times the actual size. Fig. 1 . . Extracellular form of the parasite seen in smears of spleen and liver a . . Form showing loose nuclear structure, probably preparing for division b . . Youngest form with condensed nuclear structure c . . An elongated form with chromatinic material along the periphery of the nucleus d . . A young form with loose nuclear structure e . . A rounded parasite showing enlarged nucleus and the karyosome Figs. 2 and 3 . . Intracellular groups of parasite. Some of them are seen in the process of binary fission Fig.4a . . Four parasites in close contact with each other b . . An elongated form with its nucleus already divided into two Fig. 5a . . An extracellular form of parasite showing two stained dots at either pole and its nucleus preparing for division b . . An extracellular parasite with its nucleus in metaphase Fig.6 . . An intracellular parasite with two stained dots at either pole. Its nucleus is in the resting phase Figs.7-9 . . Intracellular forms as seen in sections. Fig. 8 shows the nuclei of some of the parasites in the process of divisions. In figs. 7 and 9 note the central dot-like karyosome in the nucleus
H. N. RAY AND K. RAGHAVACHARI 31 TABLE I Temperature, frequency of B. gibsoni and anæmic changes in the spaniel which on post-mortem examination also revealed the presence of T. canis in its system Days Tempera- ture (°F) Frequency of B. gibsoni Anæmic changes Remarks 1 101.6 .. .. Inoculated intravenously with 5 c.c. of virulent blood 2 101.6 .. .. Feeds well 3 102.0 rare .. Do 4 102.2 32 Toxoplasma canis Infection in a Spaniel because in one case a strand of fibres could be seen connecting the two dots while the dividing nucleus remained in the equatorial region. In the mono- cytes which contained groups of eight or sixteen parasites one could often see signs of nuclear division in some of the more well-defined individuals (Plate I, figs. 2, 3 and 8). In none of the preparations could we see a mass of cytoplasm, with nuclei embedded in it, suggestive of schizogony. Monocytes containing about thirty or more parasites were also seen and in these, too, on careful examination, one could see some of the parasites in the stage of binary fission. From these observations it is considered that schizogony is absent in Toxoplasma and that the only method of reproduction so far known is binary fission. In sections of liver, evidence of marked cellular degeneration was present and embedded in this mass of degenerating cells were large numbers of extra- cellular parasites. A proportion of the monocytes in the sections also showed parasites and in such cases the cytoplasm of infected cells had developed a vacuole within which the parasites were crowded (Plate I, figs. 7-9). The nucleus of the parasite exhibited a vesicular appearance with a central karyo- some (Plate I, figs. 7 and 9). Sections of the spleen also showed similar cellular degeneration. In the sections of the lungs and kidney, however, the parasites were not present to the same extent as in the liver and spleen. SUMMARY The occurrence of Toxoplasma canis in a pure-bred spaniel which had succumbed to experimental Babesia gibsoni infection is reported. Stages of division encountered in this parasite were suggestive of binary fission and not of schizogony. A brief resumé of the literature on toxoplasmosis in dogs is given. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT It is our pleasant duty to express our grateful thanks to Dr F. C. Minett Director, and to Capt. S. C. A. Datta, Officer-In-charge, Veterinary Zoology Section of the Institute, for kindly going through the manuscript and for helpful suggestions. REFERENCES Blanc, G. (1917). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 10, 379 Boez, L. (1921). C. R. Soc. Biol. 85, 479 Carini, A. (1911). Ibid. 4, 518 Carini, A. and Maciel, J. (1913). Ibid. 6, 681 Laveran, A. (1913). Ibid. 6, 294 MacHattie, C. (1938). Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 32, 273 Mello, U. (1910). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 3, 359 Wenyon, C. M. (1926). Protozoology, Vol. 1 THE DETERGENT EFFICIENCY OF SODA ASH, WOOD ASH AND MUD ON BRASS AND TINNED STEEL MILK UTENSILS BY H. C. VERMA, D. L. PAUL AND ZAL. R. KOTHAVALLA Imperial Dairy Institute, Bangalore (S. India) (Received for publication on 21 October 1940) THOROUGH cleanliness of dairy utensils is of great importance. How to clean these utensils and render them sterile soon after use at the lowest possible cost forms one of the main problems of the dairyman today. Different practices are adopted for this purpose in different countries depending on the conditions, the resources of the men in the trade and several other factors. The practice with dairies run on modern lines is that, after the preliminary scrubbing and cleaning is carried out, the utensils are sterilized either with live steam, boiling water or dry heat. The cleansing agents which are popular- ly known as ' washing powders ' are of various kinds, namely soap powders, neutral soda, soda ash, causticized ash, scouring powders and trisodium phos- phate. A solution of these powders possesses the properties of emulsifying and saponifying fat and dissolving casein. Some powders also possess abra- sive properties. In rural India the use of washing powders is practically unknown because this cannot be afforded by small milk producers. The practice throughout the country is to scour the utensils with cheap materials such as wood ash or fine mud. Scouring is mostly done on the wet utensils. After the utensils have obtained the necessary degree of polish they are washed with clean water and exposed to strong sunlight. During the rainy season, instead of exposure to sunlight, the utensils are inverted for a short time over an open fire or exposed to smoke. This practice has come down from time im- memorial and is not without some technical significance. Its effect lies in the abrasive and chemical action of mud and ash and in the bactericidal action of sunlight or heat. The apparent primitiveness of the method, however, casts doubt on its efficiency and it was to determine this efficiency and to compare the method under conditions such as prevail in India with that followed by dairies adopting western practices that this investigation was undertaken. Much experimental work has been done by foreign workers on ascertain- ing the efficiency of the detergent methods followed in western practice using the reagents mentioned above. The degree of the detergent efficiency of each reagent has been determined comparatively by the amount of reduction brought about in the number of bacteria. Incidentally, it may be mentioned that the term sterilization as is commonly employed in cleaning dairy equipment does not always imply absolute bacterial sterility. It means sterility to a degree good enough for practical purposes of handling milk. Prucha, Weeter and Chambers [1918] found that 170 washed and un- steamed milk cans contained bacteria sufficient to contribute 128,000 per ml., while 91 washed and steam-sterilized cans would have added only an average 33 C 2
34 Detergent Efficiency of Soda, etc., on Milk Utensils of 23,000 bacteria per ml. had the cans been filled with milk. In making a comparative study of the collective influence of 81 steam-sterilized cans with 117 unsterilized cans in which milk was handled, they found that the former added 6,800 organisms and the latter 285,600 per ml. Ayres, Cook and Clemmer [1918] found that 60 samples from sterilized pails showed an average of 6,300 organisms with a maximum of 21,500, while 59 samples from unsteri- lized pails gave an average of 73,300 per ml. with a maximum of 284,000. Levine, Peterson and Buchanan [1927] found that sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate and trisodium phosphate possess germicidal properties. Mudge and Lawler [1928] have also found that alkali solutions possess germicidal property. Determining the efficiency of cleaning utensils by the traditional method followed in India by methods used by foreign workers does not appear to have been done in this country. It was felt that this kind of work would be instructive. It was, therefore, decided to investigate the detergent efficiency of the materials used for cleaning dairy utensils in this country, namely soda ash, wood ash and mud on brass and tinned steel utensils. Since brass utensils are commonly used in rural areas and tinned utensils in the handling of milk in dairies, these two materials were selected. The investigation is not claimed to be exhaustive and complete but it is hoped that the results will illustrate the values of indigenous cleaning methods. EXPERIMENTAL (a) Preparation of utensils.H. C. VERMA, D. L. PAUL AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 35 50 ml. of sterile water was used for each control utensil and 75 ml. for ach treated utensil. Standard nutrient agar was used for the plating and MacConkey's broth for the presumptive coliform tests. Plating in all cases was done with 1 ml. direct in triplicate and from this result the bacterial count of each utensil was calculated. The plates were incubated at 37°C. for 72 hours. Presumptive coliform tests were done with 1 ml. and 10 ml. in duplicate at 37°C. for 72 hours. Each cleansing treatment under discussion was repeated 20 times in both series. The results obtained are given in Tables I and II. TABLE I Results of cleansing treatments Expt. No. Brass series Number Tinned steel series Number 1 (Con- trol) (Wood ash) 3 (Mud) 4 (Soda ash) 1A (Con- trol) 2A (Wood ash) 3A (Mud) 4A (Soda ash) 1 6,900 3,750 6,000 2,775 16,500 7,200 5,400 3,750 2 6,750 1,650 2,250 1,500 9,900 2,850 4,500 2,700 3 7,500 2,850 3,600 1,950 12,000 2,850 2,850 1,720 4 17,250 1,875 4,875 1,725 45,000 3,450 12,750 1,500 5 16,500 1,950 4,500 2,250 60,000 1,200 2,475 975 6 15,000 1,875 5,250 1,875 75,300 3,325 4,970 2,175 7 19,500 3,150 5,525 1,350 20,000 1,650 5,700 575 8 18,450 3,450 2,700 1,275 75,000 1,125 4,875 750 9 16,800 1,200 2,250 1,650 30,450 2,250 1,875 225 10 13,650 2,775 1,725 1,050 15,750 2,170 8,250 1,220 11 14,400 1,650 2,550 1,350 62,400 1,800 9,000 1,200 12 7,050 1,275 2,175 1,200 16,500 1,200 6,700 1,350 13 13,650 3,225 5,700 2,050 67,500 2,500 7,600 1,960 14 10,800 3,525 6,600 1,350 50,800 1,800 4,250 1,550 15 16,650 1,875 3,600 1,200 49,500 3,600 4,600 2,680 16 9,750 2,475 3,000 1,875 12,750 1,950 2,525 900 17 10,500 1,950 1,800 1,125 13,500 1,425 2,925 1,050 18 7,200 2,250 2,700 975 12,300 1,295 3,750 600 19 9,000 1,800 2,175 1,200 14,250 2,170 4,200 1,200 20 11,700 2,850 5,600 1,050 16,200 1,875 3,000 1,125 Presumptive coli- form positive cases 5 1 4 Nil 8 1 5 Nil Table I shows that on comparing with bacterial counts of the control utensils, a considerable reduction in counts in both series has been brought about and that the amount of reduction varies with cleaning material used. As regards both reduction of plate count and destruction of coliform organisms, soda ash was the most effective and next came wood ash and lastly mud.
36 Detergent Efficiency of Soda, etc., on Milk Utensils TABLE II Results of cleansing treatments (Digest of Table I showing the results more clearly) Particulars Brass series Number Tinned steel series Number 1 (Con- trol) 2 (Wood ash) 3 (Mud) 4 (Soda ash) 1A (Con- trol) 2A (Wood ash) 3A (Mud) 4A (Soda ash) No. of bacteria :H. C. VERMA, D. L. PAUL AND Z. R. KOTHAVALLA 37 scouring properties of the other constituents of wood ash contribute to this detergent action. Wood ash is thus a valuable cleaning agent and its cost is negligible. The mud treatment takes third place but still shows a con- siderable effect on lowering the bacterial count. SUMMARY An investigation of the cleaning powers of soda ash, wood ash and mud on brass and tinned steel milk utensils has shown that all possess detergent properties descending in efficiency in the above order. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are thankful to Dr W. L. Davies, D.Sc., Ph.D., F.I.C., N.D.A., Director of Dairy Research, for his valuable suggestions. REFERENCES Ayres, S. H.; Cook, L. B. and Clemmer, P. W. (1918). U. S. Dept. Agric. Bull. 642 Levine, M. ; Peterson, E. G. and Buchanan, J. H. (1927). Ind. and Eng. Chem. 19, 1338 Mudge, C. S. and Lawler, B. M. (1928). Ind. and Eng. Chem. 20, 378 Prucha, M. J.; Weeter, H. M. and Chambers, W. H. (1918). Ill. Agric. Expt. Sta. Bull. 204
A NOTE ON ENCEPHALITOZOON CUNICULI INFECTION IN A RABBIT* BY H. N. RAY, M.Sc., PH.D. (LOND.) Systematic Protozoologist AND K. RAGHAVACHARI, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Inspector Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 23 September 1940) (With Plate II) ENCEPHALITOZOON CUNICULI is known to produce spontaneous encephalitis [Levaditi, Nicolau and Schoen, 1924] and nephritis [Smith and Florence, 1925] in the rabbit. Levaditi and his co-workers found the organism in the brain and kidney of the rabbit and were not only able to infect rabbits but also rats, mice and dogs. Wright and Craighead [1922] demons- trated this parasite also in the spleen, liver and myocardium. Its presence in the urine suggested to them the possible mode of infection, and later Levaditi and his collaborators were actually able to demonstrate the infectivity of the urine. Wenyon [1926], in reviewing the literature on the subject, expressed uncertainty regarding the systematic position amongst protozoa of this parasite, although Levaditi and his co-workers believed it to be a micro- sporidian. They demonstrated certain structures in the parasite which, they thought, were pansporoblasts, which ultimately gave rise to spores. They, however, failed to demonstrate a polar capsule and a filament in the spore. According to Wenyon [1926] their work required confirmation. It may be mentioned that microsporidia have not so far been recorded in any species of warm-blooded animal. In this article, the occurrence of E. cuniculi is recorded for the first time in India and a description is given of the various stages in the development of the parasite, as met with in kidney smears from an infected rabbit. Certain of these stages, when considered in their proper sequence, are suggestive of a much closer affinity of this organism with the microsporidia than with any other group of protozoa. It should, however, be mentioned that the minute size of this organism makes elucidation of its different stages a matter of considerable difficulty. We do not claim to have seen the polar filament, but anterior to the uninucleate sporoplasm we have observed a clear area which closely resembles the polar capsule of many known microsporidia. The spore would appear to have only a single capsule, each pansporoblast giving rise to a single spore. We, how- ever, refrain from placing it under any known family or genus of microsporidia until a more detailed study of this parasite has been carried out. *Paper presented to the 27th annual meeting of the Indian Science Congress, 1940. 38
LATE II [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
EXPLANATION OF PLATE All figures, except fig. 9, were drawn from smears with the aid of a camera lucida. Fig. 9 was drawn from a section of kidney, which was fixed in Duboscq and Brasil's modification of Bouin's fluid and stained with Heidenhain's iron-haematoxylin and chromotrop 2 R. The smears were either air-dried or fixed in osmic vapour and stained with May Grunwald-Giemsa Fig. 1a .. PlanontH. N. RAY AND K. RAGHAVACHARI 39 MATERIAL AND METHODS The material for our observations was obtained from a rabbit which succumbed to experimental trypanosomiasis. The kidneys were found to be slightly enlarged and on naked eye examination they showed minute petechiated areas. Impression smears made from this organ were stained in May Grunwald-Giemsa and Heidenhain's haematoxylin. Smears stained by the latter method were fixed in Schaudinn's or Bouin's (alcoholic) fluid for twenty minutes. Smears were also fixed in osmic vapour and stained with Giemsa. In order to study the organisms in sections, pieces of kidney were fixed overnight in Bouin-Duboscq and Brasil's fluid. Sections were cut 5µ thick and were stained with Ehrlich or Heidenhain's haematoxylin and counter-stained with either eosin or chromotrop 2 R. Smears stained with May Grunwald-Giemsa gave a better picture of the organism than those stained with any other reagent. Careful camera lucida drawings were made of the different stages en- countered in the course of our study of smears and sections. OBSERVATIONS ON THE MORPHOLOGY OF ENCEPHALITOZOON CUNICULI The smallest parasites encountered in our preparations measured 1.5µ in diameter. These probably represented planonts (Plate II, figs. 1a and 2). These bodies occurred in the epithelial cells of the urinary tubules and were seen later on to become slightly amoeboid in shape, the pseudopodia being thrown out in one direction only at a time (Plate II, fig. 2). The planonts appeared to divide by two different methods, viz. (1) binary fission and (2) schizogony or multiple fission. In binary fission, two types were seen. In the first, a single meront gave rise to two daughter individuals which were more or less rounded in shape (Plate II, fig. 1, b, c, d, e, f). Groups showing sixteen to twenty meronts were often seen in our preparations. In such a group we could often see the meronts preparing for further division (Plate. II, figs. 5 and 6 a, b). Some meronts also exhibited components of four individuals. The size of the meronts varied from 2.5-4.5µ in dia- meter. In the second type the meronts assumed an elongated form and often remained in chains of four to eight individuals (Plate II, fig. 1, g, h, i). In this respect it resembled the narrow form of Nosema apis described by Fantham and Porter [1912]. Each individual in such a chain measured 2µ in length and 1-1.5µ in breadth. In the case of schizogony, amoeboid masses measuring about 4-8µ in length and 3-6µ across were often seen lying within the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells of the urinary tubules (Plate II, fig. 3). Sometimes the amoeboid mass of cytoplasm gave the impression of being attached to the border of the host cell. In some cases two or three such masses were seen within one cell, each mass showing a large number of nuclei. The nuclei, with a small quantity of the cytoplasm, were later seen to differentiate them- selves from the amoeboid mass. Cells packed with meronts were, at times, seen to give way and thus to offer means for the parasite to escape and to infect other cells. The lumen of the urinary tubules was often obliterated by the presence of meronts or planonts (Plate II, fig. 9). Whether the
40 Encephalitozoon cuniculi Infection in a Rabbit meronts resulting from schizogony underwent further schizogony or divided by binary fission was, however, very difficult to ascertain. The next stage encountered in our preparation may be interpreted as pansporoblasts. The cytoplasm of a pansporoblast became loose in structure and the nucleus was often observed to have broken up into five very small nuclei (Plate II, figs.7, 8 and 13). Owing to the minute size of the nuclei, it was extremely difficult to ascertain the means by which they were utilized in the process of forming a spore. In some of the preparations in which the spore wall was not fully formed, we could frequently see one or two nuclei situated at one of its poles, and it is possible that these two nuclei formed the spore wall (Plate II, fig.10). In other preparations we could often see a nucleus situated at the margin of the vacuole which was placed anterior to the sporoplasm. Possibly this nucleus is used in the formation of the polar capsule (Plate II, fig.10). The sporoplasm at an early stage often showed two nuclei but in the mature spore we could always find a single nucleus. The sporoplasm was seen to occupy one end of the spore, which at the other end exhibited a vacuolated area very much resembling the polar capsule (Plate II, figs. 11, 12 and 14). It may, however, be mentioned that no structure resembling a polar filament was encountered inside this so-called polar capsule. It was also observed that a single pansporoblast gave rise to a single spore. The host cell was often seen to be packed with numerous spores and in such cases cytoplasmic hypertrophy was noted, the nucleus remaining unaltered. A fully formed spore is ovoid in shape and measures 2-2.5µ in length and 1-1.5µ in breadth. SYSTEMATIC POSITION Regarding the systematic position of this parasite, it is not possible to express a definite opinion at this stage of our observations but certain charac- teristics of the parasite, as enumerated below, would appear to show that, as already mentioned, it has a closer relationship with the microsporidia than with any other member of the protozoa :H. N. RAY AND K. RAGHAVACHARI 41 SUMMARY Encephalitozoon cuniculi has been recorded for the first time in India from the kidney of a rabbit which had succumbed to experimental trypanoso- miasis.Its morphology has been described in detail. The different stages of development encountered in this parasite strongly suggest its microspori- dian affinity, although the polar filament was not observed. Transmission ex- periments carried out on rabbits were ineffectual. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT It is our pleasant duty to express our grateful thanks to Dr F.C.Minett, Director, and Capt. S.C.A. Datta, Officer-in-charge, Veterinary Zoology Section of the Institute, for kindly going through the manuscript and for helpful suggestions. REFERENCES Fantham, H.B. and Porter, A.(1912). Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit.6, 163 Levaditi, C.; Nicolau, S. and Schoen, R.(1924). Ann.Inst.Past.38, 651 Smith, T. and Florence, L.(1925). J.Expt.Med.41, 25 Wenyon, C.M.(1926). Protozoology, Vol.I Wright, J.H. and Craighead, E.M.(1922). J. Expt.Med.36, 135
NEW FELLODISTOMIDS (TREMATODA) FROM INDIAN FISHES PART III. A NEW PARASITE OF THE GENUS HAPLOCLADUS ODHNER, 1911, FROM AN INDIAN MARINE FISH BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, M. Sc., D. Sc. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 7 August 1940) (With one text-figure) AMONGST the digenetic trematodes, the genus Haplocladus is remarkable in having a single intestinal cæcum which opens to the outside at the posterior end. The genus was created by Odhner [1911] for two new species of trematodes H. typicus and H. minor, which he found parasitic in the gut of Pleuronectes limauda. In this paper, the author describes the third species of the genus which is parasitic in the intestine of an Indian marine fish. HAPLOCLADUS ORIENTALIS, N. SP. In the course of an extensive parasitological examination of the marine food fishes of the Bay of Bengal, the author recovered two mature specimens of this parasite from the intestine of Synaptura orientalis (Bloch and Schn). In the living state, the worms are light brown in colour and exhibit marked power of contraction and expansion. They have a narrow, elongated body which measures 6.14-7.16 mm. in length. The body is of nearly uniform breadth, 0.52-0.64 mm. and bears minute, backwardly directed, cuticular spines. The oral sucker is an inverted pear-shaped structure of 0.28-0.34 mm. × 0.22-0.24 mm. in size. It is situated sub-terminally at the anterior end of the body. It is followed by an extremely small pre-pharynx which is visible only in extended living specimens. The pharynx is an elongated oval and muscular structure, measuring 0.28-0.3 mm. × 0.12-0.16 mm. in size, and is followed by an H. D. SRIVASTAVA 43 0.36-0.46 mm. × 0.28-0.34 mm. It is situated on one side of the acetabulum, with its greater part lying in front of the latter. The vesicula seminalis is bi-partite, being divided into two parts by a transverse construction, and measures 0.17-0.18 mm. × 0.07-0.08 mm. It is continued anteriorly into a small pars prostatica, which is surrounded by prostate glands. The pars prostatica opens to the outside through a small ductus ejaculatorius. The vesicula seminalis, the pars prostatica, the pros- tate glands and the ductus ejaculatorius are all enclosed inside the cirrus sac. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ventral view of Haplocladus orientalise n. sp. An. =Anus ; G. p. = Genital pore ; I.c. =Intestinal cæcum; O.=Ovary ; T. = Testis; Vt. = Vitellaria ; V.s. = Vesicula seminalis. The ovary is a small, oval or spherical body, which measures 0.24- 0.26 mm. × 0.2-0.22 mm. It is pre-testicular, being situated 0.6- 0.76 mm. in front of the anterior testis. The shell gland complex is diffuse and pre-ovarian. A receptaculum seminis is absent. The vitellaria consist of small, oval follicles, which extend along the side of the body from behind the acetabulum to the level of the posterior testis. The uterus is well developed and occupies the whole of the post acetabular space of the body. It contains numerous, yellowish brown operculate eggs measuring 0.034-0.038 mm. × 0.019-0.023 mm. In the general feature of its anatomy, the new species, Haplocladus orientalis, described in this paper, stands nearest to the type species,
44 New Fellodistomids from Indian Fishes H. typicus Odhner, 1911. It, however, differs from the latter in the much cephalad position of the acetabulum and the extent of the vitellaria, which reach the level of the posterior testis in the Indian species, while, in the type species, they stop in front of the anterior testis. It also differs in the relative positions of the gonads. There are also differences in the measurements of the various organs. REFERENCE Odhner, T. (1911). Zool. Anz. 38, 97
NEW HEMIURIDS (TREMATODA) FROM INDIAN MARINE FOOD FISHES PART II. TWO NEW PARASITES OF THE GENUS STERRHURUS LOOSS, 1907 BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, M. Sc., D. Sc. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 27 August 1940) (With two text figures) LOOSS [1907] created the genus Sterrhurus, with S. musculus as its type species, and included in this genus three more species: S. imocavus, S. grandiporus and S. fusiformis. Subsequently, twelve more species have been added to the genus : S. monticellii, S. brevicirrus, S. inimici, S. flori- densis, S. I46 New Hemiurids from Indian Fishes 0.38 mm. The oral sucker is transversely oval in outline and measures 0.09 × 0.12 mm. It is situated just behind a small preoral lip at the ex- treme anterior end of the body. The opening of the oral sucker is more or less anteriorly directed. The prepharynx and H. D. SRIVASTAVA 47 a small ductus hermaphroditicus. The latter is enclosed into a small spindle- shaped, muscular hermaphroditic sac measuring 0.1 × 0.04 mm. The genital pore is situated on the ventral body surface at the level of the intesti- nal bifurcation. The ovary is a small, oval structure measuring 0.1 × 0.08 mm. and is situated in front of and slightly overlapping the vitelline mass. The latter is a single, large, ovoid mass 0.24 × 0.18 mm. in size, lying at the base of the third quarter of body-length. A small bulb-shaped recep- taculum seminis is present in some specimens at the angle between the ovary and the vitelline mass. The shell gland complex lies between the median line and the anterior quarter of the vitelline mass. In fully mature specimens, the uterus occupies the whole of the post testicular area and contains a large number of yellowish-brown, operculate eggs measuring 0.019-0.023 mm. × 0.08-0.01 mm. In front of the testes the uterus follows more or less straight course. It never enters the tail region. The excretory bladder is Y-shaped, with its main stem bifurcating into two lateral cornua just behind the acetabulum. The cornua unite dorsally to the oral sucker. Amongst the species of the genus Sterrhurus, the new species, S. mono- lecithus, is unique in having an extremely rudimentary tail and a single com- pact vitelline mass. Sterrhurus karachii, n. sp. Host48 New Hemiurids from Indian Fishes The ovary measures 0.06 × 0. 08 mm. and is situated just in front of the vitellaria. The latter are composed of a pair of elongated, oval, com- pact bodies measuring 0.15 × 0.08 mm. and are situated symmetri- cally at the junction of the last two-thirds of the body-length. The uterus is well developed and occupies the whole of the intercæcal space behind the acetabulum. It contains a large number of operculate eggs 0.015-0.019 mm. × 0.08 mm. in size. The excretory bladder is similar to that described in the previous species. Sterrhurus karachii, n. sp. resembles S. monolecithus in the position of the acetabulum, the almost symmetrical position and size of the testes, the long pars prostatica and the extremely small tail. But it differs from the latter species in the relative positions of the genital pore and the vesicula seminalis, in possessing two, compact, elongated, oval, symmetrically placed vitelline masses, and in marked differences in measurement. In the cha- racter of its vitellaria, S. karachii resembles S. profundulus [Manter, 1934], but differs from it in all other important features. REFERENCES Looss,. A. (1907). Zool. Jahrb. Syst. 26, 63 Manter, H. W. (1934). Carnegie Inst. Wash. Pub., No. 435., 257 Srivastava, H. D. (1935). Parasit. 27, 374
NEW HEMIURIDS (THEMATODA) FROM INDIAN MARINE FOOD FISHES* PART VIII. THE MORPHOLOGY AND SYSTEMATIC POSITION OF A NEW PARASITE50 New Hemiurids from Indian Fishes scales and spines. The type specimen in permanent mount measures 1.6 mm. in length and 0.36 mm. in maximum breadth, which occurs across the level of the acetabulum. The suckers are fairly muscular, spherical structures, and are situated close together in the anterior third of the body. The oral sucker measures 0.4 mm. in diameter and is situated subterminally on the ventral surface, near the anterior end. The acetabulum is two-and-a-half times the size of the oral sucker and is situated at the end of the first quarter of the body. The oral sucker opens posteriorly into a spherical pharynx of 0.04 mm. diameter. The H. D. SRIVASTAVA 51 The ovary is pear-shaped and measures 0.12 × 0.07 mm. in size. It is situated in the space between the blind extremities of the intestinal cæca, the vitellaria and the hinder end. The shell gland mass of 0.04 × 0.03 mm. size lies to the left of the ovary. The receptaculum seminis is absent. Laurer's canal is present. The vitellaria are composed of two oval bodies of 0.06-0.07 mm. × 0.08-0.09 mm. size, which are situated one behind the other at the extreme hinder end of the body. The uterus is well developed and pre-ovarian. It contains a very large number of yellowish brown, operculate eggs of 0.03-0.032 mm. × 0.01-0.012 mm. in size. The excretory bladder is Y-shaped with its main stem bifurcating a little in front of the anterior testis into two cornua, which anastomose on the dorsal side of the oral sucker. The new genus Indoderogenes differs from all the genera of the subfamily Derogenetinæ, to which it obviously belongs, in the markedly anterior position of the acetabulum and the relative positions of the gonads, as well as in the length of the cæca and the pars prostatica. GENERIC DIAGNOSIS Body small, muscular, cylindrical and smooth. Suckers well developed situated close together in first third of body-length. Acetabulum, two-and- a-half times the size of the oral sucker, lies close behind the first quarter of body-length. Pharynx and NEW ALLOCREADIDS (TREMATODA) FROM INDIAN MARINE FOOD FISHES PART V. A NEW PARASITE OF THE GENUS LEPOCREADIOIDES YAMAGUTI, 1936 BY HAR DAYAL SRIVASTAVA, M. Sc., D. Sc. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 14 June 1940) (With one text-figure) IN 1936, Yamaguti described a new parasite from a Japanese fish and created a new genus Lepocreadioides for its reception. The genus, with L. zebrini as the type species, was assigned to the subfamily Lepocreadiinae Odhner, 1905, of the family Allocreadiidae Stossich, 1903. In the following year, he added a second species from another Japanese fish to the genus. In this paper is described the third species of the genus. It is a common parasite infesting the gut of an Indian marine fish at Puri and Karachi. Lepocreadioides indicum, n. sp. HostH. D. SRIVASTAVA 53 testis of 0.14-0.4 mm. × 0.1-0.2 mm. lies on the left. The vesicula seminalis is divisible into two parts ; a long, tubular, vesicula seminalis externa of 0.9-1.4 mm. × 0.3 mm. lying almost horizontally in front of the acetabulum and a small vesicula seminalis interna of 0.4-0.9 mm. × 0.4-0.5 mm. The club-shaped cirrus sac measures 0.4- 0.6 mm. × 0.1-0.14 mm. in size and extends obliquely from the shallow genital atrium to the right in caecum, in level with the anterior border of the acetabulum. It encloses the vesicula seminalis interna, a small, well-differen- tiated pars prostatica of 0.04-0.15 mm. × 0.05-0.09 mm. surrounded by prostate gland cells, and a fairly long and simple ductus ejaculatorius, which opens proximally into a small cirrus. In some specimens, the pars prostatica is constricted into two parts. The genital atrium is situated to the left of the oral sucker level with its anterior border. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ventral view of Lepocreadioides indicum, n. sp. E. bl. =Excretory bladder ; G. p. = Genital pore ; Mt. =Metraterm ; O. =Ovary P.p. = Pars prostatica ; R. s. = Receptaculum seminis ; T. = Testis; V. s. e. = Vesicul seminalis externa ; V. s. i. = Vesicula seminalis interna. The ovary measures 0.1-0.24 mm. × 0.1-0.2 mm. in size and consists of three-pear shaped lobes, which join medially. It is situated on the left side just in front of the receptaculum seminis. The latter is a roughly triangular, thin-walled sac 0.22 × 0.12-0.26 mm. in size, lying in front of the posterior testis. Laurer's canal is present. The shell gland mass lies in the space between the ovary, receptaculum seminis and the median line. The vitellaria are composed of small, irregular, follicles extend- ing along the caeca from the level of the intestinal bifurcation to their blind ends, where they turn round and extend up to the level of the receptaculum seminis. The follicles overlap the caeca at several places. The yolk reservoir is a small, triangular sac, lying between the ovary and receptaculum seminis. The uterine coils occupy the median space between the acetabulum and testes. The eggs are not numerous and measure 0.057-0.068 mm. × 0.026- 0.034 mm. in size.
54 New Allocreadids from Indian Fishes The excretory bladder is a small, narrow tubular structure extending from the anterior border of the right testis to the hinder end. Lepocreadioides indicum, n. sp. resembles the type species of the genus L. zebrini Yamaguti, 1936, in the general character of the body, in the diges- tive system, in the position of the receptaculum seminis, in the character of ovary and in the disposition of the vitellaria. It, however, differs from the type species in the character of the vesicula seminalis externa, in the extent of the cirrus sac, in the relative position of testes and in the more cephalad position of the genital atrium. The Indian species differs from the second species of the genus, L. branchiostegi Yamaguti, 1937, in the shape and size of its body, in the absence of spines in the post-acetabular region, in the shape of the cirrus sac and the vesicula seminalis externa and in the position of the receptaculum seminis. REFERENCES Yamaguti, S. (1936). Studies on the Helminth Fauna of Japan. Pt. 16. Trematodes of Fishes, III --------------(1937). Ibid. Pt. 17. Trematodes of a Marine Fish
SELECTED ARTICLES THE EFFICIENCY OF COPPER SULPHATE AND CARBON TETRACHLORIDE AGAINST HAEMONCHUS CONTORTUS IN ADULT SHEEP BY HUGH McL. GORDON, B. V. Sc. (C. S. I. R. Division of Animal Health and Nutrition, The McMaster Laboratory Sydney) (Reprinted from the Australian Veterinary Journal, Vol. XV, No. 3, June, 1939) INTRODUCTION THE high degrees of anthelmintic efficiency of solutions of copper sul- phate, copper sulphate with sodium arsenite, and carbon tetrachloride against H. contortus in young sheep have been demonstrated on a number of occasions [Seddon and Clunies Ross, 1929 ; Roberts, 1932 ; Clunies Ross and Gordon, 1934 ; and Gordon, 1935]. It has been shown that in young sheep, carbon tetrachloride possesses a very high degree of efficiency against adult H. contortus, and that treatment with this drug appears to be invariably satisfactory. Copper sulphate solutions do not appear to be quite as efficient as carbon tetrachloride, and, moreover, are ineffective unless swallowed direct into the abomasum. It has been shown by Clunies Ross [1934] and Mönnig and Quin [1935] that solutions of copper sulphate stimulate the closure of the oesophageal groove in sheep and tend to be swallowed into the abomasum in a consider- able proportion of cases. The number of cases in which the drug is not swallow- ed into the abomasum has been noted to vary fairly considerably from one experiment to another. In 15 experiments carried out at this laboratory the following results were obtained : Direct passage to abomasum : 184/209 cases or 88.0 per cent (varia- tion 70 to 100 per cent). Failure of direct passage to abomasum : 25/209 cases or 11.9 per cent (variation 30 to 0 per cent). It thus appears that when using copper sulphate solutions as anthel- mintics against H. contortus, one may expect treatment to be unsuccessful in as many as 30 per cent of animals, simply because the drug fails to pass directly into the abomasum. The average failure from this cause, however, should not be greater than about 12 per cent. On the other hand, carbon tetrachloride appears to be efficient irres- pective of its destination when swallowed. This is supported by recent experiments [Gordon], which showed that it possessed a high degree of effi- ciency against H. contortus when injected into the rumen through the abdo- minal wall. 55
56 Treatment for H. contortus in Sheep The experiments described below were prompted by lack of experi- mental information on the efficiency of anthelmintics against H. contortus in adult sheep, and by recognition of the urgent need to control the worm burdens of such sheep. Although adult sheep frequently possess a varying degree of resistance to helminth parasites, they, particularly breeding ewes, nevertheless often become heavily infested. Adult sheep may harbour large numbers of helminths without showing obvious clinical evidence of parasitism, and thus may heavily contaminate pastures for lambs or other young sheep grazing with, or following, them. While treatment of adult sheep, therefore, may be necessary in order to cure them of helminthiasis, it is probably of greater importance in reducing the degree of contamination of pastures. It is now considered that a plan for control of helminthiasis of sheep, particularly haemonchosis, should begin with treatment of ewes before lambing, and the necessity for a highly efficient anthelmintic for adult sheep is therefore obvious. Determination of a criterion for satisfactory efficiency presents a number of difficulties. Consider, for example, an adult sheep harbouring 8,000 H. contortus. A 70 per cent reduction will leave 2,400 worms, perhaps not sufficient to prevent recovery of the sheep, but assuming that half of them are females (which produce up to 5,000 eggs each per day), the sheep may still distribute 6,000,000 (1,200× 5,000) eggs every 24 hours. With a 90 per cent efficiency, 800 worms would remain, and the 400 females would produce 2,000,000 eggs every 24 hours. It thus appears that while treat- ment may be effective in curing helminthiasis, its effect in reducing infesta- tion of pastures is not necessarily as real. In other words, a moderately satisfactory treatment may prevent deaths from haemonchosis, but may not prevent development of heavy infestation in lambs pastured with ewes. A highly efficient treatment is necessary for this latter purpose. Owing to variations in degree of efficiency, it was finally decided that a treatment which reduced the egg count by 70 per cent or more should be considered satisfactory. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE The majority of sheep used were artificially infected by dosing with larvae and were maintained in concrete pens throughout the experimental period. A few sheep which had become infected by grazing on infested pastures were also used. Egg counts were carried out daily for at least 10 days before and 14 days after treatment. A decrease of 70 per cent or more in egg count was considered to indicate that treatment was satisfactory. In many cases the decrease in egg count was in the vicinity of 90 per cent. Details of egg counts are not given owing to considerations of space. Dosage (a) 1 fl. oz. of 4 per cent solution of copper sulphate. HUGH McL. GORDON 57 tests indicated that 1 fl. oz. of 4 per cent solution was an unsatisfactory treat- ment. (b) 2 fl. oz. of 4 per cent solution of copper sulphate.58 Treatment for H. contortus in Sheep At the earliest opportunity trials will be undertaken to determine the efficient dose rate of the copper sulphate nicotine sulphate mixture for hae- monchosis in adult sheep, since this mixture has the additional advantage of being relatively effective against the immature forms of H. contortus and against Trichostrongylus spp. CONCLUSIONS 1. The usually prescribed dose of copper sulphate (1 fl. oz. of 4 per cent solution) is not an efficient treatment against H. contortus in adult sheep. 2. A dose of 2 fl. oz. of 4 per cent solution of copper sulphate (double the usually prescribed dose) is very effective against H. contortus in adult sheep. 3. A dose of 2 ml. carbon tetrachloride in 3 ml. liquid paraffin is very effective against H. contortus in adult sheep. REFERENCES Clunies Ross, I. (1934). Aust. Vet. J. 10, 11-23 Clunies Ross, I., and Gordon, H. McL. (1934). Aust. Vet. J. 10, 135 Gordon, H. McL. (1935). Aust. Vet. J. 11, 109 THE TREATMENT OF BABESIELLOSIS (B. ARGENTINA) WITH ACAPRIN BY JOHN LEGG, D. V. Sc. Senior Veterinary Officer, Department of Agriculture, Queensland (Reprinted from the Australian Veterinary Journal, Vol. XV, No. 3, June 1939) INTRODUCTION ACAPRIN, which is described as N1N160 Treatment of Babesiellosis (B. argentina) with Acaprin when 6 ml. acaprin were given. Within a few hours the temperature had fallen to 104.4° and parasites had disappeared. Recovery was uneventful. Bovine 379. JOHN LEGG 61 14th day it was again up to 105°, but the blood was negative. On the morn- ing of the 15th day it was over 105° and parasites appeared in the blood. These steadily increased in numbers and during the afternoon a full dose of acaprin (6 ml.) was given. On the 16th day the temperature was still over 105° and a few parasites present. A further dose of acaprin (6 ml.) was given in the afternoon. The temperature had fallen to 102.8° by the morning of the 17th day, parasites had disappeared, and from then on recovery was uneventful. Bovine 441. FERTILE MARE MULES* BY W. S. ANDERSON University of Kentucky (Reprinted from the Journal of Heredity, Vol. 30, No. 12, December, 1939) (With Plate III) THERE are very few living animals whose mothers are mules. Two of these rarities are owned by the Texas A. and M. College, and another is owned by W. H. Mobley and Son of Columbus, Indiana. One of the two in Texas is a mare mule by a jack out of ' Old Bec ' des- cribed in this Journal, Sept., 1928. She is not a three-quarter ass as her ancestry would indicate but a mule in all her features. Unlike her mother, she proved to be sterile. The other Texas animal is the son of a saddle stallion out of ' Old Bec '. He is a five-gaited saddle horse and has been shown as such at Texas fairs. He has none of the ass-like qualities of his mule mother. He has been mated to several mares and the foals by him show no evidence of hybrid blood. Another animal with a mule mother, is a male foal by a Percheron stallion and was five weeks old in June, 1938, when photographed (Plate III). He exhibits the Percheron characteristics for a foal of that age. There is com- plete absence of any influence of the ass ancestry coming to him from his mother. His owners intend to keep him and test him by breeding. These three living animals explain those rare occasions when a female mule becomes a mother. It is known that the ass has a greater mumber of chromosomes than the horse. This difference does not interfere with an ovum of a mare developing when fertilized by a sperm of a jack ; but when the hybrid reaches physical maturity and the gonads begin to function the inequality of the chromosome numbers prevents the reproductive glands from producing sex cells. The author has examined glands of male mules after castration but has never found any spermatozoa. The production of the three animals by mare mules indicates that their ovaries did mature viable ova. Since two of the foals by stallions are horses without any features of the mule or ass, it is certain the ova that produced them carried no chromosomes from the ass. The mare mule out of ' Old Bec ' and by a jack is in every way a mule ; not an animal with three-fourths of her genes from the ass. In this case the ovum evidently carried no chromo- somes of the ass but only the chromosomes which its mother received from her mother, a female horse. The explanation appears to be, that if the female mule produces an ovum without ass chromosomes it is viable. It could happen, if in the division of the oocyte, all the ass chromosomes clung together and went into the polar, or waste cell, the final ovum would contain only the * A few days after this note was received similar information and another illustra- tion of the Indiana mule and her colt were submitted by Dr. Edwin E. Jacobs, Ashland College, Ashland, Ohio. 62
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. XI, Part I ] PLATE III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A fertile mule and her colt Photographs of the female mule from Indiana and the horse-like foal she produced when mated to a Percheron stallion. The colt was five weeks old when the picture was taken. This survey of three instances of fertile mules suggests that some female mules may occasionally produce a pure horse ovum, uncontaminated by ass ancestry, and that these rare ova are fertile.
W. S. ANDERSON 63 chromosomes received from the horse ancestry. If this hypothetical ex- planation be true then a viable ovum of a mare mule would carry the haploid number of horse chromosomes just as the ova of all female horses. On the other hand no viable ova are produced by female mules except the rare ones in which the sister polar cell carried away all the ass chromosomes. This would explain the bearing of a horse-like colt by a fertile mule, recorded skeptically by Lloyd Jones in this Journal in 1916. It was reasonably held that an animal with one-fourth ass ancestry should have some characters of the ass, but as pointed out above, this instead of being ground for doubt, may really be what is to be expected in cases of mule fertility. As the word of the breeders was the main evidence, the rare occurrences were frequently looked upon with more doubt than interest. Further evidence that the foregoing hypothesis is true is found in a recent statement from the Texas A. and M. College that " the son of the ' Old Bec' is fertile and has quite a number of colts around that section of the country. His daughters also are fertile. He is rather a popular sire locally and is used for saddle purposes". None of his offspring show any reversion to their ass ancestry. If he carried any of the chromosomes of the ass, hybrid qualities would appear in his offspring. The absence of ass-like qualities seems conclusive evidence that he himself originated from an ovum with no chromosomes from his grandsire, the jack. In 1918 the Kentucky Experiment Station purchased a mare mule that had aborted a fetus of about four or five months of age. She was mated with a stallion but failed to conceive. The fetus was preserved and appears mule-like. The high fetal mortality rate of mules that conceive may perhaps be explained by combinations of chromosomes being formed which are only partially viable. The dream of mule breeders has been to find fertile mare mules, hoping to get a race of perpetuating hybrids. The dream it seems cannot be realized as the reversion to the horse of the hybrid ancestry takes place, when they are fertile. If the above hypothesis is correct, the two male horses out of mare mules hereditarily have no maternal grandfathers as the hereditary material which each mother mule received from her sire was all eliminated in the normal random assortment as the ova were produced, and only the mother's material gift of chromosomes entered the viable eggs from which the two horses evolved.
ABSTRACTS A note on the inheritance of kemp in black-face sheep. D. M. BRYANT (1933). J. Textile Inst. 24, T 309 THE term ' kemp ' is applied to the opaque fibres, occurring in the outer coat of the primitive sheep. It is much coarser than the other fibres and, owing to the presence of an air-filled medulla, has a dead white appearance. The fibre is very brittle, possesses a marked wave in one plane only and very low tensile strength. The presence of these fibres in wool is a matter of deep concern both to the breeder and the trade. To the breeder it means depreciation in the value of the fleece and as for the manufacturer of woollen materials he can utilise the low quality wool for coarsest fabrics only. No method of removing the kemp is available except the laborious one of hand- picking. Fortunately the fine woolled sheep are mostly free from kemp but in some of the other breeds, e. g. Cheviot, it is responsible for considerable wastage. Investiga- tions were undertaken by the author to ascertain the possible mode of inheritance of kemp and the breed chosen for this purpose was the Scottish Mountain Blackface. The experi- mental sheep were kept under standard commercial conditions from year to year, which, obviously, could not be controlled. The experimental evidence has shown that there is a hereditary basis for the expres- sion of kemp in the fleece and that it is influenced to some extent by the system of feeding. Like other wool fibres, kemp also responds in thickness and rate of growth in length to altered conditions of feeding, and due to its greater original thickness and marked cons- picuousness in the fleece, better nutrition leads to apparently greater increase in the amount of kemp visible in the fleece on the living sheep. Thus these results lead to the conclusion that if an endeavour is to be made to reduce the amount of kemp in wool, attention should be devoted primarily to the manipulation of the breed constitution rather than the environment of the sheep. In the present investigation the analysis of samples from parental and filial genera- tions has shown that kempiness in the fleece is inherited, that rams with fleece containing less than 1 per cent of kemp leave greater numbers of progeny which approximate to this figure than do more kempy rams and, lastly, that it is possible to produce a flock with low kemp content by using rams of less than 1 per cent of kemp and eliminating the kempy sheep. [H. B. S. ] The improvement of Chinese and other carpet wools. R. H. BURNS A. JOHNSTON and W. C. CHEN (1940). J. Textile Inst. 31, T 37 IN this article, the authors have formulated a tentative guide of wool type for carpet wool producers. The characteristics and origin of some of the different types of carpet wools have been described and opinions of the trade in respect of the relative values of different samples of desirable and undesirable carpet wools have been recorded. It is common knowledge that carpet wools are obtained from sheep reared under primitive conditions in various parts of the world. With the exception of a few thin-tailed varieties, most of this wool comes from the fat-tailed and broad-tailed varieties of sheep in Asiatic countries. The type of fleece in these sheep is composed of a mixture consisting of a long hairy outer coat, a finer undercoat and true wool and a third type of fibre, the so- called ' kemp '. The outer coat consists of heterotypical fibres, i. e. hair and intermediate fibres. As the name implies, these fibres are neither wool nor kemp. Originally this designation was confined to those fibres which within the same shaft showed characteristics of wool fibres, kemps and hairs. Now it is restricted to those fibre shafts which possess the characteristics of both wool and hair in the same fibre, particularly in respect of medul- lation and non-medullation. True wool consists of fibres which form the fine under- coat of the mixed-wool sheep. Kemps are the brittle fibres which lie loose in the fleece. These are not normally shed. In the present investigation the authors have analysed both microscopically and macroscopically seven samples of carpet wools and a sample of Romney wool for fibre types, fibre thickness and fibre length. They have observed that the Vicanere and Aleppo wools are considered the best carpet wools in the world by carpet 64
ABSTRACTS 65 manufacturers and the Thibetan is supposed to be the best among the Chinese wools. The Vicanere wool is produced in north Central India. It is soft, lively and springy and these are the characteristics which are highly valued in carpet wools. The Aleppo wool is grown in Syria, in Asia Minor, and possesses good length and is well known for its colour, strength and resiliency. The Woozie wools, which are produced in the neighbourhood of Shanghai, are regarded by the trade as one of the poorest of carpet wools. The macro- scopical analysis of carpet wools has indicated that the more desirable types according to manufacturers contain lower percentage of true wool and kemp and larger percentage of heterotypical fibres. The Vicanere and Aleppo wools on examination admirably satis- fied this requirement. The authors conclude that Chinese wools are not as good as the Vicanere and Aleppo wools in the macroscopical characteristics. The Romney wool sample showed only true wool fibres. It is observed that an ideal carpet wool should contain :66 ABSTRACTS regards proteins. The large quantities of protein necessary to increase the milk yield cannot be obtained by adding hay, silage, cereals bran to a basic ration drawn from the fodder crops produced on the farm, without making it impossible for the animal to absorb the whole ration because of its high dry matter content. ' On the basis of the available results of investigation in different countries, it is concluded that ' when the diet is limited to fodders produced on the farm, the hope of obtaining maximum yields must be abandoned. ' Therefore, when selecting animals for breeding purposes, preference should be given to those maintaining a good average yield on the available fodder rather than high yielders. In regard to measures for increasing the fodder output, the generally recognised methods are enumerated, viz. (a) extension of cultivated areas, (b) increase in yield and more rational use of meadows and grazing lands, (c) increase in fodder crops. It is stressed that ' it is the manner of using the meadows which determines the protein content and the influence of every other factor is of less importance, being almost always indirect '. Under the self-sufficiency system adopted by several countries, the meadows and grazing lands acquire all the more importance in that they supply the greater part of the necessary protein. With regard to obtaining increase in fodder crops, it is observed that' by a rotational selection of fodder plants, by encouraging the cultivation of those giving the best yields or by reducing the fallow periods of arable land (inter-row cultivation and catch crop), it is possible either to increase the quantity of fodder harvested over the same area or to reduce the area cultivated while main- taining production at the same level '. As regards the plants to which preference should be given it is suggested that those producing the greatest quantity of nutritive substance over an equal area are to be preferred. It is stated that a plant of capital importance has been found in the sweet lupin, especially when grown in sandy soil and the green fodder produced from it is much liked. Repeated feeding trials with dairy cattle, sheep, horses, pigs and poultry show that sweet lupin seeds are pleasant to taste, easily digested and that their effects correspond to their theoretical nutritive value. It has been observed that in feeding pigs and poultry, it is necessary to supplement the protein content of the lupin seeds with albumi- noids of animal origin in order to improve its biological value. All kinds of animals like the green fodder obtained from the sweet lupin and it does not become woody till very old. Another fodder plant of recognised value, the cultivation of which is steadily increasing, is the marrow kale (Brassica oleracea acephala) . The green material contains an average of 2.0 per cent of digestible crude protein, 1.5 per cent of net digestible protein and its starch equivalent is 8.0 kg. Feeding trials have shown that considerable quantity of protein can be economised by feeding this plant to dairy cows. Considerable attention is also being paid to catch crops. An effort is being made through these crops to increase the output of feeding stuffs and consequently the quantity of vegetable protein also ; at the same time most of the silage is made from these crops. The most important forage plants grown as catch according to the kind of soil, climate and season at which the sowings are made, are the following : red clover, several other varieties of clover and grasses, sweet lupin, serradelle, forage cabbage, mustard, rye, colza, turnip, rape, green maize, fodder mallow, etc. The commonest mixtures are grass and red clover ; rye and vetch ; oats, barley, vetch and peas ; beans, peas and vetch. Certain waste and by-products have always played an important part in the feeding of animals. Innovations such as the ' Anti-Wash Campaign ', i. e. collection and utili- sation of household rubbish have led to the accumulation of large quantities of com- plimentary feeding stuff for animals. This is mostly used for pig feeding. The use of meat meal and powdered blood is not a novelty in itself but considerable progress has been made in regard to the inexpensive collection and processing of these products. Much work has been done on the collection and preservation of beet leaves which are a valuable feeding stuff for livestock on account of their protein content and rela- tively less proportion of roughage. With the modern technique of artificial drying the loss of nutritive value has been reduced to 25 per cent of digestible crude protein and 10 per cent of its starch equivalent. Efforts have also been made to extract protein from the juice which is generally lost in the process of preparing potato starch and several dry products of proved nutritive value have been obtained for feeding sheep and pigs. Increased cultivation of linseed has led to the discovery of a valuable fodder in the husks of the seed. It has been shown that the husk contains 5.3 per cent of digestible
ABSTRACTS 67 protein and a starch equivalent of 30.6 kg. Among the dairy by-products, whey has received considerable attention. Attempts are being made to discover a method of preserving this product with a view to make available a concentrated food rich in protein. Nutrition tests based on dried whey have shown that its content of nutritive principles corresponds as a rule to that of forage barley, while its mineral content, chiefly lime, is higher than that of barley. It can be given freely to pigs, young cattle and grown calves but the somewhat sour taste sets a limit to the quantity which can be added to a ration. Poultry were found to refuse dried whey after a few days, probably because of the high proportion of lactose (45 to 50 per cent) and lack of specific ferments (lac- tase). Nutrition tests have shown that the use of neutralised whey has no bad effect on the health of the animals if delivered daily when fresh in wooden containers. A passing reference has been made in regard to investigation on substitutes, i. e. substances which are likely to fill in the shortage of concentrates and especially of foods with a high protein content. The cultivation of yeasts by sacrificing carbohydrates and inorganic nitrogenous salts, the substitution of protein with non-albuminoid nitrogenous substances and recent researches in Germany on the utilisation of wood sugar for livestock feeding have been described. Under the self-sufficiency system the question of suitable preservation of fodder with the least loss of nutritive principles is of paramount importance. In this connection, it is observed that the use of hay cocks in hay making is now widespread and in many countries subsidies are granted by Government to enable the farmers to purchase them. The most recent models are made of wire on which the newly mown fodder is hung out to dry. The production of silage has been gradually improved during the past few years by processes such as the addition of different acids, of fermentable carbohydrates, lactic ferments, by means of partial wilting of green fodders, etc. Large Government subsidies have been granted for the construction of silos and this shows the importance attached to ensilage methods. Greater attention is also now being paid to artificial drying of fodder crops. The cost involved appears to be fairly high but the product has a high nutritive value and can be given to any class of livestock, though particularly useful for feeding milch stock. The above resume will show that during the last few years, the self-sufficiency movement has made rapid strides in European countries and the numerous problems confronting it are receiving concerted attention. Attempts are being made to regulate the time of calving, lactation periods, etc., in accordance with the availability of fodders during different seasons and the present trend does not aim at maximum yield, which is obtainable only with the aid of foreign concentrates, but good, average yields from strong healthy stock suited to thrive on the bulkier home-grown fodders and available vegetable proteins. In regard to this self-sufficiency problem from the Indian point of view, it is interest- ing to record that the most recent estimates of the available fodder resources (cultivated) in this country are as follows :68 ABSTRACTS It is obvious that grass and hay will tend to rectify the deficiency. Whether we can get the additional 45 per cent of the requirement from fodder grasses cannot be accurately estimated. Much more than this is certainly potentially available and it is for this reason that grass land improvement measures and better utilisation of forest areas are of so much importance. [H. B. S. ] The theory of chromosomes. Discussion of unlike twin brothers. A. LEWIS OSWALD (1940). Jersey Bul. 59, 773. A BREEDING establishment does not exist on possession of a bull. One soon notes that great bulls have brothers of mediocre or poor quality, even when bred to the same cows. This is observed in the human family where full brothers vary to a great extent in the success they attain in life. One may celebrate prematurely on bringing together a bull with a good pedigree with cows having good pedigrees. Inquiry- explains how this is possible. Each cow or bull has 32 ' atoms of the flesh ' or chromosomes, of which 16 came from its mother and 16 from its father. These numbers never vary. No one, however, has been able to explain what determines which 16 of the 32 are passed on to the progeny by the parent. Do they struggle among themselves for this privilege ? In passing 16 of the 32 chromosomes to the progeny there is no loss to the parent, at least there is no evidence to the contrary ; they are replaced immediately by 16 identical ones. Each chromosome has one vote for a particular character, brown eyes or blue eyes for example. If the chromosomes for this character from each of the parents vote for one colour ; that colour wins ; if they vote for different colours, the stronger or dominant one wins. Brothers may have eyes of different colours for this reason. Likewise, bulls which are full brothers may sire progeny that are greatly different. If two full brothers have received identical chromosomes from each parent they will be identical. The mathematical possibility of this ever occurring is, however, quite remote. It is thereby possible for twins to be as similar or as dissimilar as full brothers born at different times. All brothers and sisters have many characters in common, very rarely are they identical. Each bull has 32 chromosomes and passes. 16 to his progeny. It is probable that he passes a different combination of 16 each time. Bulls which transmit, in some un- known manner, almost the same combination of 16 chromosomes each time have progeny that are ' as similar as the proverbial peas in the pod '. A sire, therefore, which has been well bred for generations will be most apt to produce good calves. A bull whose one parent was good and the other bad will give about 50 per cent good calves and 50 per cent poor ones. ' The cow is important, but the bull is the old boy that counts. He is the " papa " of the whole crop of calves, while each " mamma " has just her own child '. On the other hand a dairyman breeds for cows ; he has no need for a barn full of bulls. The breeding of cows which produce large quantities of good quality milk and reproduce their kind is the goal of the dairyman. (NOTE. ABSTRACTS 69 Genes of interest in this study are : ' B, causing black hair, which is modified from the solid color by the presence of the recessive gene s which causes white spotting of the coat; bs, or lack of the factor for " blackish " hairs as found in the Brown Swiss and Jerseys ; d, or lack of the dominant diluting factor which effects black ; I the normal allele of the recessive dilution factor i; lack of the W factor which causes whitening in the muzzle, coat, etc ; and In, or dominant white spotting in the inguinal region.' Some Holsteins also have a dominant gene for the white star (Ws) The F1 data of this study show that the Brown Swiss carry ' bb, which would result in red, except for the presence of Es (partially epistatic to red) and ii, the latter being mostly effective on dilution of red ; D, which dilutes black to dun (one Brown Swiss male was apparently heterozygous and the other homozygous for D) ; W,70 ABSTRACTS in this way give effects quite different from their average effects. Phylogenetically the various combinations of genes must function well enough to survive. Therefore heavy selection would occur against genes which would produce good results in certain special combinations but which in the majority of the Mendelian combinations gave bad results. Manifestations of this cause of ' nicking ' are found in cases in which one sire produces good progeny with one group of dams but quite ordinary or poor progeny with another. Or if several sires are used on one group of dams their order of merit, based on the pro- geny, may be quite different from what it would be if they were used on another group of dams. It is, however, not likely that sire proving would be greatly disturbed by epistatic effects since there is no effective way of getting groups of cows that are genetically uni- form within groups, but contrasting from group to group. It cannot be accomplished alone by selection as the effect of one gene cannot be entirely distinguished from the effect of another gene. Joint effects involving three or more genes are even less likely to be observed with any degree of accuracy. The authors examined the records of 13 bulls by the analysis of variance to deter- mine whether significant differences existed among the daughters of each bull when group- ed according to their maternal grandsires. No evidences of ' nicking ' which would dis- turb the proving of any of these bulls was noted. [J. N. W. ]
REVIEW Diseases of the Pig and its Husbandary. DAVID J. ANTHONY, M. R. C. V. S., D. V. S. M. (VICT.). (London : Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, 1940. Pp. xi+272, 48 illus. 10s. 6 d.). MR. Anthony's book fills a long-felt need for an authoritative book, in English dealing with the pig from a veterinary aspect. Excellent descriptions are given of the various diseases of pigs and in several instances the illustrations of lesions should enable one to recognize the disease condition as it occurs in the affected animal. Eight chapters are devoted to the description of the diseases. One chapter deals with diseases scheduled in Great Britain, viz. anthrax, foot-and-mouth disease, swine fever and rabies, the next one with non-scheduled constitutional diseases which include the remaining bacterial and virus diseases and protozoan infections and another with deficiency diseases caused by the lack of minerals and vitamins. Four chapters are taken up by local diseases which include diseases of the digestive, urinogenital, respiratory, circulatory, nervous and cutaneous systems. Dental diseases also find a place amongst these diseases. The last chapter in this series is devoted to diseases caused by ecto- and endo- parasites. Affections resulting from infestation with Arthropoda (flies, lice, ticks and mites), trematodes, cestodes, nematodes and acanthocephala are all described and a complete list of these parasites and the methods of examining them and their ova for identification are also given. The last chapter of the book deals with mineral and organic poisons, poisonous plants and foodstuffs, which may cause trouble in pigs, and also contains a descrip- tion of anaphylactic shock as it occurs in pigs. Though the description of diseases and their control form the bulk of the book, due prominence is also given to pig husbandry, e. g. chapters are devoted to a description of various breeds, their housing and management, breeding, feeding, dentition and ageing, signs of health, restraint and handling, market requirements, etc. This is all to the good, for it is now clearly realized that in the control of diseases of animals, their husbandry must also be the subject of study and practice. The field covered by the publication is thus wide and comprehensive. It is attractively printed and bound and contains a vast store of practical information. Here in India, people are beginning to realize the potentialities of this industry, which yields most profitable returns, and we can warmly recommend the book to veterinarians who have to deal with pigs, to pig breeders and to others interested in this industry. [ R. L. K. ] 71 F
ORIGINAL ARTICLES NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS IN GOATS BY P. G. MALKANI, B. A. (HONS.), B. Sc. (LOND-VET.), M. R. C. V. S. Research Officer and Professor of Pathology and Bacteriology AND G. PRASAD, G. B. V. C. First Laboratory Assistant Bihar Veterinary College, Patna (Received for publication on 20 January 1941) (With Plates IV and V) MONTGOMERY'S [1906] pioneer work established that bilharziasis was quite common in domesticated animals in India. He showed that horse and donkey harboured Schistosoma indicum [Montgomery, 1906], that cattle harboured Schistosoma bovis [Sonsino, 1876], Schistosoma bomfordi [Montgomery, 1906] and Schistosoma spindalis [Montgomery, 1906], and that sheep harboured Schistosoma bovis [Sonsino, 1876] and Schistosoma indicum [Montgomery, 1906]. Liston and Soparkar [1918] worked out the life-history of Schistosoma spindalis [Montgomery, 1906] and showed that goat and buffalo also harboured this parasite. Seven years later, Fairley and Mackie [1925] studied the histo-pathology of Schistosoma spindalis [Montgomery, 1906] infestation in goats and established that as in bovines it affected exclusively the portal system in them and that its ova were voided only with the faeces. The problem of schistosomiasis among animals does not appear to have attracted much attention until Malkani [1932] announced both at a public lecture and in a short note in the Veterinary Record that the cause of the com- monly encountered nasal granuloma in cattle had been discovered to be a schistosome. This was soon followed by publications by Datta [1932], Rao [1932] and Malkani [1933]. In each of these publications it was clear that a new schistosome of cattle had been discovered, and Malkani [1933] consider- ing it as. a distinct species suggested the name Schistosoma spindalis var. nasale. Rao [,1932] suggested the name Schistosoma nasalis. Rao [1933] and Malkani [1933] gave records of cases (though infrequent) of nasal granuloma in buf- faloes due to the same parasite74 Nasal Schistosomiasis in Goats On 28 March 1939, a sample of nasal discharge and small pieces of growth removed from the nostrils of a she-goat were received in the laboratory from Mr. R. R. Sarkar, Touring Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Dinapore, with the history that the animal was showing nasal growths. Microscopical examina- tion of direct cover slip preparations from the sample of nasal discharge reveal- ed a large number of boomerang-shaped eggs which were indistinguishable from those found in bovine nasal schistosomiasis. Sections of the growths showed a. picture similar to that seen in bovine nasal schistosomiasis but no parasites could be seen as only superficial portions of the growths had been cut. Attempts to obtain the goat for further investigation were, however, unsuccessful. The case was treated with tartar emetic and discharged as cured. On 26 June 1939 Mr. R. R. Sarkar sent to the laboratory an affected castrated he-goat (Plate IV, fig. 1), which supplied the material for the purposes of this investigation. The goat was kept under observation for a month be- fore it was destroyed for the purpose of post-mortem and histo-pathological examinations. Features of the disease. Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II ] PLATE IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Photograph of a goat suffering from nasal granuloma [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Microphotograph of male and female schistosomes recovered from the liver of a goat suffer- ing from nasal granuloma. Note the tuberculated cuticle [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Microphotograph of eggs of Schistosoma nasalis seen in a cover glass preparation of the nasal discharge from a case of nasal granuloma in cattle
PLATE V [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Microphotograph of characteristic eggs seen in a cover glass preparation of nasal discharge from a goat suffering from nasal granuloma [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Microphotograph of a section of growth showing the concentration of eosinophiles round a cavity occupied by an egg containing a well defined embryo [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Microphotograph of a section of a growth showing cavities containing a developed embryo in one and cut parts of embryo in others [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Microphotograph of a section of a growth showing transverse section of the parasites (male and female in copula) in situ
P. G. MALKANI AND G. PRASAD 75 Examination of urine, faeces and blood. 76 Nasal Schistosomiasis in Goats leucocytes and a large number of capillary loops. Deeper layers showed marked cellular infiltration with round, epithelial, a few polymorphonuclear but mostly eosinophile cells. The eosinophile infiltration was noticeable around cavities. Many of these cavities were empty and some of them had a striking resemblance to the shape of the eggs of the parasite. Others were seen to be occupied by eggs enclosing well-defined embryos (Plate V, fig. 2) or even fully developed miracidium (Plate V, fig. 3). The large blood vessels situated deeply in the affected tissue, specially the veins, showed transverse sections of schistosomes, some of them single, others in copula (Plate V, fig. 4). Such veins showed considerable dilatation and their endothelium was also thickened. Around some of these veins one could see the same kind of cellular infiltration with formation of large plasmoidal giant cells, eosinophile infiltra- tion and fibrosis as seen round the eggs. In some parts the arteries showed varying degrees of endarteritis. The morbid histology was thus similar to the one seen by Malkani [1933] in cases of bovine nasal schistosomiasis. Discussion. P. G. MALKANI AND G. PRASAD 77 3. The goat like the buffalo must therefore be taken into consideration in the eradication campaign against the more common bovine nasal schistosomiasis. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks are due to Mr. M. I. Malik, B. Sc., M. R. C. V. S., Principal of the Bihar Veterinary College, for the facilities afforded for this investigation. We wish to place on record our appreciation of the help received from Messrs. K. S. Sankaram (Demonstrator), Raghuvans Bhushan (Artist) and R. R. Sarkar, Touring Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Dinapore. REFERENCES Bhalerao, G. D. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 2, 338 Datta, S. C. A. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 2, 131 Fairley, N. H. and Mackie, F. P. (1926). Trans. Far. East. Assocc Trop. Amidi. Sixth Congress 1 , 423 Liston, W. G. and Soparkar, M. B. (1918). Ind. J. Med. Res. 6, 567 Malkani, P. G. (1932). Ind. Vet. J. 8, 286 : Vet. Rec. 12, 416 ------------------ (1933). Ind. Vet. J. 9, 257 Montgomery, R. E. (1906). J. Trop. Vet. Sci. 1, 1 : 2, 138. Rao, M. A. N. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 3, 29 : Ind. Vet. J. 9, 107 ---------------- (1933). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 3, 160 ----------------- (1934). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 4, 1
CONCENTRATION OF VITAMIN C (ASCORBIC ACID) IN THE TISSUES OF FARM ANIMALS IN HEALTH AND DISEASE* BY S. N. RAY, M. Sc., PH. D. Assistant Research Officer (Biochemistry), Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 2 December 1940) (With one text-figure) CONSIDERABLE interest in the rô1e played by vitamin C in the animal system has been caused by the recent discovery that the vitamin C require- ment of the body is very greatly increased in several infectious diseases. Heise and Martin [1936] found that patients suffering from tuberculosis excrete in the urine less vitamin C than is excreted by healthy persons on a similar diet, and the vitamin C requirement of such patients is much greater than the normal. Similar findings were recorded by other workers in the case of a variety of infectious diseases such as pneumonia [Harde, Rothstein and Ratish, 1935] and rheumatoid arthritis [Abbassy and Harris, 1937]. As very little is known about the rôle played by vitamin C in the animal body, the cause of the increased requirement in these diseases cannot be ex- plained satisfactorily. The most plausible theory is that this vitamin may have some anti-infective action within the body and probably reacts with the toxins produced by micro-organisms. Some support to this theory has been given by Heise and Schwartz [1937], who observed a small improvement in tubercular patients who were given vitamin C. King and Menten [1935] and Greenwald and Harde [1935] also found a similar beneficial effect from the administration of vitamin C in diphtheria while Jungeblut [1939] obtained similar results in poliomyelitis. Other workers [Sendroy and Schultz, 1936 ; Parsons, 1938; Baumann and Rappolt, 1937 ; Zilva, 1937] have, however, failed to observe any such improvement in any disease through the administra- tion of vitamin C, and they ascribe the heightened requirement of the body to the increased catabolic destruction of the vitamin owing to pyrexia. So far, however, no work seems to have been done to find out the diminu- tion, if any, in the vitamin C concentration of the various tissues of common domestic animals suffering from infectious diseases. The point is of great interest since animals such as cows, horses, goats and fowls are known to live for indefinite periods in perfect health without the inclusion of any vitamin C in their diet, and are supposed to be able to synthesize this vitamin within their bodies from unknown ingredients in their feed. In fact, the only species which require vitamin C in their diet are men, monkeys and guinea-pigs. *This work was carried out in the Pathology and Bacteriology section of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. 78
S. N. RAY 79 The present work was taken in hand in order to find out whether the endo- genous production of vitamin C in livestock is sufficient to meet the enhanced requirement of the system during disease. A number of interesting facts were revealed and it was found that in many diseased conditions the vitamin C concentration in the blood and other tissues was much lower than the corres- ponding values in normal animals, proving thereby that the capacity of the animals to synthesize this vitamin is distinctly restricted. EXPERIMENTAL The vitamin C (ascorbic acid) contents of the tissues were estimated according to the method of Birch, Harris and Ray [1933]. The capsules of the organs were removed and the central portions dried between pieces of filter paper. Weighed amounts of tissue were then thoroughly ground up with 20 per cent trichloracetic acid and sand and the mixture made up to a definite volume so that the final suspension contained 5 per cent trichloracetic acid. The filtrate was titrated against a definite volume of an aqueous solution of 2 : 6 dichlorphenol indophenol, standardised against pure ascorbic acid. In the case of blood plasma, 7 c. c. of plasma were added to 3 c. c. of 20 per cent trichloracetic acid, mixed thoroughly and centrifuged rapidly for fifteen minutes. Four c. c. of the clear supernatant was titrated against a dilute standard solution of 2 : 6 dichlorphenol indophenol. A blank was run at the same time with diluted trichloracetic acid and the amount of dye required to obtain a pink colour was subtracted from the amount required by the plasma sample. Except where otherwise mentioned, all blood samples were collected from animals showing definite symptoms of the particular diseases under study, and the liver and spleen samples were taken as soon as possible after the death of the animals. Any sample showing the slightest sign of putrefaction was rejected. Both the normal and diseased animals were kept as far as practi- cable on the same type of ration. The results obtained were as follows: TABLE I Concentration of ascorbic acid in the various tissues of normal and diseased animals Nature of disease Concentration of ascorbic acid in tissues examined Blood plasma mg/100 c. c. Liver mg/gram Spleen mg/gram Hill-bulls Normal 0.3480 Vitamin C in the Tissues of Farm Animals TABLE IS. N. RAY 81 TABLE II Statistical treatment of figures in Table I Groups t Degrees of freedom Remarks A 55.28 28 Very significant B 13.57 22 Significant Group A. Comparison between the concentrations of vitamin C in normal animals and in animals suffering from rinderpest. Group B. Similar comparison in normal animals and animals suffering from acute theileriasis. The results show that the degree of depletion in rinderpest is more than four times as great as in acute theileriasis. In fowls, the concentration of vitamin C in the liver and spleen did not change when the birds had even died from such a virulent disease as Ranikhet disease. If anything, the concentration was found to have increased beyond that found in normal birds. The reason for this sharp difference between fowls and other animals is not clear. In the case of hill-bulls suffering from rinderpest it was also found (Table III) that the fall in the concentration of vitamin C in the blood was roughly proportional to the degree of severity of the infection. In this connection, it may be pointed out that in goats, which suffer from an attenuated form of rinderpest, the drop in the concentration of vitamin C in blood is much smaller than that in bulls. TABLE III Correlation between vitamin C concentration of blood and severity of rinderpest infection Number of hill-bull Concentration of vitamin C (mg. per 100 c. c. blood plasma) Degree of infection 43 0.064 ++++++ (Very severe) 44 0.220 ++++++ (Do.) 126 0.048 ++++++ (Do.) 132 0.220 ++++++ (Do.) 87 0.310 ++ (Mild) 94 0.240 ++++ (Severe) 148 0.39 0 (Nil) 66 0.285 + (Very mild) 32 0.125 ++++++ (Very severe)
82 Vitamin C in the Tissues of Farm Animals In order to find out whether the fall in the ascorbic acid concentration of blood is due to the high temperature run by the animals, a day-to-day esti- mation was made of the blood of normal animals, of animals inoculated with rinderpest virus and of animals infected with acute theileriasis. The results are depicted graphically in Fig. 1. Each curve represents the average of the figures comprising each group. It will be seen that the concentration of vitamin C in the blood of animals inoculated with rinderpest began to fall on the second day, when the temperature of the animals was still normal. More- over, in cases of theileriasis the concentration did not fall below the initial levels even though the animals were running high temperature. It may therefore, be inferred that the reduction in vitamin C in rinderpest is mainly due to the action of virus and is not associated with pyrexia. Further, the curves definitely prove that acute theileriasis has little effect on the vitamin C concentration of the blood of infected animals. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Rate of variation in the vitamin C concentration of blood plasma in normal and infected animals.
S. N. RAY 83 A curious feature of the curves is the sharp rise in vitamin C within 24 hours of inoculating rinderpest virus. This rise was observed in all the animals examined. A similar but smaller rise is also seen in the curve for cases of theileriasis after the thirteenth day, that is two or three days before the protozoa appear in the blood stream. This rise in the concentration of the vitamin appears to be a mobilising action on the part of the animal system in order to strengthen the defensive mechanism against the invading organisms. SUMMARY A decrease in the concentration of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) in the blood, liver and spleen of animals suffering or dying from a number of infectious diseases such as rinderpest, blackquarter and helminthiasis has been observed. In certain other diseases, such as acute theileriasis in bulls or Ranikhet disease in fowls, little or no such reduction was seen. In rinderpest, the diminution in the vitamin C concentration of the blood was found to run parallel with the degree of severity of the infection though it was not associated with rise of temperature. A sharp rise in the concentration of the vitamin in the blood was observed within 24 hours of inoculating rinderpest virus. A similar but smaller rise was also seen after the thirteenth day in animals infected with acute theileriasis. The significance of these findings is discussed. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS My thanks are due to Mr. J. R. Haddow, Officer-in-charge of the Pathology and Bacteriology Section of this Institute, for his constant advice and guidance, to Dr. H. N. Ray, Systematic Protozoologist and to Mr. M. K. Sreenivasan, Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, for kindly supplying me with blood from animals suffering from acute theileriasis and rinderpest. REFERENCES Abbasy, M. A. and Harris, L. J. (1937). Lancet 2, 181. Baumann, T. and Rappolt, L. (1937). Z. Vitaminforsch. 6, 1. Bessey, O. A. and King C. G. (1933). J. Biol. Chem. 103, 687. Birch, T. W. ; Harris, L. J. and Ray, S. N. (1933). Biochem. J. 27, 590. Greenwald, C. K. and Harde, E. (1935). Proc. Soc. Expt. Biol. & Med. 32, 1157. Harde, E ; Rothstein, J. A. and Ratish, H. D. (1935). Proc. Soc. Expt. Biol. & Med. 32, 1088. Heise and. Martin (1936). Proc. Soc. Expt. Biol. & Med. 34, 142. Jungeblut, C. W. (1939). J. Expt. Med. 70, 315. King, C. G. and Menten, M. L. (1935). J. Nutrition 10, 129. Parsons, L. G. (1938). Lancet 234, 123. Sendroy, J. J. and Schultz, M. P. (1936). J. Clin. Investigation 15, 369. Svirbely, J. L. (1933). Biochem. J. 27, 960. Zilva, S. S. (1937). Brit. J. Exptl. Path. 18, 449. B
EXPERIMENTS ON THE TRANSMISSION OF RINDER- PEST THROUGH THE AGENCY OF TABANUS ORIENTIS, WITH REMARKS ON THE FEEDING HABITS OF THIS FLY BY H. R. KAPUR, M. R. C. V. S. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 30 January 1941) (With 2 text-figures) INTRODUCTION RINDERPEST, being one of the oldest diseases recognized in this country as causing enormous losses among cattle every year, it would be imagin- ed that the mode of its transmission has been fully investigated by now, but a perusal of the available literature on the subject shows that this is not so. Arthropods as transmitting agents of this disease have been mentioned by various observers, but very little appears to have been done to find out whether they actually transmit the disease and set up an outbreak. The only efforts made in this direction were by Sen [1925, 1937], Hornby [1926] and Bhatia [1935]. After the reader has gone through the account of the experiments carried out by the above workers and of those detailed in this article, he would not only hesitate to form any definite opinion but also find certain conclusions as being incompatible. A few more workers have conducted experiments which aimed only at determining the duration of the viability of the rinderpest virus in the body of a tick or a fly or in the urine, faeces, etc. In most cases emulsion of the fly or the tick, after it had fed on the infected animal or on its blood or faeces, was inoculated into healthy cattle to see if the disease could be reproduced in this manner, but in no case was the disease transmitted through a bite. Thus Ward and his collaborators [1914] experimented on the viability of the virus in urine and faeces of the infected animals under various conditions, whilst Shilston [1917] carried out similar experiments with meat, bone marrow and blood. Curasson [1922] succeeded in reproducing the disease by inoculating the emul- sion of an infected engorged Ixodes ricinus tick immediately on removal from its host, but the result was negative when this was done an hour after removal. His work with Tabanus will be mentioned later in this article. DeSouza [1924] found that the tick, Boophilus annulatus, fed on an infected animal was virulent on injection after seven days. Work on the actual transmission of rinderpest through bites of insects was first undertaken by Sen [1925]. With Aëdes (Stegomyia) albopicta the results of his experiments on hill bulls were negative. With Musca domestica he obtained negative results when flies fed on infective material (such as nasal discharge, blood and faeces of infected animals) were allowed to come in con- tact with such parts of the body as seemed likely to serve as avenues of infec- tion under natural conditions, but the results were positive when such infec- tive flies were inoculated into susceptible bulls. In his third series of experi- ments he employed Linognathus vituli. Here, too, the results were negative 84
H. R. KAPUR 85 when infected lice were transplanted on a healthy bull but positive when an emulsion of these was inoculated. Hornby [1926] succeeded only in a single instance in transmitting rinderpest in East Africa through the bites of Glos- sina morsitans. Crawford [1933], in Ceylon, suggested that in the absence of Glossina the larger biting flies might transmit the disease in India. Working on this suggestion, Bhatia [1935] was the first to carry out experiments with Tabanus orientis and Stomoxys calcitrans, using the interrupted method of feeding. He conducted four experiments with T. orientis, feeding 6 flies in the first, 8 in the second, 18 in the third with negative results and 36 in the fourth where he claims to have succeeded in transmitting the disease. With S. calcitrans, however, his findings were negative throughout. Sen and Abdus Salam [1937] also report negative results with S. calcitrans. They made 411 experimentally engorged flies (fed singly) to bite a healthy animal over a period of 23 days and 670 flies (fed en masse) in 6 days, thus bringing the total to 1081 over a period of 29 days. The experiments described in this article were carried out with the object of obtaining an indication as to the extent to which transmission through biting flies is possible under field conditions, the only species of fly used in these experiments being T.orientis. The spread of a fly-borne disease depends largely on the feeding habit of the vector and, since very little is known about this habit in T. orientis, it was considered desirable also to deal with this aspect of the problem. MATERIAL AND METHOD The flies were mostly secured from the pastures frequented by healthy buffaloes every morning. They were kept in ordinary mosquito netting cages and starved for 24-48 hours. A thick layer of absorbent cotton soaked with water was kept on the roof of each cage and this in turn was covered over with a damp cloth, in order to provide the flies with a constant supply of moisture. During the day these cages were partly exposed to sunlight and a few dry twigs were also placed in them in order to simulate the natural conditions as far as possible. After the lapse of the above-mentioned period their wings were clipped half and they were then fed on a bull artificially infected with rinderpest. The host, if quiet, was made to stand ; otherwise it was cast and properly secured. An area about 6-in. × 6-in. on the back in the former and on the abdomen in the latter case was shaved and wiped clean. The feeding of flies was always conducted in shade. Six to ten flies at a time were left on the prepared site and covered over with a glass beaker, a watch being kept to study their behaviour. An animal at the height of temperature reaction was selected for providing the infective feed and used for four consecutive days for feeding the flies and it was then replaced by another that had been injected with virus four days previously. The flies that started feeding were allowed about one-and-a-half to two minutes for the feed and then interrupted. When a fly had actually fed, a large drop of blood appeared at the site of bite and it was then allowed to complete its feed on a healthy bull which was kept close at hand. If, however, B 2
86 Experiments on the Transmission of Rinderpest no blood appeared the fly was allowed again to continue its feed for another minute or so until blood appeared. Every individual feeder was treated in this manner. The interval between the infective and healthy feeds was res- tricted to just a few seconds. The experimental bulls, except when brought for feeding flies, were kept in chappars a good distance away from the rinder- pest shed. RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENTS WITH T. ORIENTIS The results of two transmission experiments are summarized in Tables I and II. TABLE I First experiment Date and number of flies collected Number of rinder- pest infested bull used and number of flies partially fed Number of flies induced to complete their feed on healthy bull No. 176 Date of feeding Remarks Result (1939) 12th May : 50 flies . . H. B. 511: 27 flies 27 (1939) 13th May Flies were starved for 24-48 hours before feed. The inter- val between the infective and healthy feeds was a few seconds. Negative 13th May: 56 flies . . H. R . KAPUR 87 It will be seen from Table I that a total of 1210 wild flies were used in the experiment and that 821 of these were partially fed on rinderpest infected animals and were allowed to complete their feed on a healthy bull which was thus subjected to the bites of infected flies over a period of 27 days, but the result was negative. The bull was subsequently tested with rinderpest virus and was found susceptible to the disease (Fig. 1). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Hill bull 17688 Experiments on the Transmission of Rinderpest TABLE II Second experiment Date and number of flies collected Number of rinder- pest infected, bull used and number of flies partially fed Number of flies induced to complete their feed on healthy bull No. 25 Date of feeding Remarks Result (1939) (1939) Flies were starved for 24-48 hours before feed. The interval between the infective and healthy feeds was a few seconds Positive 14th June: 25 flies H. B. No. 561: 19 flies 19 15th June 15th June: 20 flies H.B. No. 561:11 flies 11 17th June 16th June : 4 flies . H.B. No. 11: 24 flies 24 19th June From Table II it will be observed that a total of 54 infected flies were fed on a healthy bull on three alternate days with positive results. The animal developed a mild thermal reaction followed by mouth lesions and diarrhH. R. KAPUR 89 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Hill bull 2590 Experiments on the Transmission of Rinderpest only one was left which refused to feed and died the following night, indicating thereby that those flies which refused to feed on the first day had possibly a meal of blood before they were captured. The one that fed on the first day was again tried on the fourth day for about an hour when it showed no inclination to feed and was found dead the next morning. A second experiment with a further batch of 60 flies was carried out and 40 out of them were seen to feed, out of which 35 were probably newly- emerged, as judged by the colouration of their eyes. The duration of feed in these cases ranged from 4 to 10 minutes. Thirty out of these 40 (the rest being dead) were again tried on the fourth day when only one of them was noticed to feed for about a minute and a half. These 30, along with the remainder of the first day's unfed lot, were afterwards tried every day for the next 9 days till all of them died. During this period not one of them was seen to feed. The foregoing experiments were repeated during May and June of the following year and in these a total of nearly 80 flies were used. Of this number, only 6 could be induced to take two complete feeds, the interval between these feeds being about 72 hours in each case. In another experiment the interrupted method of feeding was employed, using a batch of 17 flies. Eleven started feeding and were allowed to continue the feed for about half a minute. These were then separated and the rest dis- carded. Next morning 2 were dull and refused to feed, while the other nine commenced feeding again but were interrupted after about a minute. The dull ones died during the night. On the third day, 7 out of the 9 were living and 6 of these were observed to feed once again and were allowed to do so for another half a minute, while the seventh was injured and subsequently died. On the fourth day, 4 out of 6 fed readily and were interrupted after a minute, while the other two refused to feed and died, one in the afternoon and the other the following morning. On the fifth day, only 3 survived. Two of these started feeding and were disturbed after half a minute, while the third was allowed to complete its feed and took 3 minutes to do so. This fly was kept separately. On the sixth day, the incompletely fed ones again commenced feeding but were interrupted after half a minute. On the other hand, the completely fed one refused to feed again although allowed half an hour to do so, once in the morning and again in the afternoon. On the seventh day, only one of the interrupted feeders and the one that had been completely engorged were found living. The former could be induced to feed again only for about a minute and never fed again during the following five days of its life in spite of repeated trials, while the latter refused to feed altogether and was found dead the next morning. From the observations recorded above, it would appear that, while the fly feeds readily a number of times by the interrupted method, it rarely takes more than one complete feed in captivity. This would seem somewhat remarkable in view of what is known concerning the feeding habits of other species of Tabanus. Thus, according to Patton and Cragg [1913], Tabanids feed every third day, while Cross and Patel [1921] observed that Tabanus nemocallosus sucked blood four times within 5 days and ten times within 16 days.
H. R. KAPUR 91 During the course of the above experiments it was observed that it took hardly 5 minutes to induce the flies to feed on a black bull, whereas it usually took 10-20 minutes to make them feed on a brown bull. This finding was further supported by the fact that these flies were always caught in areas where buffaloes were grazed, but were less common in places frequented by other cattle. In view of the above observation, black bulls were, as far as possible, selected for the subsequent experiments. Incidentally a few observations were made on the behaviour of T. orientis under natural conditions, towards animals grazing out in the field. In one instance a fly attempted to attach itself to the hind limb of a bull but was prevented from doing so by the lashing of its tail. The tail of the animal was then secured by an attendant, while the fly was still hovering over it and it now settled on the hind shin and thrust its proboscis into the skin. At its initial stage, the bite caused some discomfort to the animal, as was evidenced by the fact that it shook the limb in an ineffectual attempt to dislodge the fly but later it ceased to do so, even after the tail was let loose, and the fly com- pleted its feed in about 5 minutes. In order to find out whether this parti- cular fly would feed again it was caught and repeated attempts at feeding it proved futile. In another case a fly was seen alighting on the inside of the hock joint of a bul. In spite of the lashing of the tail and the kicking of the legs by the animal the fly succeeded in fixing itself. Immediately after, the animal became quiet and continued grazing and the fly, after completing its feed, flew off, leaving a drop of blood at the site of puncture. It was, however, cap- tured and all efforts to feed it on subsequent days proved unsuccessful. About thirty other observations were made on the feeding habits of T. orientis under field conditions at Mukteswar and they were essentially of the nature described above. It would therefore seem improbable that T. orientis plays any important rôle in the spread of rinderpest under field condi- tions in India, and inferentially this remark applies to other species of the family of Tabanidae. It is of interest that Patton and Cragg [1913] would appear, in essence, to share the views expressed above, for these workers observe as follows : ' Most biting flies take a full meal at each feed, and seldom feed more than once a day, so that the parasite cannot be passed on to a second host unless it is capable of living during this period in what would appear, judging from the behaviour of such organisms under laboratory condi- tions, to be a very unfavourable environment; or if it happened that the fly was interrupted in its meal, and settled on another individual to complete it. The intermittent habit of feeding of the non-biting muscids suggests that they are more likely to spread infection in this way than are true biting flies '. VIABILITY OF RINDERPEST VIRUS IN T. ORIENTS A series of experiments was conducted to determine the viability of rinderpest virus in the body of T. orientis after artificial feeding on infected bulls.
92 Experiments on the Transmission of Rinderpest Curasson [1922] was the earliest to undertake such viability tests in Tabanids (species not stated). In a single instance he was able to transmit the disease by inoculation of an emulsion of proboscides removed from flies imme- diately after their infective feed on an animal on the third day of fever. The result of such inoculation, however, proved negative when the emulsion was made and injected 15 minutes after the infective feed. Negative results were also obtained when there was an interval of three quarters of an hour. In the present experiments a lot of 10 dead flies, fed on an infected animal at the height of thermal reaction, was mashed 48 hours after their feed in 10 c.c. of normal saline solution. The emulsion was strained, filtered and inoculated subcutaneously into a healthy bull without producing any eflfect. The inoculation was then repeated using 10 living flies but the results were likewise negative. A third lot of 10 flies was emulsified 20 hours after the feed and on inocula- tion produced typical symptoms of rinderpest after an incubation period of 5 days. The animal, however, recovered and was subsequently subjected to immunity test and proved to be immune. Finally, the experiment was repeated with an interval of 30 hours and this likewise yielded positive results. The above observations are summarized in Table III. TABLE III Rinderpest infec- ted hill bull No. Date and number of flies fed Date of inoculation Interval Results Incubation period Remarks (1939) (1939) (Hrs.) (Days) H. B. 176 13th May: 10 flies 15th May 48 Negative ... All flies dead H. B. 31 30th May : 10 flies 1st June 48 Negative ... All flies living H. B. 596 19th May : 10 flies 20th May 20 Positive 5 9 flies living and one dead H.B. 561 15th June: 10 flies 16th June 30 Positive 4 All flies living It was intended to determine the longest period for which the virus would remain viable but due to rains having set in, no flies could be secured and further experimentation could not therefore be undertaken. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. A total of 821 wild T. orientis flies were partially fed on rinderpest infected animals and allowed to complete their feed on a healthy bull, but the latter did not develop the infection. When subsequently tested for immunity by the inoculation of rinderpest virus, the bull proved susceptible to the disease.
H. R. KAPUR 93 Another healthy bull was subjected to only 54 infective bites and this animal developed typical symptoms of the disease, which eventually progressed to a fatal issue. 2. Observations on the feeding habits of T. orientis have shown that the fly seldom takes more than one complete feed in captivity and that, under field conditions, it usually enjoys an uninterrupted feed until it is fully engor- ged. These facts make it impossible for this fly to play any important rôle in the spread of rinderpest. 3. The virus of rinderpest is viable in the body of the fly for a minimum period of 30 hours and inert at 48 hours. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author is greatly indebted to Mr. J. R. Haddow, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., I.V.S., Offg. Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for the facilities afforded in the execution of this work and the keen interest taken from time to time during its progress. Thanks are due to Mr. S. K. Sen, M.Sc., F.R.E.S., Offg. Veterinary Research Officer, in charge of Protozoological Section, for the valuable suggestions offered in the initia- tion of this work. REFERENCES Bhatia, H. L. (1935). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 5, 2. Cooper, H. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 2, 383. Cross, H. E. and Patel, P. G. (1921). Dept. Agric. Punjab Vet. Bull. 7. Curasson, M. G. (1922). Rev. Gen. Med. Vet. 31, 57. (Abstract: Trop. Vet. Bull. 10, 49.) DeSouza, M. A. (1924). Trop. Vet. Bull. 12, 63. Hornby, H. E. (1926). Vet. J. 82, 348. Patton, W. S. and Cragg, F. W. (1913). Textbook of Medical Entomology. (Christian Litera- ture Society for India, London, Madras and Calcutta.) Sen, S. K. (1925). Mem. Dept. Agric. Ind. Ent. Ser. 9, 5. Sen, S. K. and Abdus Salam (1937). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 7, 219. Shilston, A. W. (1917). Mem. Dept. Agric. Ind. Vet. Ser. 3, 1. Ward, A. R. et al (1914). Philipp. J. Sci. B. 9, 49.
CAPILLARIA BOVIS SCHNYDER, 1906 FROM THE INTESTINE OF A CALF AT MADRAS BY S. N. VAIDYANATHAN, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Helminthology Research Section, Madras Veterinary College (Received for publication on 31 December 1940) (With six text-figures) ZEDER [1800] established the genus Capillaria on material from poultry, though Schrank [ 1790 ] was the earlier to record the first member of the genus with Capillaria (Trichocephalus) anatus from Anser ferus, as the type species. Railliet [1915] accepted it as the type genus of a new sub-family Capillarinae, under the family Trichuridae. Representatives of this genus are parasitic in the intestine, liver or urinary bladder of birds, mammals, etc. Only four species of Capillaria have been known to be parasitic in the domesticated ruminants. Ransom [1911] described two of these, C. longipes and C. brevipes from the small intestine of sheep in the United States. Schnyder [ 1906 ] recorded the species C. bovis from the ox in Switzerland, giving a brief description of the worms. Morgan [1925] obtained one female of this genus from the ox in Wales, which he found allied to C. bovis and C. longipes, thus failing to arrive at a conclusive identity. Bhalerao [1933] described C. bilobata from the abomasum of hill bulls at Mukteswar. The present collection of one male and two females was made from the small intestine of an experimental calf, at the Madras Veterinary College ; in their main features, the specimens obtained resemble those of C. bovis and this opportunity is taken to record it for the first time in this presidency and possibly in India. The worm has a capillary body ; the anterior shorter portion contains the oesophagus ; the posterior, very little longer, is only slightly thicker than the anterior. The head end (Fig. 1) is smooth and rounded; mouth is simple. Oesophagus is long, gradually increasing in size posteriorly. It consists (Fig. 2) of a delicate tube apparently running through the centre of a chain of cells. The cells in the anterior portion are not clearly made out; the posterior cells, which are first small, gradually increase in size towards the end of the oeso- phagus. At the junction of the oesophagus and the intestine (Fig. 3) are situated the yellowish-brown pyriform glands. The bacillary bands on the cuticle are very indistinct in the preserved specimens. The intestine takes an almost straight course and passes into a muscular rectum opening by the anus which is sub-terminal (Figs. 4 and 6). 94
S. N. VAIDYNATHAN 95 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
96 Capillaria bovis Schnyder, 1906 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
S. N. VAIDYANATHAN 97 Female is 21.4-21.8 mm. long and 0.088-0.097 mm. in maximum thick- ness. Oesophagus measures 7.00-7.25 mm. in length. The tail end is blunt (Fig. 4). There is only one ovary, which begins at the rectal region and extends anteriorly ; it thins out, bends on itself for a short distance and continues anteriorly again as a broad uterus filled with eggs. The uterus passes into a muscular vagina (Fig. 3) which opens by the vulva near the termi- nation of the oesophagus, 7.20 mm. from the head end. The muscular vagina measures 0.220 mm. Eggs are barrel-shaped (Fig. 5) with plugs at each end containing when deposited an unsegmented ovum measuring 0.047 mm. × 0.026 mm. Male is 11.8 mm. long and 0.065 mm. in maximum thickness. The oesophagus is 4.50 mm. in length. The single testis which is bulky occupies most of the posterior region. Spicule (Fig. 6) is single, long and measures 1.01 mm. Sheath of the spicule is without spines and longer than the spicule when extruded. Tail end is curved ventrally. Along each side of the posterior end of the body beginning about 0.250 mm. from the tip of the tail, a rather broad membranous expansion extends as far as the anus. There is, besides, a membranous buras-like structure at the tip of the tail supported on each side by a leg-like process. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I am indebted to Rao Sahib M. Anant Narayan Rao, Lecturer in Parasi- tology, Madras Veterinary College, for kindly confirming the identity of the specimens. My thanks are due to the college artist, Mr. P. Doraiswami Mudaliar, for help rendered in finishing the drawings. REFERENCES Bhalerao, G. D. (1933). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 3, 166 Morgan, D. O. (1925). J. Helm. 3, 167 Ransom, B. H. (1911). Bull. U. S. Dept. Agri. Bureau Anim. Indus. 127, 1 Yorke, W. and Maplestone, P. A. (1926). The Nematode Parasites of Vertebrates : London
A NATURAL CASE OF CUTANEOUS LEISHMANIASIS IN A BULLOCK IN ASSAM BY P. G. PANDE, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. Veterinary Investigation Officer, United Provinces (Received for publication on 7 October 1940) (With Plates VI to IX) THE infection of domesticated animals with leishmania parasites has been recorded several times. In countries where leishmaniasis has been in- vestigated upon, both visceral and cutaneous forms of the disease have been observed, either as separate disease entities or in combination, affecting both man and animals. Among the lower animals the cutaneous form of the disease has been investigated in some detail in canines [Mills, MacHattie and Chadwick, 1930], and its occurrence has been reported in cats [MacHattie, Mills and Chadwick, 1931], in a horse [Bennett, 1935] and in a bear [MacHat- tie, 1927]. In India our knowledge of leishmania infection of animals is limited to few cases among dogs [Avari and Mackie, 1924 ; Row, 1925 ; Sinton and Shortt, 1934] indigenous to the western part of the country where Oriental sore, locally known as Delhi boil or Lahore boil, occurs as a commonly recog- nised human infection. The present communication deals with this disease in a bullock. This is considered to have considerable scientific interest, firstly, because leishmaniasis has never been described in a bovine host and secondly, as it relates to the occurrence of the disease in an animal other than the dog in an important endemic centre of kala-azar. HISTORY OF THE CASE AND DESCRIPTION OF THE LESIONS While working as the Veterinary Investigation. Officer for Assam, the writer in December, 1933, encountered a case of cutaneous leishmaniasis in a bullock in the village of Naura-Kuwar situated in the Golaghat sub-division which for the past few years has been known to be an endemic centre of human kala-azar. The subject was an aged bullock purchased from a wandering cattle dealer who had brought his animals by road from another town in Assam for sale in this sub-division. The owner stated that at the time of purchase the animal had several nodular lesions on both the hind legs extending from the hock to the fetlock, and that similar lesions were observed on the feet and tail of a few others of the batch. No information could be obtained as to where the rest of them were disposed off. The owner also gave the information that the nodules were transformed into sores about two months after the purchase of the animal. The condition as observed at the time of investigation was stated to have been persisting for the previous nine months The animal suffered from no systemic disturbance, but it showed as a result of neglect signs of general emaciation and unthriftiness presumably. It 98
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. XI, Part II ] PLATE VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Leishmania bodies occurring free as well as inside a macrophage in the tissue smear ×500 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. A compact cellular mass of granulation tissue associated with a number of partially or completely occluded blood vessels × 450
PLATE VII [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Macrophages loaded with leishmania bodies disposed in the vicinity of dilated lymphatics ×500 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. An area of degeneration with a few cellular elements and macrophage con- taining leishmania bodies × 880 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Ulcerated part and downward growth of the rete malpighi together with the transformation of this layer in isolated masses ×150 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Downward growth and branching of the rete malpighi and the presence of nest cells ×46
P. G. PANDE 99 showed an enlargement of both prescapular lymphatic glands and an infesta- tion with the ticks, Hyalomma aegyptium. The village in question was visited twice at an interval of about a year. On the second visit no fresh cases of the disease were seen, presumably, as the infected animal was kept in a field at a distance from where other animals were located, for the period it remained with the owner. In the affected bullock the following two types of lesions were recog- nised :100 Cutaneous Leishmaniasis in a Bullock in Assam Leucocytes Blood from ear Blood from sore periphery (per cent) (per cent) Basophiles 0.20 0.20 Monocytes 4.8 25.8 Large lymphocytes 20.5 52.6 Small lymphocytes 34.2 20.2 The above table shows a marked increase of monocytes over neutrophiles, in the smears obtained from the periphery of the sore. The total count of the large and the small lymphocytes in these smears is greater than normal, and the former variety of lymphocyte is more numerous than the latter. These haematological findings are similar to those obtained by Cardamatis [1909] in several cases of Oriental sore in Greece. The tissue smears.Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II ] PLATE VIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Macrophages in the papillary region of the corium, containing leishmania bodies X 500 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. An endothelial cell of the inner lining of a dilated blood vessel containing the leishmania bodies × 1,000
PLATE IX [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Proliferation of the endothelial lining of a blood vessel. Note one of these cells containing the leishmania bodies × 1.000 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Two leishmania bodies accurring freely in the lumen of a lymph vessel × 1,000
P. G. PANDE 101 which had persisted for two years, were at an advanced stage and earlier chang- es could be seen in the peripheral region. At the centre there was granula- tion tissue (Plate VI, fig. 2) and in its centre the parasitized endothelial cells were few and not readily detectable, while the parasites stained feebly and were ill-defined. A greater part of this region revealed a sero-fibrinous type of inflamation resulting in dilatation of the lymphatic channels (Plate VII, fig. 1) and the formation of loose cellular matrix due to diapedesis of lympha- tic and other inflammatory cells in that region. Columns of endothelial cells or the macrophages in this region were found disposed in the vicinity of the dilated lymphatics and contained leishmania bodies in their cytoplasm. The process of cellular degeneration at certain places in this region resulted in the formation of structureless masses containing only occasional cells (Plate VII, fig. 2) including parasitized macrophages. Histological examination of the superficial part of the sore in the central region revealed the solution of continuity of the epidermis (Plate VII, fig. 3), whilst the peripheral region was characterised by an intense cellular infiltra- tion and the congestion of blood vessels in the papillary portions of the corium. The most important finding in this region is the presence of numerous nest cells regarded by Lazarus-barlow as characteristic of this condition (Plate VII, fig 4). The rete malpighi layer is hypertrophied, grows downward and branch- es into the underlying corium. The cells of this layer show marked peri- nuclear vacuolation. The papillary region shows excessive proliferation and hypertrophy leading to encroachment on and disintegration of the rete malpighi which as a consequence becomes transformed, to a certain extent, into isolated masses of cells (Plate VII, fig. 3) lying in the corium. The papil- lary part of the corium shows an extensive invasion by macrophages (Plate VIII, fig. 1) containing numerous leishmania parasites. In the corium proper and in the vicinity of sebaceous and sweat glands accumulations of macro- phages are found near blood vessels some of which were occluded with pro- liferated endothelial cells. Careful examination of the dilated blood vessels in this region revealed a few intimal cells (Plate VIII, fig. 2) containing the causative micro-organisms. Proliferated intimal cells occluding the lumen of the smaller blood vessels (Plate IX, fig. 1) have also been observed con- taining the parasites, and the macrophages considered as typical of leishmania infection may thus be regarded as proliferated endothelial cells. The parasites, besides occurring intra-cellularly, have also been observed lying free in the lumen of a lymph vessel (Plate IX, fig. 2) and in tissue spaces mixed with in- flammatory cells. Our observations on the histopathology of this disease in the bovine host agree closely with the published accounts of leishmaniasis in man by Manson [1907], Wright [1903], Brooke [1903] and Balfour [1917] and that in canines by Mill, MacHattie and Chadwick [1930]. Contrary to the observations of Jeanselme and Rist [quoted by Balfour, 1917] on the histopathology of ' Bouton d'orient' focal necrosis and giant cells formation were not seen in our bullock. DISCUSSION In India there are two types of leishmania infection, firstly, the visceral form caused by Leishmania donovani and known as kala-azar principally C2
102 Cutaneous Leishmaniasis in a Bullock in Assam affecting man, and secondly, the cutaneous infection known as Oriental sore due to Leishmania tropica affecting both man and the dog. As a result, however, of the researches of Laveran and others [1917] the parasites of both forms of the disease have been shown to be immunologically different, although inoculation of L. donovani into laboratory animals, besides producing visceral leishmaniasis, may also produce lesions characteristic of L. tropica, and vice versa. Morphologically, no characteristic differences have been observed between these two species, and the parasite observed in the present case bears a close resemblance to the two known species. Work on the specific identity of the parasite could not be undertaken due to lack of laboratory facilities in Assam. However the epizootological facts known regarding both forms of the disease as prevalent in India are worthy of consideration. The geographical regions in which one form of the disease prevails are entirely distinct from those in which the other occurs. Thus according to Sinton [1925] only L. tropica infection prevails, both in man and dog, in the western part of the country or in the region north-west of a line joining Delhi and Bombay, while in parts south-east of this line only L. donovani occurs. Further, the commonly recognised insect vector of L. tropica, according to workers at Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine [Knowles, 1928], is Phlebotomus sergenti, and, as Sinton [1925] has observed, there is a co-relationship between the geographical distribution of P. sergenti and of Oriental sore. Sinton records that he has never found P. sergenti amongst sandflies collected in places south and east of a line joining Bombay and Delhi; also that Oriental sore caused by L. tropica does not occur south and east of this line. Although experimental infections with L. tropica have been successfully set up with some certainty in dogs and monkeys, they have failed in the hands of Chadwick and MacHattie [1927] in such animals as horses, cattle, sheep, a pig, fowls and rabbits. The available epizootological and experimental data make it very doubt- ful if L. tropica happened to be the cause of the sores in the present case. The possibility of L. donovani, being involved in the present case, has to be judged in the light of the following established facts concerning this species : (a) the occurrence of L. donovani south-east of the line joining Bombay and Delhi, and the non-occurrence of a single case of Oriental sore caused by L. tropica in man in this province, (b) the common insect vector of L. donovani, Phlebotomus argentipes, is found abundantly in endemic centres of kala-azar in Assam and Bengal where according to Lloyd, Napier and Smith [1925] the fly prefers to feed on cattle rather than on man, (c) both in experimental animals [Row, 1912, 1913 and 1914] and in man L. donovani may cause cuta- neous lesions. In post-kala-azar cases [Brahmachari, 1922] and in those having no previous history of kala-azar [Acton, 1926] dermal leishmaniasis of various clinical types has been encountered and described. Napier and Dasgupta [1934] and Smith and Haldar [1935] have described ulcerative lesions in man in which L. donovani have been found. The present case of ulcerative dermal leishmaniasis in a bullock in Assam would thus appear to be strongly suggestive of a L. donovani infection. Although only one case of this disease in a bovine is being described here
P. G. PANDE 103 it is believed that others will be detected in endemic kala-azar centres in Assam, if and when specially looked for. The close relationship of canine leishmaniasis to infantile kala-azar in countries on the Mediterranean littoral had caused workers in this country to suspect that dogs indigenous to endemic centres of kala-azar might suffer from the natural infection. For instance, Shortt, while working in Assam in 1923 during the height of a kala-azar epidemic, examined 44 dogs show- ing ill-health and emaciation for leishmania infection, but the results were negative. Unfortunately dogs alone were suspected of being naturally in- fected, and other domestic animals living in association with man were not similarly examined. In conclusion, the record of this single case of bovine leishmaniasis in Assam, taken in conjunction with the natural habits and bionomics of P. argentipes which is associated with cattle in this province, indicates that the epizootology of Indian kala-azar requires further investi- gation as regards the question of natural infection in animals. SUMMARY A clinical and histopathological description is given of cutaneous leish maniasis in a bullock from an endemic kala-azar centre in Assam. The organism involved in this case may be Leishmania donovani. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author is grateful to Dr. F. C. Minett, Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for going through this paper and making useful suggestions and criticism, to Col. R. Knowles of the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine and Capt. S. C. A. Datta of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for confirming the author's diagnosis of the case. REFERENCES Acton, H. W. (1926). Ann. Rept. Cal. Sch. Trop. Med., 1925. Avari, K. B. C. R. and Mackie, F. P. (1924). Ind. Med. Gaz. 49, 604. Balfour, A. (1917). 4th Report of the' Welcome Tropical Research Laboratories, Vol. A. Med. pp. 191-206. Bennett, S. C. J. (1935). J. Comp. Path. & Therap. 48, 241. Brahmachari, U. N. (1922). Ind. Med. Gaz. 57, 125. Brooke, G. E. (1908). Trop. Med. Hyg. & Parasit. Cardamatis, J. P. (1909). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 2, 257. Chadwick, C. R. and MacHattie, C. (1927). Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 20, 431. Knowles, R. (1928). An Introduction to Medical Protozoology, pp. 233-243. Laveran, A. (1917). Les. Leishmaniasis, Paris. Lloyd, R. B. ; Napier, L. E. and Smith, R. O. A. (1925). Ind. J. Med. Res. 12, 811. MacHattie, C. and Chadwick, C. R. (1927). Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 21. 3. MacHattie, C. ; Mills, E. H. and Chadwick, C. R. (1931). Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 25, 103. Manson, P. (1907). Tropical Diseases, 4th ed.
104 Cutaneous Leishmaniasis in a Bullock in Assam Mills, E. A. ; MacHattie, C. and Chadwick, C. R. (1930). Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 24, 67. Napier, L. E. and Dasgupta, C. R. (1934). Ind. Med. Gaz. 69, 121. Row, R. (1912). J. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 15, 327. SMUGGLING OPIUM AND CHARAS IN THE STOMACHS OF CAMELS BY E. S. FARBROTHER, I.V.S. Director of Veterinary Services, Bombay (Received for publication on 25 January 1941) IN the Excise Supplement of the Bombay Police Gazette of 1 August 1940 is published an interesting extract from the Annual Report for 1939 of the Central Narcotics Intelligence Bureau, Cairo, Egypt, on smuggling opium and charas into Egypt in the stomachs of camels. About 30,000 to 35,000 camels are driven into Egypt annually from the East for the meat markets of the Nile valley. In October 1939, information was received at Rafa that certain persons were going to run narcotics through Sinai concealed in the stomachs of camels which were to be driven through, ostensibly for the meat markets. This information was at once passed on to El Arish and Kantara where certain persons driving their camels across Sinai were arrested. Some difficulty was experienced in determining which camels were carry- ing the narcotics owing to the large number of camels arriving at Kantara from the East at that time. However ' the Sinai Police are an exceptionally subtle body of men and can almost smell narcotics through a brick wall' and eventually nine camels were put under suspicion at Kantara and three others were soon in the lock-up at El Arish. One of the grounds for suspicion was that the owners refused £E 10 for a miserable camel not worth £E 3. One of the camels detained at El Arish was slaughtered and in the rumen were found 27 containers with conical ends each 15 cm. long and 4 cm. in diameter. This information was conveyed to the Mamour of Kantara with instructions to slaughter the nine camels detained there while the two remain- ing camels at El Arish were also slaughtered and found to contain further narcotics. At Kantara, the nine camels had been released but were soon rounded up again and every one was found to carry narcotics in similar con- tainers. From eighteen camels seized 17.770 kilos of hashish and 62.593 kilos of opium, worth about £E 2,200 in Egypt, were recovered. It is pointed out that ' An interesting feature of this case is the strange ability of the camel to swallow 25 heavy containers or cylinders 15×4 cm. and weighing 250 gm. and to be able to travel and work with little or no inconvenience to himself.' ' The camel is a ruminant and chews the cud ; to prevent these containers being regurgitated they were weighted inside with a certain quantity of lead ; they were also made too large to pass from the rumen or first stomach into the second and other stomachs. The rumen has at the sides a number of sacks in which the camel carries his water ; it is in these sacks that the cylin- ders lodged up. According to the veterinary authorities the rumen possesses 105
106 Smuggling Opium and Charas in Camels little or none of the digestive functions of the other stomachs and foreign objects such as these containers might lie there for weeks without upsetting the camels digestion, especially when made of zinc and not tin. They are also carefully soldered up to prevent any action on the contained drugs from the heat or acids of the stomach. Presumably a camel so loaded would even- tually lose condition and die, but in the present case the poor beast has served his purpose if he has managed to carry the tins for the six or seven days needed to travel from Khan Younis to West of Kantara.' The containers are forced down the camel's throat, presumably in the same way as a ' ball' is ad- ministered to a horse. Since the number of animals that pass through the quarantine stations is so large and it will not be possible to rely on information in future, it is stated that steps are being taken to apply scientific methods for the detection of the containers and each station will have to be equipped with an X-Ray or other similar apparatus and a certain proportion of the camels submitted as a routine measure to ' its searching beam.' An interesting case of the use of science in the perpetration of crime as well as in its detection !
AUTHORS ON INDIAN VETERNARY SCIENCE: THEIR WORKS, AGE, AND ANTIQUITY BY A. KRISHNASWAMY, G. M. V. C. Civil Veterinary Department, Madras (Received for publication on 10 January 1941) INTRODUCTION THERE is an erroneous notion, generally prevalent among Western readers and Indians educated on European lines, that the ancient Hindus were a race devoted only to metaphysics and religion and that they never took any active, practical and scientific interest in the life of the world around them. But this is not really the case. In the early days of Indian history, though metaphysics and religion were indeed India's greatest contri- bution to world thought, other arts and sciences were not neglected but rather were developed with great precision and interest. Generally, so-called modern history begins where the real history of ancient India ends. The birth of Lord Buddha and the beneficent reign of the great Asoka mark not only the beginning of modern times but the ending of India's ' Golden Age.' This country known as Aryavarta or the abode of the Aryans was a store- house of learning for the whole world, and it may not be an exaggeration to say that, in every branch of science in ancient India, in the words of Captain P. Johnston Saint of the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum,' even the most irreverant layman would see the distinct forerunner of all the modern marvels of today '. Indeed Indian literature written some thousands of years ago has actually indicated lines for research of a most up-to-date character. The Hindus were among the first to develop many aspects of astronomy and eminent persons such as Cassini, Bailly, and Playfair are of the opinion that the observations and conclusions of Hindu astronomers of some thousands of years before Christ are of real aid in the development of this science to-day. In the field of mathematics, some historians are of the opinion that the credit generally given to Pythagoras is really due to the ancient Indian mathe- maticians from whom he borrowed his theories. Hindu law based upon the writings of Manu of some hundreds of years before Christ, Yajna Valkya, Parasara, Brihaspathi, Sukra and others is still the basis of the law for Hindus in India. So also in the field of medicine, India held a prominent place in ancient days and evidence has been produced by Pocock, Dietz and others to show that the ancient Egyptians, Romans and Greeks owed more than is generally recognised to ancient India. In his previous articles on' The veterinary science in India, ancient and modern, with special reference to tuberculosis ' and' Veterinary surgery and surgical instruments of ancient India ' (published in the November 1937 and January 1939 issues respectively of Agriculture and Livestock in India) the 107
108 Authors on Indian Veterinary Science the author has already traced the birth, growth and general development of the medical and veterinary sciences in all their aspects in ancient and medieval India. Again in another article on the ' History of animal husbandry in ancient India ' the author [Krishnaswamy, 1941] has tried to show how the early Aryans in India were a race of agriculturists depending solely upon agriculture and livestock for their livelihood, and how on account of the various uses to which the animals were put, and the several animal pro- ducts that were in use in those days, the early Aryans regarded animals as their foremost care. It is no wonder then, that in common with all other sciences, veterinary science developed to a high level, and several manuals were written regarding the proper management of domestic animals. For the purpose of this article, the writer is concerned only with authors on Indian veterinary science, their works and their antiquity. WRITERS ON INDIAN VETERINARY SCIENCE, THEIR WORKS AND AGE Among the original and authentic authors on Indian veterinary science are found the names of SA. KRISHNASWAMY 109 disciple. In the eighth or the last part of a book called S110 Authors on Indian Veterinary Science King RA. KRISHNASWAMY 111 book called Vaidyaka Sarvaswa or 'All about medicines' and Sahadeva being the author of a book called Vyadhisindhu Vimardana or 'The cure of the ocean of diseases'. These two books are not now extant. But the book called Aswachikitsa or 'The treatment of horses' as written by one Nakula is now available to us in print. Mrigasarma, Brihaspathi and Narada are the other persons whose names are prominent in connection with the authorship of works on veterinary science. All these were invited by King R112 Authors on Indian Veterinary Science It is now evident that almost all the authors of works on veterinary science in ancient India can be classified as having flourished in one or the other of the following three periods : (1) The Vedic period when the four Vedas were written. The Atharva Veda, which contains the treatises on medicine and also some information on veterinary science, belongs to this period. (2) The Epic period, during the early part of which the ayurveda or the science of the knowledge of life came into existence. It is to this period that SA PRELIMINARY REPORT ON A METHOD OF VACCINA- TION AGAINST RANIKHET DISEASE BY J. R. HADDOW AND J. A. IDNANI Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 17 May 1941) OWING to the urgency of the problem of control the authors think fit to publish the recent results of their work on vaccination against Ranikhet disease. In order that, where conditions make it practicable, the knowledge so far gained may then be applied by laboratories in a position to undertake the preparation of the vaccine to the protection of flocks under the somewhat restricted conditions which are at the moment possible. The idea leading up to these experiments was developed from the reports of success on similar lines with foot-and-mouth disease [Schmit et. al, 1936] and from earlier unpublished work on rinderpest at this Institute. The general principle involved is the adsorption of the virus on alumina gels which are subsequently treated with dilute formalin to destroy the un- adsorbed virus. The adsorbed virus is then inoculated and it is presumed that this is gradually released in minimal quantities into the bird's system. The reaction is in practically every case symptomless and confers an im- munity of sufficient degree to resist a test inoculation of 10-100 or more M.L.D. of virus between the 8th and 21st day after vaccination. The duration of immunity at longer intervals has not so far been tested and, until this is done, it is considered advisable to enhance the primary im- munity conferred by the vaccine by subsequent inoculation with fresh virus within the time suggested above. The preliminary experiments indicate that for any given temperature the time limits within which the vaccine matures and within which it retains its efficacy after maturation are remarkably precise, but unfortunately at the present time the keeping power is of very short duration 114 Vaccination against Ranikhet Disease the centrifuge was used instead of natural sedimentation. An effective gel was thus obtained, the process requiring only 2 days as compared with 2 weeks or more in the original procedure. Distilled water must be used throughout; in the preparation of a large quantity of this gel, tap water was used once and a product of entirely different physical and adsorptive properties was obtained. The following is the procedure for preparing 250 c.c. of the gel:J. K. HADDOW AND J. A. IDNANI 115 No detailed experiments have yet been undertaken to ascertain the quantity of virus adsorbed but it has been shown that practically all the virus is in the centrifuged gel deposit. Probably, however, a portion of the virus is attached to particles of spleen and is eventually killed by the formalin. EXPERIMENTAL The first experiment (30-5-1940) included the inoculation of 6 fowls in groups of two with vaccine stored at room temperature (14°-16°C.) for 8 days. The final dilution of formalin varied in the three lots from 1/500- 1/2000. TABLE 1 First vaccine experiment Dose of vaccine Concentration of formalin No. of fowls Reaction to vaccination Reaction to test dose virus (1 c.c. of 1× 10-4) 0.5 c.c. 1/500 2 Nil 1 died tenth day after test. 1 survived. 0.5 c.c. 1/1000 2 Nil Both died 9th and 12th day after test. 0.5 c.c. 1/2000 2 Nil 1 survived. 1 died 8th day after test. NOTE ;116 Vaccination against Ranikhet Disease mixture if placed in the refrigerator immediately after preparation can be similarly stored for 12 days prior to the period of maturation at a higher temperature; while at room or incubator temperatures the vaccine becomes completely inert in 6 to 14 days or earlier, according to temperature and the approximate period of maturation of the virus at room temperature was 8 days. A further experiment (28-9-1940 to 3-10-1940) was then carried out in an attempt to define approximately the time limits for maturation and a suitable dose for practical vaccination. TABLE II Second vaccine experiment Date Dose of vaccine No. of fowls Reaction to vaccination Result of test on 19-10-40 with 0.5 c.c. of 1×10-6 dilution of stock virus Test of vaccine stored for 48 hours at 37°C. 28 Sept. 1940 0.5 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune 1 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune 2 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune Test of vaccine stored for four days at 37°C. 30 Sept. 1940 0.5 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune 1 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune 2 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune Test of vaccine stored for six days at 37°C. 2 Oct. 1940 0.5 c.c. 2 Nil 1 immune l diedJ. R. HADDOW AND J. A. IDNANI 117 Date Dose of vaccine No. of fowls Reaction to vaccination Result of test on 19-10-40 with 0.5 c.c. of 1×10-3 dilution of stock virus Test of vaccine stored for 5½ days at 14°-16°C. 29 Sept. 1940 0.5 c.c. 2 1 died* 1 Nil 1 immune 1 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune 2 c.c. 2 1 died* 1 reacted severely 1 immune Test of vaccine stored for 7½ days at 14°-16°C. 1 Oct. 1940 0.5 c.c. 2 Nil 1 died* 1 reacted and re- covered. 1c.c. 2 Nil 1 died* 1 immune 2 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune Test of vaccine stored for 9½ days at 14°-16°C. 3 Oct. 1940 0.5 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune 1 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune 2 c.c. 2 Nil Both immune Controls to test inoculation 19 Oct. 1940 .. 6 .. All died* *Positive for Ranikhet disease. Immune = No visible reaction. D2
118 Vaccination against Ranikhet Disease The intention up to this time was to devote attention more particularly to a vaccine prepared by the less energetic treatment by maturation at compara- tively low temperatures. As, however, we had received an indication from earlier small-scale experiments, which need not be detailed here, that the alumina gel even without the addition of formalin had a distinct lethal action on the virus at room temperature, and that, therefore, the efficacy of the vaccine could not under the conditions of these experiments be preserved for long, it became apparent that speed in preparation would be an important factor if the vaccine was to be of any practical use in the treatment of outbreaks. Rapid maturation in the incubator was therefore attempted. It will be seen from the information given in Table II that after storage at 37°C. the vaccine was efficacious from the 2nd to the 4th day of inoculation, while with the material kept at room temperature (14°-16°C.) the results were irregular those after 10 days staraga being in accord with our previous- experience. Several events prevented the continuation of any but small- scale experiments during the winter but another experiment on similar lines to the one already reported was taken up (26-2-1941 to 28-2-1941) and the results are given in Table III. TABLE III Third vaccine experiment Date Dose of vaccine No. of fowls Reaction to vaccination Result of test with 0.5 c.c. of 1×10-6 dilution of virus Vaccine tested after 24 hours at 37°C. 26 Feb. 1941 0.5 c.c. 4 Nil All immune 1 c.c. 4 Nil All immune Vaccine tested after 48 hours at 37°C. 27 Feb. 1941 0.5 c.c. 4 Nil All immune 1c.c. 4 Nil All immune Vaccine tested after 3 days at 37°C. 28 Feb. 1941 0.5 c.c. 4 Nil All immune 1 c.c. 4 Nil 2 died* 2 reacted and re- covered. Controls to test inoculation 28 March 1941 .. 4 .. All died* *Positive for Ranikhet disease.
J. R. HADDOW AND J. A. IDNANI 119 It will be observed from the results given in Table III that the main objective approved to have been attained and that the period of four days which had given good results before was apparently near the point at which the vaccine loses its immunising value. To confirm this and to ascertain the infectivity of birds undergoing vaccination and to estimate the degree of immunity conferred a further batch of 35 fowls was inoculated with vaccine (20-3-1941 to 21-3-1941). The results are shown in Table IV. TABLE IV Fourth vaccine experiment Date Dose of vaccine No. of fowls Reaction to vaccine Test dose Result Test of vaccine incubated 24 hours at 37°C. 20 March 1941 1 c.c. 10 1 died* 9 Nil 0.5 c.c. of 1×10-6 dilution All imm 1 c.c. 1 Nil 1.0 c.c. of 1×10-6 dilution Died 120 Vaccination against Ranikhet Disease It will be seen from this experiment that while the immunising value of the vaccine was not 100 per cent effective at 24 hours as in the previous experiment it still protects a very high proportion of birds. We are unable at present to explain the comparatively low rate of satisfactory immunisa- tions in the lot receiving vaccine matured for 48 hours in the incubator. It will also be observed that the immunity produced is not always of such a high degree as to enable birds to resist a heavy experimental infection. It is probable, however, from a further experiment which will be reported in detail later that vaccinated fowls would resist a natural contact infection. In this experiment 19 vaccinated fowls were exposed in an infected pen, along with 10 unvaccinated birds. The vaccinated fowls remained free while four of the unvaccinated birds contracted the disease. All vaccinated birds were given a test dose of 0.5 c.c. of 1×10 dilution of virus after 15 days exposure in the pen, with the result that only one of the vaccinated fowls died of Ranikhet disease, whereas five of the surviving 6 unvaccinated fowls proved to be susceptible when used as virus reservoirs in later experiments on similar lines. With regard to the infectivity of birds undergoing vaccination, 6 healthy fowls were placed individually in close contact with 6 vaccinated fowls. In no case did the healthy birds develop symptoms ; further, mouth washings were taken form several vaccinated birds selected at random on the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th day after vaccination and inoculated into healthy fowls. The disease was not transmitted. We do not think it necessary at this preliminary stage to enter into a discussion of the findings reported. While the results obtained by the use of this form of vaccine are far superior to any other method tried in this laboratory, the limitations of the method at the moment are self-evident and further work will now be required to eliminate them or at least to define them precisely. It is hoped, however, that other laboratories having the necessary facilities will give the method a trial. SUMMARY The authors have described in detail the method of preparation of a vaccine for Ranikhet disease. The method consists in the adsorption of the virus from a spleen pulp suspension on an alumina gel. The mixture is then matured at a suitable temperature. The results of preliminary experiments with this vaccine are reported and it is shown that the period for maturation is mainly controlled by the temperature at which this is carried outJ. R. HADDOW AND J. A. IDNANI 121 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors take pleasure in acknowledging the willing co-operation of Dr S. N. Ray of the Animal Nutrition Section in supplying the alumina gels for this work, and they would also like to record their thanks to Dr F. C. Minett for his continued interest and encouragement. REFERENCES Sabin, A.B. (1932). J. Expt. Med. 56, 307 Schmit-Jensen, H. O., Schmidt, S. and Hansen, A. (1936). Rev. D'immunol 2, 359
SELECTED ARTICLES COMMON DISEASES OF YOUNG CALVES AND THEIR CONTROL IN INDIA BY R. L. KAURA, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. Assistant Serologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 31 October 1940) (With Plates X to XIII) THE cattle breeding and dairy industries annually suffer grave losses due to disease in young calves. Sufficient recognition has not hitherto been given in India to such losses, in which should be included not only fatalities among young calves which would have otherwise become valuable cows bulls or bullocks, but also the cost of looking after the diseased calves, inability to replace animals that are cast from the herd each year, expenses involved in purchasing fresh stock to keep up the strength of the herd and rearing of those calves which would in other countries have been disposed of as unprofitable. It is, therefore, of vital importance for the proper development of these in- dustries in this country that losses on this account should be checked by keeping the diseases of young calves under control and to this end stock owners should take every opportunity to obtain the assistance of the Civil Veterinary Department. At the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, Punjab, where about 7,000 head of cattle are kept, including a dairy herd, these diseases have been ob- served to occur more frequently in the dairy calves than in those of the general herds. The diseases commonly encountered are white scour, navel-ill, pneu- monia and ringworm. These as well as congenital blindness, rickets, etc., which are due to vitamin or mineral deficiency in the diet, are also common in Indian villages and certain dairy farms where calves are reared under less favourable conditions. Calves are very liable to contract heamorrhagic septicaemia (gulghotu or ghotwa) and blackquarter (phatsari) through grazing over infected areas, particularly during the rainy season, and it is therefore advisab'e that they should be protected with vaccines against such diseases before they are sent out to paddocks. The diseases of young calves may be conveniently divided into bacterial, nutritional and parasitic. I.R. L. KAURA 123 The saying ' Prevention is better than cure ' holds good in the control of congenital bacterial infections for which the following general measures of prevention are recommended, and they may advantageously be combined, in the event of actual outbreaks, with the curative measures to be described later under various diseases :124 Common Diseases of Young Calves 10. The calf pens should be built hygienically with concrete floors and be kept clean, properly drained and occasionally disinfected and white-washed. 11. If the calves are kept in small groups contagious diseases can be con- trolled more easily. 12. On infected farms the temperatures of all the new-born calves should be taken for at least 7 to 10 days from birth as in most of these congenital diseases the first indication is rise of temperature. Moreover, these diseases are more fatal to young calves, and the earlier these are detected the greater are the chances of their recovery with suitable treatment. Usually the normal calf is very active and vigorous and has a soft smooth coat. If it lies quietly or stands in a stupor or if the coat is rough, it may be taken that it is out-of-sorts and the source of the derangement should be ascertained. 13. The affected calves should be isolated immediately from the healthy and be provided with separate attendants. The premises and feeding utensils should be thoroughly disinfected. The healthy calves may be removed to fresh clean premises, preferably at a higher level. 14. The carcase of a calf that has died of any contagious disease should be either burnt or buried with lime six feet below the surface. 15. On the advice of a competent veterinary authority, calves born on farms infected with white scour or navel-ill may be given preventive inocula- tions against these diseases within a few days of the birth. Pregnant cows, especially those which habitually give birth to calves affected with these diseases, may also be similarly treated. (i) Calf septicaemia.R. L. KAURA 125 some cases there is a tendency for white scour gradually to merge into calf pneumonia. If diarrh126 Common Diseases of Young Calves carbolic acid and glycerine, and subsequently treated daily with milder dress- ings such as 2½per cent carbolic lotion or tincture of iodine till the wound is healed, When there is an abscess in the region of a joint, it should be open- ed, evacuated, irrigated with a disinfectant lotion followed by an injection of clove oil into the wound which should then be bandaged. If the abscess involves the joint proper and it has reached the stage of purulent arthritis, treatment is rarely worth while. In the case of non-suppurating inflammation of the joint, a weak biniodide of mercury blister or a mixture of liniment cam- phor co. (one part), liniment belladona (two parts) and liniment saponis (three parts) may be applied locally. Stimulants and internal antiseptics may be administered, e.g. 1 to 2 drachms of aromatic spirits of ammonia and ½ to 1 drachm of salol in about two ounces of water, thrice daily. Calcium sul- phide in 15 grains dose mixed with simple syrup may be given thrice daily as it has been found to be good in all pyaemic conditions. (v) Calf diphtheria.Ind. J. Vet. Set. & Anim. Husb. Vol. XI, Part II ] PLATE X [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A typical case of calf pneumonia [After J. F. Shirlaw] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. The cut surface of a lung showing typical lesions of calf pneumonia [After J. F. Shirlaw] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. A hill calf affected with navel-ill [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Diphtheritic ulceration on the (A) gums and lip, (B) larynx, (C) tongue and (D) intestine
PLATE XI [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Heifer calf No. 13, born blind, with no apparent pathological lesions in the eyes, out of cow No. 157 that was experimentally fed on vitamin A deficient diet at this Institute [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Typical appearance of advanced eye lesions as shown in a calf due to vitamin A deficiency [After Hart and Guilbert] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. A hair ball with salt deposit [After G. H. Wooldridge] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. A rickety calf showing emaciation, humping of back, swelling of joints, knuckling of pasterns
R. L. KAURA 127 curetted. Tincture of iodine may then be painted over the lesions. Before feeding, the milk should be warmed and about half a drachm of potassium chlorate for each calf should be dissolved in it. Internal antiseptics and stimulants, e.g. salol (½ drachm), sodium salicylate (½ drachm), and aromatic spirits of ammonia (1 drachm) in about two ounces of water may be given to the calves two or three times a day. In order to keep up the vitality of the patient, artificial feeding with whole milk and eggs may have to be resorted to in some cases. II.128 Common Diseases of Young Calves inflammatory changes followed by an opacity in the eye (Plate XI, fig. 2). Sometimes these calves also develop convulsive fits which may be associated with vitamin A deficiency. The occurrence of congenital blindness in calves can be successfully pre- vented by including green fodder or two or four ounces of cod-liver oil in the daily ration of cows especially during pregnancy. (ii) Pica.R. L. KAURA 129 organic matter in it. Absence or deficiency of vitamin D (antirachitic) which controls the metabolism of calcium and phosphorus, deficiency of lime (cal- cium) and unsuitable calcium-phosphorus ratio in the diet are the chief aetiological factors, although under the same feeding conditions some may suffer from this disease while others may escape due to certain individual differences. The affected animal shows stiffness of the limbs, disinclination to move and a tendency to stand with the back humped. The long bones in the limbs become supple and curved under the weight of the body. Their ends which form the joints become swollen. This swelling is more commonly seen at the hock and knee joints (Plate XI, fig. 4). The ends of the ribs also become en- larged and may be easily palpated or seen. The affected animal loses appetite for its normal food but licks the walls and earth, probably in order to get lime salts in which its body is deficient. The disease runs a chronic course and if an animal is left untreated it dies of exhaustion or of congestion of the lungs due to its constantly lying down on one side. The method of its control consists in providing plenty of well-balanced diet, reasonable exercise in the open and hygienic care for the pregnant cows and for the new-born calves. Sunshine is very essential in the preven- tion of this disease because it converts ergosterol, a precursor of vitamin D which is present in the skin, into vitamin D. Whole milk cannot be relied upon to supply enough vitamin D for the needs of the calf and skimmed milk is certainly deficient. Of the natural foods sun-cured hay is only reliable source of vitamin D. The calf which is given this hay liberally will not ordinarily have rickets. If at any time symptoms of rickets develop, irradiated yeast or irradiated ergosterol or purified cod- liver oil may be given in order to supply vitamin D along with bone-meal which would supply both calcium and phosphorus in a suitable proportion and plenty of nutritious diet. Light exercise, if possible, may be given in the open where there is plenty of sunshine. The affected limbs may be supported by means of splints but one should not attempt to reduce the swelling of joints by applying pressure bandages which may result in sloughing. With suitable treatment recovery may occur in a considerable number of cases, provided they are in the early stages of the disease. A deformity in the affected limbs or joints may remain even after the treatment which is useless in advanced cases. On the whole, prevention is more satisfactory than the treatment of affected individuals. III.130 Common Diseases of Young Calves they occur, because by the time they attract attention the parasitic infestation in a herd may have become heavy and have reached a serious stage :R. L. KAURA 131 and provided with clean drinking water and should not be overcrowded. Regular drenching of the whole stock with a suitable vermicide mixture, as recommended later under the parasitic infestations of the digestive tract, is likely to prove useful. Those vermicides which are excreted by the lungs and act as pulmonary and bronchial disinfectants are especially useful, e.g. turpentine oil (1-3 drachms) or carbolic acid (5-15 minims) or lysol (5-15 minims) given in milk. This method has the additional advantage of destroying stomach parasites which are so often simultaneously present. Generally the treatment of individual cases is difficult on account of the peculiar location of these worms. However, they may be killed by pouring about ½ to 1 drachm of chloroform into the nostrils or better 3 to 4 drachms of the following iodine mixture may be given slowly by means of an intratracheal injection, to be given by a qualified veterinarian :132 Common Diseases of Young Calves smaller and thinner than the female, measuring 6 to 10 inches in length and 1/6 to 1/5 inch in thickness. The female (Plate XII, fig. 8) has a straight tail and measures 8 to 12 inches in thickness. The worm eggs (Plate XII, fig. 9) are passed out in the faeces and under suitable conditions of temperature and humidity embryos appear in them in about three weeks, after which they are infective. On ingestion with contaminated food or drinking water the larval worms are liberated in the digestive canal, thence enter the blood vessels and reach the various organs, e.g. heart, lungs and liver. In about two weeks from the time that they first enter the host they reach the digestive canal a second time. These parasites do not affect the health of the animal unless they are numerous. Heavy infestation may result in chronic inflammation of the intestine, and continued diarrhInd. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II] PLATE XII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Dictyocaulus viviparous (A) Female, (B) Male [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. An embryonated egg of Dictyocaulus viviparous. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Haemonchus contortus (A) Females, (B) Males [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Mecistocirrus digitatus (A) Females, (B) Males [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. The condition produced by a heavy parasitic infestation of the digestive tract in a calf [After D. W. Baker] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. An egg of Haemonchus contortus [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7. An egg of Mecisto- cirrus digitatus [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 8. Ascaris vitulorum (female) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 9. An egg of Ascaris vitulorum [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 10. An egg of Moniezia expansa [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 11. Moniezia expansa (adult). Note the head, neck and segmented body
PLATE XIII [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Eimeria zurni (× 2,000) [After C. M. Wenyon] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. A calf affected with, sarcoptic mange. Note the thickened, wrinkled and scaly condition of the skin [After Hutyra & Marek] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Sarcoptes scabiei [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. A calf affected with ringworm. Note the circular lesions [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Boophilus australis [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. Hyalomma aegyptium [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7. Haematopinus eurysternus [After M. Imes] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 8. Linognathus vituli [After M. Imes] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 9. Trichodectes scalaris [After M. Imes]
R. L. KAURA 133 tape worms provided one per cent by weight of tobacco dust is added. The tobacco dust should be steeped overnight in a little cold copper sulphate solution and then added to the rest of the solution. It is not necessary to follow up with a purgative. Another method of treatment is to give two doses of kamala (1 to 1½ drachms) in about 4 ounces of castor oil the same day. Freshly ground arecanut (two drachms) may be given in milk twice daily for a week and be followed by a purgative, e.g. magnesium sulphate (6 ounces) dissolved in water. (v) Eye-worm infestation.134 Common Diseases of Young Calves The disease may be controlled by examining all the cattle on a farm and separating the affected animals from the non-affected ones. They should be removed from the pasture where they developed the disease and kept on high grounds or in clean dry sanitary byres until they are satisfactorily treated. Young cattle should be separated both in the byres and at pasture from the adult cattle which may be the carriers of the infection. The byres should be kept clean and the litter should be removed frequently and burnt. The animals should be prevented from drinking stagnant polluted water. Medicinal treat- ment in some cases may prove useful. One to two table-spoonfuls of the mixture containing two parts of ferrous sulphate, two parts of sulphur, and six parts of common salt may be given in the grain feed. Enema with luke-warm one per cent solution of alum and tannic acid is also recommended. During the course of the treatment the animal should be kept comfortable and well protected from the weather and be fed on dry nutritious diet. (ii) Mange.R. L. KAURA 135 Wash the surface with soap and warm water, clean it, allow it to dry and then apply the following dressing by means of a suitable brush :136 Common Diseases of Young Calves animal to another by direct contact and indirectly by posts and other fittings in the calf pens, against which the infected calves may have rubbed their bodies or which may be contaminated by clothing or grooming utensils used on infected calves. In calves the lesions are commonly found round the eyes, base of the ears or neck, shoulders, mouth and lips (Plate XIII, fig. 4). The parasite attacks the skin and destroys the hair which becomes brittle and breaks off, so that the disease is manifested by circular bare patches of skin which soon get covered with bran-like scales, but after a time the patches become covered with scabs of silvery grey colour. Sometimes these scabs crack and bleed, especially when the animal rubs the lesions against hard objects which it does owing to the irritation. The lesions do not heal spontaneously but they clean up suffi- ciently during summer and readily respond to proper treatment. In order to control an outbreak of this disease the affected animals should be separated from the non-affected ones, the premises should be kept clean, dry, properly ventilated and disinfected, and the litter should be removed daily and burnt. Clothing, grooming utensils, etc. should be disinfected by boiling or soaking in 10 per cent carbolic solution or 1 in 1000 solution of mercury perchloride. Disinfection of walls, floors, partitions and other fittings should also be done carefully. The calves should be brushed, groomed and kept clean. A liberal diet should be allowed. Cats and dogs should not be allowed to run about the infected premises as they may disseminate the infec- tion. The affected calves should be looked after by separate attendants. The best way of treating the lesions is to remove hair from round about them, soften the scabs with warm water and soap and remove all the debris, which should be burnt. Allow the parts to dry and then apply tincture of iodine or equal parts of tincture of iodine and vaseline or 1 in 40 ointment of biniodide of mercury. For widespread lesions one part of sulphur, one part of potassium carbonate, one part of oil of tar with 8 parts of lard or oil is quite good. A case should be considered as cured only when there is no longer a scabby condition of the skin and a good smooth crop of new hair grows. (iv) Tick infestation.R. L. KAURA 137 deposit her eggs. The building should be kept clean and disinfected and the animals should be dipped occasionally in a suitable tick-killing solution, or this may be applied to them with a brush or cloth. When the number of animals to be treated is small a suitable tick-killing solution, as recommended below for dipping, may be applied by means of brush or cloth, or a spray pump may be used for the purpose with satisfactory results. When the number of animals to be treated is large the best method of combating ticks is to dip the animals in a suitable solution in the same way and with the same precau- tions as recommended in the case of mange. The following formula consti- tutes a satisfactory tick-killing solution (used in Queensland):138 Common Diseases of Young Calves On careful examination one can find the parasite and its eggs (' nits '),the latter attached to the hairs. For all the three species of lice the same method of treatment and control proves effective. This consists in isolating the affected animals and applying some parasiticide dressing. The dressing should be applied thoroughly and repeated twice or thrice with 15 or 16 days' interval, as some of the eggs may survive the first dressing and hatch in about 10-14 days, thus giving rise to a new generation of lice. When the number of animals to be treated is small, equal parts of cotton-seed oil and kerosene may be applied with a brush or two parts of kerosene emulsified with one part of milk and added to 8 parts of water may be applied by means of a spray pump all over the body, taking special care of the brisket, inside the thighs, ears, etc. If the weather is not cold the hair may be clipped before applying the dressing and burnt. When the number of animals to be treated is large, dipping is the best method of treatment; the lime and sulphur dip, as recommended for mange, may be used against lice, observing all the necessary precautions mentioned there. Attention should be paid to the proper cleanliness of the animals and the premises. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I am grateful to Dr. G. D. Bhalerao for the helminthological illustrations and to Messrs F. Ware, C.I.E. and J. R. Haddow for their valuable advice and helpful criticism of this paper. REFERENCES Bechtal, H. E. et al. (1936). Mich. Agric. Expt. Sta. Tech. Bull. 150. Bhalerao, G. D. (1934). Agric. & Livestock in Ind. 4, 3. Hutyra, F. and Marek, J. (1936). Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic Animals. Immes, M. (1925). U. S. Dept. Agric. Farm. Bull. 909. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (1932-36). Annual reports. Jordan, L. (1933). Vet. J. 89, 202. Maynard, L. A. (1936). Cornell Ext. Bull. 350. Palmer, L. S. (1936). Minn. Agric. Ext. Div. Spec. Bull. 94. Robertson, A. (1931). Vet. J. 87, 312. 351. Shirlaw, J. F. (1935). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 5, 232. Udall, D. H. (1931). Vet. Med. 26, 278. Wooldridge, G. H. (1934). Encyclopaedia of Veterinary Medicine, Surgery and Obstetrics, Vol. I.
PHENOTHIAZINE140 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 141 The results reported by the present authors concern more extensive trials on larger groups of animals most of which were actually suffering from helmin- thic disease at the time that the trial was carried out. Sheep and horses have been most largely used and results, almost without exception, have been extra- ordinarily good. The phenothiazine used in these observations has been supplied by the Imperial Chemical Industries in four forms ; (a) pure phenothiazine powder, having a purity of about 99 per cent; (b) phenothiazine powder mixed with a wetting agent to facilitate its mixture with water; (c) liquid phenothiazine, being a suspension of very finely powdered phenothiazine in water containing some dispersing agent, and (d) phenothiazine tablets, containing 5 grammes of the pure drug and a certain amount of excipient together with a substance that brings about a rapid disintegration of the tablets when placed in water. Experimental Data Sheep ANTHELMINTIC EFFECT. Experiment No. 1.142 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 143 Experiment No. 6.144 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 145 Fifty-three goats were used for this experiment; 25 received one dose of phenothiazine in capsule form, varying between 10 grammes and 30 grammes according to the size of the goat, and 28 were kept as controls. During the three weeks observational period the egg count among the 25 treated goats was reduced from an average of 5,080 to an average of 533, the egg count among the 28 controls falling from an average of 6,696 to 3,808 during the same period. Several of the goats showed signs of intoxication for three or four days after the administration of these doses ; they refused all food, looked dull, and were often seen to stand motionless in a corner of the stall with their heads hanging down. As a result of the various origins of the experimental goats, and the small number of post-mortem examinations carried out, the results are less conclusive than they otherwise would have been, but they suggest that the drug acted particularly powerfully on Ostretagia circumcincta and on Trichostrongylus axei, less powerfully on worms in general in the small intestine and not at all on Nematodirus filicollis, Moniezia spp. and Fasciola hepatica. The post-mortem results also suggest the 10 gramme dose to have been less efficient than the 20 and 30 gramme doses. THE EFFECT OF SMALL DOSES IN GOATS. Experiment No. 9.146 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 147 the pericardium. Some little time after exposure to air the whole carcase took on a red colour148 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 149 like 1,000 grammes of faeces during a day and the excretion of the pheno- thiazine in the faeces would be spread over three days it is obvious that the amount requisite for the prevention of larval development must be something quite small, presumably in the region of one part of phenothiazine in 8,000 of faeces. The data from which this conclusion has been drawn are set down in Table IX. Trials later carried out in vitro showed that a mixture of 1 : 100 or of: 1 : 1,000 of phenothiazine powder in the faeces culture prevented the develop- ment of the larvae in a similar way. It was interesting to note, however, in an experiment in which the four treated goats were carrying a particularly heavy infection of Muellerius, that no effect whatsoever was produced on the larvae of this genus of lung-worms, living larvae being recovered from the culture in thousands. An observation was next made to ascertain at what stage of larval deve- lopment the action of the drug is most marked. Six 50-gramme cultures were made up for this purpose, half a gramme of phenothiazine being added to each at various stages during the culture period. When larvae were ultimately separated by means of Baermann's apparatus on the eighth day it was found that the drug had exerted its greatest influence on the eggs and early stages of developmet of the larvae. After the fifth day of development, i.e., when the larvae had reached the infective stage, the drug had taken comparatively little action. Particulars of this observation are shown in Table X. Action in Vitro.150 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 151 TABLE I (Experiment No.1) Worms recovered at post-mortem examination from six lambs dosed with 15 grammes of Swales phenothiazine mixture, and from five undosed controls No. of Lambs Stomach. Small Intestine. Eggs per Gramme Faeces. Total. O. circumcincta. O. trifurcata. T. axei. H. contortus. Larvae. Total. T. vitrinus. T. colubriformis. C. curticei. C. oncophora. N. filicollis. Larvae. Moniezia. Before Dosing. 5 Days After Dosing. Control Lambs 92 55,400 25,853 5,540 9,233 152 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 153 TABLE III (Experiment No. 2) Showing the effect of a 15 gramme dose of phenothiazine administered at the end of an outbreak of parasitic gastritis to a group of 20 lambs many of which had been severely affected. Dates of Dosings and Weighings. 20 Lambs dosed with Phenothiazine. 20 Control Lambs. Average Weight in lb. Average Increase in Weight. Egg Count per gramme. Average Weight in lb. Average Increase in Weight. Egg Count per gramme. 13-9-39 61.1 2,400 61.1 2,300 22-9-39 64.2 3.1 63.4 2.3 29-9-39 65.4 1.2 500 64.4 1.0 1,400 13-10-39 70.8 5.4 68.6 4.2 For particulars of worm infestation see Table I, the lambs referred to in Tables I and II belonging to the same flock. Increase in favour of dosed sheep = 2.2 lb. per head in one month. TABLE IV (Experiment No. 3) Showing the effect of a 20 gramme dose of phenothiazine administered towards the end of an outbreak of parasitic gastritis to a group of 28 lambs many of which had been severely affected. Species of Ostertagia were principally concerned in this outbreak. Dates of Dosings and Weighings. 28 Lambs dosed with Phenothiazine. 28 Control Lambs. Average Weight in lb. Average Increase in Weight. Egg Count per gramme. Average Weight in lb. Average Increase in Weight. Egg Count per gramme. 30-9-39 61.3 5,100 63.4 5,100 21-10-39 74.0 12.7 200 67.5 4.1 2,400 14-11-39 78.3 4.3 200 68.4 0.9 1,400 Increase in favour of dosed sheep in six weeks = 12 lb. per head, or a total of 336 lb.
154 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 155 TABLE VII Showing the effect of the repeated administration of small doses of phenothiazine to sheep Date. Eggs per Gramme of Faeces in Six Experimental Sheep. 2 Gramme Doses of Phenothiazine Daily. 5 Gramme Doses of Phenothiazine Daily. 10 Gramme Doses of Phenothiazine Daily. Sheep 1. Sheep 2. Sheep 3. Sheep 4. Sheep 5. Sheep 6. 26-1-40 2,800 700 600 900 7,700 2,100 2-2-40 2,800 200 2,600 100 7,400 500 3-2-40 400 200 1,400 156 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 157 TABLE VIIIB Showing the effect of a dose of 30 grammes of phenothiazine on strongyloid worms in horses Particulars of Horse. Dose of Phenothiazine in Grammes. Egg Count Before Treatment. Egg Count 2 to 4 Weeks After Treatment. Ascaris. Trichonema, etc. S. edentatus. S. equinus. S. vulgaris. T. axei. Ascaris. Trichonema, etc. S. edentatus. S. equinus. S. vulgaris. T. axei. Thoroughbred Foal 30 200 400 400 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 158 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 159 TABLE IX Showing the effect of small doses of phenothiazine in preventing the development of third-stage larvae in the faeces of goats Date. Dose of Phenothiazine in Grammes. Goat 388. Goat 389 Goat 414. Eggs per Gramme of Faeces. Larvae per Gramme of Faeces. Eggs per Gramme of Faeces. Larvae per Gramme of Faeces. Eggs per Gramme of Faeces. Larvae per Gramme of Faeces. 7-3-40 0.25 8-3-40 1,500 0 200 0 500 0 9-3-40 2,400 11 300 0 600 25 11-3-40 0.75 2,600 54 300 9 400 81 12-3-40 1,300 0 0 0 300 0 13-3-40 1.0 2,800 2 400 6 900 96 14-3-40 1,400 0 500 0 300 0 15-3-40 1.25 1,200 7 200 0 300 0 16-3-40 1,000 0 500 0 400 0 18-3-40 1.5 1,700 34 500 19 400 87 19-3-40 700 0 200 0 100 0 20-3-40 1.75 1,100 0 200 0 300 0 21-3-40 500 0 400 0 500 25-3-40 500 2 400 0 200 0 26-3-40 500 86 200 130 300 144 27-3-40 600 51 100 19 400 140 28-3-40 700 170 300 112 700 92 1-4-40 800 124 400 132 600 204 TABLE X Showing the effect on the development of larvae of a mixture of 1 per cent. of phenothiazine in the faeces added at various stages during the culture period Date when 1 per cent. Phenothiazine was Mixed with Cultures made 15-12-39. Number of Tricho- strongyloid Larvae. Recovered 23-12-39 Date when 1 per cent. Phenothiazine was Mixed with Cultures made 15-12-39. Number of Trieho- strongyloid Larvae Recovered 23-12-39 15-12-39 0 19-12-39 30,640 16-12-39 2 20-12-39 53,200 18-12-39 5,680 Control 88,000 potency than that of phenothiazine, and for this purpose we administered 30 grammes to one goat, collected the faeces on the second day afterwards and
160 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 161 partcuilarly well, Haemonchus appears to be less sensitive and Trichostrongylus and C ooperia occupy an intermediate position in this respect. One interesting point which came to our notice was the very good action of the drug on Trichostrongylus axei in the fourth stomach of sheep162 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 163 disturbance in a second one. A similar result was obtained by Lapage (re- ported elsewhere in this symposium) who found repeated doses of compara- tively small amounts of phenothiazine to be markedly toxic for pigs. Manson- Bahr, in a private communication to us, has reported that no toxic symptoms were noted in a human patient after a thrice-repeated daily dose of 8 grammes the anthelmintic effect of which was very satisfactory.164 PhenothiazineE. L. TAYLOR AND K. M. SANDERSON 166 observations involving some 300 to 400 sheep, 70 to 80 goats and a dozen cattle. In the small intestine of these animals it is less efficient but removes about 80 per cent of the trichostrongylid parasites there, with the exception of Nemato- dirus, on which it exerts very little action. There is no action against Fasciola nor against the anoplocephaline cestodes Moniezia and Anoplocephala. Ten grammes appears to be an adequate dose in sheep or goats although doses of 20 to 30 grammes are more likely to produce the maximum effect. Cattle respond well but are much less tolerant of the drug than are sheep or horses. Experiments on pigs and dogs have been few but it is clear that although the drug acts well on ascarids in the horse its action against these parasites is uncertain in the pig and is absent in the dog. The anthelmintic effect noted on sheep that have been more or less heavily infested with stomach worms has been extraordinarily good and, where com- parisons have been made, has generally been superior to that of copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate. The tolerance of sheep and goats is very high, 400 grammes causing no ill effect : horses withstand up to 17 times the anthelmintic dose. Some evidence of idiosyncrasy has been observed in that a group of goats showed some sensitivity to the drug on one occasion and on a later occasion proved to be very resistant to toxic action. Repeated small doses are considerably more toxic than are occasional larger doses, the minimum toxic single dose being about forty times as great as the minimum toxic dose when repeated daily. The tasteless character of phenothiazine is a great advantage in that horses will take it voluntarily in the food ; pigs and sheep may also be dosed in this way. REFERENCES Campbell, F. L., Sulivan, W. N., Smith, L. E. and Haller, H. L. (1934.) Insecticidal tests of synthetic organic compounds166 PhenothiazineCOMPARATIVE TESTS ON THE TREATMENT OF LAMBS WITH PHENOTHIAZINE AND WITH COPPER SULPHATE AND NICOTINE SULPHATE BY A. D. MCEWEN, D.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. South Eastern Agricultural College, Wye, Veterinary Department. (Reprinted from The Veterinary Record, Vol. 52, No. 36, September 7, 1940.) Experiment 1. THIS experiment was carried out in co-operation with Dr. E. L. Taylor and the experimental animals were purchased and maintained at the expense of the Veterinary Laboratory, Ministry of Agriculture, Weybridge. A flock of 123 lambs, seven to eight months old, was placed in experiment in November, 1939. The animals were divided into three groups, each contain- ing 41 lambs, and they were kept throughout the experiment on a limited range of permanent pasture that had been heavily stocked with sheep. Group 1 was treated every two weeks with 30 grammes of phenothiazine. Group 2 was treated every two weeks with 20 c.c. copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate.* Group 3 was left untreated as a control group. The lambs were weighed every two weeks. Treatment began on Decem- ber 11th, 1939, and the lambs were dosed ten times, the last treatment being given on April 29th, 1940. The final weighing was made on May 20th, 1940. The lambs were sold by public auction on June 7th, 1940. TABLE I Showing Death Rate and the Sums for which Animals were Sold Group. No. in. Experiment. No. Died. No. Survived. No. Sold. Amount. £ s . d. 1 41 10 31 30 52 17 6 2 41 8 33 31 51 5 3 41 21 20 19 28 10 0 * The mixture used contained approximately 5 per cent copper sulphate and 5 per cent " nicotine sulphate 40 solution." 167
168 Tests on the Treatment of Lambs with Phenothiazine, etc. TABLE II Showing the Mean Weights Date Weighed. Group 1. Group 2. Group 3. 11-12-39 71 72 74 22-12-39 68 69 71 8-1-40 68 70 69 5-2-40 62 63 61 19-2-40 64 64 61 4-3-40 61 59 58 18-3-40 63 59 58 1-4-40 65 61 59 15-4-40 69 65 61 29-4-40 74 71 68 20-5-40 83 82 75 In Table 2 are shown the mean weights of the three groups at various intervals after the commencement of the experiment. It may be stated that from March 18th onwards, the mean weight of the lambs in Group 1 was signi- ficantly higher than that of the lambs in Group 3. The animals in Group 2 occupy an intermediate position between Groups 1 and 3, and this suggests that phenothiazine is the better of the two anthelmintics. Experiment 2. In this experiment the dose of phenothiazine was reduced to the smaller and more convenient one of 10 grammes ; the 20 c.c. dose of copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate was retained. Fifty-four of the poorest lambs, in a flock showing evidence of parasitic gastritis and enteritis, were selected and divided into two approximately equal groups. The lambs in Group 1 were given phenothiazine and those in Group 2 were given the copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate mixture. No controls were kept. The lambs were first weighed and treated on March 18th, 1940. Altogether the lambs were dosed four times at fortnightly intervals and on each occasion they were weighed. Their weights were taken for the fifth and last time on May 20th, 1940. TABLE III Showing the Mean Weights of the Lambs Date Weighed. Group 1. Group 2. 18-3-40 71 67 1-4-40 72 68 15-4-40 77 72 29-4-40 83 78 20-5-40 96 87 It may be stated that at the last weighing the difference of 9 lb. between the mean weights of the two groups was found to be statistically significant. The experiment therefore suggests that phenothiazine is the better anthelmintic,
A. D. MCEWEN 169 Experiment 3. Observations were made on three flocks of 11 to 12 month-old lambs be- longing to the same owner. Each flock of lambs was divided into two equal groups and one group was treated with phenothiazine while the other received copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate. The dose of the former was 10 grammes and the dose of the latter 20 c.c. The animals were not weighed and the effects of the two different treatments were compared from the appearance of the animals approximately three weeks after treatment stopped. Flock 1 consisted of 86 lambs ; treatment began in March and the animals were dosed three times at intervals of three to four weeks. Flock 2 contained 45 lambs ; treatment began in April and the lambs were dosed twice. Flock 3 contained 30 lambs and they were dosed in the latter part of April. The lambs were inspected in May, between two to three weeks after the last treatment had been given. Each flock was divided into its two groups that were held for examination in adjacent sheep pens. Without knowing the treatment given to each individual group I selected the better group in each flock and in all three cases this proved to be the group that had been treated with phenothiazine. The superior condition and bloom of the lambs that received phenothiazine was most marked in the flock that had been treated for the longest period and had been dosed three times. In the flock that had been treated on one occasion only, the difference was least obvious. In each case my selection of the better group was confirmed later on in the same day by a shepherd who was not aware that the animals had been treated. These observations again suggest that phenothiazine is the better anthelmintic. Summary Comparative tests made on five flocks of lambs indicate that phenothiazine is a more effective anthelmintic than copper sulphate and nicotine sulphate. * * * * * * * *
PHENOTHIAZINE IN PARASITIC GASTRITIS BY W. T. ROWLANDS University College, Bangor, N. Wales. (Reprinted from The Veterinary Record, Vol. 52, No. 36, September 7, 1940.) THE results of small scale experiments in Australia showed that phenothia- zine was of value in treating parasitic gastritis in sheep. The following is the account of an experiment carried out in North-Wales. In no case, how- ever, could the sheep be regarded as typical cases of acute parasitic gastritis. FARM A. Eleven wether (Welsh) lambsW. T. ROWLANDS 171 two composite faeces samples, 53 ewes, 2 rams and 10 lambs were drenched with 20 grammes phenothiazine, 20 ewes and 5 lambs being left as controls. The results are shown in the table below : Group. Date. Average Weight. Average Loss in Weight. Average Egg Count. Ewes Dosed . . . 1-12-39 29-12-39 59.0 lb. 55.1 172 Phenothiazine in Parasitic Gastritis TABLE : Showing the Effect of Phenothiazine in Reducing the Worm Infestation in Five Experimental Lambs. Date. L. 1. L. 2. L. 3. L. 12. L. 17. Treat- ment. Weight in lb. E. P. G. Treat- ment. Weight in lb. E. P. G. Treat- ment. Weight in lb. E. P. G. Treat- ment. Weight in lb. E. P. G. Treat- ment. Weight in lb. E. P.G. 7-11-39 50 1,100 10 grammes Phenothiazine 35 2,000 10 grammes Phenothiazine 40 600 15 c.c. Nicotine mixture 45 700 15 c.c. Nicotine mixture 45 5,100 15-11-39 41 43 700 Died 13-11-39* 49 1,900 51 1,300 29-11-39 18 grammes of Phenothiazine 40 1,100 1-12-39 20 grammes Phenothiazine 43 600 50 600 51 700 13-12-39 45 300 43 1,000 51 400 49 1,000 28-12-39 46 100 46 nil 44 300 21-12-39; 20 grammes Phenothiazine 48 nil 12-1-39 11-1-39; 60 grammes Phenothiazine 52 nil 50 nil 11-1-39; 50 grammes Phenothiazine 48 nil 51 nil 26-1-39 54 nil 53 nil 49 nil 57 nil 6-2-39 56 nil 50 nil 50 nil 60 nil Increase in weight over experimental period 6 15 5 15 * Post-mortem examination showed no worms in abmomasum only 300 in small intestine.
ABSTRACTS Study on the mortality rates of calves in 335 herds in England and Wales (together with some limited observations for Scotland). R. LOVELL AND A. B. HILL. (1940). J. Dairy Res. 11, 225. PREVIOUS observations by two independent observers on herds in Ayrshire (Scot- land) showed an annual mortality of 20-22 per cent with 27 per cent in spring and 8 per cent in autumn calves. In the present survey the total number of live births reported in 335 herds (14,000 cows) in England and Wales during the years 1936-37 was 25,209 (12,665 male and 12,544 female) ; the mortality per 100 livebirths was 4.4 male and 5.5 female (the number for bull calves is low owing to disposal at an early age to butchers) ; the number of still- births was 4.7 per 100 total births ; the number of abortions was 6.5 per 100 pregnan- cies. The total losses (deaths, stillbirths and abortions) were 14.3 per 100 pregnancies. The corresponding figures for 47 herds (1,750 cows) in Scotland were : mortality per 100 livebirths, 4.0 male and 11.4 female ; stillbirths 2.9 per 100 total births ; abor- tions 5.2 per 100 pregnancies; and total losses 15.1 per 100 pregnancies. In both surveys roughly one in seven pregnancies failed to produce an adult animal. In determining the rates of losses in separate herds, half the herds had less than 4 per cent of total losses on the average ; one herd in five lost more than 10 per cent of its liveborn calves, one herd in ten had more than 10 per cent of pregnancies ending in still- births and one herd in five more than 10 per cent end in abortions. With regard to the seasonal incidence of mortality, the Scottish rates for female calves were 12.2 per cent for the first half and 3.7 per cent in the second half of the calendar year ; the English rates for the first and second halves of the year were : males 5.2 and 3.7, females 6.2 and 5.0 per cent. The high mortality rate in Scotland is entirely due to large numbers in the first half of the year. Factors inimical to calf life have a greater influence in this period but these factors do not affect the products of conception in utero. There was no great variation in mortality in the different regions from which the data were collected, except for a suggestion of a higher rate in Northern England. The mortality rates are also not seriously affected by size of herd. The average female death rate in herds under 20 was 6.7, and in herds over 20, 5.4 per cent. Colostrum was suckled in 71, given by bucket in 27 and not given in 2 per cent of 240 herds ; the relative death rates for these classes were : male 100, 119, 131, and female 100, 124 and 141 respectively, the differences being significant for the first two groups of females only. In methods of feeding calves, more calves died when fed diluted milk by bucket (5.8) than when suckled (4.8) or bucket-fed undiluted (4.7) ; statisti- cally the differences are not significant. Nearly half the deaths of female calves took place in the first week of life and three quarters in the first month. [W. L. D.] Microbiology of silage made by the addition of mineral acids to crops rich in protein, II. The microflora.* A. CUNNINGHAM AND A. M. SMITH. (1940). J. Dairy Res. 11, 243. THE addition of mineral acids to green vegetable matter so as to reduce the pH below 4.0 successfully preserves even highly nitrogenous materials such as leguminous crops. This is the A. I. V. process of silage making. The acid treatment however does not completely inhibit the growth of bacteria and other micro-organisms. The organisms which can grow in A. I. V. silage must be those which can initiate growth below pH 4, and it was anticipated that such silage would contain some unusual types. * The first paper of this series appeared in Zbl. Bakt., 1939, II, 100, 394-408, not at present able to be consulted. 173
174 ABSTRACTS The microflora of this form of silage consisted mostly of lactic acid bacteriaABSTRACTS 175 Component acids and glycerides of some Indian ox depot fats. T. P. HILDITCH AND K. S. MURTI. (1940). Biochem. J. 34, 1301. FOUR widely selected ox depot fats were examined, viz. those of a cow and bullock in Bombay, that of a cow in Calicut and a mixed sample from both sexes from Calcutta. The individual samples were probably taken from more than one animal. They were reasonably regular in melting point of fat and of fatty acids but the iodine value of the Bombay fats was much lower (26) than that of the other samples (31). The samples had developed free acidity before analysis and the neutralised samples only were analysed for component fatty acids and component glycerides by the methods usually adopted at the Liverpool laboratories, after preliminary fractionation by crystallization from acetone at low temperatures. Oxen in the Bombay area are fed on grass, jowar, wheat, bran and cottonseed while the main diet of the Calcutta and Calicut animals was grass and paddy straw. This difference in food was the major cause of the different compositions of the depot fats. All the depot fats examined were much more saturated than those of European and American animals, and contained only 27-33 per cent of unsaturated acids (mainly oleic) (English, 35 per cent oleic). The stearic acid content did not exceed 26-28 per cent; the palmitic acid was generally higher than the 30±3 per cent hitherto con- sidered characteristic of ox fat. In the sample from the Bombay cow, palmitic formed over 40 per cent of the total fatty acids. The presence of larger amounts of palmitic caused the melting point of the fat and the solidifying point of the fatty acids to be the same as for ordinary ox fats. The component glycerides of two cow fats studied in detail were found to conform in structure to other ox depot fats. The larger amounts of palmitic acid was reflected in increased amounts of dipalmito glycerides, but the amounts of monopalmito glyce- rides were comparable to those in other ox depot fats after allowing for the more highly saturated nature of the fats. [W. L. D.] Studies on the secretion of milk fat. 3. Effect of thyroxine administration on the blood lipoids and on the nature of milk fat. J. A. B. SMITH AND N. N. DASTUR. (1940). Biochem. J. 34, 1093. PREVIOUS experiments by others have shown that the feeding of dried thyroid gland to cows or the intramuscular injection of thyroxine raises the milk yield and the percentage of fat and solids not fat in the milk, and lowers the fatty acid but raises the sugar content of arterial blood. Four cows in the present investigation were injected intramuscularly with 10 mg. thyroxine daily for a 10-day period ; the milk was sampled and weighed before, during, and after this period. The milk yields of all cows were increased greatly during and for 3 days after the thyroxine period ; of the milk constituents only the fat showed a slight increase due to thyroxine treatment in 3 cows while a small rise in lactose was evident in the milk of the fourth animal. These results generally fail to confirm pre- vious findings of raising the solids not fat content of milk by thyroxine treatment. A detailed study of the daily change in the composition of the fat was made (Reichert and iodine values). It is unfortunate to observe that the composition of the fats from the milk of 3 cows was abnormal in the control period (Reichert, 18 to 26, iodine value 44 to 54). The fat from one of these cows, examined in detail showed a Reichert value of 17.2 and an iodine value of 48.4 after thyroxine treatment, but values of 16.8 and 46.5 respectively 15 days after the end of that period. These butterfats had high oleic and palmitic but low butyric, myristic and stearic acid contents. The sugar content of blood plasma was increased by some 10-26 per cent and the main lipoid constituents decreased by 10-20 per cent during the period of thyroxine treatment. [W. L. D.]
176 ABSTRACTS Purebred and crossbred pigs. Comparison of rate of growth and economy of gains. F. B. HEADLEY (1940). Bull. Nevada Agric. Expt. Sta. 153. HYBRID vigour in both plants and animals is a well-known phenomenon. In the case of pigs, faster and more economical growth are practical manifestations of this vigour. Crossbred Duroc-Poland China pigs were studied under Nevada conditions. Feeding was the same for each pig ; it included four pounds of skim milk and a quarter pound of a mixture of four parts fish meal plus three parts linseed meal daily. Alfalfa pasture was provided in the summer; in the winter three pounds of alfalfa meal were added to the fish and linseed meal mixture. In addition they were given barley according to body weight, varying from 1.2 lb. daily at 30 lb. to 6.2 lb. daily at 200 lb. In the summer trials using paired crossbred and purebred Duroc pigs of the same weight and sex, the days required for one cwt. gain were 68±1.1 for crossbred and 73±0.8 for purebred pigs. The pounds of concentrates required for one cwt. gain in body weight were 277±5.2 and 2.89 ±3.4 respectively. In group trials using eight pigs each in crossbred and purebred groups on pasture, the days required for one cwt. gain in body weight were 67±1.0 and 71 ±2.3 respectively ; the daily gains were 1.49±0.014 and 1.41± 0.025 and the pounds of concentrates required for one cwt. gain in body weight were 263 and 268 respectively. Finally individual and group trials similar to those above were run in the winter. The feeding was the same except that in place of alfalfa pasture, three pounds of alfalfa meal were fed daily. In the trials using paired crossbred and purebred Duroc pigs, the days required for one cwt. gain in body weight were 70±1.2 and 78±1.8 respectively. The pounds of concentrates required for one cwt. gain in body weight were 287±5.2 and 321±6.2 respectively. In the winter group study the days required for one cwt. gain in body weight were 66±1.0 and 70±1.4 and the pounds of concentrates required were 285 and 303 respectively for the crossbred and purebred groups. It is obvious from these trials that greater gains can be obtained more economically from crossbred Duroc-Poland China pigs than from purebred Duroc pigs. [J. N. W.] Breeding for egg production. L. W. TAYLOR AND I. M. LERNER (1938). Bull. Calif. Agric. Expt. Sta. 625. THE annual production of a hen is a measure of the contributions of all her egg- producing characters. These characters are best studied separately to facilitate selective breeding of a more intense nature. The age of sexual maturity determines the onset of production. This is easily de- termined by the age at which the first egg is laid. Climate, nutrition, health, etc. affect this age independent of the heredity of a bird and must be considered in selecting for early maturity. At least two pairs of genes are involved, one of which is sex-linked. Three kinds of pauses, although admitted by the authors as a term difficult to define, are also important. (1) It is not established as yet that winter pausing is entirely here- ditary. The breeder can, however, and should select for breeding only members of those families in which winter pausing is at a minimum or is absent. (2) Broodiness is a charac- ter which varies with the breed but is always present. Selection should be made, accord- ing to the authors, by the California breeders against broodiness. Two pairs of domi- nant complimentary genes are involved. Either one alone has no effect, but when both occur in the genotype then the character appears in the phenotype. This fact makes it difficult to eliminate broodiness completely. The importance of broodiness in the annual record of a bird depends both on the number of times the bird becomes broody and on the length of time in each case before the bird resumes laying. (3) Finally, spring and summer pauses occur. It is not known at present whether this character is hereditary, although, such pauses do not occur in the best producers. Selection against it is, therefore, possible for the breeder. Persistency, or the length of the laying period before the onset of the annual moult, is another important character. The date the hen was hatched seems to have more effect on the age at last egg than on the date at last egg before moulting. Selection for
ABSTRACTS 177 persistency may, however, be overdone since the moult occurs each fall. If the hen is so persistent as to interfere with or delay moulting, production may not be normal when re- sumed. Rate of production is expressed as the percentage of days on which eggs were pro- duced. Gross rate permits confusion of non-pausing birds possessing low intensity with pausing birds possessing high intensity. " Net rate " excludes the days during pauses. Clutch size, or the number of eggs layed on successive days before one day is missed, has been used to indicate the rate of production, but it does not appear to the authors as a basis for successful estimation of this rate. Viability includes the number of chicks hatched from a given number of eggs, the proportions of these chicks raised to maturity and the mortality of the laying birds. There is good evidence to show that mortality up to the end of the first laying year is partly genetic. The selection of longer-lived strains will result in greater viability. In selecting against diseases the breeder should select breeding birds from those families which are most free of the diseases and not from survivors of less free families. For measuring flock production the hen-lay average and the average of the records of surviving birds are not preferred to the production index of the Kimber Poultry Breed- ing Farm. This is a quotient of total eggs layed by a group over the original number of pullets in the group. The prevalence of non-productive or non-viable birds in the flock can best be shown by the Kimber production index since both a high mortality rate and intensive culling reduces the number of pullets after laying has begun. This index is therefore decreased. A direct correlation exists between body size and egg size, yet the producers of large eggs seldom have a high rate. The authors refer to Hayes as saying that egg size involves one dominant gene for small-eggs and two dominant genes for large eggs. Egg colour is apparently controlled by several pairs of genes, some of them acting cumulatively to produce darker shades, others acting as inhibitors of colour. Shell thickness is probably dependent on a complexity of hereditary factors. Diet, however, is very important in this respect. A considerable number of genes seem to be involved in albumen quality. Hatehability, it is suggested, is controlled by a single gene, although the authors report that some workers question this. Six or more lethal genes are known, however, to cause embryonic death in poultry. [J. N. W.] A study of nicking in Jersey cattle. L. A. JOHNSON, J. W. BARTLETT AND LYNN COPELAND (1940). J. Dairy Sci. 23, 709. NICKING is generally used in reference to the production of superior progeny from certain matings. Outcross, linebred and inbred matings are used by breeders in the hope of purifying or intensifying good qualities. If one such mating is superior it is said to ' nick '. An unanswered question in this connection, however, is : " Will a bull proved to transmit high producing capacity in one herd be equally successful in another herd where a different family blood line exists ? " In co-operation with the American Jersey Cattle Club a study was made to determine whether or not differences may appear in the producing capacity of various matings. Bulls were selected which had at least two groups of six daughters, of which each group of daughters was out of dams by one sire. All records were converted to a three times a day, 365 day, mature basis. Total fat production was used as a basis of comparison as milk and fat percentage are inherited separately and total fat is a product of the two. The authors conclude that if nicking is not evident in the mating of a bull with two or three groups of daughters from dams sired by one bull for each group it must not be assumed that nicking will not arise with a different group of daughters. Furthermore, nicking may arise from a group of dams transmitting more producing capacity to their daughters than their own records show. A bull may nick better with one group of daughters than another and still nick satis- factorily with both. It is also recognised that six cases are too few for as satisfactory a comparison as is possible from a larger number of cases. With a small number of cases, therefore, results may be obtained which would not hold should the number of cases be in- creased. Environment is also of great importance.
178 ABSTRACTS Differences occur between the production of dams and daughters which are not due to the particular mating concerned. It is further concluded, therefore, that nicking may be a term that is freely used in reference to such differences. Its use in such cases is erroneous. Nicking was not shown to be a prevailing factor among Jersey cattle, al- though its possibility should not be denied. [J. N. W.] A successful method of immunization against Newcastle disease of fowls. S. GANAPATHY IYER AND N. DOBSON (1940). Vet. Rec. 52, 52, 889. THE authors have been engaged on the investigation of Newcastle disease, commonly known as Ranikhet disease in India, with particular reference to its control by means of a suitable vaccine. Experiments were undertaken to determine the effect of serial transfers of the virus on the chorioallantoic membrane of the developing chick embryo, using almost the same technique as that described by Burnet (1933 and 1936) and employing the strain of Newcastle virus that was isolated from the 1933 outbreak of the disease in Great Britain and had undergone continued passage through fowls at irregular intervals. The age of the embryo at inoculation was from 9 to 13 days. The first passage in eggs was effected by the inoculation of a Berkefeld V filtrate of a 1 per cent emulsion in saline of liver and spleen, representing fowl passaged virus. Eggs were opened for examination and collection of the virus on the second or third day after inoculation and reincubation. Death of the embryo was seldom prolonged beyond the second day. For the passage subinoculations, from egg to egg, 0.05 c.c. of a 10 per cent suspension of the infected chorioallantois or the whole embryo, in broth or saline, was used. When eggs, after inoculation with virus, were incubated for over three days, this often resulted in partial or complete loss of virulence of the virus. Consequently the period of in- cubation after inoculation seems to be an important factor. Further, the character of the lesions is modified by the age of the embryo at the time of inoculation, and the tem- perature at which the egg is subsequently incubated. On opening the inoculated egg the chorioallantoic membrane is found to be moist and oedematous with cloudiness arising from cellular infiltration. There are also irregular whitish opaque areas on the membrane indicating ectodermal proliferation followed by, or associated with, vacuolation and necrosis. Small petechial hæmorrhages are fairly numerous and sharply outlined, particularly on the neck and along the sides of the ventral aspects of the body. These hæmorrhages were found on the inside of the wings and the legs, which were highly congested towards the extremities and occasionally on the chorioallantoic membrane. The best lesions were found following the inoculation of eggs on the 9th or 10th day of incubation. The work of Burnet and Ferry (1934) indicated that there was no modification in the virulence of the Newcastle virus as a result of twelve passages through eggs. But the present authors' observations showed the necessity for more than twelve passages before the fowl virus could be attenuated. They found that the virus after cultivation through eggs for 19 passages remained fully virulent for adult fowls but the fowl sub- inoculations carried out at the 33rd and the subsequent passages upto the 56th revealed the fact that the strain of virus had undergone a change, and ceased to cause fatal results in them and had developed immunizing properties. About two weeks after the injection of healthy fowls with the egg-passage virus, without any treatment with chemi- cals (to cause attenuation), they developed immunity which was solid enough to with- stand subcutaneous injection of 1 c.c. of fowl-passage virus containing at least 100 million fowl minimal lethal doses and constituting a much nore severe exposure than would occur under field conditions. The experiments were repeated and periodic infectivity tests were made and the results showed that in this line of the same strain of virus even after 14 passages through eggs, the virus was sufficiently attenuated to be used as a vaccine with safety and re- liability. The authors are of opinion that this variation in the number of passages required for proper attenuation may be due to such factors as the individual susceptibility or age of the embryo at the time of inoculation, the duration of re-incubation of eggs following inoculation, the occasional necessity for storage of the virus in the refrigerator between passages, owing to the shortage of suitable eggs for inoculation, and the in- dividual susceptibility of the test fowl.
ABSTRACTS 179 Although the egg-passaged virus became attenuated for fowls after a certain number of passages yet it continued to be lethal for the embryos in 48 hours even at a dilution of 0.05×10.6 g. A short experiment carried out at the 41st passage showed that the egg-cultivated virus after having undergone attenuation did not return to its original virulence following two passages through fowls, suggesting its safety for using as an immunizing agent under field conditions. Experiments to determine the effect of drying and storage of the egg-cultivated virus and further work in regard to its pro- pagation through fowls while retaining its safety and efficiency as a vaccine are in pro- gress. Owing to the marked susceptibility of young chicks the vaccination of fowls under eight weeks of age is not recommended. [R. L. K.] GIPDORIGINAL ARTICLES STUDY OF WOOL QUALITY AS THE BASIS OF INDIVIDUAL SELECTION IN BREEDING OF DECCAN SHEEP* BY E. J. BRUEN, O.B.E., I.A.S. Livestock Expert to Government of Bombay S. S. KHOT, B.AG. Manager, Sheep Breeding Farm, Poona AND A. K. DESHPANDE, B.Sc. (Received for publication on 21 October 1940) (With Plates XIV182 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection In sheep which have been bred to carry a real fleece meaning only wool fibres, a breeder has a chance to pick up fleeces of exemplary quality for his stud breeding. But it was found that the coat of the Deccan sheep has a mixture of fibres varying from a fine wool to a rough stiff hair, with all the intermediate types. A detailed study of these fibres was made and they were classed into (1) fine wool, (2) strong wool, (3) heterotypes, (4) hair, and (5) kemp. Thus to get out of this maze of variations from sheep to sheep, a standard had to be fixed for study and selection. It was decided to segregate sheep which carried wool fibres only in their fleeces or in other words those animals which bore no hair in the fleece-bearing part of the body. This phrase, ' fleece-bearing part of the body', has been purposely included here because the Deccan sheep has no wool on the head, chest, belly, legs and on the lower part of the neck. These parts are covered with stiff hair. A shepherd in the Deccan who has very little idea of quality of wool when scraping these hairy portions at the time of shearing, mixes them with the rest of the clip, and thus reduces its quality to almost a waste. Leaving aside this negligence in shearing, the selection of Deccan sheep will have primarily to be based on the percentage of hair or in other words medullated fibres in their fleeces. When once the standard of quality is fixed according to the medullation percentage, the rest of the attributes of wool, viz. length, fineness, waves or crimps and percentage of kemp will give the fleece a definite place in selective breeding. This study is primarily meant for selection of stud flocks. Thus the existing farm flock is classed into:Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part III ] PLATE XIV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Regional demarkations and places where samples are taken [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FINE MEDPLATE XV [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb, Vol. XI, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Types of Deccan sheep segre- gated on the basis of wool quality FIG. 1. Grade'A'E. J. BRUEN 183 From the existing farm flock ten ewes of the ' A ' grade type were selected for the following fibre study. A total population of 18,000 fibres was studied from the fleeces of these sheep. The Deccan sheep are shorn twice a year and it is the January 1940 clip that has been handled for the following details. WOOL ANALYSIS OF THE ' A' GRADE DECCAN SHEEP Sampling and zoning The first important item in the study of a fleece is correct sampling. A sample should be representative of the whole fleece covering every part of the body which contributes to the total yield. It is easy to work the minute details of measurements and then record them in terms of statistical methods in a laboratory, but the field sampling on which the laboratory work has to be based must be carried out with great care and by persons who know sheep and wool. The wool-carrying portion of this type of Deccan sheep was first demarked into six zones (Plate XIV, fig. 1). These are :184 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection waves or the crimps just disappeared. The method of tabbing was also fol- lowed here. The same number mentioned above for fineness determination was recorded for length measurement. The fibres termed ' heterotypes' in this work are the partially medullated fibres in the fleeces. The weights of these denote the percentage of medullated fibres in that sample, and not medullation percentage which actually shows the total medullation value of a particular sample. The medullation per- centage can correctly be measured by the Medullometer devised by McMahon at the Massy Agricultural College, New Zealand. The study was restricted to recording the percentage of medullated fibres. These fibres after being classed by hand were tested both by the Elphic Benzol method and by keeping a careful scrutiny when spread for measure- ment of diameter under the microscope. CLASSIFICATION OF SUBJECTS 1. Study of types of fibres. 2. Study of the total population of fibres irrespective of types. 3. Determination of minimum number of tests for obtaining a reliable mean for measurements of diameter and length for each type of fibre. 4. The quality of wool on different zones. 5. Analysis of variance. 6. Method of recording individual and progeny performances. 7. Miscellaneous notes in the study of wool quality. 1. Study of types of fibres There are four types of fibres in the fleece of 'A' grade Deccan sheep, viz. (1) fine fibres, (2) strong fibres, (3) heterotypes and (4) kemps. Fine fibres.E. J. BRUEN 185 TABLE I Table of constants for length measurements Samples Fine fibres Strong fibres Heterotypes Kemps Mean S. D. C. V. No. Mean S. D. C. V. No. Mean S. D. C. V. No. Mean S. D. C. V. No. Neck 2.41 0.0156 20.42 1,000 3.45 0.0228 20.95 1,000 2.84 0.0209 22.04 898 1.21 0.0311 25.65 230 Wither 2.56 0.0155 19.18 1,000 3.57 0.0211 18.63 1,000 3.05 0.0214 21.24 954 1.95 0.0287 24.20 270 Shoulder 2.11 0.0136 20.38 1,000 2.81 0.0228 21.42 700 2.48 0.0222 23.07 660 1.67 0.0237 30.54 450 Side 2.29 0.0113 15.92 999 3.10 0.0237 20.38 730 2.55 0.0237 22.36 630 1.69 0.0254 25.28 284 Back 2.28 0.0141 19.56 1,000 2.46 0.0153 18.59 890 2.15 0.0155 19.13 700 1.74 0.0233 23.60 340 Britch 2.00 0.0137 21.65 1,000 2.74 0.0234 25.62 900 2.51 0.0224 23.58 700 1.84 0.0327 30.65 305
186 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection 21.18 per cent. Fig. 1 shows the characteristic graph of these fibres very clearly. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Length frequency The variation in length from region to region is from 2.0-2.56 in. The maximum length is seen in the wither wool and minimum in that of britch (Fig. 5). The mean diameter of these fibres for 6,000 readings is 25.30 µ, the stan- dard deviation comes to 5.32 µ with a coefficient of variation of 21.00 per cent. The table of constants for diameter measurements is given in Table II. The readings for diameter of this fibre will be seen to vary from 24.90-26.77µ. This shows that this fibre is extremely even in its diameter. It can be defi- nitely said that in the Deccan wool this is the most even fibre both for length and diameter (Fig. 2).
E. J. BRUEN 187 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Diameter frequency Strong fibres.188 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection TABLE II Table of constants for diameter measurements Samples Pine fibres Strong fibres Heterotypes Kemps Mean S.D. C. V. No. Mean S. D. C. V. No. Mean S. D. C. V. No. Mean S. D. C. V. No. Neck 25.415 0.153 19.0 1,000 47.25 0.2413 16.14 1,000 56.16 0.4224 22.08 862 68.28 0.8011 20.32 300 Wither 24.90 0.1655 21.02 1,000 51.31 0.2796 16.84 1,000 59.44 0.4015 20.29 902 65 .86 0.6692 19.90 327 Shoulder 25.15 0.1655 20.0 1,000 51.58 0.3605 18.49 699 51.94 0.4541 22.44 657 59.47 0.5384 22.18 600 Side 25.03 0.1538 19.44 1,000 47.20 0.3370 19.16 720 57.10 0.5346 23.17 611 68.42 0.6692 20.21 403 Back 26.08 0.168 20.34 998 50.79 0.3640 20.86 850 61.96 0.5332 22.19 665 70.29 0.6861 20.57 443 Britch 26.77 0.1746 20.62 1,000 49.53 0.2795 17.71 899 59.76 0.4677 20.60 693 68.27 0.6455 18.95 402
E. J. BRUEN 189 The length measurement of these fibres was carried for every zone. The mean length as calculated from 5,200 readings comes to 3.05 in. with a standard deviation of 0.765 and a coefficient of variation of 25.00 per cent, The length is highest in the wither wool 190 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection it starts with a thickness of 52-61µ and in its straight growth broadens up to 80-104µ. Then it takes a spiral growth having a breadth of 90-114µ and at the tip it turns suddenly into a non-medullated structure of a fine- ness of 7µ. But in ' A ' grade sheep kemp takes a less severe structure. It starts at the proximal end with a diameter of 49.76µ and continues with about the same breadth for three-fourths of the length and begins its pointed tip which ends in 5.2µ. The various types can very well be compared by refer- ring to Plate XVI. In these sheep they have lost the chalky appearance and have developed a flinty translucency. The measurements of 2,300 kemps for length are worked out in frequencies. The mean length works to 1.82 in. with a standard deviation of 00.50 and a coefficient of variation of 27.52 per cent. The diameter measurements although not a very important factor, were recorded for 2,300 fibres to understand what type of kemp exists in these sheep. The mean diameter comes to 66.30µ with a standard deviation of 14.14 and a coefficient of variation of 28.30 per cent. The curve in Fig. 2 will show the variation in the population of these kemps. Medullated fibres.Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. XI, Part III ] PLATE XVI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Types of fibres in ' A ' grade Deccan sheep. The hairy fibres which go to make the bulk of the ' B & C ' grade are absent in these sheep [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Types of fibres in ' C ' grade Deccan sheep for comparison
PLATE XVII [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. XI, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Monthly samples of the shoulder woolE. J. BRUEN 191 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Length frequency of the total population (irrespective of types of fibres). at the outset is to calculate the minimum number of counts which should be recorded in obtaining a reliable mean for that population. This is ordinarily calculated after recording readings of a fairly large number and finding out the standard deviations along with the coefficients of variation. The minimum
192 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Diameter frequency of the total population (irrespective of types of fibres). number of tests is then calculated for each type according to the following formula:E. J. BRUEN 193 In the present study a hundred readings for diameter and length are carried out for each type of fibre in every zone. Thus the total number of fine fibres measured amounts to 6,000, and that of the strong fibres to 5,200 and lastly 4,500 for the heterotypes. The coefficients of variation for each type of fibres are recorded in Tables I and II. Minimum number of tests.194 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection TABLE IV Number of tests of length for specified accuracy (strong fibres) Value of X for P= 0.05 No. of tests N Value of X for P = 0.01 No. of tests N 0.5 9603 0.5 16630 10 2401 1.0 4159 1.5 1067 1.5 1848 2.0 600.3 2.0 1040 2.5 384.2 2.5 665.6 3.0 266.8 3.0 462.2 3.5 196.0 3.5 339.4 4.0 150.1 4.0 259.9 4.5 118.5 4.5 205.4 5.0 96.03 5.0 166.3 5.5 79.36 5.5 137.5 TABLE V Number of tests of fineness for specified accuracy (strong fibres) Value of X for P= 0.05 No. of tests N Value of X for P = 0.01 No. of tests N 0.5 6145 0.5 10640 1.0 1537 1.0 2662 1.5 682.9 1.5 1183 2.0 384. 2 2.0 665.6 2.5 246.0 2.5 426.0 3.0 170.8 3.0 295.8 3.5 125.4 3.5 217.3 4.0 96.0 4.0 166.3 4.5 75.90 4.5 131.4 5.0 61.46 5.0 106.4 5.5 50.79 5.5 87.98
E. J. BRUEN 195 TABLE VI Number of tests of length and fineness for specified accuracy (heterotypes) Value of X for P= 0.05 No. of tests N Value of X for P = 0.01 No. of tests N 0.5 8128 0.5 14080 1.0 2032 1.0 3521 1.5 903.3 1.5 1564 2.0 508.2 2.0 880.2 2.5 326.2 2.5 563.3 3.0 225.8 3.0 391.2 3.5 165.9 3.5 287.4 4.0 126.8 4.0 220.0 4.5 100.3 4.5 173.9 5.0 81.28 5.0 140.8 5.5 67.17 5.5 116.3 From the results it is evident that in the case of fine fibres the present experiment is correct to 4 per cent accuracy on either side of the mean for P=0.05. The accuracy works out to 5 per cent in the strong fibres for length and 4 per cent fineness for P=0.05. In the case of the heterotype the ex- periment is correct to 4.5 per cent accuracy for P=0.05 for fineness and length measurement as well. Hence the fleece analysis carried out in the present study can be said to give reliable accuracy of 5 per cent for P196 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection 4. Quality of wool on different zones In improvement of sheep for wool bearing character uniformity of quality is of the highest importance. As explained previously, there is a great variation in quality from fleece to fleece in the Deccan sheep. The present study is of the ' A ' grade Deccan sheep selected to carry a fleece having no hairy fibre. In the breeding of such animals one must go a step further and find out the variation of wool quality on different parts of the body. The drive in selection should be towards a sheep having uniform superior wool all throughout the fleece. This can only be achieved by regional studies and recording these observations for each generation for selecting the stud stock. The principal attributes of wool which should be given importance in judging the uniformity for the Deccan fleeces at this stage should be medullation percentage, length, fineness, and percentage of kemp. Out of these, the medullation percentage and uniformity in length are of primary importance. The fineness of fibres and the percentage of kemp are to guide the final selection. For the ten ewes under study the details of the types of fibres are already given. At the same time proportions of each of these on different zones has been completely worked out. These results are consolidated in Table VII. TABLE VII Percentage of different types of fibres on different regions Regions Fine fibres Strong fibres Medullated fibres Remarks Neck 24.32 56.49 19.17 (3.56) The figures in brackets show the percentage of kemp. Wither 33.52 44.85 22.35 (4.59) Shoulder 22.56 62.97 12.37 (4.25) Side 27.59 40.00 32.38 (12.52) Back 36.57 31.75 31.66 (9.26) Britch 17.41 42.12 40.45 (8.98) The total medullation percentage could not be worked out due to want of apparatus. The total weight of heterotypes has been taken to calculate the percentage of medullated fibres. From the point of medullation shoulder wool stands first in quality followed by neck and wither wools. On the whole in fleece classing of the Deccan sheep at the present stage of breeding, these
E. J. BRUEN 197 three regions can safely be placed together as one quality. The side and the back wools are almost alike except that the side wool has a greater percentage of kemp than the back wool. The kemp is said to be an heritable character and the students of wool and sheep advise that these should be separately estimated. However, with the quality of wool which is under study, it is advisable to take the total medullation as the primary factor in judging sheep and then correct the results by other attributes in the following order of their importance: (1) length, (2) fineness, (3) percentage of kemps, (4) crimps (or waves), and (5) density. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5. Contour of the fleece of the ' A ' grade Deccan sheep. The histograph (Fig. 5) given above will show the general stand of the coat of the Deccan sheep from region to region. It is seen that the wither wool has the longest fibre followed by neck and side wools. The back wool has the least length. This contour of the fleece is a common factor in the majority of the Deccan sheep. The most defective part of the fleece is the
198 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection back wool. In the selection of animals this defect will have to be eliminated gradually. The britch wool in any breed of sheep is classed as the lowest quality. This is also true of this breed and the figures of medullation given in Table VII are self-evident. The fineness of wool on a zone depends on the proportion of types of fibres. The percentage of fine or coarser fibre will change the mean diameter of the total population. Hence the proportions of the types and their quality are of more importance than the mean diameter for all types of fibres on a zone or in a fleece. On the whole, it can be laid down that the fleece of the Deccan sheep can be classed into four groups at the shearing yard:E. J. BRUEN 199 TABLE IX Analysis of variance for diameter200 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection sheep shows the degree of variation in the fleece character, and points out the ewes which should be selected for the next stage of improvement. TABLE X Percentage weight of wool and medullated fibres Ewe No. Wool Heterotypes Kemps 4 74.83 14.77 11.26 31 51.78 31.53 6.69 30 80.15 17.11 2.73 41 74.71 20.77 4.52 72 72.30 24.57 3.12 20 84.24 12.75 2.99 89A 67.01 12.95 20. 02 Ewe No. Wool Medullated fibres 7 42.72 (24.10 fine) (18.62 strong) 57.27 5 51.01 (36.77 fine) (14.24 strong) 48.97 69 57.92 (36. 80 fine) (21.12 strong) 42.05 Ewe No. 20 stands first both in regard to medullation and fineness of fleece. Ewe No. 30 stands second although a slightly better in length mea- surement than the previous one. Ewe No. 72 follows these two in its fleece quality. 6. Method of recording individual and progeny performances After studying the wool quality of the individual sheep, it is necessary to record it in such a way that not only will it be easy to find out the life-time performances of that sheep, but the results of its progeny, can be referred to, for further selection or elimination. This subject has been worked out in great detail by Dr Waters, Massy Agriculture College, New Zealand, who was kind enough to supply the farm with the information of his card-index method. Methods of sheep improvement are in an advanced stage in that country and there is yet time to apply the details worked out by Dr Waters to our condi- tions. However, a suitable method has been framed for recording wool quality of the Deccan sheep (vide the form on page 205).
E. J. BRUEN 201 7. Miscellaneous notes in the study of wool quality Monthly growth of wool in two extreme types of Deccan sheep.202 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 6. Monthly growth of fibres of different types in the ' A ' grade Deccan sheep. The above diagrams will clearly show that the ' C ' grade wool breaks off in October while in the ' A ' grade the growth is slightly retarded. The maxi- mum growth attained in the ' C ' grade is 2.22 in. in August, but the staple suddenly breaks in the month of September. It recoups its length only in January, while the fine fibre drops in length from 2.20-1.56-in. in October and then makes a sudden growth to 2.07 in. in December. These results show that the ' C ' grade wool breaks off definitely once in a year, while the ' A ' grade wool has a distinct tendency of developing into a non-breaking type,
E. J. BRUEN 203 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 7. Monthly growth of fibres of different types in ' C ' grade Deccan sheep. Percentage of clean wool yield.204 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection Percentage of grease.E. J. BRUEN 205 Sheep Breeding Scheme, Poona Individual and progeny record Parents Breed Individual Sire Dam Wool yield Ewe Regd. No. Breed Re. No. Breed Re. No. Shearing Date Ram Med % Med% Fleece-weight Quantity Class Sire Dam Progeny Remarks (Retained____*) (Disposed... . 206 Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection MEDULLATION Zonal analysis of the Ram/Ewe Regd. No. [NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted NUTRITIONAL EXPERIMENTS WITH CHICKENS BY A. J. MACDONALD, B.Sc., B.Sc. (AGRI.), N.D.A. Poultry Research Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, U.P. (Received for publication on 1 April 1941) INTRODUCTION IT is now widely recognized that cereals and their by-products do not alone supply all the necessary nutrients for normal growth in chickens. The feeding of cereals without protein and mineral supplements, especially during the early stages of growth, invariably results in slow and uneven growth, high mortality and poor food utilization. In western countries, where poultry keeping is most highly developed and specialized, it is customary to make good the deficiencies in cereals by supplements of suitable animal or vegetable proteins and minerals. The poultry industry in India is, however, very different from that in western countries for there is practically no specialization of production, the birds usually being kept in very small flocks under the most primitive con- ditions of housing, feeding and management. The chickens are hatched under hens and are fed limited amounts of small grains during the first few weeks of their life, but, thereafter, it is not customary to feed any appreciable amounts of food. From a few weeks of age onwards the birds are allowed to roam freely in search of their own food and pick up such materials as household scraps, fallen grains and various forms of small animal life. Such methods of rearing are very unsatisfactory, for the mortality during rearing is usually very high (50 per cent is a common figure) and the rate of growth is very much lower than that obtained under western conditions. In view of the lack of knowledge regarding chick nutrition under Indian conditions, a series of experiments were carried out to investigate the growth- promoting value of various supplements in the diet of chicks fed on a standard basal diet consisting of locally produced foodstuffs supplemented with green food and crushed limestone. In view of the proven value of separated milk in the diet of chicks, separated milk was chosen as the control supplement in each experiment and the results obtained were compared with those obtained with the standard diet only and with the standard diet supplemented with soya bean meal plus salt. As the cost of a ration is largely determined by the level of its protein content, an analysis was made of the protein consumptions of all (207)
208 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens groups during the different stages of growth. Further, as there was little information available concerning the growth rates of different breeds under Indian conditions, it was decided to use three breeds for the experiments and keep separate records of their growth rates. METHODS Breeds.A. J. MACDONALD 209 TABLE I Food composition (percentages) on dry matter basis Feeding stuff Fibre Crude protein Ether extract Nitrogen- free extract Ash Basal mash210 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens Experiment 1. To investigate the value of separated milk supplements to cereal rations StockA. J. MACDONALD 211 Breed White Leghorn Rhode Island Red Group 1 2 1 2 Sex Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female 3 weeks 6.1 5.7 2.5 2.6 6.1 5.8 2.6 2.7 4 212 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens 46.0 oz. in the water-fed group. The corresponding figures for the Rhode Island Reds were 65. 5 oz. and 48.0 oz. respectively. Food consumption.A. J. MACDONALD 213 very much sub-normal in weight and it is quite normal for animals to make better utilization of their food when fed on a good diet after being fed on a deficient one. The exceptionally high food consumption per unit of live weight gain made by Group 1 in period 5 is most probably due to the birds being well grown for their age at 16 weeks and a subsequent check in the rate of growth from 16-20 weeks due to a spell of hot weather. On the other hand the birds in Group 2 were undersized at 16 weeks and made relatively better gains in weight despite the rise in temperature. Milk consumption.214 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens total milk consumption from 0-24 weeks was 27.68 lb. Group 2, during period 4, consumed 3.82 lb. of milk and 4.51 lb. of water. The proportions of milk to water consumed during periods 5 and 6 decreased. Protein consumption.A. J. MACDONALD 215 Mortality.216 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens showed the typical symptoms of depraved appetite, consuming such objects as nails, pieces of wire and paper. The mortality from 0-6 weeks, whilst on water, was 20 chicks or 47.6 per cent, which is very much in excess of the normal. The birds pick d up very considerably from 6-8 weeks, when fed on milk in place of water, and only two deaths occurred during this period. From 8-12 weeks, the birds again fell back in condition and two more deaths occurred during the 11-12th week. From 12-24 weeks, when fed on milk and water, the condition of the birds improved very rapidly and no deaths occurred after the 14th week. The total percentage mortality from 0-24 weeks of 61.9 was very much in excess of the normal. All the birds which died were very much emaciated and the intestines were usually almost void of food. The gizzard contents were abnormal in that they contained excessive quantities of such materials as wire, nails and glass, all indicative of depraved appetite. The gizzard linings were very much eroded and darkened in colour suggesting that the diet of the birds was deficient in the gizzard factor, which is essential for normal growth of the gizzard. Egg production.A. J. MACDONALD 217 Conclusions.218 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens TABLE VIII Average weights in ounces for each breed Breed White Leghorn Rhode Island Red Desi Group 3 4 3 4 3 4 Sex Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Pay old 1.52 1.46 1.50 1.49 1.48 1.46 1.47 1.49 1.11 1.11 1.05 1.13 1 week 2.34 2.03 2.08 1.85 2.23 1.96 1.84 1.86 1.67 1.67 1.50 1.55 2 weeks 4.3 3.8 3.6 3.0 4.5 3.8 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.2 2.6 2.5 3 A. J. MACDONALD 219 The weights of the cockerels and pullets of all the three breeds were greater in Group 3 than in Group 4 at each weekly weighing from 1-8 weeks of age. The differences in weights between the corresponding birds in the two groups became consistently greater at each weekly weighing so that at 8 weeks the birds in Group 3 were significantly heavier than those in Group 4. At 8 weeks the average weights of the White Leghorn, Rhode Island Red and desi males were 28.0, 24.2 and 19.6 oz. respectively, whilst the corres- ponding figures in Group 4 were 21.7, 19.5 and 15.0 oz. The average weights of the females in Group 3 at 8 weeks were White Leghorns 22.4 oz., Rhode Island Reds 23.0 oz. and desis 19.4 oz., whilst in Group 4 the corres- ponding weights were 19.2, 16.1 and 15.7 oz. respectively. From 8 weeks onwards, whilst both groups were fed on the same rations, Group 4 grew slightly faster than Group 3. At 12 weeks of age, when the birds were sexed, there were no significant differences between the weights of the cockerels and pullets of Group 3 and the corresponding birds in Group 4 except in the case of the Rhode Island Red pullets, which were still significantly heavier in Group 3. From 12-24 weeks of age the rate of growth of the pullets of each breed was very similar in both groups for each period of the experiment. At 24 weeks the average weights of the pullets in Group 3 were White Leghorns 62.0 oz., Rhode Island Reds 61.3 oz. and desis 50.8 oz. The corresponding figures in Group 4 were 62.0, 62.5 and 50.8 oz. Food consumption.220 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens Group 3. The better utilization of the food consumed during periods 1 and 2 by Group 3 is due to the fact that the birds consumed practically the same amounts of food as Group 4 but made better gains in weight during each period. During period 3, the birds in Group 4 made greater gains in weight than Group 3 without a corresponding increase in food consumption. From 12 weeks onwards the food consumptions were somewhat erratic and no con- clusion can be drawn from the results obtained. The average food con- sumptions per bird in Groups 3 and 4 from 0-24 weeks were 22.83 lb. and 23.28 lb. respectively. Milk consumption.A. J. MACDONALD 221 of water. The total consumptions of milk and water from 0-8 weeks were 3.83 lb. and 2.41 lb. respectively. During period 3, the milk consumption was greater than that of Group 3 but the birds consumed proportionately less water. During the subsequent periods the proportions of water to milk consumed gradually decreased but in each period the consumption of milk was relatively higher than that for Group 3. The total average consumption of milk from 0-24 weeks in Group 4 was 27.9 lb., whilst in the same period the average consumption by Group 3 was 26.47 lb. Protein consumption.222 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens TABLE XII Mortality Period Deaths Group 3 Group 4 1. 0-1 week 3 4 2. 1-2 weeks 1 3 3. 2-3 A. J. MACDONALD 223 In Group 3 the first eggs were produced by the White Leghorns, Rhode Island Reds and desis at 154, 174 and 137 days respectively. In Group 4, the corresponding figures were 184, 187 and 136 days. In Group 3, 27.3 per cent of the Leghorns and 72.7 per cent of the desis had started to lay by 24 weeks, whereas none of the Leghorns and 53.8 per cent of the desis had produced eggs in Group 4. At 24 weeks the average egg production per bird in Group 3 was 1 . 2 for the Leghorns and 12 . 3 for the desis. The correspond- ing figures for Group 4 were nil for the Leghorns and 7 . 4 for the desis. Conclusions.224 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens Feeding.A. J. MACDONALD 225 TABLE XIV Average weights in ounces for each breed Breed White Leghorn Rhode Island Red Desi Group 5 6 5 6 5 6 Sex Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Day old 1.49 1.47 1.48 1.50 1.61 1.58 1.62 1.60 1.03 1.04 1.02 1.05 1 week 2.8 2.8 2.1 2.0 3.3 2.7 2.4 2.2 2.0 2.0 1.6 1.5 2 weeks 4.4 4.2 3.3 3.0 4.7 4.2 3.6 3.2 2.8 2.9 2.4 2.2 3 226 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens TABLE XV Food consumption Period Average food consump- tion per bird (lb.) Food consumption in lb. per pound live weight gain Group 5 Group 6 Group 5 Group 6 1. 0-4 weeks 1. 46 1.35 3.57 4.96 2. 4-8 A. J. MACDONALD 227 The protein consumptions recorded for Group 6 varied in the different periods according to the relative amounts of mash and grain consumed. The protein consumption of 14. 5 per cent in period 1 was slightly lower than that consumed by Group 5 but in period 2A the figures were reversed. During periods 2B, 3 and 4 the protein consumptions of 14.8 per cent, 14.4 per cent and 13.9 per cent were higher than those recorded for Group 5 but in periods 5 and 6 the percentages of protein consumed were lower than in the corres- ponding periods for Group 5. Mortality.228 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens and desis were 7.7, 0 and 5.0. At 24 weeks of age, the average egg produc- tion per bird in Group 5 was 2.9 for the Leghorns, 3.9 for the Rhode Island Reds and 4. 8 for the desis. The corresponding figures for Group 6 were 0.1, 0 and 0.5. Conclusions.A. J. MACDONALD 229 TABLE XVIII Average weights in ounces for each breed Breed White Leghorn Rhode Island Red Desi Group 7 8 7 8 7 8 Sex Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Day old 1.41 1.34 1.35 1.39 1.60 1.54 1.54 1.60 0.99 0.96 0.95 0.98 3 weeks 5.9 5.2 5.3 5.3 5.8 5.8 6.2 5.9 3.9 3.4 3.8 3.6 6 230 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens During the period 0-6 weeks, which may be looked upon as pre-experi- mental, both groups when fed on the basal ration plus separated milk made very similar gains in weights during each period of 3-weeks. At 6 weeks, when the experiment proper started, the weights of the males and females for each breed in Group 7 agreed very closely with the weights of the corres- ponding birds in Group 8. From 6 weeks onwards the birds in Group 7, fed on separated milk and water, made better gains in weight than the birds receiving the soya bean meal plus salt. At 12 weeks and at all subsequent weighings the pullets of all the three breeds in Group 7 were significantly heavier than the corresponding birds in Group 8. At 24 weeks the weights of the pullets in Group 7 were White Leghorns 55.5 oz., Rhode Island Reds 70.2 oz. and desis 41 . 5 oz. The corresponding weights of the White Leghorns, Rhode Island Reds and desis in Group 8 were 47.5, 59.1 and 35.8 oz. respectively. Food consumption.A. J. MACDONALD 231 Protein consumption.232 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens Experiment 5 The results obtained with ground soya beans in Experiments 3 and 4, though not so satisfactory as those obtained with separated milk, were consi- dered sufficiently good to warrant a further experiment along similar lines to those adopted in Experiment 4. In order to give the birds a good start, all those used in Experiment 5 were fed on cereals plus milk from 0-6 weeks. The birds were all weighed individually at six weeks and divided into two comparable groups. From 6-20 weeks one group was fed on the cereal ration plus separated milk and water in separate containers and the other group on the cereals plus ground soya beans plus salt. Stock.A. J. MACDONALD 233 TABLE XXI Average weights in ounces for each breed Breed White Leghorn Rhode Island Red Desi Group No. 9 10 9 10 9 10 Sex Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female 6 weeks 11.8 10.3 11.7 10.1 12.3 8.7 12.3 9.0 7.9 7.2 7.7 7.2 8 234 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens TABLE XXII Food consumption Period Average food consump- tion per bird (lb.) Food consumption in lb. per pound live weight gain Group 9 Group 10 Group 9 Group 10 2. 6-8 weeks 1.37 1.12 4.55 5.85 3. 8-12 A. J. MACDONALD 235 Conclusions.236 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens in Experiment 1 to a maximum of 9. 4 per cent in Experiment 3, is very satis- factory. The majority of the deaths occurred in period 1 (0-4 weeks) and these were mainly amongst weaklings due to errors in incubation or constitu- tional defects. The food consumption and food utilization figures also com- pare favourably with published figures [Card and Kirkpatrick, 1918 ; Charles and Knandel, 1928 ; Kempster and Parker, 1936]. The results obtained in Experiment 2 show that it is advisable to feed milk only to drink instead of milk and water during the early stages of growth. During the early stages the group fed on milk and water to drink from day-old onward grew more slowly, had an appreciably higher mortality and consumed more food per unit of gain than the milk supplemented group. Though the milk and water group from day-old onward grew faster during the later stages, when both groups were fed on the same diet, than the birds fed on milk only to drink during the early stages, the birds were lower in weight at all stages and took longer to come into production. Further, the feeding of milk and water from day-old onward did not result in any saving in milk, for over the whole experiment the birds consumed more milk than the group receiving milk only to drink from 0-6 weeks. In Experiment 3, the basal ration supplemented with ground soya bean meal and salt did not give as good results as the milk ration and the birds on the soya bean meal were significantly lighter at all stages from 4 weeks onwards. During the first 8 weeks the birds on the soya bean ration had a much poorer health record, a higher mortality rate and made poorer utilization of the food consumed. From 8 weeks onwards the food utilization figures in the soya bean meal group were very similar to those obtained in the milk group. The im- proved health record and the low mortality rate in the soya bean meal group during the later stages of growth suggested that soya bean meal might be used more successfully if the birds were fed initially on a milk diet and fed soya bean meal during the later stages. In Experiments 4 and 5, all the birds were reared on the basal ration plus milk to drink from 0-6 weeks. From 6 weeks onwards, half the birds in each group were fed the basal ration plus separated milk and water to drink and the other half the soya bean meal plus salt ration. In both the experiments, the rate of growth of the birds on the soya bean ration was significantly lower than that of the birds on the milk and water ration. The efficiency of food uti- lization was lowered and egg production retarded in the soya bean groups. However, the health record was comparatively good and the mortality, though slightly higher than that of the milk group, was low. The better results obtained with milk cannot be attributed to a higher protein level, for in Experiment 3 in periods 1, 2B, 3 and 4 the percentages of protein consumed by the soya bean meal group were higher than during the corresponding periods in the milk group. Similarly, in Experiments 4 and 5, the soya bean meal groups in certain periods consumed approximately the same percentages of protein as the milk groups. The good growth results obtained with milk cannot be attributed solely to the excellence of its proteins, for milk also contains other valuable growth- promoting factors such as vitamins and minerals. Similarly, the poorer rowth results obtained with soya bean meal cannot be attributed solely tog
A. J. MACDONALD 237 the poor quality of its proteins, for it is very possible that accessory food fac- tors, such as vitamin B2, might have been at a sub-optimum level for growth. Further, as experiments at Illinois [Lippincott, 1936] have demonstrated that extracted soya bean meal gives better results than ground soya bean meal and, as it is well established that chicks make poor utilization of rations containing considerable amounts of fat, it is probable that the level of fat in the ground soya beans may have had a depressing effect on the rate of growth. As the unpublished data obtained from previous experiments carried out by the author at the Rowett Research Institute, Aberdeen, had shown that extracted soya bean meal supplemented by salt gave results somewhat similar to those obtained with separated milk, it is possible that better results might be ob- tained by using soya beans that have been subjected to a suitable process of oil extraction. Hayward and his co-workers [1937] found that extracted soya bean meal subjected to heat gives much better results than unheated soya bean meal. As separated milk is often an expensive article of diet, it is pro- posed to investigate these factors more fully in a further series of experi- ments. Though separated milk was the sole milk product used, experiments by other workers [Card, 1926 ; Kempster and Parker, 1936 ; Swift, Black and Voris, 1931] demonstrate that whole milk, separated milk, buttermilk, dried skim milk and dried buttermilk have approximately the same nutritive value, when fed at similar protein levels. The results with soya bean meal supplements, though not so satisfactory as those with milk, should not preclude the use of soya bean meal when milk is difficult to obtain or very expensive, for additions of soya bean meal and salt very materially improve the nutritive value of cereal rations. However, from the results obtained in Experiments 3, 4 and 5 it appears advisable to give milk during the early stages of growth. The optimum protein levels in the ration of growing chicks have been investigated by a number of workers. Heuser and Norris [1930] conclude that chick rations should contain at least 20 per cent protein. Swift and his co-workers [1931] state that the best growth results are obtained with rations containing over 20 per cent protein. Hammond and his co-workers [1938] conclude that optimum growth in young chickens is obtained by feeding ra- tions containing 21 per cent protein. In all the 5 experiments under review, where milk was used as the sole protein-rich food, the rate of growth of the Leghorns and Rhode Island Reds compares favourably with standard figures, even though the protein levels at all periods were very much lower than 20 per cent. The percentages of protein consumed by the different groups show a considerable similarity, the consumption being high from 0-8 weeks, low from 8-16 weeks and high from 16-24 weeks. In Groups 4 and 5, however, the protein consumption remained fairly steady throughout. This was pro- bably due to the fact that the milk turned sour in the feeding vessels and was consequently more readily consumed than sweet milk. The average protein percentage figures in the food consumed for all 5 milk groups were.238 Nutritional Experiments with Chickens might have been obtained with higher protein levels, the results obtained as regards rate of growth, food utilization, general health and mortality were satisfactory. The data collected suggest that the protein requirements for growth, when milk is used as the protein supplement, are considerably lower than the accepted standards. GENERAL CONCLUSIONS (1) The feeding of chicks on a mixed cereal diet, although supplemented with liberal amounts of green food and calcium, results in very poor growth, excessive mortality and poor food utilization. (2) A ration containing liberal amounts of wheat bran and green food failed to prevent the occurrence of gizzard lesions, which appeared typical of those produced by diets deficient in the gizzard factor. (3) During the early stages of growth (up to 6 weeks), a ration of cereals supplemented by liberal amounts of green food and calcium along with separat- ed milk to drink proved adequate. (4) During the early stages of growth the feeding of milk and water in separate containers gave substantially poorer results than when milk alone was provided as a drink. (5) From 6 weeks onwards, the feeding of milk and water in separate containers gave satisfactory results as regards growth etc. and resulted in a considerable saving in cost. (6) The nutritive value of cereal rations is greatly improved by a supple- ment of soya bean meal plus salt. (7) Soya bean meal plus salt proved inferior to milk as a supplementary feed for chicks up to 6 weeks of age and to milk and water from 6 weeks on- wards. (8) The feeding of cereals plus separated milk to drink from 0-6 weeks and cereals plus soya bean meal and salt from 6 weeks onwards gives better results than cereals plus soya bean meal and salt from day-old onward. If no milk is available for chicks less than 6 weeks old, soya bean meal and salt can be used with fair success. (9) The protein requirements for young chicks during early life are con- siderably lower than the accepted standard of 20 per cent when the protein supplement is provided in the form of milk. REFERENCES Almquist, H. J. and Stockstad, E. L. R. (1937). J. Nutr. 13, 339 Card, L. E. and Kirkpatrick, W. F. (1918). Storrs. Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 96 Card, L. E. (1926). Poult. Sci. 5, 199 Charles, T. B. and Knandel, H. C. (1928). Pa. Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 218 Hammond, J. C., Hendricks, W. A. and Titus, H. W. (1938). J. Agri. Res. 56, 791 Hayward, H. J., Haplin, J. G., Holmes, C. E., Bukstedt, G. and Hart, E. B. (1937). Poult. Sci. 16, 3 Heuser, G. F. and Norris, F. C. (1930). Fourth World's Poult. Cong. Rept. Proc., 307. Kempster, H. L. and Parker, J. E. (1936). Missouri Agri. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 247 Lippincott, W. A. (1936). Poultry Production 5th Edn. 411 Macdonald, A. J. Unpublished data. Rowett Research Institute, Aberdeen. Swift, R. W., Black, A. and Voris, L. (1931). Poult. Sci. 10, 288 Upp, C. W. and Thompson R. B. (1927). Oklahoma Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 167
OBSERVATIONS ON BABESIA FOLIATA N. SP. FROM A SHEEP* BY H. N. RAY, M.Sc., PH.D. (LOND.) AND K. RAGHAVACHARI, G.M.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 3 March 1941) (With Plate XVIII) PIROPLASMOSIS is a very wide-spread disease of sheep and goats from which India is by no means free. Wenyon [1926] recognises three species of Babesia infecting sheep and goats, of which two, viz. Babesia sergenti and Babesia motasi, are the only ones recorded in this country. Babesia sergenti was encountered for the first time in India in the blood of a goat under rinder- pest experiment at the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar [1932], while Achar and Srikantiah [1934] have, under similar experimental con- ditions, observed the occurrence of Babesia motasi in the blood of sheep in Mysore. Sarwar [1935] described Piroplasma taylori from a goat in the Punjab. This organism was originally considered by Bhatia [1936] to belong to the genus Theileria but subsequently, after having examined the preparations of Sarwar, he [Bhatia, 1938] concluded it to belong to the genus Babesia. During the course of routine examination of blood smears of animals of this Institute the writers found a species of Babesia in the erythrocytes of a sheep which was being used in an experimental test with blackquarter vaccine. When compared with other ovine species of Babesia, this parasite was found to differ from them in many respects. In this article, therefore, it is described as Babesia foliata n. sp., the specific name being suggested by its general appearance, which is similar to that of a leaf. OBSERVATIONS ON THE MORPHOLOGY OF BABESIA FOLIATA N. SP. The parasite, as mentioned above, has a leaf-shaped outline. The broad pole is rounded and is the widest part of the parasite. The same breadth is maintained for about two-thirds of the length while the superior third gradually tapers into a fine point (Plate XVIII, figs. 1 and 12). The majority of the para- sites occur in pairs, there being a cytoplasmic connection between the pairs at the narrow pole, and usually they occupy the centre of the erythrocyte. Out of a small count of a hundred and twenty parasitised corpuscles, it was found that the organism was placed centrally in 82.5 per cent and *Paper presented to the 26th session of the Indian Science Congress held at Lahore 1939. 239
240 Observations on Babesia foliata n. sp. from a Sheep peripherally in 17 . 5 per cent of the infected cells. The distribution of the angle between the pairs is indicated in Table I. TABLE I Angle Position of the parasite in the erythrocyte Central Peripheral per cent per cent 180° 31 10 Obtuse 25 40 90° 29 30 Acute 9 20 Parallel 6 Nil In cases where the parasites were found to be situated parallel to each other, no cytoplasmic connection between the pairs could be seen at the narrow pole. Occasionally, when forming an obtuse angle the parasites were so far away from each other that this cytoplasmic connection was very faint. Cells con- taining a single parasite were rarely seen in our preparations. Such rare forms were chiefly amoeboid in shape and showed signs of nuclear division. The stages of division of this parasite did not appear to differ in any way from those of B. bigemina described by Nuttall and Graham-Smith [1908], for which reason it has been considered unnecessary to describe them here. In amoeboid forms, as well as in the paired individuals, a vacuole was often seen occupying a cent- ral position. The size of the parasite varied from 2 . 065-4. 13Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part III ] PLATE XVIII Babesia foliata n. sp. [ All figures are camera lucida drawings of smears preparations stained with Giemsa (unless otherwise stated). × 2300 ] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIGS. 1-3. Pairs showing typical leaf-like outline of the parasite. FIGS. 4-7. One individual in the pair presenting an edge-on view. FIG. 8. Individuals of a pair situated at an angle of 180°. FIG. 9. A single parasite which appears to have just entered a corpuscle. FIG. 10. Parasites about to leave the corpuscles. FIG. 11. From wet smear fixed in Bouin and Duboscq fluid and stained with Feulgen and counter- stained with light-green. Note the arrangement of chromatin in the nucleus at the narrow pole and the hydrolysed vacuolated area at the broad pole of the parasite. FIG. 12. Fixed as above and stained with Feulgen and counterstained with Heidenhain's iron- alum-haematoxylin. Note the hydrolysed area which has taken a deep haematoxylin stain. N.B.H. N. RAY 241 Starcovici [1893], this parasite differed by occurring almost always in pairs, producing a heavier infection, and also in its location in the majority of cases in the centre of the cell. The parasite also differs from B. taylori Sarwar [1935] in the absence of extra-cellular multiplication, its ovoid and rounded body, the hypertrophy of the infected corpuscle, and multiple infection of the cell. There would appear to be no similarity between this parasite and Babesia sergenti Wenyon [1926], as the latter is rounded or bacillary in form and is non-pathogenic. Moreover, according to Thomson and Hall [1933], B. sergenti is placed under the genus Theileria. The accompanying table compares the species of Babesia recorded from sheep and goats in respect of their shape and size, the angle between the pairs, their position in the corpuscle and the effect on the parasitised erythrocyte. TABLE II Comparisons of the species of Babesia from sheep and goats Characters B. motasi Wenyon (1926) B. ovis Starcovici (1893) B. sergenti Wenyon (1926) B. taylori Sarwar (1935) B. foliata n. sp. Shape . . Pear-shaped, singles, and pairs Pear-shaped forms rarely seen. Singles majority round Round and bacil- lary Mostly ovoid and round; pear- shaped forms rarely seen. 1 to 16 parasites seen in one cell Flattened, leaf- shaped in out- line. Mostly in pairs. Rarely more than one pair seen in one cell Size in microns . 2.5-4.5×1.2- 3.0 Never exceeds 2.0 ? 2.0×1.0 2.065-4.13×0.1 -1.5 Angle between the pairs Acute Obtuse ? ? Majority obtuse Position in the red blood cor- puscles Centre Margin Centre (?) . When singles, central Majority centre Effect on the parasitised cor- puscle Hypertrophy No change No change (?) . Hypertrophy No change Host Sheep and goats Goats Sheep and goats Goats. Sheep SYMPTOMS OBSERVED IN THE HOST The infection in the sheep referred to above was heavy and was accom- panied by a rise of the temperature ranging between 102.4-104.4°F. The general condition deteriorated daily. No haemoglobinuria was detected by applying the Benzidine test to the urine. Microscopically, there were con- siderable anaemic changes, which consisted of marked anisocytesis, slight polychromatia and marked increase in the punctate basophils. The red blood corpuscles towards the latter part of the disease showed an increase in the central halo and ultimately only the margins of the corpuscles were stained.
242 Observations on Babesia foliata n. sp. from a Sheep TRANSMISSION The transmission of the disease was successfully carried out by direct intravenous inoculation of blood from the natural case into two experimental sheep. Goats were also inoculated with the infected blood but they failed to react. The parasites were later found in the blood of the two sheep. In one, the parasite was seen on the third and fifth days, and in the other on the fourth and twenty-first days, after inoculation of infected blood. With the appearance of the parasite in the peripheral circulation the animals showed thermal reactions. These sheep also showed in their blood anaemic changes similar to those observed in the natural case. Subsequently, these changes disappeared and the animals recovered without the intervention of any drug. DIAGNOSIS Systematic position. Babesia foliata n. sp. (Haemosporidiida, Babesiidae). Description.EXPERIMENTAL INFESTATION WITH FISCHOEDERIUS ELONGATUS IN A CALF AT MADRAS BY S.N. VAIDYANATHAN, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Helminthology Research Section, Madras Veterinary College, Madras (Received for publication on 12 April 1941) RAO and Ayyar [ 1932 ] have determined by infection experiments carried out in Madras that Cercariae Indicae XXIX Sewell, 1922 is the larval stage and the snail Limnea leuteola (Lamarck) an intermediate host, of the amphistome Fischoederius elongatus. An experiment was therefore per- formed to confirm these findings, as well as to find the clinical significance in an infection. Cercariae Indicae XXIX Sewell, 1922 discharged by the snail Limnea leuteola (Lamarck) were allowed to encyst on blades of grass and a total of 250 encysted cercariae, collected within a week, were fed on the 7th April 1940 to a heifer calf aged about a year and three months. The calf used for the experiment was under observation for seven-and-a-half months prior to the date of infection and it was kept during the whole period in experimental sheds of the College Laboratory under conditions designed to prevent extra- neous parasitic infection. Previous infection with any amphistomes was ruled out by a daily examination of the dung which was negative for their ova. The calf was destroyed on the 14th June 1940, nine weeks after the date of infection. At post-mortem ninety adult Fischoederius elongatus were collected from the wall of the rumen. In this infection, producing 36 per cent adult amphistomes out of 250 encysted cercariae fed, during the development of the parasite within the host, there was no systemic disturbance met with. The temperature ranged from 100°F. to 102°F. touching 102°F. for only a couple of days. The dung was normal and the appetite good throughout. Though faecal examination made every day prior to destruction revealed no ova of amphis- tomes, eggs were detected mixed up with the contents of the rumen at post- mortem. It may, therefore, be said that eggs are discharged by these am- phistomes by the ninth week after infection. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The author is indebted to Rao Sahib M. Anant Narayan Rao, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, for guidance and help generously given during the conduct of the experiment. REFERENCES Rao, M. A. and Ayyar, L. S. P. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 2, 402 Sewell, R. B. S. (1922). Ind. J. Med. Res. Suppl. No. 3 243
A STUDY ON GOAT SPLEEN TISSUE VACCINE AS AN IMMUNIZING AGENT AGAINST RINDERPEST BY K. S. NAIR, G.B.V.C., M.R.C.V.S., D.T.V.M. Superintendent R. KRISHNAMURTI, G.M.V.C. AND G. S. KALYANASUNDARAM, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Assistant Surgeons, Serum Institute, Madras (Received for publication on 24 January 1941) (with one text-figure) INTRODUCTION THE preparation of a single, safe and cheap product for the effective immunization of cattle and buffaloes against rinderpest has been engag- ing the attention of various workers for a long time past, and the use of goat spleen tissue preparations may be said to be the outcome of such work. Based on the results published by Kerr and Menon [1934] and Kerr [1935] on the use of goat spleen tissue for the control of the disease in Bengal, experiments were conducted at the Serum Institute, Madras, under laboratory conditions, with a view to study the adaptability of the same technique in the Madras province. METHOD OF REMOVAL OF SPLEEN Healthy young goats are injected with 5 c.c. of rinderpest goat blood virus, and killed at the height of thermal reaction usually on the 4th or 5th day. As the normal temperature of goats in Madras is about 100° F. a tem- perature of 103° F. and above in the morning is considered to be a satisfactory reaction. The goat is bled for virus and the abdomen is then shaved and dis- infected and the spleen removed under aseptic precautions. EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED AT THE INSTITUTE Spleen taken from goat No. 856 of the 300th passage of goat virus, Muk- teswar strain (Fig. 1), was used. The spleen was cut into pieces weighing ap- proximately one gramme each and put into small sterile test-tubes which were then sealed with cotton plugs dipped in boiling paraffin. The tubes were then packed in a case with damp cotton wool, and kept at room temperature which ranged from 83 . 8° to 86° F. (The temperature of the tube was less by nearly 3.5° F. than the temperature of the room and this difference in temperature was noticed for 10 days after which the temperature of the tube equalled the temperature of the room, since all the moisture had evaporated from the damp cotton wool by that time.) 244
K. S. NAIR, R. KRISHNAMURTI AND G. S. KALYANASUNDARAM 245 TEMPERATURE CHART [NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted 246 Goat Spleen Tissue Vaccine as an Immunizing Agent DETAILS OF REACTIONS Forty-four buffalo-calves were used in all, in this experiment. For pur- poses of classification of reactions, they might be grouped into two batches : First batch.K. S. NAIR, R. KRISHNAMURTI AND G. S. KALYANASUNDARAM 247 There was a mortality of 0.5 per cent in the cattle and 2.5 per cent in the buffaloes. 32 per cent of the cattle and 20 per cent of the buffaloes showed no reaction to vaccination. In some cases, anti-rinderpest serum had to be used to check the severity of reaction. IMMUNITY TEST Immunity tests with rinderpest bull virus were conducted on a few vaccinated animals in selected areas a few months after the original vaccina- tion and it was found that the immunity was solid. DISCUSSION It was found, both from experiments conducted in the laboratory and in the field, that the method of vaccination with an emulsion of one per cent strength of infected goat spleen, in normal saline, was not altogether satis- factory, as it produced severe reactions and even mortality in some cases. Though in Bengal very good results were reported with this method of vaccina- tion by Kerr & Menon [1934] and Kerr [1935], yet in this province the ex- perience was such that it was not possible to encourage this method. Many of the vaccinated animals had good reactions which were nearly as severe as those seen in goat blood virus alone method and quite alarming enough for the ryots. Many animals were reported to have lost their condition after vaccination, and in case of working animals which were put to work after vaccination, the reactions were found to be severe. It was also found necessary in some cases to give anti-rinderpest serum to modify the severity of reactions. In Bengal, this method was found to be efficient and safe to combat rinderpest outbreaks [Kerr & Menon, 1934], but later on, however, the experience as stated in the annual report of the Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal [1938- 39] was that this method had not only caused severe reactions which proved fatal, but there was evidence of the introduction of infection in apparently healthy herds leading to outbreaks of rinderpest. CONCLUSIONS Rinderpest goat spleen tissue is potent for four days when stored at room temperature ; the immunity conferred is satisfactory. The reaction set up in the susceptible buffalo-calves is severe, a mortality of 20 per cent being observed in the calves when infected with potent goat spleen. The application of this method of vaccination without serum in combating outbreaks of rinderpest is not suitable when the susceptibility of cattle and buffaloes is high, as it may produce reactions the nature of which sometimes creates panic among the ryots. SUMMARY Experiments were conducted at the Serum Institute, Madras, with saline emulsions of rinderpest goat spleen tissue stored at room temperature for varying periods. It was found that emulsion of fresh goat spleen tissue as
248 Goat Spleen Tissue Vaccine as an Immunizing Agent well as emulsions prepared from spleen tissue stored at room temperature for 1 to 4 days (strength of the emulsion being one per cent in 0. 5 per cent saline) produced uniformly severe rinderpest reactions in buffalo-calves, in doses of 1 c.c. and 0.5 c.c. and conferred immunity. Emulsions prepared from spleen tissue stored at room temperature for 5 to 10 days did not produce any reac- tion and had no antigenic value. The dose of either 0.5 c.c. or 1 c.c. made no appreciable difference in the severity of reactions produced or in the degree of immunity set up. The adoption of this method in the field to combat outbreaks of rinderpest was not found to be quite safe in the Madras province as the reactions set up after vaccination were rather severe. REFERENCES Ann. Rept. Civil Vet. Deptt. Bengal for 1938-39 Kerr, P. J. and Menon, M.B. (1934) Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 4, 75 Kerr, P. J. (1935) Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 5, 67
K. S. NAIR, R. KRISHNAMURTI AND G. S. KALYANASUNDARAM 249 Experiments with goat spleen tissue vaccine (one per cent emulsion in 0.5 per cent. saline) Serial No. Nature of the goat spleen tissue vaccine used Dose Number of calves used Reactions Reactions after retest with rinderpest bull virus Remarks 1 Fresh vaccine 1 c.c. 2 Severe; one died Nil One died after re- test due to ema- ciation Do. ½ c.c. 2 Severe; both died. ... 2 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for one day 1 c.c. 2 Severe; one died Nil One died after re- test due to ema- ciation Do. ½ c.c. 2 Severe; both died ... Do. 3 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for two days 1 c.c. 2 One moderately severe and one non-reactor Nil Do. ½ c.c. 2 One severe and one mild Nil 4 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for three days 1c.c. 2 One moderately severe and one non-reactor No reactions in one and severe in the non-reactor Do. ½ c.c. 2 Severe; one died Nil 5 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for four days 1c.c. 2 One severe and the other non- reactor No reactions in one and severe in the non-reac- tor which died Do. ½c.c. 2 Mild Nil 6 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for five days 1 c.c. 2 Nil Severe; both died Do. ½c.c. 2 Nil Severe; one died 7 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for six days 1 c.c. 2 Nil Severe; both died Do. ½c.c. 2 Nil Do. 8 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for seven days 1 c.c 2 Nil Severe Do. ½ c.c. 2 Nil Severe; one died 9 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for eight days 1 c.c. 2 Nil Mild in one and severe in the other which died Do. ½ c.c. 2 Nil Severe 10 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for nine days 1 c.c. 2 Nil in one and severe in the other* which died Severe *Probably this calf was in the incubative stage of the disease at the time of in- oculation Do. ½ c.c. 2 Nil Severe 11 Tissue kept in room tempera- ture for ten days 1 c.c. 2 Nil Severe and one died Do. ½ c.c. 2 Nil Severe and both died
BREEDING COLOURATION OF BARBUS (PUNTIUS) STIGMA (CUV. & VAL.)* BY H. K. MOOKERJEE, D. Sc. (LOND), D.I.C., F.N.I., S. R. MAZUMDAR, M.Sc. AND B. DAS GUPTA, M.Sc. Department of Zoology, Calcutta University (Received for publication on May 3, 1941) (With Plate XIX) BARBUS (PUNTIUS) STIGMA is a small Carp Minnow commonly found in ponds, pools and ditches of Bengal; it usually grows to a size of 2 to 3 inches, but according to Day [1878],' It attains at least 5 inches in length.' Day mentioned that' As food it is bitter'. We have, however, found that the flesh of the fish is not bitter, but as the gall-bladder is got rid of by external pressure at the time of preparation of the fish, sometimes a certain amount of bile remains inside and this makes the fish bitter. During the dry season it is caught by the poorer people in large quantities by inexpensive methods of fishing [Hora, 1933]. The fish can easily be reared in small aquaria, but owing to its dull colouration it has not found favour with aquarists. In the course of our investigations on the life-histories of the freshwater fishes of Bengal, we noticed that during the breeding season, which lasts from April to July, both sexes develop a characteristic band of carmine red colour along the lateral line. In the male it is well defined and of a deeper colour and extends to the end of the caudal fin, while in the female it is more or less diffuse and only extends up to the end of the caudal pedunc e. (Plate XIX). U ually the female develops this colouration only when fully ripe or immediate y before it is ready to lay eggs, while in the male the colour band is developed with the ripening of germ cells. The body of a mature female is proportionately deeper than that of the male. Day (loc. cit.) also noted that the species is marked ' with a scarlet lateral band at some seasons ', but evidently he did not realise its significance. In several species of Carp Minnows the males assume brilliant colour during the breeding season [Innes, 1935] and during these periods sexes can *Chaudhuri [1916] has shown that Barbus (Puntius) stigma (Cuv . & Val.) is a synonym of Barbus (Puntius) sophore Hamilton. In view of the fact that Hamilton [1822] found this fish ' very common in ponds ' of Bengal, we consider that Chaudhuri's views are probably correct, but as Day's Fishes of India and the volumes in his Fauna of British India series are still our standard works on Indian fishes we have retained the specific name stigma in Day's sense to facilitate reference. 250
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part III ] PLATE XIX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
H. K. MOOKERJEE, S. R. MAZUMDAR AND B. DAS GUPTA 251 be readily distinguished. The Indian species of Barbus in which this character has already been noticed are B. (Puntius) chola Ham., B. (Puntius) concho- nius Ham., B. (Puntius) gelius Ham. and B. (Puntius) terio Ham. Misra [1938] described the colouration of preserved specimens of the male and the female of B. (Puntius) malanampyx Day , while Hora and Misra [1938], in describing the secondary sexual characters of B. (Puntius) ticto Ham., referred to the differences in the colour of the preserved male and female specimens. Hora, Misra and Malik [1939] have also referred to the differences in the colouration of the male and female specimens of ticto and conchonius. REFERENCES Chaudhuri, B. L. (1916). Mem. Ind. Mus. 5, 436 Day, F. (1878). Fishes of India, pp. 579 (London) Hamilton, F. (1822). An account of the Fishes found in the River Ganges and its Branches p. 310 (Edinburgh) Hora, S. L. (1933). Journ. As. Soc. Bengal 28, 197 Hora, S. L. and Misra, K. S. (1938). J. Bomb. Nat. Hist. Soc. 40, 29 Hora, S. L., Misra, K. S. and Malik, G. M. (1939). Rec. Ind. Mus. 41, 267 Innes, W. T. (1935). Exotic Aquarium Fishes, pp. 187-202 (Philadelphia) Misra, K. S. (1938). Rec. Ind. Mus. 40, 259
SELECTED ARTICLES EXPERIMENTS ON THE ANTHELMINTIC ACTION OF PHENOTHIAZINE BY GEOFFREY LAPAGE, M.A., M.D., M.Sc. Institute of Animal Pathology, University of Cambridge (Reprinted from the Veterinary Record, Vol. 52, No. 36, September 7, 1940) THE experiments described below were begun in October 1939, and formed part of the field trials which, as Dr. Taylor explains elsewhere in this symposium, were instituted by the Agricultural Research Council. They were planned with the advice and practical assistance of Professor Dalling, F. Blakemore, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., F. Day, F.R.C.V.S., and J. A. J. Venn, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M. Professor Keilin, Director of the Molteno Institute, University of Cambridge, made the spectroscopic examinations of the blood of some of the horses. The egg and differential worm counts would not have been possible without the skilled help of H. E. Bowman. The phenothiazine used was supplied by the Agricultural Research Council and was therefore part of the stock which was also supplied to the other contributors to this sympo- sium. Most of the contributors judged the effect of phenothiazine by egg counts and periodical weighings of the animals treated and the writer also followed this practice, except that he did a series of egg counts before the dose was given and took the average, in every instance, between the counts done on two different portions of the same sample of faeces, these two counts being done by different observers. These two counts on the same sample of faeces often differed very considerably, so that the precaution of taking the average of two was amply justified. It was unfortunately not possible to supplement the egg counts and weighings with autopsies, histological examinations of organs removed, especially of the kidney and the liver and by examinations of the blood (although the blood of some of the horses was examined), but these further examinations are being done on animals being used for additional expe- riments now in progress. The object of these additional experiments is to gather further information about (1) the relative efficiencies of copper sulphate alone, copper sulphate and nicotine, phenothiazine suspended in liquid, and tablets of phenothiazine ; (2) the effect of phenothiazine on the host; (3) the greater or less effect of phenothiazine on particular species of nematodes. There is some evidence in the literature and in private communications to the writer, which suggests that phenothiazine acts most powerfully on nematodes living in the abomasum and in the lower parts of the bowel, and that it has less effect on nematodes living in the duodenum and the upper part of the small intestine. This evidence is not in any way conclusive, but it seems to the writer that this question should be investigated further. The study of it could well be combined with a study of (4) the effects, if any, of the environ- ment of intestinal nematodes on phenothiazine and (5) the mode of action of phenothiazine, about which we know nothing at all. Taylor records in this 252
GEOFFREY LAPAGE 253 symposium that phenothiazine, in amounts far too small to have any anthel- mintic action in a host animal, will inhibit the development of eggs and early larvae, although they do not affect the infective larvae. Such in vitro observa- tions suggest a direct action of the drug. On the other hand, there is evidence which suggests that the action of phenothiazine is more pronounced in rumi- nant hosts, in which the drug has to pass through the rumen and other oesopha- geal chambers of these animals, than it is in omnivorous hosts such as the pig and the dog. It is possible that the intestinal contents of ruminants allow the drug freer access to the nematodes than the pastier faeces of omnivora do, but other factors probably operate as well. Swanson, Harwood and Connelly (1940) (J. Amer. vet. med. Ass. 96. 333-338) found that phenothiazine was as effective as oil of chenopodium for the removal of ascarids from mature pigs and suggest that the ascaricidal principle of phenothiazine may be " activated by the substances excreted by those worms." They thought it was more effective when the infestations were heavy than when they were lighter. On the other hand, Singer and Baker (1940) (Cornell Vet. 30. 375-382) found that phenothiazine was more effective against lighter nematode infestations of sheep than against heavier ones. Observations like these do, nevertheless, justify the question, which is also raised by other points in the literature : Is pheno- thiazine inactive as an anthelmintic until it is chemically changed in the gut, so that its action is greater on species living in the lower part of the alimentary canal ? There is urgent need for the investigation of this and collateral ques- tions. Associated with them is the problem of why it is necessary, as all workers agree that it is, to give so much phenothiazine, in order to produce an adequate anthelmintic effect, that a great deal of it is passed out again in the faeces apparently unchanged. This is a waste that might be avoided if we knew how phenothiazine acts on a nematode ; we might then be able to use a modified form of it, or a derivative of it, which would be more potent and per- haps effective for all nematodes. TECHNIQUE.254 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine Swanson, Harwood and Connelly (1940) (J. Amer. vet. med. Ass. 96. 333-338) who studied the action of phenothiazine on Ascaris in pigs, used two kinds of phenothiazine, namely, " conditioned " phenothiazine, containing a dispersal agent to render it suitable for use as an insecticidal spray and " recrystallised " phenothiazine, which was more effective than the " condi- tioned " product. The writer is informed by Imperial Chemical Industries, who supplied to the Agricultural Research Council the phenothiazine used by the writer, that their phenothiazine, being a distilled product, can be regarded as being as pure as the recrystallised product used by Swanson, Harwood and Connelly. SHEEP AND LAMBS 1.GEOFFREY LAPAGE 255 exception of a negative egg count on the day after the last of these three doses, no lasting effect on the egg count was noted. No further doses were therefore given. The egg counts remained at a mean of 100 for a further 14 days after the last dose, when the egg counts were discontinued. The animal was however, kept in the box with the Unmarked Lamb until 8-4-40. On 7-4-40 and 8-4-40 its egg count was 0 and 100 respectively. The history of the Unmarked Lamb was similar. After the initial dose of 0.27 gramme per lb. body weight (24 grammes) its egg count dropped from a mean of 3,850 e.p.g. to a mean of 550 e.p.g. It remained slightly higher than that of the Marked Lamb. On 6-1-40, 57 days after the initial dose, an attempt to remove its remaining worms was made by giving it in water as a drench 9 grammes of phenothiazine powder. Two days after this dose the egg count had dropped from a mean of 500 e.p.g. to 0. The next day (9-1-40) it had risen again to 50 e.p.g. and remained at this level till 15-1-40, when it was 200 e.p.g. On 17-1-40 it was 350 e.p.g. On 19-1-40 and 20-1-40 two successive doses of 9 grammes each were given in the form of the 1 gramme tablets in gelatine capsules. The day after the second of these doses the egg count was 0 and it remained so until 25-1-40. On this date and on 26-1-40, two further doses of 9 grammes of the same tablets were given and the egg count remained at 0 until 31-4-40, when it was 100. On 31-1-40 and 1-2-40 and 2-2-40, three successive doses of 9 grammes each of the same tablets were given. From 3-2-40 to 7-2-40 the egg count remained at 0, but was at 100 e.p.g. on 7-2-40. It remained at this level until 16-2-40 when the egg counts were dis- continued until 8-4-40 when the count was 0 again, although this lamb had been in the same box with the Marked Lamb, which still had an egg count of 50 to 100 e. p.g. The undosed ewe had a mean egg count on the first three days of the experi- ment of 1,350, 2,700 and 1,800 respectively, but by the fifth day it had fallen, without dosing, to 600 and thereafter fluctuated between 400 and 800 e.p.g. until 7-12-39, when it was killed off by mistake. It did not therefore provide a very satisfactory control. The fall in its egg count without dosing is, however, a point to be noted, because this frequently happens in all kinds of animals and must be considered when the egg count is used as a criterion of the effect of any anthelmintic. The conclusion drawn from this experiment was that a dose of about 0 . 3 gramme per lb. body weight removed most of the worms of a light infes- tation, but that a few remained, which it was difficult to remove with phenothiazine, perhaps because the animals were confined in a box and probably self-and cross-infestation were occurring all the time. Animals in the field would be subject to much heavier infestations after dosing, so that it would be even more difficult, if not impossible, to reduce their egg counts to 0 and to maintain it so. The reduction of the egg counts to 0 for three or four days was not regarded as significant, because egg counts are notoriously fallible as evidence of the degree of an infestation. In any event, the failure to pro- duce a negative egg count over long periods may carry with it the advantage that the retention of some worms by an animal helps to maintain its resistance to further infestation. On the other hand, Gordon (1939) (Austral. Vet. J. 15. 118-120) has pointed out that in a sheep harbouring, say 8,000 Haemonchus
256 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine contortus, half of which may be females each producing 5,000 eggs per 24 hours, a 90 per cent. reduction of the worm burden still leaves 800 worms, 400 of which can be calculated as being females, so that this sheep will still be voiding 2,000,000 eggs in 24 hoursGEOFFREY LAPAGE 257 No. Initial Weight 24-5-40 Before Dose of 5 Grammes Phenothiazine Weight 3-6-40 Weight 13-6-40 Weight 24-6-40 3 52 60 70 82 4 *53 57 62 71 5 64 70 65 85 6 65 74 73 86 7 63 74 80 86 8 31 34 38 46 9 *60 67 69 77 10 49 56 62 65 11 60 66 72 80 12 57 68 69 79 13 *53 64 71 81 14 68 76 82 90 15 48 56 60 65 16 67 76 83 88 17 *46 58 62 70 18 46 54 60 66 19 40 46 53 58 20 (22) 24 22 22 21 58 71 74 77 22 27 36 40 47 23 *48 58 64 71 24 52 60 66 71 25 66 76 84 87 26 *57 64 72 82 27 (32) 37 38 44 28 64 68 74 76 29 53 60 65 69 30 63 69 74 77 31 63 70 73 80 32 73 82 90 94 33 73 81 84 85 34 54 64 72 77 35 *57 68 75 69 36 58 63 72 82 37 63 76 82 87 38 55 60 66 71 39 45 53 58 61 40 59 66 72 76 41 48 56 60 64 42 60 70 74 82 43 55 64 70 74 44 45 58 66 73 45 51 58 64 71 46 55 62 64 70 47 47 57 56 70 48 55 68 73 79 49 50 60 66 70 50 58 68 64 73
258 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine Group 2. Nos. 51-100. Weights stated in lb. Avoirdupois No. Initial Weight Before Dose of 2 oz. of 1 per cent. Copper Sulphate Weight 3-6-40 Weight 13-6-40 Weight 24-6-40 51 58 66 75 82 52 77 93 95 100 53 57 70 76 85 54 53 60 66 75 55 51 56 52 54 56 50 54 56 64 57 37 44 52 58 58 51 58 62 65 59 *53 63 68 76 60 42 50 55 65 61 63 64 70 77 62 70 84 90 91 63 53 58 60 70 64 22 28 30 36 65 50 54 60 64 66 66 72 79 84 67 76 85 92 101 68 50 56 66 73 69 13 16 18 20 70 *64 76 78 89 71 51 62 65 72 72 46 50 57 61 73 *45 55 63 70 74 53 64 76 82 75 49 58 63 65 76 50 57 62 66 77 66 78 85 90 78 57 64 73 78 79 53 60 61 64 80 58 66 64 70 81 54 63 66 76 82 63 70 80 87 83 30 34 38 40 84 60 70 70 74 85 60 71 78 89 86 *44 50 59 68 87 *50 58 66 72 88 *50 58 65 71 89 59 67 64 80 90 73 86 90 96 91 52 60 67 73 92 56 66 73 82 93 51 56 64 67 94 71 80 90 92 95 50 60 68 76 96 61 70 76 87 97 54 60 60 63 98 54 60 64 64 99 76 88 96 100 100 56 64 68 73
GEOFFREY LAPAGE 259 TABLE II Total weights in lb. Avoirdupois Group 1. Nos. 1-50. Given 5 Grammes Phenothiazine. Group 2. Nos. 51-100. Given 2 oz. of 1 per cent. Copper Sulphate. Total Weight. Increase. Eggs per Gramme Average of 2 Counts. Total Weight. Increase. Eggs per Gramme Average of 2 Counts. 24-5-40 2,693 1,050 2,708 2,150 3-6-40 3,107 414 Average 8 .3 150 3,012 304 Average 6.08 400 13-6-40 3,440 333 Average 6.6 50 3,369 357 Average 7.1 3C0 24-6-40 3,642 302 Average 6.04 100 3,677 308 Average 6.1 250 It will be seen that the weight increases of individual lambs differed con- siderably, and that some of the animals at times lost a few pounds in the inter- vals of ten days. The main fact emerging from the experiment is that there was no significant difference in the progress of the weight increase in the two groups. The slight advantage on the 20th day in favour of the group given copper sulphate and its disappearance by the 30th day should be noted here, in view of the results of the next two experiments. It could be argued that the dose of phenothiazine that was given was small, a normal therapeutic dose being 10 to 30 grammes. Yet the egg count of Group 1 was reduced by this small dose in about the same proportion as the reduction of the higher egg count of Group 2 by copper sulphate. It could equally well be argued that, in spite of the higher egg count of Group 2, about twice as high as that of Group 1, the copper sulphate enabled this group to maintain a weight increase equiva- lent to that of Group 1 given a small dose of phenothiazine. The experiment does not tell us whether, if the dose of phenothiazine had been higher, Group 1 would have shown a markedly greater increase of weight than that attained by Group 2. Another experiment, now in progress, may help to answer this question. Meanwhile, this experiment shows that even 5 grammes of pheno- thiazine has a significant effect on a comparatively heavy infestation with Haemonchus, Ostertagia and Nematodirus. It has been suggested [Singer and Baker. (1940.) Cornell Vet. 30. 375-382 and others] that Nematodirus is one of the nematodes (Trichuris and Ancylos- toma deudenale may be others) which are comparatively little affected by pheno- thiazine, but the writer has as yet seen no evidence in favour of this view. B. Experiment A was repeated on a group of ewes and lambs belonging to this Institute, but the egg counts on the composite faecal samples taken before dosing were low, so that little information was expected from this experiment about the relative efficiencies of phenothiazine and copper sulphate. Further, accidental obliteration of some of the markings prevented the keeping of an accurate record of the weight of individual animals. The two groups A and B were kept separate, grazing on different fields about a mile apart. The following table (see next page) gives the relevant data about these animals. It shows that the weight increase during the 23 days following the
260 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine dose was small. Some animals, like some of those in experiment A, lost a few pounds. Both copper sulphate and phenothiazine reduced the egg count of the ewes to 0, while the egg counts of the lambs were not appreciably affected by either anthelmintic. It will be seen that in this experiment, unsatisfactory though it was, there was, 23 days after the dose, a slight advantage in weight increase in favour of the group given copper sulphate. In experiment A there was a similar advant- age, 20 days after the dose, in favour of the group given copper sulphate. By the 30th day this had disappeared. In the experiment next to be described, the group given phenothiazine attained, by the 30th day, a total weight approaching twice that attained by the group given copper sulphate and nicotine. C. One hundred lambs, three to four months old, were included in this experiment. On 5-7-40 one lamb of this flock had been sent to the Institute for post-mortem examination. A worm count done on it showed 2,100 Oster- tagia in the abomasum and 50,000 or more Nematodirus in the small intestine. Egg counts on the contents of the colon and rectum showed 13,800 eggs of Nematodirus per gramme and 3,500 eggs per gramme of other nematodes, presumably Ostertagia. TABLE III Total Weight Before Dose on 27-5-40. Composite Egg Count Before Dose on 27-5-40. Total Weight on 20-6-40 (23 days later). Composite Egg Count on 20-6-40 (23 days later). Total Gain. Growp A. Given Copper Sulphate (10 to 15 c.c. of 5 per cent. solution according to body weight) Ewes 2,092 lb. 350 e.p.g. 2,186 lb. 0 e.p.g. 94 lb. Average 1.9 Lambs 875 GEOFFREY LAPAGE 261 difference of 4 to 6 lb. in the weight of each animal according to whether it stood at one or other end of the platform of the machine, while an intermediate weight was recorded when it stood in the middle of the platform. This possible error was reduced to a possible error of 2 lb. or so per lamb by inducing each lamb to stand at the same end of the platform while its weight was being recorded. This experience showed that it is possible to introduce a consider- able error into any experiment involving the use of a weighbridge, unless the position of the animal on the platform of the machine is always the same. Another possible source of error in the weights is the normal variation in the weight of each animal before or after a feed or access to water ; they should always be weighed at the same time in the day. Further, when faecal samples are being taken from each lamb, it is inevitable that different amounts of faeces will be taken from each, either because the finger cannot take equal amounts from each, or because the second 50 lambs in a group of 100 will have been waiting longer and will often have emptied the rectum before the sample is taken or because the faeces of some are looser than those of others, so that the finger removes less and there are relatively fewer eggs in the amount of solid removed. When, therefore, all the samples are mixed to form a composite sample on which an egg count is made, it may occur that the egg count is really done mostly on the faeces of the first 50 of the group and mostly on the best- formed faeces of these. It may therefore not represent the average egg content of the faeces of individual lambs. On the 10th, 20th and 30th days after the doses were given, the lambs were again weighed and faecal samples were taken. Throughout the experi- ment the lambs were grazing on grass with the rest of the flock and had no extra feed. The following table gives the relevant facts about them. TABLE IV Group 1. Given 5 Grammes Phenothiazine in Tablet Form. Group 2. Given 5 to 8 c.c. of a Solution Containing 10 per cent, of CuSO4 and 10 per cent. of a Solution Con- taining 40 per cent. Nicotine Sulphate. Total Weight. Increase. Eggs per Gramme Average of 2 Counts. Total Weight. Increase. Eggs per Gramme Average per 2 Counts. 26-6-40 2,898 (before the dose) 650 3,162 400 5-7-40 3,367 469 Average 9.38 200 3,837 675 Average 13.5 550 15-5-40 3,200 Loss 167 Average 3.3 200 3,464 Loss 373 Average 7.46 400 26-5-40 4,208 Increase 1,008 Average 20.16 350 3,980 Increase 516 Average 10.3 400 Total gain in 30 days 1,310. Average 26.2 Total gain in 30 days 818. Average 16.3 No satisfactory explanation was found of the considerable loss of weight during the second ten days in both groups but especially in Group 2. It may
262 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine have been partly an apparent loss due to the fact that the lambs were weighed on the first two occasions in the morning and on the second two occasions in the afternoon and that in the afternoon they may have been emptier of grass and water and therefore weighed lighter than they would have done in the morning. But this could hardly have accounted for the whole of the loss of weight record- ed, nor for the fact that the loss was twice as much in the group given copper and nicotine. The main fact emerging from this experiment is, nevertheless, that the total gain of weight in 30 days attained by the group given pheno- thiazine was substantially greater (approaching twice as much) than that of the group given copper sulphate and nicotine. This happened in spite of the fact that only a small dose of phenothiazine was given, namely 5 grammes, whereas 10 to 30 grammes is a normal therapeutic dose. This experiment showed, therefore, that, although at the end of the first ten days the group given copper and nicotine (like the groups given copper sulphate only in experiments A and B) had gained more weight than the group given phenothiazine, by the end of 30 days the group given phenothiazine had done considerably better than the group given copper and nicotine, and a good deal better than the corresponding group in experiment A. This conclusion is supported by a comparison of the composite egg counts. The small dose of phenothiazine reduced this and kept it down at about the same level for 30 days, while copper and nicotine (a normal therapeutic dose) did not appreciably affect it. It may be noted here that Singer and Baker (1940. Cornell Vet. 30. 375-382) found that phenothiazine was more effective than copper sulphate and nicotine or tetrachlorethylene against nematode infestations of sheep. Further experiments are desirable to ascertain the accuracy of the impres- sion given by this experiment (and to a lesser degr ee by experiment A also) that the effect of phenothiazine lasts much longer than that of copper and nicotine. If this should prove to be true, the other experiments on sheep and horses, described in this paper, will have an additional interest because they show that egg counts reduced by phenothiazine do not necessarily rise again for many weeks, although the animals are out at grass and are presumably being continuously re-infested. GOATS So far only one goat has been available. This was a goat weighing 62½lb., belonging to a member of the staff of the Imperial Chemical Industries, Man- chester. Samples of its faeces were sent by Dr. J. R. M. Innes, who subse- quently dosed it with 10 grammes of phenothiazine without toxic effect. Before the dose was given the faeces showed an egg count of 3,650 eggs per gramme (average of two counts). A sample of faeces collected 24 hours after the dose showed an egg count of 100 (average of two counts). Fourteen days and eighteen days after the dose the egg count was still 100 e.p.g. and 18 days after the dose it was 50 e.p.g. (average of 2 counts). Further samples of faeces will be examined to find out whether the egg count, like that of the lambs and ewes described above, will remain at this low figure for a considerable time.
GEOFFREY LAPAGE 263 Attempts to Kill the Ciliates in the Rumen of Sheep with Phenothiazine On 22-4-40 counts were begun of the ciliates in the rumen of a sheep with a fistula into the rumen. The fistula had been made by Mr. Phillipson, of this Institute, some weeks previously and the sheep was in good bodily condition, weighing 258 lb. The number of ciliates present was estimated only roughly because it was difficult to count organisms so active as these. The method was to withdraw 2 c.c. of rumen contents, mix it with 98 c.c. water and remove 0.1 c.c. with a pipette. This was diluted with an equal quantity of Lugol's iodine, which killed the ciliates. The ciliates were then counted with the aid of an eye-piece in which hairs crossed at right angles were fixed to divide the field into four parts. The number counted was multiplied by 500 to give the number of cili- ates per c.c. After the dose of phenothiazine, the ciliates already dead were first counted in the drop. The iodine was then added to kill the rest, and the number of ciliates was counted again, so that the number alive and presumably not affected by phenothiazine could be estimated. Egg counts were also done, but not more than an average of 50 e.p.g. were found so that the anthelmintic effect of the phenothiazine was ignored. The daily ciliate counts were :264 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine seen that the egg counts of all those which were dosed except No. 6, were reduc- ed by the dose to 0, but the egg counts of the controls were also very low, so that this result is inconclusive. The results obtained with the marked and unmarked lamb (recorded above) show that it is unlikely that the egg count reduced to 0 would have continued at 0 for very long and that it would probably have been very difficult to keep the egg count at 0. It is likely that 50 to 200 e.p.g. would have remained even after repeated doses. The chief value of this experiment was that it showed that no toxic effects were observed in calves six months old when doses of 80 to 125 grammes of phenothiazine were given. TABLE V. Date. Kept in a barn. Kept Outside in a Compound on Straw. No.l. No. 4. Contr. No. 5. No. 6. No. 7. No. 8 Contr. No. 9. Contr. No. 10. Contr. 20-10-39 500 No faeces 300 200 100 400 200 100 21-10-39 22-10-39 23-10-39 600 Given 100 grammes Phenothiazine 100 0 Given 125 grammes Phenothiazine 150 Given 100 grammes Phenothiazine 100 Given 80 grammes Phenothiazine 200 200 500 24-10-39 25-10-39 26-10-39 100 200 100 No faeces 100 200 0 500 27-10-39 28-10-39 29-10-39 30-10-39 31-10-39 0 50 50 250 0 50 200 150 1-11-39 2-11-39 0 100 0 100 0 100 0 400 6-11-39 0 0 0 50 0 100 50 400 HORSES PONIES DRENCHED WITH PHENOTHIAZINE.GEOFFREY LAPAGE 265 The egg counts were reduced immediately, dropping from the region of 1,000 to 1,500 until, three days after the dose, they were negative. They remained negative until the ninth day after the dose, when the egg counts were discontinued. After the dose many dead ciliates were found in the faeces. This suggests that phenothiazine kills ciliates which live, as those of the horse do, in the caecum and colon, although the introduction of phenothiazine directly into the rumen contents of a sheep had had no effect on the ciliates there (as recorded above). This is a detail which supports the view expressed by other workers that phenothiazine has more effect on parasites which live in the caecum and colon, a view which suggests that phenothiazine cannot act immediately, but requires time to undergo some change before its toxic action on nematodes is exerted. HORSES DOSED WITH PHENOTHIAZINE POWDER IN BRAN AND TREACLE.266 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine rather more than 0.5 gramme per lb. body weight, was to test the toxicity of the drug. There were so few eggs in the faeces that this animal was not suit- able for observation of the anthelmintic efficiency of the drug. On the day after the dose the animal was off its food and was passing red urine. The mucosae were bronzed and there were petechial haemorrhages in the vulva around the vestibule, possibly due to irritation by the urine. On the second day after the dose, the animal was normal again and remained so until the fourth day after the dose, when the mucosae were practically normal in colour. The animal had evidently suffered no serious ill-effects from this large dose. Forty-nine days after this large dose, a second dose of 500 grammes was given, also by stomach tube. This time the phenothiazine powder that had just been introduced by Imperial Chemical Industries was used in water. This large dose was given in the morning. At 3 P.M. the same day the animal was uneasy, showed evidence of intestinal discomfort, and would not feed. The mucosae of its eyes and mouth were already bronzed and the urine thick and chocolate-coloured. Possibly the intestinal discomfort was due to the mechanical effects of the bulk of the drug in the stomach, because by the next morning the animal was feeding well and seemed fairly fit. The mucosae were still bronzed and the urine red. Blood submitted to Professor Keilin for spec- troscopic examination showed an increase of about 10 to 12 per cent. of methae- moglobin which suggested that the phenothiazine had produced some oxida- tion of the haemoglobin, but the amount of methaemoglobin was not accurately estimated. No sulphhaemoglobin was present and the blood did not show any other abnormality. On the following day the methaemoglobin was only slightly reduced, but by 16-1-40, eight days after the dose, it had practically all disappeared. In blood, taken two days after the dose, the haemoglobin index was 83 per cent. and the red cell count 6,037,500, the colour index being 0.7 ; two days later the haemoglobin index was 78 per cent, and the red cell count 6,818,000, the colour index being 0.58. On the eighth day after the dose, the haemoglobin index was 81 per cent., and the red cell count 7,000,000 and the colour index 0.578. These figures are within the normal variations shown by the blood of healthy horses. The day after the dose, a number of dead strongyles were recovered from the faeces, some containing eggs, others being flattened and pigmented brown. These were identified as mature and immature Trichonema spp. On the second day after the dose, the animal was still listless, but brighter than the daybefore. Its temperature was 92.2°, and the limbs were cold. It ate hay, but little else ; the mucosae were still bronzed and the urine red ; in the afternoon the temperature had risen to 100.2° and a bran mash was refused. On the third day after the dose the animal was still listless, with a morning temperature of 100° and an afternoon one of 99.2° and red urine and bronzed mucosae. Rather more food was taken and the condition was on the whole better. On the fourth day after the dose the temperature was as for the third day, the mucosae almost normal, the urine still red and the animal was eating hay only. On the fifth day after the dose the morning temperature was 100.6°, the mucosae about the same, the urine still red, but the animal was much brighter and was feeding better.
GEOFFREY LAPAGE 267 On the seventh day after the dose the mucosae were still slightly bronzed, especially above the teeth, the urine was still red and the bowels loose, but the animal was feeding well and in quite good condition. By the eighth day after the dose, when the spectroscopic blood examina- tion showed that very little methaemoglobin was left, the urine was still red. It did not become normal till the tenth day when the mucosae were also normal and the animal had fully recovered. This history is interesting because it shows that a second large dose of 0. 5 gramme per lb. body weight given to a young horse was definitely toxic, whereas the previous dose had had little toxic effect. The interpretation of this result is difficult, but it is worth noting, because it may indicate that successive doses must be given with care. It is possible that one dose may sensitise an animal for some time. On the other hand, the dose given to this horse was excessively large and its very bulk may have caused most of the trouble. There is no record of ill-effects in horses from repetition of the small doses and there is evidence in the literature that, in other animals, repeated small doses do not have toxic effects and may be more effective than larger single doses. The experiments with pigs recorded below suggest that the age of animals dosed is an important factor. A note on the effects of relatively large doses recently given to young foals by F. Day, F.R.C.V.S., will be sent to the Veterinary Record as soon as possible. Thoroughbred 1.268 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine Summary of post-mortem findings :GEOFFREY LAPAGE 269 second day. On the third day six pigs showed complete loss of co-ordination, but recovered by the fourth day. The dose was not repeated after this second dose. Group C given 0.1 Gramme per lb. Body Weight as a Mass Dose in Feed.270 Anthelmintic Action of Phenothiazine is mixed in the feed and the pigs are allowed to take it as they will, there is danger that some will get too much and will suffer accordingly. Larger doses will in the near future be given to pigs individually and the results will be compared with those of Swanson, Harwood and Connelly (1940) (J. Amer. vet. med. Ass. 96, 333-338), who gave up to 1 gramme per lb. body weight to older pigs without toxic effects. Meanwhile, it is probably wise to give phenothiazine to young pigs with great care. The Ascaris burden of the pigs described above was not removed, nor much influenced, by this dose of phenothiazine. The reason for this is not clear. SUMMARY (1) Two lambs weighing 74 lb. and 89 lb. were given 0.3 gramme and 0.27 gramme per lb. body weight respectively of phenothiazine in the form of tablets. Three days after the dose the egg count had fallen, in the one case, from 7.400 e.p.g. to 200 e.p.g. and, in the other, from 3,850 to 550 e.p.g., these egg counts being the mean of two counts done by different observers on different portions of the same sample of faeces. The egg counts of both lambs, which were kept in a box together, remained round about this figure for rather longer than five months. Attempts to reduce the egg count to 0 and to main- tain it at 0 by giving further doses of phenothiazine were not successful. It is never desirable to remove all the nematodes from any animal because this procedure will lower or remove the host's resistance to the infestation. (2) Comparisons of the effect of phenothiazine, copper sulphate and copper sulphate and nicotine on nematode infestations of ewes and lambs in the field indicated that small doses (about 0.1 gramme per lb. body weight) of pheno- thiazine lowered the egg counts more effectively than did either of the other two anthelmintics and tended to maintain them more effectively at a lower level. In three experiments 157 ewes and lambs were weighed every ten days for a period of 30 days after doses of about 0.1 gramme per lb. body weight of phenothiazine. The results indicated that, even when these small doses are given, the weight increase of animals given phenothiazine is significantly greater at the end of 30 days than that of animals given normal therapeutic doses of copper sulphate or copper sulphate and nicotine, although, during the first 20 days or so, the animals given these two latter anthelmintics appear to put on slightly more weight. The egg counts of the animals given pheno- thiazine were reduced more effectively than those given the other two anthel- mintics and remained low. It is thus possible that phenothiazine has a more lasting anthelmintic effect than copper sulphate and copper sulphate and nico- tine, perhaps because it prevents the development of a second generation of worms picked up from the pasture. Further experiments on this question are in progress. It is unlikely that a copper deficiency in the animals used contributed in any way to these results, because there was no evidence of this and swayback had never been reported from the district in which the animals used were bred. (3) No toxic effects were shown by any of the sheep treated with these doses of phenothiazine. It was not expected that the small doses used would have any toxic effects,
GEOFFREY LAPAGE 271 (4) A similar marked fall in the egg count of a single goat from 3,650 e.p.g. to 150 e.p.g. was noted 24 hours after it had been given, without toxic effect, a dose of 0.15 gramme per lb. body weight of phenothiazine. (5) Attempts to kill the ciliates in the rumen of a sheep by introducing phenothiazine powder into the rumen through a fistula did not kill any appre- ciable number of the ciliates. Thionol appeared in the urine of the sheep 5½ hours after phenothiazine was set free in the rumen. (6) Doses of 80 to 125 grammes of phenothiazine did not produce any visi- ble toxic effect in calves six months old. (7) The passage of red urine and bronzing of the mucosae, which usually persists for four days or so after the administration of phenothiazine, was noted in all the sheep, horses and calves treated. When the doses were larger, loss of appetite and listlessness were noted. These are signs that the dose should not be increased, nor repeated until a considerable interval has elapsed. (8) Phenothiazine powder at the rate of about 0.1 gramme per lb. body weight administered to horses, either mixed in a feed of bran and treacle or given suspended in water with a stomach pump, reduced the strongyle egg count to 0, or near that figure, and the egg count did not rise again appreciably for many weeks, although the horses were at grass. (9) One horse, given 500 grammes of phenothiazine in water with a stomach pump (a dose of about 0.5 gramme per lb. body weight) suffered little more than transient loss of appetite and listlessness. After the same dose 49 days later the same horse became restless and uncomfortable and refused to feed for a few days, but subsequently recovered. Another horse, given 1,000 grammes with a stomach pump showed marked toxic effects, but the existence in this animal of thrombo-angiitis rendered it impossible to say whether the symptoms were due to this disease or to the phenothiazine. Examination of the blood of these horses showed no other abnormality than a transient excess of methaemoglobin. (10) Evidence is given which suggests that phenothiazine should be admi- nistered to young pigs with great care, although doses of 0.5 gramme per lb. body weight appear to have no toxic effects on mature pigs.
HIGH RECORDS CONTRASTED WITH UNSELECTED RECORDS AND WITH AVERAGE RECORDS AS A BASIS FOR SELECTING COWS* BY J. C. BERRY AND J. L. LUSH Iowa Agricultural Experiment Station (Reprinted from the Journal of Dairy Science, Vol. 22, No. 8, August-1939) WHILE making some preliminary studies of suitable ways to test the rela- tive values of production records, singly and in various combinations, for predicting future records of the same cow and for evaluating her transmitting ability, we noted an article by Copeland (2) purporting to show some advan- tages for using a cow's highest record as an index to her lifetime producing ability and to her transmitting ability. As our data, which came from a different source, seemed appropriate for testing Copeland's conclusions, we repeated a part of his analysis on our own material and added a few other features which, it is hoped, will demonstrate why the ex post facto selection of the highest record is an unsound procedureJ. C. BERRY AND J. L. LUSH 273 reported by Copeland. For the four ' repeatability ' comparisons (the first four in Table 1), our coefficients are lower than those reported by most studens of this question, while those of Copeland are among the highest we have ever seen. More typical are findings like those of Plum (5) that a correlation of .60 existed between records of the same cow in the whole popu- lation of records from many herds, but that on an intra-herd basis the correlation between records of the same cow was reduced to .40. Perhaps a high degree of heterogeneity from herd to herd existed in Copeland's data. TABLE I Correlation coefficients for Holstein H. I. R. records Jersey R. of M. records and Jersey Herd Test records Variates correlated Coefficients of correlation 115 Holstein H.I.R. cows 197 R of M. cows* 166 Jersey First record with the second . . . . .30 .71 .78 Second record with the third . . . . .42 .77 .80 Third record with the fourth . . . . .55 .69 .75 Fourth record with the fifth . . . . .45 .59 .83 First with ave. of next four . . . . .49 .62 .80 First with ave. of all five . . . . .68 .75 .88 Highest with ave. of all five . . . . .90 .92 .92 Highest with ave. of other four . . . . .83 . . . . Lowest with ave. of all five . . . . .79 . . . . Lowest with ave. of other four . . . . .70 . . . . *Copeland's data. If the various records were all equally correlated (r) with each other, the correlation between the first and the average of the next four would be ex- pected to be r [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]. It is a little lower than this (if for r is used the simple arithmetic average of the four repeatability correlations shown) in all three sets of data (especially so in the Jersey R. of M. records), thus indicating that the correlations between non-consecutive records (not shown) average somewhat lower than those between consecutive records. Similarly, if all the correlations between the individual records were equal to r, the correlation between the first record and the average of the first five records would equal [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]. Again the actual figures are lower (much lower in the case of the Jersey R. of M. records) than they would be if the non-con- secutive correlations averaged as high as the consecutive ones which are shown.
274 A Basis for Selecting Cows The numerical values to be expected in the case of the correlation between the highest record and the averge of all five are not clear because of the com- plex statistical relations brought about by the ex post facto selection of the highest record. That such selection has an effect on the correlation subse- quently calculated can be made clear by considering an extreme case in which it is assumed that we have samples of five records each from cows between which there really are no intrinsic differences, the variation between the various records being wholly due to varying external circumstances and to sampling variations. This is the same statistical problem as would exist in [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. The statistical consequences of the ex post facto selection of the highest record among five. The normal curves, all drawn at the same height on the ordinate axis, illustrate the variation to be expected between different records of the same cow in a population of cows which all have exactly the same real ability. In such a population it would sometimes happen that the highest of five records would be very high ; sometimes it would be moderately high ; and sometimes even the highest record would be moderately low. When a sample of five records is located along the abscissa according to the highest record in it, the other four must come from the unshaded portions of the frequency curves PLATE XX ] [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part IV OUTKRAAL IN THE FOREST AREA AT MUKTESWAR [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2.
J. C. BERRY AND J. L. LUSH 275 Figure 1 is intended to show graphically what would happen in such a case if the highest of the five records in each sample were correlated with the average of the other four. Six normal curves with their means at the same level have been drawn at intervals of 100 lb. along the abscissa to show the restrictive effect of locating the sample along the abscissa according to the highest of the five records in it. In each case the other four records must all be below the diagonal RS, and must come from the unshaded portions of the normal curves. At the right hand side of the graph (where the high record happens to be very high) little restriction is laid on the magnitude of the other four records, but toward the left hand side most of the unshaded portion of the curve lies very near the diagonal RS and the average of the other four records cannot be far below the high record. Because of the constricting influence of the high record on the magnitude of the other four, the total distribution becomes funnel shaped and the line BCD (drawn through the means of the unshaded portions of the six normal curves) showing the regression of the average of the other four on the high one is curvilinear in character. The extreme narrowing of the distribution when the high record itself is not very large, is particularly potent in giving a large correlation between the high record in the sample and the average of [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Correlation (. 83) between the highest record and the average of the other four records in a population of 115 H. I. R. cows. All points must fall below the diagonal AB. The regression line is the best-fitting straight line but does not tell the full story, since the real relation between the two variates is curvilinear. The restrictive influence of the highest record on the magnitude of the other four records is especially evident towards the left side of the diagram. the other four records, even in an extreme case like this where the samples come from the same universe (as from a group of cows all with the same pro ducing ability).
276 A Basis for Selecting Cows Actually, of course, there are differences between the cows, too, and this gives the regression line more of an upward slope and somewhat less curvi- linearity although the funnel shape of the data and the extreme restriction at the left are conspicuous features of the actual data as shown in Figure 2. It is thus apparent that the correlation coefficient for the high record and the average of the other four owes a part of its magnitude merely to the fact that the first mentioned variate was selected because it was the high record. Because of the curvilinearity and the funnel shape, the biometric relations seem complex and we do not know how to separate the observed correlation coefficient into the spurious part which comes from this useless ex post facto arrangement of the data and the part which would show the genuine useful- ness of the high record in predicting records not yet made when the high one was selected. When the highest record is correlated with an average of the five which include it, the coefficient becomes still larger. The situation is the same as shown in Figure 2 except that each point is now moved upward one-fifth of the distance which in Figure 2 separates it from the line AB. Naturally those lying farthest away are moved most and so the correlation is distinctly increased but no new knowledge is gained. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Figure 3 shows the first record as correlated with the average of the other FIG. 3. Correlation (.49) between the first record and the average of the next four records. Same cows as in Figure 2. The straight line shows the linear regression of the average of the other four records on the first record. four. Using the first record sets no restriction on the magnitude of the average of the other four. The other four can all be below the first, or all above it, or some on one side and some on the other. Such a correlation in an unbiased estimate of the usefulness of the first record for predicting the average of the other four.
J. C. BERRY AND J. L. LUSH 277 WHY NOT THE LOW? To demonstrate more clearly how subsequent selection of a record because of its size affects the correlation coefficient, the lowest of the five records was correlated with the average of the remaining four and also with the average of all five. In our data the low record was less variable (278 A Basis for Selecting Cows first three were compared with the fourth and with the fifth; and then the unselected first, second and third were correlated also with the fourth and fifth records. The results of such a fair test on our data are shown in Table II. The differences between the correlations in the same column are not sta- tistically significant (on this amount of dataJ. C. BERRY AND J. L. LUSH 279 TABLE III Correlation coefficients between the average of the first two daughter records and various records of the dam Dam's record which was correlated with the average of the daughter's first two records Correlation coeffi- cients Highest of all five records . . . . . . .29 Lowest of all five records. . . . . . . .15 Highest of first three records . . . . . . .24 Lowest of first three records . . . . . . .19 Medium of first three records . . . . . . .33 First record . . . . . . .24 Second record . . . . . . .14 Third record . . . . . . .23 Fourth record . . . . . . .29 Fifth record . . . . . . .13 Copeland's comparissons Highest records of 176 dams and highest records of the daughters .29 Average records of 176 dams and average yield of their tested daughters . . . . . . .30 TABLE IV Correlations of averages of a cow's first records with her subsequent records and with her daughter's records Dam's average Correlations coefficients Dam's fourth record Dam's fifth record Daughter's ave. of first two Actual Exp. Actual Exp. Actual Exp. Ave. of first two records . .59 .47 .38 .47 .24 .25 Ave. of first three records . .65 .51 .38 .51 .27 .27 Ave. of first four records . . . . . .44 .53 .30 .29280 A Basis for Selecting Cows. TABLE V Correlation coefficients between the average of the last three records of six-record cows and the first three records taken singly and in various combinations Records correlated with the average of the last three records Correlation coefficients Actual Expected First record . . . . . . . . . .42 .49 Second record . . . . . . . . .45 Third record . . . . . . . . .46 Average of first and second . . . . . .54 .59 Average of first and third . . . . . .53 Average of second and third . . . . . .54 Average of first, second and third . . . . .58 .64 On comparing these tables with Tables I to III, it seems that there is a trend toward increased prediction value of average records as compared with single records. The ' expected ' values included in Tables IV and V are the ones which would have occurred if the various records of the same cow had all been equally correlated with each other and if they all had had equal standard deviations and if they had all been equally correlated with the daughter average. The correlation coefficients used in calculating the expected values in Table IV were the arithmetic means of the ten intercorrelations between the first five records (.39) and of the five coefficients between the cow's five records and her daughter's average (.21). In Table V, the inclusion of the sixth record gave a mean repeatability of .37. The divergence of observed from expected values presumably was caused by actual inequalities among those various correlations and standard devi- ations and by the limited amount of data studied. The expected values, however, serve to indicate the magnitude of the increase which, theoretically, should occur as the correlation coefficients are based on averages of larger and larger numbers. Probably the results will become more regular when more data are included. The present amount of data is not large enough to be expected to show significant differences. TABLE VI Distribution of the highest record of five over the five lactation classes Lactations First record Second record Third record Fourth record Fifth record Number of high records . . . 27 24 20 23 21
J. C. BERRY AND J. L. LUSH 281 CASE OF COWS WITH UNEQUAL NUMBERS OF RECORDS Table VI shows that the highest record made by a cow is about as likely to occur in any one of the first five lactations as in any other. Assuming a per- fectly even distribution of the high record, it follows that the probability that a cow with just one record has already made what would be the highest in five if and when she completed the additional four is .20 ; in the case of a cow with two records the probability is .40; for the three-record cow it is .60 ; for the four-record cow, .80; and for the cow with five records, the probability is, of course, 1.0. This shows clearly the unfairness of using the highest record as a basis for comparing cows which have completed unequal numbers of lactations. The bias introduced by unequal numbers is evident also upon considering the ratio range/282 A Basis for Selecting Cows. the decreased variability of averages based on large numbers. Otherwise it would almost always appear that the best producersJ, C. BERRY AND J. L. LUSH 283 (2) Copeland, Lynn (1938). The use of records in evaluating the inheritance of cows and in the proving of bulls. J. Dairy Sci., 21, 651-660 (3) Lauprecht, E. and Miinzner, H. (1933). Uber die richtige Gewichtsbestirumuug bei Zusammenfassung von einzelnen arithmetischen Mitteln zu einem Gosamtmi- ttel. Der Züchter 5 (12), 281ABSTRACTS Prevention of ovine mastitis by the use of staphylococcus toxoid. F. C. MINETT (1939). J. Comp. Path. 52, 167 RECENT knowledge on the rôle of antitoxin in staphylococcal immunity had not been exploited to ascertain if the course of infection in staphylococcus mastitis in animals can be modified through prior intervention with toxoid. The author has, there- fore, now tried to supply experimental data on the point. The sheep was employed as the experimental animal for testing the extent to which specific toxoid treatment might modify the course of acute staphylococcus mastitis and in order to gain experience of the kind of toxoid that should be used and the antitoxin response likely to be aroused. It is essential to note that the sheep for use in these experiments were selected after a preliminary titration of their blood sera for natural staphylococcal ABSTRACTS 285 (3) Under the conditions of the experiment two injections of toxoid at an interval of about three weeks gave a better immunity than a single dose. Immu- nity was evident for at least three months after the second injection. In a single experiment one large dose of alum toxoid gave a rather better immunity response than two doses of unprecipitated toxoid and the smaller amounts of alum toxoid. The amount of antitoxin developing in sheep treated with toxoid tended to be greater in animals with higher pre-injection titres. In sheep judged to be adequately protected antitoxin levels averaging 8 to 24 units per c.c. serum were observed 10 to 20 days after treatment, representing increases of 6 to 15 times the pre-injection, titre. [V. R. R.] An insectarium with constant temperature and humidity control, together with a description of a simplified technique for the rearing of Anopheles maculipennis var. atroparvus. D. S. BERTRAM AND R. M. GORDON (1939). Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 33, 279 IN the first part of the paper the authors describe the construction and equipment of an insectarium recently built at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, in which moisture is supplied by two humidifiers regulated by a humidity control apparatus. and heat by means of electric heaters provided with thermostats. The room has a capacity of about 1,000 cubic feet, and did not prove very expensive to construct. The solar heat that enters through a window is a source of difficulty in this contrivance. It was found impossible to maintain a constant temperature without the use of blinds, since sudden rises in temperature of as much as 5°C. (9°F.) occurred on sunny days even in early summer. It was possible to maintain constantly a relative humidity between 75 and 85 per cent so long as reasonable precautions were taken to see that the door of the insectarium was not left open unnecessarily. No arrangement is made for reducing humidity. The room is used for maintaining stocks of various biting insects. The second part of the paper describes a method for rearing Anopheles maculipennis var. atroparvus in the insectary. The authors have followed Bate's method in principle. This consists in making a thick suspension of soil and adding it to the breeding bowl at frequent intervals. This method is simple and. very successful. [B. C. B.] The anterior pituitary lobe hormones in the treatment of ketosis in the dairy cow. M. G. FINCHER AND C. E. HAYDEN (1940). Cornell Vet. 30, 197 THE pituitary gland is closely related to the function of the reproductive glands and the udder. There is a definite relationship between high milk production, poor re- production and acetonemia. It has been suggested that one of the functions of the anterior pituitary lobe hormone (A. P. L.) is to control or regulate the carbohydrate metabolism. Ketosis is believed to be due to disturbance in carbohydrate286 ABSTRACTS Some cases responded very well to the treatment and it became evident from the chemical examination of blood and urine of treated cases that A. P. L. had some definite merit and. it appeared to be the only treatment required in some cases. The writers ad- mit that the data obtained by them are too few to substantiate the claim that these hor- mone preparations are specific in the treatment of ketosis though in some cases their use appeared to have had some merit especially as a few of their serious cases of ketosis recovered with no other therapy. In most severe cases of acetonemia in valuable cows where the speedy return to high milk production is desirable it would appear wise to combine the use of A. P. L. with dextrose, calcium gluconate and chloral. These writers believe that the anterior pituit- ary lobe hormones may have a definite place in the treatment of disorders that afflict the dairy cow at or near parturition. [P. R. K. I.] Maintenance protein requirements of sheep. (a) The endogenous nitrogen metabolism of sheep with special reference to the maintenance require- ment of protein. D. B. SMUTS AND J. S. C. MARAIS (1938). Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Indust 11, 131. (b) The endogenous nitrogen metabolism of young sheep with special reference to the estimation of the maintenance requirement of sheep. D. B. SMUTS AND J. S. C. MARAIS (1939). Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Indus. 13, 219. (a) THE authors subscribe to the view that the maintenance requirement of nitrogen of an animal can be measured by the total nitrogen excretion in the urine after the endogenous level is attained. On this basis the endogenous urinary nitrogen excretion of mature Merino wethers was determined. The nitrogen-free diet consisted of dextri- nised starch, agar, cod-liver oil, bone ash and salt. A constant level of endogenous nitrogen excretion, viz. 0.041 gm. per kg. body-weight was reached in from 6-15 days of nitrogen free feeding, the length of this period depending on the protein content of the diet on which the animals were kept prior to nitrogen free feeding. The distribution of the urinary end products, e.g. creatinine, total sulphur and neutral sulphur at endogenous level was also determined. On the result of this experiment the maintenance require- ment of a 100 lb. sheep for digestible protein was calculated to be 23 gm. ; this figure is rather less than that advocated in the usual standards. (b) In this study an experiment similar to that in (a) was conducted on young Merino wethers with a view to establishing their maintenance requirement. The animals were put for three weeks on a 14 per cent protein ration previous to nitrogen free feeding. In this experiment it was found necessary to include some wheat straw and to reduce the agar in order to ensure an adequate energy intake. The endogenous level was reached on the 5th or 6th day of experimental feeding, in contrast with 14 days with mature sheep. The endogenous nitrogen excretion was found to be 0.051 gm. per kg. for four months old wethers. This corresponds to a requirement of 29 gm. digestible protein for a 100 lb. sheep. A formula for determining the maintenance requirement of sheep was suggested by the authors and its application tested. Moreover, it was shown that the basal meta- bolism of sheep can be predicted from the endogenous nitrogen, and that the figures arrived at agree very well with the values published in the literature. [R. M.] Dry skim milk in rations for growing, laying and breeding fowls. W. H. OTT., H. C. KNANDEL AND R. V. BOUCHER (1939). Pennsylv. Agri. Expt. Sta. Bull. 381, 1 ALTHOUGH the value of skim milk in. poultry rations is widely recognised, there is comparatively little information regarding the optimum amounts which should be fed to various classes of poultry. This bulletin gives the results of an investigation carried out to test whether or not the addition of dry skim milk improves an already high grade and well balanced basal ration, and to ascertain the optimum amounts neces- sary.
ABSTRACTS 287 Three experiments of 72 weeks duration each were carried out on Single Comb White Leghorns ; the progeny of the first year's experimental birds were studied in the second year, the various groups being fed the same rations as in the first year. A fresh stock of birds was used in the final year. The birds in each experiment were equally distributed among eight groups and fed all mash rations in which the percentage of skim milk ranged from 0 to 8.75. The other constituents in the feed were suitably altered, within narrow limits, to maintain an average content of 16.9 per cent protein, 1.7 per cent calcium and 1 per cent phosphorus during the first 12 weeks of growth, and 14.4 per cent protein, 2.4 per cent calcium and 1.7 per cent phosphorus there- after. Males were separated at 4 and 6 weeks of age and used for studying the shrinkage of live weight in shipping broilers. The chicks were weighed at bi-weekly intervals till 24 weeks of age, and the mean weight in pounds per bird for each group has been presented. According to the authors, the beneficial effects of skim milk feeding were most pronounced in the first two weeks, and persisted till 10 weeks, during which period the gain in body-weight increased in proportion to the amount of milk fed; the differences in all cases, however, were relatively small. The efficiency of food utilisation appeared to be slightly better in the higher milk level groups in the early phase of growth, but this was counteracted in later weeks. When both efficiency of food utilisation and early rapid growth are considered, the best response was obtained from the groups fed 1.25 and 2.5 per cent milk. Although the figures cited show no advantage in feeding skim milk beyond 10 weeks from the standpoint of body-weight alone, it is doubtful if its discontinuance would be beneficial in the long run. No data are included on the effects of such a procedure on subsequent egg production. The fact that among the laying hens in the second genera- tion, age-at-first-egg decreased, and weight-at-first-egg increased with increasing levels of milk, and that mortality was significantly higher in the groups receiving 5 per cent and less of skim milk indicates the favourable effect of a liberal supply of milk. Egg production of the birds in the first generation (1st and 3rd years of experiment) was more or less similar in all the groups, but in the second generation (2nd year of ex- periment) production was rather poor in the no milk and 1.25 per cent milk groups. There was no corresponding increase beyond the 5 per cent level in any of the years. Highest egg weights were obtained from the 3.75 and 5 per cent groups. Eggs from the 2.5 per cent and 3.75 per cent groups hatched as well as those laid by birds receiv- ing higher amounts of milk. Taken together, these observations indicate that the opti- mum supplement of dry skim milk for laying hens is between 2.5 and 5 per cent, when the ration is otherwise well balanced. The internal quality of the eggs was also tested in the first year on a random selection of 10 eggs from each group from one day's production. The factors studied were per- centage of egg shell of total egg weight, percentage of ash in egg shell, percentage of yolk and firm albumin of total egg weight, albumin and yolk scores, and yolk index; but there were no significant differences in any of these factors in any of the groups. In two experiments on the shrinkage of live weight in shipping broilers, the greates shrinkage occurred in the no milk group, while the most satisfactory results were obtained in the 2.5 and 3.75 per cent milk groups. [Y. V. N.]
ANIMAL QUARANTINE NOTIFICATION United States of America THE following animal quarantine order has been received in the office of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. Those interested are advised to apply to the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for loan. Order to prevent the introduction into the United States of rinderpest and foot-and-mouth disease dated 26th October 1940 issued by the Bureau of Animal Industry, United States Department of Agriculture. 288 GIPDERRATA. THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. Volume XI, Part II, 1941. Page 114, 3rd line from bottom, for 1 × 105 read I × 10-5. Page 114, last line, for 1×107 read 1 × 10ORIGINAL ARTICLES JOHNE'S DISEASE : TEN YEARS' OBSERVATIONS ON AN EXPERIMENTAL HERD BY F. WARE, C.I.E., F.R.C.V.S., F.N.I., I.V.S. AND M. K. SRINIVASAN, G.M.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar* (Received for publication on 21 January 1941) (With Plate XX) THIS herd was constituted in 1929 mainly with the following objects: (a) To observe whether under the conditions existing at Mukteswar the disease would spread from infected to healthy cattle, (b) to study the effect of treating a proportion of the animals with a live vaccine accord- ing to the method of Vallée and Rinjard [1926]. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE EXPERIMENT The herd was started in a shed in the main Institute area but after about a year the survivors were transferred to a particularly secluded out-kraal in the forest area of the Mukteswar Institute where the remainder of the experi- ment was carried on. This kraal (Plate XX) situated at an altitude of 6,125 feet consists of an area of land just less than ¼ acre in extent, gently sloping from south to north, and is bounded by a wire fence. The soil is sandy and except in certain spots there is little tendency for rain to collect even during the monsoons. Seasonal variations in temperature are : November to March, min. 23°-37°F., max. 57°-66°F. ; April to July, min. 36°-52°F., max. 72°- 80°F. The average annual rainfall is about 50 inches of which 20 to 25 inches fall during the summer monsoon from July to September. In April-June the daily average sunshine is about 12 hours, while in winter the average snowfall calculated as rain is 7 inches. The main shed measuring 40 by 12 feet usually housed 30 to 35 cattle of various ages and there was also a smaller shed. Both were ill-ventilated, with rough paved floors, and were used for housing the animals at night. During the day the animals were allowed to roam at will in the kraal, as well as in the adjoining forest for purposes of grazing. In fine weather they remained in the forest from 8 A.M. till 3 P.M. The calves were kept with their mothers and were not weaned, and the cows were not milked. On return from grazing the animals were given a diet of * The investigation recorded in this article was initiated, at the instance of the senior author, by the late Mr H. Cooper, M.R.C.V.S., and carried through with the help of several other members of the staff of the Institute, to whom acknowledgements are due. The compilation of the data and the writing of the paper has been carried out by the junior author with the assistance of Dr F. C. Minett, who also made the final tuber- culin and Johnin tests. (289) A
290 Johne's Disease hay or grass and a little concentrate mixture (crushed gram, wheat bran, oil cake and salt). The roughage was fed on the floor of the sheds. Water was supplied from an iron tank filled from a stream running down the hill- side and during the early part of the experiment drainage water from the sheds was also allowed to run into the tank. The cleaning of the sheds and of the outside enclosure was purposely not thorough and the floor of the sheds became slushy at the time of the rains and snow. All calvings took place in the same sheds, along with other animals. It was thought that these conditions in the sheds would give the infection every chance of spreading to the healthy animals, but it will be observed that the animals in other res- pects led a very natural life, were given a reasonably adequate maintenance ration and were not subjected to any physical strain, except at the time of calving. From time to time, the animals were tested by the double intra- dermal method with ordinary tuberculin and with avian tuberculin. Both tuberculins were prepared from glycerol broth cultures and were used in the heat-concentrated form. Finally, in April 1940, a test was made with ordi- nary tuberculin and Johnin, in both cases ammonium sulphate precipitated products from synthetic media and prepared in the Medical Research Council Laboratories, Mill Hill, England. From time to time also rectal smears and bowel washings were examined in a further attempt to locate infected animals. All animals which died or were destroyed were examined for Johne's disease by making microscopical preparations from the bowel wall, particularly from the terminal portion of the ileum and from the ileo-caecal valve. At the conclusion of the experiment selected animals were slaughtered and attempts made to cultivate Johne's bacilli on a liver extract-phlei-egg medium: COMPOSITION OF THE HERD The herd has been gradually built up of (a) naturally infected cattle from outside, and (b) healthy cattle, and its numbers have been augmented by the progeny of these two groups of animals. Breeds represented were : Tharparkar, Hissar, Bihar, Assamese, Sindhi and cross-bred. The size of the herd increased from 3 in August 1929 to 110 in April 1940, when the experi- ment was closed. [Although the total number of animals passing through the herd has been stated as 110, only 95 are mentioned in Appendices 1 and 2, the remainder having either died or been killed as calves by wild animals.] In August 1929 there were purchased from Bihar three naturally infected cows (Nos. 1, 2 and 3), all three being typical cases of Johne's disease in which acid-fast organisms could be easily demonstrated in rectal smears and faeces. The animals reacted to avian but not to ordinary tuberculin. Two of these cows (Nos. 2 and 3) died a few months later in spite of treatment with formalin and Johne's bacilli were isolated from both of them. The third cow (No. 1) attained good condition and ceased to react to avian tuberculin, although rectal smears were teeming with acid-fast organisms resembling Johne's bacilli. She died in May 1931 of Johne's disease. A second batch of 9 cows (Nos. 4-10, 61 and 62), 1 calf (No. 11) and 2 bullocks (Nos. 12 and 13) were received from Bihar in 1930. All these animals, as well as cows 1, 2 and 3, were accommodated temporarily in a shed in the
F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 291 main Institute area and were transferred during 1930 to the out-kraal. All of the second batch of animals, except the calf (No. 11) which was not tested, had been declared infected as a result of an avian tuberculin test at the farm of origin. On arrival at Mukteswar they were retested with avian tuber- culin and all except two (cow 5 and calf 11) reacted. Bowel washings from all these animals, except calf 11, showed acid-fast bacilli which were regarded as those of Johne's disease. They were subsequently tested at intervals with avian tuberculin with varying results (Appendix 2). The two bullocks were proved at post mortem examination in June 1931 to have been infected with tuberculosis and Johne bacilli could not be isolated. Of the remaining animals, 7 cows and the calf are dead and the remaining 2 cows (Nos. 61 and 62) were still alive and in fair condition at the close of the experiment. At post mortem examination Johne's disease was confirmed in 4 of the 7 cows (Nos. 4, 7, 8 and 10) and in the calf which was then 2½ years old. Of the other 3 cows, one (No. 5) was a tubercular subject while in two of them (Nos. 6 and 9) neither tuberculosis nor Johne's disease could be confirmed. In July 1930 a cow (No. 14) which had reacted strongly to avian tuber- culin and weakly to ordinary tuberculin was received from the Central Pro- vinces and on post mortem examination Johne's disease could not be verified. In July and September 1937 there were received from Assam 18 animals (4 cows Nos. 15, 16, 63, 64 ; 14 bulls and bullocks Nos. 17292 Johne's Disease VACCINATION From 1930 onwards every other calf born into the herd was injected subcutaneously in the neck with living Johne bacilli from culture [Vallée and Rinjard, 1926] the injection being made within 24 hours of birth. In most cases the vaccine was prepared from a stock culture of the organism grown on a phlei-agar medium. Until 1933 each animal vaccinated was given 25.0 mg. culture suspended in 2.5 c.c. saline. From 1934 to 1940 the same amount of culture was mixed with 600.0 mg. sterile sand suspended in 2.5 to 5 c.c. liquid paraffin or vaseline oil. As expected, this produced an extensive firm and lasting swelling whereas there was no enduring local reaction to the saline suspension of bacilli. The fate of vaccinated animals and of the unvaccinated controls is summarized in Appendix 3. It will be seen that of 8 calves vaccinated with the saline suspension 3 developed Johne's disease while of 8 unvaccinated animals 4 became infected. Of 14 calves vaccinated with live bacilli mixed with the unabsorbable recipient one deve- loped Johne's disease, while 2 out of 13 controls became similarly infected. RESULTS OF TESTS Out of 60 animals in Appendix 2 (a), 46 reacted strongly or weakly to avian tuberculin at least once during the period of observation and of these 46 reactors, 24 were confirmed as cases of Johne's disease. Out of 14 animals which did not react to avian tuberculin, 9 were positive for Johne's disease. Ten out of 60 reacted to ordinary tuberculin but only 4 of the 10 had micro- scopic lesions of tuberculosis. DISCUSSION At the time this experiment was started more than ten years ago no knowledge was available as to the ease or difficulty with which the disease might be disseminated. There was, however, a feeling that in view of what is known to happen on infected farms, spread might occur rather easily. Actually, as described above, the converse was the case, the disease dying out although apparently given every chance to spread. On reflection, how- ever, and in the light of present knowledge of the subject of epidemiology and the influence of environment on the spread of disease, it is clear that the events in an experimental herd such as this were bound to be complex and difficult to interpret. In what follows, some attempt is made to analyse the position. It may be noted in the first place that the herd was made up of animals received from different places, at different times and in various stages of in- fectivity. In the various groups of animals received and examined at post mortem the proportion found to be infected was as follows : Bihar 8 out of 13, Assam 3 out of 14, Mukteswar Dairy 13 out of 21, while out of 30 calves born into the herd 12 acquired infection. Two animals of Bihar, 4 of Assam, 2 of the Mukteswar Dairy and 23 born into the herd are alive and in good condi- tion. Thus during 10 years 1930 to 1939, 36 known infected animals were added to the herd, viz. in each year 4, 3, 4, 4, 1, 2, 7, 5, 1 and 5. Four of these were destroyed and 32, including the 12 calves, died. In spite of this,
F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 293 judging from the final tuberculin and Johnin tests carried out in April 1940 the disease had failed to extend. In April 1940, 33 animals, other than very young calves, were available for test, viz. 2 cows from Bihar, 6 animals from Assam, 4 cows from Mukteswar Dairy and 21 animals born in the herd of which 12 had been vaccinated. The only ones to react were the vaccinated animals. Following this test 6 animals (Nos. 67294 Johne's Disease cannot be stated, and in the present herd no proof of real or complete re- covery has been obtained, but the issue is often confused by the difficulty which is experienced, firstly in making a diagnosis at all in this disease and secondly, after making a positive diagnosis, in obtaining confirmation at post mortem examination. In this connection it is of interest to note that although several of the animals shown in Appendix I (Nos. 6, 9, 12, 13, 14, 38 and 68) are recorded as having shown acid-fast organisms in faecal or rectal smears, these were not recovered later at post mortem, either by micro- scopical or cultural examination. Serial No. 44 in the same appendix was artificially infected intravenously with a dose of pure culture of Johne bacilli and gave 3 positive reactions to the avian tuberculin test, yet on post mortem examination acid-fast organisms were not recovered. Another point to be considered is the comparative value of avian tuber- culin and of Johnin, applied by the double intradermal method, for the diag- nosis of this disease. As noted above, in this work out of 46 reactors to avian tuberculin 24 were proved to be positive for Johne's disease, while out of 14 non-reactors, suspected of Johne's infection on other grounds, 9 were found to be positive. With regard to Johnin there are a number of observations in the literature. Reference to some of these is given by Minett [1933, 1935] who has also reported on the value of a synthetic Johnin for the diagnosis of Johne's disease in cattle. In a series of 53 animals which had reacted to the double intradermal method of testing, 39 were proved to be infected on post mortem examination, while there was presumptive evidence of this infection, either from post mortem examination or from the history of the case, in eleven of the remaining 14. Repeat tests on a number of the animals in this series showed much variation in the degree of local response to Johnin, a result which was attributed to variations in the allergic state. A few other cattle which were at an advanced stage of the disease did not react. The vaccination experiments in the Mukteswar herd were started with the possibility in mind that the disease would spread easily and that in this way the value of vaccination might be judged. Unfortunately, since the disease did not spread and the number of calves available for vaccination was small, no conclusion can be drawn as to the usefulness or otherwise of the method and the second object of the work in the experimental herd was therefore not achieved. The question may be asked finally in what way the conditions of the present experiment differ from those cases in which the disease seems to spread without hindrance. The favourable conditions under which the animals in this experiment were maintained have already been referred to and it seems probable that under good farming conditions the disease spreads easily only (a) when there is a high level of infective material within a restricted space, (b) when the level of host susceptibility is high, as when there is a high proportion of very young animals. With the present herd an attempt has been made to estimate the chances at different times of healthy animals acquir- ing infection by preparing a list of (a) the number of infected animals in January and July in each year and their status as regards clinical or latent infection and (b) the number of healthy or presumably healthy contacts and their age on the same dates. The ratio of (a) to (b) would clearly be a means of judging
F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 295 the chances of spread at different stages of the experiment. The actual results of this enquiry are not detailed here but it is strongly suggested that the danger of infection spreading could at no time have been great, in view of the high average age of the contacts and the paucity of animals suffering from the disease in clinical form. Under these circumstances some 75 per cent of the animals at the most susceptible age escaped infection. The results of the Mukteswar experiment are in general accord with those of Hagan and Zeissig [1933] who found in their six years' experience of a herd experimentally infected with Johne's disease that even under conditions of severe exposure a considerable number of animals failed to contract the disease naturally. SUMMARY An account is given of a herd of cattle maintained at Mukteswar for a period of 10 years to determine the chances of Johne's disease spread- ing amongst them. Although a number of naturally infected adult animals died of the disease and although some 25 per cent of the calves born in the herd also became infected and died, there was no general spread of infection under the conditions there prevailing and at the termination of the experi- ment Johnin testing of the whole herd and post mortem examination of 6 animals selected at random indicated that the disease had disappeared. It seems, therefore, that in practice there is no great danger of Johne's disease becoming established in a well-managed herd, unless there is a high initial level of infection in a restricted space, and a relatively large proportion of highly susceptible, i.e. very young animals, are present. REFERENCES Cooper, H. & Srinivasan, M. K. (1931). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 1, 215. Hagan, W. A. & Zeissig, A. (1933). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc. 82, 391 296 Johne's Disease APPENDIX 1 History in brief of animals belonging to the experimental herd (showing the age at entry, duration of stay in herd and fate) (1) C. Bihar. 4 yr. Aug. 29F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 297 APPENDIX 1298 Johne's Disease (87) B. b. Jan. 35 of C. 5 (61). Still alive. (88) B. C. b. Jun. 38 of C. 51 (82). Dest. July 40. J. d. F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 209 APPENDIX 2 (a) Results of tests with ordinary and avian tuberculin. (Animals with serial Nos. 1 to 60) Serial No. Animal Date of test Result with Diagnosis post mortem Avian tuberculin Ordinary tuberculin 1 C. May 29 . . + 300 Johne s Disease Serial No. Animal Date of test Result with Diagnosis post mortem Avian tuberculin Ordinary tuberculin 10 C. Apr. 30 . . + F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 301 Serial No: Animal Date of test Result with Diagnosis post mortem Avian tuberculin Ordinary tuberculin 22 B Mar. 37 . . + 302 Johne's Disease Serial No. Animal Date of test Result with Diagnosis post mortem Avian tuberculin Ordinary tuberculin 32 C. Jun. 33 . . F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 303 Serial No. Animal Date of test Result with Diagnosis Avian tuberculin Ordinary tuberculin 46 H. Jun. 33 . . 304 Johne's Disease APPENDIX 2(b) Results of tests with ordinary and avian tuberculin and with synthetic tuberculin and Johnin (Animals with Serial Nos. 61 to 95) Serial No. Animal Date of test Avian tuber- culin Ordi- nary tuber culin Synth etic tuber- culin Synth- etic Joh- nin Diagnosis post mortem Remarks 61 C. Apr. 30 . + F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 305 Serial No. Animal Date of test Avian tuber- culin Ordi- nary tuber- culin Synth- etic tuber- culin Synth- etic Joh- nin Diagnosis Remarks 70 C. July 29 . 306 Johne's Disease Serial No. Animal Date of test Avian tuber- cul in Ordi- nary tuber- culin Synth- etic tnber- culin Synth- etic Joh- nin Diagnosis Remarks 83 H. Apr. 40 . . . . . F. WARE AND M. K. SRINIVASAN 307 APPENDIX 3 Vaccination Results Year No. of animals Found infected with Johne's disease Johne's infection not found Still living Remarks 1930-33 . 8 vaccinated . 3 2 3 Bacilli in saline used for vaccination 8 controls . 4 *3 1 1934-40 . 14 vaccinated . 1 4 9 Bacilli in oil and sand used for vaccination 13 controls . 2 2 9 * One was tubercular
MULTIPLICATION OF B. ANTHRACIS AND CL. CHAUVF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 309 that in his experiments urine, blood or hay infusion were added to the soil, that all the materials were sterilized by heat and that the methods used, being based merely on microscopical appearances, would now-a-days be considered hardly sufficient. While his conclusions may have been correct in the cir- cumstances, his work certainly does not support the contention that the orga- nism can multiply in soil under natural conditions. In a publication from the United States Department of Agriculture, written by Salmon and Theobald Smith [1904], it is said, 'Meteorological conditions also have an important share in determining the severity of the disease. On these tracts subject to inundations in spring, a very hot, dry summer is apt to cause a severe outbreak. The relation which the bacillus bears to these conditions is not positively known. It may be that during and immediately after inundations or in stagnant water the bacilli find enough nourishment in the water here and there to multiply and produce an abundant crop of spores.' Milks [1910] thought that his laboratory experiments indi- cated that anthrax bacteria would grow in low, swampy places or in any place where there was sufficient moisture. In a popular bulletin on anthrax written by Higgins [1916] and issued by the Department of Agriculture, Ottawa, the following statement appears : ' Our experiments would also indicate the probability that the germ is not only capable of remaining alive in soil but that it can also reproduce itself where conditions are favourable. All soils, however, would not lend themselves with equal facility to the vegeta- tion of the anthrax organism. A suitable soil must be slightly alkaline if marked growth is to take place. We have found that a decoction of leaves is too acid to permit the growth of the bacilli. When, however, such a de- coction is tempered with an alkaline soil, growth might take place under favourable temperature conditions.' Szpilman [1914] states that the disease is indigenous in certain regions (so-called anthrax districts) which are of a marshy humus-rich nature over an impervious subsoil. But it is pointed out that it may also occur on other soil formations, e.g. chalk or clay. In Pomerania, anthrax occurs almost exclu- sively on peat pastures with lime subsoil or on heavy loam, close to river beds [Stampa, 1935]. Pokschischewsky and Golowin [1933] note the usual belief that favourable conditions for the development of anthrax are found on soils that are rich in organic matter and sufficiently damp. They attempt- ed to obtain support for this contention by periodic recording of the pH, moisture content and temperature of the soil from permanently infected areas, as well as by bacteriological examination of the soil for anthrax. Few details are given and the claims of the authors are largely hypothetical. Burow [1912] in Germany could find no correlation between anthrax outbreaks and the composition of the soil. He considers that in the warm season the an- thrax bacillus, thanks to nutritive substances fortuitously offered to it, finds in the soil an opportunity for better ' development'. The surface layers in particular have to be considered. Writing of the disease in South Africa, Kehoe [1917] states that there are special districts where the disease appears to have been unusually pre- valent. The author also refers to Hutcheon, who believed that the prevalence of anthrax in South Africa in summer and autumn was to be explained by
310 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. ChauvF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 311 From a perusal of veterinary literature, it may be concluded that there is much uncertainty as to whether pathogenic organisms which find their way into the soil actually multiply therein. It is well known, on the other hand, that many of the common soil bacteria have an antagonistic action upon bacteria, pathogenic or otherwise. A familiar and classical example is the inhibitory effect of ' bacillus pyocyaneus ' upon the anthrax bacillus but many other bacteria have a similar action. For instance, Isabolinski and Sobolewa [1934] have recently emphasized that Bact. coli is antagonistic to B. anthracis both in vivo and in vitro ; when both are sown together in broth, coli alone grows. Proteus vulgaris and also mixtures of streptococci and staphylococci are likewise antagonistic. As Lewis [1929] and Waksman and Woodruff [1940] point out, a rich literature has now accumulated on the subject of bacterial antagonism and many efforts have been made to deter- mine the properties and nature of the antagonistic substances produced. Blackquarter Blackquarter also is referred to as a soil disease and its prevalence in certain countries is stated to be similar, in many respects, to that of anthrax and to be related to particular types of soil. Thus, Hunziker [1927] states that in Switzerland outbreaks of blackquarter are related to the chalk content of the soil. Viljoen and Scheuber [1926], writing of blackquarter in South Africa, state that, although the disease occurs in all parts, it tends to be regionally distributed, being more prevalent in low-lying areas. There is no reason to believe that the disease in South Africa is connected with any special kind of soil but its occurrence is seasonal, being at its worst during the spring and early summer months and especially after heavy rains. The organism is generally believed to be a facultative parasite, capable of exist- ing and multiplying in the soil of certain localities, but, as the authors state ' no experimental evidence to prove this contention or to show how long the organism can exist outside the animal body has ever been advanced ' Seddon and Edgar [1930] say that, although the soil of damp or marshy areas is usually regarded as the normal habitat of Cl. chauv312 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. ChauvF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 313 The Mukteswar soils were passed first through a coarse sieve, then ground lightly and put through a 1 mm. sieve ; the sieved soil was then air-dried and stored in jars at laboratory temperature. At time of use, 25-50 gm. were transferred to 125 c.c. bottles of 5 cm. diameter, water was added and the wool-plugged bottles autoclaved for 1-2 hours at 20-25 lb. pressure. Later in attempting to surmount the difficulty of sterilizing this amount of soil at one or two heatings in the small bottles, the soil was placed in thin layers in open beakers and flooded with water before autoclaving. After cooling, the wet soil was placed in the bottles and re-autoclaved. When cold, sterile water was added to give the required concentration and indiarubber corks were fitted to the bottles. (One of the major difficulties in this work has been to sterilize the soil effectively ; our efforts were not always successful, even when 25 gm. amounts spread in thin (about 1 cm.) layers and well flooded with water were autoclaved). Tests were also made with natural (i.e. un- sterilized) soil. At the conclusion of the experiment, the water content of each sample was taken as a check. Water A few experiments were made to see if B. anthracis and Cl. chauv314 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. ChauvInd. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part IV ] [PLATE XXI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Characteristic surface and deep colonies of B. anthracis on agar
F. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 315 18 c.c. saline. 1.0 c.c. amounts were then seeded into tubes of brain-liver medium. After 24 and 48 hours at 37°C. those tubes showing gas were noted. After incubation, a microscopical examination was made from all the culture tubes and those sown from sterilized soil dilutions were also planted out on agar to detect any aerobic contamination. It was found that in the con- ditions of experiment gas production could usually be taken as an index of growth of chauv316 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. ChauvF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 317 The behaviour of the anthrax bacillus in these soils is shown in Table V. It is seen that growth takes place in all cases, except in very acid soils, where as would be expected, there is a tendency for growth to be inhibited. Naturally, the saturation capacity of these soils varied greatly but they were all brought to the water-logged state before being seeded. It may here be noted that, according to Koci [1934], the extreme pH limits for growth of the anthrax bacillus are 6.6 and 8.7, with an optimum between 7.2 and 8.1. B. Natural (unsterilized) soils and water containing same In experiments with natural soils, a suitable quantity of air-dry Muktes- war soil was thoroughly mixed with two-fifths of its weight of tap water and amounts corresponding to 200 gm. of the dry soil were distributed in 250 c.c. bottles (bottom diameter 6.3 cm.). Some of the bottles were sterilized to act as controls and the water content then readjusted to equal roughly that of the unheated soil. The actual water content of all bottles was taken at the end of the experiment. In the water experiments, thin layers of soil (50 gm.) were placed in rounded 500 c.c. flasks and filled with distilled water. Some were autoclaved to act as controls. Anthrax spores were added in known numbers to the bottled soil and well mixed. Spores were similarly added to the water in the flasks. After various periods at 25°C. or 30°C., the soil was again mixed, the flasks were shaken and samples (4.8 gm. soil, 4 c.c. water) withdrawn for making dilu- tions,318 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. ChauvF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 319 The observations set out in this paper do not support the view of those who believe that the anthrax bacillus may lead a saprophytic mode of exis- tence. In a sense, therefore, it might be considered erroneous to speak of anthrax as a soil disease. It is admitted that in most countries soil tempera- ture and moisture conditions might at times be suitable but there was no sign of growth in natural soil stored in the laboratory in bottles under favourable conditions and there seems to be no reason why the result should have been otherwise in the open. One may put it that the organism has no need to rely on saprophytism to maintain itself in the world, since in animals dying of anthrax the disease is septicaemic and hence there is a good chance of the surroundings becoming heavily contaminated. Considered from this point of view, the organism is a parasite as obligatory as, say, the tubercle bacillus both in hot and in temperate countries, but, at the same time, its chance of survival outside the host are high owing to the resistance of its spores. We have seen little in the literature which might help one to visualize quantitatively the possible extent of ground contamination. Szpilman [1914] refers to an observation where one loopful of blood from a rabbit at the time of death produced some 4,000 anthrax colonies, or nearly 200 million bacteria in 100 gm. blood. We have taken the opportunity of making some further observations of the same nature. In the blood of guinea-pigs freshly dead of anthrax we have found the numbers of organisms to vary from about one to 25 millions in each drop. In the blood of 5 goats dying of anthrax in other experiments, the numbers of anthrax colonies (in millions) developing from 1.0 c.c. of blood were : 22, 50, 72, 260, 370. From the blood-stained nasal discharge of dead goats the number of colonies (in thousands) growing from 1.0 c.c. were : 250, 460, 520, 1000. In 4 goats the nasal discharge was not visibly blood-stained ; from 3 of these no anthrax colonies were ob- tained, from the fourth there were 18,000 per c.c. In a hill bull just dead of anthrax, the organisms in blood-stained nasal discharge numbered 800,000 per c.c. In another hill bull freshly died of anthrax, which we had the oppor- tunity to examine, there were 2.5 million viable organisms per c.c. haemo- lysed blood taken from a peripheral vein and in the blood-stained nasal discharge there were 8,000 per c.c. It cannot be said that the failure of the anthrax bacillus to grow in natural soil or water was entirely unexpected. The organism is known to be suscepti- ble to the action of bacterial antagonists and these apparently suffice to res- train multiplication even when, by chance, temperature and other conditions are favourable. We have, in fact, isolated from Mukteswar soil two bacterial species which are definitely inhibitory to the anthrax bacillus. In the case of C l. chauv320 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. ChauvF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 321 Hastings, E. G. (1923). Abs. Bact. 7, 6 Henry, H. (1929). System of Bact., Med. Res. Coun. 3, 40 Hesse, E. (1924). Archiv. f. Tierheilkunde. 50, 168 Higgins, C. H. (1916). Dept. Agric., Ottawa Bull. 23 Houston, A. C. (1911). Quoted by Henry, H., p. 41 Hunziker, R. Ref. in 1927. Schweizer Arch. f. Tierheilkunde. 69, 217 Isabolinski, M. P. and Sobolewa, R. M. (1934-5). Z. Bakt. Orig. 133, 107 Keen, B. A. (1926). J. Min. Agric. 33, 210 Keen, B. A. and Russell, E. J. (1921). J. Agric. Sci. 11, 211 Kehoe, D. (1917). 5th & 6th Rep. Dir. Vet. Ser., S. Africa, 211 Koci, E. (1934). Biol. Abs. 8, 2279 Lewis, I. M. (1929). J. Bact. 17, 89 Mair, W. (1908). J. Hyg. 8, 37 Martin, S. (1897-8). Local Govt. Board, Rep. Med. Officer 308 M'Fadyean, J. (1898). J. Comp. Path. & Therap. 11, 51 Milks, H. J. (1910). J. Trop. Vet. Sci. 4, 162 Mollet, F. (1913). Schweizer Arch. f. Tierheilkunde. 55, 413 Oppermann, T. (1906). Archiv. f. Tierheilkunde. 32, 41 Pokschischewsky, N. A. & Golowin, A. D. (1933). Z. Haustiere. 43, 93 Read, W. D. B., Singh, G., Seal, S. C. and Bose, S. (1939). Ind. J. Med. Res. 27, 1 Salmon, D. E. and Smith, Theobald (1904). U. S. Dept. Agric., Bureau An. Indust., Circular 71 Schrakamp, F. (1884). Archiv. f. Hygiene. 2, 335 Seddon, H. R. and Edgar, G. (1930). Aust. Vet. J. 6, 98 Stampa, W. (1935). Biol. Abs. 9, 363 Szasz, A. (1914). Z. Haustiere. 15, 442 Szpilman, J. (1914). 10th Int. Vet. Cong. Rep. 3, 367 Thornton, H. G. (1922). Ann. App. Biol. 9, 241 Viljoen, P. R., Curson, H. H. and Fourie, P. J. J. (1928). 13th & 14th Rep. Dir. Vet. Ser. S. Africa, 431 Viljoen, P. R. and Scheuber, J. R. (1926). Ibid. 11th & 12th, 501 Waksman, S. A. & Woodruff, H. B. (1940). J. Bact., 40, 581
322 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. Chauv322 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and CL ChauvF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 323 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] TABLE II
P. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA TABLE II Growth of anthrax in Mukteswar soil B at varying water content and, except where otherwise stated, at 25°C. Number of experiment . . 3 3 3 4 5 3 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 4 5 7 6* 8* 7 6 8 324 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. Chauv324 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and CI. ChauvF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 325 TABLE IV Growth of anthrax in Mukteswar soil B containing various enrichment substances Number of experiment . . . . 7 8 9 7 9 8 10 8 11 11 Horse manure Plant manure Ammonium sulphate Lime Super- phos- phate Water content of soil, (estimated per cent of dry soil) 30 30 30 30 40 40 326 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. ChauvF. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 327 TABLE VI d growth of anthrax in natural soil Number of experiment 18 13 14 15 16 17 Sterilized soil (controls) 30ºC Temperature Water content Estimated per cent 21 27 31 30 35 38 57 266 180 126 52 F. C. MINETT AND M. R. DHANDA 327 TABLE VI Attempted growth of anthrax in natural soil Number of experiment 13 14 15 16 17 18 13 14 15 16 17 Natural soil Sterilized soil (controls) Temperature . . . 25°C. 25°C. 30°C. 30°C. 30°C. 30°C. Water content (final per cent) 20 27 34 33 36 34 21 27 31 30 35 38 Estimated number of anthrax bacteria added (per gm. wet soil) 47 256 180 126 52 150 57 266 180 126 52 Plated or injected328 Multiplication of B. Anthracis and Cl. ChauvTHE VITAMIN A CONTENT OF COW'S BUTTER AND GHEE AND OF BUFFALO GHEE BY B. N. MAJUMDAR, M.Sc. Research Assistant, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 21 July 1941) BUTTER and ghee have been analysed from time to time by various workers for their vitamin A activity [Morgan and Pritchard, 1935, 1937 ; Baumann et al., 1934; Baumann and Steenbock, 1933; Gillam et al., 1936; Bacharach, 1930; Grewal, 1933 ; Grewal and Kochar, 1938; De and Majumdar, 1938]. The values in most cases have been recorded in terms of Carr-Price or Blue values, instead of the easily understood International Units. For comparative work, this has introduced difficulties as there are no recognized conversion factors for the expression of Blue values in terms of International Units. Apart from the above reports, little information was available on the vitamin A contents of butter and ghee prepared from the same source. Since butter and ghee, particularly the latter, are important constituents of Indian diet, it was thought desirable to undertake a systematic survey of this question and to present the results in International Units. Ten samples of fresh butter (cow's*), were therefore, obtained from the Government Dairy Farm, Wellington, where it was specially prepared on successive days without the addition of salt or colouring matter. Ghee was prepared in the laboratory from these samples in open porcelain dishes over a naked flame. The spectrophotometric method of assaying vitamin A and carotene was adopted. The principle and details of the method are similar to those described by De [1937]. The band at 328 mµ was taken as characteris- tic of vitamin A and that at 463 mµ of carotene. The bases of calculation were 1,600 for vitamin A and 1,900 for carotene. In this connection, 18 samples of buffalo ghee (sent by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser to the Govern- ment of India) were also analysed as it was considered importart to know the difference in the vitamin A activities of cow and buffalo ghee. The results are recorded in Tables I and II. In tabulating the data, one microgram of vitamin A was taken to be equivalent to 1.56 I.U. and one microgram of carotene equivalent to 1.66 I. U. [Morgan et al., 1935]. *The cows from which the butter was obtained were mostly cross-bred animals. (329)
330 Vitamin A Content of Cow's Butter and Ghee and Buffalo Ghee TABLE I Vitamin A and carotene content of cow's butter and of ghee prepared from the same material Sample Material Moisture content Vitamin A per gm. of fat I.U. Carotene per gm. of fat I.U. 1 Butter 16.0 17.5 10.8 Ghee .. 14.7 9.3 2 Butter 13.0 15.6 9.0 Ghee .. 13.7 8.0 3 Butter 19.0 18.1 11.5 Ghee .. 14.7 9.1 4 Butter 17.0 15.3 8.8 Ghee .. 13.0 7.4 5 Butter 19.0 20.4 8.7 Ghee .. 16.2 6.6 6 Butter 15.4 19.7 8.7 Ghee .. 17.0 7.3 7 Butter 15.2 15.0 6.3 Ghee .. 12.2 5.0 8 Butter 17.1 20.0 8.8 Ghee .. 15.4 6.6 9 Butter 18.1 19.0 8.5 Ghee .. 15.4 6.6 10 Butter 16.2 16.2 3.3 Ghee .. 9.0 1.8
B. N. MAJUMDAR 331 TABLE II Vitamin A content of buffalo ghee Sample Nos. Vitamin A per gm. of fat 1 0.98 2 1.98 3 0.73 4 2.43 5 2.93 6 1.21 7 1.98 8 1.21 9 1.45 10 0.97 11 1.45 12 1.45 13 3.40 14 2.43 15 2.90 16 3.40 17 1.98 18 1.47 The average vitamin A value of the cow butter samples was found to be 17.7 I.U. per gm. of fat and the carotene content 8.4 I.U. The vitamin A content and the carotene values of ghee samples prepared from the above butter were on an average 14.1 I.U. and 6.8 I.U. per gm. respectively ; while, with buffalo ghee the average vitamin A value observed was 1.9 I.U. per gm. and traces only of carotene were found to be present. These are within the range of those reported by some other workers. Next, in continuation of previous work [De and Majumdar 1938], it was thought worthwhile to study how far the period of heating and the maxi- mum temperature reached in the course of the preparation of the ghee samples were responsible for the destruction of the vitamin A originally present. The results tabulated in Table III show that the loss of vitamin A during the preparation of ghee was on an average 17.4 per cent and depended on the temperature and the period of heating.
332 Vitamin A Content of Cow's Butter and Ghee and Buffalo Ghee TABLE III Effect of temperature and the period of heating on the vitamin A content of ghee Sample Nos. Period of heating (in minutes) Maximum tem- perature reached (in °C.) Loss of vitamin A per cent 1 30 125 16.0 3 B. N. MAJUMDAR 333 Note After the present communication was sent to the press, an article on the Vitamin A content of ghee by M. C. Muthanna and P. K. Seshan (Ind. Med. Gaz. 1941, 76, 487) has appeared. The average values of the vitamin A content of Bengal and Sind ghee, as found by these authors, agree fairly well with the results reported in this paper. REFERENCES Bacharach, A. L. (1930). Brit. Med. J. 2, 141, July 26th Baumann, C. A., Steenbock, H., Beeson, W. M. and Rupel, I. W. (1934). J. Biol. Chem. 105, 167 Baumann, C. A. and Steenbock, H. (1933). ibid, 101, 547 De, N. K. (1937). Ind. Jour. Med. Res. 24, 737 De, N. K. and Majumdar, B. N. (1938) ibid, 25, 857 Gillam, A. E., Heilbron, I. M., Ferguson, W. S., and Watson, S. J. (1936). Biochem. J. 30, 1728 Grewal, K. S. (1933). Quart. J. Pharm. & Pharmacol. 6, 650 Grewal, K. S. and Kochar, B. D. (1938) Ind. J. Med. Res. 25, 623 Morgan, R. S., and Pritchard, H. (1935). Analyst, 60, 355 ON THE NATURE OF THE URINOGENITAL PAPILLA OF C LARIAS BATRACHUS (LINN.) AND HETEROPNEUSTES FOSSILIS (BLOCH) BY H. K. MOOKERJEE, D.Sc. (LOND.), D.I.C., F.N.I. S. R. MAZUMDAR, M.Sc. AND B. DAS GUPTA, M.Sc. Department of Zoology, Calcutta University (Received for publication on 13 April 1940) (With two text-figures) IN a recent article by the authors [Mookerjee, Mazumdar and Das Gupta, 1940] attention was directed to the differences between the external urinogenital structures in the males and females of the species. In the pre- sent article they propose to deal with similar structures in two other catfishes popularly known as ' Magur' and ' Singi' which are of great economic im- portance in Bengal. The presence of urinogenital papillae or the so-called pseudo-copulatory organs has been recorded in a number of siluroid and other fishes [Dean, 1923]. More recently Hora and Law [1941, 1 and 1941, 2] described such structures in certain species of Mystus (= Macrones) and Batasio (Family: Bagridae), and in Gagata (Family : Sisoridae), but so far as the authors are aware the urinogenital papillae of' Magur ' and ' Singi ' which belong to the genera Clarias (Family: Clariidae) and Heteropneustes (=Saccobrachus) (Family : Heteropneustidae) respectively have not yet been described. In these two fishes the anus and the urinogenital openings, although distinct from each other, are placed close together; the anus being in front of the urinogenital opening. The anal opening in both the sexes is an ovoid aperture, guarded by the anal sphincter. The ureters open into the bladder. The urethra and the genital duct in the females open separately while in the males the urethra and the genital ducts are confluent. The urinogenital papilla is a free, muscular, sac-like structure, which arises from the midventral surface of the body shortly behind the anal opening ; it is visible to the naked eye and can easily be raised with a needle. In C. batrachus the comparatively stouter papilla is placed much nearer the anus than it is in H. fossilis. In the females the papilla is more flush with the body surface than it is in the males, particularly in H. fossilis. (334)
H. K. MOOKERJEE, S. R. MAZUMDAR AND B. DAS GUPTA 335 In C. batrachus the urinogenital papilla of the male is elongated and narrower than that of the female ; its free end is pointed in the male and relatively much broader in the female (Fig. 1). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. C larias batrachus (Linn.) In H. fossilis, the urinogenital papillae of both sexes are more or less like those of C. batrachus except that in the former, the papillae are compara- tively narrower and more pointed (Fig. 2). There is a median cleft on the ventral surface of the female urinogenital papilla representing the urinogenital opening, while in the male this opening lies at the tip of the papilla. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Heteropneustes fossilis (Bloch) During the spawning season, the papilla of the females becomes swollen1 and the cleft becomes vascular. Since these fishes are highly prized as diet for invalids in the convalescent state and since there is also a belief that the male specimens are superior to the females in respect of their taste and food value, the shape of the papilla should prove useful for identifying the sexes. Some means to determine the males and females will also prove helpful for the culture of these important edible fishes. 1 The swelling is very marked in specimens fixed in 4 per cent Formaldehyde.
336 Nature of the Urinogenital Papilla The authors made observations on 75 specimens of C. batrachus and 140 specimens of H. fossilis. It was found that the approximate proportion of males to females is 1 : 6 in H. fossilis and 1 : 2 in C. batrachus. ACKNOWLEGEMENT The authors have written this article in consultation with Dr S. L. Hora and are obliged to him for his suggestions and criticism. REFERENCES Dean (1923). Bibliography of Fishes, III, 576, 577 and 606. Hora, S. L. & Law, N. C. (1941, 1). Rec. Ind. Mus. 43. 9. SELECTED ARTICLES EQUINE ENCEPHALOMYELITIS IN INDIA BY J. F. SHIRLAW, M.R.C.V.S. Officer-in-Charge, General Disease Investigation Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (With Plates XXII338 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India Incidentally, about this time, American Veterinary opinion was forsak- ing the time-honoured term " forage poisoning " in horses, in favour of the term " equine encephalomyelitis ", it having been proved by Mayer, Howitt and others [1931] that the common meningo-encephalitis of horses is in reality a specific encephalomyelitis associated with a neurotropic virus. Somewhat later, it was shown that two types of the disease exist in North America, the Eastern and Western, each associated with an immunologically distinct virus. In India, Mosley, Heane and Shirlaw [1934] proved the existence of equine- encephalomyelitis and adduced some evidence to show that the disease bears a distinct relationship to the form of equine encephalomyelitis described by Moussu and Marchand in France [1924], a disease which, they said, was pro- bably imported from America during the World War. Mosley, Heane and Shirlaw [1934] expressed the opinion, based on pathological findings and ex- perimental transmission in two horses, that the disease, in India, is probably due to a neurotropic virus. This revolutionary concept of the etiology of obscure nervous diseases of animals was speedily succeeded by difficulties in interpretation of the syn- drome and pathological feature. Following upon the acceptance of a virus etiology, more attention came to be paid to pathological differences, while variations in the type of virus readily became apparent. Moussu and Marchand claimed that the French form of the disease posses- sed no radical difference from Borna disease, an opinion which Nicolau and Galloway promptly refuted on the grounds that, in Borna disease, the lesions arè essentially confined to the central nervous system and intranuclear inclu- sions, considered specific of Borna disease, are absent in the disease described by Moussu and Marchand. Accepting this opinion, the type of equine encephalomyelitis occurring in America would appear to be an intermediary form. As in Borna disease, lesions of the internal organs are either absent or inconspicuous. Intra- nuclear inclusions are considered not to be a specific diagnostic feature of the American form, although Hurst, in a study of the Western type describes the presence of intranuclear inclusions in the nerve cells of the tissues which he examined. These differences have pointed to the probability that several types of neurotropic virus exist, each tending to a general and similar syndrome, influenced by common epizootic factors. There has been, moreover, a recent tendency to consider that all neurotropic viruses are not essentially parasitic on nerve cells. Certain of them, probably, while evincing a predilection for nerve cells, are not entirely selective, and may invade the tissues of the internal organs with resultant lesions therein. In other words, certain neurotropic viruses possess organotropic affinities. More recently, it has been shown that the viruses of pox and measles and vesicular stomatitis, previously considered as dermatropic and organotropic, possess considerable neurotropic affinities. It appears probable that certain of the equine encephalomyelitis viruses are essentially neurotropic with organotropic affinities, and this probably accounts for the variations in syndrome and pathological expression in a disease which is fundamentally basic in type.
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part IV ] [ PLATE XXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SECTION OF SPINAL CORD AFFECTED WITH SUBPIAL HAEMORRHAGE Note the separation of and pressure upon nerve roots, and the markedly sclerotic appearance of an arterial branch [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SECTION OF CEREBRAL (PARIETAL) CORTEX Intense neuronophagia
PLATE XXIII ] [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SECTION OF CEREBRAL (PARIETAL) CORTEX Perivascular infiltration marked, with diffuse infiltration of monaeytes and total disappearance of nerve cells [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SECTION OF PARIETAL CORTEX (FRONTAL LOBE) Marked perivascular "cuffing," neuronophagia and diffuse monocytosis
J. F. SHIRLAW 339 Hurst has attempted a classification of neurotropic viruses according to the distribution of the lesions encountered on histological examination of the brain, a feat which presupposes that one is dealing with a pure single type virus and one somewhat complicated by the fact that small laboratory animals are in themselves liable to a specific encephalomyelitis, which may flare up on the depressant action induced by the inoculation of a neurotropic virus isolated from a different animal species. Hurst sums up these difficulties in expression, from the point of view of etiological, pathological and clinical considerations, in one pregnant sentence : " The various forms of virus encephalomyelitis bear no closer relation, one to another, than does smallpox to measles." When we remember the intense concentration of highly skilled workers in those countries afflicted with the disease and the controversies that have arisen, the difficulties of the isolated worker in India, on similar problems, may readily be realised. II.340 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India Poyser writing on Kumri [1885] states : " The question of causation attracted more than ordinary attention whenever it (Kumri) assumed an epizootic character and was unusually fatal. Further opportunity (to study the disease ?) was not met with until August, September and October 1884 when so-called Kumri appeared in Meerut in an epizootic form among the horses of the 8th Hussars and among private horses. Such cases occurring simultaneously at Saharanpur have been called Kumri, at Ambala and Muttra paralysis, and in Morar, Brain disease or paralysis. Kettlewell believes that some cases are complicated with cerebro-spinal meningitis and it is not un- likely that this complex phase may obtain, as he says, in some and possibly in the worst cases. It is to be distinctly understood that the recent equine epizootic in Meerut is no new disease : it is simply a very old one with a new name and the same with which the writer had to contend in Meerut twelve or thirteen years ago, there and then registered as Kumri or paralysis." Lingard [1896] describes an outbreak of equine paralysis which he investi- gated at Karnal (Punjab) and comments on peculiar ' acute cases '. It is interesting to note that Lingard ascribed this disease to forage poisoning. Similar outbreaks occurred at Tinnevelly (Madras) in 1914-15, Secunder- abad (Deccan) 1916 and Saharanpur 1923. Among four hundred and twenty five horses at Secunderabad, twenty-two contracted paralysis, fifteen of which had to be destroyed, one dying of the disease. At the same time, four chargers of the 2/7th Hampshire Regiment became affected at a fresh centre in Secunder- abad and three died. It appears obvious, therefore, that an acute cerebral form of the disease (equine encephalomyelitis) was not unusual, in epizootic orm, in certain areas in India where Kumri was rife. The observations of these workers constitute the earliest efforts in organis- ed veterinary work in India. The subsequent history of the disease may be gleaned from the Annual Administration Reports of the Army Veterinary Service in India. In 1921-22, sixty horses were affected with " disease of the nervous system ", eight died and twenty-five were destroyed. Horses, mules, buffaloes and camels are also noted to have been affected with cerebro-spinal meningitis, encephalitis, congestion of the brain, epilepsy, general paralysis, paraplegia, vertigo, chorea and hemiplegia, and it appears obvious that a considerable proportion of these cases, at least, were either Kumri or encepha- lomyelitis. Succeeding reports indicate the comparative and fluctuating frequency of these affections. Outbreaks of equine paraplegia were recorded at the Army Remount Depots at Sargodha, 1923, at the same time as an outbreak at Saharanpur, but it was not until the year 1926-27 that the army reports make mention of a serious outbreak of ' forage poisoning ' at Jhansi (U. P.) in the horses of the 16th Light Cavalry. The outbreak commenced in September, 1926 and within a few days, sixty-one animals were affected, of which twenty-nine died. In addition to this outbreak, eight cases of a similar nature occurred at Mona Remount Depot during October, five cases dying and one recovering. The disease reappeared at Mona in February 1927, six horses being affected with five deaths. These cases were attributed to sorghum poisoning, but the clinical histories suggest equine encephalomyelitis.
J. F. SHIRLAW 341 The following year at Jhansi (August 1927) a serious outbreak of ' tym- panitic colic ' broke out in the horses of the regiment affected during the pre- ceding year and the 31st Mule Transport Company. Within nine days, sixty cases occurred, with ten deaths. This outbreak was ascribed to forage poison- ing and guinea grass was considered a possible etiological factor. It appears probable, from such meagre records as obtain, that the disease was a recrude- scence of the disease noted during the previous year. During January, 1930, fourteen cases of ' poisoning ' occurred among the horses of the 22nd Field Battery R. A., Lucknow, of which one died, two developed paraplegia and were destroyed, and eleven recovered. This out- break, undoubtedly one of equine encephalomyelitis, was considered to be due to soaked gram fed to the horses. In the winter of 1930, Simpson investigated an outbreak of disease in army horses at Rawalpindi. The symptoms were those commonly associated with equine encephalomyelitis and the cause was ascribed to ratti seed poison- ing. At about the same time, fourteen cases of a similar disease occurred at the Remount Depot, Saharanpur. This outbreak was diagnosed as paraplegia and the fodder incriminated as the source of origin. The year 1933 saw the severest and most extensive outbreak of paraplegia which has affected a cavalry regiment and a thorough investigation showed the disease to be a true encephalomyelitis which does not differ in any vital respect from the same disease which has given rise to a great wealth of literature in other countries in recent years. A second severe outbreak of equine encephalomyelitis occurred in the same regiment during the winter of 1935-36, but no major epizootic has since occur- red. Minor outbreaks, in which two or three horses may be affected, have, however, been frequent during the last few years, while sporadic cases have, undoubtedly, gained in frequency. Equine encephalomyelitis appears firmly rooted in certain areas in India which have now come to be looked upon as enzootic areas and there appears no doubt that today the disease is on the increase. III.342 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India temperature recording of all incontact horses was adopted, towards the end of the outbreak, ten horses suddenly developed pyrexia. Five of theseInd. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part IV ] [ PLATE XXIV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SECTION OF KIDNEY Note the considerable area of haemorrhage, the slight interstitial hyperplasia, and the comparative normality of the tubular epithelium [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CHRONIC FIBROUS LEPTO-MENINGITIS An unusual and somewhat rare lesion in encephalomyelitis
PLATE XXV ] [ Ind J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SMALL ARTERY IN WHITE SUBSTANCE OF CORD Marked perivascular infiltration, over-distension and early rupture of the homonymous vein
J. F. SHIRLAW 343 These, however, are the most important points of comment :344 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India Most of the paraplegia cases commenced with severe dullness, marked lameness in one limb, either fore or hind, quickly followed by incoordination, usually posterior but occasionally anterior, with marked abduction. Several cases showed acute jaundice, while symptoms of colic in some and catarrhal fever in one, ushered in the lameness. A prefebrile stage was noted in several cases. In 1932 (November and December), at Sargodha, twenty two fillies went down with ' paraplegia'. Four fillies had arrived six weeks previously from Saharanpur. The cases ranged from mild to severe. Seven animals were affected with cerebral symptoms, six of which developed repidly from early paraplegia, and the temperature of four rose markedly (106.5°) before death. The remaining cases, all of which were relatively mild, were considered cured at the end of a month. At Lahore (September, 1935PLATE XXVI ] [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XI, Part IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MESIAL SECTION OF CEREBRUM Note the prominent haemorrhages, and the yellowish coloration of the substance. This is fairly typical of equine encephalomyelitis and is produced by dispersal of haemoglobin derivatives consequent on venous haemorrhage or suffusion of blood through over-distension of veins
J. F. SHIRLAW 345 studied. The exact nature of the disease was only determined during the latter part of the outbreak. Individual cases were then observed with an added knowledge of what to look for. Heane has excellently described the epizootology and symptomatology in general, the first concise account of the disease in India. His observations may be amplified by the writer's account of the symp- toms shown in fourteen cases of which he has accurate clinical and post-mortem records. An analysis of these may be of interest to show the peculiar varia- tions of the symptom-complex. Horse 156.346 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India Horse 266.J. F. SHIRLAW 347 one or two symptoms which may be common to other diseases. Diagnosis in these cases must, eventually, unless the disease develops further, depend on pathological examination and demonstration of specific lesions in the central nervous system. Equine encephalomyelitis, like rabies, follows no precise syndrome, even if text-book descriptions might lead one to believe so. Every veterinary officer in India knows how frequently cases of atypical rabies are encountered and how easily a mistaken diagnosis may be made. These remarks apply equally, if not more forcibly, to sporadic cases of equine encephalomyelitis. The writer, however, looks upon the examination of the urine348 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India Horse 282.J. F. SHIRLAW 349 extensive. Liver and kidneys highly congested; bladder, a few petechiæ; spleen, few surface petechiæ and hæmorrhagic. Kidney, highly congested ; lymph glands hæmorrhagic ; blood clots poorly. Horse 312.350 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India Others do not, and cystitis cannot, therefore, be looked upon as a primary lesion of the disease but as essentially secondary. The degree of cystitis which is present in some cases, the marked induration of the bladder wall and the early formation of calculus, force one to the conclusion that the vesical paralysis and retention must have been insidious in its development and even in peracute cases, apparently normal a few hours previously, which suddenly became paralysed and died within twenty-four hours, chronic cystitis may be found. A reasonable explanation of this is that these cases had been undergoing a slow, insidious, progressive invasion of and damage to vital nerve centres and it was only when the infection reached the brain in a massive concentration, or when the damage wrought on the cortical tissues reached a peak, that a crisis was precipitated with the sudden appearance of peracute symptoms. This is not an unreasonable assumption when one considers that, in the subacute and chronic cases the cord is predominantly affected and the cerebral lesions extremely slight, though definite. In spite of the marked cystitis frequently present, no case of ascending pyelitis has ever been encountered. Marked swelling of the spleen appears a fairly constant lesion. Hæmorrhage from the splenic vessels is occasionally severe and coalescence of such areas results in the transformation of the spleen into a vast blood clot with obliteration of the cellular elements. The kidney lesion is of particular interest. The kidney is enlarged, the capsule tense, but the substance is not pale in colour or somewhat mottled as in an acute parenchymatous nephritis. The cut surface possesses a uniform colour and lines of hæmorrhage may be seen radiating between the tubules, both of the medulla and cortex. The arterial branches in the pyramids are sclerotic. This is such a constant lesion in the chronic form of the disease as to be practically diagnostic when the lesions affecting the central nervous system are slight, and there is a strong clinical history. In subacute cases the lesions may be so slight as to escape notice. The only lesions may be a ground glass appearance of the meningeal vessels, and punctate hæmorrhages in the grey matter of the brain and spinal cord. These, as well as the faint hæmorrhagic intertubular striæ in the kidney, may only be visible with a hand lens. Out of nineteen samples of urine examined, all were positive for blood and fifteen for bile pigment. The cerebro-spinal fluid was invariably clear and appeared under pressure. The difficulties in evaluation of pathological findings during the course of an outbreak is well illustrated in the Veterinary Officer's experiences during the outbreak at Sargodha, 1932. Of the seven fillies which died, filly 7804 showed a complete loss of sensation in the quarters and in the perineum and certain brain symptoms were detected. At post-mortem examination, the blood was tarry and fluid, the blood vessels of the brain and cord showed in- tense congestion and numerous petechiæ were present on the bladder mucosa and the intestine. The temperature of this filly rose to 104° before death. Filly 8054, ill for five days, showed no other symptom than incoordination and the only lesion noticed at post-mortem was slight enlargement of the spleen. Filly 8686, ill for the same period, was similarly affected with slight intestinal congestion in addition. In both these cases the temperature rose before death. Filly 8992 showed no lesions at post-mortem. Filly 7987 showed
J. F. SHIRLAW 351 posterior incoordination only and a temperature of 106° before death, after three days illness. The only lesions were slight enlargement of the spleen, slight gastro-enteritis and slight congestion of the bladder, which contained blood-stained urine. Filly 8545 was the most severely affected case and was found down in the paddock unable to rise. Kept in slings, it survived for two months and was finally destroyed. The only symptom noted was grave poste- rior incoordination and marked swelling of the vulva and sexual excitement. Hæmoglobinuria was noticed. At post-mortem, the only lesion found was a chronic indurative cystitis, much blood in the urine and fibrous thickening of the blood vessels in the parenchymatous tissues. Filly 9020 was a case of paraplegia and showed loss of sensation in the quarters and perineum. Brain symptoms were present and the temperature rose to 106.8° before death, after five days illness. The blood was tarry, the intestines showed slight gastro- enteritis, the blood vessels of the brain and cord were markedly prominent, hæmorrhages were seen within the endocardium, the spleen was normal and the bladder was thickened and full of blood. The remaining fillies simply showed symptoms of posterior incoordina- tion, the majority with loss of sensation in the perineal region, paralysis of the tail muscles, sinking of the loins, a straggling gait and vesical and rectal paraly- sis. It will be seen therefore that there was no constant symptomatology in these cases, which would lead one to a solution of the etiological factors. VI.352 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India distribution of these lesions is irregular throughout the brain, relatively slightly affected areas existing alongside of areas in which the changes are expressed in maximum degree, even in adjacent areas of the parietal cortex. In the cord, there is no particular localisation of this process. The dorsal and ventral horns are equally affected, and the lesion is, therefore, unlike that of anterior poliomyelitis in which the anterior horn is alone affected. In no case has it been possible to demonstrate the presence of specific inclusion bodies, whether intranuclear or cytoplasmic, in the nerve cells of Ammon's horn, which is a selective site of occurrence [Nicolau and Galloway.] Bouin was used as a routine fixative, on account of its rapid penetration. According to certain observers [Hurst], sublimate fixed material is to be preferred in examining for inclusion bodies and this observation coincides with the writer's later experiences in the examination of nerve tissues for Negri bodies. The routine stain used was Mann, but the panoptic method, May-Grunwald-Giemsa and Pappenheim, gave equally negative results. It appears, therefore, at the moment, that ' inclusion bodies ' are not a specific feature of the Indian form of equine encephalomyelitis and it is this feature which promptly distinguishes it from ' Borna disease'. The blood vessels, especially the arterioles, of the brain and cord are affected with a chronic, proliferative type of inflammation extending through all coats and leading to a narrowing of the lumen. The gross thickening of the blood vessels is a characteristic lesion. One would expect, in such lesions, to find thrombosis fairly frequent, but this lesion has never been noted and areas of infraction with secondary softening (colliquative necrosis) are certainly absent. The veins are abnormally distended and over dilata- tion tends to spontaneous rupture with considerable haemorrhage. It is not unusual to find, especially in the vessels of the pia-arachnoid, an extensive area of venous haemorrhage surrounding the homonymous artery and, in the cord, effecting a mechanical separation of the dorsal nerve ganglia. The kidney lesion consists, in early cases, of marked haemorrhage between the tubules, which themselves are perfectly normal, although they contain a considerable quantity of blood. Rupture of the capillaries of the glo- merular tuft is frequent. This lesion appears to depend on a primary sclerosis of all branches of the arterial supply of the kidney. It is interesting to note that Nicolau and Galloway encountered a similar lesion in the kidneys of inoculated rabbits. " The condition may be described as renal congestion, not a true nephritis ", and they consider it to originate from a compression of blood vessels. In cases which have survived for a long time, there is a marked tendency for an interstitial change to supervene although haemor- rhages are still prominent. Perivascular infiltration is frequently seen around the small cortical vessels. Similar changes affecting the blood vessels may- be seen in the spleen and liver and, less frequently, in the lungs, and haemor- rhage in these organs has undoubtedly a similar origin to that noted in the kidney. VII.J. F. SHIRLAW 353 that equine encephalomyelitis is caused by the ingestion of toxic forage and this idea of fodder poisoning is one that is still held in many quarters. This theory may be briefly disposed of by stating that:354 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India The mortality due to the technique was nil. Several guinea-pigs and rabbits died within a period of three to eight days, but as they showed no nervous symptoms, it was not considered, at that time, that a specific en- cephalomyelitis had been transmitted. The brain and cord were, fortunately, removed and fixed in each case. It was a surprise, therefore, to find, on histopathological examination of the brain and spinal cord of these cases, precise lesions of encephalomyelitis and this finding naturally led to the planning of more carefully observed experiments. It proved easy to obtain fresh inoculation material, as from this time, reports of sporadic cases of equine encephalomyelitis were frequent. EXPERIMENTAL Transmission Experiments : materialJ. F. SHIRLAW 355 a virulent inoculum, cannot be explained. It may be mentioned that no case of spontaneous occurrence of a specific neurotropic virus infection had ever been noted in the rabbit stock. No group virus immunity could explain the phenomenon. The supposition that a mild degree of cerebral irritation had been induced with a resultant flaring up of a latent but specific virus is one that had no support. The results of guinea-pig inoculations correspond in all essential details with those in rabbits. Two out of three guinea-pigs died with similar and more intense lesions than those noted in rabbits. It will be seen that both guinea-pigs injected subdurally died, with an average period between inocu- lation and death of three days. The lesions in the spinal cords of both guinea- pigs were peracute and the inflammation was entirely monocellular. It will also be noted that one serial transmission was made, with successful result between rabbits 151 and 155. The second set of transmission experiments was carried out with materials from three horses which developed paraplegia some months after the cessation of the main outbreak affecting the horses of the 13th D. C. O. Lancers, and after the regiment, stationed at Jullundur, had been declared free of the disease. Horse 62 developed paraplegia at Khanewal on 7th December 1933 and made an apparent recovery. On 4th October 1934 this animal showed complete incoordination of the posterior limbs with incontinence of urine, which progressed till destruction was necessitated. Horse 233 was a similar case. Pyrexia was noted at Multan on 30th January 1934 and this animal was discharged cured three days later. On 4th October 1934 (the date of a general veterinary inspection of the regiment) lack of coordination and incontinence of urine was noted. Horse 527 developed paraplegia at Khanewal on 24th November 1933 and was a precisely comparable case. These three animals were destroyed at Lahore and the brain and cord used for inoculation experiments in rabbits and guinea-pigs. The technique employed was that of Nicolau and Galloway in their studies of Borna disease. Transmission Experiments : material356 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India Transmission Experiments : materialJ. F. SHIRLAW 357 Transmission experiments : Material358 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India Results of intranasal inoculation of white mice with brain emulsion from a natural case of equine encephalomyelitis Date of inoculation Animal number 22-1-36 140 Died, 3 days. 26-1-36 146 Died, 45 days. 10-3-36 171 Died, 26 days. 7-4-36 3 Died, 18 days. 25-4-36 15 Died, 12 days. 7-5-36 19 Died, 34 days. 12-6-36 26 Died, 45 days. 29-7-36 47 Died, 3 days. 4-8-36 52 Died, 3 days. 8-8-36 58, unfiltered Died 20 days 60, filtered Died. 7 days 61, filtered Died 3 days 68 Died 39 days 66, filtered Died 14 days 86 Died 29 days 69, filtered Died 17 days 71, filtered Died 26 days NOTE.J. F. SHIRLAW 359 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EQUINE ENCEPHALOMYELITIS AND KUMRI Kumri (syn. equine paraplegia, ' Muttra' paralysis) has been defined (Macalister) as a chronic, incurable disease of horses, characterized by inco- ordination and loss of power in the hind limbs, but not attended with obvious visceral disturbance, wasting of muscles or trophic skin lesions. There is a general opinion, in India, that equine encephalomyelitis and Kumri are essentially different diseases, although they may possess a super- ficial resemblance. The importance of this latter disease may be assessed by the comments of the Civil Veterinary Department, Madras, on the Tinnevelly outbreak (1914):360 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India fibrinous lepto-meningitis over the mesial portion of the cerebral hemispheres. In one case, a decided cerebral congestion was observed. In the cord, the dura mater shows a thickened, ground glass appearance indicating a residual meningitis. Punctate haemorrhages are seen in the grey matter of the cord (Macalister). The spinal fluid is clear, if under pressure. Kumri is peculiar in that it appears to possess an enzootic distribution. Its incidence appears remarkably influenced by seasonal variations. It is a disease predisposed to by sudden falls in temperature. In recent years, Sahai has commented on the coexistence of Kumri and equine encephalo- myelitis in Bihar, which is considered the worst affected province in India. Describing the histopathology of the disease, Macalister enumerates all the nerve lesions which have been discussed in equine encephalomyelitis. There is an exact parallel between these two descriptions, and this writer goes on to say : " in other diseases in which the nervous system shows infiltra- tive and degenerative lesions similar to those present in Kumri, there is definite proof that the causal agent is a virus. Whereas, however, the morbid changes in Kumri are not inconsistent with the existence of a causal factor of this class, these appearances do not alone justify the hypothecation of the existence of such an agent, in face of contrary experimental evidence. Such tissue changes may be caused by toxic influences of widely dissimilar type." Pre- cisely what the " contrary experimental evidence " is to which he alludes and the nature of the toxic factors which lead to the production of a non-inflamma- tory encephalomyelitis is not clear. It is a peculiar fact that Macalister confined his studies to the pathology of the spinal cord, although in several cases, he noted macroscopic brain lesions. The writer has conducted extensive studies on the brain and spinal cord of Kumri cases, and the lesions noted histopathologically do not differ in any degree from those observed in equine encephalomyelitis. The lesions of the kidney and arterial system were likewise identical. It is interesting to find that Poyser noted cerebral haemorrhage in certain Kumri cases. Kumri is a spastic paralysis with marked abduction. This indicates an upper motor neuron involvement, and, therefore, lesions in the cerebral cortex affecting the Betz cells, the efferent fibres of which go to form the pyramidal tract. In other words, Kumri is essentially a disease affecting the brain in every case. Poyser's observations on the implication of the heart indicate an impairment of the cranial nerve roots. Sufficient has been said, therefore, to show the analogy between Kumri and equine encephalomyelitis and there can be no doubt that KumriJ. F. SHIRLAW 361 is an opinion that has been tentatively stated and equally denied by clinicians of experience. They are similar diseases in that they both affect the central nervous system of the horse, and in diseases affecting such a highly organized system, the diversity of the type of lesion and the functional expression is the feature to be considered. It is only on an accurate study of the re- active phenomena, in conjunction with detailed study of the nervous lesions, that any attempt can logically be made to correlate these two diseases of apparent dissimilar nature. " Kumri and equine encephalomyelitis have much in common epi- zootologically. Incidence is largely controlled by seasonal variation and climatic factors. On purely clinical con- siderations, Kumri possesses a well defined train of symptoms with little variation. Equine encephalomyelitis is more variable in its outward expression, varying between manifestations of acute cerebral symptoms (true encephalitis) and mild exhibi- tions, usually progressive, of symptoms referable to the spinal cord (true myelitis). In naturally occurring outbreaks of equine encephalomyelitis it is usual to encounter cases pursuing a course which is indistinguishable from classic Kumri. " Pathologically, the two diseases are characterized by an absence of gross anatomic change. Occasionally, in both diseases, tissue haemorrhages, especially haemorrhage in and around the spinal cord, are encountered, although the latter are more common in the fulminating type of encephalitis. It is in the central nervous system that the features are found that justify the assertion that Kumri and equine encephalomyelitis, if not actually identical, are at least most intimately related. Study of the histopathology of the spinal cord and brain reveals a similarity of lesions so striking that little doubt remains, that, in both diseases, there is a common factor producing a common effect varying only in degree. The etiology of Kumri and equine encephalomyelitis remains obscure but since there is a pronounced neurological similarity to certain diseases of the human subject, of virus origin, considerable importance attaches to the possibility of a neurotropic virus being of etiological significance." The terms ' Kumri' (lit. sprained back) and ' paraplegia ', which is merely the symptom of a lesion of the spinal cord or higher nerve centres, are obviously ones that should now be abandoned in favour of the more precise and comprehensive term of equine encephalomyelitis, which, as in other countries, has been shown to be caused by a neurotropic virus. DISCUSSION Equine encephalomyelitis in India bears, apparently, a close relation to the Moussu362 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India (d) ' JoestJ. F. SHIRLAW 363 streptococcal infection (Strep. melanogenes). The part played by this organism in equine encephalomyelitis is one that has given rise to much discussion. It is generally conceded that this organism is of no etiological significance and the fact that it was found in only four cases in spite of strict bacteriological examination must rule it out as a possible pathogenic factor, thus lending additional proof, if that were necessary, to the general consensus of opinion. In three experiments, which are not recorded in the text, attempts were made to reproduce disease in horses by the intrathecal inoculation (two cases) of freshly isolated broth cultures of the organism. One experimental horse received 5 c. c. of the culture intravenously. In none of the cases was any reaction noted. What, therefore, is the explanation of ' septicaemic ' cases, if a bacterial infection is found incapable of proof ? The writer has pointed out that, in certain cases, lesions occur around the hypothalamic area, in which is found the heat regulating centre. Interference in the conducting paths then results in an uncontrolled rise of body temperature and a condition approaching heat stroke. It is interesting to note that, as in heat stroke, the temperature of some of these cases has been observed to rise after death, and the post- mortem lesions, with the severe internal haemorrhage, tarry fluid blood, and rapid decomposition are not dissimilar to those encountered in heat stroke cases at post-mortem. These haemorrhages are not to be confused, however, with those found at post-mortem in which fully clotted extravasations are seen within the brain pulp, around the cord and in the kidney, spleen and liver. These develop, apparently, from venous haemorrhage consequent on a sclerotic arteriole system. Nicolau and Galloway say, when mentioning the areas of haemorrhage in the kidneys of inoculated rabbits, that they appear to develop from compression of the arteries, an opinion with which the writer is in full accord, although it is strange that these writers do not comment on structural dysfunction of the arterial system, if this be a suitable explana- tion. Generally speaking, the severe, acute forms of equine encephalomyelitis in India are associated with severe haemorrhage. In mild cases which progress to paralysis necessitating destruction, extensive haemorrhage is absent and the only vascular abnormality noted is an over-fullness of the veins, both of the central nervous system and the internal tissues. It is impossible to account for the generalized arterial sclerosis and it is peculiar that it has never been observed by writers on the disease in other countries. The writer has frequently observed that in normal Indian horses, there is a decided tendency to arterial sclerosis, and this is ascribed to the general massive helminthic infection, with the absorption of toxins, to which the Indian horse is normally subject. It may be, therefore, that the degree of arterial sclerosis noted in cases of equine encephalomyelitis is not a specific lesion of that disease, although it may be a lesion aggravated by the disease through trophic influences resulting from the impairment of the vaso-motor centre which is one peculiarly susceptible to neuron destruction. It appears fairly certain that, if the intensity of the lesions and their irregular distribution throughout the brain are a criterion, variations in symtomatology owe their origin to this factor. The ultimate elucidation of
364 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India symptoms in individual cases must, apparently, depend on a study of dege- neration of ganglionic centres, and their residual neuronal capacity associated with impulse transference along the neuronal pathways. The question as to whether carriers exist in this disease is one of much importance and has occasioned considerable perplexity in the minds of army authorities in India. That question seems, at least, to have been answered. The proof is indirect, it must be admitted, but the contention that carriers exist is the only reasonable explanation of the genesis of certain outbreaks that have been observed. The history of the three recovered cases which relapsed at Jullundur is a further support of this contention. The virus was recovered from the brain tissue eighteen months after apparent recovery. One question that cannot be answered is, what is the potential danger of such cases in an equine population ? No effectual answer can be supplied at the moment, since all attempts to explain the mysterious spread of the disease during the course of an outbreak have proved unavailing. Attempts were made to transmit the disease to susceptible horses (Jullundur, 1936) by the inoculation of blood from horses showing the earliest symptoms of the disease, with negative results. It would appear at first sight, therefore, that insect vectors can play little part in the dissemination of the disease. Recent American work shows, however, that the virus is present in the blood in the prodormal, prefebrile phase of the infection, and that certain species of Aedes can be responsible for the spread of the disease. This aspect of the problem is one that has not, as yet been studied in India and is one, obviously, that demands further investigation. The writer believes, however, although the evidence may be circumstantial, that infection is air borne, as in the case of the equine influenza virus. One of the earliest symptoms in the disease, and one that is frequently overlooked, is a mild, watery discharge from the nose. The nasal pharyngeal atrium is one that is well established in certain neurotropic diseases of the human subject and the extreme susceptibility of small rodents to intranasal insufflation, in conjunction with observed clinical facts, points to a probability of this being the method of spread during the course of an outbreak. Whatever the method of spread of the virus, there appear to be deter- mining or controlling factors which, during the course of an outbreak, operate conjointly with the virus. The waves of infection noted appear to be governed, in some obscure fashion, by external (climatic) and possibly metabolic factors. There can be little doubt of the truth of that observation and in this direction, rather than in an immediate solution of the vagaries of the virus, much im- portant work remains to be done. " The circumstances under which infection occurs appear to depend upon the presence of favouring environmental conditions, the nature of which is unknown ". (Edelman, quoted by Hutyra and Marek). The somewhat equivocal results obtained in transmission experiments in rabbits are comparable with the results recorded by American and French workers. Meyer [ 1932 ] explains these apparent discrepancies by saying " it is sometimes impossible to find the virus in the central nervous system, as the results either of unequal distribution or of autolysis." Lesions in the brain are, in the Indian form of equine encephalomyelitis, certainly of irregular
J. F. SHIRLAW 365 distribution and one would be entitled to believe, therefore, that the distri- bution of the virus corresponds to the distribution of the lesions. Yet, so far as the results recorded in the text can be considered conclusive, Guinea-pigs are invariably susceptible to subdural inoculation of brain sus- pensions and filtrates, thus proving a distribution of the virus, not necessarily uniform, throughout the brain. The probable explanation is that Guinea- pigs are much more suceptible to the virus than rabbits. In the two inocula- tions performed on the horse, this animal appeared particularly susceptible and it would appear, therefore, that animal host susceptibility is a variant factor. Hurst has shown, for example, that the monkey alone is susceptible to the virus of anterior poliomyelitis and so strict is the host specificity, that the Old World monkey is alone susceptible. Variations in the strains and virulence of strains is another factor that must be reckoned with. Kumri lesions are usually of a mild degree, and it is possible, therefore, that the strain responsible for the initiation of the lesions is of a mild degree of virulence. It would be as correct to argue, however, that in Kumri enzootic areas the majority of animals have acquired some degree of immunity through exposure to latent infection, an observation that is supported by the fact that, in such areas, acute"explosive " cases of the disease are not rare. The work of Macalister on Kumri is a classic. It would be out of place to criticise it too severely but it must be remembered that this author was writing at a time when the knowledge of neurotropic virus diseases was in its infancy. World-wide research has illumined many obscurities. Macalister defines Kumri as a combined diffuse sclerosis and central poliomyelitis of the horse, with demyelination of the nerve tracts. He states, that the title chosen is not free from objections, as he was uncertain whether sclerosis was a primary or secondary lesion. The writer has been unable to confirm Macalister's findings that Kumari is a demyelinating disease with secondary sclerosis. A large number of spinal cords both from cases of equine encephalomyelitis and those designated Kumri have been examined by Busch's modification of the Marchi method, with entirely negative results. These were selected from recent, acute cases of the disease and it is considered that the lesions described by Macalister were probably secondary, dependent on extensive neuron degeneration, although even in chronic cases of Kumri, these lesions could not be determined by the writer. Demyelination is not a primary lesion of neurotropic virus infections. ' A point worthy of emphasis is that these neurotropic viruses are not responsible for direct damage to the myelin sheaths : when nerve cells are destroyed, the usual type of Wallerian degeneration ensues in the corresponding nerves and tracts, but a primary attack on the myelin is characteristic of quite another type of encephalitis ' [Hurst]. If a type of encephalitis of different features from equine encephalomye- litis (or Kumri) exists in India, it has not made itself apparent. CONCLUSIONS 1. Equine encephalomyelitis, of a type strictly comparable with that existing in Western countries, exists in India.
366 Equine Encephalomyelitis in India 2. The disease is caused by a neurotropic filtrable virus which can readily be transmitted to susceptible small animals, as well as the horse, with the production of classic lesions. 3. Equine encephalomyelitis manifests three types during the course of an outbreak, cerebral, spinal and mixed cerebro-spinal. 4. Kumri is a form of encephalomyelitis in which the disease mainly assumes a spinal form, although acute cerebral types are not uncommon. REFERENCES Burke, R. W. (1897). Veterinarian 70, 263 and 570. Howitt, B. F. (1932). Jour. Inf. Dis. 51, 493 and 565. Hupbauer, A. (1933). Wien. Tierarztl. Mschr. 20. Hurst, E. W. (1934). Jour. Exp. Med. 59, 529. THE POSSIBLE EXISTENCE OF FOWL PARALYSIS (NEUROLYMPHOMATOSIS GALLINARUM) IN INDIA BY R. L. KAURA, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. Assistant Animal Husbandry Commissioner with the Government of India OUTBREAKS of paralysis in fowls have appeared in Germany, Holland, America, Canada, British Isles and in many other countries, which suggest that this disease is world-wide in its distribution. In India the disease has been reported from Bombay by Mohey Deen [1933] who concluded that fowl paralysis (wry neck) was due to calcium deficiency, from Hyderabad by Mahajan [1934] who reported it as polyneuritis in fowls, from Mysore by Krishniengar [1937] who described it as neurolymphomatosis gallinarum and from the Central Provinces by Bachan Singh [1940] who described it as leg weakness in poultry due to nutritional deficiency. Kaura and Ganapathy Iyer [1937] have described paralysis of legs, wings, head and neck in poultry due to Ranikhet disease virus which apparently became neurotropic in type. Para- lysis occurring as a result of parasitic infestation is also not uncommon. Un- fortunately very little trouble has been taken to differentiate and classify the various types of paralysis and the possibility of a simultaneous occurrence of true fowl paralysis (neurolymphomatosis gallinarum) in the same bird where some other diagnosis has been given, has been over-looked. It is possible that the disease may exist in provinces and states but, other than those mentioned in the preceeding paragraph possibly owing to the comparatively small amount of attention that has been paid to the diseases of poultry in the past, it has not yet been brought to light. Also it should be noted that in the case of this disease, in which the symptoms vary according to the nerves and organs involved, it may be necessary to hold a histopathologi- cal examination before arriving at a definite diagnosis. The special cell which infiltrates and swells the nerves in cases of fowl paralysis is not normally en- countered in any quantity in the body tissues but if this fowl paralysis cell does multiply and accumulate then there is formed a modified tumour called a lymphoma ; hence the term ' neurolymphomatosis gallinarum', i.e. a swel- ling of the nerves of the fowl by lymphocyte-like cells. The degree of infiltra- tion of a nerve by these cells determines the extent of destruction of the nerve fibre caused by pressure. These cells can affect not only nerves of legs and wings but any nerve in the body, e.g. nerves of gastro-intestinal tract etc., or in fact any part of the body, e.g. eyes, ovary, liver, kidneys, lungs, brain, spinal cord etc., with consequent symptoms. If an accumulation of such tumour cells does not affect the nerves, paralysis will not occur and the chief symptom by which the disease can be recognized is missing. Therefore, instead of the term ' neurolymphomatosis gallinarum ', Warrack (367)
368 Possible Existence of Fowl Paralysis and Dalling [1932] have suggested ' lymphomatosis ', the difference lying in the fact that the former term suggests that the nerves are always affected whereas in practice it is known that certain cases occur affecting the ovary or other organs without involving the nerves. It is more correct to use these terms instead of fowl paralysis which is an indefinite term and which should therefore be discarded as we have done in the case of ' roup ' in favour of fowl pox. ETIOLOGY The cause of this disease is not definitely known but there is some evidence that the disease is due to a filterable virus and is of a hereditary nature but secondary factors appear necessary to help such a latent condition flare -up. This explains why transmission experiments carried out in America by Pappen- heimer and his associates [1929] and in England by Warrack and Dalling [1932] by inoculating young birds with a saline suspension of affected spleen were not cent per cent successful. The disease was reproduced only in 25 per cent of the inoculated birds. Seager [1933] has collected experimental evidence to show that the etiological agent of this disease is a virus which may provoke a cellular hyperplasia of tumour-like proportions in the nervous system and various visceral organs particularly the ovary. He has also recorded that lymphoid cellular lesions of the iris are frequent, lymphocytosis in the blood is usually present in active cases and the various secondary factors help to precipitate the invasion of the tissues by the virus. Blakemore and Dalling [1939] have produced evidence to show that fowl paralysis is an infectious disease and the infecting agent is probably filterable. A series of passage experiments with liver emulsions in groups of young chicks was carried out, and it was shown that the infecting agent increased in virulence and caused illness and death among chicks within 1 to 4 weeks. They have further stated that previous failures to transmit the disease may be due to the sus- ceptibility of the strain of fowls employed, the degree of virulence of the in- fecting agent, the stage of the disease at which tissues are selected for trans- mission work, and the type of tissue selected. The research work carried out at the Poultry Pathological Research Laboratory, Goring, Reading, under the Poultry Disease Investigation Fund (Bulletin No. 1 and 2R. L. KAURA 369 Crammer [1920] has shown that an absence of vitamin B is associated with a diminution in the lymphoid tissues, i.e. those parts of the body where lymph cells are produced, whilst Funk [1914] found that if vitamin B was absent from the diet, cancer growths slackened and grafts were unsuccessful. Con- versely Eardman and Haagen [1928] found a great occurrence of tumours in rats when there was an excess of vitamin B in their diet. Tanniguchi [1928] found that transplanted cancers (sarcoma) in hens showed least growth on vitamin B deficient diet, whilst on a vitamin B rich diet the tumours penetrated irregularly into the tissues. Bayon [1932] has suggested that deficiency of vitamin C is responsible for the wide spread nature of this disease where birds are kept intensively and are deprived of vitamin C containing foods. Plimmer and his associates [1927] suggest that birds require about 6 per cent of vitamin B in their ration. But, most of the birds receive a diet containing an excess of vitamin B (present in the outer layers of grains etc.) and a complete deficiency of vitamin C (present in cabbage, grasses etc.), which constitute' vitamin imbalance ' and facilitate the development of this disease in susceptible birds. The use of rich, forcing mashes containing 18 per cent and more of proteins of high biological value causing too rapid a growth-rate and the practice of using in unlimited quantities mashes more especially those containing milk pro- ducts and yeast which cause an excessive, abnormal, unnecessarily fast rate of growth, early maturity and premature egg production are also liable to influence adversely the development of latent fowl paralysis. 3. Management.370 Possible Existence of Fowl Paralysis old chicks. Most of the cases occur soon after the pullets are in full lay, after the first moult and after the breeding season in the case of cockerels. It has been suggested that the disease may not be infectious or contagious as only a few birds in a flock become affected at a time and by the end of a season from 5 to 50 per cent of the whole flock may have suffered. But, Williams. Gildow and Lampman [1938] have stated that it is transmitted by contact and that up to 40 per cent of pullets from susceptible flocks became affected when placed with affected chicks. Chicks from paralysis-affected stock are more resistant than those from paralysis-free stock and those bred from pullets are more susceptible than those bred from two-year old hens. Symptoms and lesions will depend upon the parts and the nerves involved. Affected fowls may, therefore, show a variety of symptoms. The paralysis form is first shown by drooping of one or both wings, partial lameness in one or both legs, or paralysis in one wing and one leg. In the beginning lameness may pass off only to recur again. In ad- vanced cases as the affected parts get completely paralysed the bird is unable to move and lies in a helpless condition, often with one leg stretched forward as far as possible and the other stretched backward to its full length. Frequently the digits are paralysed and incapable of being extendedR. L. KAURA 371 in the living bird based on exposure and examination of the sciatic nerve for macroscopic changes. The nerves running from the backbone (just in front of the ovary) to the gizzard and proventriculus are often enlarged and should be examined before the viscera are removed. These nerves may be very much enlarged whilst those supplying the legs or wings are but slightly abnormal. A nerve lying between the rectum and oviduct may be enlarged when all the nerves are normal and it is usually involved when the large intestine (rectum) just preceding the cloaca is ballooned. The small intestines particularly the duodenum may show inflammation with yellowish brown discolouration. In the case of leukaemia, the liver, spleen and kidneys are usually enlarged, soft, and easily ruptured. The liver is usually spotted with brownish or grey areas. Tumours may be present in all parts of the body but the ovary, kidneys, heart, lungs, spleen and digestive tract are usually affected. For definite diagnosis histopathological examina- tion of the suspected nerves and tissues is necessary in order to demonstrate the infiltration by lymphocyte-like cells, as in certain acute cases no naked eye lesions may be observed except perhaps some inflammation of the digestive tract and the nerves may appear to be normal. Control.372 Possible Existence of Fowl Paralysis REFERENCES Bachan Singh (1940). Ann. Rep. Vet. Invest. Officer, C. P. and Berar, p. 9. Barker, C. W. (1939). Cornell Vet. 29, 41. Bayon(1932). Vet. Rec. 12, 457. Blakemore, F. and Dalling, T. (1939). Proc. 7th World Poul. Congr. p. 282. Crammer (1920). Brit. J. Expt. Path. 1, 184. Eardmann and Haagen (1928). Deutsche Med. Wchnschr. 53, 796. Fritzsche, K. (1937). Z. Infenkt. Hanst. 54, 124. Funk (1914). Lancet 1, 98. Kaura, R. L. and Ganapathy Iyer, S. (1937). I. C. A. R. Misc. Bull. No. 15, p. 5. Krishiengar, K. (1937). Ann. Adm. Rep. C. V. D., Mysore, p. 10. Mahajan, M. R. (1934). Ann. Rep. Vet. Invest. Officer, Hyderabad, p. 2. Mohey Deen, M. (1933). Ind. Vet. J. 9, 205. Pappenheimer, Dunn and Seidlin (1929). J. Exp. Med. 49, 87. Plimmer, Rosedale, Raymond and Lowndes (1927), Biochem. J. 21, 1141. Seagar, E. A. (1933), Harper Adams Utility Poult. J. 18, 627. Tanniguchi (1928). Fukuoka-Ikwedaigaku-Zasshi I, 59, 1,131. Warrack and Dalling (1932). Vet. J. 88, 28. Williams, J. K., Gildow, E. M. and Lampman, C. E. (1938). U. S. Egg and Poul Mag. Jan. 1938, p. 24.
POISONING OF CATTLE BY ARTIFICIAL MANURES BY M. CRAWFORD, M. R. C. V. S. Deputy Director (Animal Husbandry) and Government Veterinary Surgeon Ceylon (Reprinted from The Tropical Agriculturist, Vol. XCVI, No. 6, 1941) ALTHOUGH artificial manures are used largely on estates in Ceylon, cases of poisoning of cattle by such manures have been of very rare occurrence in the past. Some years ago a number of ' tavalam ' bulls on an upcountry estate which had been transporting bags of a manure mixture died. The mixture in this case contained among other things calcium cyanamide and potassium nitrate. The bulls had been observed to lick the manure bags with relish apparently liking the salty taste of the mixture. The symptoms shown were suggestive of hydrocyanic acid poisoning and experiments in the laboratory showed that goats died with classical symptoms of hydrocyanic acid poisoning when drenched with a suspension in water of this mixture. In a case recently reported sixteen head of cattle died a short time after being allowed to graze on a portion of a rubber estate which had been dressed the previous day with nitrate of soda. All sixteen cattle died within a few hours. The symptoms as described by the keepers were bloating, distress shown by the cattle running about wildly, severe purging with, in some cases, eversion of the rectum and bleeding. On post-mortem examination by the Assistant Veterinary Surgeon, severe inflammation of the stomachs and small intestines was observed. Irri- tant poisoning was suspected and the Assistant Veterinary Surgeon collected about a cigarette-tin-full of what he described as ' a white powder which had been spread on the land ' and sent it for examination. He also sent samples of stomach contents from the dead cattle. These were examined by the Agricultural Chemist who reported374 Poisoning of Cattle by Artificial Manures In the first place nitrate of soda is commonly used as a manure in Ceylon yet no cases of poisoning by it have been reported in the past. A search of the literature available was made but no records of poisoning by nitrate of soda could be found. Cases of poisoning of cattle by nitrate of potash are recorded in the literature, such cases having occurred where nitrate of potash has been given as a purgative in mistake for Epsom salts. In these cases the dose of nitrate of potash had been from ½ to 1 lb. in solution in water. As a rule the sodium salts are less toxic than the corresponding potassium salts which would lead one to assume that the fatal dose of nitrate of soda would probably be round about½ a pound. If that assumption be correct, the affected cattle must have consumed considerable quantity of the manure. This is quite possible as nitrate of soda has not unpleasant slightly salty, ' cool ' flavour. It is well-known that cattle often show a marked craving for salt and will lick salt with avidity if occasion offers. It is quite possible that this is the explanation of this unusual occurrence. Another point is that had the amorphous and very hygroscopic form of nitrate of soda been used it is most probable that all or most of it would have gone into solution and been absorbed into the soil in the interval between the application of the manure to the soil and the cattle being allowed to graze over the land. The unusual features of this incident are that the substance incriminated is one very commonly used as a manure and one which is not poisonous unless taken in comparatively large quantities. The combination of circumstances which brought about this accident are dry weather, the fact that a very short time elapsed between the manure being applied and the cattle being allowed to graze over the land, and one must assume that the cattle in this case had a definite craving for salt which led them to seek out and lick up this substance on account of its salty taste. It is obvious that such accidents can be prevented by the very simple precaution of not allowing cattle to graze over land which has been dressed with nitrate of soda until an interval of some days has elapsed especially in dry weather. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS To Dr Joachim and Dr Koch for analysis and to Mr W. Chandrasena, G. B. V. C. for an account of the clinical symptoms and post-mortem findings.
THE USE OF ANTHRAX VACCINES PREPARED FROM AVIRULENT (UNCAPSULATED) VARIANTS OF BACILLUS ANTHRACIS BY MAX STERNE Section of Bacteriology, Onderstepoort (Reprinted from the Onderstepoort Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Industry, Vol. 13, No. 2, October 1939) A TECHNIQUE has been described [Sterne, 1937a, 1937b] for consistently obtaining avirulent, immunogenic variants from virulent anthrax strains. The results of field and laboratory tests with vaccines prepared from such variants will be described in this paper. EXPERIMENTS To find out how long suspensions of avirulent variants retained their immunizing power Avirulent variants 22A2, 33B2, 34A2, and 34F2 were grown on nutrient agar until fully sporulated. The spores were suspended in 50 per cent gly- cerine-saline. Their concentration was approximately 300,000 per c.c, which is roughly, that in vaccine prepared here ordinarily. Sheep were inoculated, subcutaneously, with 1.0 c.c. Table I gives the results of these laboratory tests. TABLE I Avirulent Variant Isolated from Virulent Strain on Vaccine prepared from Avirulent Variant on Sheep Immunized with Vaccine on Result of Test with Virulent Spores on Immunized Sheep Normal Controls 22A2 5-2-36 13-7-36 31-7-36 6/6 0/4 22-9-36 6/6 0/4 33B2 27-7-36 13-8-36 14-8-36 5/6 0/4 7-8-37 5/6 0/4 34A2 7-8-36 13-8-36 14-8-36 5/6 0/4 7-8-37 6/6 0/4 34F2 10-8-36 10-6-38 14-6-38 6/8 0/2 12-6-39 6/6 0/2 5/6 is equal to 5 sheep out of 6 lived. (375) F 2
376 Use of Anthrax Vaccines The vaccine prepared from strain 22A2 was potent after nearly two months, and that prepared from strains 33B2, 34A2, and 34F2 after a year. It should also be noted that the vaccine from 34F2 was prepared two years after the isolation of this variant. TABLE II Duration of immunity produced in guinea-pigs by an avirulent variant Guinea pigs Immunized with 34F2 on Tested with 100 M. L. D. Vaccine Strain on Result of Test on Immunized Guinea-pigs Normal Controls 3 29-3-39 5-6-39 3/3 0/4 5 25-11-38 13-12-38 5/5 0/12 3 25-11-38 19-12-38 3/3 0/6 3 25-11-38 5-6-39 3/3 0/4 The results showed that guinea-pigs were solidly immune six months after vaccination. Immunity tests with vaccines prepared from avirulent variants 22A2 and 34F2 All batches of avirulent vaccine, except the first, were prepared from strain 34F2. This was isolated from a virulent strain on 10th August 1936. Preparation of vaccine.MAX STERNE 377 TABLE III Strain Batch No. No. of Doses Prepared Prepared on Sheep Immuni- zed on Result of Test with Virulent Spores on Immuni zed Sheep Normal Controls 22A2 4 80,000 13-7-36 31-7-36 6/6 0/4 34F2 14 300,000 11-3-37 .. .. .. 34F2 19 300,000 18-5-37 18-5-37 10/10 0/2 34F2 21 250,000 7-6-37 8-6-37 7/8 0/2 34F2 24 500,000 6-9-37 7-9-37 10/10 0/2 34F2 25 500,000 20-9-37 21-9-37 10/10 0/2 34F2 39 300,000 10-6-38 14-6-38 10/12 0/2 34F2 50 500,000 21-2-39 23-2-39 10/12 0/2 34F2 51 700,000 4-4-39 4-4-39 10/10 0/2 34F2 52 900,000 21-4-39 24-4-39 9/20 0/2 34F2 53 700,000 9-5-39 9-5-39 8/10 1/2* 34F2 54 700,000 22-5-39 22-5-39 7/10 0/2 Totals . 5,730,000 .. .. 97/108 1/24 * During the three years covered in Table III 63 further normal sheep were used as controls for other batches of ordinary vaccine. All died. The one control that lived (Batch 53) showed no reaction at all, and also no reaction to a second inoculation of a large virulent test dose. It is possible that a sheep immunized previously was used here as a control. FIELD TESTS WITH VACCINES PREPARED FROM AVIRULENT VARIANTS These were started in 1936, and the amount of vaccine issued was increased as experience was gained of its use. To date, June 1939, about 2,700,000 doses have been used. Batch 4.378 Use of Anthrax Vaccines Batches 39, 50, 51.MAX STERNE 379 Thus the avirulent vaccine was as effective as the ordinary saponin spore vaccine. A few years ago thousands of cattle died annually from anthrax in the Transkei. The reduction in mortality shown in Table IV is the conti- nuation of a trend that commenced in 1928, when systematic immunization was started in the Transkei. A detailed discussion of this anti-anthrax campaign will be given in another publication. Use of avirulent vaccine on animals other than bovines. Sheep.ABSTRACTS Age as a factor influencing breeding efficiency in a dairy herd. G. A. BOWLING, D. N. PUTHAM AND R. H. ROSS (1940). J. Dairy Sci. 23, 1171. ONE objection to the exclusive use of proved bulls in a dairy herd is the larger numbe of services required for heifers when old bulls are used. The Breeding efficiency is of considerable economic importance in the case of dairy cattle. The authors studied data found in the herd books of the West Virginia Agricultural Experiment Station to determine the effect of the age of the bull on the number of services required per conception for females grouped by number of conceptions. The records of only animals which had calved or those known to be breeders were consider- ed. Bulls ranged in age from one to fifteen years. Forty-three bulls and seven hundred and six cows were included in the study. The average number of services per conception for cows, using bulls of different ages, was 2.79, 1.86, 1.79, 1.82 and 1.80 for the first, second, third, fourth, and the fifth and sixth conception respectively. When age of both the bull and the cow was con- sidered the breeding efficiency of bulls under four years was found to be better than older bulls for heifers. This was also true for the second conception, but to a smaller extent. This greater breeding efficiency of young bulls did not hold for cows bred for the third or higher conception. The services per conception for bulls under four years varied from 1.49 to 1.62 for the first conception, 1.45 to 1.58 for the second, 1 . 38 to 1.76 for the third, 1. 57 to 2 .00 for the fourth, and 1.33 to 1.77 for the fifth and sixth. For bulls over four years of age the ranges of services per conception were 1. 79 to 5 .50, 1 * 58 to 2.52, 1.42 to 2.52, 1.25 to 3.00, and 1.20 to 3.14 for the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth and sixth respectively. A gradual decrease in breeding efficiency occurred as the age of the bull increased. With cows of all ages this lower efficiency of the bull be- came significant after six years of age : after thirteen years of age the breeding efficiency of bulls dropped off markedly. Prompt conception in heifers, it is shown, is more certain if young bulls are used. [J. N. W.] Notes on the artificial insemination of horses in the Philippines. FLORENCIO A. SOLIVEN (1940). Phil. J. Ani. Husb. 7, 459. THE proper introduction of sperm cells obtained from the male into the sexual appara- tus of the female for the purpose of effecting conception without sexual intercourse is called artificial insemination. ' This practice was first used by the Arabs but present methods are largely due to Prof. Ivanov of the Soviet Russian Government. The instru- ment, cleanliness of the operation and -the quality of the semen determine the success of artificial insemination. Collection of horse semen may be carried out by the artificial vagina or by recovering that portion of the ejaeulum which remains in the penis after natural intercourse. The artificial vagina consists of a large outer metal tube, long enough to receive the full length of the penis of the stallion, with a thin rubber lining. The space between the tube and lining is filled with warm water and the inside lubricated with vaseline or liquid petrolatum. At the outer end a small rubber sack or breeder's bag is attached to the lining to receive the ejaculum. For insemination a speculum is required for insertion into the vagina of the mare ; it should reach the cervix and extend outside the vulva a few inches. A syringe, preferably glass, fitted with a long rubber tube is used for inject- ing the semen sample through the cervix into the uterus. Inserting capsules containing semen into the uterus is suggested for mares with abnormal cervical passages. The sanitation of the operation must be carefully controlled. If semen is to be re- covered from the penis of the stallion after natural intercourse, the tail, buttocks, anus and vulva of the mare and the entire penis of the stallion must be thoroughly washed with warm water and soap. If semen is to be obtained by the other method the glass parts of the artificial vagina must be carefully washed with hot soda water, dried and rinsed with 65 per cent alcohol. For the rubber parts soap may be used with the hot water, followed by the alcohol rinse. (380)
ABSTRACTS 381 The quality of the semen will depend upon the methods of collection and preserva- tion. For semen obtained directly from the penis of the stallion after natural inter- course the quality is low as it contains secretions of the vagina of the mare and may be a medium through which disease is spread. Semen collected by the artificial vagina, if the procedure has been properly carried out under the most sanitary conditions, will be of very good quality and may keep well. The semen is preserved by first allowing it to stand a few minutes. One part is then mixed with two parts of preserving diluent and the mixture is cooled by packing in cracked ice. It is then stored at 8°-10°F. until used. [J. N. W.] Inheritance of horns in sheep. B. L. WARWICK AND P. B. DUNKLE (1939). J. Heredity 30, 325. IN many breeds of domestic sheep the rams have horns. They may be relatively small or as large as those of the Rocky Mountain Bighorn, a wild species. In any species the horns of the female, when present, are much smaller than those of the male. One of the big horned domestic breeds is the Dorset Horn. In the most widely distributed breed or type of domestic sheep, the Merino (including the Rambouillet), the males of most strains have horns while the females are hornless. The females do have knobs, however, ordinarily less than one inch high, resembling horn cores. In some cases they have horn-like coverings called scurs which are easily distinguished from the horns of the Dorset female by their small size and irregular shape. Some strains of Merino and Rambouillet as well as many other breeds of domestic sheep, such as the Shropshire, Southdown, Cotswold and Suffolk, are hornless in both sexes. They not only lack horns but have depressions in the skull instead of horn cores. In 1905 and 1909 Wood crossed the Dorset Horn and Suffolk breeds and interpreted the inheritance of horns in sheep as dominant in the male and recessive in the female. His results have, however, been interpreted differently by later workers. Arkell proposed another hypothesis in 1912 which involved a sex-linked inhibitor, but this explanation has since been discarded. An intermediate horn in Wood's F1 generation might have suggested dominance of hornlessness in both sexes with this dominance incomplete in the male. On the basis of present evidence this seems to be a valid explanation of horn inheritance in sheep. Wood's F1 ewes all had depressions. At two or three years of age, however, scurs appeared. Arkell studied crosses of hornless breeds with the Dorset Horns as well as those of hornless breeds with the Merino and Rambouillets. The authors suggested in 1931 that the horns of Rambouillet males and the knobs of the females were due to one principal pair of recessive genes. Recent experiments confirm this in their opinion. They now think that scurs may be due to additional minor genes but their tests are incomplete. They have, however, confirmed the mono- factoral basis for the inheritance of hornlessness and horned in this stock. Commercial crossing of Dorset Horn rams with Merino ewes is common in certain areas. All F1 ewes, whose dam was a Merino with knobs, have horns. ' When homo- zygous hornless Rambouillet rams, ' as identified by breeding tests, ' or rams of pure hornless breeds........are crossed with Merino or Rambouillet ewes, the F1 female progeny are invariably hornless (with depressions). ' Hornless female progeny are always produced when Dorset, which is horned in both sexes, and Merino or Rambouillet, in which the male is horned and the female is knobbed, are respectively bred to a pure hornless type. When the Dorset and the Merino or Rambouillet are crossed with each other, horned females of the Dorset parental type are obtained. ' These facts suggested the hypothesis that the genes for hornless, Dorset horns, and Merino horns constitute an allelic series. ' In confirmation of this, backcrosses of an F1 Dorset × Rambouillet ram to a Rambouillet or Meri o ewe with knobs were made. Female progeny were horned and knobbed, as expected, in a 1:1 ratio. If, how- ever, instead of being allelic the horns of the Dorset and Merino were due to different pairs of genes, such back crosses should have given horned, knobbed and hornless female progeny in a ratio of 1:2:1. The genes are indicated thus ; hornlessness H, Dorset horns H ' and Merino or Ram- bouillet horns h. They are considered allelic. [J. N. W.]
382 ABSTRACTS Genetics and range sheep improvement. JULLIUS E. NORDBY (1940). The Scientific Monthly, October, pp. 310ABSTRACTS 383 Inbreeding would produce both desirable and undesirable progeny. Information about the potential usefulness of a strain, would be useful, therefore, before much inbreed- ing was done. The frequency of tests might be governed by the rate of inbreeding. In any case progeny tests should be made often enough to properly guide the development of a line. Rams used for inbreeding may be tested for four purposes, i.e. ' their value for perpetuating their own line ; for crossing with other inbred lines ; for top crossing with unrelated purebred ewes and for crossing with ranch ewes. ' These tests may not all be made on each generation. Testing a ram for perpetuating his own. line may be greatly limited by the small number of ewes in the line. One means of measuirng his trans- mitting qualities, however, would be to use him on ewes of mixed breeding or unrelated purebred ewes. [J. N. W.] Animal breeding methods used in the formation of types of cattle suitable for raising in the tropics. MIGUEL MANRESA (1939). Philippine Agriculturist 28, 479. THE Philippines is a tropical country. There are two methods of breeding used in the production and improvement of cattle suitable for such countries ; one is improve- ment of locally adapted cattle, the other is the creation of new breeds by blending the desirable characters of western breeds with those of tropical breeds. The first method is slow but relatively great numbers of individuals of the species concerned are available so that little capital is required. The second method is more expensive but has proved successful in several places. In either case, the success depends upon a permanent, well defined policy governing the programme. Too frequently, attempts made to improve cattle have been frustrated by a change of personnel, resulting in an extensive change being made in an existing programme. The Red Sindhi, Sahiwal and Nellore cattle of India and the Batangas of the Philip- pines are mentioned as breeds of animals which have been developed to a considerable extent in areas of the respective countries where they are indigenous. The Red Sindhi has been developed by selection and culling. The author quotes Littlewood [1936] as saying, ' it is one of the purest and most distinct of the Indian breeds of cattle. ' The Sahiwal is being developed largely by the Imperial Agricultural Research Institute at New Delhi. In the early work done at this Institute the yield of a herd of 49 Sahiwals was increased from 2.6 liters of milk daily in 1913-1914 to 5.7 liters in 1928 by proper breeding methods and management. The average was further increased to 9.56 liters in 1936 by early training, milking four times daily and pre-milking. Work done in the Madras Presidency and in the Philippines with pure Nellore (Ongole) cattle has yielded such results as an increase in the average daily production of milk of 1.4 liters between 1931 and 1936. This was accomplished by the workers in India. Improvement in the size of the Batangas in the Philippines has given results ' much faster than expected '. This work, begun in 1919, consisted of close culling and selection with no introduction of exotic blood. The Santa Gertrudis breed of Texas, the Philamin of the Philippines, the Africander of South Africa and an unnamed strain of crossbred cattle of North Australia are mention- ed as arising from the crossing of local with exotic cattle. The author explains that the Santa Gertrudis was formed by using the Indian Brahman, Durham and Shorthorn breeds to produce progeny containing ½ Brahman, 57/128 Shorthorn and 7/128 Durham in which very rigid selection was practised. The Africander is not discussed. In the Philippines the Hereford of Texas, Indian Nellore and Philippine native breeds were crossed in several ways. The ½ Hereford, ¼ Nellore and ¼ Native were found to be the best. Several such animals were selected by the Philippine College of Agriculture as the foundation herd of the Philamin breed. The names of the three countries from which came the breeds that were used were combined by Manresa (1934) to form the name of this breed. In Australia the 384 ABSTRACTS The influence of intensity of egg production upon infertility in the domestic fowl. W. F. LAMOREUX (1940). J.Agri.Res. 61, 191. DURING a period of five years over 1200 selected White Leghorn females and 100 males were used in a study to determine whether the degree of fertility is influenced by the intensity of egg production and to note the basis for such a relationship if it exists. Artificial illumination was used to a limited extent. All eggs were incubated. To determine infertility the eggs were candled or the appearance of the germinal disc of the broken egg was observed after 18 to 25 hours of incubation. Individual incubation records for the hens during February, March and April of each year were studied by three measures of intensity of egg production : '(1) the number of eggs laid during a specific period of 6 weeks ; (2) the number of eggs laid during each week of the incubation period ;' i.e., from February 1 to April 30 and ' (3) the number of eggs laid per clutch (number of eggs laid on consecutive days). ' After the first and last hatch of the season was eliminated, those hens which layed during the remaining six weeks each year, numbering 856, were included in the study of No. 1. Egg production varied from 13 to 40 eggs. The highest proportion of infertiles, 24.4 per cent, occurred among the lowest producers, whereas the smallest proportion of infertiles, 13.0 per cent, was among the best layers. In studying No. 2 the incubation record of each hen was divided into weekly periods : the first week was eliminated to assure adequate time for mating with the males. Each weekly record was put into one of seven groups according to the number of eggs laid during that week. The mean percentage of infertile eggs by groups was 14.7, varying from 31.2 per cent in the one-egg group to 11.8 per cent in the seven-egg group. Finally, in considering No. 3, all complete clutches of 1178 hens were studied. Here also the lower the intensity of egg production, indicated by the smaller clutch, the higher the proportion of infertiles ; and vice versa. In each of the five years studied there were 1.5 to 6.7 per cent fewer infertiles in the larger clutches than in the smaller ones. The rate of ovulation cannot be influenced by the degree of infertility ; this rate does, it appears, affect the fertility of the eggs laid. Other workers have shown that (a) estrogen is probably secreted in the theca interna of the Graafian follicle, (b) although the ova of a poor layer develop equally as fast as those of a good layer, the latter has more ova in the final stages of development at any one time than the former, and (c) in the follicle of a very young oABSTRACTS 385 Experiments on the use of chronic gonadotrophin (pregnancy urine extract) for the treatment of sterility in dairy cattle. A. C. BOTTOMLEY, S. J. FOLLEY AND HELEN M. SCOTT WATSON (1940). J. Agri. Sci. 30, 235. THE authors have pointed out that in England the sales of dairy cows at the peak of their productivity due to sterility are equal to the combined loss from recognized tuberculosis, contagious abortion and udder troubles. The magnitude of the loss to dairy farmers from bovine sterility is often not fully realized. Non-infectious sterility not due to anatomical defects, and obvious deficiencies in nutrition or management may be due to endocrine disturbances and might be expected to respond to hormone therapy. On such cases the authors experimented with human pregnancy urine extract which was a specially concentrated preparation of Antuitrin " S " standardized at 500 rat units per c. c. (henceforward referred to as P. U.) supplied by Dr J. Stanley White of Messrs Parke Davis and Co. The fertility of three sterile pedigree bulls, the semen of which showed a deficiency in sperm number together with absence of motility, was restored by two intramuscular injections of 2 c. c. P. U. at 4-5 days interval. Their semen returned to normal and contained a large number of highly motile sperms. It was thought probable that this condition might be due to hypofunction of the epididymis, which in turn might be due to failure of the interstitial tissue of the testes to secrete androgens, and P. U. produced beneficial results as pregnancy urine gonadotrophin stimulates the interstitial cells and thus indirectly the accessory organs. Even in the absence of cystic ovaries or a persistent corpus luteum, cows may fail to come into oestrus. In such cases sterility may be due either to a low rate of secre- tion of gonadotrophic factors by the pituitary, causing ovarian inactivity, or to a wrong balance of the follicle-stimulating and luteinizing hormones leading to a disturbance of the normal ovarian cycle. It was considered that on the basis of experiments on other species treatment with P. U. might induce oestrus in a proportion of such cows. Three out of five cows responded within 24 hours to intravenous injections of 5 c. c. P. U. and one out of four to an injection of 3 c. c. P.U. Two out of five cows responded imme- diately to a series of three intramuscular injections of 2 c. c. P. U. and one cow responded to a single intramuscular injection of 2 c. c. P. U. In addition four cows failed to res- pond immediately to four intramuscular injections of 2 c. c. P. U. As far as can be seen from the limited number of animals used, intravenous administration is more likely to succeed than intramuscular and 5 c. c. would appear to be necessary in most cases. Such high doses may, however, sometimes produce anaphylactic shock when given intra- venously, despite the fact that the protein content of P. U. is so small that it cannot be detected by ordinary reagents. Probably, the failure to respond to P.U. injections was due to the lack of sufficiently ripe follicles in the ovary, and it is possible that injections of pregnant mare's serum, which is rich in follicle-stimulating hormone, followed by luteinizing extract (P. U.) would have induced oestrus in these cases. It was observed that service at the heat induced by P. U. proved fertile in one case only, but in other successful cases the injections served to re-activate the ovaries and pregnancy followed subsequent services. Certain cows may show a regular oestrus but nevertheless fail to conceive. It is believed that the condition might be due to partial lack of luteal tissue and therefore to deficiency of progesterone, in which case conditions in the uterus would be unfavour- able for implantation of the fertilized egg. In some cases, possibly, ovulation fails to occur because of an insufficient secretion of luteinizing hormone by the anterior pitui- tary. Either of these conditions might be expected to benefit by treatment with P.U. and the authors have produced experimental evidence to show that treatment with P. U. at the time of service increases the fertility of such cows. [R. L. K.] Transmission of tuberculosis from man to cattle Extract from The Lancet, 9, 419. THE transmission of tuberculosis from cattle to man is so much more important than the reverse that the possibility of dairy cattle being infected by their attendants will be a new conception to many. It is true that the Public Health (Prevention of Tuberculo- sis) Regulations of 1925 prohibit the employment in a dairy of persons suffering from
386 ABSTRACTS respiratory tuberculosis, but this clause was probably untended primarily to guard against direct infection of the milk. Nielsen and Plum of the State Veterinary Serum Labora- tory of Copenhagen have now recorded instances of infection of cattle by tuberculous persons employed on farms in Denmark. Farms which had been free from tuberculin reactors revealed without warning a surprising number of positive reactors, suggesting the sudden appearance of an unexpected focus of infection in their midst. To give one instance, a herd which had been free from tuberculosis since 1932 suddenly yielded 19 posi- tive reactors out of 29 cattle. On investigation a farm hand was discovered who had been previously vigorous and apparently healthy, but who was later admitted to hospital and subsequently transferred to a sanatorium. The records in the other farms quoted in the paper are similar. There were 17 farms in all, and in 13 of these, a worker suffer- ing from tuberculosis was found from whom the bovine strain of the tubercle bacillus was isolated. In one instance a human-type strain was obtained from a worker, in two other the strain had not been typed, and in the remaining case the strain though bovine might conceivably have reached the herd during transport. Reid has also recorded an instance in this country of a heifer infected with the human type of bacillus and cites two more from the literature published by A. S. Griffith in 1913. In only one of these three, however, was contact with a phthisical person establishedREVIEW The Principles and Practice of Feeding Farm Animals. E. T. HALNAN and F. H. GARNER. (Longmans Green & Co., London, 1940, p. 359 15s.) THIS publication is a welcome addition to the existing literature on animal nutrition. The authors state that they have tried to meet the demand for information of both the scientific worker and the practical farmer ' by explaining in simple terms the principles of nutrition and the application of these principles to the feeding of live-stock. In so doing they have further endeavoured to maintain a proper balance between the natural enthusiasm of science and the practical points of good husbandry ; none too easy a task, since it is generally admitted that the scientist and the husbandman have always proved uneasy bed fellows '. The book is well written. It is divided into two sections, in the first of which theoretical considerations such as the chemical composition of the feeding stuffs and animals, the fate of food in the animal, biological values of feeding-stuffs and feeding standards are discussed. In the second section, various topics such as the feeding of different types of farm animals, the com- mon feeding stuffs of the British Isles and their utilization, etc. are discussed from the practical point of view. An interesting chapter in this section deals with the feeding practices in war time. The first section thus deals with general scientific principles and follows the usual practice in other well known text books, while the second section will appeal more to the farmer engaged in animal husbandry work in the British Isles. [K. C. S.]. (387) GIPDINDEX TO AUTHORS A PAGE ANDERSON, W. S., " Fertile Mare Mules " . . . . . . 62 ANTHONY, DAVID J., " Diseases of the Pig and its Husbandry " (Review) . . . . . . . . . . 71 B BARTLETT, J. W. (see JOHNSON, L. A.). . . . . . 177 BERRY, J. C. and LUSH, J. L., " High Records Contrasted with Un- selected Records and with Average Records as a basis for Selecting Cows" . . . . . . . . . . 272 BERTRAM, D. S. and GORDON, R. M., " An Insectarium with Constant Temperature and Humidity Control, together with a Description of a simplified Technique for the Rearing of Anopheles maculipennis var. atroparvus " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . . . 285 BOTTOMLEY, A. C, FOLLEY, S. J. and WATSON, HELEN M. SCOTT, " Ex- periments on the Use of Chronic Gonadotrophin (pregnancy urine extract) for the Treatment of Sterility in Dairy Cattle " (Abst- ract) . . . . . . . . . . 385 BOUCHER, R. V. (see OTT, W. H.) . . . . . . . 286 BOWLING, G. A., PUTHAM, D. N. and ROSS, R. H., " Age as a Factor influencing Breeding Efficiency in a Dairy Herd " (Abstract) . 380 BRUEN, E. J., KHOT, S. S. AND DESHPANDE, A. K., " Study of Wool Quality as the Basis of Individual Selection in Breeding of Deccan Sheep " . . . . . . . . . . 181 BRYANT, D. M., " A Note on the Inheritance of Kemp in Black-face Sheep " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . . . 64 BURNS, R. H., JOHNSTON, A. AND CHEN, W. C, " The Improvement of Chinese and other Carpet Wools " (Abstract) . . . . 64 BUSHNELL, RALPH J., " Color Genes in Holstein-Friesian by Brown Swiss Crosses " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . . . 68 C CHEN, W. C. (see BURNS, R. H.) . . . . . . . 64 COPELAND, LYNN (see JOHNSON, L. A.) . . . . . . 177 CORNELL, R. L. and OONYWONGSE, RATANA, " Observations on Rinder- pest Immunisation with Goat Virus ". . . . . . 1 CRAWFORD, M., " Poisoning of Cattle by Artificial Manures " . . 373 CUNNINGHAM, A. AND SMITH, A. M., " Microbiology of Silage made by the Addition of Mineral Acids to Crops rich in Protein, II. The Microflora" (Abstract) . . . . . . . . . . 173
ii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETETINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY D PAGE DASTUR, N. N. (see SMITH, J. A. B.) . . . . . . 175 DESHPANDE, A. K. (see BRUEN, E. J.) . . . . . . 181 DHANDA,.M.R. (see MINETT, F. C.) . . . . . . . 308 DOBSON, N. (see IYER, S. GANAPATHY) . . . . . . 178 DUNKLE, P. B. (see WARWICK, B. L.) . . . . . . 381 F Farbrother, E. S., " Smuggling Opium and Charas in the Stomachs of Camels " . . . . . . . . . . 105 FINCHER, M. G. and HAYDEN, C. E., " The Anterior Pituitary Lobe Hormones in the Treatment of Ketosis in the Dairy Cow " (Abst- ract) . . . . . . . . . . 285 FOLLEY, S. J. (see BOTTOMLEY, A. C.) . . . . . . 385 Garner, F. H. (see Halnan, E. T.) . . . . . . . 387 GILLAM, A. E. AND KON, S. K., " Passage of Carotenoids from Food to Milk in the Cow. The Fate of Lycopene " (Abstract) . . 174 GORDON, HUGH, MC. L., " The Efficiency of Copper Sulphate and Carbon Tetrachloride against Haemonclms confortus in Adult Sheep ". . . 55 GORDON, R. M. (see BERTRAM, D. S.) . . . . . . 285 GUPTA, B. DAS, (see MOOKERJEE, H. K.) . . . . . . 250, 334 GURBAX SINGH, (see NANDA, P. N.) . . . . . . . 16 H Haddow, J. R. and Idnani, J. A., " A Preliminary Report on a Me- thod of Vaccination against Ranikhet Disease " . . . . 113 HALNAN, E. T. and GARNER, F. H., " The Principles and Practice of Feeding Farm Animals ". (Review) . . . . . . 387 HAYDEN, C. E. (see FINCHER, M. G.) . . . . . . 285 HEADLEY, F. B., " Purebred and Crossbred Pigs. Comparison of Rate of Growth and Economy of Gains" (Abstract) . . . 176 HILDITCH, T. P. AND MURTI, K. S., " Component Acids and Glycerides of some Indian Ox Depot Fats " (Abstract) . . . . 175 HILL, A. B. (see LOYELL, R.) . . . . . . . . 173 I Idnani, J. A. (see Haddow, J. R.) . . . . . . . 113 IYER, S. GANAPATHY AND DOBSON, N., " A Successful method of Immu- nisation against New Castle Disease of Fowls " (Abstract) . . 178
INDEX TO AUTHORS iii J PAGE JOHNSON, L. A., BARTLETT, J. W. and COPELAND, LYNN, " A study of Nicking in Jersey Cattle" (Abstract) . . . . . 177 JOHNSTON, A. (see BURNS, R. H.) . . . . . . . 64 K KALYANASUNDARAM, G. S. (see NAIR, K. S.) . . . . . 244 KAPUR, H. R., " Experiments on the Transmission of Rinderpest through the Agency of Tabanus Orientis, with Remarks on the Feed- ing Habits of this Fly " . . . . . . . . . . 84 KAURA, R. L., " Common Diseases of Young Calves and their Control in India " . . . . . . . . . . 122 iv THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE and ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE MANRESA, MIGUEL, " Animal Breeding Methods used in the Formation of Types of Cattle Suitable for Raising in the Tropics " (Abstract) 383 MARAIS, J. S. C. (see SMUTS, D. B.) . . . . . . . 286 MATTICK, E. C. V. (see SHATTOCK, P. M. F.) . . . . . 174 MAZUMDAR, S. R. (see MOOKERJEE, H. K.) . . . . . 250, 334 MC EWEN, A. D., " Comparative Tests on the Treatment of Lambs with Phenothiazine and with Copper Sulphate and Nicotine Sulphate " 167 MINETT, F. C, " Prevention of Ovine Mastitis by the Use of Staphylo- coccus Toxoid " . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284 INDEX TO AUTHORS V R PAGE RAGHAVACHARI, K. (see RAY, H. N.) . . . . . . 28, 38, 239 RAY, H. N. and RAGHAVACHARI, K., " A Note on Toxoplasma Canis Infection in a Spaniel " . . . . . . . . . . 28 vi THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE SRIVASTAVA, HAR DAYAL," New Allocreadids (Trematoda) from In- dian Marine Food Fishes, Part V. A New Parasite of the Genus Lepocreadioides Yamaguti, 1936 " . . . . . . . . . . 52 STERNE, MAX., " The Use of Anthrax Vaccines prepared from Avirulent (Uncapsulated) Variants of Bacillus Anthracis " . . . . 375 T TAYLOR, E. L. and SANDERSON, K. M., " PhenothiazineINDEX TO SUBJECTS A PAGE Acaprin, treatment of Babesiellosis with . . . . . . 59 Acids (component) of some Indian ox depot fats . . . . 175 Age as a factor influencing breeding efficiency in a dairy herd . . 380 Age of authors on Indian veterinary science . . . . . 107 Animal breeding methods used in the formation of types of cattle suit- able for raising in the tropics . . . . . . . 383 Animal nutrition, present-day problems in . . . . 65 Animals (farm) concentration of vitamin C in the tissues of, in health and disease . . . . . . . . . . 78 Anopheles maculipennis var. atroparvus, technique for the rearing of . 285 Anthelmintic action of phenothiazine . . . . . . 252 Anthelmintic (phenothiazine), a remarkably efficient . . . . 139 Anthrax vaccines prepared from avirulent variants of Bacillus anthracis 375 Antiquity of authors on Indian veterinary science . . . . 107 Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) concentration of, in the tissues of farm ani- mals in health and disease. . . . . . . . 78 Assam, cutaneous leishmaniasis in a bullock in . . . . . . . . 98 Avirulent variants of Bacillus anthracis, anthrax vaccines prepared from 375 B B. anthracis and Cl. chauvoei in soil and in water . . . . 308 B. argentina, treatment of, with acaprin . . . . . . 59 Babesia folliata n. sp. from a sheep . . . . . . . 239 Babesiellosis, treatment of, with acaprin . . . . . . 59 Bacillus anthracis, anthrax vaccines prepared from avirulent variants of . . . . . . . . . . 375 Barbus stigma, breeding colouration of . . . . . 250 Blood lipoids, effect of thyroxine administration on . . . . . 175 Brass milk utensils, the detergent efficiency of soda ash, wood ash and mud on . . . . . . . . . . 33 Breeding (animal) methods used in the formation of types of cattle suit- able for raising in the tropics . . . . . . . 383 viii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Breeding fowls, rations for. . . . . . . . . . . 286 INDEX TO SUBJECTS ix PAGE Charas, smuggling of, in the stomachs of camels . . . . 105 Chickens, nutritional experiments with . . . . . . 207 Chinese and other carpet wools, improvement of . . . . 64 Chromosomes, theory of . . . . . . . . 68 Clarias batrachus, urinogenital papilla of . . . . . . . . . . 334 Cl. Chauvoei. multiplication of, in soil and water . . . . 308 Color genes in Holstein-Friesian by Brown Swiss crosses . . . 68 Colouration (breeding) of Barbus stigma . . . . . . 250 Copper sulphate, efficiency of, against Haemonchus contortus in adult sheep . . . . . . . . . . . 55 X THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Encephalitozoon cuniculi infection in a rabbit . . . . 38 Encephalomyelitis (equine) in India . . . . . . . . . . 337 Equine encephalomyelitis in India . . . . . . . . . . 337 F Farm animals, feeding of . . . . . . . . . . 387 Fat (milk), secretion of . . . . . . . . . . 175 Fats, Indian ox depot, component acids and glycerides of . . . 175 FEEDING AND FEEDING STUEESINDEX TO SUBJECTS xi PAGE Haplocladus Odhner, 1911, a new parasite of the genus from an Indian fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 Heteropneustes fossilis, urino-genital papilla of . . . . . 334 Holstein-Friesian, color genes in, by Brown Swiss crosses . . . 68 Hormones, anterior, pituitary lobe, in the treatment of ketosis in the dairy cow . . . . . . . . . . . . . 285 Horns, inheritance of, in sheep . . . . . . . 381 Horses, artificial insemination of, in the Philippines . . . . 380 I Immunization against Newcastle disease of fowls . . . . 173 Immunizing agent against rinderpest, goat spleen tissue vaccine as . 244 Indian ox depot fats, component acids and glycerides of . . . 175 xii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Mastitis (ovine) prevention of, by the use of staphylococcus toxoid . 284 Microbiology of silage made by the addition of mineral acids to crops rich in protein . . . . . . . . . 173 Milk composition, effect of sub-clinical staphylococcus mastitis upon . 174 INDEX TO SUBJECTS xiii PAGE POULTTRY DISEASES AND PESTSxiv THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Steel, (tinned) milk utensils, the detergent efficiency of soda ash, wood ash and mud on . . . . . . . . 33 Sterility in dairy cattle, treatment of . . . . . . 385 Sterrhurus Looss, 1907, two new parasites of the genus . . . 45 Streptococcus mastitis, (sub-clinical) in herds free from, and its effect upon milk composition . . . . . . . . 174 T Tabanus orientis, transmission of rinderpest through the agency of . 84 Thyroxine administration, effect on the blood lipoids and on the nature of milk fat . . . . . . . . 175 Tinned steel milk utensils, detergent efficiency of soda ash, wood ash and mud on . . . . . . . . 33 Toxoplasma canis infection in a spaniel . . . . . . 28 Trematoda, Fellodistomids, from Indian fishes . . . . . . 42 INDEX TO SUBJECTS XV PAGE VETERINARY MEDICINES