Vol. XIII, Part I March, 1943 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 6 or 9s. 6d. Rs. 2 or 3s. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI 1943 ICAR. 6. XIII.1 500
Editorial Committee P. M. KHAREGAT, C.I.E., I.C.S., Vice- Chairman, Imperial Council of Agri- cultural Research. W. BURNS, C.I.E., D.Sc., I.A.S., Agri- cultural Commissioner with the Gov- ernment of India. F. WARE, C.I.E., F.R.C.V.S., F.N.I., I.V.S., Animal Husbandry Commis- sioner with the Government of India. RAO BAHADUR B. VISWANATH, C.I.E., F.I.C., F.C.S., Director, Imperial Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. F. C. MINETT, D.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Direc- tor, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. Z. R. KOTHAVALLA, B.AG., B.Sc., N.D.D., Director of Dairy Research, Bangalore. BIRBAL SAHNI, M.A., Sc.D. (Cantab.), D.Sc. (Lond.), F.R.S., Professor of Botany, Lucknow University. J. N. MUKHERJEE, D.Sc., Ghose Professor of Chemistry, University College of Science. and Technology, Calcutta. JAMES N. WARNER, M.Sc., Professor of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad. S. KRISHNA, PH.D., D.Sc, F.I.C, F.N.I., Biochemist, Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun. B. SAHAY, I.C.S., Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. Editor F. M. DE MELLO, B.A., B.Sc. (Econ.) The Editorial Committee, in its work of examining papers received for publica- tion, is assisted in an honorary capacity by a large number of scientists working in various parts of India. Contributions and books and periodi- cals for review should be addressed to the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricul- tural Research, Publication Section, New Delhi. Communications regarding subscrip- tion and advertisements should be ad- dressed to the Manager of Publications, Civil Lines, Delhi. Instructions to Authors Articles intended for publication in The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry should be accompani- ed by short popular abstracts of about 300 words each. In the case of botanical and zoological names the International Rules of Botani- cal Nomenclature and the International Rules of Zoological Nomenclature should be followed. References to literature, arranged alphabetically according to authors' names, should be placed at the end of the article, the various references to each author being arranged chronologically. Each reference should contain the name of the author (with initials), the year of publication, title of the article, the abbreviated title of the publication, volume and page. In the text, the reference should be indicated by the author's name, followed by the year of publication enclosed in brackets; when the author's name occurs in the text, the year of publication only need be given in brackets. If the reference is made to several articles published by one author in a single year, these should be numbered in sequence and the number quoted after year both in the text and in the collected references. If a paper has not been seen in original then it is safe to state ' original not seen.' Sources of information should be speci- fically acknowledged. As the format of the Journals has been standardized, the size adopted being crown quarto (about 7CONTENTS (VOL. XIII, PART I) March 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal PAGE Original Articles STUDIES ON NEWCASTLE (RANIKHET) DISEASE VIRUS (WITH PLATES ICONTENTS (VOL. XIII, PART II) June 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal PAGE Original articles FLUORINE INTOXICATION OF CATTLE IN INDIA (WITH PLATES VIII & IX AND ONE MAP) B. N. Majumdar, S. N. Ray and K. C. Sen 95 SOYA BEAN MEAL SUPPLEMENTS FOR CHICKENS A. J. Macdonald and S. Bose 108 ANALYSIS OF WEIGHT RECORDS OF ETAH GOATS (WITH TWO TEXT-FIGURES) C. K. Dilwali . . . 115 SPOILAGE IN DRIED SHRIMPS . . . . . . K. Gopinath . . . 121 A PRELIMINARY NOTE ON SOME INDIGENOUS METHODS OF EGG PRESERVATION (WITH PLATE X) T. S. Krishnan . . 127 A SIMPLE ' RAM-KO ' METHOD FOR THE ESTIMATION OF FAT IN MILK (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) C. S. Ram Ayyar and Zal R. Kothavalla 133 SOME OBSERVATIONS ON RICKETS IN PUPS . . . . K. Raghavachari . . 137 THE RELATION OF THE CANDLING APPEARANCE OF EGGS TO THEIR THICKS WHITE PERCENTAGE (WITH PLATE XI AND ONE TEXT-FIGURE) T. S. Krishnan . . 141 STUDIES ON THE COMPOSITION OF THE BLOOD OF FARM ANIMALS IN INDIA, I.CONTENTS (VOL. XIII, PART III) September 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles PAGE TREE LEAVES AS CATTLE FODDER, I. THE SEASONAL VARIA- TION IN THE COMPOSITION OF SAME EDITABLE TREE LRAVES (WITH TWO TEXT-FIGURES) S. A. Momin and S. C. Ray 183 TREE LEAVES AS CATTLE FFODDER, II. DIGESTIBILITY COEFFI- CIENT AND NUTRITIVE VALUE OF SAME TREE LEAVES Chet Ram and S. C. Ray . 191 GREEN BERSEEM AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR CONCENTRATES FOR ECONOMIC FEEDING OF DAIRY CATTLE N. C. Das Gupta . . 196 COMPARATIVE VALUES OF PROTEINS FOR CHICKENS . . A. J. Macdonald . . 214 THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION AND VITAMIN-A POTENCY OF COW'S MILK AND BUTTER FAT UNDER INTENSIVE GREEN FEEDING AND THE CAROTENE METABOLISM OF DAIRY ANI- MALS B. C. Ray Sarkar and K. C.Sen. . 219 OBSERVATION ON A CONTAGIOUS KERATITIS OF INDIAN SHEEP (WITH PLATE XVII) P. N. Nanda and M. Abdussalam 228 PHOSPHORUS IN MILK, I. THE PHOSPHORUS PARTITION IN THE MILK OF COW, GOAT, SHEEP AND HUMAN BEINGS K. P. Basu and K. P. Mukherjee 231 PHOSPHORUS IN MILK, II. AVAILABILITY OF PHOSPHORUS OF THE MILK OF COW, GOAT AND BUFFALO K. P. Basu and K. P. Mukherjee 236 SKRJABINEMA OVIS (SKRJABIN, 1915) WERESCHTSCHAGIN, 1925, AN OXYURID PARASITE OF THE GOAT (CAPRA HIRCUS) IN INDIA S. N. Vaidyanathan . 240 REUTILIZATION OF USED AGAR MEDIA, I. E. V. Seshacharyulu and Zal R. Kothavalla 241 ON THE PARENTERAL ADMINISTRATION OF SEA-WATER IN THE TREATMENT OF CANINE MANGECONTENTS (Vol. XIII, Part IV) December 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal PAGE Original articles STUDIES ON PROTEIN METABOLISM, I. INVESTIGATIONS UPON THE ENDOGE NITROGNE METABOLISM OF CATTLE N. D. Kehar, B. Mukherjee and K. C. Sen 257 STUDIES ON PROTEIN METABOLISM, II. THE EFFECT OF MUSCULAR WORK ON ENDOGENOUS PROTEIN CATABOLISM IN CATTLE N. D. Kehar, B. Mukherjee, V. V.S. Murty and K.C. Sen 263 OBSERVATION ON THE FORMS OF BABESIA GIBSONI (PATTON) IN THE DOG ; WITH A NOTE ON THE SYSTEMATIC POSITION OF THE PARASITE (WITH PLATES XIX AND XX) H. N. Ray and J. A. Idnani 267 THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF STAR GRASS (CYNODON PLEOTOSTA- CHYUM) AT DIFFERENT STAGES OF GROWTH AND THE NUTRI- TIVE VALUE OF MATURE STAR GRASS HAY N. L. Mathur and S. G. Ray 274 EFFECT OF INVERSION OF TUBES AT DIFFERENT INTERVALS ON THE REDUCTION OF METHYLENE BLUE IN MILK E. V. Seshacchayulu and Zal R. Kothavalla 277 BERSEEM HAYORIGINAL ARTICLES STUDIES ON NEWCASTLE (RANIKHET) DISEASE VIRUS* BY S. GANAPATHY IYER, G.M.V.C. Research Officer, Poultry Diseases, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute Mukteswar (Received for publication on 2 January 1941) (With Plates I2 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus heavy losses amongst his poultry flock '. After considerable study Shirlaw concluded that he was dealing with a virus disease ; in addition, he suggested the similarity between ' Ranikhet disease ' and ' Newcastle disease ' as reported by Doyle in 1927. In 1931 Cooper showed that the Indian virus was immuno- logically indistinguishable from the Java and Philippines and original New- castle strains. Crows were reported to have died in large numbers [Sahai, 1937, 1 and 2]. Kylasamier [1931] studied a similar widespread virulent disease of fowls which occurred in the Madras Presidency during 1929-30. A disease, apparently similar to Newcastle disease, was reported from Ceylon in 1930 by Crawford. The mortality was usually 100 per cent and, in addition to affecting chickens, the disease was observed in turkeys, guinea-fowl and crows. It is not known whether any cross immunity test was carried out between the Ceylon and the Newcastle strains of the virus. Konno, Ochi and Haschimoto [1929] and Nakamura, Oyama, Fukusho and Tomonaga [1933] reported this disease in Korea and in Japan. In 1931, Newcastle disease was reported from Australia. It was presumed that the disease, previously unknown in this continent was imported from overseas. Mortality was 100 per cent of the affected birds. Johnstone [1933] reported a second outbreak of this disease from Victoria. Although symptoms differed in some details from those seen previously, it was demons- trated by cross-immunity tests to be a recurrence of the same disease. Hudson [1937] from East Africa reported upon a highly fatal disease of fowls which was transmissible to pigeons. Here again the symptoms were those of Newcastle disease. Description of the disease Newcastle disease is an acute, infectious and contagious disease of fowls, showing considerable resemblance to fowl plague and is characterized by respi- ratory distress and a very high percentage of mortality. It is caused by a filter-passing virus. Clinically, peracute, acute or chronic forms may be recognized. (i) In peracute cases the bird usually dies suddenly without showing any visible signs of illness. In India during the early part of the investigation, fatal cases with neither symptoms nor lesions were commonly encountered. In about 90 per cent of the fowls experimentally inoculated at Weybridge by the author, many, which were normal in appearance in the evening, were found dead next morning. (ii) In acute cases, the period of illness lasts for three or four days. The great majority of cases are of this type. The symptoms described by Doyle [1927] are in essence as follows :Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part I ] PLATE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Experimental Newcastle disease. Note ruffled feathers and crouched appearance. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Experimental Newcastle disease. Note breathing through the mouth.
PLATE II [ Indian J. Vet, Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Experimental Newcastle disease. Note paralysis of leg and wing, closed eyes and oral breathing. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Experimental Newcastle disease in a pigeon. Note paralysis of leg and wing. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Experimental Newcastle disease in chicks. Note the chick in extremis on the 2nd day after infection.
S. GANAPATHY IYER 3 febrile reaction and the shorter period of incubation in some of the recorded outbreaks from India [Cooper, 1931]. Observations subsequently carried out have, however, shown that these differences do not always exist and the occurrence of a thermal reaction just at the onset of illness is a fairly common symptom of the disease caused by the Indian strain of the virus. (iii) In chronic cases, as a result of injury to nerves, twitching of the head and neck and lameness or paralysis of the legs and wings may occur [Kaura and Iyer, 1937] (Plate II, fig. 1). Doyle [1927] demonstrated by the inoculation of brain tissue from diseased birds that the paralytic symptoms are a true mani- festation of the original infection with Newcastle virus. The author has observed that when once the nerves are involved and the paralytic form sets in, the course of the disease is considerably prolonged and that, if attention is paid to artificial watering and feeding, such birds may live for another month or two and may even recover. As a rule, however, the paralysed bird dies of inanition. The objection to keeping such birds alive is that they will probably act as carriers of the infection and so will prolong the course of the outbreak. In all forms of the disease, recovery is rare, and re- covered birds are seldom of any further use for breeding [Picard, 1928]. Attempts at individual treatment are, therefore, uneconomic. Susceptibility Ranikhet disease has been reported in a variety of birds, both domesti- cated and wild, but, as a rule, the disease is most frequently observed in fowls. In the annual report of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (1931), it was mentioned that geese and ducks became infected by artificial inoculation and the virus could be recovered from them, although these birds were found to be relatively resistant. Crows also were experimentally infected with the virus. Picard [1934] reported that the fowl virus infected pigeons and ducks more readily than turkeys and geese. In 1930, he had reported that by the continuous passage of virus through pigeons the virus became inert after the third passage. Manninger [1936], however, observed that, in pigeons, the virus died out at the 13th passage. The fact that pigeons are susceptible to experimental infection with Ranikhet virus (Plate II, fig. 2) is invaluable in the differential diagnosis of this disease and fowl plague. Doyle [1927 and 1935] failed to set up natural infection in pigeons with fowl virus but reported that young pigeons were highly susceptible to experimental inoculation, and that older pigeons, whilst somewhat refractory, were nevertheless readily infected by artificial inoculation. Manninger [1936], however, considers that variable results are produced in pigeons and that they are, therefore, unsuitable for the differentiation of Newcastle disease and fowl plague. It appears, therefore, that the question of the susceptibility of pigeons to Ranikhet disease and fowl plague needs further urgent study. Among large animals, the Newcastle virus has been inoculated into bulls, sheep, goats, horses, and pigs with negative results. Kraneveld and Nasoetion [1938] report that they were unable to infect mice with Newcastle virus but they showed fowl plague virus to be pathogenic for mice. This finding is in agreement with that of Nakamura and Imai [1938] and with the results obtained by the writer.
4 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus Diagnosis Because of its similarity in several respects to a number of other fowl diseases, the diagnosis of Ranikhet disease is not easy. Bacteriological examin- ation and fowl sub-inoculation tests are essential for a differential diagnosis. The symptoms of fever, inappetance, somnolence, gastro-enteric disturbance and paralysis of the legs and wings are seen also in fowl cholera, fowl typhoid, fowl plague, spirochaetosis, and a variety of other diseases. Fowl plague seems to be one of the diseases to which Newcastle disease has several points of resemblance and the demonstration of immunological differences between the two diseases seems necessary for a positive diagnosis. Burnet and Ferry [1934] made comparative filtration studies between Newcastle disease and fowl plague viruses, and showed that the two viruses were independant, the Newcastle disease virus being larger than that of fowl plague. Further, they produced evidence as a result of their experiments using the technique of inoculation of the chorioallantoic membrane of the developing chicken embryo to show that fowl plague and Newcastle disease viruses were distinct entities. The Newcastle virus was found to be more resistant to photo- dynamic inactivation by methylene blue solution than fowl plague. Etiology and nature of the virus The etiological agent of Newcastle disease has been shown by Doyle [1927], Burnet and Ferry [1934] and a number of other workers to be a filterable virus. In studying the nature of the virus, Doyle [1927] selected mouth exudate for filtration experiments, as being most suitable. That most workers have found the saliva of infected fowls to be the best medium for these studies may be accounted for by the fact that the virus is intra-cellular in the tissues and that it is difficult to release the virus from the cells. Picard [1933], in his attempts to loosen the virus completely from the cell- structure through osmosis, exposed the organ emulsion to the influence of a 9 per cent salt solution. Topacio [1934] successfully cultivated the virus for 31 generations over a period of 112 days in a medium consisting of chicken-embryo tissue and plasma. The culture-virus did not appear to differ from the natural virus in its ability to set up an active immunity, as shown by the susceptible fowls immunized with the former resisting the injection of the latter. In some of the experi- ments the cultures were contaminated. The virus was, however, freed from contamination by filtration ; a certain amount of contamination did not appear to interfere with the viability and multiplication of the virus. Farinas [1930] reported that the virus, as determined by cataphoresis, was negatively charged. This has been confirmed by the author. Under natural conditions it is unlikely that the virus will remain viable for any great length of time [Iyer, 1939]. Owing to the rapid dissemination of infection and the almost 100 per cent mortality, not very long after the infec- tion has gained entrance into the animal body, instances of persistence of in- fection are uncommon in localities where the rearing of fresh birds is sus- pended for a time. Under experimental conditions, the virus, as contained in the organs such as liver and spleen, can be conserved in the refrigerator for about six months in 50 per cent glycerine.
S. GANAPATHY IYER 5 Liver and spleen pulp, desiccated in vacuo, over phosphoric anhydride and stored in the refrigerator, conserved the virulence for about three years. Exposure of saline emulsion of infected organs to direct sunlight for an hour had no effect on the virus. At room temperature, the virus died out more rapidly [Iyer, 1939]. It has been observed that active virus can be recovered from dead birds 72 hours after death, but that the tissues may be contaminated with intestinal bacteria. Where fresh virus was used for direct passage, the bird generally died in four to five days. Heating to 50°C. and over invariably killed the virus. At 37°C. the virus died out after three days. Shirlaw [1937] found that the change of virus from virulency to avirulency was, however, abrupt, a characteristic of this virus. Refrigerated virus on removal to a higher temperature soon died out. Doyle [1927] dried various infected organs. Most of his results showed that at 40 days the virus was virulent, but at 100 days it was avirulent. Virus in 50 per cent glycerine was active after 197 days, but was dead after 259 days. Virus in normal saline was. viable up to 86 days, but aviable on the 100th day. Spleen in a petri-dish was viable after 80 days, but dead after 150 days. Blood in sealed pipettes remained virulent for 109 days. At 37°C. the virus was active after 48 hours, but, after 72 hours it was inert. Doyle [1935] draws attention to the fact that Newcastle virus remained viable for at least six months in the bone marrow and muscle of carcases stored under ' trade chilling conditions '. Cooper [1931] mentioned that the emulsion of internal organs stored un- preserved in the refrigerator remained viable up to 169 days. The author had observed that small pieces of liver and spleen tissue kept in the cold in sealed tubes retained the virulence of the virus for over a year in the cold (0.5°C). Minor variations in the results of different workers in a subject of this nature may be due to the manner in which the virus was collected and the nature of the virus-containing material. Farinas [1930] mentioned that heating at 50 to 55°C. killed the virus in 30 minutes and direct sunlight killed it in one hour. In the ice-chest, the virus remained potent for at least ten months and 20 days ; at room temperature, the virus in liquid form remained active for 15 days. Virus in garden soil or in stagnant water, placed in a room with diffuse light through a glass, was ren- dered inactive in four days. From fowls, active virus was obtained 168 hours after death. Dobson [1939] refers to the persistence of the virus under natural conditions in indoor brooders for a period of seven weeks. Proper cleansing of the infected batteries had not been carried out before re-stocking. Regarding the distribution of the virus in the system, it is present, as mentioned previously, in all organs and body fluids. According to Doyle [1927], inoculation of the lung, bone-marrow and cervical portion of the spinal cord gave variable results. Inoculation of blood does not always reproduce the disease, since the virus does not appear to be firmly adherent to the blood cells. Doyle [1927] reported that the serum from two sick fowls was pooled, centrifuged and inoculated into a fowl. The fowl sickened on the fifth day and died on the eighth day. Therefore, serum from sick birds may contain active virus. Fowls, infected either naturally or artificially, generally die, but in rare cases they may recover. It has never been found possible to recover the virus from such birds after recovery.
6 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus Period of incubation In natural outbreaks, it is hardly possible to estimate the exact period of incubation owing to the rapidity with which the infectious agent becomes dis- seminated and to the highly fatal nature of the disease. It would appear that two to five days would be normally required for the first symptom of the dis- ease to be manifested among birds exposed to infection under field conditions. When healthy susceptible birds are given free access even for one day to com- mon feeding and watering along with experimentally infected birds, all the birds invariably start to die of the disease from about the fifth day onwards and the deaths continue to occur up to two or three weeks or until the last bird succumbs. Thus, it is evident that perpetuation of infection in infected premises is possible, especially where unsatisfactory hygienic conditions prevail. Doyle [1927] found that four days was the average period of incuba- tion when fresh virus was used. Chicks are very highly susceptible and the disease runs a much shorter course than it does in adults (Plate II, fig. 3). Suggestions regarding method of natural infection In nature the infection, in all probability, takes place by ingestion and cohabitation. Healthy fowls, left in contaminated coops, either empty conse- quent on the removal of the dead bird previously housed therein, or placed along with the infected birds, usually contracted the infection and died. The author has observed that transmission of the disease was seldom successful by an exchange of respiration. Pathology The post-mortem lesions of over two thousand fowls have been examined There do not appear to be any characteristic lesions of the disease. When the disease first occurred in India, in most of the cases which were presumably peracute cases, there were practically no discernible lesions though the fowls were dying in large numbers. Certain carcases looked absolutely normal. Continued examination of a large number of fowls from different sources disclosed small sharply outlined haemorrhages on the gizzard fat, pericardium, heart muscle, and the mucous membrane of the proventriculus (Plate III, fig. 1). They were seldom seen, however, on the inside of the breast bone in which site they are usually observed in fowl plague. Catarrhal enteri- tis is frequently seen in the duodenum (Plate III, fig 3). In experimental infection, these lesions were consistently observed. The inside of the proven- triculus is often semi-dry and coated with thick mucus. The nature of the lesions in the duodenum invariably depends on the time the bird takes to die, as also on the severity of the infection. Sometimes the mucous membrane is studded with pin-head-sized sub-mucous haemorrhagic spots (Plate III, fig 3), or it may be superficially congested. In some birds diffuse reddish ulcers with irregular margin and coated with bran-like deposits are seen [Kylasamier, 1931]; such lesions occasionally appear along the entire length of the intes- tines (Plate III, fig 3). The ileo-caecal valve seldom remains normal (Plate III, fig. 2). The mucous membrane is ulcerated and coated with necrotic tissue. In the rectum, numerous haemorrhagic-looking ulcers are seen with a coating of greyish deposit. Other systemic changes are those of fever. The
Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part I ] PLATE III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Two specimens of proventriculus of fowls died of experimental Newcastle disease. Note petechiae on the mucous membrane. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Rectum, ileum and caeca of a fowl which died of experimental Newcastle disease. Note the extensive ulceration and the characteristic bran- like deposit at the ileo-caecal valve. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Pieces of intestine of a fowl which died of experimental Newcastle disease. Note the catarrhal enteritis and haemorrhages.
PLATE IV [ Indian J. Vet Sci. & Anim: Husb., Vol. XIII, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. 14 days old chicken embryo showing minute sharply outlined haemorrhages on the wings and legs [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. 14 days old chorio-allan- toic membrane of a developing chicken embryo showing lesions of New- castle disease (natural size) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. The lesions in Fig. 2 magnified. Note the greyish white necrotic areas on the chorio-allantoic membrane representing areas of ectodermal proliferation, vacuola- tion & necrosis ×25 (See also Fig. 5) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Normal section of 14 days old chorio- allantoic membrane of the developing chicken embryo × 60 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Microphotograph of 14 days old Newcastle disease infected chorio-allantoic membrane showing ectodermal proliferation, vacuola- tion and necrosis, and cellular infiltration of mesoderm ×100 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. Same section as in Fig. 5 but magnified showing vacuolation of the ectodermal cells with inclusion-like bodies ×300
S. GANAPATHY IYER 7 liver, spleen and kidneys may be congested. The trachea is usually unaffected but may show slight congestion and contain mucus. The lungs show little organic change, which is strange in view of symptoms of respiratory distress shown by the birds during life. In chronic cases where the fowls show nervous symptoms the nerves seldom show macroscopic changes, but, microscopically, areas of cellular infiltration may be seen. The brain is congested and the meningeal vessels are injected. The exact nature of the change depends upon the extent of neurotropism. Kylasamier [1931] described the pathological histology of the gastro- intestinal lesions. The lesions in the proventriculus are described as a distor- tion of the gastric follicles and, in the intestines, the villi are distorted with superimposed bran-like deposits. Burnet and Ferry [1934] made a comparative study of the viruses of fowl plague and Newcastle disease, using the technique of inoculation of the chorio- allantoic membrane. According to Burnet and Ferry, sections of the infected membrane showed the principal lesion to be a patchy ectodermal proliferation, followed by, or associated with, gross vacuolation of the epithelial cells and eventual necrosis (Plate IV, figs. 4, 5 & 6). In some areas, the vacuoles con- tained acidophilic bodies. In fowl plague, the membrane shows an almost complete absence of ectodermal cells, although both the viruses cause the death of the growing embryo in 24 to 48 hours. Burnet and Ferry state that when an egg containing an embryo, which has just died after inoculation, is opened and examined, there are apparently certain lesions characteristic of the disease. The chorio-allantoic membrane is moist, with oedema and cloudiness arising from cellular infiltration. There are also irregular whitish opaque areas representing the areas of ectodermal proliferation (Plate IV, figs. 2 & 3). Small petechial haemorrhages are fairly numerous and sharply outlined, particularly on the neck and along the sides of the ventral aspect of the body (Plate IV, fig. 1). The author confirmed all these findings in a large number of serial passages of the virus through eggs. Minute pin-point haemorrhages were usually seen on the wings, claws and the under surface of the abdomen. In some of the eggs, the legs were dark-red in colour. Control Hygienic measures, that is the adoption of the general principles of segre- gation and disinfection are the only possible methods of control known at the present moment [Sahai, 1937], but, under field conditions, hygienic measures are of limited value, especially in India where the question of extermination of the infection by the destruction of all the sick and in-contact fowls is hardly possible. Haddow [1937] suggested splitting the flocks into small batches and distributing these as far as possible from each other. The disease is notifiable in Great Britain. The order of 1936 which came into operation there on 11 January 1937 suggests preventive measures which consist of timely diagnosis, the isolation of incontact birds, the prevention of movement of birds from the infected area, the quarantine of freshly purchased birds for two weeks, the disinfection of infected crates, utensils, houses, nest boxes, runs, etc., the avoidance of spread by attendants and the hygienic disposal of excreta and dead birds.
8 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus Picard [1930] experimented with a number of drugs, such as potassium permanganate, zonite, neosalvarsan and urotropine, but failed to demonstrate their therapeutic value. Naik [1936] carried out a series of experiments with trypan blue, three under field conditions and one under artificial conditions. His favourable findings were not, however, confirmed by Shirlaw [1937]. Preliminary experi- ments by Shirlaw on the value of camphor in Newcastle disease used after the method of Jacotot and Le Roux [1935] against rinderpest afforded encouraging results, but, when applied on a large scale, they were not uniform. For immunization, Picard [1930] tried a variety of vaccines such as dry- chalk-vaccine ; Umeno-and-Doi's carbol-glycerine saline vaccine used in rabies; Kelser's chloroform vaccine for rinderpest; mitigation of the virus by passage through pigeons ; and the production of immune serum from turkeys and geese. He considered success by any of these methods unlikely. In 1932, he tried the ether-virus vaccination similar to Bailly's rabies vaccina- tion ; vaccination through injection of the virus into the feather quill; gall vaccination according to Koch's rinderpest immunization; and the use of bacteriophage vaccine consisting of a filtrate of the faeces of a hen recovered from the disease, stimulated through contact with brain virus filtrate, again with little hope of success. However, by the feather quill method of immuniz- ation, he succeeded in establishing protection against a virus infection with 100 M. L. D., though he was unable to immunize against higher doses of infection by artificial inoculation and natural infection. The same author, in 1933, reported unsuccessful results of experiments on organ vaccine using virulent brain, liver, spleen, and egg yolk infected with the passage virus. In India, Cooper [1931] obtained some success from the use of serum from recovered birds. With the object of developing a simultaneous method of immunization, his efforts to prepare a serum on a large scale from donkeys by hyper-immunization met with no success. He also prepared a vaccine accord- ing to Kelser's vaccine for rinderpest which again was of no value. Kylasamier [1931] reported that a vaccine made of organ emulsion con- taining 1 per cent toluol and attenuated by 1 in 1000 formalin gave some useful results. Nakamura, Oyama and Wagatsuma [1937] claimed to have had some success with a formalized tissue-vaccine. The brain, spleen and liver of a fowl dead of experimental intra-cerebral infection were used in the preparation of the vaccine. A mixed saline emulsion of these organs was diluted with an equal volume of fowl serum (1:3 ). One part of 2 per cent Merck's formalin was added to ten parts of the mixture and kept at 37°C. for three days and then stored in the ice box or in the cold room. At the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, where the writer had been working on this disease, several experiments on the problem of prophylaxis and control were conducted. Haddow [1933, 1935 and 1936] mentioned that formalinized tissues, prepared in a manner similar to those used for rinderpest, had been tried with unsatisfactory results. Tissues, rapidly dried at 0°C. in vacuo, were also tried. Although the first batch of vaccines appeared to be satisfactory, these results could not be repeated. It was shown that immunity could be produced at doses slightly lower than those
S. GANAPATHY IYER 9 which produced death but the standardization of such vaccine, for safe use in the field, had not, so far, been possible. Tests with vaccines to set up immunity, prepared in a manner similar to those prepared by Daubney and Kelser for rinderpest, were also carried out but the results were irregular. Oral administration of the virulent material failed to induce immunity. As a result of continued work with Ranikhet disease, in 1936 it was reported that of the various kinds of vaccines experimented with, formalized vaccines were considered most hopeful, but, owing to the irregular reaction following vaccina- tion, the product could not be released for field use. Considerable success attended an attempt to immunize fowls by the inoculation of mixtures of viru- lent tissue emulsion and a solution of saponin. There was, however, consi- derable variation in the local inflammatory reaction of individual birds in res- ponse to the saponin injection and a practical standard was not achieved. Shirlaw [1937] stated that the work on vaccination by virus and serum mixture gave somewhat doubtful results. A specific antiserum was prepared by the hyper-immunization of birds which proved resistant to the usual dose of virus administered under the skin or reacted and recovered from the effects of the disease. At least 2 c.c. of this serum was required to neutralize 10 M. L. D. of the dried virus. With the serum-virus mixtures, made from desiccated virus, only an uncertain degree of immunity could be produced. Certain of the experimental birds withstood a subsequent test dose of 50 M. L. D. virus. It appeared, however, that the immunity resulting by this method was only partial rather than absolute and there was little prospect of success in this direction. The action of the influence of light upon the virus was studied, particu- larly with a view to attenuating the virus and rendering it suitable for use as a vaccine [Shirlaw, 1937]. Attenuation was attempted by suspending the virus in graded dilutions of methylene blue and subjecting it to photo-dynamic inactivation. The method was almost similar to that of Perdrau and Todd [1933], and yielded no conclusive results with Ranikhet disease virus as the attenuation of the virus was beset with difficulties peculiar to it, and, under experimental conditions,' an end-point was reached where the virus was either fully virulent or inert '. Several species of birds and animals were injected with the virus with the hope of attenuating it but the results were unsatisfactory. While pigeons are susceptible to experimental infection, there is no hope of their being used in providing a vaccine as in fowl pox, [Doyle and Minett 1927]. The serum of sheep, healthy or treated with the virus, was shown to have a virucidal effect but its application under experimental conditions to develop active or passive immunity was unsuccessful. Farinas [1930] obtained similar results. The possibility of a modified attenuated virus changing back into its virulent form should always be considered. Haddow and Idnani [1941] working with the Indian strain of the virus on its immunological aspect have had encouraging results in the preparation of a vaccine by employing the method of adsorption of the virus on alumina gel and by allowing the mixture to mature at a previously determined temper- ature. It is encouraging to note that this vaccine is free from any unmodified virus capable of setting up the disease in contact fowls.
10 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus II. EXPERIMENTAL WORK Purpose of work From the foregoing it will be seen that there is no aspect of the problem of greater importance than the control of the disease. The author had been engaged on this investigation whilst on study-leave in Great Britain on deputa- tion from the Government of India. During a large amount of experimental work with fowl-passage virus, in an attempt to produce a satisfactory immu- nizing agent, no useful results were achieved. General experimental procedure The fowls used for the different experimental inoculations were males and females of Rhode Island Red, White Leghorn and Light Sussex breeds, from six months to two years of age. The birds were mostly bred at the Ministry's Veterinary Laboratory, Weybridge, and it is remarkable that their susceptibil- ity to experimental infection with passaged Newcastle disease virus was very high. The birds, before coming in under experiment, were housed in fold units. During periods when there was a shortage of healthy fowls, a few third-year birds were included for certain inoculations without affecting the results. After inoculation, the birds were kept in individual coops measuring about 3 × 3 ft. made of corrugated sheet iron unless otherwise stated. The usual grower's mash and grain were fed. Water was given individually to birds in separate galvanized trays. The dead birds were removed each day, post- mortem examination made and the carcases incinerated. The coops in which the birds had died were sterilized. In certain experiments, where infection was intended to be conveyed through contact with soiled litter, food and water, contaminated coops were retained and the experimental birds were left in them. Many of the experiments were conducted during the winter months. The virus contained in organs, such as liver and spleen and occasionally brain from the experimentally infected fowls, collected after death, was preserved in 50 per cent glycerol saline and stored in the refrigerator 0.5°C. when not required for use. The standard virus, which has been referred to in the succeeding pages, unless otherwise stated, was represented by a 1 per cent saline suspension of equal parts by weight of liver and spleen from one or more fowls which had died of experimental Newcastle disease virus infection. The emulsion was rendered cell-free by spinning at 500 revolutions per minute for about three minutes and the supernatant fluid was then pipetted off. In experiments involving the use of egg cultivated virus, a 10 per cent emulsion in saline or broth of infected chorio-allantois, or whole embryo infected experimentally, was used as the material containing the virus. Search for a vaccine (a) Formalized vaccine. (i) Formalized liver and spleen vaccine. To liver and spleen suspension of fowl-passage virus, formalin was added to a concen- tration of 0.2 per cent and the mixture was attenuated at 37°C. for 72 hours, during which period it was agitated by gentle shaking twice a day to distribute the sediment uniformly. The vaccine was tested for bacterial contamination
S. GANAPATHY IYER 11 and, if found free, was inoculated into fowls. Two doses of 5 c.c. each were injected into each fowl at a weekly interval; two fowls were injected by the subcutaneous route ; two by the intramuscular route ; and two intravenously. Results. As will be seen from Table I, the two fowls which received two doses of the vaccine into the muscle both died, one seven days and the other 11 days after the last dose of the vaccine. The cause of death was Newcastle disease. Since the birds died sometime after vaccination with the first dose, it was presumed that the vaccine was free from any active virus. Moreover, judging from the absence of reaction in the other fowls inoculated by other routes with the same vaccine, the birds treated intramuscularly in all pro- bability, picked up infection from the neighbouring coops and apparently, there was no protection against contact infection conferred as a result of the vaccine- treatment. The remaining four birds which survived the injection of the two doses of the vaccine, died when tested for immunity 13 days after the last dose of the vaccine. Therefore, organ vaccine made by using formalin has no apparent protec- tive value. While doing this work, the technique of Nakamura et al. [1937] was followed as far as possible, as these workers reported favourable results with a formalized vaccine. They found that the intravenous route was most efficacious and double intravenous injections at an interval of five to seven days gave immunity in 54 out of 87 birds 14 days after the last dose of vaccine, whereas all controls died. These authors state that in spite of careful preparation, the efficiency of the different batches of vaccine varied. The success claimed by the above workers could not be obtained in the present experiment. TABLE I Liver and spleen-formalin vaccine and comparative value of different routes of inoculation. 5 c.c. inoculated on each occasion Route Fowl No. Dates of vaccination Result Subcutaneous . 1895 16-11-39 and 23-11-39 . Survived, tested immimity on 6-12-39, died 5th day 1891 Ditto . . Ditto Intravenous . . 1896 Ditto . . Ditto 1893 Ditto . . Ditto Intramuscular . 1894 Ditto . . Died 4-12-39, perhaps from contact infection 1892 Ditto Died 30-11-39, perhaps from contact infection (ii) Formalized brain vaccine. One part of 2 per cent formalin was added to nine parts of 1 per cent brain suspension in saline representing fowl-passage virus and the mixture was attenuated at 37°C. for three days. Soon after the above period the vaccine was tested in fowl No. 2009. This fowl survived. An attempt was made to reinforce the immunity, if any, by treating the bird with 0.1 c.c. of fowl-passage virus containing about 10 million M. L. D. on the 11th day after vaccination. The bird died on the 5th day.
12 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus (iii) Formalized spleen vaccine. That formalin is invaluable in the prepa- ration of vaccines for virus diseases has long been known, consequently Shirlaw [1937] suggested the use of formalized spleen vaccine for Ranikhet disease as in the control of yellow fever. Bedson [1938] reported that a considerable degree of immunity to psittacosis, in mice could be produced by the injection of a vaccine consisting of virulent mouse spleen emulsion inactivated by 0.1 per cent formalin and stored in the refrigerator for 10 to 14 days before use. Preparation. The entire spleen usually about the size of a cherry and weighing about four grams, was collected from a fowl which had died of experi- mental infection with Newcastle virus. A 5 per cent suspension in phosphate buffer solution pH 7.6 was prepared and 0.1 per cent formalin added. The contents were thoroughly mixed and the vaccine-mixture was stored in the refrigerator at 0 to 5°C. for 14 days. It should be mentioned that, while prepar- ing the vaccine, the whole spleen was included without filtration or centrifu- gation to get rid of the coarse tissue fragments but the tissue was finely minced. This was done as it was thought that virus, as contained within the cells and used with the tissues, would offer a more efficient product than the usual cell- free organ extracts. Kelser [1930], referring to the rabies-chloroform-treated- vaccine, considered that the active principle of the vaccine may be something other than dead virus, possibly a cellular principle resulting from the reaction between the virus and the tissue cells or it may be a particular stage of the virus which occurs only in close conjunction with the tissue cells. Test. The formalized spleen vaccine for Newcastle disease was injected in fowl No. 2089, 5 c.c. subcutaneously on 4 April 1940 ; the bird survived and on 18 April 1940 it was exposed to coop-contact infection. The fowl died on 23 April 1940 showing lesions of Newcastle disease. (b) Crystal violet vaccine The use of crystal violet by Dorset [1935] in the United States Bureau of Animal Industry, as an agent for the attenuation of hog cholera virus, yielded promising results for the production of a satisfactory vaccine. The product, de- signated as regular vaccine Mc Bryde & Cole [1936] was prepared by adding one part of one per cent aqueous solution of phenol to nine parts of denfirinated blood obtained from pigs sick with cholera. Five parts of one per cent aqueous solution of crystal violet were then added to 100 parts of the previously pheno- lized blood. This mixture was incubated at 37.5°C. for 14 days. Crystal violet vaccine for the prevention of swine fever in pigs has given variable results in the hands of different workers, Mc Bryde & Cole [1936], Munce [1937], Hupbauer and Tomasec [1937] and Edgington and Schalk [1939], but certain improvements in the physical and chemical nature of the vaccine appear to be necessary. (i) Preparation of crystal violet vaccine for Newcastle disease virus. Only fresh virus was used in the preparation of the vaccine. Simultaneously with the study of the immunizing value of the vaccine, the effect of crystal violet on the virus after different periods of contact at 37°C, and at room temperature was determined with a view to developing a standard in the pre- paration of the vaccine. Crystal violet solution. Crystal violet of commercially high purity, from Messrs G. T. Gurr & Co., London, was used. A 0.5 per cent aqueous solution
S. GANAPATHY IYER 13 was made by digestion with hot water, as the dye is difficult to dissolve. The solution, after sterilizing in steam by the intermittent method, was stored in a glass stoppered bottle at about 20°C. to avoid deposition of crystals. It was seldom found necessary to filter the solution. Buffer solution. Anhydrous dibasic sodium phosphate (Na2HPO4) was freed from moisture by freshly drying to constant weight at 110°C. A 3 per cent aqueous solution was prepared and sterilized by autoclaving at 5 lb. pressure for 15 minutes. Vaccine mixture. With sterile precautions, one part of the crystal violet solution and one part of the buffer solution were stirred into eight parts of virus suspension. The mixture was inactivated at 37°C. for different periods (Table II) ranging from 1 to 96 hours. The mixture was agitated by gentle shaking twice a day during incubation to distribute the sediment uniformly. Tests. The purity of the vaccine was determined by appropriate cultural tests after diluting the vaccine so as to reduce the amount of the dye which would inhibit bacteria especially Gram positive organisms. The safety and potency of the different lots of vaccine mixture were determined in fowls. All fowls which survived the vaccine-treatment were tested for immunity after varying periods by inoculation with fowl-passage virus, or by coop-contact infection. In a few cases, the presence of immunity in fowls was verified by serological tests involving the injection of a susceptible fowl or developing chick embryo with serum-virus mixtures. TABLE II Effect of crystal violet on Newcastle virus from fowl, by contact at 37°C. for different periods Expt No. Contact hours Date of inoculation Dose Fowl No. Result Immunity test Date Result I 24 31-10-39 1 c.c. 1870 Lived . . 17-11-39 Died 4th day 48 1-11-39 14 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus Results Experiment I. The results were nullified by the fact that the control fowl (No. 1881) injected with the virus incubated for 96 hours survived and later proved to be susceptible. Indeed, Newcastle virus seldom remains viable for longer than 72 hours at 37°C. [Doyle, 1927 ; Iyer, 1939]. Treatment with inert virus appears to confer no immunity. Experimnet II. The results were not uniform. The fowl injected with the vaccine-mixture incubated for 18 hours lived but later died when tested for immunity ; whereas the fowl treated with the vaccine subjected to 24 hours contact died. This indicates, that a period of more than 24 hours at 37°C. is necessary to attenuate the virus. A dose of 1 c.c. of the vaccine was injected subcutaneously in this and in the previous experiment. Experiment III. A dose of 5 c.c. of the vaccine was injected into each fowl. The vaccine mixture, depending upon the length of exposure to in- cubator temperature, either killed the fowl or failed to confer any definite protection against infection by coop-contact. A period of contact at 37°C. from 42 to 48 hours is perhaps the optimal time for the inactivation of the virus in the presence of crystal violet solution. Experiment IV. In this experiment, fowls which survived vaccination proved susceptible to experimental infection by coop-contact. The actual period when the virus changes from virulency to avirulency may be between 42 and 44 hours. Experiment V. The vaccine was tested in six fowls. Two doses of 5 c.c. each, per bird, were given at a week's interval. The control fowl which was injected with the incubated virus without crystal violet died. Five of the vaccinated fowls died over a month after the inoculation of the second dose of the vaccine, presumably as a result of Newcastle disease. It was believed that these fowls might have picked up infection from other experi- mental birds which were all housed together, though in different coops. Fowl No. 2123, which survived the vaccine treatment, died on immunity test. There is little doubt, therefore, that the vaccine as used in this experiment is valueless as an immunizing agent. (ii) Effect of crystal violet on Newcastle disease virus at room atmospheric temperature. The vaccine mixture was made as in the previous experiments in which attenuation was effected at 37°C. In this experiment the vaccine was stored inside a cupboard in a room where the atmospheric temperature was about 70°F. Fowls were inoculated after 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours storage of the vaccine. The results were irregular (Table III) in fowls surviving vaccination as no immunity could be demonstrated against inoculation with virus. Two fowls died of Newcastle disease following the vaccine treatment.
S. GANAPATHY IYER 15 TABLE III Inactivation of Newcastle disease virus by crystal violet at room temperature Contact hours Date of Inocn. Fowl No. Result Immunity test Date Result 24 31-10-39 1869 Lived . . 17-11-39 Died 6th day 48 1-11-39 1828 Died 5th day . .. 72 2-11-39 1830 Lived . . 17-11-39 Died 4th day 96 3-11-39 1880 Died 6th day . .. 96 3-11-39 1882 Died 10th day . .. Control, inoculated virus plus saline (iii) Crystal violet vaccine using brain tissue virus. As it was recogni- zed that the nature of the tissues incorporated in the vaccine may influence their immunizing value, one lot of vaccine was prepared from brain virus. To eight parts of one per cent saline suspension of brain tissue, from a fowl which had died of experimental disease, was added one part of three per cent aqueous dibasic sodium phosphate solution and one part of 0.5 per cent aqueous solution of crystal violet. The vaccine-mixture was attenuated at 37°C. for 24 hours and then inoculated subcutaneously in fowl No. 1874 on 23 November 1939. This fowl remained healthy until the 7th day ; when 0.1 c.c. of fowl-passage virus, representing about 10 million M.L.D. was injected with a view to reinforcing the partial immunity if such existed, the fowl died on the 4th day. (c) Preparation of a vaccine by employing the chorio-allantoic technique Rous and Murphy [1911] in their study of Rous sarcoma were the first to make use of the chorio-allantoic membrane of the developing egg. Wood- ruff and Goodpasture [1931] adopted this technique for the propagation of viruses on the chorio-allantoic membrane of the hen's egg and were successful in growing fowl pox virus. Burnet and Ferry [1934] have shown that the New- castle virus is highly infective for the developing embryo. The virus after having undergone at least twelve passages through eggs during three months was found to be fully virulent for fowls. Burnet [1933, 1934, 1935 and 1936] has given a detailed description of an improved technique of chorio-allantoic membrane inoculation and of the method of examination of the developed lesions. This method of virus culture has been reported on during recent years by Goodpasture, Woodruff and Buddingh [1932] and Kunert [1935], for vaccinia ; Paschen [1936] for ectromelia ; Higbie. and Howett [1935], Beard et al. [1938] and Lyon and Wyckoff [1938] for equine encephalomyelitis ; Bengston and Dyer [1935] for Rocky Mountain spotted fever ; Brandly [1937] and Beaudette and Hudson [1939] for infectious laryngo-tracheitis ; Gallo- way [1937] for foot-and-mouth disease ; Peragallo [1937 and 1937, 1] for rabies virus ; Hoffstadt and Pilcher [1938] for myxomatosum ; Kunert [1938] for rinderpest ; Beaudette and Hudson [1938], Glover [1939] and Brandly and Dunlop [1939] for bird pox virus; and Stevenson and Butler [1939] for the preparation of a vaccine against smallpox.
16 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus Experimental procedure Vigorous, healthy fowls were specially mated for this work. Leghorns and Rhode Island Reds were used. Fertile eggs, not more than five days old, were selected for incubation. From 6 to 12 eggs at a time were placed in the incubator and three such sets were made in a week, so that sufficient eggs might be available each time that inoculation was due. After incubation for 9 to 12 days, the eggs were tested by ' candling ' to remove ' clears ' and ' dead-in-shells '. The optimal period of incubation for an easy technique of inoculation and collection of virus was found to be about 11 days. The technique of Burnet [1933 and 1936] was followed as far as possible' Experimental infection of eggs Virus. The first batch of eggs was inoculated with a Berkefeld V filtrate of liver and spleen fowl-passage virus which has undergone, during seven years, innumerable and continuous, as well as intermittent passages, through fowls. The inoculum was tested for bacterial contamination by appropriate cultural tests. Usually three eggs were inoculated with the material at each passage. The records were maintained by noting the passage number as P1, P2, etc. and the number of eggs within each passage as E1, E2, etc. The virus was found lethal to the embryo at the first passage and also during the subse- quent transfers, using every time-for sub-inoculation, saline or broth emulsion of the infected chorio-allantoic membrane or the whole embryo. As a rule, direct sub-inoculations were made with fresh virus each time but occasionally, when suitable well-developed eggs were not available for the work, egg virus in the form of emulsion of chorio-allantoic membrane or embryo in broth or saline was stored in the refrigerator (0 to 5°C.) until satisfactory eggs became available. Storage of virus for one or two weeks did not appear to alter its virulence for the embryo. No difficulty was experienced in obtaining quan- tities of virus, free from bacterial contamination, at each passage. It was also observed that contaminated samples could be purified by filtration through a Berkefeld V filter without any appreciable loss of virulence. The age of the embryo at inoculation ranged from 9 to 13 days. Eggs were opened for ex- amination and collection of virus on the second or third day following rein- cubation after inoculation. It should be mentioned that a re-incubation of the egg of over three days after inoculation often resulted in partial or com- plete loss of virulence of the virus. Therefore, the period necessary for the reincubation of eggs after inoculation with virus seems an important factor for a successful propagation of the virus [Brandly, 1937]. Following inoculation and re-incubation, the eggs were, as a rule, opened for examination and collection of the virus on the 2nd or 3rd day. Death of the embryo usually occurs within 48 hours. In the case of dead embryos, the shell membrane which can be seen through the cover slip is usually moist and greyish. There is, as a rule, transudation of fluid between the shell membrane and the chorio-allantois. The latter is thickened and oedematous and often shows areas of cloudiness resulting from cellular infiltration (Plate IV, figs. 2 and 3). The membrane also shows minute greyish white flecks which Burnet described as the areas of ectodermal proliferation characteristic of Newcastle disease, Histological sections of the chorio-allantois, as described
S. GANAPATHY IYER 17 by Burnet [1936], show patchy ectodermal proliferation, followed by, or associated with, gross vacuolation of the epithelial cells and necrotic changes (Plate IV, figs. 4, 5 and 6). In some of the vacuoles of the proliferating ectodermal cells there is evidence of acidophilic bodies, which Burnet [1936] considers as droplets of mucin (Plate IV, fig. 6). Lesions. Eggs in which the embryos had died but in which no lesions were found, invariably contained the active virus. The characteristic lesions of Newcastle disease in eggs were observed in almost all the eggs in the differ- ent passages (Plate IV, fig. 1). Serial cultivation of the virus through eggs was successfully carried out. The virus continued to be lethal for the embryo and took a generalized form of infection. The virus was confined not only to the membrane, but also present in the embryo. The death of the embryo was seldom prolonged beyond the third day following inoculation. (i) Experimental vaccination of fowls with egg virus. Susceptible fowls were inoculated with the egg cultivated virus at different passages. The virus had maintained its normal virulence for fowls up to the 19th passage in one line and to the 12th passage in the other. But when the 1st line egg virus, after having undergone 33 passages, was inoculated into healthy fowls, there were indications that the virus had undergone some modification and was admirably suited for the immunological work in the form of what may be termed ' live-virus-vaccine '. Attenuation of the virus in the 2nd line, how- ever, was evident at the 14th passage. From Table IV, it will be seen that fowls have been successfully immunized against Newcastle virus by em- ploying the egg technique. The immunity was satisfactory in the different tests after the egg virus had undergone 33 passages with Line I and 14 passages with Line II. Fowls, inoculated with the vaccine, seldom showed any sign of illness but, rather, appeared to have acquired absolute protection against what may be considered as severe infection. At the time of writing, 57 passages, during 12 months, have been made with the 1st line of the virus. The virus still kills the embryos two to three days after the inoculation but is not lethal for fowls. It is, therefore, invaluable as an immunizing agent; moreover, there has been no difference in the ' takes' in the different passages. It is, however, realized that the various factors, that would influence the successful employment of this method for prophylaxis against Newcastle disease on any large scale, still remain to be investigated. While evidence has been adduced to show that Newcastle disease virus, after being cultured through developing chick embryos, has become so attenuated as to enable it to be employed as a safe immunizing agent, the work of Smith, Penna and Paoliello [1938], on yellow fever vaccination with cultured virus may be re- viewed here, for the behaviour of the two viruses is more or less identical. Vaccine for human use against yellow fever was prepared from the develop- ing chick embryos inoculated with the culture-virus. In making the vaccine, only virus which had been cultivated through from 205 to 287 passages was used. Eggs with living embryos about seven days old were selected for inocu- lation After inoculation the eggs were incubated at 37°C. for three or four days and then the embryos were taken out for vaccine preparation. A 10 per cent suspension of the finely ground tissue in normal human serum was
18 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus made and centrifuged ; and the supernatant fluid removed and filtered through Seitz discs at 10 lb. pressure. The filtrate was frozen and desiccated and stored at 4°C. For vaccination this dried virus was rehydrated immedi- ately before use. Reaction to the vaccine when it occurred was mild, generally consisting of headache, low-grade fever and pains on the 6th or 7th day. No instance of delayed reaction to the vaccination has been encountered. Antibodies may appear after the 7th and before the 21st days and persist for at least one year. Under field conditions about 95 per cent of vaccinated persons are reported to have acquired the immunity. One of the questions to which Smith et al. [1938] gave consideration in using any live virus for yellow fever vaccination was that of a possible transmission of such virus by mosquitos, with perhaps a resulting increase in virulence with repeated passage. Studies on monkeys and subsequent observations on man, carried out in areas free from known vectors of yellow fever, however, showed that the virus circulates in minimal quantities in the blood, and that, in many cases, no circulating virus at all could be demons- trated by the mouse test. As a result of the extended observations with the egg cultivated New- castle virus, there are indications which point to the fact that, owing to the unknown nature and variation of the individual susceptibility of fowls, it is logical to expect a small percentage of reactors which may occasionally be fatal, especially among birds under 12 weeks of age. This point will be given consideration in any further work. Cultured Newcastle virus does not appear to revert to original virulence. Referring to Newcastle disease, only in one instance was there at this stage an indication to show that the cultured Newcastle virus did not contain any harmful virus capable of returning to its original virulence and able to kill fowls (Table IV). Fowl No. 2286 was killed five days after inoculation with the egg cultivated virus and its spleen was sub-inoculated into a susceptible fowl to ascertain whether or not the apparently modified virus could, under favourable conditions, revert to its original virulence. This fowl remained well and was shown to be successfully immunized. Titration of egg virus. In a few limited observations, the end-point of the egg cultivated virus was determined by the inoculation of eggs. It is noteworthy that a dilution of 0.05 × 10S. GANAPATHY IYER 19 TABLE IV20 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus TABLE IVS. GANAPATHY IYER 21 Immunization tests with crystal violet treated egg virus (Table V) Experiment I. At the time of the vaccine preparation, the virus had been cultivated in eggs through 12 generations. The egg virus at the 12th passage had not been modified in its virulence. Fowl No. 2137 which had received the vaccine treatment 5 c.c. subcutaneously showed no symptom of illness ; 39 days after vaccination, it was exposed to coop-contact infection ; it remained healthy ; but 54 days after vaccination, it was changed to another coop in which a bird had previously died of experimental disease. The vacci- nated fowl died, however, six days later. As it showed lesions suggestive of the disease, animal sub-inoculation was carried out and it was proved that the bird died of Newcastle virus infection. Serum-virus neutralization test. Serum from fowl No. 2137 concerned in the previous experiment was collected on the 14th day following the vaccine- treatment. To 0.5 c.c. serum was added 0.5 c.c. fowl-passage virus. The contents were mixed well and incubated for 18 hours at 37°C. Control tubes containing virus plus normal fowl serum and virus plus saline were also prepared. The above mixtures were inoculated into fowls which were apparently healthy. All the fowls died. From this, it was concluded that the serum from the vaccinated fowl evidently contained no specific neutral- izing antibody. Although these results were not very satisfactory, it seemed possible that with greater attention to the physico-chemical aspects, this kind of vaccine might be improved. Experiment II. In this experiment, the vaccine was prepared from the virus after cultivation through 23 generations in the developing eggs. The fowls were inoculated with 5 c.c. each under the skin on 29 March 1940. The birds remained lively and showed no symptoms of the disease. They were, however, shown to be immune against subsequent experimental infection. In connection with equine encephalomyelitis, it is stated that the egg virus treated with formalin confers more rapid protection and may be used in the presence of virulent outbreaks [Lyon and Wyckoff, 1938] ; [Beard et al., 1938]. On 16 May 1940, these two fowls were left in a pen along with a number of experimentally infected fowls and they remained healthy. The results of this experiment appear very promising and it may be con- sidered as a successful attempt at vaccination against Newcastle disease. It is possible that the virus, after cultivation in eggs, has acquired some new property which has rendered it an efficacious and safe immunizing agent, thus paving the way for useful line of further research following the modern con- cept of the chorio-allantoic method of virus-culture. At this stage, it is recognized, however, that the results of a test conducted with so few birds cannot be accepted as conclusive. Work on similar lines was, therefore, repeated in subsequent experiments. Experiment III. Several points of useful information emerge from this. From the fact that fowl No. 2276, which was one of the six vaccinated fowls, died when tested for immunity by experimental inoculation seven days after the vaccine treatment, and at the same time fowls which were tested for immunity 14 and 21 days following the vaccination remained healthy, it is evident that, consequent on treatment with the crystal violet vaccine, protection is perhaps
22 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus established only after the 7th day and is solid on the 14th and 21st days. In the previous experiment, it appeared that there was satisfactory immunity 11 days after the vaccination. If this method of preventive treatment is to prove practicable on any large scale, it will be necessary for the birds sub- jected to prophylaxis by crystal violet vaccine to be segregated from the infected surroundings for a period at least of 14 days to obviate the risk of the birds contracting the infection during the negative phase. It will be further seen from this experiment that 14 days after vaccination, three fowls with- stood the infection by pen-contact. Vaccine does not disseminate infection. From the fact that a healthy fowl placed along with the vaccinated fowls for a period of 14 days remained un- affected (Table V), but died when exposed to the infection, the vaccine does not appear, to be capable of disseminating the disease from the vaccine- treated birds. At this stage with the limited experiments and observations, it would not be justifiable to claim that the vaccine is definitely free from any unmodified virus capable of returning to its virulence under some suitable conditions. The results, however, warrant a further extensive trial of the vaccine. So far, the immunization experiments have been restricted to one strain of virus only, that is, the English strain. It would be interesting to know if, by this method, other strains of virus, such as the Indian strain, against which primarily this work was initiated, would yield to similar bio- logical modification. Experiment IV. To confirm the promising results so far achieved, im- munization work with further lots of crystal violet treated egg virus was undertaken. In this experiment, the virus used had undergone 41 serial passages through eggs and a larger number of birds and controls employed. The birds were housed together in a pen with common food and water. Twelve fowls were inoculated with 5 c.c. of the vaccine subcutaneously, and 12 control fowls of almost the same weight and breed were placed with these and allowed to mix freely so that the possibility of dissemination of Newcastle disease consequent on vaccination could be ascertained. Results. There was no reaction in any of the fowls but subsequent observations were impossible owing to an outbreak of fowl pox among these experimental birds. This experiment is, therefore, not recorded in Table V. TABLE V Egg virus crystal violet vaccine for Newcastle disease Vaccine lot No. Date of inoculation Fowl No. Inoculum 5 c.c. subcut Result of vaccination Result of immunity test I 5 Feb. 1940 2137 Passage 12 . . Remained well . Contact infection on 30 March 1940, died II 29 Mar. 1940 2878 Passage 23 . . Do . Immune to one million M. L. D. on 9 April 1940, and 100 million M. L. D. on 22 April 1940; control fowls died 2879
S. GANAPATHY IYER 23 TABLE V24 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus TABLE VII Attenuated egg virus and formalin Date of inoculation Fowl No. Dose and route Result and remarks 13-4-40 2223 5 c.c. S/c Survived, immunity test on 22 April 1940, died 4th day 13-4-40 2224 S. GANAPATHY IYER 25 use for the control of swine fever in the United States Department of Agri- culture advocated by Dorset. While investigating some of the conditions which might affect the successful employment of the crystal violet vaccine against Newcastle disease, there were indications that, owing to certain vari- ations in the individual susceptibility of fowls, it might offer certain diffi- culties militating against a satisfactory standardization of the vaccine. Within the limits of the present experiments and the scope of the preliminary immunological work, there are indications that the use of crystal violet with the egg cultivated virus in the preparation of the vaccine against Newcastle disease can with advantage and impunity be eliminated. Further work is being carried out to investigate the various factors which may influence the successful employment of these methods of preventive treatment. It is hoped that a preliminary report of this nature will be of value in solving the vexed problem of controlling Ranikhet disease in India by under- taking wholesale immunization of flocks in endemic areas. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author wishes to express his gratitude to Dr W. H. Andrews, Director, Veterinary Laboratory, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, Weybridge, England, for the various facilities given to him during the prosecution of this work. His thanks are due to Mr T. M. Doyle for his helpful suggestions ; to Mr N. Dobson, for his professional cooperation and immense help ; to Mr L. E. Hughes for assistance in histo-pathology and to Mr A. Norman for his excellent photographs. In the preparation of this article the author received considerable advice and constructive criticism from Mrs L. H. Shirlaw, B.A.; therefore, his grate- ful thanks are also due to her. REFERENCES Acevedo, R. A. (1933), Gaz. Bureau. Anim. Indust. Philippine Is. 3, 80-7 Beaudette, F. R. and Hudson, C. B. (1938). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 93, 146-50 Beaudette, F.R. and Hudson, C. B. (1939). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 75, 333-39 Beard, J. W., Finkelstein, H., Sealy, W. C. and Wyckoff, R. W.G. (1938). Science 87, 490 Bedson, S. P. (1938). Brit. J. Exp. Path. 19, 353-66 Bengston, I. A. and Dyer, R. E. (1935). Pub. Health Rep. Wash. 50, 1489-98 Brandly, C. A. (1937). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 90, 479-87 Brandly, C. A. and Dunlop, G. L. (1939). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 95. 340-9 Burnet, F. M. (1933). J. Path. Bact. 37,107 Burnet, F. M. (1934). Brit. J. Exp. Path. 15, 52-5 Burnet, F. M. (1935). Med. J. Aust. Nov. 16th, 687-9 Burnet, F. M. (1936). Med. Res. Council. Sp. Rep. Series No. 220, London Burnet, F. M. and Ferry, J. D. (1934). Brit. J. Exp. Path. 15, 56-64 Cooper, H. (1931). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. Anim. Husb. 1, 107-23 Coronel, A. B. (1939). Philipp. J. Anim. Indust. 6, 43-54 Crawford, M. (1930). Rep. Gov. Vet. Surgeon, Ceylon Dobson, N. (1939). Proc. 7th World's Poult. Congr., 250-3, Washington, D. C. : U. S. Dep. Agric. Dorset, M. (1935). Vet. Bullet. 9, 206
26 Studies on Newcastle (Ranikhet) Disease Virus Doyle, T. M. (1927). J. Comp. Path. 40, 144-69 Doyle, T. M. (1935). J. Comp. Palh. 48, 1-20 Doyle, T. M. and Minett, F. C. (1927). J. Comp. Path. 40, 247 Edgington, B. H. and Schalk, A. F. (1939). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 94, 501-9 Edwards, J. T. (1928). Rep. Imp. Inst. Vet. Res. Mukteswar Farinas, E. C. (1930). Philippine J. Agric. 1, 311-64 Galloway, I. A. (1937). 5th Prog. Rep. Foot and Mouth Dis. Res. Committee Min. Agric. and Fish. London Glover, R. E. (1939). J. Comp. Path. 52, 29-46 Goodpasture, E. W., Woodruff, A. M. and Buddingh, G. J. (1932). Amer. J. Path. 8, 271-81 Haddow, J. R. (1933). Rep. Imp. Inst. Vet. Res. Mukteswar Haddow, J. R. (1935). Rep. Imp. Inst. Vet. Res. Mukteswar Haddow, J. R. (1936). Rep. Imp. Inst. Vet. Res. Mukteswar Haddow, J. R. (1937). Proc. Anim. Husb. Res. Wkrs. Conf. Delhi, 1936, 64-70 Haddow, J. R. and Idnani, J. (1941). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 11, 113-21 Higbie, E. and Howitt, B. (1935). J. Bact. 29, 399-406 Hoffstadt, Rachael E. and Pilcher, K. (1938). J. Bact. 35, 353-68 Hudson, J. R. (1937). E. African J. Agric. 2, 495-7 Hupbauer, A. and Tomasec, I. (1937). Vet. Arhiv. 7, 484-90 Iyer, S. G. (1939). Ind. Sci. Cong. Absts. Jacotot, H. and Le Roux, G. (1935). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 28, 360-3 Johnstone, R. N. (1933). J. Dept. Agric. Victoria. 31, 80-83 Kaura, R. L. and Iyer, S. G. (1937). Misc. Bull. Imp. Council Agric. Res. India. No. 15 Kelser, R. A. (1930). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 67, 595 Konno, T., Ochi, Y. and Haschimoto, K. (1929). Deut. Tier. Wschr. 37, 515-7 Kraneveld, F. C. and Nasoetion, A. (1938). Vet. Bull. 10, 256 Kunert, H. (1935). Z. Hyg. Infekt Kr., 117, 216-28 Kunert, H. (1938). Deuts. tierärztl. Wschr. 46, 487-90 Kylasamier, K. (1931). Ind. Vet. J. 7, 340-6 Lyon, B. M. and Wyckoff, R. W. G. (1938). Vet. Med. 33, 408-9 Manninger, R. (1936). J. Comp. Path. 49, 279-83 Mc Bryde, C. N. and Cole, G. G. (1936). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 89, 652-63 Munce, T. W. (1937). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 90, 304-21 Naik, R. N. (1936). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., 6, 322-7 Nakamura, J., Oyama, S., Fukusho, K. and Tomonaga, N. (1933). J. Jap. Soc. Vet. Sci. 12, 135-46 Nakamura, J. Oyama, S. and Wagatsuma, S. (1937). J. Jap. Soc. Vet. Sci. 16, 55-8 Nakamura, J. and Imai, N. (1938). J. Jap. Soc. Vet. Sci. 17, 114 Paschen, E. (1936). Zlb. Bakt. I.135, 445-52 Peragallo, I. (1937, 1). G. Batt. Immun. 18, 289-90 Peragallo, I. (1937, 2). Ann. Igiene (sper.) 46, 421-5 Perdrau, J. R. and Todd, C. (1933). Proc. Roy. Soc. London, Ser. B. 112 Picard, W. K. (1928). Dept. Agric. Ind. Commer. D. E. Indies, Vet. Bull. 65 Picard, W. K. (1930). Ned. Ind. Blad. Diergeneesk. 42, 4 Picard, W. K. (1933). Ned. Ind. Blad. Diergeneesk 45, 62 Picard, W. K. (1934). Zlb. Bakt. I. 132, 440-7 Rodier, E. A. (1928). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. 25, 781-3 Rous, P and Murphy, J. B. (1911). J. Amer. Med. Ass. 56, 741 Sahai, L. (1937, 1). Agric. Livestock India. 7, 11-7 Sahai, L. (1937, 2). Proc. Anim. Husb. Res. Wkrs. Conf. Delhi, 1936, 64-70 Shirlaw, J. F. (1937). Rep. Imp. Vet. Res. Inst. Mukteswar Smith, H. H. Penna, H. A. and Paoliello, A. (1938). Amer. J. Trop. Med. 18, 437-68 Stevenson, W. D. H. and Butler, G. G. (1939). Rep. Pub. Health and Med. Sub., London Topacio, T. (1934). Philipp. J. Ani. Indust. 4, 50 Woodruff, A. N. and Goodpasture, E. W. (1931) Amer. J. Path. 7, 209
BRUCELLOSIS IN INDIA BY J. B. POLDINGResearch Officer, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for Publication on 25 July 1942) INVESTIGATION of contagious abortion in India has been the subject of an Imperial Council of Agricultural Research scheme for a period of over three years and it has been observed that Brucellosis is by far the most common cause of this condition in Indian bovines. This article, therefore, has been written with the object of indicating what has so far been achieved in the study of this disease, as it occurs in the Indian subcontinent. The investigation of Brucellosis in India, however, is not yet complete and in any case there is no limit to the amount of information that it seems desirable to acquire concerning so wide-spread a disease. In order, therefore, that Indian veterinarians may have readily to hand, as much instruction as possible on the diagnosis and control of the disease, a series of appendices describing some useful technical methods have been prepared and are obtainable from the Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Muktes- war28 Brucellosis in India TABLE I Indian Brucella strains Host No. of strains isolated Typed as A A/M M Dairy Cow . . 20 11 8 1 Village Cow . . 4 0 4 0 Buffalo (Dairy) . . 16 10 6 0 Goat . . 1 0 0 1 Horse . . 1 1 0 0 Man . . 1 0 0 1 Total. 43 22 18 3 A = abortus, A/M J. B. POLDING 29 TABLE III The relation between the incidence of abortion and the occurrence of European blood in Military Dairy Farms Military Dairy Porcent- age of crossbreds in herd. Percentage of aborters All breeds Cross breeds Indige- nous breeds Allahabad . . 90 42 45 20 Ambala . . 82 25 27 16 Quetta . . 80 30 33 17 Lahore . . 17 10 4 11 Ferozepore . . 1 10 0 10 Average... 54 22 21.5 15 The term ' aborters ' refers to animals with a history of abortion present in the herd at the time of a single random observation. The figures in Tables II and III tend to show that the higher the propor- tion of European blood in a herd, the higher is the incidence of infection in all classes of animals. TABLE IV The percentage of aborters present at a single random observation in the classes of stock indicated Class of animal No. of animals observed Percent- age of aborters Crossbred stock of 15 Military Dairy Farms . . . 1,333 16.0 Country-bred stock of 13 Military Dairy Farms . . . 164 7.5 Buffaloes of 15 Military Dairy Farms . . . 1,880 5.0 Indigenous cows not in contact with crossbred cattle (Northern India) 4,495 3.5 Buffaloes not in contact with crossbred cattle (Northern India) 895 3.5 Buffaloes in special environments (1 farm) . . . 281 15.5 Indigenous cows in special environments (3 farms) . . . . 502 3.5 Northern India is taken to be the territory north of a line drawn from Bombay to Calcutta, Bengal and Assam excluded. From Table IV it will be seen that:30 Brucellosis in India These conditions will be discussed more fully in a later section, and it is suffi- cient to say here that buffaloes in this environment show a startling increase in the rate of abortion as compared with the rate in the Punjab, whilst cows in the same environment show the same rate as for Northern India. The numbers recorded in these classes are small, especially in the case of buffaloes, as figures are difficult to obtain from many Bombay farms. Nevertheless, many additional farms have been examined and in the absence of records the general impression received supports the figures shown in the table. It is concluded, therefore, that when buffaloes are removed from their natural environment, they become much more susceptible to Brucellosis than similarly moved indigenous cattle. Indeed, in these circumstances, their susceptibility perhaps reaches or even surpasses that of the crossbred cows of Northern India. There is some evidence to show that either the susceptibility of Indian cattle is decreasing, or that better methods of animal husbandry are limiting the spread of Brucellosis. Table III was constructed from records made during the period 1924 to 1929 and Table IV from figures collected from 1939 onwards. It is noteworthy that the average number of abortions in the former table is greater than that in the latter. Again, the annual reports of the Military Dairy Farm show a progressive decrease in abortions from all causes during the years 1932 to 1939. Lastly in 1923, the mean number of abortions present at a single random observation on 5 Punjab Grantee farms was 3 per cent of the 1264 animals observed, while at the time of the writer's visits in 1939, this figure had fallen to 1 per cent of 835 animals. If this decrease is indeed due to a reduction in susceptibility, it may only repre- sent a phasic decrease, but if it is due to better animal husbandry then the decrease is likely to be permanent. The susceptibility of various classes of stock to repetitions of abortion is shown in Table V. TABLE V The likelihood of repeated abortions in various classes of Indian stock Class of stock Percentage of animals aborting Average expect- ation of loss of calves per aborter Popula- tion observerd Once Twice Thrice Four times Crossbred cows 79.5 17.5 2.5 0.5 1.24 198 Country-bred cows 90.0 9.0 1.0 0.0 1.11 75 Buffaloes 90.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 1.10 91 Assuming that the percentage abortions shown in Table IV are correct then amongst 100 crossbred cattle 16 may be expected to be aborters and their total loss of calves would be 16 × 1.24 =19.84 calves. The same fig- ures for country-bred cows and buffaloes work out at 8. 33 and 5.5, respective- ly, and by making the last figure unity, the preceding figures would be
J. B. POLDING 31 1.5 for country-bred cows, and 3.5 for crossbred cows. Thus, suscept- ibility to abortion amongst buffaloes, country-bred cows and crossbred cows is 1: 1 . 5 : 3.5. Applying the same calculation to buffaloes in special environments, their susceptibility figure works out at a little over 3. The susceptibility of sheep and goats to the Brucella types extant in India appears at the present time to be small but the final word has yet to be said on this subject. Incidence of Brucellosis in India (i) On organized farms. It is not proposed to give a list of places in India where Brucellosis is present, it being sufficient to state that this disease can usually be detected on almost any organized farm in the country. It may also be added that where European blood is present and conditions of animal husbandry are favourable the annual average loss of calves will be in the neighbourhood of 3 per cent. In well-run indigenous herds in good climates on the other hand the average loss may be less than 1 per cent, while in thoroughly bad conditions the annual loss of calves amongst any type of animal may be as high as 25 per cent. (ii) In village or desi cattle. It is impossible to give accurate figures for actual abortion rates amongst village cattle as no records have been kept. It is probable, however, that Brucellosis in this class of stock is common in Bengal and Assam; it is certainly common in Orissa, eastern and central Madras, in the eastern and central parts of Central Provinces, and in the south-eastern parts of Hyderabad State. It appears to be rare on the Deccan plateau. The survey of villages north of the line from Bihar to Bombay is not yet complete. Conditions governing the spread of Brucellosis in India It is, of course, quite impossible to assess accurately all the factors affect- ing the spread of Brucellosis, but the following are probably the most important in India ; (1) the magnitude of existing reservoirs of infection, (2) the magni- tude and direction of cattle movements, (3) the prevailing conditions of animal husbandry, (4) the climate and (5) the phasic susceptibility of animals. It is the writer's opinion that, when factors (3) and (4) are favourable, the magni- tude of existing reservoirs, even when cattle movements are considerable, is insufficient to cause a large increase in abortion in India. The gravest possible cause of increase in sources of infection would be, undoubtedly, an increase in the importation of foreign cattle or an increase in cattle movement from villages on the Eastern Seaboard of the Indian peninsula. There is also danger of a further spread of infection from an increase of cattle movements from a few special areas such as Calcutta or Bombay. Actually, at the present time, where animal husbandry has been improved or is improving and the climate is good, the existing reservoirs seem hardly sufficient to main- tain themselves. When conditions of animal husbandry and climate are bad, however, the smallest reservoir is probably sufficient to spread infection. As regards animal husbandry, at present there seems to be no evidence that ill balanced cattle feeding per se plays an important role in the spread of Brucellosis. Indeed, it is well known that some of the best-fed herds are the worst infected. Nevertheless, it is believed that the contamination of food, especially cut green fodder, by animal secretions may play some part
32 Brucellosis in India in the spread of this disease. The branch of husbandry that is most likely to affect the spread of Brucellosis in cattle is, undoubtedly, the hygienic conditions of the animal's environment. Animals kept in semi-ranch con- ditions or in sanitary quarters with proper drains and maternity wards are obviously less exposed to infection than chose that are not. With regard to climate, it is obviously much easier to keep quarters hygienic in sunny, dry climates than in places with less sunlight and a high rainfall. Indeed, it is believed that one of the most important factors affecting the spread of Brucellosis is humidity and lack of sunlight, a belief based on the following considerations:J. B. POLDING 33 The fundamental facts governing the use of this test are probably as follows. Shortly after its invasion by Brucella, the host develops a response which is detectable by the agglutination test. Unfortunately this response is often inconstant in degree, time of appearance and duration. This inconstancy is probably governed by the time of ingress of infection in relation to pregnancy, and by the amount of hold the infection is able to gain over the host. Experimental records have enabled reactors to be divided into two classes, viz. ' constant reactors' and ' inconstant reactors'. The '' constant reactor ' responds within a short period after infection by producing in its serum a high agglutinin titre and this persists for several years subject to a slow over-all decline. The ' inconstant reactor' responds with a low fluctuating serum titre, which may appear, disappear and reappear at irregular intervals for several months after infection. Experimental observations engender the belief that in an average outbreak of Brucellosis 5034 Brucellosis in India Another system is becoming increasingly popular overseas, namely vaccination, but as its practice has only lately been taken up seriously in India, it is not yet possible to give details of the method. For general guidance, however, it may be said that the method of vaccination at present in vogue consists of a single subcutaneous injection of 5.0 c.c. of a saline suspension of low virulent strain of Brucella organisms. The most suitable subject for vaccination is the calf or the heifer and vaccination is mainly recommended in badly infected herds maintained under adverse conditions. In certain circumstances adult animals can be vaccinated. At present, nothing can be said as to the duration or degree of protection offered by this form of immunization in India but from reports of overseas experiments it appears that, given the right circumstances, an annual abortion rate of say 20 per cent can be reduced to about 3 per cent. Up to the time of writing, between two and three hundred animals have been vaccinated in India, and so far no un- fortunate sequelæ have been observed. The immediate reaction to the injection is a slight rise of temperature on the second and third days, together with a local swelling at the site of injection which is rarely larger than a man's hand and which disappears completely in a week or 10 days.
STUDIES ON THE EFFECT OF VARIOUS FACTORS ON THE VITAMIN C CONTENT OF THE MILK OF COWS AND BUFFALOES BY ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND HARNAND SINGH GILL Imperial Dairy Department, Bangalore (Received for publication on 28 March 1942) IN the human diet vitamin C is considered to be one of the vital factors in the maintenance of health. Fresh milk is one of the sources for our supply of vitamins. Since milk and milk products play a very important part in the dietary of the majority of the Indian population, vitamin C is of special signi- ficance. It is very sensitive to the action of light and heat, and in this country where the milk is transported in open vessels for distribution, etc. and subject- ed to high temperatures of boiling, before consumption, its study is made all the more important. Whitnah and Riddell [1937] found that the average values of vitamin C content in milk for the different breeds of cows were, Ayrshire 24.1, Guernseys 26.0, Holsteins 23.5 and Jerseys 29.2 mg. per litre. Kon and Watson [1936] observed that the vitamin C content of colostrum was slightly higher than that of milk. The work of King and Waugh [1934] showed that the des- truction of vitamin C in milk was much more in the ' holding method' than in the ' flash method ' of pasteurization. In the same work the authors showed that prolonged heating of milk, exposed to air, tended to destroy vitamin C more severely than heating it to the boiling point for a short time. Kon and Watson [1936] found that half an hour's exposure to sunlight was sufficient to change all the ascorbic acid in a pint bottle of milk into the reversibly oxidized form. Schwartze, Murphy and Hann [1930] showed that the rate of des- truction of the vitamin C varied with the kind of metal with which the milk came into contact during heating. It decreased by 20 to 40 per cent with aluminium ; slightly greater with tinned copper and up to 80 to 90 per cent with naked copper. In India no work has so far been carried out to study the effect of various factors on the vitamin C content of milk. The climatic and other conditions of this country are so different from those of temperate countries that the results obtained abroad could not be expected to hold good here. It was therefore, thought that work done in this country on the lines followed by workers in other countries might prove useful. Although this investigation cannot be claimed to be an exhaustive one, it is hoped that the results obtained, will prove useful for further investigation when so little data are available on the subject in this country. 35
36 Vitamin C Content of Milk of Cows and Buffaloes EXPERIMENTAL (a) Plan of work This work was done with a view to determine the vitamin C content of the milk of cows and buffaloes and the effects of various factors on it. The animals selected for the purpose included Sindhi, Gir, Crossbred and Ayrshire cows and Murrah buffaloes. The animals concerned were fed on a controlled ration consisting of Guinea grass, Rhodes grass, Ragi straw and a grain mixture fed at the rate of 1 lb. for every 2 lb. of milk produced. It was decided to determine the effects on the vitamin C content of the milk obtained from these animals in its relation to the breed, temperature of heating and storage, exposure to sunlight, kind of metal of the containers, etc. (b) Method of estimating vitamin C (i) Reagents used. The 2 : 6-dichlorophenol indophenol solution used for the purpose was prepared by grinding the dye in a mortar with pre-boiled glass distilled water until the solution was complete [Manaker and Guerrant, 1938]. The solution was then standardized by adding 1 gm. of potassium iodide and 1 ml. of 25 per cent sulphuric acid to 15 ml. of the dye solution and titrating the liberated iodine with 0 . 01 N sodium thiosulphate solution, 1 ml. of which is equivalent to 0.88 mg. of ascorbic acid. This method of standardization of the dye solution is based on the quantitative conversion of the potassium iodide into iodine. (ii) Estimation of reduced ascorbic acid. To 25 ml. of milk taken from the representative sample, were added 15 ml. of 25 per cent trichloroacetic acid. The mixture was allowed to stand for a few minutes after shaking and was then filtered. Five ml. of the clear resultant filtrate were titrated from a microburette with 2 : 6-dichlorophenol indophenol reagent until a faint pink colour, which persisted for about half a minute, was obtained. (iii) Estimation of total ascorbic acid. Through the remainder of the filtrate a moderate stream of hydrogen sulphide was passed for about 15 minutes. The container was then stoppered and the saturated solution was allowed to stand in the dark for about 15 hours. At the end of this period, the solution which became cloudy on standing was filtered and the hydrogen sulphide was removed by passing a current of carbon dioxide until the emergent gas failed to stain moist lead acetate paper. This took on an average about 10 minutes. The filtrate was then titrated against 2 : 6- dichlorophenol indophenol reagent. The hydrogen sulphide treatment was employed to reduce the reversibly oxidized ascorbic acid. The titrations were carried out in a semi-dark room with the help of an artificial light. The water used for preparing the solutions and for the dilutions and rinsing of the apparatus, was obtained by distilling the ordinary distilled water in a glass apparatus. In the course of the estimation of vitamin C no metal was allowed to come in contact with the milk. (c) Factors studied (i) Effect of breed on the vitamin C content of milk. Animals beyond the first month of lactation were selected for estimating the vitamin C content of milk. Samples were taken both morning and evening for a period of two weeks from 12 animals from every breed of cows and Murrah buffaloes, with the exception of the Ayrshire breed, of which only two animals were
ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND HARNAND SINGH GILL 37 available. A representative sample was made up by taking 15 ml. of milk from every sample. The vitamin C content of this sample was determined on the lines indicated above. Daily variations in the values for each breed of animals for 14 days, both morning and evening, have been determined and the average figures for this period are presented in Table I. TABLE I The average vitamin C content of milk of cows and Murrah buffaloes as determined before and after the hydrogen sulphide treatment Class of animals Vitamin C in mg. per litre of milk Morning Evening Before treatment with H2S After treatment with H2S Before treatment with H2S After treatment with H2S Sindhi cows .... 26.4 29.0 27.2 29.3 Gir cows . . . . 26.3 28.7 26.8 28.9 Crossbred cows.... 23.0 25.1 23.5 25.6 Ayrshire cows.... 22.7 24.9 22.9 25.0 Murrah buffaloes. . . 27.0 29.6 27.4 29.8 It will be seen from Table I that of the four breeds of cows studied, (a) the Sindhi cows produced milk of the highest and the Ayrshire cows produced milk of the lowest vitamin C content; (b) the vitamin C con- tent of the milk of Murrah buffaloes was also very high and higher than most of the breed of cows ; and (c) the ascorbic acid content of the evening milk was slightly higher than that of the morning milk. (ii) Effect of breed on the vitamin C content of colostrum. The vitamin C content of the colostrum of different breeds of cows and Murrah buffaloes was also determined both morning and evening from the first to the fifth day of calving. For the estimation of reduced and total ascorbic acid in the colostrum, the same procedure as was adopted in the case of milk was followed. TABLE II The vitamin C content of the colostrum of cows and Murrah buffaloes No. of days after calving Class of animals Vitamin C in mg.per litre of milk Morning Evening Before treatment with H2S After treatment with H2S Before treatment with H2S After treatment with H2S 1 Sindhi cow 27.3 29.7 27.9 30.3 2 27.6 30.0 28.5 30.6 3 27.6 29.4 28.2 30.0 4 27.0 29.4 27.6 30.0 5 26.4 29.4 27.3 29.4
38 Vitamin C Content of Milk of Cows and Buffaloes TABLE IIZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND HARNAND SINGH GILL 39 TABLE III The vitamin C content of milk before and after pasteurization No. of experi- ments Method of pasteurization Vitamin C in mg. per litre of milk Vitamin C before pasteu- rization Vitamin C after pasteu- rization *Percentage loss in pasteu- rization 1 Holding . .. 25.6 20.0 22.0 2 Do. ... 25.2 19.0 24.6 3 Do. ... 25.8 19.2 25.6 4 Do. ... 24.6 18.6 24.3 *N.B.40 Vitamin C Content of Milk of Cows and Buffaloes (c) After 20 minutes of boiling almost the whole of it was destroyed. And (d) After 30 minutes of boiling the ascorbic acid was completely des- troyed. (v) Effect of storage of milk on its vitamin C content. The ascorbic acid content of fresh milk was estimated and the sample of milk then divided into two portions and put into stoppered flasks. One portion was kept in cold storage and was tested for its vitamin C content at intervals of 24 hours. The other portion was kept at the room temperature and tested at intervals of three hours until the milk curdled on heating. TABLE V Effect of storage on the vitamin C content of milk (Initial vitamin C 25.2 mg.) Vitamin C in. mg. per litre of milk Room temperature Cold store temperature 45°F. After 3 hours . . 23.4 After one day... 23.4 After 6 hours . . 21.6 After two days . . . 22.2 After 9 hours . . 20.4 After three days . . . 20.4 After 11 hours . . 19.2 After four days . . . 18.6 Table V indicates that: Milk kept at room temperature lost nearly 24 per cent of its ascorbic acid content at the end of 11 hours and that kept in the cold store lost over 26 per cent at the end of four days. (vi) Influence of light on the vitamin C content of milk. The ascorbic acid content of milk was determined and one lb. of the milk was then distributed in small glass containers. One container was exposed to direct midday sun- light (in early June), one to diffused light and the other was kept in a dark place. The vitamin C content of each sample was estimated at intervals of 15 minutes. TABLE VI Influence of light on the vitamin C content of milk Time of exposure (minutes) Method of exposure Vitamin C in mg. per liter of milk Before exposure After exposure 15 Direct sunlight 24.9 16.8 30 Do. 24.9 8.9 45 Do. 24.9 0.0 15 Diffused light 24.9 23.5 30 Do. 24.9 22.2 45 Do. 24.9 20.8 15 Darkness 24.9 24.6 30 Do. 24.9 23.9 45 Do. 24.9 23.5
ZAL R, KOTHAVALLA AND HARNAND SINGH GILL 41 It was found that: (a) Vitamin C was completely destroyed when milk was exposed to direct midday sunlight for 45 minutes. (b) A little less than 17 per cent of it was destroyed when milk was exposed to diffused light for the same length of time, and (c) When milk was kept in the dark over the same period the loss in ascorbic acid content was just a little over 5 per cent only. (vii) Effect of the kind of metal on the vitamin C content of milk. The vitamin C content of milk was estimated before it was subjected to the action of various metal surfaces in the course of pasterurization. Four vessels of the same size and capacity constructed of aluminium, nickel, tinned copper and naked copper were obtained and to each of these 2 lb. of milk were added. The milk was heated to 145°F. and this temperature was maintained for 30 minutes. It was then cooled and the ascorbic acid content determined for each vessel. Three trials were made with the ' holding method' for every kind of metal utensil used. A similar number of trials with the same vessel was also made with the ' flash method ' of pasteurization. The loss in the ascorbic acid content of milk due to the action of different metals in both the methods of pasteurization was then estimated. TABLE VII Action of metals on the vitamin C content of milk during pasteurization Method of pasteurization Metal used Average per cent of vitamin C lost in pasteuriza- tion Holding . . . . Nickel.... 8.3 Flash . . . . Nickel.... 5.1 Holding . . . . Aluminium.... 26.1 Flash . . . . Aluminium.... 21.1 Holding .... Tinned copper.... 28.4 Flash ... .. Tinned copper .... 23 .5 Holding.... Naked copper.... 78.4 Flash . . . . Naked copper.... 69.2 It is evident from Table VII that: (a) The destruction of the ascorbic acid of milk was lowest in a nickel pasteurizer and greatest in a naked copper pasteurizer. (b) The destruction with ' holding method ' of ascorbic acid was over 78 per cent whereas in the ' flash method ' of pasteurization it was 69 per cent with the copper surfaces. (viii) The loss in vitamin C content of milk during its handling and pro- cessing in a commercial dairy. This part of the work was done in order to find out to what extent the vitamin C content of milk was affected in the normal course of handling. and processing market milk in a dairy. As soon as the milk was drawn from the animals its vitamin C content was determined. Samples were taken just before pasterurization and again after the milk had been pasteurized, cooled and bottled. Three hours after pasteurization (which is the usual time taken to deliver milk to the customers in the rounds)
42 Vitamin C Content of Milk of Cows and Buffaloes the vitamin C content of the unsold milk brought back to the dairy was determined, both from half and one pound size bottles of milk. TABLE VIII Effect, of handling and processing milk in a dairy on its ascorbic acid content Vitamin C in mg. per litre of milk Immediately after milking...... 24.8 Just before pasteurization ...... 24.3 Immediately after pasteurization (flash) ... 18.4 Three hours after bottling (½ lb. bottles) ... 9.5 Three hours after bottling (1 lb. bottles) ... 13.6 It was found that: In the normal process of handling, pasteurizing and bottling of milk, in a commercial dairy the loss of vitamin C content was over 60 per cent in half pound bottles and almost 50 per cent in one pound bottles by the time the milk was delivered at the customer's door. SUMMARY The vitamin C content of the milk and the colostrum of the Sindhi cows was found to be higher than that of the Gir, the Crossbred and the Ayrshire cows. The Murrah buffaloes produced milk and colostrum of a higher ascorbic acid content than the cows of most of the breeds experimented with. The destruction of the vitamin C content of milk was greater in the ' holding ' than in the ' flash method ' of pasteurization. With the first boil attained, the milk lost about 23 per cent of its ascorbic acid content, and after 10 minutes of boiling over 66 per cent and after 20 minutes of boiling almost the whole of it. Milk kept at room temperature lost nearly 24 per cent of its ascorbic acid content at the end of 11 hours, while that kept in the cold store (45°F.) lost only about 26 per cent at the end of four days. Vitamin C was completely destroyed when milk was exposed to direct midday sunlight (June) for 45 minutes, about 17 per cent when it was exposed to diffused light and only 5 per cent when it was kept in the dark for the same length of time. The destruction of ascorbic acid was lowest when the milk was heated in a vessel made of nickel, slightly higher in aluminium, still higher in tinned copper and highest in naked copper. In the last case the destruction was over 78 per cent in the ' holding' and 69 per cent in the ' flash method ' of pasteurization. Milk handled and processed in a commercial dairy and delivered to customers in half pound bottles lost over 60 per cent and in one pound bottles over 50 per cent of its vitamin C before it was delivered at the customer's door.
ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA AND HARNAND SINGH GILL 43 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are grateful to the staff of the Imperial Dairy Institute, Bangalore, for arranging and supplying the samples of milk, etc. as required. REFERENCES King, C. G. and Waugh, W. A. (1934). J. Dairy Sc. 17, 489 Kon, S. K. and Watson, M. B. (1936). Biochem. J. 30, 2273 Manaker, M. H. and Guerrant, N. B. (1938). Ind. Eng. Chem., Anal. Edi. 10, 25 Schwartze, E. W., Murphy, F. J. and Hann, R. M. (1930). J. Nutrition, 2, 325 Whitnah, C. H. and Riddell, W. H. (1937). J. Dairy Sci. 20, 9
PLEUROPNEUMONIA IN GOATS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO PASTEURELLA INFECTION BY P. G. PANDE, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. Veterinary Investigation Officer, United Provinces, Lucknow (Received for publication on 18 September 1941) (With Plates V and VI) PLEUROPNEUMONIA which has been described as one of the most serious diseases affecting goats has been reported from several provinces and has also on previous occasions been investigated at the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. The object of this paper is to record the results of an investigation on an outbreak of this disease in which the rô1e of a pasteurella organism as a causative factor has been established. HISTORY OF THE DISEASE The first outbreak of this disease in a virulent form was reported in 1923 from Garhwal district, practically eliminating the goat population. In 1924, outbreaks of pleuropneumonia prevailed in Almora district and accounted for the death of 1,500 animals. Most of these outbreaks remained undiagnosed, and no organisms of possible etiological significance were isolated. In 1926, a form of pneumonia was investigated by Cooper in hill-goats, and in this connection the following is quoted from Shirlaw [1939]: ' Impressed by the large number of cases of pneumonia spontaneously occurring in goats at Mukteswar, Cooper conducted bacteriological examination on the diseased lungs from which he isolated an organism of the pasteurella genus which proved pathogenic to rabbits. From an outbreak in Garhwal hills he isolated a similar organism, thus satisfying himself that the disease of goats naturally occurring at Mukteswar did not radically differ from that reported from the provinces.' About the same time Haddow [Shirlaw, 1939] investigated the disease at Izatnagar among the local goats and concluded that the condition was an acute bacterial pneumonia, the organism involved being diplococcus, probably a pneumococcus. During 1937-38, a form of pneumonia in kids was investigated at the Goat Breeding Farm, Etah, and diagnosed as bronchopneumonia. As all these cases occurred in winter, chill was attributed to be the pre-disposing cause. The condition was not investigated bacteriologically and its etiology remained obscure. An outbreak of pleuropneumonia which provided material for cultural and experimental studies appearing in this paper occurred in August 1940, at the Goat Breeding Farm, Etah. Six animals succumbed to the disease out of 20 affected in a herd composed of 200 goats. The disease had pre- vailed among the male stock, affecting only the adult bucks, and the young 44
P. G. PANDE 45 male goats and nannies kept under similar conditions had escaped infection. The outbreak, however, subsided with the death of all the affected bucks. The first victim of the disease at this farm fell ill on 30 August 1940, and died on the following day ; the second was observed on 2 September 1940 and died two days later. Of two more cases which developed on September 4, one died on the 9th and the other on the 10th September. The last two cases developed on September 5 and were destroyed on the 10th for the pur pose of post-mortem examination and collection of material for further work. SYMPTOMS It was difficult to ascertain the incubation period of the disease in animals in the field, but in experimental cases it varied from one to three days. Goats of all ages were equally susceptible to experimental infections, although cases on the farm were observed only among the adult stock. The symptoms in both natural and experimental cases were observed to be identical, the first sign of the disease being disinclination to eat grain and a tendency to isolate from the main herd. The condition was in every case characterized by extreme dullness, high temperature varying from 105° to .108° F. in the morning and appearence of serous or thick mucoid discharge from the nose and watery secretion from the eyes. The affected animals stood with hanging heads and the hind legs brought forward under the belly. Sali- vation in a few was so profuse that the ground in front was found wet with the discharge. Respiratory symptoms were most marked. There was heavy breathing mostly abdominal, in type. Groaning was audible at frequent intervals and twitching of the nostrils was observed during each act of respira- tion. At this stage the animals stood with their forelegs apart. They had a little or no tendency to move, and if forced to move groaning at each step could be heard. Symptoms of cough may not be noticed in acute cases of the disease, but its occurrence has been observed in every chronic case, both under natural and experimental attacks. Death in acutely affected animals has been observed to supervene within 1.2 to 24 hours from the onset of symptoms, but at the same time a number of cases both natural and artificially infected were also observed to continue from 4 to 6 days or more. Recovery is excep- tional, and none of the affected animals showed diarrhoea suggestive of intes- tinal involvement. PATHOLOGY Gross lesions Autopsy on two natural cases of the disease revealed that the main changes were confined to the lungs, the pleura and the pericardium, and varied in extent depending upon the severity and the duration of the disease. These post-mortem findings are summarized in detail below. Case 571. Both the lungs were firmly adherent to the pleura on each side ; the pleural cavity contained about 20 c.c. of slightly blood-tinged fluid ; the apical and the middle lobes of both the lungs were found enveloped in a thick fibrinous deposit; all the lobes of the right lung and the apical and the cardiac lobes of the left were completely consolidated and showed
46 Pleuropneumonia in Goats areas of grey hepatization; a greater part of the left diaphragmatic lobe showed consolidation in the red hepatization stage and a zone of spread; the pericardial sac contained about 30 c.c. of blood-tinged fluid and the linings of the pericardium and the surface of the myocardium were found covered with shreds of fibrin. Case 596. Areas of consolidation were found in both the lungs, but only the apical and the cardiac lobes of both were completely consolidated ; some parts of these lobes were oedematous with prominent interlobular septa and the others had passed into the stage of red hepatization; areas of grey hepati- zation were, however, absent; the whole apical and cardiac lobes of the right and a part of the cardiac lobe of the left were covered with a gelatinous clot of pleural exudate; the diaphragmatic lobes showed a few irregular haemor- rhagic infarcts. The pleural cavity and the pericardial sac contained each about 100 c.c. of clear straw-coloured fluid. In experimentally reproduced cases, the nature of the lesions did not materially differ from those of the field cases, except in their extent and distribution according to the routes of inoculation of the culture or other infective material. In the majority of cases injected by the intratracheal route, the lesions appeared first in the right lung, involving the apical lobe first and later extend- ing to other lobes of the same side. If the animal did not die or was not destroyed at this stage the left lung also showed involvement chiefly of the cardiac lobe. Very few cases infected by this route showed lesions in the remaining two lobes of the left lung. Lesions resulting from the intravenous and the subcutaneous inocula- tions of the infective materials were uniform in distribution in both lungs and appeared in the form of haemorrhagic infarcts or patchy consolidation. A few cases in which infection was obtained by contact with the affected animals, and by feeding of infective materials showed consolidations in both lungs and areas of red and grey hepatization were present in each lobe. The lung lesions in experimental cases appear in the form of a more or less extensive consolidation (Plate V, fig. 1) involving one or more than one lobe, either completely or partially. In the case of a partial involvement of a lobe, the diseased part has always been found demarcated from the healthy lung tissue which beyond the line of demarcation shows a typically congested zone of spread. Apart from the diffuse type of lesion, one could see particularly over the diaphragmatic lobes scattered areas of patchy congestion simulating haemorrhagic infarcts, when recently formed, which with the progress of the disease may be transformed into typically consolidated areas. Areas of red and grey hepatization seen easily through the opaque and usually thicken- ed pleural covering revealed a variegated appearance on section (Plate V, fig. 2). In an acutely inflamed lung tissue the interlobular septa have been distinctly seen from within the pleural covering (Plate V, fig. 1), and on section- ing the lung tissue at this stage of hepatization, a small amount of red-tinged fluid escaped from the cut surfaces. The cut ends of the bronchioles were observed to be patent, although on squeezing a frothy mucoid discharge exuded from them. The portion of the lung tissue involved in red hepatiza- tion looks more compact and firmer in consistency and the cut surfaces, with
Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part I] [PLATE V [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. The right lung showing complete consolidation of one lobe and patches of consolidation on other lobes [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. The cut surface of a hepatized piece of lung showing thickening of the interlobular septa
PLATE VI [ Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Showing intense leucocytic infiltration of the pleura and an interlobular septum × 40 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Showing an early stage of hepatization commencing with the filling up of the alveoli with sero-cellolar exudate × 40 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Showing a patent bronchiole and throm- bosis of bronchial vessels Section prepared from an area of pulmonary infarct, and a scrutiny will reveal congestion of the alveolar capillaries × 40
P. G. PANDE 47 the help of a hand lens, appear to consist of minute granules varying in size from a pin point to a pin head, which may be said to correspond with the lung aveoli packed with red blood and other inflammatory cells. The thoracic cavity contained a straw-coloured, or sometimes, a sero- sanguineous fluid varying in amount from 500 c.c. to one litre. In cases of longer duration the pleural membranes were found covered with fibrinous deposits, and clots of fibrin were noticed enveloping the apical and the cardiac lobes, particularly of the right lung. Another important and regular autopsy finding was sero-sanguineous or fibrinous pericarditis. Goats inoculated intravenously or subcutaneously with the culture or lung emulsion showed petechial spots on all the serous membranes and the endothe- lial lining of the heart, and areas of patchy congestion on the intestinal mucosa.Histo-pathology The lungs and the associated pleura were the only organs examined histo- logically, as they were found chiefly affected. In cases of longer duration the pleura was found thickly covered with a fibrinous exudate undergoing various stages of organization. The inter-lobular septa in continuity with the thick- ened pleura (Plate VI, fig. 1) contained leucocytic infiltration and engorged capillaries. The lung tissue from a natural case showed extensive areas of grey hepatization but areas of red hepatization were also discernible at places where changes were of more recent duration, involving extension. In experimental cases characteristic changes in their orthodox sequence were observed all in the same lobe. The early microscopic lesion has been observed to begin with the congestion of capillaries in the inter-alveolar septa, and the alveoli as a sequence have been observed to contain (Plate VI, fig. 2) sero-cellular exudate at this stage. Areas of haemorrhagic infarcts, on section, showed thrombosis (Plate VI, fig. 3) of minute bronchial vessels, engorgement of alveolar capillaries and exudation of blood in the alveoli, along with other inflammatory cells. Microscopical examination of stained slides by oil-immersion lens revealed a great number of slender rods, 1 to 3 microns in length, seen with some difficulty in densely packed alveoli, but more easily in less infiltrated areas where they were numerous. BACTERIOLOGY Examination of smears from the cut surfaces of a consolidated portion of the lung revealed a large number of gram-negative, slender and short rod shaped bacilli, measuring from 1 to 3 microns in length, and having bipolar appearance when stained with methylene blue or Leishman stain. They have been seen to be most numerous in smears prepared from early lesions. The same bipolar organisms could be readily and regularly obtained in pure culture from the thöracic fluid, consolidated lung, pericardial fluid and the heart blood. Cultures obtained from liver and kidney contained some contaminants, Morphology. In. smears prepared from cultures grown on solid media. the organism appears as short and plump rods, although few may appear as elongated rods with slightly convex sides and rounded extremities. It is gram-negative, non-motile, non-capsulated, non-sporulating and non-acid-fast In smears prepared from broth culture the organism has been seen to occur
48 Pleuropneumonia in Goats in more slender and bacillary form. Bipolar staining has been distinctly seen in smears prepared from culture. Cultural characters. The organism on plain agar does not grow luxuri- antly, but when growth occurs at 24 hours incubation the colonies appear greyish, raised, circular and 1 to 2 mm. in diameter. A characteristic feature is the margin of the growth which is heaped up for a greater part of the colony, but a zone of ¼ to ½ mm. in the periphery is distinctly thin and glisten- ing in appearance, showing distinct radiation with the naked eyes. Under strict anaerobic conditions the growth is visible on agar plates, but is poor as compared with aerobic growth. In bouillon, the growth is characterized by the turbidity of the medium at 12 hours incubation. At 24 hours of incuba- tion, sedimentation of the growth takes place. As the growth becomes older, the sediment becomes heavy and appears stringy when the culture tube containing the growth is shaken up slightly. On gelatin media at 22°C., only a slight growth was observed on the surface but no liquefaction of the media occurred. The colour of the litmus milk was changed to pink, but co- agulation did not occur. In peptone media, the organism produced indol. The organism did not grow on bile-salt media. The production of H2S on lead acetate medium was faint. Nitrate was reduced to nitrite. The organism was slightly positive for M. B. reduction test and strongly so for catalase test. Voges-Proskauer and methyl red tests were negative. Fermentation reactions were obtained with different carbohydrates in bouillon made of meat extract with the addition of 0.5 per cent of the res- pective sugars and 1 per cent peptone using neutral red and Andrade's solution as indicators. The reactions obtained with both the indicators were observed to be constant as seen in the following table :P. G. PANDE 49 but was killed when heating was prolonged to 30 minutes. Broth culture kept in the incubator (37°C.) for a week was found virulent for laboratory animals and the natural host. Twenty-four hours old bouillon culture tubes kept in April sun (outside temperature, 95°F.) in direct exposure for six hours and for six successive days remained viable. The organism survives for a long period under low temperature. The bacilli have repeatedly been isolated from lung pieces and pleural fluid kept in refrigerator at freezing temperature for a month; and even after this prolonged cold storage, the above materials have also proved infective to goats when injected by the intra-tracheal route. Distribution in the organs. In every case of pleuropneumonia, the bacil- lus has been isolated from the consolidated lung and observed in smears pre- pared therefrom. From healthy parts of the lung the organism could not be isolated. The same organism may be cultivable from the pleural effusion, mediastinal and bronchial lymph glands, nasal discharge and pericardial fluid. Inoculation of culture media from heart blood of animals which died of the disease or were destroyed in extremis always resulted in good growths of the organism. Blood from the jugular vein of two cases failed to give any growth. The bacillus may be cultivated from the liver and the spleen, but not always in a state of purity. Pathogenicity in laboratory animals. The infective materials used in pathogenicity tests were the pleural and the pericardial fluids, 24 hours old culture in broth and an emulsion of 24 hours old culture on blood-agar media. Rabbits inoculated intravenoulsy or intraperitoneally with 0.5 c.c. of these materials succumbed within 6 to 12 hours after inoculation. Guinea pigs and pigeons inoculated with the same materials in the same doses, by in- traperitoneal or subcutaneous routes, succumbed two and three days after inoculation, respectively. White mice inoculated with these materials by the subcutaneous route in 0.5 c.c. dose died 24 hours after inoculation. The organism could be isolated in pure culture from the heart blood of all these laboratory animals. In large animals. The typical disease in goats, sheep and buffalo calves could be reproduced by intratracheal inoculation of infective materials, and the goats thus infected showed symptoms of the natural disease, i. e., the lungs, the pleura and the pericardium were the principal organs involved. The organism isolated from the artificially infected goats corresponded in morphological and cultural characters and biochemical reactions to that isolated from the natural cases of the disease. Sheep were found equally susceptible when inoculated subcutaneously or intratracheally, the symptoms and the lesions in these animals being those of pleuropneumonia, as in goats. In buffalo calves the inoculation of infective materials produced a syndrome of generalized septicaemia, resembling those of haemorrhagic septicaemia. The calves infected by the intratracheal route with 4 c. c. of 24 hours old bouillon culture of the organism showed about 48 hours after inoculation high fever, trembling and inflammatory oedema in the region of the throat and died on the following day, exactly 72 hours after injection. Post-mortem examination of these animals revealed lesions of pleuropneu-
50 Pleuropneumonia in Goats monia, pericarditis, and also those of generalized septicaemia. The organism could be recovered from the heart blood, the lungs and the inflammatory effusion of the throat. About 3 c.c. of this effusion, when given intratracheally, produced pleuropneumonia in a goat which proved fatal within five days. The organism recovered from the buffalo calves and the goat infected with the throat effusion of the former resembled in every detail that isolated from the natural cases of the disease. TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENTS By filtered lung material These experiments were conducted with a view to ascertaining whether the conditon was primarily associated with a filtrable virus. In these ex- periments the hepatized lungs from goats 571 and 596 (natural cases) were thoroughly triturated with sand and the supernatant fluid was filtered through Chamberland filter candle 5 bis. L. 3. The filtrate thus obtained was inject- ed intravenously and intranasally to goats. The results are tabulated below. Table showing the results of filtration experiments Source of material goat No. Expt. goat No. Date of inocula- tion Route of inoculation Material Dose Remarks 571 88 12-9-40 Intravenous . . Filtrate 10 c.c. The animal was kept under observation for about a month but showed no reaction. 108 P. G. PANDE 51 revealed consolidations of the apical, cardiac and a part of the diaphragmatic lobes of the right lung, and pericarditis on post-mortem examination. Experiment No. 252 Pleuropneumonia in Goats Experiment No. 9.P. G. PANDE 53 symptoms and further rise in temperature. From October 30, the symptoms began to subside, and on November 2 the animal appeared to be normal. VACCINATION EXPERIMENTS A fortnight after their recovery, goats 193 and 124 were bled and their sera contained agglutinins which caused clumping of the organism (made in an emulsion standardized to the opacity of Brown tube No. 3) in a litre of 1: 1,000 and 1: 1,200 respectively. The sera from normal goats did not cause this phenomenon even in a dilution as low as 1 : 20. After about a week these animals were inoculated, one subcutaneously with 3 c.c. and the other intravenously with 4 c.c. of 72 hours old broth culture without any ill effects. These observations suggest that animals that have recovered from the disease acquire antibodies in their blood in sufficient concentration to protect them from further infection. These observations, however, formed the basis for devising experiments on active immunization of animals with vaccines prepared from the culture and the hepatized lung emulsion. The vaccines prepared on the following lines were tried. 1. A 24 hours old blood-agar culture heated at 58.0°C. for 30 minutes. 2. A 24 hours old blood-agar culture formalized to the extent of 2.5 per cent. 3. A 24 hours old blood-agar culture formalized to the extent of 0.5 per cent. 4. Lung emulsion of an experimental case of pleuropneumonia forma- lized to the extent of 0.5 per cent. Each of these vaccines prior to its use on goats was tested for its inertness on culture media and on rabbits, and kept for 48 hours in the refrigerator. The heat-killed vaccine when tested on five goats was found to have no protective value as the vaccinated animals showed no reactions and they all died when tested for immunity with virulent lung emulsion. The vaccine prepared from culture emulsion formalized to the extent of 2.5 per cent was also found to be ineffective. In this experiment 20 goats were used, but all died when tested for immunity 14 days after vaccination. It may, however, be concluded that in case of the first vaccine the temperature at which the culture was heated had also destroyed the antigenic property of the vaccine, and in the case of the second, the concentration of the formalin had the same deleterious effect. The last two vaccines were found to be successful as will be seen from Tables I and II. TABLE I Vaccination experiments with 24 hours old blood-agar culture vaccine formalized to the extent of 0.5 per cent. The dose was 5 c.c. given subcutaneously and immunity test was performed 14 days after vaccination Brand Nos. Vaccination reactions. Immunity test Test material Dose Route Reactions 219 Dull and off feed . . . Fresh lung emulsion . 1 c.c. I/t . None 217 Do. ... Do. . . 2 c.c. Do. . None 215 Slight . . . . Do. . . 3 c.c. Do. . Slightly off feed and dull 206 104. 6° F. off feed and dull. Do. . . 5 c.c. Do. . Do.
54 Pleuropneumonia in Goats Brand Nos. Vaccination reactions. Immunity test Test material Dose Route Reactions 207 Dull and off feed . . Fresh lung emulsion 5 c.c. I/t . Slightly off feed and dull 208 Do. ... Do. . . 4 c.c. Do. . Do. 218 Lame, dull and off feed . Do. . . 3 c.c. Do. . Do. 220 Do. ... Do. . . 4 c.c. Do. . Do. 221 104.4°F., lachrymatic, dull and off feed Do. . . 5 c.c. Do. . Do. 222 Dull and off feed . . Fresh lung emulsion . 3 c.c. Do. . Do. 223 Do. ... Culture emulsion . 1 c. c. S/c . Do. 224 Slight .... Do. . . 2 c.c. Do. . Slightly dull 225 105.0° F., lachrymation, nasal discharge and heavy breathing Do. . . 3 c.c. Do. . None 226 Dull and off feed Do. . . 3 c.c. S/c . Do. 227 Slight .... Do. . . 2 c.c. Do . Slightly dull 228 Con- trol. ... Fresh lung emulsion . 3 c.c. I/t . Severe reactions followed by death 229 Con- trol ... Culture emulsion . . 3 c.c. S/c . Do. It will be seen from Table I that out of 15 animals 12 showed some degree of reaction, and only in 3 out of 12 these may be said to have been well mark- ed. Further, it may be noticed that the three vaccinated animals, in which the reaction was only slight, withstood the dose of test materials as effectively as the others. TABLE II Vaccination experiments with the hepatized lung emulsion formalized to the extent of 0.5 per cent. The dose was 5 c.c. given subcutaneously and immunity test was performed 14 days after vaccination Brand Nos. Vaccination reactions Immunity test Test material Dose Route Reactions 129 Dull and lame . . . Fresh lung emulsion . 2 c.c. S/c . Swelling at the seat of injection, no other re- action 130 Do. ... Do. Do. Do. . None 134 103.8° F., off feed and dull Do. Do. Do. . Do. 135 Slightly off feed and dull . Do. Do Do. . Do. 131 103.0° F., off feed and lame Do. Do. Do. . Do. 132 104. 0° F., off feed and lame Do. Do. Do. . Swelling at the seat of injection, no other re- actions 128 103.4° F., off feed and lame Do. Do. Do. . Do. 130 104.0° F., off feed and lach- rymation Do. Do. Do. . Do. 127 Dull and lame . . . Do. Do. Do. . Do. 126 Dull and off feed . . Do. Do. Do. . Do. 138 Con- trol ...... Do. 5 c.c. Do. . Severe reaction followed by death
P. G. PANDE 55 It will be seen from Table II that all the vaccinated goats showed well- marked reactions following upon vaccination, and all were found immune when subsequently tested for immunity. The results of the vaccination experiments as shown in Tables I and II clearly indicate the possibility of the usefulness of the vaccines under field conditions. EPIZOOTOLOGY At the Goat Breeding Farm, Etah, the bucks and the nannies of both the Jamnapari and Barbari breeds are maintained separately, and to ensure proper management of the herd kids of both are kept away from their mothers. The disease prevailed amongst the bucks, all being farm-bred. Prior to the appearance of the outbreak, no animals were purchased from outside, and the possibility of the disease having thus been introduced was obviously eliminated. The commonly accepted view on the epizootology of pasturellosis that the organism normally present in the upper respiratory tracts assumes pathogenicity in animals predisposed to certain debilitating factors was not sufficiently proved in respect of these outbreaks, as although such prevailing factors as fatigue due to long journey and sudden climatic changes might have predisposed the animals to infection, bacteriological examination of the nasopharynx of in-contact animals could not be accomplished, no survivors being available in the affected batch. Although subjected to the same pre- disposing factors, animals of other batches showed no infection, and cultural examination of the nasopharynx and the tracheal tracts of five healthy goats taken at random proved negative for this or any other types of pasteurella. The isolation of the causative organism from the nasal secretion of affected goats, viewed in conjunction with the successful transmission of the disease by contact with sick animals, would indicate that the infection, having once started in a herd, can spread in nature through the respiratory tract, as the bacilli sprayed out from the nasal secretion in the act of sneezing may heavily charge the atmosphere of a closed shed and could easily be inhaled in large numbers by healthy animals when they came in contact, or otherwise mingled with the diseased ones. DISCUSSION Organisms of the pasteurella group have been isolated from enzootics of goat pneumonia in the past in this country, but up to the present their true significance in the causation of these outbreaks has not sufficiently been explained. The earliest authentic record of pneumonia in goats due to a pasteurella organism is that of Nicolle and Refik-Bey [Hutyra and Marek, 1938] and what appears to be the same outbreak has recently been described in greater detail by Kolayli and Raif [1935] in goats in Anatolia. Clinically, the Anatolian outbreaks appear to bear several points of re- semblance to the condition described in this paper, except that the animals in these outbreaks did not show symptoms of paralysis as noted by those workers. On epizootiological and pathological grounds, however, no appre- ciable differences exist. Morphologically and culturally, and in biochemical reactions the organism isolated from the present outbreaks seems to agree closely with Bacillus bipolaris caprisepticus isolated by Kolayli et al.
56 Pleuropneumonia in Goats from the Anatolian outbreaks. Both are indol-positive and both fail to ferment lactose. Regarding the infectivity of the organisms, the noticeable point of difference is that the cultures of B. bipolaris caprisepticus are fatal to goats by all the routes except the intratracheal one, whereas the organism described in this paper can infect goats, sheep and buffalo calves by every route of inoculation, the intratracheal one being the route of choice for all experimental infections described in this paper. This is one of the unique features of the organism, and in this respect it resembles the type of pasteu- rella isolated by Dungal [1931] from cases of enzootic pneumonia in Icelandic sheep. Cultural examinations of blood at all stages of the disease have yielded negative results and inoculations of blood of experimentally affected goats to healthy ones have failed to reproduce the disease. This is in con- firmity with the results obtained by Kolayli et al. [1935] in goats and by Jones and Little [1921] in cows. Although the morphological and cultural characters of pasteurella of varying origin, and the pathological processes caused by them agree with one another on broad grounds, there exist, however, certain differences among them which admit the existence of different types in the pasteurella group as a whole. Thus, although the origanisms isolated from sheep pneumonia by Dungal [1931] in Iceland, and by Montgomerie, Bosworth and Glover [1938] in Wales, agree in general characters, they differ markedly in their patho- genecity to sheep. They are indol-negative and in this respect they differ from the type isolated by Newsom and Cross [1923] from ovine pneumonia, which is indol-positive. Jones and Little [1921] isolated several types of pasteurella from calves affected with pneumonia, some of which differ from classical organisms. They divided their strains into three groups, namely I, II and III respectively. Groups I and II were encapsulated and were of low virulence for rabbits and mice. Group III, which was pathogenic for rabbits, was regarded as belonging to the haemorrhagic septicaemia class. Pasteurel- losis is a widely prevalent disease amongst cattle and buffaloes in India, but as far as sheep and goats are concerned, the number of recorded observations appears to be scanty. A recent description of pasteurellosis in sheep and goats by Naik [1938] in Bombay Presidency does not include pleuro-pneu- monia as a clinical or post-mortem feature. The bacteria isolated from goats in Anatolia and in this country, however, have a marked resemblance to Jones' group III. Both ferment dextrose, saccharose and mannitol, but not lactose and salicin. Both are indol-positive and both do not cause haemolysis on blood-agar media. Both the goat strains are non-capsulated and in this character they resemble some of the strains in Jones' group III. There is a difference in the action on maltose since Jones' strains failed to affect this sugar, whereas both the goat strains fermented it. The unique features of the outbreaks investigated by the author are that the simple contact of healthy goats with the affected animals could re- produce the disease in the former, and the feeding of infective lung materials and cultures of the organism was equally effective in setting up the disease in experimental goats. The virulent organism of the natural cases of the disease, if present in large numbers in excretions of diseased animals, could easily infect contact animals of normal resistance. This point has been discussed in
P. G. PANDE 57 the previous section dealing with the epizootiology. Although sporadic cases of the disease, and at least the first cases in an enzootic occur in animals which are the carriers of the pasteurella, other animals in the herd, by gaining access to contaminated fodder and litters, may acquire infection with the highly virulent organism of the natural disease, usually through the digestive tract, as suggested by Hutyra and Marek [1938]. The predisposing factors have been considered to play an important role in precipitating the disease in bacillus carriers, and this might also be the case with respect to other animals in the herd in which the bacilli gained entrance through the digestive or the respiratory tract. The pathogenesis of infection by the feeding of infective lung materials and cultures as obtained in this investigation may, therefore, be explained on the assumption that the organism after ingestion, having established on the pharyngeal and intestinal mucosae, asserted their patho- genic effects consequent upon the lowering of the animals' resistance due to such predisposing factors as chill, semistarvation and unhygienic conditions exercising their influence throughout the course of the experiments. As a result of these studies it has been made clear that the organism from the natural outbreaks being highly virulent could reproduce the disease on inoculation to normally resistant goats. In carrier animals the pasteurella present in the upper respiratory tract seem to have a relatively low virulence and do not affect them so long as their resistance remains unimpaired. It is known that these organisms inhabit the upper respiratory tract of sheep and cattle [Dungal, 1931 and Jones and Little, 1921] and in outbreaks of pneu- monia in these animals, the role of predisposing factors has been definitely ascertained. In the outbreaks recorded in this paper, it may, nevertheless, be stated that while such factors as fatigue and sudden climatic changes might have predisposed the animals to infection, the existence of carriers in enzootics of goat pneumonia has yet to be determined. A previous infection with the organism seems to confer immunity to recovered animals. The results of vaccination experiments with the formalin- killed culture and the formalized saline emulsion of the hepatized lung appear to justify adoption of the vaccines as prophylatic agents in the field. SUMMARY 1. A description is given of an enzootic form of pleuropneumonia in goats which occurred at the Goat Breeding Farm, Etah, in the United Pro- vinces. It bears a close resemblance to the condition described by Kolayli and others in Anatolia. 2. An organism related to the pasteurella group has been isolated from affected lungs, pleural effusion, heart blood, pericardial fluid and nasal discharges of the affected animals. The organism thus obtained closely resembles on morphological, cultural and biochemical grounds, Jones' group III, i.e. they are non-haemolytic, non-capsulated, indol-positive and highly pathogenic for experimental animals. 3. Organisms recovered from affected animals could infect healthy goats by subcutaneous, intravenous, and intratracheal routes of inoculation, producing symptoms and lesions of the natural disease. Cultures were also infective to sheep and buffalo calves when injected intravenously or intratracheally.
58 Pleuropneumonia in Goats 4. Experimental evidence was obtained on successful transmission of the disease from affected to healthy goats by contact and also by feeding of in- fective lung materials and cultures to healthy animals. It is suggested that outbreaks in nature may be precipitated by a sudden change in weather conditions, fatigue and other predisposing factors. 5. Preliminary attempts at vaccination with the formalized vaccines prepared from the hepatized lungs and the blood-agar culture have given encouraging results. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author wishes to express his thanks to Mr T. J. Egan, I. V. S., Director, Veterinary Services, United Provinces, for providing facilities for this work at the Provincial Veterinary Laboratory, Lucknow. REFERENCES Dungal, N. (1931). J. Comp. Path. and Ther. 44, 126 Hutyra, F., Marek J. and Manninger R. (1938). Sp. Path. and Ther. of Diseases of Domestic Animals, 4th edition, Vol. 1, Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, London Jones, F. S., and Little, R. B. (1921). J. Exp. Med. 34, 541 Jones, F. S., and Little, R. B. (1922). J. Exp. Med. 36, 273 Kolayli, C. and Raif, M. (1935). Rec. Med. 111, 38 Montgomerie, R. F., Bosworth, T. J., and Glover, R. E. (1938). J. Comp. Path. and Ther. 51, 87 Naik, R. N. (1939). Ann. Administration Rep. of the Vet. Invest. Officer, Province of Bombay, 13 Newsom, I. E., and Cross, F. (1923). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 62, 759 Shirlaw, J. F. (1939). Proceedings, 3rd Anim. Husb. Wing Meeting, Feb., New Delhi
AN OUTBREAK OF BOVINE ENCEPHALOMYELITIS BY S. R. HASSAN, B.A., M.R.C.V.S., L.M. AND J. A. IDNANI, G.B.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 23 December 1941) THE object of this article is to record an outbreak of encephalomyelitis which occurred among the cultivation and dairy animals of the Institute at Izatnagar during the winter of 1938-39 and which lasted for about three months. The dairy herd consisted of 43 cows, three stud bulls and 45 young stock. These animals were accommodated in temporary thatched sheds at a distance of about one hundred yards from 50 bullocks and 35 buffaloes used for cultivation work. Prior to the outbreak, no case of encephalomyelitis at this Institute is on record. With regard to the origin of the outbreak, it may be stated that, on account of constructional work then in progress on the estate, a number of outside horses and cattle had access to the Institute. Altogether 20 animals, viz. five bullocks, one buffalo bull, 12 cows, one buffalo calf and a pony contracted the disease and died. The first case, bullock 1320, was seen to be ill on 5 December 1938 and died three days later. It had previously been working on the estate area where it had contact with the outside animals. It was housed in a shed along with other bullocks and buffalo bulls near the dairy animals. The two dairy byres, a furlong from each other, had the same attendants, who may have carried the infection from one place to the other. Various groups of animals also came into contact with one another whilst watering and grazing. The disease was mainly confined to the vicinity where it had originally started. Table I shows the time between the onset of the disease and death in individual cases. TABLE I Animals involved in the outbreak Animal Age in years Onset of illness Duration in days Bullock 1320...... 9 5-12-38 3 Bullock 1543...... 8 7-12-38 3 Cow 100 ....... 5 8-12-38 7 H ifer 172...... 2 9-12-38 2 Cow 91....... 6 10-12-38 4 Bull-calf 3...... 1 11-12-38 4 Bullock 136...... 8½ 12-12-38 3 Cow 80....... 7 11-12-38 6 59
60 An Outbreak of Bovine Encephalomyelitis TABLE IS. R. HASSAN AND J. A. IDNANI 61 which were not relieved by withdrawing 10 c.c. of cerebrospinal fluid. The amount of this fluid and the rate of its flow appeared to be normal. When down, the animals were seen to strain but this seemed to be largely due to spasms of the muscles connected with the act of defecation. Towards the end, the eyeballs became fixed and staring. Hyperaesthesia, which was present in the early stages, appeared to pass off in one or two days and was followed by drowsiness and finally by coma and complete paralysis. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS Two possibilities, other than encephalomyelitis, could not be entirely ruled out ; one, some form of poisoning producing nervous symptom, the other rabies. To dispose of the former, chemical examination of fodder, etc. was undertaken but in no case was any poison detected. Rabies was considered unlikely as none of the affected animals was known to have been bitten by any carnivorous animal. Moreover, Negri bodies were found in no case examined. Further, rabies in cattle is usually of the furious type, while in the present outbreak only three animals (cow 91, bullock 114 and buffalo 296) exhibited maniacal symptoms. CONTROL Measures deemed to be suitable were taken to check the spread of the disease, viz. segregation of animals showing symptoms, isolation of suspects and in-contacts and thorough disinfection of the premises. The usual graz- ing areas were closed and the animals were sent in small batches to new pas- tures. In spite of such precautionary measures, the disease continued to spread and eventually subsided spontaneously. Hexamime (urotropine) was tried in several cases but without satisfactory results, injections being given intrathecally in dosage of 2.0 c.c. of a 10 per cent solution, sometimes repeated on two or three consecutive days. MORBID ANATOMY In none of the cases examined at autopsy, were gross lesions suggestive of any specific disease seen. Although in most cases a certain amount of gastro-enteritis was present, the principal seat of lesions was the brain and spinal cord. The meninges were congested and pin-point hæmorrhages in the parenchyma of the brain were more or less constant. HISTOPATHOLOGY Histological examination of the brain and spinal cord was undertaken in all cases. Tissues were fixed in 10 per cent formalin or in Bouin's fluid. The report of the pathologist on the first two cases, on which a diagnosis of encephalomyelitis was established, states : ' Brain and spinal cord showed marked diffuse inflammatory changes, non-suppurative in character, asso- ciated with encephalomyelitis, consisting chiefly of necrosis and neurono- phagia of nerve cells. The grey matter of the dorsal (posterior) horns appear- ed to be practically devoid of nerve cells, with distinct glial proliferation with monocytes forming perivascular cuffs. No polymorphs were seen. The vessels of the pia arachnoid were congested and those in the meningeal fold, like the vessels of the grey and white matters, showed distinct cuffing. The pathological changes were most marked in the spinal cord, less in the
62 An Outbreak of Bovine Encephalomyelitis cerebellum and least so in the cerebrum. The condition might thus be re- garded as a posterior poliomyelitis with encephalic extension.' EXPERIMENTAL TRANSMISSION As soon as it became evident that the disease might be due to a virus, attempts were made to reproduce the disease in experimental animals (cattle, rabbits, guinea-pigs) in order to isolate the virus and study its nature. In attempts at transmission, various routes were employed, subdural, subcuta- neous and intranasal. The results of these experiments are shown in Table II. From the primary tests shown in Table II, there was evidence that the disease was in most cases transmitted to rabbits and guinea-pigs. In several animals, disturbance of the central nervous system was seen during life and histological examination showed abnormalities in the brain and cord. Two separate ' strains', one isolated from cattle and the other from pony 5B, were maintained in serial passage through rabbits and guinea- pigs. The bovine strain was transmitted through two series of animals by subdural inoculation and by intranasal instillation respectively of a 1 per cent suspension of brain collected at the height of the disease or at post- mortem. At the fourth passage, an attempt was made by the subcutaneous and intranasal routes to transmit the cattle strain to two bulls and the pony 5B strain to two ponies, the experimental animals being kept under observa- tion for 6S. R. HASSAN AND J. A. IDNANI 63 TABLE II Primary transmission experiments Source of maurial Inoculated to Details of inoculation Date Result Cow 100 . . . Rabbit No. 1 . Medulla, 1 per cent susp., 0.1 c.c intrathecally 17-12-38 D 13 Cow 100 and Bullock 136 Bull-calf No. 7 Liver, splcen, kidney and urine, mixed susp., 5.0 c.c. subcutaneously and brain susp.intranasally 16-12-38 D 22 Hill bull 530 . Brain, medulla and cord. mixed susp., 5.0 c.c. subcutaneously 20-12-38 No reaction Hill bull 65 . Ditto . . . 20-12-38 D 113 Hill bull 69 . Ditto . . . 20-12-38 No reaction Hill bull 68 . Brain, medulla and cord, mixed susp., 5.0 c.c. intranasally 20-12-38 Do. Bullock 1543 . Hill bull 404 . Ditto . . . 20-12-38 Do. Cow 172 . . Hill bull 143 . Ditto . . . 20-12-38 Do. Cow 100 . . Rabbit 2 . Brain, medulla and cord, mixed susp., 0.2 c.c. subdurally 21-12-38 Do. Bullock 136 . Rabbit 3. Brain, medulla and cord, mixed susp., 0.5 c.c. intranasally 21-12-38 Dest. 17 ; paralysis Cow 91 . . Rabbit 4 . . Brain, medulla and cord, mixed susp., 0.1 c.c. intracerebrally 21-12-38 No reaction G. pig l . . Brain, medulla and cord, mixed susp., 0.2 c.c. subdurally 21-12-38 D 6 G. pig 2 . . Brain, medulla and cord, mixed susp., 0.5 c.c. intranasally 21-12-38 No reaction G. pig 3 . Brain, medulla and cord, mixed susp., 0.1 c.c. intracerebrally 21-12-38 D 33 Mouse 1 . Brain, medulla and cord, mixed susp., 0.2 c.c. intranasally 21-12-38 D 33 Cow 106 . . { G. pig 4 . Cord susp., 0. 1 c.c. subdurally . 27-12-38 D 18 Rabbit 5 . Medulla susp., 0 . 1 c.c intrathecally . 19-12-38 D 11 Cord susp., 0. 1 c.c. subdurally . 27-12-38 After first inoculation Cow 142 . . { Rabbit 6 . Ditto . . . 30-12-38 D 122 Kabbit 7 . Ditto . . . 30-12-38 D 38 G. pig 5 . Ditto . . . 30-12-38 D 29 G. pig 6 . Ditto . . . 30-12-38 D 12 Bullock 114 . Rabbit 8 . Ditto . . . 2-1-39 D 80 Rabbit 9 Ditto . . . 2-1-39 D 80 G. pig 7 . Ditto . . . 2-1-39 No reaction G. pig 8 . Ditto . . . 2-1-39 D 30 Buffalo 296 . Rabbit 10 . Brain susp., 0.1 c.c subdurally . 5-1-39 No reaction Rabbit 11 . Ditto . . 5-1-39 Do. Cow 82 . . G. pig 9 . Cord susp., 0.1 c.c subdurally . 1-1-39 D 20 G. pig 10 . Ditto . . . 1-1-39 D 29 Cow 153 . . G. pig 11 . Cord susp., 01 c.c. subdurally 6-1-39 D 23 G. pig 12 . Ditto . . . 6-1-39 D 32 Cow 74 . . G. pig 13 . Ditto . . . 6-1-39 D 68 G. pig 14 . Ditto . . . 6-1-39 D 41 Cow 56 . . Rabbit 12 . Medulla susp., 0.1 c.c intrathecally 25-1-39 No reaction Rabbit 13 . Medulla susp. 0.1 c.c. subdurally . 25-1-39 D 21 Bull-call 35 . Blood total 40.0 c.c. subcutaneously 21-1-39 to 24-1-39 No reaction Cow 40 . . Rabbit 14 . Brain susp., 0.1 c.c. subdurally . 9-2-39 D 22 Rabbit 15 . Ditto . . . 9-2-39 No reaction Pony 5B . Rabbit 16 . Blood, 10.0 c.c subcutaneously . 28-2-39 Do. Rabbit 17 . Ditto . . . 28-2-39 Do. Rabbit 18 . Brain and cord, mixed susp., 0.1 c.c. subdurally 1-3-39 D 30 Rabbit 19 . Urine, 10.0 c.c. subcutaneously, blood 10.0 c.c. intranasally 1-3-39 No reaction Rabbit 20 . Urine, 10.0 c.c subcutaneously 1-3-39 Do. Susp. = suspension D=died on.........day TABLE III Serial inoculations with natural encephalomyelitis material Source of material Inoculated to Passage No. from original material Details of inoculation Date Result Rabbit 1 (vide Table II) Rabbit 21 Rabbit 22 2 Brain and cord, mixed susp., 0 1 c.c. subdurally 30 December, 1038 No reaction B. calf 7 (vide Table II) B. calf 19 . 2 Medulla susp., 3.0 c.c. sub- cutaneousiy 10 January, 1939 D 30 B. calf 25 . 2 Medulla susp., 3.0 c.c. and 0.5 c.c. intranasally 10 January, 1939 D 36
64 An Outbreak of Bovine Encephalomyelitis RABBIT 3PLATE VII [ Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part I ] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Crinum defixum Ker-Gawl (Family Amaryllidaceae) showing the leaves, bulb and roots.
INVESTIGATIONS ON THE TOXICITY OF CRINUM DEFIXUM KER-GAWL, I BY M. R. SUBRAMANIA SASTRY C. K. VELAYUDHAN NAYAR R. RAMASWAMY AND K. VENKATACHALAM The Research Unit, Medical College, Madras (Received for publication on 21 January 1942) (With Plate VII) ON a report that cases of poisoning by Crinum defixum Ker-Gawl (Family Amaryllidaceae) had been occurring in cattle around Mettupalayam, in Coimbatore district, Madras province, a toxicological investigation was undertaken on this plant. Crinum defixum is a native of the Concan, Coromandel, and of many parts of Bengal. It is also said to be common on the banks of the Deccan rivers, and grows well in muddy and swampy places. This species has no stem, but possesses a spherical bulb and succulent leaves (Plate VII). An average-sized bulb has a circumference of about 2 to 4 inches, and its roots penetrate into the mud. This plant generally flowers at the end of the rainy season. The flowers are large, sessile, white and fragrant during night. The bulbs are extremely acrid [Watt, 1889]. Attempts were made to determine the degree of its toxicity, the mini- mum lethal dose orally and the cumulative effect, if any. A. The degree of toxicity Feeding experiments, both with bulbs and leaves, were made on dogs of different ages. They were dried, powdered and suspended in water. The feeding was done with the aid of a stomach tube. (1) Bulbs (Crude). Eight dogs both young and old were fed with bulbs, powdered and suspended in water. Of these two died, but six re- covered after showing severe toxic symptoms. An aqueous extract of the bulbs was also given to six dogs, five of which recovered after exhibiting more or less severe symptoms of poisoning, but the sixth one died. The residue after the removal of the extract was also fed to two dogs ; both of them showed similar toxic symptoms in a lesser degree and recovered. The results of these experiments indicate that (1) the bulbs are definitely toxic and (2) the toxic principle or principles found in these are only partially soluble in water, as is evident from the fact that both the aqueous extracts and the residue have produced toxic symptoms in different degrees. The details of the experiments are given in table I. (2) Leaves. Six young dogs were fed, two with the powdered leaves, two with the aqueous extract of the leaves and two with the residue left 65
66 Toxicity of Crinum defixum Ker-Gawl, I Table I Preparation used No. of dogs fed Dose given per kg. of body weight (gm.) Total quantity fed (gm.) Whether the symptoms shown were severe or moderate Whether died or survived Observations Remarks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 (a) Dried and powdered bulbs 8 3 22.8 Less severe . Survived About 15 minutes after feeding there was frothing from the mouth, salivation which gradually became profuse, severe attempts at retching, bile tinged emesis, diarrhM. R. SUBRAMANIA SASTRY, AND OTHERS 67 after removing the extract. The results of these experiments are tabulated in Table II Table II Preparation used No. of dogs fed Age Dose given per kg. of body weight (in gm.) Total quantity- fed (in gm.) Observations (a) Powdered leaves 2 Each 4 months old 4 11 11 Showed no devi- ation from the normal (b) Aqueous extract of the leaves 2 Each 5 months old 3 10.5 & 10.5 Do. (c) Residue after remov- ing the extract 2 Each 5 months old 3 Do. Do. The results of these experiments show that the leaves do not possess any toxic properties. B. The minimum lethal dose, orally Since old dogs were found mostly to resist and survive the effects of the toxicity, only young dogs were selected to determine its minimum lethal dose. Eight young dogs (one old dog as control) were fed with the powdered bulbs and the results of the experiments showed that the M. L. D. was about 1 . 75 gm. per kilogramme of body weight. Different doses were tried and the details of the experiments are tabulated in Table III Table III Preparation used Age of the animal No. of dogs used Dose given (in gm.) Average weight of the animal (in kg.) Results No. ended fatally Number survived Bulbs (dried and powdered) Young (below 18 months) 1 1.5 7 .. 1 Young (below 12 months) 3 1.6 3½ to 7 1 2 Do. 4 1.75 4 to 7 4 .. *Old (more than 18 months) 1 2 6.5 1 9 5 4 NOTE. In the earlier stages of the investigation it was observed that in many cases the powdered bulbs, in doses even as high as 3 to 3 .5 gm. per kg. of body weight, did not prove lethal to animals older than 18 months [vide Table I].
68 Toxicity of Crinum defixum Ker- Gawl, I C. The cumulative effect (1) Bulbs. Five dogs were fedM. R. SUBRAMANIA SASTRY, AND OTHERS 69 (5) The minimum lethal dose of the bulbs administered orally is about 1 . 75 grammes per kg. of body weight. (6) The bulbs have a definite cumulative action. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was done at the Research Unit, Medical College, Madras under the ' Scheme for Research into the Indigenous drugs of India used in Veteri- nary practice with special reference to their toxicology', financed by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. We are highly grateful for the financial help given by the Council. Our thanks are due to the District Veterinary Officer, Coimbatore, and the District Forest Officer, Coimbatore North, for the suppply of the necessary material for this investigation and to the Government Systematic Botanist, Coimbatore, for the identification of the plant. We are also indebted to the Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras for the facilities afforded and the Director of Veterinary Services, Madras, for his direction and advice. REFERENCE Watt, G. (1889). Dictionary of the Economic Products of India 2, 590
TUBERCULOSIS AMONGST GOATS AT THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR BY P. N. NANDA, M.R.C.V.S. Superintendent, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar AND GOPAL SINGH, L.V.P. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar (Received for publication on 25 February 1942) TUBERCULOSIS in goats is known to occur since 1884 [Koch] and the first authenticated case was reported from Great Britain by Edgar [1892]. Later, this disease was recorded in many countries by different workers from time to time, such as by Bulling [1896], Thompson [1904] in Saxony, Melvin [1908] in United States of America, Griffith [1917] in England, Golden [1921] in a herd of goats imported into America from Switzerland, Little [1924], Giescu [1924] in Cologne, Fourie [1928] in South Africa, Schwabacher [1934], Bishop, Barnes and Reidy [1934] in America, Begley [1938] in Ireland, Carmichael [1938] in Uganda and McKay [1939] in England. It has also been reported from Germany by Karl Hertha cited by Calmette [1923] and from France, by Morel cited by Celmethe [1923]. Hitherto it was practically unknown in India, until recently when Iyer [1932] reported its incidence in hill goats at Mukteswar. The low incidence in this country had led to the belief that this species of animal was immune from tuberculosis. It was probably on this assumption that Handa and Datta [1935] stated that goats' milk was free from tubercle bacilli. A reference to the report of the Royal Commission on Human and Animal Tuberculosis [1907], however, indicates that goats are very susceptible to even small doses of tubercle bacilli of bovine type. Records available at this farm, show that until recently, no cases of tuber- culosis in goats were detected in spite of the fact that careful post-mortem examination was carried out as a routine practice, in every case whenever an animal died on the farm. From 1 January 1939, to 1 August 1941, post-mortem examinations were carried out on 5 male and 50 female goats but in no case macroscopic tuberculous lesions were discovered. Five cases of tuberculosis in goats have, however, recently occurred in quick succession on this Farm. The protocols are recorded below :P. N. NANDA AND GOPAL SINGH 71 animal, however, began to lose condition. On 1 August 1941, symptoms indicative of pneumonia were noticed. There was dullness, depression and emaciation. Appetite was suppressed and rumination suspended. Mucous membranes of the eye and buccal cavity were anæmic. Respiration was difficult and abdominal. There was a slight mucous discharge from the nostrils with occasional coughing. Temperature went up to 106°F. Aus- cultation of the chest revealed bronchial or tubular sounds on both sides and a few patches of consolidation in the right lung were perceptible. Blood smears were negative for bacterial and protozoon infection. Smears prepared from the nasal discharge and stained by Ziehl-Nielsen's stain, revealed the presence of a few diplococci only. No acid-fast bacilli were seen. The animal succumbed on 10 August 1941. Post-mortem findings72 Tuberculosis Amongst Goats Case No. III Female goat No. 806, AgeP. N. NANDA AND GOPAL SINGH 73 DISCUSSION A reference to literature and the occurrence of cases of tuberculosis in goats on this farm have afforded conclusive evidence that goats in this country- are not immune from tuberculosis. It is difficult at this stage to attempt to judge the incidence of and actual mortality from this disease, but it can safely be said that tuberculosis in this country has a wider distribution than has been hitherto supposed. The possibility of goats becoming infected from cattle will now be a serious problem to be faced. Iyer [1932], while studying the strains of tubercle bacilli infecting goats, reported that they are of bovine origin. This statement is further supported by a case recorded by Griffith [1917] where it was noticed that the goat fed on cow's milk later developed the disease. The organism was isolated and proved to be of bovine type. The occurrence of five cases of tuberculosis amongst goats in rapid succession would also point to the fact that the disease was acquired from the farm cattle in which the incidence of tuberculosis has shown a very sharp increase during recent years. The cattle and goats at this farm graze over the same area and thus the chances for the dissemination of disease are quite favourable. The report received from the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar regarding the type of the organism is as follows :74 Tuberculosis Amongst Goats REFERENCES Begley, P. T. (1938). Vety. Rec. 50, 10, 286 Bishop, C. P., Barnes, M. F. and Reidy, T. B. (1934). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assc. 85, 457 Bulling (1896) quoted by Carmichael (1938). Vet. Rec. 50, 36, 1147 Calmethe, A. (1923). Tubercle bacillus infection & T. B. in man and animals Carmichael, J. (1938). Vet. Rec. 50, 36, 1147 Edgar (1892). J. Comp. Path. & Ther. 5, 80 Fourie, P. J. (1928). 13th & 14th Rep. Dir. Vet. Res. S. Afr. Pt. 1, 623 Giescu (1924) quoted by Carmichael (1938). Vet. Rec. 50, 36, 1147 Golden, G. E. (1921). Amer. Vet. J. 59, 79 Griffith, A. S. (1917). J. Path & Bact. 21, 342 Handa, B. N. and Datta, D. L. (1935). Vet. Bull. Civil Vety. Dept. Punjab. No. 6, 19 Iyer, P. R. K. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. 11, 41 Koch, R. (1884) quoted by Carmichael (1938). Vet. Rec. 50, 36, 1147 Little, W. L. (1924). Vet. J. 80, 371 Melvin (1908). 25th Ann. Rep. U. S. Bur. of Ani. Ind. 98 Royal Commission on T. B. (Human & Bov.) Sec. Inter. Rep. Pt. 1, 70 (1907) Schwabacher, H. (1934). J. Comp. Path. & Ther. 47, 214 Thompson, (1904). 21st Ann. Rep. U. S. Bur. of Ani. Ind. 342
SIZE OF EXPERIMENTS FOR TESTING SERA OR VACCINES BY P. V. SUKHATME Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi AND V. G. PANSE Institute of Plant Industry, Indore (Received for publication on 20 March 1942) IN veterinary research experiments designed to test the efficacy of vaccine or serum treatments are commonly required to be undertaken and the question arises as to how many animals should be experimented with before a research worker can conclude that the vaccine in question is effective. The question is one of practical value owing principally to the difficulties which arise in securing a large number of suitable animals, and it is consequently necessary to know the minimum number of animals required to ascertain with a known degree of confidence that the result observed is due to the treatment-effect and not chance causes. The object of this note is to illustrate the principles involved in determining the number of animals required in such experiments. Suppose it is known that the normal rate of infection of a certain disease in cattle is, say, 25 per cent. Further suppose that an average healthy animal is injected against infection with a newly discovered serum and is found to be free from infection. Can the evidence be considered adequate to support the claim in favour of the serum ? Common-sense would tell us ' no ', for even without the application of the serum there is more likelihood that the animal would remain free from infection than that it would catch infection. How can we then accept the claim about the efficacy of the serum treatment ? Suppose that another experiment is made with two animals and it is found that both animals are free from infection. Would the evidence be now adequate to support the claim of the serum treatment ? As in the case of one animal the answer would depend on the probability of the event happening, if the serum treatment was without effect. This probability is easily found. The event happened is that both animals are found to be free from infection. According to past experience the probability of an animal remaining free from infection is ¾ and of it catching infection is ¼. The probability that one animal may remain free from infection is ¾ ; the probability that the other may remain free is also ¾ ; therefore the probability that both will remain free, which is the event actually observed, is the product of these two independent probabilities, i.e. ¾ × ¾ = 9/16 The only alter- natives to the event that has taken place are (i) one animal may catch infection and the other may not (ii) both may catch infection. The probability that 75
76 Size of Experiments for Testing Sera or Vaccines one may catch infection is ¼ the probability that the other may not catch infection is ¾ ; the probability that this combined event may happen is there- fore ¼ × ¾ ; but the one animal that may catch infection can be either of the two experimented with and therefore this value of the probability for the combined event has to be multiplied by 2. The probability therefore that one may catch infection and one may remain free from infection is 2 × (¼ × ¾) = 6/16 Finally the probability of each catching infection is ¼ and consequently of both catching infection is ¼ × ¼ =1/16 We can tabulate the results as follows:P. V. SUKHATME AND V. G. PANSE 77 catch infection is ¼ × ¼ × ¼, since the event can happen in only one way, and equals 1/64 . Tabulating we have78 Size of Experiments for Testing Sera or Vaccines arising through pure chance is (¾)12 or only 0.0317 per cent, nearly five times as small as in the previous case and sufficiently small for all practical purposes to differentiate between chance and real deviations. Or again if we suppose that in an experiment with 24 animals only two caught infection we shall have three events to consider (i) the event observed giving a departure of four from the expected number of six (ii) the event in which one caught infection giving a departure in each class ' infected' and ' non-infected ' of five and (iii) the event in which none caught infection giving a departure in each class of six. The probability of the first event is obviously 24×23/2 (1/4)2 (¾)22 =0.03077, that of the second is 22(¼) (¾)23 =0.00803 and that of the third is (¾)24 =0.00100 the sum of the three being 0.03980 or 4.0 per cent, again sufficiently small to differentiate with a fair degree of confidence between chance and real devia- tions. As to what is a sufficiently small probability in order that the departure may be regarded as really due to the treatment effect is left to the discretion of the research worker. Generally a probability of 5 per cent or less is con- sidered sufficiently small by the statistician and the departure is considered to be significant. The foregoing approach illustrating the principle and the procedure involved in the test of significance for the departure of the observed result from the expectation can be readily used to determine the number of animals necessary to conclude whether the observed reduction in the rate of normal infection by the experimental treatment is significant. For instance, in the experiment with 12 animals none catching infection, considered above, we might say that the result like the one observed will occur with a sufficiently low probability and that therefore 12 animals will be sufficient to reach a conclusive verdict on the efficacy of the experimental treatment. Or again referring to the experiment with 24 animals, two catching infection, giving a rate of infection of less than 10 per cent we might say that in experiments of this size a result such as the one observed or better lowering the normal rate of infection by 15 per cent or more will occur with a sufficiently low probability and that, therefore, 24 animals will be sufficient to conclude that the experimental treatment significantly lowers the rate of infection by 10 per cent or more than the normal. Actually in the first example, working at the 5 per cent level of significance, even 11 animals will suffice since the probability that none out of 11 is infected is 0.04224, but with 10 animals and none-catching infection the probability is larger than 0.05, and we, therefore, conclude that it will not be advisable to experiment with less than 11 animals. Similarly, in the second example if the margin of reduction desired to result from the experimental treatment is 10 per cent it will be found that a minimum number of 23 animals will suffice to secure a conclusive verdict. There is, however, one aspect of this problem arising from the discontinuity of the binomial distribution which must be examined before finally accepting this conclusion about the minimum number of animals. For, just as a sample of 23 appears to be adequate to test the point at issue, a sample of 18 is equally so, since the probability of observing the rate of infection of 10 per cent or less in a sample of this size is also less than 0.05. The same is true, when the size is 19 but with 20 or higher numbers upto 23 the case is different since with
P. V. SUKHATME AND V. G. PANSE 79 a sample of this size the probability required is larger than 0.05 as will be seen from the following table :80 Size of Experiments for Testing Sera or Vaccines direction has to be as large or larger than 1.645 times the standard error. The exact probability corresponding to any ratio of the observed departure to its standard error is readily available from text books on statistics. In a sample of 12 with none catching infection the departure is clearly 3 ; the ratio of the departure to its standard error is 3/1.5 or 2 and the probability will be found to be 0.023 as against the true value of 0.032 deduced earlier. A sample of 24 giving a departure of four from the expected infected number will be similarly found to give the probability of 0.030 against the value of 0.042 obtained earlier from first principles. The difference in the values of the probability found by the two methods is obviously due to the use of the approximation in place of the exact method of the binomial law of distribution. The difference, is, however, small. It can be shown that when the sample size is not too small, say, not smaller than 10, and also when the rate of infection is not too small, say, not less than 10 per cent or not too large, say, not more than 90 per cent, the normal distribution gives a sufficiently close approximation to the binomial law of distribution. In the problem before us the number of animals required for experimentation will depend upon the normal rate of infection and the margin of difference in percentage infection due to treatment it is considered desirable to detect. The larger the margin the smaller will be the number of animals required. In practice we shall rarely be concerned with testing a reduction of more than about 25 per cent and we can, therefore, safely use the normal method of ap- proximation in place of the binomial method for working out the probability and hence for finding out the minimum number of animals required. It has, however, been assumed above that the normal rate of infection remains unchanged. The normal rate of infection is calculated from a large body of data collected in the past and cannot necessarily be realized in a given sample. For the rate of infection besides being subject to secular changes may vary with place and climate and may even differ in the two sexes. The normal rate of infection based on past experience may not for these reasons be comparable with the rate of infection observed in the experimental group of animals and it is, therefore, safer and usual for the experimenter to have a control group side by side with an experimental one in order to ensure that the comparison is unbiased and reliable. The problem now is to determine the size of each group so that a conclusive verdict on the question whether the experimental treatment will reduce the normal rate by a given margin will be possible. With two groups of size n in each, the experimenter will observe two rates of infection q1 in the control group and q2 in the experimental one and will be faced with the question whether the difference d between q1 and q2 is more than is likely to arise merely by chance. If the treatment was without effect and if the experiment was repeated a large number of times q1 would sometimes be less and sometimes more than q2 ; but in the long run the experimenter will observe no significant difference between the two. He would indeed expect the difference q1P. V. SUKHATME AND V. G. PANSE 81 where Q1 is the normal rate of infection whose estimates are q1 and q2. Ac- cording to the normal theory we should observe a positive difference q182 Size of Experiments for Testing Sera or "Vaccines cases we must frankly agree that there is no alternative but to work with whatever number of suitable animals one can manage to get, always remem- bering that larger the number of animals the larger will be the chance of testing conclusively the difference between the normal and the experimental treatment. When the number of animals obtainable is less than what is statistically required, the experiment can only serve to give an indication of the treatment effect but is unlikely to lead to any conclusive inference until the results are confirmed by some other independent evidence or by repeti- tion. Table showing the minimum member of pairs of animals in experiments with sera or vaccines Normal rate of infection d/Q 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 Margin of difference desired between the experimental and the normal treatment 10 69 87 101 114 123 130 134 135 134 130 123 114 101 87 69 15 31 38 45 51 55 58 60 60 60 58 55 51 45 38 31 20 ... 22 25 28 31 32 33 34 33 32 31 28 25 22 17 25 ... ... 16 18 20 21 21 22 21 21 20 18 16 14 11
ABSTRACTS The coccidiostatic effect of sulfaguanidine (sulfanilyl guanidine). P. P. LEVINE (1941). Cornell. Vet. 31, 107-12 IN this article the author has described the results of his preliminary experiments on the coccidiostatic effect of sulfaguanidine on coccidia of fowls. It is indicated that this drug, when used in concentration as low as ½ per cent of the mash, prevented infection of chickens with E. praecox, E. mitis, E. maxima and E. hagani. When admi- nistered, in 1 per cent concentration in the feed, sulfaguanidine was found to be effective in markedly reducing the severity of coecal lesions due to E. tenella, and 1½ per cent concentration was found effective against E. necatrix. It is, however, stated that this drug had no curative effect on chickens which were already infected with E. tenella and E. necatrix. In the opinion of the author, this chemical agent holds promise as a coccidiostatic agent for the control of all types of coccidiosis. [H. N. R.] The value and relative effectiveness of preparations of rotenone, derris powder and cube powder as larvicides for cattle grubs. C. E. SMITH, ELMER LIVENGOOD and IRWIN H. ROBERTS (1941). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc. 99, 391-4 THE experiments described in this paper were carried out in Colarado and in Missouri 1 during 1938-40, the two powders mentioned in the title being derived from the roots of Derris elliptica and Lonchocarpus nicou respectively. In Colarado, the cattle grub (Hypoderma lineatum) remains in the subdermal tissues about 30 days before dropping off and entering the pupal stage. The treatment of a particular group of animals was therefore, undertaken about 30 days after the appearance of first grub holes in that group, the object being to extend ' the period of the effectiveness of larvicidal wash over a greater portion of the grub season '. The wash was prepared by dissolving 4 oz. of laundry soap in one gallon of water heated to 100°F. and then adding the powder (or rotenone) to the solution. The liquid, while warm, was applied to the tumours from pint jars provided with perforated lids, the wash being worked into the hair coat by means of stiff-fibre scrub brushes. Each group of animals was treated once. They were examined three to five days after treatment and subsequent examinations were made every two or three weeks until all grubs had dropped off from the control cattle. A total of 67 animals were treated with rotenone, 219 with derris powder and 119 with cube powder, while 76 animals were kept as controls. The results showed that chemically pure rotenone was inferior, as a larvicide against H. lineatum, to either derris powder or cube powder and that powders classed as containing 4 per cent rotenone were as effective as those with a rotenone content of 5 per cent. Derris and cube were found to be equally effective, the minimum requirement for a dependable wash being 12 oz. of either powder to a gallon of water. [S. K. S.] Sporadic bovine encephalomyelitis (Buss disease). S. H. MCNUTT and E. F. WALLER (1940). Cornell. Vet. 30, 437 SEVERAL forms of encephalitis have been reported in the bovine species. Rabies, Aujoszky's disease, listerellosis and malignant catarrhal fever, all cause symptoms of encephalitis. Turning sickness in Uganda is caused by a protozoa (a Thieleria sp.) In this article the authors describe yet another form of encephalitis due to a hitherto unreported infective agent. Relatively few animals are affected with sporadic bovine encephalomyelitis at any one time. Only young cattle under three years of age are observed to get naturally infected. Calves have been artificially infected, either by the subcutaneous or intracranial inoculation of infective material. The incubation period ranges from 4 to 27 days. There is a pronounced fever which persists throughout the course of the disease, until it be- comes subnormal just before death. The main nervous symptom is a pronounced de- pression which develops gradually. Sometimes the affected animal falls down. Turn- ing, rubbing or excitability is never observed. A slight diarrhoea and a moderate dis- charge from the nostrils and eyes may be noticed. The course of the disease extends from one to three weeks. Death results in 40 to 70 per cent of cases. Those which recover return,to normal temperature in a couple of days after inoculation. 83
84 ABSTRACTS Following a subcutaneous or an intra muscular inoculation, there results a local indurated swelling characterized by a monocytic infiltration. The lymphatic glands become enlarged. At the time, the lymp nodes of the throat are affected, encephalitis develops. The brain shows no macroscopic lesions, but histological examination reveals a perivascular cuffing, focal areas of monocytic infiltration with some liquefactive necrosis of the larger areas. There may be cell infiltration and oedema of parts of the meninges. The lesions are well distributed along the cord. The nasal passages arc congested and contain catarrhal exudates. The liver and sometimes the kidneys have areas of mono- cytic infiltration. Pleurisy and peritonitis with sero-fibrinous exudate appears to be common in the later stages. The causal organism is not capable of cultivation on ordinary media. The virus is viable in frozen material up to four months, the longer intervals not tested. Survival in 50 per cent glycerine is poor. It has been propagated in chick embryos for over 60 days in serial passages. The Berkefeld N. filtrates of infectve tissues did not prove infective. Immunologically the disease has been differentiated from Western type of equine ence- phalomyelitis and Listerellosis. The guinea-pig has been found to be a suitable experimental animal, but the disease produced in the guinea-pig is different from that in cattle. Cattle suffer from encephalo- myelitis with late peritonitis and pleurisy without encephalitis. Chances of ' takes ' are optimal after inoculation by the intraperitonial route, and uncertain by the entra- cranial route. [V. R. R.] Some recent observations on fowl paralysis (Neurolymphomatosis). F. BLAKEMORE, and T. DALLING (1939). Seventh World's Poultry Congr. and Expos. Proc. U. S. A., 282-6 EXPERIMENTS undertaken to inbreed a strain of fowls which were severely affected with fowl paralysis showed that the disease was eliminated after the second generation. There was no evidence of acquired resistance, as the chicks of the fifth generation were highly susceptible. With the strain so bred, transmission experiments were carried out by inoculation with tissue emulsions from affected cases or by exposure to natural infections. In the first experiment 2 out of 78 artificially inoculated birds developed lymphocytic infiltration of the nerves and 14 out of 33 fowls placed in contact were affected. The control fowls obtained from another flock did not contract the disease. The presence of intestinal parasites among experimental fowls, at the later stage of the disease, was considered to have no association with neurolymphomatosis. In subsequent serial passages, using liver suspensions, the virulence of the disease was considerably increased. In this series 44 out of 56 birds showed lesions of fowl paralysis. Certain atypical lesions, chiefly in the heart and the liver, consisting of whitish areas with or without enlargement of the organs were observed. The histological examination of affected tissues showed that the reaction was essen- tially one of an inflammatory character, followed by lymphoid infiltration and that the lesions in the nerves occurred late in the course of the disease. The causal agent of fowl paralysis contained in the tissues was infective at a certain stage of the disease and was probably filterable. [J. A. I.] The treatment of anoestrus in domestic animals with ' Stilboestrol Dipropionate '. R. F. MONTGOMERIE and GEORGE BROWNLEE (1941). Vet. Rec. 53, No. 39 THE authors describe the two years' research on cows and heifers of low fertility treated with Stilboestrol. They report that the synthetic oestrogen has all the pro- perties of the natural hormone and at the same time is cheap enough to be used in the field. The authors treated their cases with 10 mg. in heifer and 20 mm. in heavier breeds, the drug being given intramuscularly in oil. Experimentally heifers and cows always conceived when mated at the first oestrus after treatment. The drug is said to stimulate directly the anterior part of the pituitary body, with the release of follicle stimulating and luteinising hormones. The authors also suggest a table of doses for domestic animals. [W. M. K.]
ABSTRACTS 85 Development of neutralizing antibodies to the viruses of equine encephalo- myelitis (western strain) and St. Louis encephalitis in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid of man and animals, together with recovery of the St. Louis virus from the blood of monkeys. F. HOWITT BEATRICE (1941). J. Immunology 42, No. 2, 117-31 THE author demonstrated the presence of neutralizing antibodies specific for the viruses of encephalomyelitis (Western strain) and St. Louis encephalitis, in the blood sera and cerebrospinal fluid of patients recovering from these infections, with no evidence of cross immunity. The author showed that in experimental monkeys inoculated intracutaneously with Western virus, antibodies began to appear in the serum irregularly about the 5th or 6th day after injection and were more regularly present in seven to nine days, becoming progressively stronger through the 5th week. It was also observed that these antibodies did not appear as early in the cerebrospinal fluid, but were found in small amounts by the 8th or 9th day and became stronger by the 10th or 11th day. The antibodies either failed to appear or were only weakly positive in those animals running a fatal course after intracerebral inoculation. Observations of St. Louis virus were that the antibodies were more difficult to de- monstrate in the serum of experimental monkeys, inoculated intracutaneously and that these antibodies appeared only occasionally after 14 days. But after intracerebral injections these could be found within 9 to 14 days. The disease did not run a fatal course as in animals inoculated with Western virus. The observations on mixed infection with both viruses were that, with a single exception, practically no antibodies developed against the St. Louis virus either in the blood or the cerebrospinal fluid, following intracutaneous and intracerebral inoculation. The author's conclusions were that the Western virus could be recovered from the blood and the cerebrospinal fluid of experimental monkeys during the first few days following intracutaneous and intracerebral inoculation and from the blood alone in animals inoculated with the St. Louis virus. In case of mixed inoculations both viruses could be recovered at different intervals. [W. M. K.] Straw pulp: Results of controlled feeding trials (1941). Jour. of the Ministry of Agriculture 48, No. 2 THE paper records the results of the controlled feeding trials, carried out with straw pulp at five different centres in England and Wales, under the auspices of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Agricultural Research Council. The process of straw pulping consisted in treating chaffed straw one inch in length with 1½ per cent solution of caustic soda, for a period of 20 hours and allowing to drain on the ramp for about 20 minutes and washing with water for four hours. The plant used was that recommended by the Imperial Chemical Industries, Ltd. No special difficulties were encountered either in the preparation of the pulp or in feeding it to the animals. In most of the stations, young dairy cattle were used for the experiments, which lasted from 10 to 16 weeks and the straw studied was wheat straw. In one centre, the effect of feeding with treated and untreated straw was studied both in the warm and cold weather. The animals were divided into two groups and suitably balanced rations for the control and the experimental groups were adjusted to theoretically equal feeding values. To produce a definite live weight increase per day, untreated straw was used in one case and treated straw in the other. The experiments conducted in three of the stations showed that the animals of the experimental groups had better bloom and fleshing than those in the control groups, that there was a definite advantage of about 0.6 to 0.7 lb. live weight increase per head per day for the straw pulp fed animals, and that the predigestion of straw resulted in a marked improvement in palatability and its feeding value (S. E.) from about 13 to 40. In two of the centres, however, the treated straw was unpalatable to and reluctantly eaten by cattle. According to these trials soda treatment did not materially improve its nutritive value.
86 ABSTRACTS Taking the results of these experiments into account, the Minister of Agriculture in consultation with the Agricultural Research Council, decided to carry on propaganda for the extensive use of treated straw commonly known as the straw pulp. [N. K.] Quality of frozen poultry as affected by storage and other conditions. HAROLD M. HARSHAW, WALTER S. HALE, T. L. SWENSON, LUCY M. ALEXANDER and R. R. SLOCUM. (1941). Tech. Bull. No. 768, U. S. Dept. Agri. Washington, D. C. FATTENED and dressed cockerels representing light and heavy birds of the two breeds, Barred Plymouth Rock and Buff Orpington, were used in this investigation. These birds were packed in wooden boxes, frozen at ABSTRACTS 87 The amino acid deficiencies of certain plant proteins and the supplementary effect between plant proteins as measured by means of their biological values. J. S. C. MARAIS and D. B. SMUTS (1940). Onderstepoort J. 15, 225 IN a previous work, the authors proved the deficient nature of various plant proteins by the growth response obtained by the paired feeding method in rats. This paper deals with the determination of the biological values of different plant proteins as well as the values obtained by the supplementation of such feeds with various natural as well as synthetic food-stuffs and chemicals. Such values will be of help not only to study, in detail, the changes in the nitrogen balance but also to apply the information in the economical nutrition of farm animals. Thus, it may be known that lucerne is deficient in cystine, but unless the nitrogen conservation through the addition of cystine or other plant proteins is known, the results remain of purely academic value. The biological values of different seeds were obtained by using rats as experimental animals. Special cages and food pots used in the experiment are described. The biological values for lucerne meal + 0.2 per cent d-methionine, whole oats seed + 0.2 per cent d-lysinedi-hydrochloride, pea nut meal +0.2 per cent l cystine, pea nut meal + 0.2 per cent d-methionine, linseed meal + 0.2 per cent l cystine, whole yellow maize meal + lucerne meal and whole yellow maize meal +soya-bean meal are 90, 86, 66, 78, 86, 80 and 75 respectively. From previous experiments the biological values for lucerne meal, pea nut meal, linseed meal, whole oats seed, whole yellow maize meal and soya-bean meal are known to be 60, 72, 78, 83, 67 and 55. The supplementation of lucerne with methionine, therefore, improves the nitrogen utilization of the lucerne proteins by 30 per cent. On the other hand, the supplementation of oats seeds with lysine or pea nut meal with cystine shows little or no improvement at all, thus proving that the proteins of these feeds are not deficient in the respective amino acids. The increased biological values of pea nut meal and linseed meal on the addition of methionine and cystine demonstrate the deficiencies of the proteins of these feeds in these amino acids. If no supplementary relationship existed between the proteins of yellow maize and lucerne, and yellow maize and soya-bean, the mean biological values of the protein mixtures would have been 64 and 61 respectively. The much higher values obtained show on the other hand that the lysine and tryptophane deficiencies of yellow maize are made good by lucerne and soya-beans; whereas the cystine deficiency of the proteins of lucerne and soya-beans are corrected by the addition of maize meal. Thus though the protein of individual food stuffs may be of low nutritive value, the mixture of two such deficient feeds may have highly improved biological efficiency. [S. N. R.] Studies on control of liver fluke of cattle in the Hawaiian Islands. E. ALICATA JOSEPH (1941). Amer. J. Vet. Res. 2, 152-66 AT the outset the author has considered the factors involved in the maintenance and spread of fascioliasis in the Hawaiian Islands. These consist of the swampy condi- tion of the country, the poorly drained lowlands, the mild climate which offers an ideal environment for the propagation of snails and for the hatching of the fluke eggs, and the feeding of cattle on cut forage from swampy areas and allowing them to graze on such lands. The methöds of fluke control are considered under three heads, viz. (1) the control of the fresh-water snail which serves as an intermediate host; (2) protection of animals from infection and (3) destruction of flukes of cattle by the use of anthelmintics. (1) Snail Control. The author recommends the solution of 1 part of copper sulphate in 300,000 parts of water for the destruction of snails. In regard to the biological control the author found that, although the crayfish (Astacus nigrescenes) is a very good snail predator, it burrows holes in the banks and occasionally destroys the taro corms. It was, therefore, considered unwise to release the crayfish in the swamps. The author ad- vocates fireflies (Luciola spp.) as a possible biological means of controlling the snails. The larvæ of these flies are carnivorous and utilize fresh-water snails as food.
88 ABSTRACTS (2) Protection of cattle from infection. This can be accomplished by fencing the infected areas by preventing animals grazing on swamps and by total stoppage of feeding the animals on forage obtained from infected areas. The author advocates ensilage as a means of destroying the fluke cysts on vegetation. These cysts are destroyed within a period of three months. Ensilage would thus permit the utilization of vegetation from wet areas which would otherwise be useless. (3) Treatment of cattle for flukes. The author tried Distol, Kamala, Hexachloroethane and a mixture of the last two drugs. Of these the last one, viz. the mixture of Kamala and Hexachlorethane, was found to be very efficient. Doses found most effective are as follows :ABSTRACTS. 89 went into pneumonia in its final stages, and death from the latter cause. The disease proved to be fatal in 50 to 75 per cent of the cases and those which withstood were greatly- retarded in their development. Treatment. Two herds (six calves in each), one a Holstein and the other a Jersey, were available for study. In both the herds the amount of milk fed was rigidly reduced with the onset of diarrh90 ABSTRACTS 20 parts per million hastened the onset of the abnormality. In the group of chicks re- ceiving both the alcoholic and aqueous extracts, development was quite normal, and perosis was completely absent. However, supplementing a low manganese diet (30 parts per million) with the alcoholic extract was ineffective in preventing perosis, though the attack was much milder. Breed differences were noticed here also, the early maturing breeds being more susceptible to attack. Measurements of the length and diameter of the humerus, tibia and metatarsus of birds of comparable weights in the two groups showed that though their manganese intake was adequate, the bones of chicks which did not receive the alcoholic extract were pronouncedly shorter and thicker than normal. These bone dimensions were not so abnormal when the alcoholic extract was fed with a diet of low manganese content, thus indicating that under the conditions of the experi- ment, the absence of the organic factor was the more important cause of perosis than a deficiency of manganese. In order to ascertain whether choline is the protective agent supplied by the alcoholic liver extract, some trials were carried out by supplementing the various diets with 0.1 per cent choline. These experiments indicated that choline has some power to prevent perosis, although it is not the only factor concerned. [Y. V. N.] Treatment of canine Babesiasis by 4 : 4'- diamidino diphenoxy propane. J. CARMICHAEL and R. N. T.W.FINNES, (1942). Ann. Trop. Med. & Parasit. 35, 191-3 IN this article the authors have shown that 4 : 4'ABSTRACTS 91 concentration of 0 .5 per cent. The reinforced toxoid was prepared by precipitating toxoid with ammonium sulphate (600gm./litre) from anaculture (pH. adjusted to 7.4) and dissolving in a further quantity of anaculture, thus concentrating the toxoid four to five fold. The alum-precipitated toxoid was prepared by the addition of potassium alum to anaculture (pH 7.4) to make a final concentration of 2 per cent. Zinc chloride was added in a similar concentration. The six vaccines were used on groups of six ewes of the Romney breed, two doses at an interval of 15 days being given. In the experiment in which lambs were actively immunized, the response of groups of lambs (about 3½ months old) from vaccinated and unvaccinated dams to active immuni- zation (2 doses at 7 weeks interval) with some of the toxoids was studied and the possibi- lity of the presence of transmitted passive immunity in the lambs sera influencing the subsequent response of these lambs to active immunization was investigated. The de- gree of response to immunization was judged by two factors, viz.92 ABSTRACTS Pure Zebu cattle in Trinidad resist the ravages of strongyles better than the other breeds of cattle ; it is also found that sheep succumb to the attacks of helminths more easily than cattle. Experimental evidence of breed and strain differences in resistance It has been observed that such heavy breeds and varieties as Rhode Island Reds, White Plymouth Rocks and Barred Plymouth Rocks had significantly fewer and smaller Ascaridia than the lighter White Leghorn and White Minorca breeds. Certain breeds of sheep are more resistant than others to the infection of stomach worms such as Hae- monchus, Ostertagia and Nematodirus and the resistant lines of sheep to stomach worms could be established without sacrificing type, conformation, quality of carcase or desirable wool characteristies. Age, resistance to helminthic infections Experimental evidence Looss in 1911 showed that some of the hookworm larvæ fed to young dogs were able to reach maturity, whereas previous investigators had failed to obtain such results in adult dogs. Similar observations were also made in the case of Ascaris infections in pigs and Syngamus trachea infection of chickens. A gradual increase in the resistance of chickens, as they became older, to the infection of Ascaridia and Rallietina has been notice- ed. All the experimental data obtained so far indicate that the phenomenon of increased resistance with age may occur in mammalian, avian, amphibian and mullus- can hosts to trematode, cestode or nematode helminth. Epidemiological evidence of age resistance Available data show that after the age of 15 to 19 years, people develop resistance to hookworms. In the case of human Ascaris, it was found that the peak of infection occurs in the age group of 7 to 14 years. Cram and Reardon found that pinworm infection in youths from 6-18 years was 51 per cent as compared with 22 per cent for adults. In Belgian Congo, Fisher found that the clinical manifestations of schistosomiasis is es- pecially common in children under 10 years of age but never in persons over 30. Attempts to explain age resistance Attempts to explain the age resistance on the basis of an abnormal host hypothesis, the action of body defence cells and a growth-inhibiting substance have been made by various workers. Foster found a parallel between resistance and the haemoglobin level of the host. Duodenal mucus and age resistance While attempting to ascertain the possible structural differences in the habitat of Ascaridia in younger than in older chickens Ackert and Edgar made histological studies of portions of duodena of such chickens. There were some differences in the thickness of muscular layers, but the most striking difference was in the increasing number of goblet cells in the chickens as they grow older. It was* felt that the secretion of the goblet cells might be a factor in the elimination of the worms from the host, since it had been ob- served repeatedly on opening the duodenum that the mucus was much more abundant in the older chickens than in the younger ones. These observations were confirmed even in the case of rats. As a result of a series of well conducted experiments, they came to the probable conclusion that the duodenal mucus secreted by the goblet cells contains a. ther mostable substance that inhibits the development of intestinal helminths. [G. D. B.]
REVIEW Spontaneous and Experimental Leukaemia in Animals. By JULIUS ENGELBRETH-HOLM, M. D. (Translated from Danish by C. L. Heel: Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh, 1942, pp. xxiii & 245, 15s.) IT is the aim of this book, published on behalf of the Scientific Advisory Committee of the Lady Tata Memorial Trust, to review the collected knowledge of spontaneous and experimental leukaemias in animals and to discuss the relationship which these conditions bear to the problem of leu- kaemia in man. The greater part of the volume is devoted to the animal leukaemias on which most of the literature is widely scattered or otherwise inaccessible to the veterinary worker; much of it is also so controversial that confusion and not enlightenment is the lot of the worker whose studies lie in this highly specialized field of knowledge. Dr Engelbreth-Holm has performed a work of distinction and high value in presenting in one small volume a lucid ex- position of the problem. This is supported by an admirably arranged biblio- graphy extending to over 400 references freely drawn on in the text. A classification of the leukaemias is included in a short historical intro- duction. If much of this is old ground, the crisp and comprehensive manner in which it is covered will be appreciated. The main subject matter is his- torically arranged. This enables the reader systematically to grasp the thoughts and achievements of the earlier workers on the subject, the scope and the nature of present day research, and the probable directions in which future research tends. This logical sequence is maintained in five headings dealing with (a) Spontaneous leukaemia in animals (b) Transmission experi- ments (c) The role of heredity in animal leukaemias (d) Attempts to produce leukaemia experimentally (e) Relationship between human and animal leukaemias. The various types of leukaemias that have been discovered in animals are enumerated, although one finds no mention made of Hodgkin's disease which, if not the commonest, is certainly one of the most interesting of the animal leukaemias. Much attention is given to the transmissible leukae- mia of the domestic fowl and the mouse and the virus aetiology of these affections is very fully discussed. The aetiological dissimilarity of human leukaemias is rightly mentioned. The role of heredity in susceptibility and immunity in the experimentally transmissible leukaemias is recent work that touches controversial ground : the known facts are, however, clearly stated. The author contests the claims that leukaemia can be produced by carcino- genic agents and differentiates between the ' leukaemoid state' and frank leukaemia. He considers, however, that most leukaemias in animals are of neoplastic origin, and that they have much in common with leukaemias of the human subject, although not all the latter fulfil the criteria of the neo- plastic state. This is a book which the worker on animal leukaemias and cognate problems cannot afford to be without. [ J. F. S.] 93 GIPDCONTENTS (VOL. XIII, PART I) March 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal PAGE Original Articles STUDIES ON NEWCASTLE (RANIKHET) DISEASE VIRUS (WITH PLATES IORIGINAL ARTICLES FLUORINE INTOXICATION OF CATTLE IN INDIA By B. N. MAUMDAR, S. N. RAY AND K. C. SEN, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 28 August 1942) (With Plates VIII & IX and one map) ALTHOUGH fluorine poisoning of human beings and of cattle and other farm animals has formed the subject of study in other countries and good reviews on it are now available [Roholm. 1937 : Pierce, 1.939], the existence of this trouble was not suspected in this country until recently. So far as farm animals are concerned, wait of a proper disease survey and lack of suitable diagnostic methods have contributed to the difficulties of studying this problem in the field, and clinical observations have not always proved very helpful because of the well-known fact that osteomalacia and chronic fluorosis in cattle cannot be differen- tiated by purely clinical methods, as the syndrome in both the diseases is very similar. In 1933, Mahajan, Veterinary Investigation Officer, Hyderabad (Deccan), reported a peculiar disease of cattle in the Yedreddipally region of Hyderabad State which he described as starting with a stiffness in the legs leading to lameness. This sympton, together with progressive emacia- tion, which became evident about a month later, persisted throughout the course of the disease (i.e. 8 months to a year). The animals showed an inclination to lick such objects as their earthen manger and stones. A characteristic symptom observable on post-mortem examination was that of bony calluses of a somewhat spongy nature on the ribs, usually the seventh to the eleventh at about the centres and in one instance, two frac- tures had occurred. Hoof deformity, particularly overlapping, was apparent. All other organs appeared normal. Mahajan diagnosed the cases as osteomalacia. The phosphorus contents of all the fodder sam- ples sent from that locality were extremely low ; one sample of bone supplied (a piece of rib with callus) had a low phosphorus content, but speci- mens obtained later from a second case gave normal calcium and phosphorus figures. Based mainly on dietetic considerations, phosphorus deficiency was taken to be the primary cause of this patholo- gical condition, and an addition of bone flour to the ration of these animals was reported to have made some improvement in their condition [Mahajan, 1934-35]. On the basis of these field observations, Sen [1935] assumed the existence of osteomalacia in cattle in certain regions of India. Examination. of the blood sera carried out during 1935. however, gave rise to the first doubts about the correctness of this diagnosis. In osteo- malacia in ruminants resulting from aphosphorosis. a fall in blood phosphorus precedes any outward clinical sign [Theiler. Green and Du Toit, 1927]. About nine samples of serum from affected animals were examined and the calcium and phosphorus values were found to be as high as those obtained from healthy animals of the same breed from a neighbouring village. Com- parative results are given in Table I. TABLE I Mineral composition of blood serum of affected and normal animals No. of animals Species Phosphorus mg. 100 c.c. serum Affected group 1 Buffalo 10.7 6.0 2 96 Fluorine Intoxication of Cattle in India observed closely resembled those seen by Mahajan. Viswanathan did not carry out post-mortem examinations but, on clinical grounds, considered the trouble to be due to one of the following causes: (a) a deficiency or excess of calcium, (b) a de- ficiency of phosphorus or (c) vitamin deficiency. As a result of these two reports, a further investiga- tion on mineral deficiency in relation to the disease was considered necessary. In 1937, Shortt et al. [1937] published a paper describing cases of chronic fluorosis in human beings in Madras Presidency. When it was realiz- ed that the endemic districts were adjacent to those areas in which osteomalacia had been diag- nosed by Mahajan and synchronized with those where Viswanathan had observed his so-called ' rheumatic arthritis ', the possibility of the condi- tion under review being due to fluorosis could not be overlooked. When, moreover, the disease was noticed in young calves (osteomalacia being a disease of adults) and brown pigmentations were observed on the teeth of the affected animals, the condition was definitely diagnosed as fluorosis. Additional support to this diagnosis was provided by an examination of one sample of water from an affected area, in which a concentration of fluorine as high as 2.5 p.p.m. was found [Viswa- nathan, 1938-39]. Acting upon the advice of the Director of Veteri- nary Services, Hyderabad, Mahajan visited the village of Kopnur, where the disease, so long called osteomalacia, was prevalent. Evidence of endemic fluorosis was also apparent in children and in a few adults [Mahajan, 1938-39]. The fluorine concentration of samples of water collected was found to be as high as 2 p.p.m. Samples of teeth from cases of rheumatic arthritis received about the same time from the Veterinary Investigation Officer, Madras, had fluorine concentration much higher than that in normal calves as reported by western workers. As no data was available re- garding the fluorine content of the teeth and bones of normal animals in India, an investigation along that line was instituted. At the same time, an attempt was made to produce the pathological symptoms described by the field workers by ex- perimentally feeding known amounts of fluorine to cattle. The results of these investigations form the subject matter of this paper. While the work was under progress, we learnt of a similar type of feeding investigation started by the Government Agricultural Chemist, Coimbatore [Ramiah, 1939- 40, 1940-41]. As a result of our work, as well as of that carried out in Coimbatore, it is evident that the conditions described by Mahajan and others were produced by chronic fluorine intoxica- tion. In the light of the present investigation, it appears necessary to re-examine the cases of osteo- malacia from other parts of India. For example Sahai [1937-38] reported two cases of osteomalacia in buffaloes, one in Bihar-Shariff in the district of Patna and the other near Nawada in the district of Gaya. Similarly, Khan [1937-38] observed cases of unthriftiness and poor condition in cattle in certain villages of the Kangra valley and suspected a mild form of osteomalacia. In this connection, mention may be made of the survey by Wilson [1939] who observed cases of mottled enamel of the teeth in these regions. She also reported a high concentration of fluorine in the drinking water. The Deputy Director, Veterinary and Animal Husbandry Services, Baroda State had reported to this Institute of a similar trouble in the Amreli district of the Baroda State. Water samples from this area, examined for their fluorine contents, exhibited the medium high range of 0.6-0.9 p.p.m. The Veterinary Investigation Officer, Central Provinces, also came across cases of stiffness of joints, lameness, etc in cattle in some villages of Chanda district of that province. Analysis of water from an ' affected ' village revealed the high concentration of 1.1 p.p.m. of fluorine. It will be of interest to determine whe- ther there are also other authentic fluorosis areas A curious feature about the distribution of these suspected fluorosis zones may be mentioned. All these places are situated at an altitude of between 600-1,200 ft. above sea level in the vicinity of mountain ranges. Thus Alampur in Hyderabad (Deccan) and Kurnool in Madras are all near the Nalamalai hills, Bihar-Shariff and Nawada in Bihar are near the Rajgir Hills, Kangra is in the valley of the Punjab hills, while Amreli in Baroda is near the Girnar hills. All the localities mention- ed are over 600 ft. Many of these places are moreover, near sites of old volcanic regions and hot or sulphur springs are still in existence in the vicinity. It is thus possible, as suggested by Wilson [1939], that in all these regions there is a substratum of rocks which includes lavas and associated granites and chryolites giving rise to an increased fluorine content of the soil and water A map of India showing the reported distribution of the so-called osteomalacia and rheumatic arthritis in cattle is given in Fig. 1. In view of the findings at Madras, Hyderabad and Kangra it appears possible that evidence of fluorine poison- ing of both cattle and human beings will be found in Baroda, C. P. and Bihar as well and a survey of these areas is thus indicated.
B. N. MAJUMDAR, S. N. RAY AND K. C. SEN 9 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
98 Fluorine Intoxication of Cattle in India EXPERIMENTAL Our investigations were pursued along two definite channels. The first was to establish some diagnostic means by which cases of fluorosis might be recognized by chemical examination of the tissue samples and, secondly, to produce the patho- logical symptoms described by field conditions of feeding. We have been fairly successful in both our attempts, the details of which are given below. Chemical diagnostic method It has been long known that normal bones and teeth contain fluorine and that ingestion of fluo- rine raises the fluorine content of these tissues by 10-30 times the normal amount [Roholm, 1937]. Consequently, the level of the fluorine content of the bones of animals suffering from fluorine intoxication would at once determine the degree of its severity. The drawback to such a procedure is that, though fluorine has been found in normal bones, no systematic work had been done to find out the normal range, which has been given as from 0.01 to 0.15 gm. of fluorine per 100 gm. of bone ash [Pierce, 1939]. The reason of such a variation is probably due, partly to the difference in the feed of the animals examined by the different investigators, and partly, and this is more important, to the types of bone examined and the ages of the animals. Evans, Phillips and Hart [1938] found that the fluorine contents of the bones of mature cows on a fluorine low ration was 3-4 times greater than that of calf bones. As we could not find any other reference regarding the rate of immobilization of fluorine in the bones and teeth of bovines with the age of the animals, it was decided to study this aspect in greater detail. Our results are given in Table II. Before the work could be taken up, we had to perfect a method for the determination of fluorine in biological materials. The original Willard and Winter method [1933], as modified by Armstrong [1933], was at first used and was found to give somewhat inconsistent results, duplicate deter- minations often varying by 50-200 per cent. By effecting a few modifications, a satisfactory method was evolved and amounts as low as 25 to 30 microgrammes can now be easily estimated, the error at this low level seldom exceeding 10 per cent. The details of the method will be pub- lished in a separate article. Fluorine contents of normal bones and teeth Samples of the bones and teeth of cattle and buffaloes of varying age were obtained from the local slaughter house as well as from the animals of the production section of this Institute. A few samples were also obtained from Calcutta. All the animals chosen were healthy. The ages of the animals were also ascertained at the time of collection. The following samples were examin- ed :B. N. MAJUMDAR, S. N. RAY AND K. C. SEN 99 rats the concentration of fluorine in bone in rela- tion to age followed a logarithmic curve. They, however, did not analyse the pelvic bones and their conclusions were based on analysis of ribs and femurs. When it is remembered that these samples have been obtained from various localities from animals obviously on different types of feeds, it appears that, up to a certain maximum limit, the deposition of fluorine in the bones is inde- pendent of the amount ingested in the diet. Only when this limit is exceeded is fluorine apt to be retained in the bones in greater quanti- ties. This point will be dealt with in a later part of the paper. Fluorine content of the blood of normal animals Very little work has been done regarding the fluorine content of the blood. Gautier and Clausman [1913], whose investigations were very comprehensive, found about 0.46 mg. of fluorine per 100 gm. of fresh blood in human beings. Lang [1928] reported a value as high as 0.75 mg. fluorine per 100 c.c. blood in rabbits. The latter worker in collaboration with Stuber [Stuber and Lang, 1928, 1929] formulated a theory that the fluorine content of the blood determined its coagulation time and that the blood of haemophiles contained 4-5 times more fluorine than normal blood. This assertion could not, however, be corroborated by Hoff and May [1930] or by Feissly, Fried and Oehrli [1931], who could only find traces of fluorine in the blood of both normals and haemophiles in amounts less than 0.5100 Fluorine Intoxication of Cattle in India attempt was made to make the ration similar to that given under field conditions in those areas where fluorosis is suspected. The fluorine dosages in the second and third groups were selected on the following basis. The water intake of these hill bulls was, on an average, 2½ gallons per day. It has for long been thought that the animals in the endemic fluorosis zone receive their daily fluorine dosage from their water intake alone. On this consideration these hill bulls, if transferred to such an area, would consume 50 mg. of fluorine per clay, assuming roughly a fluorine concentration of 4 parts per million in the water supplied. This concentra- tion of fluorine in water is rather a high one, though occasionally obtained in endemic fluorosis zones. A continuous use of water containing much less (i.e. 1 mg. fluorine per litre) causes mottled teeth in human beings [Smith and Davey, 1939]. On the other hand, reports available from other workers reveal that the minimum amount of fluorine, which, when ingested daily, will result in a syndrome of chronic fluorosis in cattle is about 3 mg. per kilogram of body weight [Taylor, 1929 ; Reed and Huffman, 1930 ; Phillips, Hart and Rohstedt, .1934]. As the weights of our animals ranged from .125-150 kg., 500 mg. of fluorine per day represented roughly 3Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim, Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II ] PLATE VIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Animal on high fluorine diet. Note emaciated condition. The left hind leg is kept raised above the ground and shows a striking similarity to the so called ' rheumatic arthritis'. On post mortem examination, the femur was found fractured (see Plate IX) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Side view of a foot from an animal on high fluorine diet. Note the overlapping of hoofs and the crack.
PLATE IX [Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Amin. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Left :B. N. MAJUMDAR, S. N. RAY AND K. C. SEN 101 concentration of dietary calcium from 0.23 to 0.73 per cent depressed the total retention of fluorine 10 to 13 per cent. The symptoms observed, in the animals of the high fluorine group correspond with those reported by Mahajan, In this connection, it is of interest to quote a few lines from Sahai [1937-38]. This investigator saw two cases in buffaloes which he reported as osteojnalacia. ' In one of these there were several bony growths over the ribs, while the other suffered from general stiffness all over the body, this stiffness having first started, in the fore limbs and later spread to the hind, limbs.' Presumably, none of the field workers, Mahajan, Viswanathan and Sahai, examined, the long bones, so that no reports are available as to whether exostoses were found there also. It is probable that the dosage in the high fluorine group, as used by us, was so high that the animals died before periosteal deposits on the ribs could take place. With slower chronic intoxication, it is quite possible that exostoses may be produced also on the ribs. In this connection, mention may be made of the one sample of ribs obtained, from Hyderabad. The callus formed on it was quite different from the beading observed in rickets or osteomalacia in rats and resembled the exostoses obtained by us in the fluorine fed animals. Mineral composition of blood The effect of feeding fluorine on the calcium and inorganic phosphorus concentration of blood serum was observed. Sera of the animals were examined at the start of the experiment, and the animals were then periodically bled and the blood consti- tuents determined. It is known that One of the first symptoms of rickets or osteomalacia is either a drop in the serum calcium [Miles and. Feng, 1925] or a diminution of inorganic phosphorus in the blood. In bovines, according to Malan, Green and Du Toit [1928], hypophosphoraemia precedes any outward clinical sign, there being no noteworthy change in the calcium content. Side by side with calcium and. phosphorus deter- mination, the fluorine concentration of the whole blood of the animals in. the different groups was estimated.. This was done to study the effect of fluorine feeding on. the concentration of this mineral in. the blood. A lew determinations of magnesium in the serum were also made. The results are embodied in Table IV. TABLE IV Mineral composition of blood No. of animal Start 2 months after 4 months after 7 months after Ca P Mg F Ca P F Ca P F Ca P Mg F A Control group 89 . . 10.6 4.94 2.36 0.15 8.4 5.67 0.13 10.8 3.9 0.13 9.1 5.33 2.7 0.15 368 . . 11.5 4.12 2.30 0.18 10.2 4.71 0.21 10.5 3.96 0.15 11.0 3.19 2.89 0.18 400 . . 11.7 4.26 2.33 0.23 9.6 5.00 0.23 10.2 3.94 0.1.5 11.0 3.66 2.80 0.17 Average . 11.3 4.44 2.35 0.19 9.4 5.13 0.19 10.5 3.93 0.14 10.4 4.73 2.80 0.17 B. Low flvorine group 39 . . 13.0 4.52 2.08 0.14 9.2 5.19 0.10 12.3 3.96 0.13 11.4 3.32 3.84 0.17 88 . . 11.7 3.62 2.28 0.18 8.3 5.76 0.22 12.3 5.67 0.13 10.8 6.2 2.33 0.18 356 . . 11.3 4.44 2.29 0.11 10.3 4.60 0.17 12.7 3.56 0.12 10.7 4.91 2.72 0.15 Average 12.0 4.19 2. 22 0.14 9.3 5.19 0.18 12.4 4.40 0.13 11.0 4.81 2.96 0.17 C. High fluorine group 167 . . 11.6 4.88 2.43 0.12 .. 4.97 0.30 7.7 3.67 0.28 9.9 3.7 2.11 0.37 180 . . 11.5 3.48 2.44 0.11 9.2 4.94 0.30 10.3 .. 0.27 9.6 5.4 2.01 0.46 402 . . 10.9 4.97 2.33 0.09 8.9 4.12 0.29 .. 3.6 0.24 8.6 5.4 2.54 0.41 Average . 11.3 4.44 2.30 0.11 9.1 4.68 0.30 9.0 3.63 0.26 9.4 4.8 2.22 0.41 D. Calcium group 148 . . 11.8 4.00 2.35 0.13 8.4 5.13 0.33 10.8 3.94 0.19 11.3 4.30 2.73 0.31 178 . . 10.9 4.19 2.32 0.12 8.6 7.40 0.27 9.6 5.19 0.22 10.4 4.88 2.39 0.23 391 . . 11.5 4.17 2.16 0.08 9.3 4.97 0.23 9.4 3.67 0.20 8.9 3.62 2.80 0.30 Average 11.5 4.30 2.28 0.11 8.8 5.83 0.28 10.0 4.33 0.20 10.2 4.27 2.64 0.28 (Calcium mid magnesium are expressed in mg. per 100 c.c. serum and fluorine and phusphorus in mg. per 100 c.c. whole blood. Calcium was determined according to Clark and Collip's [ 1925] method, phosphorus by Fiske and Subbarow's [ 1925] method and magnesium by Holzapfel's [1934] method.)
102 fluorine Intoxicution of Cattle in India It is at once apparent that oven a month before their death, the animals on the high fluorine diet scarcely showed any lowering of blood phos- phorus. The calcium concentration was slightly lowered, but the extent of this lowering could not be considered significant. The magnesium con- tent is definitely lower than that of either the control or of the low flourine groups, but the most significant change is the increase by about 400 per cent in the flourine content of the blood. A noteworthy feature is that the concentration was found to have increased as early as two months (or perhaps even earlier) after fluorine feeding was started, i.e. at a period when no other symptoms, except some loss in weight, of flourine intoxication were noticeable. On the other hand, in the low fluorine group where the animals did not show any pathological symptoms during the whole period of nine months, the concentration of minerals in the serum and blood hardly differed from the figures obtained from the control ani- mals. If anything, the animals of the low fluorine group showed slightly higher Ca, P and Mg con- centrations in the blood serum. It is evident, therefore, that the dosage of flourine given to the low fluorine group animals was too small to bring about symptoms of fluorine intoxication and that, perhaps in low doses, flourine may even have a slightly beneficial effect on calcium and phospho- rus metabolism. The recent observation that low amounts of fluorine inhibit the development of dental carries support this hypothesis [McClure, 1941]. The low fluorine feeding is, however, being continued for a further period in order to find out whether there is any cumulative effect from the fluorine ingestion. In the calcium group of animals in spite of a much higher calcium intake, the concentrations of Ca, P and Mg are very similar to those of the control animals. The flourine concentration is intermediate between those seen in the control or low fluorine group and those in the high fluorine group. This bears out our previous statement that calcium compounds administered simultaneously with the fluorine diminishes the toxicity of sodium fluoride. This is probably brought about by the precipitation of a portion of fluorine as calcium fluoride in the gut, thereby reducing the amount available to the animal system The increased concentration of the blood fluorine, together with the appearance of symptoms of mild fluorosis after about nine months of experimental feeding, shows, however, that even an excess of calcium cannot immobilize the whole of the fluorine and that sufficient was absorbed by the animals to produce conditions of mild intoxication. It is quite possible that the amounts of fluorine fed by us to the high fluorine group may have been in excess of that consumed by the animals in the endemic fluorosis regions, and that animals given lower doses of fluorine might have been saved from the effects of toxicosis by the administra- tion of sufficient quantities of bone meal or of some other calcium supplement. The blood analysis figures, incidentally, fore- shadow a diagnostic method for detecting fluorosis in its earlier stages. This is especially important when if is realized that the fluorine concentration of the blood of normal animals is independent of such variable factors as age, sex, period of lacta- tion, etc. (Table III). Moreover, as has just been shown, the administration of amounts of fluorine low enough to produce any sign of toxicosis has no effect on the fluorine concentration of the blood. The fact that the fluorine concentration in blood varies with the severity of the symptoms is also of great value for diagnostic purposes. Analysis of bones and teeth Samples of bones and teeth from the three ani- mals on the high fluorine group were analysed for their calcium, phosphorus, magnesium and fluorine contents. The bones and teeth from two animals of the control group and two animals from each of the calcium and low fluorine groups were also examined. The exostosis on the bone of one of the high fluroine group animals was sawn off and was also analysed separately. The results are given in Table V. It appears, therefore, that a high fluorine intake causes no significant changes in the calcium and phosphorus contents of the bones. Our results resemble those of Kick, Bethke and Edginton [1933] who working with pigs also found no change in the calcium and phosphorus contents of the bones of the control and fluorine-fed animals These workers, however, found an increase in the magnesium content of bones of the fiuorine-fed animals. Similar difference has been observed by us in our animals also, but the administration of extra calcium is found to bring the magnesium content to the normal level. Like them, we found in the fluorine-fed animals a decrease in the car- bonate contents of bones (only the pelvic bones were examined). Here again the figures for the calcium group of animals resembled those of the control group. Further work is, however, in progress. Like other workers, we have found that the fluorine concentration of the bones and teeth in- creases very considerably on ingestion of fluorme In the case of the pelvis, the increase in our high fluorine group is 7-18 times more than the fluorine concentration in the pelvis from control animals of the same age group (of Table II). The con- centrations in the femur and vertebrae are similarly increased. The increase in the fluorine
B. N. MAJUMDAR, S. N. RAY AND K. C. SEN 103 Table V Analysis of bones and teeth of the experimental animals No. and age of animal Group and length of period under experiment Material Ash per cent of f.f.m. CO2 per cent of f.f.m. Calcium gm./100 gm. ash Phosphorus gm./100 gm. ash Magnesium gm./100 gm. ash Fluorine mg./10 gm. f.f.m. 89 . . . (5½ years) . Control . (9 months) . Femur . 69.2 41.0 17.3 1.95 38.2 Pelvis . 63.4 3.97 42.0 17.2 1.92 73.9 Vertebra . 56.1 40.0 17.7 1.93 132.8 Molar . 82.7 39.3 17.7 2.13 35.7 Incisor . 81.7 38.5 17.7 2.02 34.3 368 . . . (6½ years) . Control . . (11 months) . Femur . 72.8 41.5 17.6 1.83 34.9 Pelvis . 63.6 3.81 41.0 17.3 1.82 78.4 Vertebra . 60.8 40.5 17.3 1.83 105.4 Molar . 80.7 40.5 17.7 2.01 33.9 Incisor . 78.7 40.5 17.6 2.36 31.2 39 . . . (6 years) . Low fluorine . (10½ months) . Femur . 71.8 42.3 17.9 2.08 126.8 Pelvis . 62.1 4.38 41.8 17.3 2.14 271.2 Vertebra . 59.9 40.5 17.7 2.23 287.5 Molar . 81.3 40.5 18.2 2.30 40.7 Incisor . 80.7 41.0 17.9 2.20 37.1 88 . . . (5 years) . Low fluorine . (12 months) . Femur . 72.9 40.0 18.0 2.18 140.5 Pelvis . 62.2 3.96 40.3 17.9 2.23 269.5 Vertebra . 58.0 39.8 17.9 2.19 303.5 Molar . 85.1 39.8 18.3 2.10 30.1 Incisor . 85.0 39.4 18.8 2.24 30.5 178 . . . (6 years) . Calcium . . (9½ months) . Femur . 66.7 41.0 17.5 2.03 478.0 Pelvis . 63.7 3.42 40.8 17.5 1.81 686.0 Vertebra . 59.5 41.0 17.5 1.81 686.2 Molar . 81.7 41.5 17.7 1.80 53.1 Incisor . 79.2 41.0 17.7 1.99 58.1 391 . . . (5½ years) . Calcium . . (11½ months) . Femur . 73.1 39.8 18.2 1.80 443.5 Pelvis . 59.6 3.29 41.3 17.9 1.80 820.3 Vertebra . 58.4 40.3 18.4 1.81 829.0 Molar . 82.0 39.3 18.0 1.78 124.6 Incisor . 78.3 39.0 18.2 1.90 138.8 167 . . . (4½ years) . High fluorine . (7½ months) . Femur . 67.7 41.5 17.3 1.94 564.1 Pelvis . 67.2 3.65 42.3 17.1 2.20 1115.5 Vertebra . 62.4 42.0 16.4 2.24 992.2 Molar . 85.4 39.0 17.7 2.14 93.9 Incisor . 82.8 39.0 18.1 2.29 104.8 Exostosis . 67.5 3.10 41.3 17.1 2.00 1392.7 180 . . . (4½ years) . High fluorine . (8½ months) . Femur . 66.8 40.0 17.3 2.10 578.9 Pelvis . 62.5 3.66 39.3 17.3 2.08 720.8 Vertebra . 53.0 39.5 17.3 2.13 784.4 402 . . . (7 years) . High fluorine . (8½ months) . Femur . 69.5 39.5 17.4 1.90 528.2 Pelvis . 63.4 3.75 40.5 17.2 2.01 851.6 Vertebra . 52.1 40.8 17.1 2.00 739.8 Molar . 79.8 39.5 18.1 2.09 156.9 Incisor . 79.3 41.0 18.0 2.25 113.0 Calcium and phosphorus were estimated according to the method of Talapatra, Ray and Sen [1940] and magnesium by a modified Holzapfel method [1934]. f.f.m. = fat-free material. concentration of the molars and incisors is much in fluorine, the concentration being 2.5 times lower, being in the nature of 2-3 times that of higher than that of the femur from which it was normal teeth. The exostosis is exceptionally rich taken.
104 Fluorine intoxication of Cattle in India The feeding of calcium compounds definitely lowers the fluorine contents of the bones and teeth. The fluorine content of the bones is, however, quite high and approaches that of the high fluorine group. This is to be expected, as we can presume that signs of fluorine intoxication, i.e. develop- ment of exostoses on the bones, etc. will only appear when the bones become more or less satur- rated with fluorine. On the other hand, the fluorine contents in the molars and incisors in one of the animals are of the same magnitude as seen in normal animals of the same group. It is probable, therefore, that the concentration of fluorine in developed teeth can only be increased with great difficulty as a result of the ingestion of large quantities of fluorine. In the case of the particular animal of the calcium group, the ad- ministration of calcium may have removed a sufficient amount of the ingested fluorine to pre- vent the teeth being affected, even though mild symptoms of fluorosis appeared. It may be stated here that no mottling of teeth was noticeable in any of the high fluorine group of animals. In one of the animals of the calcium group (No. 148) which was discontinued after an experimental period of 10 months and was given green feed, a few white spots were found on the incisors three months after the fluorine feeding was stopped. This animal is still under observation. Fluorine contents of the teeth and bones of animals suffering from rheumatic arthritis and osteomalacia As mentioned above, we received from the Veterinary Investigation Officer, Madras, three samples of molars and incisors from cases of rheu- matic arthritis. The fluorine concentrations in those samples are given in Table VI. TABLE VI Concentration of fluorine in the teeth of animals suffering from rheumatic arthritis No. of Sample Material Ash per cent. Mg. fluorine per 100 gm. fat-free material 1 Molar . . 75.3 172.8 Incisor . . 73.6 163.5 2 Molar . . 70.0 202.6 Incisor . . 75.6 134.8 3 Molar . . 79.5 122.3 Incisor . . 73.3 107.4 It will, be seen that the fluorine concentrations in the teeth are fairly high, being much the same as or greater than those found in the high fluorine group of our animals (Table V). Samples of bones and teeth from a country bullock suffering from osteomalacia in the Yadred dipally village of the Hyderabad State were re- ceived through the courtesy of Mr B. K. Badami. Director of Veterinary Services. The animal was reported ill for the last five years and was showing acute lameness. The analytical data of the different bones and teeth are given in Table VII. TABLE VII Analysis of bones and teeth of an animal suffer- ing from osteomalacia Material Ash percent Calcium gm./100 gm. ash. Phos- phorus gm./100 gm. ash Magne- sium gnv./100 gm. ash Fluorine mg./100 gm. fat. free material Femur . . 63.4 41.0 17.7 2.03 527.0 Pelvis . . 64.8 41.3 17.7 1.97 459.6 Vertebra . . 61.5 41.1 18 .2 2.08 570.2 Molar . . 77.3 39.3 18.2 1.97 195.8 Incisor . . 77.6 ... ... ... 98.2 It will be noted that the fluorine concentration in all the bones was very high. The calcium and phosphorus contents were normal, thus showing that this case was definitely not one of osteomala- cia. A peculiar feature of this case was that no exostoses were found in any part of the bony structure on post-mortem examination and no thickening of the shaft could be observed. Although a simple 'post-moriem examination did not reveal the nature of the disease in such a case, the chemical examination of the bones and teeth provided a better picture and the high fluorine content of the tissues pointed unmistak- ably to the etiology of the trouble. A special feature of these rheumatic arthritis and osteo- malacia cases may be pointed out here namely that the molars of these field samples showed much more fluorine content than those observed in our high fluorine group of animals. The diff- erence may be due to the fact that the field cases were chronic and a slow intoxi- cation with lower doses of fluorine must have occurred. The animals were also probably much younger when the intoxication first started and, as such, with growing tissues, a comparative- ly much larger deposition of fluorine might have taken place in the molars. This explanation appears to receive support from the fact that in the experiment on calves at Coimbatore a similar high value of fluorine content in the molar was observed (private communication). Our experi- mental animals, on the other hand, were all adults,
B. N. MAJUMDAR, S. N. RAY AND K. C. SEN 105 Their teeth were fully developed and, as such, were presumably more resistant In acute fluorine poisoning. DISCUSSION From the above observations. it is very pro- bable, that the symptoms produced in our animals by fluorine administration are similar to those seen in animals suffering from so-called osteomalacia and rheumatic arthritis. The several objections to the theory that the Held cases are authentic instances of osteomalacia may be recapitulated : (1) The first symptom of osteo- malacia is a low phosphorus content of the blood scrum. No such lowering of blood phosphorus was seen in the field cases. In our animals also, the calcium and phosphorus level in the blood was scarcely affected, even when the animals were showing severe symptoms of toxicosis. (2) The calcium content of osteomalacia bones is detinite- ly low [McCrudden, 1910], while the calcium and phosphorus contents of bones from fluorosis cases are not altered. With the exception of one sample, in all samples from field cases as well as in those from our experimental animals, the percentages of calcium and phosphorus in the bones were found to be scarcely altered. (3) We found that animals showing symptoms of fluorosis began to improve as soon as fluorine administration was stopped. Mahajan (private communication) also reports that when affected animals were removed from one village to another they often showed rapid improvement. As conditions of feeding in neigh- bouring villages may be taken to be more or less similar, the improvement in the condition of the animals may be assumed to be due to the with- drawal of fluorine from their feed. (4) Under field conditions, it was seen that healthy animals imported from outside into endemic zones deve- loped this disease in six to eight months' time. in our experiment, too. the symptoms were seen to occur after about six months. It is not possible for osteomalacia to occur so rapidly, as symptoms of aphosphorosis can be brought about in bovines only with great difficulty after 2 or 3 years, while those of acalcicosis are practically impossible to reproduce. One point of interest may be mentioned here. it has been for long tacitly assumed that all the fluorine in the feed of the animals is obtained from the water. When we take our low fluorine group of animals we find that these animals were given similar amounts of fluorine to those they would have ingested had they been drinking water with a fluorine content as high as 4 p.p.m. These animals, however, behaved in every way like the controls, and it can be assumed that the fluorine in such small amounts has no deleterious action upon their health at least within so short a time. If anything, it may have a slightly stimu- lating effect upon calcium and phosphorus mobili- zation (Table IV). In order to produce symptoms of even mild chronic fluorosis, within a period of six to eight months, much larger amounts of fluorine have to be ingested. As water intake can supply only a small fraction of the toxic dose, it may be presumed that the rest of fluorine adminis- tered must have come from the concentrate mix- ture and roughage given to the animals or, as is more likely, from some other extraneous source, such as natural earth licks. In support of this theory, we give the following analytical figures for the fluorine contents of the ingredients of the rations used for our experimental animals ;106 Fluorine Intoxication of Cattle in India Finally, it may bo stated that a complete metabolism experiment of all the animals in the lour groups has been conducted and the results indicate that ingestion of fluorine at a high level leads to a loss of body calcium, phosphorus and protein, which can be more or less checked by the addition of calcium salt. A low fluorine ingestion, however, improves the balance of all. these consti- tuents. Details of this experiment will be given in a future communication. SUMMARY The fluorine content of the bones and teeth of normal animals is found to increase with age In the case of the pelvis especially, the concentra- tion of fluorine per unit of bone is directly propor- tional to the age of the animal. The fluorine content of the blood of normal animals is fairly constant and independent of such variable factors as age, breed, period of lactation, etc. Sodium fluoride fed at the level of 3-4 mg. of fluorine per kg. body weight produced symptoms similar to those reported in cattle and buffaloes from various parts of Madras and Hyderabad (Deccan). Those diseases were provisionally called rheumatic arthritis and osteomalacia res- pectively, but are now seen to be cases of fluorosis. The chief symptoms were loss in weight, difficulty of movement, deformation of the hoof, exostoses on the long bones, debility and death. The addition of calcium salts to animals receiv- ing fluorine at the above rate mitigated the symp- toms of toxicosis. Feeding fluorine at a low level, i.e. 0.3B. N. MAJUMDAR, S. N. RAY AND K. C. SEN 107 McCrudden, F. H. (1910). Archiv Int. Med. 5, 596 Mahajan, M. R. (1934-35). Ann, Rep. V. I. O., Hydera- bad State, 3, Imp. Coune. Agri. Res., New Delhi Mahajan, M. R. (1935-30). Ann. Rep. V. I. O., Hydera- bad Stale, 3, Imp. Coune. Agri. Res., New Delhi Mahajan, M. R. (1938-39). Ann. Rep. V. I. O., Hydera- bad State, 7, Imp. Coune. Agri. Res., New Delhi Malan, A. I., Green, H. H. and Du Toit, P. J. (1928). J. Agric. Sci. 18, 376 Miles, L. M. and Feng, C. T. (1925). J. Exp. Med. 41, 137 Pierce, A. W. (1939). Nutrition Abs. and Rev. 9, 253 Phillips, P. H., Hart, E. B. and Bohstedt, G. (1934). Agri. Exp. Sta. Wisconsin, Res. Bull. 123, 30 Ramiah, P. Y. (1939-40). Rep. Animal Nutrition, Work, Coimbatore, Imp. Coune. Agri. Res., New Delhi Ramiah, P. V. (1940-41). Rep. Animal Nutrition Work, Coimbatore, Imp. Coune. Agri. Res., New Delhi Reed, O. E. and Huffman, C. F. (1930). Agri, Exp. Sta. Michigan, Technical Bull. 105 Roholm, K. (1937). Fluorine Intoxication, H. K. Lewis & Co., London Sahai, L. (1937-38). Ann. Rep., V. I. O., Bihar, 8 Imp. Coune. Agri. Res., New Delhi Sen, K. C. (1935). Agric. & Livestock in India 5, 115 Shortt, H. ESOYA BEAN MEAL SUPPLEMENTS FOR CHICKENS By A. J. MACDONALD AND S. BOSE, Poultry Research Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 21 August 1942) PREVIOUS experiments by Macdonald [1941] demonstrated that separated milk in the ration of chickens gave better results than equivalent amounts of protein from soya bean meal. It was suggested, however, that better results might have been obtained with extracted soya bean meal. As separated milk is normally a somewhat expensive ingredient, it was decided to investigate the possibility of improving the value of soya bean meal by processing it prior to its use as a supplement in the ration of chickens. LITERATURE From experiments with rats, Hayward, Steen- bock and Bohstedt [1936] concluded that ordinary soya bean meal had a fairly low nutritive value. Commercial soya bean oil meal, manufactured by the expeller process at a temperature of 105°C. for 2 minutes, and hydraulic meal, cooked at a temperature of 82°C. for 90 minutes, proved of a value similar to raw soya bean meal. On the other hand, commercial soya bean meal which had been prepared by the expeller process at medium temperatures (112-130°C.) and at high temperatures (140-150°C.) for 2½ minutes or hy- draulic meals cooked at 105°C. and 121°C. for 90 minutes contained proteins which had about twice the nutritive value of the raw soya bean meal or the low temperature processed meals. As the food intake of all the rats during the early stages of the experiment were similar, it was concluded that the poor growth results with the raw soya bean meal and the low temperature processed meals were due to some deficiency and not to lack of palatability.. The addition of casein supplements to the deficient diets resulted in normal growth, suggesting that the deficiency existed in the protein fraction. The authors concluded that the processing of the soya bean meal at medium or high temperatures resulted in the release of some factor which was essential for normal growth. In later experiments [1936] the isame authors found that the addition of cystine to unheated soya bean oil meal was bene- ficia. Cystine supplements to soya bean oil meals processed under controlled conditions proved of no value. Workers at Purdue University [1928] found that raw soya bean meal plus minerals for chickens was inferior to soya bean oil meal and minerals. Hayward, Halpin, Holmes, Bohstedt and Hart [1937] found that high temperature soya bean oil meal (processed at 140-150°C. for 2½ minutes), medium and high temperature hydraulic soya bean oil meal (cooked at 105° and 121°C. for 90 minutes) and solvent extracted soya bean meal (cooked at 98°C. for 15 minutes) all gave much superior growth with chicks over a period of eight weeks than raw soya bean meal and low tempera- ture soya bean meal (processed at 105°C. for 2 minutes). In experiments with chicks and rats, Hayward and Hafner [1941] found that supplements of 0.3 per cent cystine or 0.3 per cent methionine to raw soya beans improved the biological value of the proteins. The nutritive value of the protein fraction of the soya beans was also increased by autoclaving. METHODS Two experiments with chicks, one over a period of 24 weeks and the other over a period of eight weeks, were conducted to test out the relative values of separated milk, soya bean meal, ex- tracted soya bean meal and heated extracted soya bean meal. Both experiments were carried out on week-old, White Leghorn × Rhode Island Red chicks. Week-old chicks were chosen in pre- ference to day-old chicks as former experience had shown that day-old chicks usually contained a number of weaklings which, if used for ex- periment, somewhat interfered with the results, whereas with week-old chickens it is possible to eliminate most of those showing undesirable characters. All the chicks prior to the commence- ment of the experiment were fed on a standard diet of cereals and separated milk, supplemented with green food and calcium. FEEDING In both experiments all the birds were fed on mash and grain rations. The mash was fed ad libitum in suitable containers and the grain was fed in the morning and evening according to appetite. Supplementary calcium as broken lime- stone was fed ad libitum and succulent chopped berseem in adequate amounts was fed once daily throughout the experiments. A basal mash consisting of wheat bran 50 parts, yellow maize meal 30 parts and ground oats 20 108
A. J. MACDONALD AND S. BOSE 109 parts was fed to all the groups. During the first six weeks the grain ration consisted of equal parts of yellow broken maize, jowar and cheena and from six weeks onward the grain ration consisted of equal parts of yellow broken maize, wheat and paddy. Tables I and II give the average compo- sition of the mashes and grains used in each experiment. TABLE I Percentage composition of foods110 Soya Bean Meal Supplements for Chickens Feeding-stuff Moisture Crude Protein Ether extract Fibre Nitrogen free extract Ash Chicks grainA. J. MACDONALD AND S. BOSE 111 The weights of the cockerels and pullets in Group 1 were slightly- heavier at the first weighing (3 weeks) than those in the other three groups and the differences in weights became greater at each weighing until the cockerels were removed at seven weeks. At seven weeks the average weights of the males and females in Group 1 were 14.1 oz. and 13.3 oz. respectively. The corresponding weights of the males and females in Groups 2, 3 and 4 were 9.8 oz., 9.7 oz.; 10.4 oz., 10.4 oz. ; 10.7 oz. and 10.3 oz. respectively. At this stage the males and females in Group 1 were significantly heavier than those in the other three groups but there were no significant differences between the weights of the birds in Groups 2, 3, and 4. The pullets in Group 1 were significantly heavier than those in the other three groups at each weighing until the end of the experiment. At 25 weeks the respective weights of the pullets in Groups 1, 2, 3 and 4 were 58.4 oz., 51.3 oz., 50.1. oz., and 51.7 oz. At no stage in the ex- periment was there any significant difference bet- ween the weights of the birds in Groups 2, 3 and 4. Food consumption. Table IV gives the average food consumption per bird in pounds for each group for each period of four weeks and the correspond- ing food consumption in pounds per pound of live weight gain. TABLE IV Food consumption Period Average food consumption per bird (lb.) Food consumption in lb. per lb. live weight gain Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 1. 1-5 weeks . . 1.68 1.25 1.37 1.24 4.57 5.35 5.39 5.12 2. 5-9 weeks . . 3.03 2.78 2.49 2.75 4.62 4.84 5.00 4.72 3. 9-13 weeks . . 5.22 4.80 4.10 4.13 6.35 6.66 6.14 6.50 4. 13-17 weeks . . 5.76 4.64 5.26 5.19 7.59 7.04 8.15 7.70 5. 17-21 weeks . . 4.49 3.87 4.16 3.77 9.74 10.00 11.30 9.90 6. 21-25 weeks . . 4.34 4.46 4.44 4.80 9.47 9.11 8.60 8.46 During the first five periods, the average food consumption per bird in Group 1 was slightly greater than that of the corresponding birds in the other three groups. The birds in Group 1 were, however, heavier throughout and during the first two periods they made slightly better utilization of the food consumed. Over the whole six periods, however, there was no appre- ciable difference in the efficiency of food utilization in any of the groups. Protein consumption. Table V gives details of the protein percentages contained in the foods consumed during the six periods from 1-25 weeks TABLE V Percentage protein consumption Period Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 1. 1-5 weeks . . 14.3 14.4 14.6 14.5 2. 5-9 weeks . . 14.4 14.2 14.5 14.4 3. 9-13 weeks . . 13.3 14.2 14.3 14.3 4. 13-17 weeks . . 13.8 14.4 14.2 14.1 5. 17-21 weeks . . 14.0 13.7 13.7 13.5 6. 21-25 weeks . . 14.4 13.2 13.6 13.2 There was very little variation in the percentage protein consumed by the four groups during the first two periods. Group 1 consumed somewhat smaller percentages of protein during periods 3 and 4 than Groups 2, 3 and 4 but in periods 5 and 6 the figures were reversed. In Groups 2, 3 and 4 the percentage protein consump- tion decreased more or less steadily from the start to the finish of the experiment but the per- centage consumptions were very similar for all three groups during each of the periods. Mortality. All the groups had a good health record throughout but Group 1 handled better at all stages and had a slightly better bloom than those in the other groups. The mortality per- centages from 1112 Soya Bean Meal Supplements for Chickens however, gave no better results than extracted soya bean meal or heated extracted soya bean meal. As other workers had found that soya bean meal was inferior to extracted soya bean meal or heated extracted soya bean meal, it was decided to check up the accuracy of the results obtained by repeating the experiment along similar lines with four more groups of chickens. Owing to difficulty in obtaining large amounts of extracted soya bean meal, the experiment propor was ter- minated after eight weeks. Stock. A total of 332 wing-banded, week-old, White Leghorn × Rhode Island Red chickens were divided up into four comparable groups. Feeding. Group 5 was fed on the standard basal ration plus separated milk to chink for eight weeks. Groups 6, 7 and 8 were fed. the basal ration. plus salt supplemented with soya bean meal, extracted soya bean meal and heated extracted soya bean meal respectively for eight weeks. From 8A. J. MACDONALD AND S. BOSE 113 During periods 1 and 2, the birds in Group 5 consumed slightly more food than those in the other three groups. The birds in Group 5, how- ever, were heavier throughout and made better utilization of their food as judged by the food consumed per pound of live weight gain. During the final period of four weeks the birds in all four groups consumed somewhat similar amounts of food. Group 5 made slightly better utilization of the food consumed than Groups 6, 7 and 8. The food utilization figures were again very similar for Groups 6, 7 and 8. Protein consumption. Table VIII gives details of the protein percentages in the foods consumed during each of the four-weekly periods. TABLE VIII Percentage protein consumption Period Group 5 Group 6 Group 7 Group 8 1. 1-5 weeks . . 14.9 14.6 14.6 14.6 2. 5-9 weeks . . 13.8 14.5 14.2 14.3 3. 9-13weeks . . 13.5 13.4 13.4 13.7 The percentages of protein in the food consumed by the four groups were very similar for each of the respective periods. During period 1, Group 5 consumed a slightly higher percentage of protein than Groups 6, 7 and 8 but in period 2 the figures were reversed. During the final period of four weeks on the standard diet, the percentages of protein consumed were very similar for all four groups. Mortality. All the groups had a very good health record throughout but, as in Experiment 1, the birds on the milk ration behaved better and had a more thriving appearance than those in the other three groups. No apparent differences in handling or in appearance were observed bet- ween the birds in Groups 6, 7 and 8. The mor- tality percentages from 1114 Soya Bean Meal Supplements for Chickens CONCLUSIONS 1. The feeding of chicks from 0-6 weeks on a cereal ration supplemented with liberal, amounts of green food and calcium along with separated milk to drink proved satisfactory. 2. From 6 weeks onward a basal ration of cereals plus green food, calcium and separated, milk and water to drink in separate containers gave satis- factory results. 3. Supplements of (a) soya bean meal and salt, (b) extracted soya bean meal and salt and (c) ex- tracted soya bean meal, heated for 2½ minutes at 140-150°C. plus salt, proved inferior to separated milk from 1ANALYSIS OF WEIGHT RECORDS OF ETAH GOATS By C. K. DILWALI, B.Sc. (HONS.), M.A., Research Scholar in Statistics, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi (Received for publication on 1 April 1942) (With two text-flgures) THE Etah, farm started goat breeding work in 1932 with Barbari and Jumna Pari breeds. They started with, a foundation stock of 36 Barbari goats, nine kids and three bucks. Six more goats were purchased later. The three purchased bucks were given the register-numbers 48M, 49M and 50M. and a fourth buck purchased later was num- bered 631M. Some of the foundation stock was also mated to the male progeny of 48M and 49M. The daughters of the foundation stock we shall hereafter call, for convenience, as the first genera- tion, the daughters of these as the second genera- tion and so on. Jumna Pari stock purchased in 1932 was 47 goats and four bucks. Later addition brought up the purchased number of Jumna Pari goats to 104. Each kid was weighed when born correct to 4 oz. as the smallest unit. Every month the kids were weighed on the 15th and the 30th, till, the kids became one year old. These weight records are available for both the breeds from 1934 to 1940. The object of the paper is to analyse the weight records for the following points : (i) To compare the breeds and sexes regarding the mean live weight (m.l.w.) and growth-rate. (ii) To find the best season for breeding goats. (iii) To find out if the breeding policy of the farm has resultad in any improvement in the m. 1. w. and growth-rate. (iv) To find, out if m.l.w. and growth-rate are correlated with the initial weight. Statistical analysis. The very first step was to evolve a satisfactory growth-curve, i.e. a curve showing growth at various intervals. For this six males and six females of each breed were select- ed at random. Kidding time is shown on each curve. Graphs of growth-curves for these were drawn representing time along the horizontal axis, with 15 days as unit, and weight along the vertical axis with one pound as unit. A few of these curves are reproduced here in Figs. 1 and 2. The curves showed two turnings (called the points of inflexion) with concavity of one of these turnings towards the horizontal axis and the other awway from the horizontal axis. The general shape and the two turning points suggest that the algebraic curve W = A+BX+CX2+DX3 would be a good fit. At start the curves are steep (i.e. make a big angle with the horizontal axis) but later this angle de- creases. This shows that the growth-rate is very high in the beginning which falls off in later weeks. Even at the end of one year the tendency of the curves is that live-weight is on the increase. One other feature of interest is that every curve showed a downward curvature in summer months, suggest- ing that winter is better than summer for the growth of the kids. In order to test if the growth- rate at any moment "was proportional to the live- weight at that instant, the logarithms of weights were plotted against time as before. The curves were very irregular with only one concavity which was turned towards the horizontal axis. If the presumed law of growth were correct the curves should have been straight lines. The value of graphs is mostly of a suggestive nature. We know much more about our data when wo obtain the values of A, B, C, etc. in the algebraic curve W = A+BX+CX2+DX3. These constants are so chosen that the departure of the curve from the points to which the curve is fitted. is least. It has been agreed to measure this de- parture by the sum of the squares of the deviations of individual points from the fitted curve. So to choose the constants this sum of squares is made least. This method of finding the constants of a curve is called the method of least squares and is due to Legendre. In the proposed curve the highest power of × is three and so we call it a parabola of third degree. Which degree parabola would best fit our data cannot be decided merely by looking at the graphs of growth-curves. There -are better ways of deciding it. In this method the degree of parabola is increased by stages and its superiority over the lower degree is tested [Tippett 1931]. In this type of investigation, the curve is put for convenience in a rather different form, namely, W=a+b116 Analysis of Weight Records of Etah Goats [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Time: fortnightly intervals FIG. 1. Growth curves for the first year of Jumna Pari goals, 1939-40 far greater than could be explained away by more chance variation. In the curve W = A+BX+ CX2+DX3 : A means the mean-fortnightly-live- weight (m.f.l.w.): B means m.f. growth-rate; C means the rate of change in growth-rate, D has no practical, physical meaning. Though algebraic theory decides in favour of third degree parabola yet, as the aim of our analysis is to decide upon questions of practical importance, we have to keep only the second degree parabola, namely W=A+ BX+CX2. Dr. Wishart [1938, 1939] for the same reason omitted terms higher than second degree while analysing the Cambridge Pig Experiment [1938, 1939,1936] For reasons of great ease in calculations, the weight-at-birth, which if included makes the first intervals unequal was omitted in analysis. Its inclusion would have made the time intervals of comparisons unequal, and calculations would have been much heavier as fisher's method evolved for equal intervals would then have not been available. But we satisfied ourselves that this omission did not really much matter. From the fitted curves, the weights at birth were determined by extra- polation, and the departure of these calculated weights at birth, from the actual weights at birth. was tested by ×2C. K. DILWALI 117 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Time: fortnightly intervals. FIG. 2. Growth curves for the first year of Barbari goats, 1939-40 females. There are two ways of getting the vari- ances of the constants of the typical curves. From the variance of a group of values, we can find how much a particular value can depart from the group mean due to chance alone. In one method we regard the constants of the different curves as estimated statistics subject to error, in the other, these constants are taken as actual observations subject to no error at all. In our case, we have adopted the second method for obtaining the variances. We suppose the constants to be nor- mally distributed. The four typical curves are given below :118 Analysis of Weight Records of Etah Goats advancing time was significantly more rapid in males than in females. In all the three characters compared the Jumna Pari breed was significantly better than Barbari in regard to m.f.l.w. and m.f. growth-rate. Also the growth-rate decrease with advancing time is significantly more in Jumna Pari than in Barbari. To find the best season for kidding, the averages of m.f.l.w. and m.f. growth-rate for the summer and winter kiddings were compared in each breed. The information is set out in Table III. In both the breeds the kids born in winter show significant- ly higher m. f.l.w. than the kids born in summer. With regard to growth-rate both the seasons are alike for each breed. This shows, on the whole, that kids in winter are better than the kids born in summer. We now come to the question whether the successive generations have shown any improve- ment with regard to the three characters. For this, dams from first generation were compared with their daughters in the second generation. The results are shown in Table IV. There is no significant improvement in regard to any charac- ter. Comparison of second and third generation is set forth in Table V. There is deterioration though the differences are not statistically significant. The comparisons so far made are those between the successive progenies and their mothers, and although appropriate from the viewpoint of testing the success of breeding policy do not give us a complete picture of the improvement in the per- formance of the herd as a whole in successive generations. This is done in Table VI. This gives the analysis of variance with regard to the three characters of the three generations taken as a whole. We find no significant changes; rather there is a deterioration from second to third gene- ration. To see if the bucks possessed any transmitting abilities with regard to these three characters, we compared the daughters of a sire, against their dams for these three characters. Such a compari- son is possible for buck Nos. 633M and 152M. For others the number of daughters was less than four and so they have been omitted. The pedigrees of these bucks are given below :C. K. DILWALI 119 TABLE I Mean values of A, B and C and their variances for both breeds and sexes Particulars of breed and sex m.f.l.w. or 120 Analysis of Weight Records of Etah Goats TABLE VI Analysis of variance of the constants for different generations in Barbari goats For Due to D.F. S.S. Variance Ratio of variances m.f.l.w. . .{ Between generations . . . 2 56.4838 28.2419 1.5 Within generations . . . 79 1469.3372 18.5992 ... m.f. growth-rate .{ Between generations . . . 2 0.0604 0.0302 0.3 Within generations . . . 79 8.3815 0.1061 ... Change in growth- { rate Between generations . . . 2 0.005475 0.002738 2.1 Within generations . . . 79 0.102438 0.001297 ... TABLE VII Comparison of constants between the progenies of Buck No. 152 and their dams SPOILAGE IN DRIED SHRIMPS By K. GOPINATH, B.A., M.Sc., Assistant Research Officer, Department of Marine Biology and Fisheries, University of Travancore, Trivandrum (Received for publication on 23 September 1942) THE families Penæidæ and Palæmonidæ are represented in Travancore by 18 species which fall under six genera. Of these, Penaeus monodon Fabr. Alcock., P. indicus M. Edw., P. carinatus Dana (de Man), Metapenaeus monoceros (Fabr.), M. affinis (M. Edw.), Metapenaeopsis dobsoni, var. nov., Parapenaeopsis maxillipedo Alcock., and P. stylifera (M. Edw.), belonging to the family Penæidæ, constitute the bulk of the commercial 'prawns' of this State.* Palaemon carcinus Fabr., P. idae Heller. and P. dayanus Henderson, belonging to the family Palæmonidæ, are fresh- water forms and though they are fished in large quantities, find only a local market. It may, however, be pointed out herein that the use of the common term 'prawn' for all the species is a misnomer which by common usage has supplanted the more accurate and accepted term 'shrimp'. This implies that a great portion of what is known as prawn fisheries of this State is really shrimp fisheries and this distinction between the two types of fisheries is important for classifying the various sections of the fishing industry. Though prawn fishing is by no means unimportant, commercial shrimping maintains a business which yields more than 15 lakhs of rupees per annum and supports more than twelve thousand fishing families of the State, who live exclusively by this industry. It may be impossible to trace the origin and development of shrimping in Travancore though it may safely be asserted that it has been in existence from very early days as shown by certain indirect historical evidences. It is probable, however, that intensive fishing is only of recent origin, as indicated by the fact that there are even now suitable areas which remain un- exploited. During recent years shrimp fisheries have developed in various parts of the world. Chopra [1936], reviewing the report on the Cape Crawfish Industry of South Africa, has given a vivid account of the rapid development the industry has undergone in recent years as a result of careful scientific investigations. Chopra [1939 again describes how the prawn industry of Norway has remarkably grown in the last thirty or forty years. The shrimp industry of the United States of America has grown markedly in the past two decades and today probably it is the biggest shrimp producing country in the world. In 1931, which was only an ordinary year for shrimps, U. S. A. produced 98,765,943 lb. of shrimps valued at 3,526,864 dollars [Johnson & Linder, 1934]. It was the discovery of foreign markets which stimulated the rapid development of our industry and more than 85 per cent of our catch is exported to foreign markets. Since the industry developed on the normal stimulation of demand, unaided by technical or scientific control, it is still in a pri- mitive condition. The methods of production, preservation and packing now adopted show that a great deal still remains to be perfected before the industry can be put on a sound commercial basis. The shrimp fisheries of Travancore depend for their success on the presence of a chain of back- waters permanently connected with the sea. These backwaters afford excellent feeding grounds and into these the young of shrimps migrate in large numbers [Panikkar, 1937]. Here they undergo development for about an year and then return to the sea for breeding. During this migration and also during their stay in the backwaters, they are caught in large quanti- ties by means of various devices. The method of preservation mostly followed in this country is very simple; the hauls are thrown into circular copper vats with small quantity of water and heated till they are semi- cooked and turn red in colour. Brine is seldom used here, though it is a common practice along the Sind Coast [Rai, 1934]. The semi-cooked shrimps are then dipped, drained and spread on mats and allowed to dry in the open sun for a couple of days. When they become quite dry and crisp, they are gathered in gunny bags and thrashed on a thick log of wood to remove the head, shells, appendages and the other smaller tissues usually termed 'bran'. This completes the process of preparation. Without further delay the meat is packed in gunny bags and sold to merchants who make quick arrangements for the disposal of the commodity. Thus it will be seen *From the systematic survey of the ' prawn fauna ' of Travancore conducted by Mr Natarajan of this Laboratory. The paper is under publication. 121
122 Spoilage in dried Shrimps that all transactions in shrimp meat are character- ized by a desire to dispose of the commodity in the quickest possible manner and this is mainly due to the very low keeping value of the product prepared in the manner described above. Panikkar's observations on the prawn industry of the Malabar coast with special reference to Travancore [1937] have thrown some light on the bionomics of a few of the species constituting the fisheries, methods of their capture and preserva- tion. He has also given a short account of the history of the industry, in which he has casually mentioned the handicaps of the present trade and emphasized the need for improving the methods of production and preservation on scientific principles. Referring to the low keeping value of the cured shrimps, he has remarked that they remain fit for human consumption only for about four months and that they are spoiled afterwards. But he has neither given the factors leading to the output of such inferior products nor the cause of the spoilage. Nor has any attempt hitherto been made for investigating the cause of spoilage and formulating measures for its pre- vention. It is well known that cured shrimps deteriorate very quickly and that this spoilage is mainly due to the attack of minute organisms mistakenly termed 'lice' by the local fishermen and merchants. It is estimated that this spoilage is definitely responsible for the deterioration of a large proportion of the total export, involving considerable loss to the industry. A study of this spoilage and suggestion of remedial measures for its prevention are two of the important and urgent necessities of the shrimp trade and the present work was undertaken with this object in view. METHODS OF INVESTIGATION For the purpose of investigating the causes of spoilage commercially cured shrimp and samples prepared in the laboratory were used. The laboratory samples were prepared from back- water specimens belonging to the family Penæidæ. In curing them in the laboratory, they were boiled in a small quantity of water for about ten to fifteen minutes and then dried in the open sun. The duration of drying was varied from one to three days in order to obtain samples under different degrees of desiccation. Thus for example, certain samples were dried for one day, others for two days and still others for three days. Similarly, in order to study the influence of different concentrations of brine on the spoilage, samples were treated in brine varying from 2-8 per cent. In all cases the samples were artificially inoculated with the parasites for studying the reaction and respective degrees of resistance. As dried shrimps are usually sold in the shelled* and unshelled conditions, both the types of pro- ducts were prepared and by combining various factors involved in the methods of preservation, the following list of samples was obtained. 1a. Commercially cured shrimps . . unshelled 1b. Commercially cured shrimps . . shelled 2a. Lake shrimps dried for one day . . unshelled 2b. Lake shrimps dried for one day . . shelled 3a. Lake shrimps dried for two days . . unshelled 3b. Lake shrimps dried for two days . . shelled 4a. Lake shrimps dried for three days . unshelled 4b. Lake shrimps dried for three days . shelled 5a. Shrimps cured in 2 per cent brine . unshelled 5b. Shrimps cured in 2 per cent brine . shelled 6a. Shrimps cured in 3 per cent brine . unshelled 6b. Shrimps cured in 3 per cent brine . shelled 7a. Shrimps cured in 4 per cent brine . unshelled 7b. Shrimps cured in 4 per cent brine . shelled 8a. Shrimps cured in 5 per cent brine . unshelled 8b. Shrimps cured in 5 per cent brine . shelled 9a. Shrimps cured in 6 per cent brine . unshelled 9b. Shrimps cured in 6 per cent brine . shelled 10a. Shrimps cured in 7 per cent brine . unshelled 10b. Shrimps cured in 7 per cent brine . shelled 11a. Shrimps cured in 8 per cent brine . unshelled 11b. Shrimps cured in 8 per cent brine . shelled All the samples were kept in separate containers and changes in their conditions noted. In ex- periments of this type, where reaction of various methods of preservation to attack of the para- sites is to be studied, it is necessary to keep all samples under almost identical conditions and this was achieved by using uniform grade of shrimps and containers and maintaining uniform tem- perature. By adopting these methods, sources and chances of infection were rendered constant as far as possible, so that whatever differences are noticed with regard to the time taken for the infection to set in, they are to be attributed to the resisting properties of the respective samples. The history of each sample was carefully studied and recorded in a tabular form (Appendix II). Infected samples and freshly cured ones were placed side by side in separate containers and the fresh lot watched for probable sources of infection. Appendages of possible transmitting agents of the vicinity such as ants and flies were also examined under a microscope. Reaction of the attacking organisms to condi- tions of humidity was also investigated by keeping the infected shrimps in desiccators from which moisture had previously been removed by means of anhydrous calcium chloride. SPOILAGE The onset of spoilage in shrimps is generally marked by the gradual change in the colouration *Samples in which the shells have been removed
K. GOPINATH 123 of the material from its healthy reddish tint to a dull brown. At the same time, the presence of numerous minute parasites on the shrimp meat becomes visible even to the naked eye as minute whitish moving specks. This attack by the parasite is followed by the formation of a very pungent odour which renders the infected material a highly objectionable article of food. The spoilage once started goes on with extreme rapidity destroying the material in no time. Most of the meat is converted into a brown powdery substance which collects at the bottom of the container. Deposits of this powder ranging from one to one and a half centimeters thickness have been observed in certain cases. In the unshelled samples, only the shells remain after some time, the meat having been converted into the powdery residue. Another characteristic of this infection, which is of much importance to the industry, is the considerable reduction in weight brought about on the cured material. It is estimated after repeated trials in the laboratory that about one third of the total weight of the cured material is thus lost by this infection. The real cause of this spoilage is found to be the attack of mites, which on superficial examination appear as white specks on the surface of the shrimp meat. These mites belong to the group of Cheese-mites, which have a wide range of distri- bution. Members of this group are the simplest and probably the smallest of mites and the name Cheese-mites has been given to them because of the frequency with which they attack commercial cheese. The species involved in the spoilage of shrimps is Caloglyphus micophagus (?)* In attacking the shrimps, the mites eat into the meat converting it into the brown powdery substance. A thoroughly spoiled shrimp meat has a typical 'worm eaten' appearance and is unwholesome to smell and taste. The brown powdery substance is composed of mite fæces, dead mites, moulted skins and mite eggs in various stages of development and is known to be defi- nitely allergic producing itching and urticarious swellings. It is probable that the strong pungent odour characteristic of mite infested shrimp is the result of some sort of secretion produced by the mite, since it is positively known in the case of ordinary cheese-mites that they saturate the cheese with some kind of secretion before eating into it. Although the possibility of gastro-intestinal disturbances due to the consumption of mite infested food stuffs is mentioned by Patton [1930] no such instance has up till now been brought to the notice of the author. All the different stages in the life history of the mite such as eggs, larvæ, nymphs and adults are usually found on the infected shrimp meat. The eggs are very minute, translucent and ovoid with rounded ends and under ordinary conditions deve- lop in the course of a couple of days. The larva which is smaller and rounded in shape has only three pairs of legs. The larva moults to form the nymph, which in turn moults to form the adult, the hypopal stage being absent in this. The total period of development from the egg to the adult is usually from four to seven days and during this period it undergoes three main moults. The period of development, however, shows ten- dency to lengthen when there is not enough food material for the organisms to thrive on. For example, at the initial stage of the infection when food material is plentiful and conditions most favourable, development proceeds with rapidity and is completed in about four days. When the greater part of the shrimp meat has deteriora- ted by being converted into the powdery residue the period of development is also lengthened from four to seven days. SOURCES OF INFECTION Two main methods of infection are observed to take place. (1) Direct infection by the parasites themselves and (2) Infection through a trans- mitting host, viz. the common house fly. (1) In the course of experiments, when freshly cured shrimps were kept in the vicinity of infected samples, the mites were actually observed to crawl from the latter to the former. Though the shrimps were kept in petri dishes and covered over with glass plates, the infection was found to take place. By the fourth day after the shrimp meat was thus kept, the mites were found to crawl on the outside of the petri dishes and over the glass plates, while a few of the smaller ones happened to get inside the dishes. These began to multiply rapidly and after a week a large number of eggs larvæ and adults was found on the material. Probably this method of infection is the one that usually takes place during the storage of shrimps in godowns. Old and fresh consignments are generally stored in the same room, the holes and crevices of which are infested with mites. It is easy to see how infection of fresh consignments is brought about. The cured shrimps are packed in gunny bags or heaped at the corners of the rooms and none of these methods affords sufficient protection against the entry of so small an or- ganism as the mite. (2) A number of flies was caught from the vicinity of the place of storage and when these were examined under a microscope some of them showed the presence of young mites, eggs and *For classification and description, refer appendix I at the end of this paper.
124 Spoilage in dried Shrimps nymphs sticking on to the hairs on the append- ages and body. Such flies carrying the eggs and larvæ infect fresh consignments during their visits to the latter. This mode of infection takes place during the later stages of the curing process. The curing sheds and drying yards are always in- fested with flies and the possibility of infection is ever present in these places. In the laboratory, though under artificial conditions, infection through flies was found to take place. These observations corroborate the view held by many authors that nymphal stages of mites are trans- ported to new surroundings on the legs of flies and other allied agents. Another probable method of infection is that which takes place through the agency of the wind, in which case the brown powder containing the eggs, larvæ and adults is blown to fresh consign- ments of cured material. Such infection can only take place when shrimp meat in an advanced state of infection is stored in open windy places along side freshly cured material. Since this is not a common method of storage, chances of this type of infection are rare, though Patton [1930] men- tions the possibility of this type of infection, es- pecially in the case of other household Tyrog- lyphoids. SPOILAGE IN RELATION TO METHODS OF CURING In Appendix II is given the progress of spoilage in the different samples cured under various methods of preservation. An analysis of these results and a comparison of the respective keeping values mainly indicate the following. Unshelled shrimps are more susceptible to infection and they retain freshness for a much shorter period than the shelled variety. Whether they be sun dried or salt cured, infection sets in at an earlier date and even the progress of spoilage is comparatively vigorous. Probably the presence of shells and certain amount of moisture retained within them create the optimum conditions favourable for the multiplication and development of the parasites. Commercially cured product is much inferior in quality and it is easily susceptible to infection. The maximum period during which commercially cured shrimps remain devoid of any trace of infection is found to be 9 weeks. This low keeping quality is attributable to the low standard of preservation adopted by the ordinary curers. The keeping quality of cured shrimps is highly enhanced by three days' drying in the open sun. In the unshelled variety of shrimps dried for three full days, infection commenced by the 10th week, while in the shelled variety it set in by the 12th week. Three days' drying made the shrimps sufficiently dry and crisp, while four days' drying made them too brittle and rendered perfect packing difficult. Treatment of shrimps in a 5 per cent solution of sodium chloride is very effective in increasing the keeping value of the cured product. In the unshelled samples cured in 5 per cent brine, in- fection set in by the 13th week, while in the shelled variety infection started only by the 15th week. This was the maximum period during which any of the present series of samples was found to remain devoid of any trace of infection. Samples cured in brines varying from 6 to 8 percent, were found to be in no way superior to sample cured in 5 per cent, since in all the former samples infection commenced by the 15th week. Excess of salt on the shrimp is found to have no action either in inhibiting or preventing the infection by the parsites. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS Investigation on the relative action of mites to conditions of humidity showed the following; when cured shrimps in which infection was vigo- rous and number of parasites numerous were placed inside a desiccator from which moisture had been removed by means of anhydrous calcium chloride, it was observed that the activity of the parasites was slowly suspended. After four days, most of the organisms were found to be either inert or dead. When shrimps which were freshly cured and infected were placed inside the desic- cator, no spoilage took place and development of the parasites was very slow. It was noticed that even constant exposure to dry atmosphere was detrimental to the mites. Thus it is seen that certain degree of moisture in the atmosphere is essential for the successful development of the parasites. This is fully supported by the fact that it is only during mon- soon seasons, when humidity of the atmosphere is rather high that spoilage of shrimps due to the attack of mites is very vigorous. Unfortunately, the monsoon season coincides with the season of maximum abundance of shrimps in the back- waters and so infection is inevitable under the existing conditions. Storage of cured shrimps in air tight containers was attempted with satisfactory results. Con- tainers were devised out of ordinary cigarette tins and cured shrimps introduced into these were sealed in partial vacuum. The material thus kept was found to be in perfect condition and devoid of any trace of infection. In Madras and Sind, ' semi-dried ' prawns are packed in con- tainers sealed in an atmosphere of carbon dioxide. A somewhat similar process is adopted in this country for packing cashew nuts. But the present investigations indicate that the presence of carbon dioxide is not always necessary for
K. GOPINATH 125 nhancing the keeping quality of the packed material, provided the tins are properly and carefully sealed in partial vacuum. Ordinary godowns where the cured materials are stored ready for market are usually kept intidy. They are not cleaned after each con- signment is removed for disposal and hence parti- cles and pieces of previous consignments are allow- ed to accumulate inside the sheds. These pieces infect every fresh consignment subsequently introduced and stored there. Besides this, as ointed out in an earlier part of this paper, every ole and crevice in these buildings are infested with mites which may infect all consignments taken in. Thorough cleaning of these godowns and fumigation with sulphur dioxide and other mild disinfectants was found to be very effective a controlling mites inside the godowns. Except in the case of air tight containers, in all ther cases it has been possible only to restrict the action of the mites to the minimum and not to prevent their attack completely. The jute eags in which the cured and finished products are stored, are very unsuitable since they do not afford efficient protection against the mites. Since it is also seen that flies play an important part in the afection of cured material under local conditions, he most suitable method of packing and storage will be the use of airtight containers. The produc- ion of cured shrimps in this part is so great that a every large number of containers is necessary if the hole quantity is to be properly packed. But the present scarcity of tin containers and the restric- tions imposed on their use do not permit the con- emplation of such a scheme. If therefore better ality of cured shrimps is to be ensured, the only alternative left at present is the adoption of improv- ed methods of preservation as suggested in the preceding paragraphs. In all the experiments so far conducted no chemical preservative other than common salt has been used. But by using some of the well known chemical preservatives, it may be possible to render the shrimps immune to the attack of the para- sites, thereby improving the keeping quality. Many chemicals are used in foreign countries for the preservation of fish and meat, subject to the restrictions laid down in the food laws of the respective countries. Thus in Great Briton and British Empire there is a great restriction in the use of such chemicals, whereas in Germany and candanavian countries there is comparatively treat freedom. In the United States of America there seems to be greater freedom in the use of chemicals at least in the case of fish. Both boric and benzoic acids and their sodium salts have been employed with success in all the above countries for preservation of fish and sodium salts of benzoic acid have been found to be by far superior to all other chemicals used [Tarr and Sunderland, 1939]. This aspect of the problem is reserved for a subsequent paper. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I am grateful to Dr K. L. Moudgill, Director of Research, University of Travancore for having given me all facilities for carrying on the investi- gations and to Dr C. C. John, Professor of Marine Biology and Fisheries for kindly suggesting subject and also for his helpful guidance. My thanks are also due to Rai Bahadur Dr S. L. Hora, Director of Fisheries, Bengal, for kindly going through the manuscript and making valuable suggestions. REFERENCES Chopra, B. (1936). The Cape Crawfish Industry of South Africa, with some observations on the Prawn and Crab Fisheries in India. Current Science 4, 529-33 Chopra, B. (1939). Some food Prawns and Crabs of India and their fisheries. Jour. Bombay Nat. Hist. Soc. 4, 12, 228 Ewing, H. E. (1935). Manual of External Parasites, London. Chapter on Parasitic mites. Johnson, F. F. & Linder, M. J. (1934). Shrimp Industry of the South Atlantic and Gulf States, with notes on other domestic and foreign areas. Investigational Report No. 21, U. S. Dept. of Commerce. Bureau of Fisheries, 4 and 63-5 Panikkar, N. K. (1937). The Prawn Industry of the Malabar Coast. Jour. Bombay Nat. Hist. Soc. 39, 343-52 Patton, W. S. (1931). Insects, ticks, mites and vanomous animals of medical and veterinary importance. Pt. I, Medical, 640-2 Patton, W. S. (1932). Insects, ticks, mites and venomous animals of medical and veterinary impor- tance, Pt. II, Public Health, 661-77, and 685-88 Rai, H. S. (1934). The Shell Fisheries of the Bombay Presidency. Jour. Bombay Nat. Hist. Soc. 36, 884-97 Savory, T. H. (1935). The Arachnida, London Tarr, H. L. A. & Sunderland, P. A. (1939). The role of preservatives in enhancing the keeping qualify of fresh fillets. Fishery Research Board of Canada, Progr. Rep. Paci. Bio. Stn., Nanaimo and Paci. Fish. Expr. Stn. Prince Rupert, No. 39 APPENDIX I Caloglyphus mycophagus (?) These are minute mites ranging from 0.2 mm. to 0.45 mm. The body is about twice as long as broad and has neither folds nor many bristles as in the other members of the family. Even the few bristles present are simple. Segmentation of the body is absent except for a well marked groove separating the pro-podo-soma from the hysterosoma. It possesses typical acarid month parts and the scutal plates appear to be well chitinised since that portion is much thicker and brownish in colour. It has four pairs of structurally similar legs, each five jointed and ending in a well developed recurved claw, the tarsus of each leg having a complement of strong setae on it. These organs of attachment are further supplemented by one or two pairs of suckers on the ventral side, the male
126 Spoilage in dried Shrimps possessing two such pairs and the female only one pair. The male has a prominent flat posterior margin while the female has a more rounded one. In close association with the above species of mites another species, viz. Cheyletus eruditus belonging to the family Cheylitidæ is also found on the shrimp meat. These mites are characterized by their bigger size, ranging up to 1 mm., longer legs and very large pincer like pedi- palps diagnostic to the species. It is suggested by many authors that these are a sort of beneficial acarids found usually on materials infested with Tyroglyphoids and that they prey on the latter. APPENDIX II Progress of spoilage due to the infection of mites in shrimps cured under various methods Sample No. Type of material Date of expr. Date of first infection Maximum infection Complete deterioration Keeping value in weeks 1a Commercial shrimps . . . . . unshelled 8th Oct. } 40 19th Nov.'40 8th Dec.'40 16th Dec.'40 6 1b Ditto . . . . . . . shelled . 10th Dec.'40 22nd Dec.'40 30th Dec.'40 9 2a Lake shrimps dried for 1 day . . . . unshelled 20th Nov.'40 4th Dec.'40 9th Dec.'40 6 2b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 3rd Dec.'40 16th Dec.'40 23rd Dec.'40 8 3a Lake shrimps dried for 2 days . . . . unshelled 2nd Dec.'40 22nd Dec.'40 30th Dec.'40 8 3b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 17th Dec.'40 7th Jan.'41 15th Jan.'41 10 4a Lake shrimps dried for 3 days . . . . unshelled 24th Dec.'40 6th Jan.'41 14th Jan.'41 11 4b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 30th Dec.'40 20th Jan.'41 28th Jan.'41 12 5a Shrimps cured in 2 per cent brine . . . unshelled 4th Aug.} 41 5th Oct.'41 26th Oct.'41 30th Oct.'41 9 5b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 13th Oct.'41 1st Nov.'41 9th Nov.'41 10 6a Shrimps cured in 3 per cent brine . . . unshelled 11th Oct.'41 26th Oct.'41 2nd Nov.'41 10 6b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 27th Oct.'41 23rd Nov.'41 1st Dec.'41 12 7a Shrimps cured in 4 per cent brine . . . unshelled 25th Oct.'41 16th Nov.'41 22nd Nov.'41 12 7b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 17th Nov.'41 14th Dec.'41 20th Dec.'41 141 8a Shrimps cured in 5 per cent brine . . . unshelled 2nd Nov.'41 17th Nov.'41 25th Nov.'41 13 8b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 18th Nov.'41 14th Dec.'41 23rd Dec.'41 15 9a Shrimps cured in 6 per cent brine . . . unshelled 2nd Nov.'41 17th Nov.'41 24th Nov.'41 13 9b Ditto . . . . . shelled 17th Nov.'41 16th Dec.'41 24th Dec.'41 15 10a Shrimps cured in 7 per cent brine . . . unshelled 3rd Nov.'41 17th Nov.'41 25th Nov.'41 13 10b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 18th Nov.'41 15th Dec.'41 24th Dec.'41 15 11a Shrimps cured in 8 per cent brine . . . unshelled 2nd Nov.'41 18th Nov.'41 26th Nov.'41 13 11b Ditto . . . . . shelled . 18th Nov.'41 16th Dec.'41 23rd Dec.'41 15
A PRELIMINARY NOTE ON SOME INDIGENOUS METHODS OF EGG PRESERVATION By T. S. KRISHNAN, B.A., M.Sc., A.I.C., Poultry Research Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for Publication on 29 April 1942) (With Plate X) FOWLS do not, as a rule, lay eggs at an even rate throughout the whole year. In northern India, the highest production generally occurs from January to April. Thereafter, the rate declines with the approach of summer months and, though there may be a slight rise in the monsoon (July and August) if the birds are pro- perly protected from the rains, there is a tendency for a general decline in production until they stop laying during the moult. The moulting period varies somewhat with the breed but in North India it generally occurs between the months of September and December. Pullets begin to lay at different times according to their date of hatch but, on the average they do not come into maxi- mum production until about February. The older birds, too, starting to lay after the moult, reach their peak production at about the same period. In many northern countriew ith a well organized and thriving poultry industry, the egg production during the spring months is generally in excess of current requirements. On the other hand, during autumn and early winter months the production is usually less than the demand. Consequently, eggs are much more expensive during the latter period than the former. Taking advantage of this price variation, marketing agencies in those countries put the surplus eggs of the spring months into cold storage and release them later when prices are high, thus making available a regular supply of good eggs all the year round. In India, however, there is no large seasonal surplus in production and consequently the average price of eggs is not subjected to violent fluctuation. During the hot months of May and June the demand is generally low, owing to the common belief that eggs constitute an unsuitable diet in hot weather and also to the very poor quality of the average market egg. Consequently, the prices are not high in spite of the comparatively low production at this season. The prices during the period of high production (January to March) are generally better than during the hot weather, probably because of the heavy demand and the better quality of the eggs. Hence, there is little scope in India, under existing conditions, for large- scale cold storage of eggs as practised in many other countries. Nearly all eggs are of excellent quality when new-laid but they are highly perishable and deteriorate rapidly unless proper precautions are taken to conserve their initial quality. If eggs are kept under ordinary atmospheric conditions, they develop enlarged air cells due to a loss of moisture and the shrinkage of the internal con- tents. In the hot weather especially, the thick jelly-like albumen deteriorates and becomes watery. At the same time water from the albu- men begins to enter the yolk causing it to increase in size and weakening the surrounding vitelline membrane. On account of these changes, the yolk, which should stand up well-rounded in the centre of a compact layer of firm albumen, flattens out or even ruptures in an egg which has been left too long in a warm atmosphere. Since the carbon- dioxide tension in the outside atmosphere is lower than that inside a new-laid egg, there is a gradual loss of this component from the egg, with the result that the albumen becomes more alkaline. This hastens the rate of the deteriorative changes. Also, if the temperature at which the egg is stored is above 68°F., the embryo in fertile eggs begins to develop. Since the temperatures prevalent in the plains of India during the hot weather are very high, being not far from the optimum in- cubation temperature of eggs, rapid embryo development occurs in fertile eggs under normal storage conditions. During this season, if fertile eggs are left at ordinary room temperature for even a week, they generally become inedible on account of embryo development. All the above-mentioned physical and chemical changes are considerably slowed down by keeping the eggs at a temperature below 60°F., embryo development ceasing below 68°F. Though humi- dity, air circulation, carbon-dioxide concentra- tion, cleanliness of eggs and packing materials also affect the keeping quality of eggs, the most im- portant consideration is the provision of a properly adjusted cool temperature in the storage room. Since the vast bulk of eggs marketed in India are fertile, the importance of keeping them cool during the hot weather to prevent large scale damage by embryo development is obvious. Since, however, the poverty of the producer as well as the low price of eggs make the use of a 127
128 Indigenous Methods of Egg Preservation refrigerator or other cold storage either impossible or uneconomic, the real problem in India demand- ing urgent attention is the evolving of a cheap and efficient method for the lengthening of the useful life of fresh eggs during the hot weather. The village producers usually put the eggs laid by their birds into baskets and keep them in the coolest part of the house till the egg collector arrives or they are sent to the town markets. These conditions are not conducive to the conserv- ing of egg quality, especially during the hot weather; consequently the average market egg at this period is of poor quality. Occasionally a few indigenous materials are used as preservatives in different parts of the country. The materials generally employed are such things as green neem and shisham leaves, rice husks or bran, dry salt, dry charcoal powder and moist sand [Marketing Report, 1938]. Little is known about the effi- ciency of these preservatives in conserving egg quality. Recently, however, the writer has carried out a series of tests as to the efficiency of some of the above substances for the preservation of eggs during the hot and moist months of July and August. The following materials were studied :Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II] PLATE X [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 Measuring the height of the yolk [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 Determination of the diameter of the yolk [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 Measurement of the depth of air cell
T. S. KRISHNAN 129 measurements can be made is also considerably widened. All yolk indices reported in this paper have been determined by this procedure. In some experiments only infertile eggs were used while in others equal numbers of fertile and infertile eggs were employed. A daily record was kept of the maximum tem- perature and relative humidity in the egg storage room during the whole course of these trials. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Green neem and shisham leaves In the experiments with these two materials, infertile eggs only were used. As it is well known that infertile eggs stand storage better than fertile ones, it is reasonable to assume that the efficiency of these preservatives would not be higher with fertile eggs than with infertiles, and consequently that the results of this test are the best obtainable with these substances. The maximum daily temperatures in the storage room during the period of this investigation ranged from 95°F. at the commencement to 87°F. at the end of the period of experimentation. The relative humidity during the same time ranged from 64 per cent to 80 per cent. With the eggs preserved in green neem leaves fermentation of the leaves was marked even on the first day, the temperature rising to 102°F. which was 7° above the room temperature. After the second day the temperature began to fall and at the end of five days, when eggs were removed for analysis, the temperature had fallen to 97°F. Similar but less marked changes were noticed in the case of the eggs preserved in shisham leaves. When eggs were taken out for examination after five days, the leaves gave off a musty smell. The exterior of the shells of the eggs preserved in both materials were covered with dark spots which also gave off a musty odour. When opened out, the eggs preserved in neem leaves appeared to be normal except for a slight smell of neem in some of them but with shisham leaves half the number of eggs tested were already spoilt by mould growth and the rest had a slightly mouldy smell. Since the leaves were mouldy in both cases the remain- ing eggs were preserved in fresh lots of the res- pective leaves for the next five days. Fermenta- tion did not ensue but all the eggs in both groups were completely spoilt by mould when examined at the end of the second five days. This is pro- bably due to the fact that all eggs had already been infected with mould spores during the first five days and merely keeping them in fresh leaves could not arrest the growth of the mould. The figures for interior quality as measured at the different stages are given in Table I. TABLE I Changes in yolk index of eggs preserved in neem and shisham leaves Preservative Period of storage (days) Yolk index Control Preserved Neem leaves . . 0 (Initial quality) 0.400 0.400 5 0.280 0.359 10 0.197 * Shisham leaves . 0 (Initial quality) 0.411 0.411 5 0.309 0.345 10 0.229 * * Measurement of yolk index could not be made since all eggs were spoilt by mould growth. It may be seen from the above that preservation in neem leaves resulted in the yolk index decreas- ing from 0.400 to 0.359 in five days, indicating a decline in quality of 10.3 per cent from the ori- ginal level. During the same period the control eggs showed a loss of 30 per cent from the initial level. In the next five days, while the controls declined by a further 20.8 per cent in quality, the yolk index dropping to 0.197 from the initial figure of 0.400, the preserved eggs were all spoilt by mould growth. With shisham leaves similar results were obtained. The decrease in quality shown by eggs preserved in this material as well as the corresponding controls during the first five days was 16.1 per cent and 24.8 per cent res- pectively from the starting level. At the end of ten days all the preserved eggs were found to be mouldy, while the controls still remained fit for consumption though they had lost 44.3 per cent of their initial quality, the yolk index having declined from 0.411 to 0.229. From the yolk-index figures it would appear that the preservatives were of some value in reducing the loss of yolk quality during the first five days. However, as some of the eggs pre- served in neem leaves smelt of neem and half of those in the shisham leaves group had been spoilt by mould growth within this period, it is apparent that these defects more than counterbalance the slightly better yolk-index figures obtained with the two preservatives. At the end of ten days, though all the preserved eggs were spoilt, the controls, as judged by their broken-out appearance, were all still edible. The small differences in the
130 Indigenous Methods of Egg Preservation rate of deterioration among the two sets of con- trols are perhaps due to the experiments not being carried out simultaneously as well as to variations in individual egg quality. Between the two pre- servatives there does not appear to be any out- standing difference in efficiency. Hence it appears that the preservation of eggs in green neem or shisham leaves, under the condi- tions of this test, is not only of no advantage but even of positive disadvantage. Rice husk, salt and wood charcoal Fertile and infertile eggs in equal proportions were used in the tests with rice husk, salt and wood charcoal. The maximum temperature and relative humidity during the period of these experi- ments averaged about 87°F. and 75 per cent, respectively. Owing to the high temperature prevalent in the egg storage room all fertile eggs, whether preserved or not, developed prominent blood rings by the fifth day of storage on account of embryo development. Owing to this develop- ment all of them had become inedible. At the end of ten days of storage, conditions were naturally considerably worse, the contents of some eggs having actually started to rot, owing, presumably, to the death of the germ. There was, however, no case of mouldiness in any of the different sets of preserved eggs, owing to the fact that the storage materials contained insufficient humidity for the development of moulds. Figures for changes in interior quality set out in Table II refer only to infertile eggs as all fertile ones were spoilt by embryo development. A study of the data in this table shows that preserva- tion in rice husk, salt and wood charcoal resulted in percentage declines from the original level of 33.3, 30.4 and 29.2 in five days and 42.4, 46.4 and 49.0 in ten days, respectively. With the corresponding sets of control eggs for the above three materials, the percentage deteriorations recorded were 34.4, 34.1 and 35.5 in five days and 49.9, 50.6 and 51.7 in ten days, respectively. TABLE II Changes in yolk indices of eggs preserved in rice husk, salt and wood charcoal Preservative Period of storage (days) Yolk index Control Preserved Rice husk . . 0 (Initial quality) 0.427 0.427 5 0.280 0.285 10 0.214 0.246 Preservative Period of storage (days) Yolk index Control Preserved Salt . . . 0 (Initial quality) 0.405 0.405 5 0.267 0.282 10 0.200 0.217 Wood charcoal . 0 (Initial quality) 0.439 0.439 5 0.283 0.311 10 0.212 0.224 The rates of decline in quality as judged by measurement of the yolk index were very similar in all the control eggs. With the use of preserva- tives, the lowest percentage decline in quality at five days was recorded in the eggs preserved in the wood charcoal and the greatest decline in the eggs stored in rice husk. At ten days, the lowest percentage decline in quality was observed in the eggs stored in rice husk and the highest decline in the eggs stored in wood charcoal. However, though the rates of decline both at five and ten days were slightly less in the preserved than in the control eggs, the differences were relatively small and were not significant. With these three pre- servatives, there were no harmful effects resulting from mould development. Linseed oil The investigation with linseed oil lasted for five weeks. With this material also both fertile and infertile eggs were tested. Fertile eggs were kept as controls only for two weeks (since it was be- lieved that they could not last longer without spoiling) after which only infertiles were employed. In the oil-treated group, both fertile and infertile eggs were tested for the full period of five weeks. The actual behaviour of the fertile eggs stored for the first two weeks fully justified the assumption that such eggs could last no longer without spoil- ing, since all such eggs were spoilt by the end of the first week, consequent upon embryo develop- ment. Painting with linseed oil did not affect the rate of embryo development. Since temperature and humidity, the most important factors controlling the development of the embryo, were favourable (as may be seen from Table III), the results obtained were to be expected.
T. S. KRISHNAN 131 TABLE III Record of weekly average maximum temperature and relative humidity during the linseed oil servation experimen Period of storage Average max. temperature °F. Av. relative humidity per cent 1st week . . . 88 72 2nd 132 Indigenous Methods of Egg Preservation maintaining egg quality during periods of high temperature and high humidity. In fact, it was actually shown that the use of the leaves mentioned is definitely deleterious, as the decayed leaves led to the development of mould growths in the eggs. Linseed oil enabled infertile eggs to be kept in fairly good condition for a period of five weeks, even in hot weather, but seemed to be unable to prevent fertile eggs from spoiling. It should, therefore, be noted that, unless special precautions to arrest embryo development are taken, only infertile eggs should be held for any period in excess of a week, during the hot weather. Since the vast bulk of eggs produced and marketed in India are fertile, and as none of the above pre- servatives are able to prevent embryo develop- ment, it appears that other and more suitable methods must be evolved for preventing the wastage due to this cause. The most obvious method of preventing losses resulting from em- bryo development in the hot weather is the pro- duction of infertile eggs. Much propaganda amongst village producers will, however, be neces- sary before this improvement can be brought about, as the ordinary ryot believes that egg production ceases or is much reduced in the absence of the male. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The writer is indebted to Mr A. J. Macdonald, Officer-in-charge, Poultry Research Section, Im- perial Veterinary Research Institute, for his invaluable help throughout the course of these investigations and to Mr Mohd. Athar Ali, Re- search Assistant, for his assistance in the experi- mental work. REFERENCES Parsons, C. H. and Mink, L. D. (1937). U. S. Egg & Poul. Mag. 43, 484 R ept. on the marketing of eggs in India and Burma (1938). Marketing Series No. 9, Delhi Sharp, P. F. and Powell, C. K. (1930). Ind. & Eng. Chem. 22, 909
A SIMPLE 'RAM-KO' METHOD FOR THE ESTIMATION OF FAT IN MILK By C. S. RAM AYYAR and ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA, Imperial Dairy Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 9 May 1942) (With one text-figure) MILK fat is commercially a very valuable consti- tuent of milk. Hence a simple, quick and in- expensive method for its estimation is always helpful. The most commonly used methods are the Babcock and the Gerber. Both these methods give accurate and reproducible results but their main drawback is the rather high initial cost of the outfit. Further, the handling of chemicals such as strong sulphuric acid involved in the tests by unskilled hands is dangerous. Hence the utility of these two methods under Indian condi- tions is rather limited. Several simple butyro- metric methods using alkaline solutions have been put forth mainly with the object of simplifying the outfit to be used. Notable amongst these are Gerber's, Hoy berg's, Neusal's Sin-acid and Ha-Ha. The greatest handicap in spreading the use of these alkaline butyrometric methods is that the composition of the alkaline solution used in the tests is kept a trade secret. In the present studies, an attempt has, therefore, been made to evolve a method based on. similar principles, which would prove accurate, simple and economi- cal and which requires no costly item, like a centri- fuge. EXPERIMENTAL In this experiment, the Gerber test was adopted as the standard for comparing the results obtained with it with the experimental results. The butyro- meter used for the purpose of the present study was the one used for the Ha-Ha method for the determination of fat in milk (Fig. 1). In this test, 9.7 ml. of milk and 6.5 ml. of the special alkaline solution were mixed together and maintained at 52°C. in a water bath, with frequent shaking, for about 30 minutes when the separated fat was read on a scale graduated in per cent. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Special type of butyrometer used in the experiment (1) Effect of using different concentrations of sodium hydroxide. Repetto is quoted by Harvey and Hill [1936] as recommending for his centri- fugal method, the use of 6.5 per cent sodium hydroxide solution. Trials were carried out using 9.7 ml. of milk, 5.5 ml. of sodium hydroxide solutions of varying strengths from 5.0 to 10 per cent and 1 ml. of iso-butyl alcohol in the butyro- meter referred to above. The tubes were kept in a water bath at 52°C. for about half an hour, giving frequent shakings, when fat separated out as a clear layer. The results obtained are shown in Table I. All determinations were carried out in duplicate, and the average figures obtained are only presented in this and other tables. Six trials were conducted in each series. TABLE I Effect of using different concentrations of sodium hydroxide Milk used Gerber 5 per cent NaOH 6.5 per cent NaOH 7.5 per cent NaOH 10 per cent NaOH Pasteurized, milk . 4.1 3.7 3.9 4.0 4.2 Fresh milk . . 5.4 4.8 5.0 5.6 5.9 Buffalo milk . . 6.8 6.0 6.2 6.9 7.0 These data show that, using sodium hydroxide solution of 5.0 and 6 . 5 per cent strength, the results for fat were always lower than those obtained in the Gerber test. With 7.5 per cent sodium hydroxide, the fat percentage was fairly close to that given by the standard method, but the results were not consistent, sometimes being lower and sometimes higher. With a higher concentration of sodium hydroxide, the results were definitely higher. This shows that sodium hydroxide alone is not a satisfactory reagent for fat testing. (2) Effect of using different alcohols. Trials were next carried out to see if the use of some other alcohol improved the results. For this purpose, amyl, butyl, iso-propyl and iso-butyl alcohols were tried along with 5.5 ml. of 6.5 per cent sodium hydroxide solution. The results obtained are shown in Table II. From this, it is clear that iso-butyl alcohol is the only satisfactory alcohol which could be em- ployed with alkaline solution as a fat-clarifying agent in milk. (3) Selection of suitable alkali. As pointed out before, it was found necessary in the course of the 133
134 A Simple 'Ram-Ko' Method for Estimation of Fat in Milk TABLE II Effect of various alcohols on fat test (Gerber test 4.3 per cent fat) Without alcohol 1 ml. amyl alcohol 1 ml. methyl alcohol 1 ml. isopropyl alcohol 1 ml. butyl alcohol 1 ml. isobutyl alcohol Fat not separated at all . . Fat not clear. Amyl alcohol separated out Practically no separation of fat Fat not clearly separated 4.0 per cent fat. Took longer time for clearing 4.2 per cent fat experiment to add other substances besides sodium hydroxide as protein solvents, to get accurate results. With this object in view, solu- tions of sodium phosphate, Rochelle salt and sodium citrate were tried. These, however, did not give any satisfactory results. Nicol [1937] has recommended for the deter- mination of fat in ice cream, a solution consisting of sodium salicylate 645 gm., potassium carbonate 355 gm., sodium hydroxide 160 gm., distilled water 2840 ml., and iso-propyl alcohol 945 ml. For the experiment, 6.5 ml. of this solution were mixed with 9.7 ml. of milk and kept at 52°C., but no separation of fat took place even after half an hour. In further trials, therefore, 9.7 ml. of milk were mixed with 5.5 ml. of salicylate reagent and 1 ml. of iso-butyl alcohol. The results of these trials are given in Table III. TABLE III Effect of using salicylate reagent on fat test (Temperature 52°C.) Percentage of fat by Gerber test Salicylate reagent Pasteurized milk . . . 4.6 4.5 Sindhi composite . . . 5.7 5.6 Buffalo milk . . . . 6.2 6.0 Milk diluted with water . . 3.8 3.7 Buttermilk . . . . 1.0 0.6 Cream diluted with water . . 5.0 4.9 The figures show that there is a greater approxi- mation of the results obtained by the salicylate reagent to Gerber readings than what were obtained by the use of sodium hydroxide alone, though the results in most cases were still con- siderably lower. (4) Effect of using higher temperature. In the last section where a temperature of 52°C. was used for heating, the results were shown to be lower than those obtained with Gerber method. Trials were, therefore, carried out using a tem perature of 60°C. The results obtained are shown in Table IV. TABLE IV Effect of using higher temperature on fat test using salicylate reagent Percentage of fat by Gerber test Salicylate reagent 52°C. 60°C. Fresh cream diluted 10 times with water. 4.7 4.6 4.7 Whey . . . . 1.6 1.5 1.6 Pasteurized milk . . 4.0 3.9 3.9 Sindhi cow's milk . . 5.0 4.6 5.0 Cow's fresh milk . . 4.7 4.5 4.7 Buffalo's fresh milk . . 5.9 5.7 5.8 Milk diluted with water . 3.2 3.0 3.2 Buffalo milk diluted 1:1 . 4.7 4.6 4.7 Buttermilk . . . 1.0 0.6 0.9 These results show that keeping the tubes in the water bath at 60°C. gave more concordant results. The separation of fat also took place in a shorter time at 60°C, (20 mts.) than at 52°C. (30 mts.). So this temperature of heating was adopted for all furher trials. The time of heating was fixed at 20 minutes. (5) Effect of varying the amount of iso-butyl alcohol. Trials were carried out to find the opti- mum quantity of iso-butyl alcohol required for separating the fat. For this purpose, to a mix- ture of 5.5 ml. of salicylate reagent and 9.7 ml. of milk varying amounts of alcohol were added. The results obtained are shown in Table V.
C. S. RAM AYYAR AND ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA 135 TABLE V Effect of varying the quantity of iso-butyl alcohol Percentage of fat by Gerber test Salicylate reagent plus iso-butyl alcohol 0.5 ml. 0.8 ml. 1.0 ml. 1.2 ml. 1.5 ml. Pasteurzied milk 4.1 Fat not clear 3.8 4.1 4.5 5.0 Pasteurized milk 3.9 Fat not clear 3.6 3.9 4.1 Fat not clear Fresh milk . 4.8 Fat not clear 4.2 4.7 5.2 Fat not clear Fresh milk . 5.2 Fat not clear 4.8 5.2 5.4 Fat not clear From these results, it can be seen that the amount of iso-butyl alcohol used, appeared to have some effect on the reading. Amounts less than 1 ml. or more than 1.2 ml. gave either low or high percentage of fat and no or incomplete separation. On the other hand, 1 ml. seems to be the optimum amount which would give more or less a correct reading. (6) Effect of excess of alcohol on the reading of the fat column. The slightly higher reading, which was obtained when more than 1 ml. of alcohol was used, according to Table V above, was suspected to be due to some of the alcohol itself getting separated along with the fat. To find out whether that was actually the case, the following further trials were conducted. Varying amounts of iso- butyl alcohol, from 0.5 ml. to 1.5 ml. were added to 5.5 ml. of salicylate reagent, followed by 10 ml. of water. The tubes were well shaken and kept at 60°C. The results obtained are shown in Table VI. TABLE VI Effect of using excess of alcohol Amount of iso- butyl alcohol added in ml. Reading per cent 5.5 ml. of salicylate re- agent and 10 ml. of water. 0.5 Nil 0.8 Nil 1.0 Nil 1.2 0.6 1.3 1.5 1.5 2.0 From Table VI, it is clear that the maximum amount of alcohol miscible with 5.5 ml. of the alkaline solution was 1 ml. Any amount in excess of it separates out. This confirmed the previous hypothesis that the higher readings with more than 1 ml. of iso-butyl alcohol were due to the separation of a portion of the alcohol itself. (7) Effect of varying the quantities of salicylate reagent used. For this purpose salicylate reagent varying in quantities from 5.0136 A Simple ' Ram-Ko ' Method for Estimation of Fat in Milk the bottom of the water bath. After the first three minutes, the tube is taken out and shaken vigorously and returned to the bath. After another three minutes, the above process is repeated. The tube is then kept for 10 minutes in the bath, when all the fat should separate out as a clear liquid on the top. The tube is now taken out, gently turned upside down and returned to the bath keeping it in the original position for another three minutes. Then the tube is finally taken out and the column of fat then read in the neck of the butyrometer which is graduated to give the reading in percentages. By this method, very satisfactory results were obtained with whole milk, skim milk, buttermilk and whey in the investigations carried out. Further work on this problem is still in progress, aimed at standardizing a still simpler type of butyrometer and also substituting iso-butyl alcoho by a cheaper solvent. SUMMARY A simple (Ram-Ko) butyrometric method using alkaline solution is described for the determination of fat in milk and milk products. The method ensures the same degree of accuracy in results as that obtained with the Gerber test and has the added advantage that the initial cost of the equip ment as well as of testing the samples is very low since no centrifuge is required. REFERENCES Harvey and Hill (1936). Milk production and Control 424 Nichol, H. (1937). Minnesota test for fat in ice cream Dairy Industries 2, 284
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON RICKETS IN PUPS By K. RAGHAVACHARI, G.M.V.C., Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 4 May 1942) BEFORE Mellanby [1921] had conclusively estab- lished that the antirachitic vitamin was intimately connected with the aetiology of rickets in dogs, several hypotheses were postulated to explain the cause of rickets in man and animals. The earlier hypotheses which were classifiable as (a) dietetic imbalance, such as deficiency of fat or excess of carbohydrate in the food, (b) environment138 Some Observations on Rickets in Pups These results may be compared with normal values for serum Ca and P given by Dukes [1937] and by Meysenbug and M'Cann [1921]. The former gives 9.0K. RAGHAVACHARI 139 (1) Whereas in the rest of the bitches living under identical conditions, the off-spring, with two exceptions, were apparently normal, only in the case of bitch No. 60 were the pups observed to suffer from rapidly progressive rickets. In this connection the breeding records of the kennel during the period may be consulted (Table IV). At first, it appeared that dog 74, with a deformity in one leg, possibly rachitic in origin, was the cause. But when the mating of this dog with another bitch (No. 10) usually resulted in normal off-spring, this belief appeared to be incorrect. (2) The change of sire in the case of bitch 60 did not improve matters, as in the two subsequent whelpings the pups were rachitic. It, therefore, appeared likely that the malady originated with bitch No. 60, and that there was some hereditary or predisposing cause other than what can be explained on usually accepted theories. Accord- ing to Ellis and McLeod [1923], heredity appears to have no direct connection with rickets, although Siegert [1903, 1905] believes that the incidence of the disease in breastfed children may be accounted for on this ground. Korenchevsky [1923] made interesting observations on two infants in Vienna. The first was born in July of a healthy mother, and the second during the following month of a mother suffering from osteomalacia. The mother of the first acted as a foster-mother to the second child from a few days after its birth. Both children were brought up under identical condi- tions. By the middle of December, severe rickets was observed in the child of the mother who had suffered from osteomalacia. The baby from the healthy mother was in good condition. It was concluded, both from human experience and animal experimentation, that the young born of a mother whose vitality is depleted may be predis- posed to rickets. Maxwell and Miles [1925] also noticed rickets in infants born of mothers suffering from osteomalacia. It was unfortunate that critical studies could not be undertaken to establish the existence of osteomalacia in bitch No. 60, though the analysis of her serum which was low in inorganic phosphorus (Table III) indicated a predisposition and a border line condition of nutritional instability [Howland & Kramer, 1922]. It may be pointed that the low figures for serum phosphorus, which were obtained when the animal was not pregnant or lactating, would be probably further reduced by the drain of pregnancy and lactation. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS My thanks are due to Mr P. C. Banerji, G.B.V.C., for his interest, to Dr F. C. Minett and to Dr N. D. Kehar for assistance with this article and to the latter for the analysis of blood sera and of bones. REFERENCES Adams, G. McCollum, E. V. (1928). J. Biol. Chem. 78 495 Dukes, H. H. (1937). The Physiology of Domestic Animals. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, London Ellis C. & McLeod, A. L. (1923). Vital factors of fooas, vitamins and nutrition. Chapman & Hall, London Hawk, P. B. & Bergeim, O. (1931). Pract. Physiol. Chem. Blackiston & Sons, Phila delphia Howland, J. & Kramer, B. (1922). Trans. Amer. Pediat. Soc. 34, 204 Korenchevsky, V. (1923). J. Path. & Bact. 26, 382 Loll, W. (1923). Biochem. Zeit. 135, 493 Maxwell, J. P. & Miles, L. M. (1925). J. Obstel. & Gynae- cology 32, 433 McCrudden, F. H. (1910). J. Biol. Chem. 7, 199 Mellanby, E. (1921). Experimental rickets, Med. Res. Coun. Sp. Rep. Ser. No. 61, 20, 47 Meysenbug, L. & M'Cann, G. F. (1921). J. Biol. Chem., 47, 541 Siegert, F. (1903-1905). Cited by E. A. Park (1923). Physiol Rev. 3, 106 (original not seen) Steenbock, H., Sell, M. T. & Jones, J. H. (1923). J. Biol. Chem. 56, 345 Steenbock, H. & Black, A. (1924). J. Biol. Chem. 61, 405 Steenbock, H. & Black, A. (1925). J. Biol. Chem. 64, 263 TABLE I Breeding history of Bitch 60 Mated with dog No. Date of litter Number and condition of progcny Remarks 74 Feb. 36 Four. Developed rickets No cod liver oil given to bitch. 38 12-11-36 Four. Developed rickets Do. 38 8-11-37 Five. One died early, one normal and three developed rickets, of which one (a) died later, (b) and (c) surviving. No cod liver oil given to bitch. Cod liver oil given to pups (b) & (c), (a) acting as con- trol. Pup (b) improved in con- dition. Pup (c) improved later when given calci- um also. 38 25-11-39 Three Remained normal Cod liver oil given to bitch during and after pregnan- cy. Two genera- tions of pups, all normal, were ob- tained from one of the three bitch- es born Nov. 39. 38 1-3-41 Two. One normal, other mild rickets. No cod liver oil given to bitch. 38 27-11-41 Four. One died early, one normal and two developed rickets. Do.
140 Some Observations on Rickets in Pups TABLE II Breeding records, other than those of Bitch 60 Bitch No. Dog No. Date of litter Number and condition of pro- geny 71 84 12-11-36 Three. Normal. 9 {84 65 26-11-36 Four. Normal. 12-12-37 Four. Normal. 92 1 20-12-36 Three. Normal. 90 1 { 17-1-37 Three. Normal. 30-4-38 Three. Normal. 10 74 { 228 { 26-2-37 Three. Normal. 26-12-37 Three. Normal. 13-11-39 Five. Two developed rickets. 18-12-41 Three. Normal. 3 1 { 21-11-37 Three. Normal. 9-9-38 Four. Normal. 105 186 { 22-11-38 Two. Normal. 12-2-40 Three. Normal. 22-1-42 Three. Normal. 11-8-42 Three. Normal. 107 186 { 30-5-40 Four. Normal. 11-9-41 Five. Normal. 18-8-42 Two. Normal. 106 186 { 23-6-40 Three. Normal. 16-5-41 Two. Normal. Bitch No. Dog No. Date of litter Number and condition of pro- geny J.b 186 26-6-40 Three. Normal. 163 38 21-7-40 Three. Normal. 181 48 {22-1-41 23-6-41 29-6-41 One. Normal. 179 Three. Normal. 196 Five. Normal. 174 228 22-12-41 Seven. Normal. 211 288 15-8-42 Three. Normal. 212 198 {17-8-42 15-8-42 Four. Normal. 214 Three. Normal. TABLE III Analysis of serum for calcium and phosphorus (mg. per 100 c.c. serum) Serum from animal Inorganic phosphorus Calcium 38 3.7 14.2 74 1.9 10.5 1 4.3 13.9 60 2.4 9.7 9 3.6 12.7 90 6.6 13.2 TABLE IV Percentage composition of the bones of normal and rachitic pups (on a fat-free dry matter basis) Authors Normal bone Rachitic bone Femur Rib Femur Rib Inorg. ash CaO P2O5 Inorg. ash CaO P2O5 Inorg. ash CaO P2O5 Inorg. ash CaO P2O5 Present observation . 65.70 36.4 26.93 61.8 34.3 25.97 26.4 7.6 11.2 20.0 7.8 8.2 Mollanby (1921) . .. 27.78 .. .. .. .. .. 13.3 .. .. .. ..
THE RELATION OF THE CANDLING APPEARANCE OF EGGS TO THEIR THICK WHITE PERCENTAGE By T. S. KRISHNAN, B.A., M.Sc., A.I.C., Poultry Research Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 27 July 1942) (With Plate XI and one text figure). IN the modern marketing of eggs, grading is of primary importance. The purpose of grading is to classify eggs according to their size, external appearance and interior quality. Effective grad- ing enables the trade 'to quote prices based on comparative values and offers an incentive to the producer to give the best possible care to the eggs. The consumer's reaction to the dependability of quality is likely to outweigh his hesitancy about buying the higher priced grades. Grading also enables persons in the trade to sort the eggs in accordance with the purpose for which they are best suited. Sorting according to size and appear- ance is comparatively easy but to classify eggs according to their interior quality is not so simple. Several methods for judging the quality of broken out eggs are available but there are not so many for grading eggs-in-shell according to their interior quality. Those suggested by Wilcke [1936] and Carr [1939] have not found any wide acceptance, while the ' floatation test ' is somewhat crude. The only method that is in general use is ' candl- ing '. This makes possible rapid grading for trade purposes. In this method, the egg is held with the end containing the air cell (usually the broad one) uppermost, in an inclined position, in front of the opening in the candling device (Plate XI, Fig. 1) through which a beam of strong light issues. The egg is then given a rapid twist to set the contents rotating. This enables the observer to see all the egg contents silhouted against the light. The operation is best carried out in a darkened room as the light then shows up the moving egg contents more clearly. The size and condition of the air cell, the shadow, size, outline, position and mobility of the yolk, as well as the nature of the white can be easily discerned. Cracks and checks are noted. Meat spots, blood spots, developed embryos, moulds, rots and other egg faults are also observed. In a good fresh egg, the air cell should be small, firm and round ; the yolk should be centrally placed and should cast a pale shadow with a very indistinct outline ; the white should be firm and clear. The movement of the yolk should be free but slow. No evidence of embryo development, foreign bodies or other egg faults should be present. As the interior quality of the egg deteriorates with age or other cause, the air cell generally increases in size, the yolk enlarges and the thick white liquefies. Consequently the yolk approaches near- er to the shell and casts a darker shadow, the out- line of which becomes progressively more distinct with loss of quality. Its movement, too, becomes at first very rapid and later on sluggish. If the egg is fertile and has been exposed for some time to high temperatures, the embryo begins to develop and shows either a developed embryo spot, a blood ring, a dead germ or blood veins. This method of judging the interior quality of eggs is not by any means perfect but in experienced hands 'candling' generally proves sufficiently satisfactory for commercial purposes. Very good and very poor eggs are separated with comparative ease but intermediate grades are usually more difficult to classify. Several factors influence the candling appearance of eggs. One of the most important is the effi- ciency of the candling lamp. The design of the candling lamp determines the efficiency of the illumination of the egg contents by influencing the amount, intensity, direction and colour of the light used. As Graham [1934] has put it, 'To solve the problem of candling, the help of the physicist in devising a suitable lamp is indispen- sible '. Doan [1934 1/2/3] has done a considerable amount of work on candling equipment and has devised a lamp [1936] which is said to increase internal egg visibility and also relieve the strain on the eyes of the operator. It does not, however, allow the high speed grading usually attained with the standard commercial types. Wilhelm and Payne [1934] have also tested the efficiency of different types of candling lamps fitted with clear, frosted or red bulbs. The two latter were found to be slightly more efficient than the first. Benja- min and Pierce [1937] also refer to a candler for accurate research work, developed by Shackel- ton and Powell, in which a transparent colour scale is used. This is said to enable the operator to judge the internal quality more accurately. Almquist [1933] worked out in detail the relationship of the candling appearance of eggs to their actual internal 141
142 Candling Appearance of Eggs and their Thick White Percentage quality. Among the important factors found by him to affect candling appearance were : yolk colour as influencing yolk shadow, position of the yolk, distribution of thick and thin white and cloudiness of albumen. In addition to the above were the changes in the size of the air space, the defects of the air space, the mottling of the shell and the shell texture. Tinted, thick and spotted shells also interfere with candling appearance. Schroeder [1933] also observed that candling was not a sufficiently accurate index of actual interior quality He pointed out the influence of yolk colour on yolk shadow, the impossibility of finding out flavour by candling and also the general inaccuracy in classifying eggs as 'watery whites' for reasons such as the presence of bubbly air cells. Coles [1940] mentioned the effect of misplaced chalaza or ruptured thick white layer on yolk visibility. How changes in temperature or pH may affect the candling appearance of eggs has been studied by Almquist, Givens and Klose [1934]. They noticed that the transmission of light varied in the different layers of egg albumen and that this was correlated with the percentage of mucin in the white. The physical condition of the mucin was affected by changes in the temperature and pH. They found that the changes in the trans- mission of light due to these factors caused differ- ences in the candling appearance of eggs which were not necessarily correlated with the changes in their interior quality. In spite of these several drawbacks, Almquist [1933] holds that 'in view of the number of widely differing factors that contribute to the quality of an egg, it appears extremely unlikely that any grading method can be devised which will possess as much versatility, accuracy and speed as the candling method '. The following investigation was undertaken to find out the relationship of candling appearance to actual interior quality. PROCEDURE Day-old eggs from birds of the Institute flock consisting of White Leghorns, Rhode Island Reds and desis, which were fed, housed and managed under standard conditions, were used for the experiment. The eggs were candled and divided into two arbitrary grades according to their candling appearance. The mobility of the yolk and the intensity of the yolk shadow were the main considerations according to which eggs were graded for their interior quality. Those with limited yolk movement and dim yolk shadow were classed as grade I, and the rest, with free and rapid movement of the yolk and a comparatively darker yolk shadow, were classed as grade II. In assign ing the candling grade, egg faults such as mean spots, blood, cracks, defective air cells, etc when present were ignored. The candling was carried out in a darkened room with the aid of at Ovolux egg candler (Plate XI, fig. 1) fitted with a 25 watt clear glass bulb. After candling, all the eggs were broken out and the actual interior quality determined by measuring the percentage thick white. This estimation was carried out (Plate XI, fig. 2) by the sieve method of Holst and Almquist [1931] as described by Macdonald and Krishnan [1942]. During the course of the experiment, which lasted from 1 March to 31 July, 1940, 542 white Leghorn, 576 Rhode Island Red and 750 desi eggs were examined. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS The frequency distributions of the percentage thick white of eggs of different breeds for the two candling grades and their statistical significance are given in Table I and the Chart. From Table I it is seen that, out of the 1868 eggs examined during the experiment, from all breeds combined, 1291 (i.e. 69.11 per cent) were classed on candling as grade I. The proportion of eggs candled as grade I from the three different breeds, White Leghorns, Rhode Island Reds and desis, were 67.1 6, 78.65 and 63.20 per cent respectively. Hence, except in the case of the Rhode Island Reds, about two-thirds of all the eggs candled were assigned to grade I. Among the Rhodes, however, the pro- portion of eggs assigned to this grade was a little more than three-quarters of the total number tested. An examination of Fig. 1 shows that the frequency distribution curves of the different breeds are more or less the same in both the grades. It also appears that there are no outstanding differences between the slopes of the curves of the two grades in the same breed. The curves for the Rhode Island Reds have a tendency to shift more towards the side of the lower thick white percentages, while the others tend to have a greater spread in the region of the higher thick albumen figures. These tendencies are brought out by the frequency distribution figures presented in Table II. In this table the eggs of the different breeds, in each grade, have been classified into three main groupsIndian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II ] PLATE XI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. The Ovolux egg candler [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Determination of thick white percentage
T. S. KRISHNAN 143 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Percentage frequency distribution curves of thick white percentage in eggs of different breeds
144 Candling Appearance of Eggs and their Thick White Percentage TABLE I Test of significance Breed Candl- ing grade Size of sample Mean percentage thick white and its standard error S. E.of differ- ence of means Differ- ence of means S. E. of differ- ence White Leghorn { I II 364 51±0.405 }0.697 1.43 178 52±0.567 Rhode Island Red { I II 453 48±0.392 }0.840 1.19 123 47±0.742 Desi . . { I II 474 50±0.346 }0.637 4.71* 276 53±0.534 All breeds . { I II 1,291 49±0.223 }0.429 4.66* 577 51±0.365 *Highly significant TABLE II Percentage distribution of poor, average and high quality eggs in the two grades of eggs of different breeds Breed Candling grade Poor (less than 40 per cent thick white) Average (45-55 per cent thick white) High (over 60 per cent thick white) White Leghorn . { I II 5.0 57.1 11.7 3.9 53.4 14.6 Rhode Island Red . { I II 16.1 42.8 6.4 22.0 49.6 4.1 Desi . . . { I II 8.4 56.3 6.5 4.0 43.8 18.8 All breeds . . { I II 10.1 51.8 7.7 7.8 48.0 14.4 It will also be seen that, in all breeds other than the Rhodes, the proportion of poor quality eggs was higher in grade I than in grade II, and that of the high quality eggs was greater in grade II than grade I. With Rhode Island Reds, the reverse was noted in both cases. The mean percentage thick white of eggs (Table I) was about the same in all the breeds as well as between the two grades in each one of the individual breeds. The figures for the Rhodes were slightly lower than those of the other two breeds. Even in this factor, the grade II eggs had the higher figure, except in the case of the Rhode Island Reds. DISCUSSION In spite of the fact that the mean percentage thick white of the eggs of the Rhodes was some- what lower than those of the other two breeds, a much larger proportion of the eggs of this breed was classed as grade I in candling. Since all birds of the different breeds were fed the same ration, candling appearance could not have been materially affected by yolk colour. The brown shell of the egg of the Rhode Island Reds gives a reddish colour in candling which causes some difficulty in properly assessing the intensity of the yolk shadow. The latter is a factor of considerable importance in deciding the candling grade. Though allowance for this factor was made while candling, it seems to have influenced the grading to some extent as shown by the higher percentage of eggs of this breed classed as grade I. Hence shell colour appears to interfere with candling appear ance. The grading of eggs by candling was carried out with the object of grouping the better class of eggs in grade I and the poorer in grade II. If candling appearance were a true index of percent- age thick white, the proportion of the better class of eggs in grade I, i.e. having a thick albumen percentage greater than 60, should be high, and that of the poorer ones, with less than 40 per cent thick white, very low. Similarly in grade II, the great majority of the eggs should belong to the latter category and hardly any to the former class. From the experimental results of the com- bined breeds as well as those of the Leghorns and desis, however, it will be seen that the proportion of the poorer quality eggs in grade II was not only very low but also considerably less than in grade 1. Also, the percentage of eggs of the higher quality was decidedly more in grade II than in grade I. Further, it was found that grade II contained a higher proportion of better quality eggs than of low quality ones. It would, therefore, seem that the grading of day-old eggs by candling was not very successful in accurately sorting them out according to their percentage thick white. Among the Rhodes, however, the proportion of the poorer quality eggs in grade II was higher than that of the other breeds in the same grade. But in this same breed the percentage of eggs having less than 40 per cent thick white, in grade I, was nearly twice that found among the desis, and over three times that in the Leghorns in the same grade. Further, the percentage of the higher quality eggs among Rhodes, in grade I, was the lowest among the different breeds investigated. It was also found that the actual average interior quality of the eggs of the Rhode Island Reds was the lowest of the three breeds studied. The relationship of candling appearance to thick white percentage in eggs of this breed, therefore, does not seem to be any better than in the others. The statistical analysis of the results, given in Table I, aslo confirms this view. The data show
T. S. KRISHNAN 145 that there was no significant difference in the mean percentage thick white, between the two candling grades of either the Leghorns or the Rhodes. There was, however, a highly significant difference between the two grades in the desis and, consequently, also among the combined lot of eggs. If it is borne in mind that in these latter cases the significantly higher figure belonged to grade II eggs, which were intended to consist only of the poorer quality ones, the inefficiency of candling as a reliable method of judging the actual thick albumen percentage is forcibly demonstrated. CONCLUSION From the results of the above study, therefore, it appears that there is little relationship between candling appearance and real interior quality as judged by measurement of the thick white percentage. This conclusion is in agreement with the observations of Stewart, Gans and Sharp [1932]; Almquist [1933] ; Schroeder [1933] ; Pennington, True, Rich and Kiess [1934]; Macdonald [1936] ; and Paulhus and Gwin [1940]. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I am greatly indebted to Mr A. J. Macdonald, Officer-in-charge, Poultry Research Section, for his encouragement and advice in this study. I also wish to thank Mr S. Sen, Statistical Assistant, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Muktes- war, for statistical analysis of the results and Mr Mohd. Athar Ali, Research Assistant, for assistance in the laboratory work. REFERENCES Almquist, H. J. (1933). Univ. Calif. Bull. No. 561 Almquist, H. J., Givens, J. W. and Klose, A. (1934). Ind. Eng. Chem. 26, 847 Benjamin, E. and Pierce, H. C. (1937). Marketing of Poultry Products Carr, R. H. (1939). Poul. Sci. 18, 225 Coles, R. (1940). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 46, 92 Doan, R. L. (1934, 1). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 40 (8), 15 Doan, R. L. (1934, 2). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 40 (9), 25 Doan, R. L. (1934, 3). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 40 (10), 19 Doan, R. L. (1936). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 43, 80 Graham, W. R. (1934). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 40 (1), 38 Holst, W. F. and Almquist, H. J. (1931). Hilgardia 6, 49 Macdonald, A. J. (1936). Proc. VI World's Poul. Congress, Vol. I, 293 Macdonald, A. J. and Krishnan, T. S. (1942). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 12, 318 Paulhus, N. G. and Gwin, J. M. (1940). Poul. Sci. 19, 357 Pennington, M. E., True, M. J., Rich, A. D. and Kiess A. A. (1934). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 40 (5), 43 Schroeder, C. H. (1933). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 39 (6), 44 Stewart, G. F., Gans, A. R. and Sharp, P. F. (1932). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 38 (8), 14 Wilcke, H. L. (1936). Iowa Agr. Expt. Sta. Bull. No. 194 Wilhelm, L. A. and Payne, L. F. (1934). U. S. Egg and Poul. Mag. 40 (6), 28
STUDIES ON THE COMPOSITION OF THE BLOOD OF FARM ANIMALS IN INDIA 1. A STUDY OF SOME HAEMATOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL CONSTITUENTS IN THE BLOOD OF NORMAL CATTLE By D. N. MULLICK and A. K. PAL, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 8 September 1942) FROM an extensive study of the blood composi- tion of livestock carried out in South Africa and the United States of America, it was concluded that an analysis of blood could be conveniently used for the detection of some forms of deficiency in farm animals before any clinical symptoms developed. Once standard figures for the different blood consti- tuents of normal animals become available, it will be easier to interpret any change in those constitu- ents resulting from disease. In India, little work has been done on this subject, hence the main purpose of this investiga- tion has been to establish a normal value for the blood constituents of farm animals, especially of cattle, in India under varying climatic conditions. To this end, data are recorded from various groups of cattle at this Institute. The conduct of feeding and management of the animals may be considered similar to that of any other Government farm in this country. EXPERIMENTAL The animals used were mostly of the Hissar breed excepting six working bullocks of the Dhanni variety. All the animals were tested for tuber- culosis and rinderpest and were found negative ; further all of them remained healthy throughout the experiment. They were divided into the following groups and sub-groups ; 1. Growing animals : 0-6 months, 6-12 months, 12-24 months. 2. Adult animals : (i) Cows : lactating, lactating and pregnant, pregnant and dry. (ii) Bullocks and bulls : Hissar, Dhanni (work- ing animals). Blood samples were taken at the same time each morning and before feeding ; neutral potassium oxalate solution was used as anti-coagulant. Whole blood was taken for the estimations of red blood corpuscles, white blood corpuscles, haemo- globin, iron, inorganic phosphorus and sugar, while serum was used for calcium and magnesium esti- mations. Blood for determinations of inorganic phosphorus and sugar was sampled on the spot. The chemical methods used for analysis of Ca Mg, P and sugar were those suggested in the tech- nical communication No. 9 of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition [1937]. Standard methods were employed for cell-count [Schafer, 1938]; iron and haemoglobin were determined by the method of Wong and the standard glass plates of New- comer respectively, as described by Hawk and Bergeim [1938]. DISCUSSION OF RESULTS The average figures for analysis of blood consti- tuents are given in Table I. From this table, it may be observed that the values for red and white blood cells, haemoglobin, iron, calcium, phosphorus and sugar were highest in the young animals and decreased with age. In the case of inorganic phosphorus, the gradual fall with increasing age was relatively more conspi- cuous. In adult animals of different groups namely, lactating and pregnant and dry, these constituents remained practically constant. When breed characteristics were taken into con- sideration, it was noticed that the inorganie phos- phorus and magnesium were highest in the Dhanni bullocks and that the sugar remained constant in all the breeds. Magnesium remained practically constant, irrespective of age or sex. Red blood corpuscles. The average values were 11.6 and 8.1 millions per c. mm. of blood for grow- ing and adult animals, respectively. These results agree with those of Canham [1930] for growing animals and with those of Fraser [1931], Nicols [1935], Dukes [1937] and Sankaranarayan [1937] for adults. White blood corpuscles. The averages were 13.1 and 9.0 thousands for young and adult animals, respectively. These average values are in close agreement with those of Canham [1930], Fraser [1931], Dukes [1937] and Sankaranarayan [1937]. Haemoglobin. The average values for haemo- globin were 14.6 and 10.9 gm. per 100 ml. of blood for young and adult animals, respectively. The results agree with those of McCay [1931], Brooks and Huges [1932], Dukes [1937], Hammersma [1937], Gonzaga [1939], and Allcroft [1941]. 146
D. N. MULLICK AND A. K. PAL 147 TABLE I. Analysis of blood and blood serum for various constituents Description Breed Sex R. B. C. (millions per c. mm.) W. B. C. (Thousands per c. mm. Per 100 ml. of blood Per 100 ml. serum Remarks Hb mg. Fe mg. Inorg. P. Sugar mg. Ca. mg. Mg. mg. Young . . Hariana M 12-8 14.6 16.0 53.5 6.61 106.3 12.8 2.18 Average of 6 animals 0-6 months F 13.5 14.2 15.5 52.2 6.80 105.5 13.1 2.6 0 Average of 9 animals 0-6 months M 11.6 13.0 14.0 46.9 5.40 98.0 13.5 2.6 5 Average of 7 animals 6-12 months F 11.4 13.6 13.1 43.8 5.70 97.3 13.4 2.6 4 Average of 10 animals 6-12 months M 10.2 11.2 .. .. 5.50 96.9 12-8 2.33 Average of 10 animals 12-24 months F 10.3 11.8 .. .. 5.50 95.8 12.5 2.40 Average of 13 animals 12-24 months Average 11.6 13.1 14.6 49.1 5.92 99.9 13.0 2.46 Average of 61 animals 0-24 months Adult cows . Hariana . .. 8.0 9.0 11.4 39.4 4.41 76.0 11.8 2.46 Average of 11 animals lactating. 8.2 8.7 10.7 40.4 4.10 80.6 11.0 2.76 Average of 7 animals lae- tating & pregnant 8.3 9.6 10.6 41.0 4.44 77.1 11.4 2.41 Average of 14 animals dry and pregnant Average 8.2 9.1 10.9 40.5 4.32 77.7 11.4 2.54 Average of 32 animals Adult bullocks . Hariana . M 8.0 8.4 10.8 36.3 4.04 82.6 10.5 2.40 Average of 6 animals work- ing bullocks Average 8.1 9.0 10.9 39.6 4.26 80.1 11.2 2.51 Average of 38 animals. cows and bullocks of game breed. Dhanni . M 7.9 8.0 12.5 42.1 5.56 88.3 11.1 2.84 Average of 6 animals working bullocks
148 Composition of Blood of Farm Animals in India Iron. The results for iron gave average values of 49.1 and 39.6 mg. per 100 ml. of blood for young and adult animals, respectively. The values obtained by 6ther workers, viz. McCay [1931], Hammersma [1937] and Gonzaga [1939] are in agreement. Calcium. The average values were 13.0 and 11.2 mg. per 100 ml. serum for growing and adult animals, respectively. Anderson, Gayley and Pratt [1930] recorded higher values in growing animals and this is confirmed by our observations. The figures for adult animals were in full agree- ment with the results obtained by these and other authors, viz. Blatherwick [1920], Robinson and Huffman [1926], Hayden and Fish [1928], Allardyce, Fleming, Fowler and Clark [1930], Hambrock [1931], Allcroft and Green [1934], Hammersma [1937], Dukes [1937], Kennedy, Anderson, Bech- del and Shighey [1939] and Ochoa [1940]. Phosphorus. The average values for inorganic phosphorus per 100 ml. of blood were 5.92 and 4.26 mg. for young and adult animals, respectively. The values for growing animals agreed closely with those obtained by other workers, viz. Palmer, Cunningham, Eckles [1930], Malan, Bekker and Johnson [1935] and Johnson [1939] while for adults practically the same values were noted by the fol- lowing observers : Hart, Steenbock and Humphrey [1920], Theiler, Green and Du Toit [1927], Ander- son et al. [1930], Becker, Neal and Shealy [1933] and Johnson [1939]. Meighs, Blatherwick and Cary [1919], Robinson and Huffman [1926], Malan and Bekker [1931], Kennedy et al. [1939], Johnson [1939], Sen, Kehar and Govinda Rao (unpublished data) concluded that pregnancy and lactation had little effect on the calcium and phosphorus content of blood. Magnesium. The average values in 100 ml. serum were 2.46 and 2.51 mg. for young and adult animals, respectively. Our findings for young animals agreed well with those of Duncan and Huffman [1938]. The figures for adult animals of Briggs [1923], Robinson and Huffman [1926] and Groenewald [1935] are practically the same as those obtained by us. Sugar. The results for sugar gave an average value of 99.9 and 77.7 mg. per 100 ml. of blood for young and adult animals, respectively. The sugar content gradually diminished with increasing age. The same observation was reported by Anderson et al. [1930], Demmel [1933], Allcroft and Green [1934] while Hodgson, Riddel and Huges [1932] and Kennedy et al. [1939] reported similar values for adult animals. As regards breed characteristics, blood was ana- lysed from two different breeds (Hissar and Dhanni) The analytical figures for the inorganic elements showed some variation ; though the type of work, feed and environment were identical, the blood composition of the two breeds appeared to be different. This finding opens up a new line of in- vestigation and a systematic study will have to be undertaken with a larger number of animals, in order to investigate the differences in blood com- position of animals of various breeds in India. Statistical analysis. From a statistical analysis of the data, the following conclusions appear to be warranted. In the case of growing animals, highly significant differences exist between the means of the groups 0-6 months, 6-12 months and 12-24 months in red blood corpuscles, white blood cor- puscles, haemoglobin, iron, phosphorus and sugar. With adults, there is no significant difference be- tween the means of the groups in any of the consti- tuents analysed. SUMMARY The blood of young and adult healthy cattle of different groups was analysed for red blood cor- puscles, white blood corpuscles, haemoglobin, iron, calcium, magnesium, inorganic phosphorus and sugar. Standard figures for these elements were established under various age, sex, and physiolo- gical conditions. Blood from two different breeds (Hissar and Dhanni) has been examined and some breed differ- ences have been noticed. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The writers express their gratitude to Dr K. C. Sen, Officer-in-Charge and Dr N. D. Kehar, Re- search Officer (Physiology) of this section for their keen interest in the work and for their valuable suggestions. The authors are also indebted to Mr S. R. Hassan, Officer-in-Charge, Biological Products Section, for his help and for facilities for work among the animals of the section. REFERENCES Allcroft, W. M. and Green, H. H. (1934). Biochem. J. 28 2220 Allcroft, W. M. (1941). J. Agric Sci. 31, 320 Allardyce, Fleming, Fowler and Clark (1930). Canad. J. Res. 3, 120 Anderson, A. K., Gayley H. E., and Pratt A. D. (1930) J. Dairy Sci. 13, 336 Blatherwick, N. R. (1920). J. Biol. Chem. 42, 517 Becker, R. B., Neal, W. M. and Shealy, A. L. (1933). Florida Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 264, 27 Briggs, H. P. (1923). J. Biol. Chem. 57, 351 Brooks, H. J. and Huggs, H. S. (1932). J. Nutrition, 5, 35 Canham, A. S. (1930). 16th Report Dir. Vet. Services and Animal Indust. U. S. A.
D. N. MULLICK AND A. K. PAL 149 Demmel, M. (1933). Biochem. Ztchsr. 262, 294 Dukes, H. H. (1937). The Physiology of domestic animals. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, London Duncan, C. W. and Huffman, C. F. (1938). J. Dairy Sci. 21, 689 Fraser, A. C. (1931). Univ. Camb. Inst. Animal Path. 1st report 29, 30 and 31 Gonzaga, A. C. (1939). Phillipine J. Animal Indus. 6, 253 Groenewald, J. W. (1935). Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. 4, 93 Haag, J. R. and Jones, I. R. (1935). J. Biol. Chem. 110, 439 Haanbrock, H. (1931). Dissertation, Hannover, 83 Hammersma, P. J. (1937). Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Indust. 8, 443 Hart, E. B., Steenbock, H. and Humphrey, G. C. (1920). Wisconsin. Agric. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 49, 19 Hawk, P. B., and Bergeim, O. (1938). Practical Physio- logical Chemistry, J. & A. Churchill, London Hayden, C. E. and Fish, P. A. (1928). Cornell Vet. 18, 197 Hodgson, R. E., Riddel W. H. and Huges J. S. (1932). J. Agr. Res. 44, 357 Godden, W. (1937). Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutri- tion publications Tech. Communication No. 9 Johnson, A. R. (1939). J. Nutrition 17, 15 Kennedy, W. L., Anderson, A. K., Bechdel, S. I. and Shighey, J. F. (1939). J. Dairy Sci. 22, 251 Malan, A. I. and Bekker, J. G. (1931). 17th Report Dir. Vet. Services and Animal Indust. Onderstepoort McCay, C. M. (1931). J. Dairy Sci. 14, 373 Meighs, E. B., Blatherwick, N. R. and Cary C. A. (1919). J. Biol. Chem. 37 Nicols, R. E. (1935). Vet. Med. 30, 289 Ochoa, J. I. (1940). Quoted by Nutrition Abs. and Rev. 10, 706 Palmer, Cunningham and Eckles (1930). J. Dairy Sci. 13, 174 Robinson, C. S. and Huffman, C. F. (1926). J. Biol. Chem. 67, 245 Sankaranarayan, N. S. (1937). Indian. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 7, 97 Schafer, S. E. (1938). Essentials of Histology. Longmans, Green & Co., London Sen, K. C., Kehar, N. D. & Govind Rao. (Unpublished results) Theiler, A., Green, H. H. and Du Toit, P. J. (1927). J. Agri. Sci. 17, 291
PROTEINS FOR EGG PRODUCTION By A. J. MACDONALD and S. BOSE, Poultry Research Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, United Provinces (Received for publication on 19 October 1942) (With Plate XII) IT is essential that the poultry farmer should possess a sound knowledge of how best to feed his birds, for on the average commercial poultry farm the cost of feeding stuffs represents about 60 per cent of the total running cost. The feeding of un- warrantedly expensive feeding material is un- economic, whilst reducing the food bill at the ex- pense of efficiency not only lowers the production but also the profits. To get the best economic results, it is essential to feed palatable and well- balanced rations from cheap and easily available sources. Fowls on account of their simple and compa- ratively short digestive system must be fed on easily digested foodstuffs. Cereals and their by- products, on account of their relatively low cost, combined with their high palatibility and digesti- bility, form the best sources of energy. Cereals alone, however, are insufficient, for their proteins are deficient in quantity and quality. They are also deficient in certain minerals essential for growth and egg production. In countries where poultry are kept in large units under commercial condi- tions, it is customary to make good the deficiencies in cereals by supplements of suitable proteins and minerals. In India, however, there are very few commercial poultry farmers, and fowls are nor- mally kept in very small units as a sideline to other occupations. The conditions under which the fowls are kept are very primitive and the food they are given, if any, is deficient both in quantity and quality. The true figure for the average egg production for the whole country cannot be accurately deter- mined and, though the Egg Marketing Report [1938] gives it as 50 eggs per bird, unpublished data from this Institute suggest that the figure is even lower than this. Though the desi stocks in the country are undoubtedly poor in quality, the low egg production cannot be attributed pri- marily to poor stock, since under good environ- mental conditions unselected desi birds at this Institute gave an average annual egg production of 116 [1940-41]. These improved results sug- gested the need for carrying out controlled experi- ments on the value of different protein sup- plements in egg laying rations ; for the full value of breeding improvements in different breeds can only be measured by feeding the birds on balanced rations. As salt is known to improve the biological value of proteins, it was decided to feed a control diet consisting of cereals supplemented with salt, cal- cium and green food. As milk is the best known protein supplement both for egg production and hatchability, separated milk was used as one of the protein supplements and the results compared with those of (1) earthnut meal supplemented with salt, (2) soya bean meal supplemented with salt and (3) meat offals (intestines of animals from the slaughter house) supplemented with salt. EXPERIMENTAL Stock. A total of 240 six-months old White Leghorn pullets were divided into five comparable groups and fed on the experimental rations for a period of 280 days. All the birds were trapnested throughout. Housing. The birds were housed in 8 ft. x 6 ft. houses constructed from 1 in. angle iron covered with wire (½ in. mesh). Protection from the sun and rain was provided by means of chuppars made of bamboo and bhurra grass. Protection from the prevailing west wind was provided by means of a tattee made of similar materials. The trapnests, feeding hoppers and water utensils were all placed under the chuppars. Each of the houses was placed centrally in a run measuring 120 ft. x 90 ft. Feeding. All five groups were fed on mash and grain rations throughout the experiment. The basal mash fed to all groups consisted of wheat bran 50 parts, yellow maize meal 30 parts and ground oats 20 parts. The grain ration fed to all the groups consisted of a mixture of equal parts of yellow cracked maize, wheat and paddy. Broken limestone and water were fed ad libitum to each of the groups, together with liberal amounts of cut green food every even- ing. Group 1 (Basal Group) was fed the basal mash supplemented with 1 per cent common salt. Group 2 (Milk Group) received the basal mash supplemented with 0.5 per cent common salt and approximately 4 oz. of milk per bird per day. Group 3 (Earthnut Group) was fed on a ration consisting of 79 parts basal ration supplemented 150
PLATE XII [Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Waste-proof hopper
A. J. MACDONALD AND S. BOSE 151 with 20 parts earthnut meal and one part common salt. Group 4 (Soya Bean Meal Group) received 3 parts basal mash plus 26 parts soya bean meal and one part salt. Group 5 (Meat Group) received same mash as Group 1 supplemented with 9 oz. of meat offal per bird per day. Groups 1-4 were fed dry mash ad libitum in waste-proof hoppers (Plate XII). The meat offal for Group 5 was passed through a mincer, weighed according to the number of birds in the group and boiled in a small quantity of water for one hour. The cooked material and the liquid left after cooking the meat were then mixed with the mash and fed at 7 A.M. every day. The mash and meat offals were fed at the rate of 1.2 oz. dry mash and 0.9 oz. meat offals per bird per day. Groups 1-4 were fed approximately ½ oz. grain per bird at 7 A.M. and as much grain as they would consume in about 10 minutes at 4 P.M. Group 5 received their morning grain feed at 11 A.M. and their evening feed at 4 P.M. Group 5 also received dry mash ad libitum from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. The average composition of the mashes and grains used are given in Table I. TABLE I Food composition (percentages) Feeding stuff Moisture Fibre Crude protein Ether extract Nitrogen free extract Ash Groups 1 & 5 Parts Basal mash . . . 99 } 10.7 10.3 10.9 5.1 57.6 5.4 Salt . . . . 1 Group 2 Basal mash . . . 99.5 } 10.8 10.2 10.9 5.0 57.5 5.6 Salt . . . . 0.5 Group 3 Basal mash . . . 79 } 10.3 9.2 18.3 5.5 51.2 5.5 Earthnut meal . . 20 Salt . . . . 1 Group 4 Basal mash 73 } 10.2 9.3 18.2 7.8 48.9 5.6 Soya bean meal 26 Salt . . . . 1 Grain mixture . . . 9.6 4.3 9.8 3.1 70.4 2.8 Egg production. Table II gives the average egg production per bird in each group for each period of four weeks and the total egg production over the whole period of 40 weeks.
152 Proteins for Egg Production TABLE II Average egg production per bird Group 1 2 3 4 5 Period 1, 9-7-41A. J. MACDONALD AND S. BOSE 153 The average egg size in all groups increased steadily during the first three periods but there was a drop in egg size during period 4. In Groups 1, 3 and 4 the apparent reduction in egg size was due to many of the laying birds going into moult. In Groups 2 and 5 moulting was not common and there was a correspondingly smaller decrease in egg size. Thereafter the egg size increased for all groups but decreased again as the temperature rose. The maximum percentage reductions in egg size in Groups 1-5 were 4.8, 3.8, 6.2, 5.2 and 2.8 respectively. Food consumption. Table IV gives details of the average daily consumption of mash, grain, milk and meat offal, the total food consumption per bird per day and the weight of food consumed per pound of egg produced. The percentage protein consump- tion of each group is also given. In order to give comparative figures for the total daily average food consumption per bird, the separated milk consum- ed by Group 2 was calculated on the basis of a dry matter content of 10 per cent. Similarly the meat offal consumed by Group 5 was calculated on the basis of a dry matter content of 30 per cent. TABLE IV Food consumption and utilization Group 1 2 3 4 5 Average daily consumption of mash per bird (oz.) . . 1.64 1.65 1.60 1.45 1.80 Grain (oz.) . . . . . . . . . 1.83 1.99 1.80 1.86 1.81 Milk (oz.) . . . . . . . . . .. 4.02 .. .. .. Meat offal (oz.) . . . . . . . . . .. .. .. .. 0.87 Average daily total food (oz.) . . . . . 3.47 4.04 3.40 3.31 3.87 Percentage protein . . . . . . . 10.4 13.7 13.8 13.5 14.0 Lb. food consumed per lb. egg produced . . . . 5.11 4.12 5.08 5.34 4.24 Over the whole period, the average consumption of food per bird was significantly greater in Groups 2 and 5 than in Groups 1, 3 and 4. Though the birds in Group 2 consumed slightly more food than those in Group 5, the difference was not significant. The food consumptions in Groups 1, 3 and 4 showed no significant differences. In Group 1 the average protein consumption for the whole period was only 10.4 per cent. In Groups 2, 3, 4 and 5 the average protein percentages in the food consumed were 13.7, 13.8, 13.5 and 14.0 respectively. Every effort was made to keep constant protein percent- ages in Groups 2-5 and the slight differences in the figures obtained were due to the birds consuming unequal amounts of mash and grain. For every pound of egg produced, the food consumption in pounds in Groups 1-5 were 5.11, 4.12, 5.08, 5.34 and 4.24 respectively. Hatchability. In order to obtain information regarding the value of the different supplements for breeding fowls, six separate hatches at weekly intervals were made with eggs from each of the groups. Two White Leghorn cockerels were placed in each of the pens 10 days prior to collecting eggs for the first hatch. Thereafter the males were moved in rotation into different pens every week in order to minimize differences due to individual idiosyncrasies in the males. The eggs for each hatch were never more than one week old at setting and they were all incubated under standard condi- tions in a forced-draught, electric incubator run at 99.5-99-75°F. Table V gives details in regard to the eggs set, and to the percentages of infertile eggs, dead germs, dead in shell and hatchability of fertile eggs.
154 Proteins for Egg Production TABLE V Hatchability results Group 1 2 3 4 5 No. of eggs set . . . . . . . . 513 845 485 603 813 Percentage infertile . . . . . . . 5.3 12.4 12.2 12.7 16.0 Percentage dead germs to fertile eggs . . . . 5.8 3.0 7.0 8.5 7.3 Percentage dead in shell to fertile eggs . . . . 6.6 8.8 10.0 8.2 10.0 Percentage hatchability of fertile eggs . . . . 87.6 88.2 83.0 83.3 82.7 In all six hatches, Group 1 tended to give a some- what higher percentage of fertile eggs than the other four groups. The hatchability of fertile eggs in all five groups was good but Groups 1 and 2 gave slightly better results than Groups 3, 4 and 5. No difference in the appearance of the day-old chickens was noticeable. Unfortunately, owing to lack of accommodation, it was impossible to carry out rearability trials. Mortality. The birds were weighed at the start of the experiment and at approximately three- monthly intervals. Details in regard to the aver- age weights of the birds which completed the ex- periment are given for each weighing in Table VI. The percentage mortality figures for each group over the whole 40 weeks are also included. TABLE VI Record of mortality and weight Group 1 2 3 4 5 No. of birds at start . . . . . . . . 48 48 48 48 48 Percentage mortality . . . . . . . . 12.5 16.7 12.5 12.5 10.2 Average weight at 9-7-41 (oz.) . . . . . 57.2 56.9 55.8 56.8 57.0 Average weight at 9-10-41 (oz.) . . . . . 62.4 69.1 65.8 64.4 66.2 Average weight at 9-1-42 (oz.) . . . . . 70.2 70.2 73.8 69.9 72.6 Average weight at 14-4-42 (oz.) . . . . . 64.2 73.3 69.4 64.5 69.3 Average gain in weight during experiment (oz.) . . 7.2 16.4 13.6 8.3 13.3 The general health in all five groups remained reasonably good throughout. Many of the birds in Groups 1, 3 and 4 moulted in the middle of the experiment (periods 3A. J. MACDONALD AND S. BOSE 155 pen. The average egg size of 2.05 oz. in Groups 2 and 5 was also satisfactory. As the total per- centages of protein in both the separated milk ration and the meat offal ration were slightly below 14 per cent, which is generally regarded as the minimum requirements for satisfactory egg pro- duction, it appears that both separated milk and meat offal are satisfactory sources of proteins. The average egg production in Group 1 of 95.0 cannot be considered satisfactory as it is equiva- lent only to a calculated annual production of 123.8 eggs. The average egg size of 2.00 oz. was also appreciably lower than that of Groups 2 and 5. The egg production record from Group 1 on a total protein intake of only 10.4 per cent, however, suggests the necessity of further investigation into the protein requirements for maintenance and egg production. Halnan [1938] gives the daily re- quirements for a 4 pound bird as 7.8 gm. digestible protein for maintenance and 10 gm. protein for each 2 oz. egg produced. The actual consumption of total protein per bird per day in Group 1 was only 10.2 gm. Calculated on the results of various digestibility trials [Jull, 1930], it can be safely assumed that the protein digestibility coefficient of the combined mash and grain ration used did not exceed 80 per cent. On a digestibility basis of 80 per cent, the average daily intake of digestible protein was only 8.2 gm. It is, therefore, obvious that the egg production of 95.0 eggs during a period of 280 days could not be maintained on Halnan's standards for maintenance or production, unless the birds were able to pick up considerable quanti- ties of protein from the run. However, even after making allowance for the consumption of green food fed to the birds and for the limited amounts picked up from the runs, it is extremely doubtful whether the birds consumed the necessary stipu- lated requirements for maintenance and egg-pro- duction. The results add further confirmatory evidence to the conclusion [Macdonald, 1937] that maintenance and egg production can be supplied by rations containing considerably less protein than the present accepted standards. The rations containing supplements of soya bean meal and earthnut meal gave no better egg production than the cereal plus salt ration. The poor results with both of these vegetable proteins is rather surprising in view of the beneficial results obtained from them in chikenegrations [Macdonald, 1941, 1942]. The avecra egg size recorded from the two vegetable protein supplemented groups was similar to that obtained from Group 1. The average egg size in all groups decreased with the rise in temperature, which occurred during periods 9 and 10. In countries where the tempera- ture does not exceed 70-80°F., the size of eggs from pullets rises steadily for five to six months and thereafter remains fairly constant during the remaining portion of the first laying year. The drop in egg size recorded during this experiment is similar to that experienced in former years and supports the findings of Warren [1939], who de- monstrated that temperatures of over 70°F. have an adverse influence on egg size in pullets. Though the data presented is somewhat limited, it is in- teresting to note that the egg size in Groups 2 and 5 did not decrease until the 10th period, whereas in the other groups on rations giving poorer egg production and egg size, the drop in egg size com- menced earlier. As the average food consumption per bird decreased with the onset of the hot weath- er, it is probable that such reductions in egg size are due to lack of essential nutrients and to loss of appetite. The lower food consumption figures in Groups 1, 3 and 4 cannot be attributed solely to unpalatability, since Group 2 consumed more food, excluding the milk, than Group 1 which received similar mash and grain rations. Group 5, however, had to be fed on a wet mash which probably result- ed in increased palatability, and further work is necessary to throw more light on this aspect of the problem. Groups 2 and 5 consumed significantly less food per pound of egg produced than Groups 1, 3 and 4. The lower food utilization by Group 1 was probably due to the low percentage of protein in the food consumed. The rations of Groups 3 and 4, however, had similar protein contents to Groups 2 and 5, and their poorer utilization of food must, therefore, have been due to the poorer quality of the protein supplements. The general health of the birds, excluding a con- siderable amount of moulting in Groups 1, 3 and 4 during the middle part of the experiment, was good. The moulting which occurred in these three groups, however, suggests that the rations fed to them were deficient in some factor necessary for good egg production. Though Group 2 had the highest mortality (16.7 per cent), there was no significant difference in the mortality rate in the five groups. Deaths were mainly due to ovarian and other miscellaneous causes, and there was no indication that any of the rations were directly concerned. Despite the better egg production which must have thrown a greater strain on the stamina of the birds, Group 2 had a higher average body weight at the end of the experiment than any of the other groups. As good egg production alone may be very mis- leading in estimating the value of a ration for breeding fowls, incubation trials were carried out to throw more light on this important point. Group 1 on the low protein diet gave the highest fertility and almost as good hatchability as Group 2 which gave the best hatchability results. The good fertility and hatchability obtained from group 1
156 Proteins for Egg Production is in agreement with the satisfactory hatching results obtained under village conditions where the birds are fed on a very low level of nutrition. The good hatchability results obtained from the sepa- rated milk supplement are in agreement with the findings of Graham, Smith and McFarlane [1931]. However, from the data presented it would be un- wise to make sweeping conclusions. Since all rations gave a hatchability figure for fertile eggs of well over 80 per cent, it must be concluded that all rations were satisfactory from the hatchability standpoint. CONCLUSIONS (1) A cereal ration plus one per cent common salt in conjunction with liberal amounts of green food and calcium (total protein content 10.4 per cent) is unsatisfactory for egg production. (2) Soya bean meal and earthnut meal both proved valueless as protein supplements for egg production. (3) Separated milk is a very valuable protein supplement either for laying or breeding fowls. (4) Meat offal as a protein supplement gave al- most as good results as separated milk. As meat offal is usually obtainable at a low cost, it should be used much more freely in laying rations. (5) High temperatures have a depressing in- fluence on food consumption and egg size. (6) The protein requirements for maintenance and egg-production are lower than the accepted standards. REFERENCES Ann. Rep. Imp. Vet. Res. Institute (1940-41). Manager of Publications, Delhi Graham, W. R., Smith, J. B. and McFarlane, W. D. (1931). Ontario Dept. of Agri. Bull. No. 362 Halnan, E. T. (1938). The Scientific Principles of Poultry Feeding. Ministry of Agri. and Fisheries Bull. No. 7 Jull, M. A. (1930). Poultry Husbandry. McGraw Hill Book Co. Inc., New York and London, 315 Macdonald, A. J. (1937). Poultry Sci. 16, 247 Macdonald, A. J. (1941). Indian J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 11, 207 Macdonald, A. J. and Bose, S. (1943). Soyabean meal supplements for chickens. Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 13, 108 Report on the Marketing of Eggs in India and Burma. (1938). Manager of Publications, Delhi Warren, D. C. (1939). J. Agr. Res. 59, 441-452
AN ADAPTATION OF WHITE'S METHOD FOR THE COLLECTION OF INFECTIVE LARVAE FROM BOVINE FAECAL CULTURES AND ITS PRACTICAL APPLICATION By S. N. VAIDYANATHAN, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Helminthology Research Section, Madras Veterinary College (Received for publication on 10 February 1942) FAECAL cultures are ordinarily made, in mixed infections with strongyle nematode worms, com- mon amongst veterinary subjects, particularly the domesticated ruminants and the horse, for an identification of the infective larvae developing therein, as an aid to the adoption of correct remedial measures. The infective larvae of many strongyle nema- todes are observed, during the close of their free- living period, to migrate from the medium in which they have been growing. This fact is made use of by many workers to formulate suitable methods for recovering them. The collection of infective larvae in clean water without contamination is a more discriminative work and for some purposes quite indispensable. The method described below has this advantage amongst others. A very inexpensive and effective device, to facilitate the process of migration of infective larvae, develop- ing in faecal cultures, has been in daily use at the Madras Veterinary College Helminthology Laboratory, for almost two years now, and it has proved to be of great use. Although it remains to be seen, whether this method will serve for all migrating larvae, at all seasons and. places, it has been found very satisfactory, up to the present, for all the common strongyle worms met with in the city of Madras amongst cattle, sheep and goats viz : Strongyloides papillosus, Haemonchus contortus, Trichostrongylus axei, Trichostrongylus colubriformis, Cooperia punctata, Cooperia pecti- nata, Bunostomum phlebotomum, Bunostomum trigonocephalum, Gaigeria pachyscelis, Oeso- phgostomum columbianum, Oesophagostomum venulosum and Oesophagostomum radiatum. It is therefore, thought advisable to publish this note for the benefit of others. SOME COMMON METHODS KNOWN Familiarly known as Leiper's, this method consists in the use of a moist blotting paper, lining the interior of a petridish, to cover another containing the faecal culture. The infective larvae migrate up on to the blotting paper which is shaken up in a small quantity of water, to free them when required, Veglia [1923, 1928] advocates the use of tall fruit jars to make faecal cultures. The faeces is placed at the bottom, broken up, slightly damped with water and the lid of the jar screwed down tightly. In summer months, the jars are stored in a dark room at room temperature, while in winter they are placed in an incubator running at about 25°C. The mature larvae, observed to migrate up the walls of the culture jar, are collected by means of a blotting paper lining the interior, which is washed in a few cubic centi- metres of water. Monnig [1938] advises transferring these migrating larvae, on the walls of the culture jar, by the point of a needle or a fine camel hair brush. Deschiens [1939] describes a simple method which avoids breaking and contamination of the faecal mass and, yet, yeilds a large number of larvae, in a suspension free from faecal matter. The author considers it satisfactory for all larvae exhibiting positive hydro-tropism. The appara- tus consists of a small fluted cone of Laurent filter paper, containing a few cubic centimetres of distilled water. This is placed in a space of equivalent size cleared in the centre of the culture. The larvae then find their way into the distilled water by climbing over the top of the cone or occasionally by perforating it. White [1927] suggests simple apparatus to trap the migrating larvae in water. Faecal matter to be cultured is properly mixed with charcoal and transferred to the half of a petridish with a mois- tened filter paper covering the bottom. Sterile water is poured into a crystallizing dish to cover the bottom and into it is placed the half petridish containing the culture. A watch-glass is used as a cover, and the apparatus set in a place where a high humidity may be maintained. Many of the larvae, on approaching the third larval stage, migrate from the culture and are trapped in the water ; surrounding the petridish. MATERIALS AND METHODS An adaptation of White's [1927] method was used by the author employing still simpler appa- ratus. The materials necessary for setting up a 157
158 White's Method for Collection of Infective Larvae culture are so little and within the provisions of any veterinary institution, that it can be adopted as a routine for the gathering of infective larvae, for the specific diagnosis of verminous infesta- tions. In the main, it consists in replacing the crystallizing dish and the watch-glass cover with two petridishes. The materials required are two petridishes of the same diameter (about 5 inches) and a petridish of half that diameter with a cir- cular blotting paper to cover the bottom and distilled water or water boiled and cooled to avoid contamination with the larvae of free-living forms. These form a set sufficient for each culture. The blotting paper is moistened with a little water. Material for culture preferably fresh faeces, prepared according to the method described later, is loosely spread on the blotting paper to fill half to three-quarters of the petridish. The petridish is then transferred to the centre of one of the larger petridishes, so that a trench of uniform width forms between the two. Water is run into the trench to a height quarter inch below the brim of the petridish. A belt of water is thus formed to trap any larvae migrating from the culture. The third petridish is placed inverted over the culture, the opposing brims of the two large petridishes being adjusted to flush against each other. The apparatus after labelling, is placed for incubation, preferably, where a high humidity may be maintained. The cover serves to prevent undue evaporation of the culture ; the water belt delays it still more. It is unnecessary during ordinary weather condi- tions to attend to the moisture content of the culture under such arrangement, as the water evaporating from the trench condenses on the inside of the cover and, so keeps the culture moist ; in addition it creates and maintains throughout a high humidity within which is so essential for migration. However, in very dry weather, when the surrounding atmospheric conditions maintain only a low humidity, sprinkling of the culture with a little water everyday is desirable. Under optimum conditions, the infective larvae of Strongyloides papillosus migrate into the water by the end of the second day after culture while all the rest of the infective larvae do so from the fourth to the seventh day. After use, the apparatus with the culture, may then be dismantled and steamed. THE CULTURES. N. VAIDYANATHAN 159 bench, at room temperature. Migration of the infective larvae are observed to take place during the dull light of the evening and early morning. There is no migration of these larvae during noon when there is bright light. THE EXPERIENCE AT MADRAS At Madras, where this culture method was extensively tried all the year round, without the use of an incubator, the temperature varies from 22° to 40°C. Experience shows that cultures are best made for migration and the maximum production of infective larvae, when the tempera- ture ranges between 24° to 28° C. In places where the temperature may never touch these limits, it would appear that the faecal cultures should be incubated within the temperature range of 24° to 28°C. for the successful cultiva- tion and migration of the infective larvae to facilitate the diagnosis of the specific verminous infestation. Under lower temperatures, the eggs take longer to hatch ; in some species, there results a slow development of the pre-infective larval stages with consequent delay in migration. Higher temperatures bring on a rapid preliminary development and even migration in many species; but a decreased output of infective larvae results due to mortality in the eggs and the pre-infective larval stages. At all seasons, taking off the top petridish for a few minutes each day, reduces undue losses amongst the pre-infective larval stages, that would, otherwise, be caused through the continued imprisonment of fermentation gases forming over the culture. An ineffective or a complete failure of the culture sometimes occurs, mainly due, to condi- tions that either kill the eggs, or destroy the pre-infective larval stages growing in the culture. Dysenteric evacuations, which rapidly putrefy, on standing, bring on an ineffective and, not infrequently, a complete failure of the culture. Growth of moulds and fungi on the culture results also in undue mortality of the migrating larvae due to entanglement. It was found that a few drops of formalin dashed on the inside of the top petridish, or a small crystal of thymol, placed over the culture, greatly lessened and very often completely prevented the contaminative growth. Cultures kept in subdued light within the laboratory, restricted the growth of fungi and moulds considerably. Stocking these cultures in a room, where there was no access to bright light, had the same effect. The scope and extent of trapping, in the water trench, every infective larvae developing in the faecal culture of the domesticated bovines were explored by a few experiments. Ideal cultures were made out of the same weight of dung from a calf carrying a mixed infestation with Strongyloides papillosus, Bunostomum phlebotomum, Oeso- phagostomum, radiatum and Cooperia species. Similar cultures were made of the faeces of sheep and goats harbouring Oesophagostomum colum- bianum, Bunostomum trigonocephalum and Tri- chostrongylus species. They were incubated under optimum conditions, as detailed earlier in this paper. Varying the quantity of water in the trench appeared to modify the humidity within the culture. It was observed, that other condi- tions being the optimum, the greatest number of infective larvae could be collected in the trench of water, when a maximum humidity was obtain- able within the culture. These cultures were kept as long as ten days, to determine, whether every infective larva develop- ing within the culture, would migrate and be trapped in the trench of water. The presence of any infective larva left in the culture was made out by extraction by the Baermann technique [1917] as modified by Cort et al. [1922]. The culture always revealed the presence of one or more of some species or other of infective larvae, which failed to scale over the wall of the culture dish; but the numbers recovered were too few even in the one that showed the greatest number amongst them, to bear any statistical significance. However, the author is very sceptical in attaching too much importance to larval counts as obtain- able by this method. No experiments have been made to determine that the developing infective larvae bear a constant relationship, to the eggs in the original cultures, in their numericals, after the initial losses in the egg and pre-infective larval stages; that such losses are negligible for any statistical significance, as otherwise, the intensity of an infection, judged on egg counts, may be wrongly interpreted, if considerably low larval counts result on culture. Nevertheless, the possibility of minimizing the lossses by refined culture methods, as detailed earlier in this paper, affords all chances of making larval counts in the various species more useful to the estimation and treatment of parasitism than egg counts in which the species cannot always be identified. It is hoped to make a statistical analysis of experi- ments bearing on these points to draw a useful interpretation of its application in the daily routine. For the present, till that is attained, the practi- tioner who treats his patients, with an intimate knowledge of the specific parasitism involved, will be able to judge the utility of his treatment by making faecal cultures regularly, before and
160 White's Method for Collection of Infective Larvae after treatment, in petridishes of standard size containing the same quantity of culture material each time and collecting the infective larvae developing therein, in a fixed quantity of water in the trench. In the event of the right treatment being given for any one species, the infective larvae of that species will collect in the trench of water in fewer numbers than before such treat- ment ; but the occurrence of fewer larvae persists even after repeated culture in those cases partially treated. If all the worms of the species have been expelled by the treatment, no infective larvae of that species must appear in the trench of water. The sensitiveness of these findings may be further enhanced and greater value added to the interpretation of results based on them, if the routine of fishing out by the Baermann technique any infective larvae that may be retained within the culture be adopted. PRACTICAL APPLICATION For the specific diagnosis of verminous infesta- tions, this method is comparatively simpler. All that one has to do is to transfer the bottom dish under a low power microscope, and pick out through the finely drawn capillary end of a pipette, fitted with a rubber teat, any larva for study or identification. A few or many of them may be gathered in a drop or two of water and lightly warmed over a flame or a trace of iodine solution added to kill them, before examination under a cover-slip. It would appear that the practice of adhering to a routine in the use of similar-sized petridishes amount of culture material, quantity of water used in the trench and the adoption of the refined culture methods has other far reaching results. With some experience, one can estimate by the amount of larvae collected, the exact position of parasitism, and draw up a comparison amongst a number of his patients based on clinical symptoms as well before deciding on the necessity for treatment ; otherwise it would be very often unwise and unnecessary to interfere with the host- parasite tolerance already existing. The bottom dish can be examined, whenever necessary, under a dissection microscope, for the detection of any migrated larvae, after lifting up, preferably by forceps, the culture dish and placing it on the inverted top dish. This advantage permits of the petridish being replaced by a fresh one carrying water to make account of the larvae migrating between any two stated periods, or make easy study of the variations under which migration is effected under different experimental conditions of temperature, humidity and light. A ready suspension of infective larvae without any contamination, as obtainable in this method, is invaluable for experimental work in helmintho- logy ; it is easy to pick out a required number of infective larvae of any one species. In the detection of light infestations with any species of strongyle worms, when no infective larvae gather in the trench of water by this culture method, the Baermann technique should be employed to fish out any larvae that may be retained in the culture. The complete absence of any infective larvae, either in the culture or in the trench of water, is no indication that an animal is free from strongyle infestations, as every one of the eggs passed in the dung need not turn into an infective larva, even under the most optimum conditions. However, in practice it very often happens that one fails to detect the presence of an egg in the direct smears, but finds the infective larvae on culture, as the amount of faeces used for a culture is many times more than that used for direct smears and far in excess, to cover all losses occurring during the develop- ment from the egg to the infective larva. The mere finding of infective larvae in a faecal culture, in the absence of clinical symptoms, should not be taken as sufficient indication for undertaking treatment. Animals in good condition carry a very heavy infection of worms, sometimes, without manifesting apparent symptoms of parasitism. Treatment of these animals is, no doubt, indicated from the fact that these animals prove a source of danger to the worm-free com- panions, as they would be continually soiling the common grazing ground by the infective larvae developing in their dung. In these cases culture of dung would reveal innumerable infective larvae, for guiding the practitioner to decide on treatment. It is observed that in Madras, by this culture me- thod the infective larvae of Strongyloides papillosus could be trapped in the trench of water in very large numbers during the winter months- October to JanuaryS. N. VAIDYANATHAN 161 but the temperature and environmental condi- tions prevailing then do not probably allow the infective phase in the life-history of the parasite to prevail. One should, therefore, estimate an infection with Strongyloides papillosus, if it has any importance at all, from egg counts only. The success of this method, the whole year round, in Madras, within the laboratory, at room temperature, without an incubator being used, suggests its usefulness at many places in India and the tropics. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author is greatly indebted to the late Mr M. R. V. Panikkar, Principal, Madras Veterinary College, for encouragement during the observa- tions, to Mr Rao Sahib M. Anant Narayan Rao, Lecturer in Parasitology, for helpful guidance and facilities generously provided, and to Messrs R. Swaminath Ayyar and S. Vaidyanatha Mudaliar of the College staff for helpful criticism in editing this paper. REFERENCES Baermann, G. (1917). Gencesk, Tijdschr. Ned. Ind, 57, 579-669 Cort, W. W., Ackert, J. E., Augustine, D. L. and Payne. F. K. (1922). Amer. J. Hyg. 2, 1-16 Deschiens, R. (1939). Bull. Soc. Path. exot. 32, 165-9 Faust, E. C. (1937). Papers on Helminthology published in commemoration of the 33 year Jubilee of K. J. Skrjabin, 160-5 Monnig, H. O. (1930). 16th Rept. Dir. Vet. Ser. Ani. Indus. S. A. 2, 175-98 Monnig, H. O. (1938). Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology. Veglia, F. (1923). 9th and 10th Rept., Dir. Vet. Ed. and Res., U. S. Afr., 809-23 Veglia, F. (1928). 13th and 14th Rept., Dir. Vet. Ed. and Res., U. S. Afr. 755-850 White, G. F. (1927). Science 66, 302
OBSERVATIONS ON THE BIOLOGY OF ORNITHODORUS PAPILLIPES BIRULA* By S. N. SAPRE, B.Sc., G.B.V.C., Research Scholar, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 19 June 1942) THE observations embodied in this paper were- made during the years 1938-40 at the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. O. papillipes Birula (1895) (O. crossi Brumpt) was first recorded by Motschulsky from the Caucasus, where it occurs in the cracks of clay walls in stables and human dwellings. In India, these ticks have been recorded by Cross [1921] as occurring in stables in the Murree hills, Punjab. Very little information is available regarding the biology of O. papillipes and the object of the work described below was to determine the number of moults, this tick undergoes before reaching matu- rity, the duration of the different stages and the percentages of mortality in each stage. Obser- vations were also made on oviposition, copula- tion, feeding habits and longevity. Material and methods Females of O. papillipes were isolated and kept singly in specimen tubes which were placed in wooden boxes, each holding about 24 tubes. The ticks were kept in an incubator at 25°C. The tubes were plugged with cotton wool enclosed in pieces of muslin. Small pieces of filter paper were placed inside the tubes to provide a hiding place for the ticks and also to serve as an absorbent for their excrement. The ticks were fed on a rabbit secured on a specially prepared wooden board. Eggs laid by individual ticks in one day were counted and kept separately in tubes, and a record was kept of the time of the emergence of the larvae in each batch of eggs. These particulars were entered on a history card which was folded and placed inside the tubes. The larvae were fed together but from the first nymphal stage a separate record was maintained for each individual until it reached the adult stage. Accurate records were also kept of the duration of the attachment of each parasite to the host. Feeding habits of O. papillipes The female ticks were fully engorged at their first feed, but, subsequently, they either refused to feed or fed partially. The time taken by the females for the first full feed was, on an average, one hour, the maximum and minimum duration of the feed being 2½ hours and 20 minutes res- pectively, and, as a rule, they refused feed a second time. The time required for a full feed in the case of the larvae varied from 8 minutes to one hour, as will be seen from Table I. TABLE I (100 larvae put on a rabbit) No. engorged Time (in minutes) before dropped off 5 . . . . . . 8-10 30 . . . . . . 10-15 15 . . . . . . 15-20 10 . . . . . . 20-25 15 . . . . . . 25-30 5 . . . . . . 30-35 5 . . . . . . 35-45 5 . . . . . . 45-50 5 . . . . . . 50-55 5 . . . . . . 55-60 The duration of feed in the case of the nymphal stages was as follows :S. N. SAPRE 103 female. The spermatophores are then ejected. Finally, after creeping back a little the male pushes the spermatophores with its mouth- parts into the vulva. This performance usually lasts for several-hours. Oviposition in O. papillipes The eggs are deposited in batches at intervals of a few days. Those of each batch adhere to one another by means of an agglutinative substance. This substance soon ceases to be effective as is the case of O. savignyi [Cunliffe, 1922] and the eggs become separated. The females usually start laying eggs about January or February and the oviposition extends over a period of about four to five months and in some cases even up to eight months, the eggs being laid after each feed. Oviposition is resumed about the same time in the following year, the tick remaining more or less quiescent during the intervening period. O. papillipes has occasionally been observed to lay eggs at other times of the year, though the number of eggs in such cases is comparatively small. When first deposited, the egg is dark brown in colour; later it becomes dark yellow and finally pale yellow. When the larva hatches out, the shell is left behind as a small piece of white material. The maximum number of eggs laid by a single individual during its lifetime, at a temperature of 21°C. and 25°C. is about 737 and 809, respectively. The data in regard to oviposi- tion are summarized in TABLE II. TABLE II Ticks maintained at 21°C. 25°C. Maxi- mum Mini- mum Aver- age Maxi- mum Mini- mum Aver- age Interval, between copu- lation and commence- ment of oviposition (in days) 32 16 23 27 15 21.5 Number of eggs deposit- ed after each feed. 449 8 223.5 580 10 296.5 Interval between feeding and commencement of oviposition. 176 12 48.5 210 10 78 Duration of oviposition after each feed (in days) 210 4 91 371 11 116.5 Number of eggs deposit- ed by one female. 737 635 681.5 808 634 700 Percentage of fertile eggs. 88.3 76.7 81.65 82.2 64 74.35 The increase of temperature by 4°C. decreased the period between fertilisation and oviposition and increased the average number of eggs deposit- ed after each feed but. at the same time, the fertility of the eggs decreased from 81 to 74 per cent. At 21°C. oviposition ceased when the female was 510 days old and at 25°C. when it was 485 days old. The oviposition generally occur- red at night. It is of interest that the foregoing observations are in accord with those recorded by Cunliffe and Nuttall [1921] on the biology of O. maubala, for these authors write as follows: "Under laboratory conditions, therefore, the influence of the temperature factor on oviposition (in the case of this tick) is very marked, a rise of 8°C. (from 22°C.) practically doubling the rapidity of egg production after each meal, but at the same time reducing the fertility of eggs by 30 per cent." Longevity of O. papillipes (a) Females. The longevity of 14 female ticks, reckoned in days from the date of emergence from the nymphal stage, was as shown in TABLE III. TABLE III. Number of ticks. Longevity in days Tempera- ture. Maximum Minimum Average 4, fed . 21°C 697 565 620.5 7, fed . 25°C 585 491 543 3, unfed 25°C 384 272 321 (b) Males. The average longevity of live male ticks which were periodically fed and kept at 25°C. was 381 days, the maximum and mini- mum longevity being 548 and 214 days, respec- tively. (c) Nymphs. The observations made on live unfed individuals of each of the four stages of nymphs kept at 25°C. are summarized below :164 Observations on the Biology of Ornithodorus papillipes Birula larvae which emerged on each day were noted. The data from five such history cards showed that the minimum duration of the egg stage is 15 days and the maximum 31 days (average 19 days). The largest numbers of larvae emerged on the 18th, 19th and 20th days. Observations on the larval stage The duration of the larval as well as of the nymphal stage is calculated from the date of their first feed, for changes for the next stage start only after this feed. Unfed larvae or nymphs have never been observed to moult or reach the next stage. Mortality among larvae The percentage of mortality among larvae of O. papillipes ranged between 36 and 47. The majority of the larvae were observed to hatch out in a moribund condition, while some, though apparently in good condition immediately after emergence, remained active only for a few days and died before they were a week old. It has been observed that such larvae refuse to feed when put on a host. A larva that has fed usually attains the adult stage. Actually, the mortality in the nymphal and adult stages is almost negligible. Number and duration of nymphal stage Some of the progeny of one of the females were reared individually up to the adult stage in order to determine the number and duration of the nymphal stages and the observations are sum- marized in TABLE IV. TABLE IV Duration of nymphal stages (at 25°C.) Stage Duration in days Number or indivi- duals observed Maxi- mum. Mini- mum. Average Egg to larva . . . 31 15 19.6 787 Larva to No. Inymphal stage 19 12 14.7 360 No. I to No. II nymphal stage 27 15 18.2 170 No. II to No. III nymphal stage. 35 17 21.7 167 No. III to No. IV . . 36 18 22.5 78 to Male . . . . 43 18 24.7 45 to Female . . . 31 18 23.7 23 No. IV to No. V . . . . 42 22 28.6 5 to Male . . . . 54 21 30.1 24 to Female . . 49 21 26.5 45 No. V to No. VI . . . Observed only in one case and the duration was 40 days. to Male . . . . ... ... ... Nil to Female . . . 60 28 37.5 4 No. VI to No. VII . . ... ... ... Nil to Male . . . . ... ... ... Nil to Female . . . Observed only in one case and the duration was 71 days. As already shown earlier in this article, some of the eggs remained unhatched and a large propor- tion of the larvae died without reaching the adult stage, so that the total number of adults raised amounted, roughly speaking, to 50 per cent of the eggs deposited. As an example of the ratio of sexes, there were 69 males and 73 females in a batch of 142 adults reared from eggs. The number of ecdyses undergone by nymphs before reaching maturity varied as shown in TABLE V. TABLE V Ecdyses in O. papillipes Number of cedyses Percentage of males Percentage of females 4 . . . 65.21 31.5 5 . . . 34.78 61.64 6 . . . Nil 5.48 7 . . . Nil 1.38 As will be seen, males appeared after the fourth and fifth ecdyses, while females appeared after the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh. The majority of males appeared after the fourth ecdysis and the majority of females after the fifth. The number of moults varied from four to seven, the minimum period for metamorphosis being 77 days. The mean minimum periods required for meta- morphosis from egg to adult stage are 96 and 124 days in males and 95, 120 and 160 days in females, according to whether the male undergoes four or five and the female four, five or six moults. Preparatory to the emergence of the next stage, the nymphal skin usually splits laterally as far as the anterior edge of the spiracle. The periods mentioned above are longer by an average of 28 days than in the case of O. moubala reared at 22°C. It is of interest to observe that, unlike those of O. coriceus, O. moubata and O. savignyi, the larva of O. papillipes is active and takes a feed before it moults into a first stage nymph. Sexually mature specimens of O. papillipes were kept alive for long periods but no individual was observed to undergo ecdysis once it had reached the adult stage. SUMMARY The average period taken by a female O. papil- lipes for a complete feed on its host is one hour. The larvae feed for 10-20 minutes at each meal, whilst the duration of feed in the first, second and third nymphal stages is 15-25, 35-45 minutes respectively and that in the fourth and fifth nymphal stages 45-60 minutes. Copulation
S. N. SAPRE 165 occurs shortly after the feed. Eggs are deposited in batches at intervals of a few days, the process extending over four to five months. A single female lays 680 to 700 eggs, of which 64 to 88 per cent are fertile. The longevity of adults ranged from 543 to 620 days and that of unfed nymphs in their different stages from 213 to 369 days. Unfed larvae survived for a maximum period of 52 days. The average duration of the egg, larval and the five nymphal stages were observed to be 19, 15, 18, 21, 22, 28 and 37 days respectively. The number of ecdyses undergone by O. papillipes before reaching maturity varied from four to seven, males generally appearing after four moults and females after four to seven moults. The mean minimum period from the egg to the adult stage is 96-124 days in the case of males and 95-160 days in the case of females. REFERENCES Nuttall, G. H. F., Warburton, C., Cooper, W. F. and Robinson, L. E. (1908). Ticks. A Monograph of the Ixodoidea Pt I, 79-80 Cunliffe, N. (1922). Parasitology 14, 17-26 Cunliffe, N. and Nuttall, G. H. F. (1921). Parasitology. 13, 327-47 Brumpt, E. (1936). Precis de Parasitologie. 5th Edn. Pt II, 1199-1201 Cross, H. E. and Patel, P. G. (1921). A note on Arga- sidae found in the Punjab Dept. Agri. Punj. Vet. Bull. No. 6, Lahore K
COTUGNIA BHALERAOI N. SP. By S. VAITHIANATHA MUDALIAR, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, Madras (Received for publication on 6 October 1942) (With two text-figures) SPECIMENS of this tapeworm were recently collected on two occasions from (Gallus gallus domesticus) a black minorca hen and a light sussex chicken. The unusually large size of the worm attracted the notice of the author who, after a careful study, found it to be a species of Cotugnia, unrecorded so far. A description of the parasite is given below. The maximum length of the worm is 110 mm. and the maximum width 10 mm. The scolex (Fig. 1) is a little broader than long and measures 0.8 mm. in length and 1.0 mm. in width. No distinct neck can be distinguished, the strobila appearing attached directly to the scolex. All the segments are broader than long. The suckers are roughly circular in outline and measure 0.4 mm. across. The rostellum is very much smaller than the sucker, being delved into the anterior end of the scolex and encloses an elliptic area, measuring 0.19 × 0.09 mm. A large number of T-shaped hooks, 0.009 mm. long, fringe the ostellum in two rows. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 The sexual primordia are seen to begin a few segments from the scolex and a mature segment measures 0.95 mm. long and 2.71 mm. broad. The maximum width reached at the posterior end is 10.0 mm. Only one excretory canal is visible on either side and the genital ducts pass dorsally to this. Each segment (Fig. 2) has two sets of genitalia and the genital pore opens at about the middle of the segment, laterally. The testes, about forty in number, spread across the width of the segment and behind the middle, and extend to a little beyond the excretory vessel on either side. The ovary is disposed in thick follicles, arranged symmetrically, in front of the vitelline glands and measure 0.25 × 0.20 mm. The vitellaria consist of two to three pyriform lobes and lie in close apposition with and posterior to the ovary The cirrus sac is long, spindle-shaped, being narrowed at both ends and extends up to the excretory canal. The cirrus is unarmed and conti- nued inwardly into the vas deferens which is thrown into a number of folds at its junction with the cirrus. The vagina is straight or slightly wavy and placed ventrally, behind the cirrus. The common opening of the vagina and cirrus is not demarcated by a well-developed genital atrium. The vagina is continued into a fusiform receptaculum seminis, measuring 0.19 mm. in length and lying transversely and dorsally to the excretory vessel on either side. The uterus is not persistent and the whole segment transforms itself into a receptacle for ova which appear buried in the parenchyme, in no regular order. DISCUSSION Soutwell [1930] in his key for the species of Cotugnia has included only one parasite Cotugnia margareta Beddard, 1916 on the basis of its having a rostellum much smaller than the suckers. The parasite under consideration resembles this in this respect but differs from it in other respects. The points of difference present in the parasite under consideration are its larger sized hooks, having a T-shape, the presence of a single pair of excretory canal, the contiguity of the vagina with the receptaculum seminis and the longer 166
S. VAITHIANATHA MUDALIAR 167 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. cirrus-sac approaching the excretory vessel. On the basis of the above, the parasite is considered to be different from Cotugnia margareta Beddard, 1916 and it is proposed to name it Cotugnia bhaleraoi n. sp. in honour of Dr G. D. Bhalerao Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Mukteswar, whose contributions in the field of helminthology are well known. A detailed comparison regarding the measurements of the various parts of the worm with those of Cotugnia margareta Beddard, 1916 is not possible, since such measurements are not furnished for the latter, in the original paper. Specific diagnosis Generic characters of Cotugnia. Maximum length 110 mm. Rostellum much smaller than the sucker ; hooks T-shaped; scolex almost squarish and continues into the strobila with no distinct neck; single ventral excretory canal: long cirrus sac reaching the excretory canal. Host. Gallus gallus domesticus. Location. Intestines. Locality. Hosur Cattle Farm, Madras, South India. Type specimen in the Museum of the Depart- ment of Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College. REFERENCES Beddard, F. E. (1916). Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 32, 695-706 Southwell. T. (1930). Cestoda II. 110 Index to lettering Suc. . . Sucker. Ros. . . Rostellum (hooks diagramatic only). Ov. . . Ovary. Test . . Testes. Vit. . . Vitellaria. v. d. . . Vas deferens. Cir. . . Cirrus. C. S. . . Cirrus sheath. Vag. . . Vagina. R. S. . Receptaculum seminis. ex. c. . Excretory canal.
A NOTE ON THE CRUDE FIBRE OF SUNFLOWER (HELIANTHUS ANNUUS) By ATAM SINGH, B.Sc. (Agri.), Chemical Research Laboratory, Punjab Agricultural College, Lyallpur (Received for publication on 2 November 1942) READ [ 1933] found that sunflower can be grown throughout the year under the climatic conditions prevalent in the Punjab and, since it can provide green fodder throughout the year, he designated sunflower as 'All the year round fodder crop.' Lander and Dharmani [ 1936 ] undertook detailed investigations on the nutritive value of this fodder by actual feeding trials. They found that it constituted a maintenance ration for heifers when fed ad lib. From the data obtained from digestibility trials, it was observed that the coefficient of digestibility of crude fibre of sunflower in comparison with that of other fodders used by them in their inves- tigations, was conspicuously low. This is clear from the following figures reported by them :ATAM SINGH 169 TABLE I Feed Per 100 part of dry Per 100 parts of crude fibro Lig/ cellu- lose in c. fibre Av. dig. cooff. of Partition of lignin in Crude fibre Lignin Cellu- lose Lignin Cellu- lose c. fb. N. F. E. c. c. ub. N. F. E. Column I Column II. Column III Column IV Sunflower . . 31.8 8.6 27.0 18.9 74.8 0.253 20.2 70.9 6.0 2.6 Oat hay . . 38.5 9.6 35.6 9.2 88.1 0.104 66.2 64.9 3.6 6.0 Dub grass . . 26.2 9.9 24.3 10.3 84.5 0.122 53.8 46.4 2.7 7.2 Wheat bhusa . . 44.2 13.2 40.4 8.5 89.1 0.095 61.2 52.5 3.8 9.4 Jowar . . 33.3 9.9 29.5 8.0 86.5 0.093 57.5 61.9 2.6 7.3 It will be seen from the figures given in Table I that the amount of lignin expressed as percentage of dry material in sunflower is the lowest of all these feeds. But when we turn to column II of this table we find that the crude fibre of sun- flower contains the highest amount of lignin. Another point which needs emphasis is the high lignin: cellulose ratio present in the crude fibre of sunflower (0.253) as compared with that of the other feeds (0.093170 A Note on the Crude Fibre of Sunflower with present day method of expression of results former method of expression is more comprehen- is given in Table II and it will be seen that the sive and informative. TABLE II Feed Ash Fat Protein Crude fibre N.F.E. Suggested partition of carbo- hydrates Lignin Cellulose Insol. in alkali Sol. in alkali Other carbohy- drates Sunflower . . . . 8.56 2.83 12.34 31.80 44.47 27 00 6.00 2.60 40.67 Oat hay . . . . 8.00 1.52 5.32 38.50 46.66 35.60 3.60 6.00 39.96 Dub grass . . . . 10.57 1.30 6.26 26.20 55.67 24.30 2.70 7.20 47.67 Wheat bhusa . . . 8.50 0.88 2.50 44.20 43.92 40.40 3.80 9.40 34.52 Jowar . . . . 9.24 1.42 3.84 33.50 52.00 29.50 2.50 7.30 46.20 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The author wishes to express his best thanks to Dr R. Narain, Assistant to the Agricultural Chemist, Lyallpur, for his help and suggestions in carrying out this work. REFERENCES Crampton. E. W. and Maynard, L. A. (1938). J. Nutri. 15, 383 Lander, P. E. and Dharmani, L. C. (1936). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Ani. Husbandry 6, 117 Read, S. W. (1933). Agri. & Live Stock in India 3, 246 Scheunert, A. and Grimmer, W. (1906). Ztschr. F. Physiol. Chem. 47, 88 Waksman, S. A. and Stevens, K. R. (1930). Ind. & Eng. Chem. (Anal. Edition) 2, 167 Woodman, H. E. (1928). Jour. Agri. Sci. 18, 713 Woodman. H. E. and Stewart, J. (1932). Jour. Agri. Sci. 22, 527
DIRO-FILARIA REPENS INFESTATION OF DOGS By R. G. DHAYAGUDE, M.D., Department of Pathology and Bacteriology, Seth G. S. Medical College, Bombay (Received for publication on 15 August 1942) (With Plates XIII and XIV) IN the course of post-mortem examinations, multiple nodules varying in size from 25 mm. to 2 cm. were encountered in the spleen of human beings. These nodules had a dark red colour, were well circumscribed, had a firm consistency and projected above the surface of the spleen when lying in a superficial position. Histo- pathological examination showed that they were of the nature of granulomata, probably parasitic in nature. Further investigations brought forth evidence to show that they were microfilarial in origin. Microscopic study of the microfilarial obtained from the nodules revealed that the micro- filarice in question were those of Wuchereria bancrofti (Dhayagude & Amin 1942). Filarial worms are parasitic to humans as well as a number of domesticated and wild animals. It is not known whether nodules of type men- tioned above have ever been described in the spleen of animals infested with filaria. From a comparative point of view, it is interest- ing to make a study of one of the domesticated animals infested with filaria. Dogs are known to be infested with this worm, and in this paper an account is presented of the study of filarial infec- tion of the dogs in Bombay. Neumann [ 1905 ] gives the following six species of microfilaria as parasitic to dog: (1) Dirofilaria immitis. (2) Dirofilaria repens, (3) Dirofilaria ochmani, (4) Acanthocheilonema recondita, (5) Achanthocheilonema dracunculoides and (6) Micro- filaria acquieri. Bhalerao [ 1935 ] in his mono- graph of helminth parasites of domesticated ani- mals in India makes no mention of Dirofilaria ochmani. According to him, there are four members of the super-family of filariodea which are parasitic to the dog. Of these, two belonging to the genus of Dirofilaria are more common than the other three, viz. Dracunculus medinensis, Dipetalonema reconditum and the undescribed adult of Microfilaria lewisii [ Korke, 1924 ]. The genus Dirofilaria consists of two species: (1) immitis and (2) repens. Dirofilaria immitis has been found in Bengal, Punjab, Madras, United Provinces, Ceylon and Burma. Repens, on the other hand, has been encountered in Bihar and Orissa. Immitis being the more widely spread species, it was expected that it would be met with in Bombay. It has, however, been observed that, in a study of over two hundred dogs, no specimen of immitis could be obtained, while in a small number of them repens variety was found to be parasitic. Material. The dogs that were examined were from amongst those collected from different parts of Bombay island by the Bombay Municipality for destruction. The blood of these dogs was investigated for microfilaria on three successive days, and the dogs whose blood did not contain them were returned, only the positive ones being retained for further study. The work of blood examination was carried on. for a period of six months and Table I gives the month, the number of dogs examined and the number which showed the presence of micro- filaria in the blood. TABLE 1 Month No. of dogs examined No. of dogs positive September 1941 . . 73 5 October 1941 . . . 29 2 November 1941 . . 12 Nil December 1941 . . . 44 Nil January 1942 . . . 36 2 February 1942 . . . 7 Nil 6 months172 Diro-filaria repens Infestation of Dogs about 5.78µ. The tail end of the microfilaria tapers like a whip lash and its movements are of graceful serpentine character. There is no sheath, and no tongue like process is thrown out periodi- cally as in microfilaria bancrofti. The micro- photograph of the stained preparations brings out very clearly the absence of a sheath, the character of the granules, the arrangement of the vacuole, nerve rings, etc. According to Fülleborne [Panda, 1932 ], it is practically impossible to distinguish the microfilaria of immitis from the repens variety, except by the dimensions of the larva. The average length of the Dirofilaria immitis is 243.9µ, while that of repens varies from 300 to 375µ. It will be seen from this that the microfilaria seen in the blood of the dogs caught in Bombay belongs to the repens type. It might be men- tioned here that one other type of microfilaria was met with in the blood of one dog. It is being further studied. Periodicity of microfilaria. Since the object of this investigation was to find out whether the spleens of these animals contained nodules similar to those found in the human beings, it was decided to ascertain whether the microfilaria of the infest- ing species showed any periodicity as in the case of Wuchereria bancrofti. The blood of a positive dog was examined five times during the course of the day and the number of microfilaria con- tained in 20 c.mm. of blood was determined. From the ear vein of the dog, the above quantity of blood was aspirated and then discharged on a slide over which a broad rectangular coverslip was placed. It was allowed to rest, so that the movements of the microfilaria were slowed. The wet-film was examined from one end to the other and the microfilaria were counted. Tables II and. III give the result of examinations on two dogs carried out on three successive days. TABLE II Count of microfilaria per 20 c.mm. of blood Day Time 6 A. M. 10 A.M. 2 P.M. 6 P.M. 10 P.M. 16-3-42 . . 17 7 9 55 36 17-3-42 . . 16 11 22 50 84 18-3-42 . . 12 2 38 42 30 Total . . . 45 20 69 147 150 Average . 15 6 23 49 50 TABLE III Day Time 2 A.M. 6 A.M. 10 A.M. 2 P.M. 6 M.P. 10 P.M. 16-6-42 . . . . . 41 29 90 45 17-6-42 . 28 30 35 32 68 87 18-6-42 . 48 22 21 54 105 93 19-6-42 . 49 42 . . . . . . . . Total . 125 94 97 115 263 225 Average . 42 31 32 38 88 75 In the second case the blood was examined at 2 A.M. in addition to the times mentioned in Table I. From these tables it will be seen that the lowest counts are obtained at about 10 A.M. and towards the evening the count goes on increasing from 6 to 10 P.M. It is remarkable to note that between 5 P.M. and 6 P.M. the count of microfilaria jumps up to double its original value. The figures given in Table IV are from counts made from a dog on three alter- nate days. TABLE IV Count of microfilaria per 20 c.mm. of blood Day Time 5 P.M 6 P.M. 23-6-42 . . . . . 68 123 25-6-42 . . . . . 49 101 27-6-42 . . . . . 77 170 Total . 198 394 Average . 65 131 This indicates that there is a definite periodicity of the microfilaria in the case of Dirofilaria repens. Out of the nine dogs which showed the presence of microfilaria in the peripheral blood, in the first dog the subcutaneous tissue was not examined, as at that time the possibility of repens being the frequent type was not thought of. Of the remaining eight positive dogs five showed the presence of adult worms. Autopsy. The positive dogs were killed and a complete autopsy was held. A careful examina- tion of the heart and the pleural cavities was made in order to find out whether worms of immitis type could be recovered. In none of the nine positive dogs, it was possible to get that species. The spleens of the animals were carefully ob- served to see if any nodules resembling those found in human beings were met with. In none of the animals were such nodules to be noticed.
Indian. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II ] PLATE XIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Microphotograph of the microfilaria of Dirofilaria repens. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Photograph of the male Dirofilaria repens Note the curved posterior extremity, sma size and the fineness when compared with the female worm in Plate XIV, fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Camera lucida drawing of the tail end of the male worm to show the spicules and the pre and ad-anal papillae.
PLATE XIV [ Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Photograph of the female Dirofilaria repens. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Photograph of 8 of the 10 worms recovered from a single dog. Two worms were damaged during the pro- cess of skinning. Of the 8, two are males.
R. G. DHAYAGUDE 173 Helminths. After a thorough post-mortem, the skin of every animal was flayed with a view to getting the adult worms of the repens type, of which the habitat is the subcutaneous tissue. The worms are found as coiled knots of dead white material which can be seen sometimes with diffi- culty on the whitish yellow subcutaneous tissue. When a little time is allowed to pass some more come into view. They wriggle out very slowly and can be observed to change their position if watched for a little time. In the case of three dogs in which, although the blood contained micro- filaria, adults could not be obtained. The negative result for the adult worms could only be account- ed for by supposing that the worms were already calcified and could not be seen or that they were so few that, in spite of a careful examination, they were missed. The largest number recovered out of two positive dogs was 1.0 in each (Plate XIV, Fig. 2). Adult male and female worms.MORBID GROWTHS IN THE HORN CORE OF A BULLOCK By BALBIR SINGH, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Central Provinces and Berar and D. J. GUPTE, G.B.V.C., Veterinary Assistant Surgeon (Received for publication on 8 November 1942) (With Plate XV) OUR knowledge so far about the diseases of the horn of cattle is very limited. The condition known as Huequera (literally hollow horn, a rarefying ostitis), was recorded by Lerena in 1934 * from Buenos Aires in South America. He observed Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the lesions, while the blood of affected cattle showed Trypanosoma viva infection. ' Horn cancer ' is a condition commonly met in different parts of India. It was known to be peculiar to Indian cattle only till Burgraaf in 1935 * reported its incidence in Dutch East Indies also. It was believed that the disease is related to (a) certain working conditions of cattle in India, e.g. rope galls on horns, (b) the possibility of irritation of the cranial cavity set up by certain flies and worms and (c) the irritation due to frequent use of coal tar in treatment. There is, however, no scientific evidence in support of these beliefs. The morbid material obtained from affected cases has been studied in detail from time to time by various workers but the etiology still remains obscure. The present note records a case encountered in the horn core of a bullock in the Central Provinces. History of the case. The right horn of an aged grey bullock became loose and in nearly a month's time descended gradually from its normal posi- tion to hang on the ear of the affected side. While standing, the animal held its head slightly bent n the affected side. At the root of the horn there was a circumscribed inflammatory ring, from which oozed out a steady flow of sticky discharge which seemed to cause good deal of local irritation. The horn could be moved antero- posteriorly as if on a. ball and socket joint and this movement caused some pain to the animal. This kind of horn loosening is locally known as 'Karanjooa'. It is believed that the cattle contract the disease when a bird named Karanjooa perches on their horns. Diagnosis and treatment. The case was pri- marily diagnosed as horn cancer. The amputa- tion of the affected horn was carried out at about an inch from its root. It was surprising to find that instead of the usual profuse bleeding en- countered at such operation, a steady stream of yellowish frothy discharge oozed out instead. On examination the horn core was found to contain a big cyst, which ruptured when an attempt was made to remove it. On further examination, the rest of the core was found to be full of such cysts varying from the size of an Indian berry to a big tomato. Plate XV shows (A) T. S. of the horn showing a cyst with a small pedicle. (B) A cyst removed from the horn. The amputated part was dressed by an antiseptic dusting powder containing 15 per cent phenols (crude cresols) spread over a cotton pad and a tight bandage was applied. The affected part was examined on the fourth day when the wound was found to have started granulating. Then 0.1 Picis carb dressing was applied daily and the part was bandaged tightly. The animal recovered completely after 21 days treatment. Some morbid material was forwarded to the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Muktes- war, and the report on its examination states ' that the growth presents the histopathological picture of a mucoid cyst arising from the lining membrane of air sinuses of the skull. Prolonged examinations have failed to reveal any evidence of an infestation with Zoo-parasites. There is reason to believe that the growth is of mycotic origin. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We are thankful to the Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for the examination of specimen. * Mukteswar, An. Rep. I. V. R. L., 1936-37 174
Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II ] PLATE XV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Morbid growths in the horn core of a bullock
SOME METHODS OF FEEDING TICKS* By S. N. SAPRE, B.Sc., G.B.V.C. Research Scholar, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 1 June 1942) PROBLEMS encountered in feeding intermittent feeders, such as Hyalomma, Rhiphicephalus and Haemaphysalis, particularly where the hosts are large animals, have been discussed by Lounsbury [1902-1906]. For feeding these ticks and ensuring their recovery after engorgement, he used a kind of stocking to enclose them upon the legs of the host, while bags with draw-strings were used when the ticks were applied either to the scrotum or the ear. He obtained the best results with the scrotal bags. Hooker, Bishopp and Wood [1912], while work- ing out the life-histories of certain species of Ameri- can cattle ticks, used what was essentially a modification of Lounsbury's method. In addition to Lounsbury's bag, they used a disc-shaped leather collar for the ear. In the case of small animals (e.g. rabbits), however, they claim to have obtained better results by enclosing them in cloth bags along with the ticks to be fed and confining them in wire cages. DuToit [1917] used a cloth garment for feeding larvae and nymphs on the legs of cattle, the draw- strings being tied at the waist and at the base of the legs to prevent the escape of the ticks. Morton [1928] developed what would appear to be a very satisfactory method for feeding ticks on rabbits. He used screen capsules, stamped out from a twenty-mesh (20 in 1 inch) screening by means of a die. The finished capsule has a circular depression of three-eight of an inch by two inches surrounded by a circular rim and looks like a low-crowned hat. The rim of the capsule fits tightly against the belly of the host, being fitted to it by adhesive tape. Morton [1928] also evolv- ed the so-called ' longevity tube method ' for keeping alive unengorged ticks for any desired period up to one year, until they were needed for experimental work. Nieschulz and Wawo-Roentoe [1930] used the following method for feeding Rhipicephalus in its different stages on mice, guinea-pigs and dogs. They tied the host on to a plank and, after clipping the hair from a small area on the back, stuck a piece of linen with the parasites enclosed in it. to the area by means of celloidin solution. A neck collar was used for preventing the animal from scratching off the linen. Sen[1933] used a modification of Nieschulz and Wawo-Roentoe's method for feeding Rhipicephalus sanguineus, while experimenting upon the trans- mission of Piroplasma gibsoni infection through the agency of this species of tick. The method consisted in the use of special cloth covers to en- close the ticks over a limited area of the skin of the host by means of celloidin solution and the adhe- sive known as ' Chatterton's Compound ' For protecting this cloth cover, he used the lid of a cigarette tin with holes in it to admit air for the ticks to breathe. He also used special coats and card-board collars to prevent the ticks from being scratched off by the animal. Rees [1934] used car bags for rabbits as well as for large animals. He used adhesive plaster instead of draw-strings and covered the bags with cylinders made of fine mesh copper screening Bloomers or garments similar to those used by DuToit with elastic bands instead of draw-strings were also employed for feeding ticks on cattle. Bags made of bolting silk cloth were used for feeding fowl ticks on the wings of the hosts which were enclosed in the above bags. Kohls [1937], Trager [1939], and Bingham [1941] employed pill-boxes containing ticks attached with adhesive tape to the shaved sides of the hosts, to permit repeated observations and careful control of the engorging ticks. In each of the above cases small animals such as guinea-pigs, rabbits, and deer-mice were used. In his attempt to work out the life-histories of the commonest Indian ticks, the present writer had to develop a suitable method for feeding them on their natural hosts, e.g. cattle, goats and dogs. Ear and scrotum bags were found unsuitable, because, in the first place, they would not keep on the host for the necessary length of time, and secondly, because rats frequently gnawed holes in the cloth, thereby allowing the ticks to escape. It is relatively simple to feed Boophilus australis on account of the fact that it is a continuous feeder. Once the larvae are put on the animal's body, they readily attach themselves to the skin, usually after selecting a suitable place for the purpose, and on moulting they re-attach themselves to a neighbouring area, so that it is only necessary to watch for the adult ticks to drop off after engorgement. It is more difficult in the case of interrupted feeders. For feeding these successfully, *Paper read at the Indian Science Congress held at Madras, January 1940 175
176 Some Methods of Feeding Ticks Morton's capsules in a modified form were found very useful. The original Morton's capsules are not sufficient- ly strong and are suitable for use only on small animals, such as rabbits. With bigger animals, they are liable to be damaged or crushed, and in such cases, capsules of tin or iron were used. These were three inches in diameter and half an inch deep with a rim of about 1/4 inch all round. A. central area, one inch in diameter from the roof of the capsule, was removed and a piece of fine- mesh copper wire gauze was soldered to this area to admit air for the ticks to breathe. A flat area was selected on the body of the host (the quarters or the loins were found suitable for this purpose) and the hairs thereon were close clipped. A circular piece of linen, slightly smaller in size than the casule, was fixed on the part with a solution of celloidin of a suitable consistency, a little open- ing being left to introduce the parasites. The ticks to be fed were collected in a thick agglutina- tion tube and the latter inserted through the open- ing. A few taps on the tube caused the parasites to roll down in the form of a ball under the linen cover, and the opening was then closed with celloi- din solution. The rim of the capsule which had been previously coated with Chatterton's Compound was now held over a spirit lamp till this substance melted and the capsule was then fixed over the linen piece. By using a neck-rack, the animal was prevented from tampering with the capsule. The advantage of this method of feeding ticks is that the tin capsule can be removed every day and the ticks which are engorged drop off in the capsule and are removed without any difficulty. The capsule can be easily fixed and removed daily till all the ticks are fully fed, thus enabling the worker to obtain full data concerning the feeding time of the ticks. The same method, with a little modification, can be used for feeding ticks on dogs and goats. Wooden capsules are more convenient for this purpose than those made of iron. The capsules are about two inches in diameter and a quarter of an inch in depth and in the thickness of the wall. Small holes are bored in the roof to admit air for the ticks to breathe. The process of ap- plying the parasites and fixing the capsule is the same as that described in the case of cattle. However, when the host employed is a dog, it has to be kept under more effective control. This is achieved by placing a leather or card-board collar round its neck and by using a coat, specially pre- pared for preventing the animal from scratching off the capsule. For feeding Argasid ticks on rabbits the follow- ing method has proved convenient. The rabbit is tied on a board with a neck collar and a small area on its abdomen is shaved. The ticks to be fed are collected in a small petri dish which is inverted on the area and kept pressed against the abdomen with a bandage tied over the petri dish. The use of the bandage also provides the ticks with the necessary darkness in which they attach and reed. After about half an hour, the bandage is removed and the engorged ticks collected. For feeding Argas persicus ticks (which, in the adult stage, are nocturnal feeders) on fowls, a jar of fairly large capacity has been found convenient. A square glass jar, such as is used for storing sul- phuric acid, serves the purpose well. The lid of the jar is made of tin with a central area of about three inch diameter fitted with fine copper gauze to admit air. A wooden or iron platform, about two inches high, with holes all over it, is placed at the bottom of the jar. The fowl, with its head enclosed in a cloth bag, is placed on the platform along with the ticks; and the jar is closed and left- over night. The engorged ticks drop off the host and are easily collected the following morning*. Ticks are best maintained during their non- parasitic period in incubators at 22°-26°C. For providing humidity which is essential for the nor- mal growth of ticks, a glass of water may be kept inside the incubators. Individual ticks are kept in entomological specimen tubes with strips of filter paper to give the ticks a hiding place and, at the same time, to absorb their excretions. The mouth of the tube is closed with a piece of muslin to prevent the escape of the Ticks and this also allows them a sufficiency of air. An identity card is attached to each tube and all observations are noted on the card. SUMMARY The method of feeding ticks on large animals, such as bullocks, by means of ear and scrotum bags and similar other appliances, was found to be unsatisfactory. For this purpose the use of a modified Morton capsule made of iron or tin proved very useful. The use of similar capsules made of wood with holes in the roof gave equally good results in feeding ticks on dogs and goats. The parasites to be fed are first enclosed under a circular piece of linen stuck with celloidin solution to a flat part of the body of the host, after the hairs thereon have been closely clipped. The capsule is then fixed over it by means of Chatterton's Compound. It may be daily removed, any en- gorged ticks may be collected and the capsule refixed. Thus, the advantage of this method over the old methods is that the daily progress of the parasites can be studied and, at the termination of each feed, the full number of the parasites can be recovered without difficulty. *The methods described above for feeding ticks on dogs and fowls were already in use at the Mukteswar Institute at the time the writer undertook these studios
S. N. SAPRE 177 REFERENCES Bingham, M. L. (1941). A note on the bionomics of Ixodes ricinus L. Parasitology 33, 316 DuToit, P. J. (1917). The collection and breeding of the native tick, Ixodes ricinus, Berliner Tierarzt. Woch. 35, 124 Hooker, W. A., Bishopp, E. C. and Wood, H. P. (1912). The life-history and bionomics of some North American ticks. U. S. Dept. Agric. Bur. Ent. Bull. No. 106, 106-239. (Cited by Rees, C. W. 1934.) U. S. Dept. Agric. Tech. Bull. 418 Kohls, G. M. (1937). Tick rearing methods, with special reference to the Rocky Mountain wood tick, Dermacenter andersoni Stiles. In Galtsoff, P. S., Lutz, F. E., Welch, P. S., and Needham, J. G., culture methods for invertebrate animals, Comstock Publishing Co., Ithaca, N. Y., 246-56. Lounsbury, C. P. (1902). Tick heart water investigations. Rep. Gov. Ent. Cape of Good Hope Dept. Agric. 1901, 29-73 (Cited by Rees, C. W. 1934) Lounsbury C. P. (1906). Ticks and African Coast Fever. Cape of Good Hope J. Agric. 28, 654 (Cited by Rees, C. W. 1934) Morton Fred. A. (1925). Quantity production of tick parasites. Montana State Board Ent. 7th Bicnn Rep. 32 Nieschulz, O. and Wawo-Roentoe, F. K. (1930). The breeding of ticks. Zbl. Bakt. (1 orig.) 115, 486 Rees, C. W. (1934). Transmission of anaplasmosis by various species of ticks. U. S. Dept Agric. tech. Bull. 418 Sen, S. K. (1933). The vector of canine piroplasmosis due to Piroplasma gibsoni. Indian J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 3, 356-63 Trager, W. (1939). Acquired immunity to ticks. J. Parasit. 25, 57-81
NOTES OF PARASITOLOGICAL INTEREST By M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College (Received for publication on 31 March 1942) (With Plate XVI) IN the course of routine examination of materials received for diagnosis in the department of Para- sitology at the Veterinary College Laboratory, Madras, several interesting specimens and cases were met with, and the author takes the oppor- tunity of recording some of those in these notes. Schistosoma suis in dogs Schistosomes have previously been recorded as one of the causes of dysentery in the dog by Swaminathan [1934], Rao and Ayyar [1935] and Rao [1937]. Since then the author detected in the faeces of another dog admitted into the College Hospital, ova of schistosomes indistinguish - able from those of Schistosoma suis [Rao and Ayyar, 1933]. This dog was treated intravenously with sodium antimony tartarate and discharged as apparently cured though the faeces contained very few eggs. The same dog was readmitted about six months later for nephritis to which it succumb- ed. Even at that time its faeces contained a few ova of schistosomes. A careful post-mortem ex- amination resulted in the finding of half a dozen pairs of schistosomes from the mesenteric veins, the portal veins being entirely free. These were identified as Schistosoma suis [Rao and Ayyar, 1933]. Pharyngostomum Cordatum Diesing 1850 A few specimens of these were received in this Laboratory, collected from the small intestine of a tiger, shot in the Coorg forests. Through the courtesy of the Hon'ble Miriam Rothschild, it was possible to get them identified by Dr Baylis to be Pharyngostomum cordatum. This species has been fairly frequently recorded from the European wild cat and also from the domestic cat in China. Dr Baylis thinks that this parasite has not so far been reported from the tiger and hence this is the first record of its kind in the tiger (Coorg, India) and in India. Trypanosomes in skin lesions of cattle (Taurine species) During the year 1940-41, it was possible to study this condition in three animals, two (a cow and a heifer) from Tanjore in October 1940 and one cow at Chingleput in February 1941. The history and symptoms of each of these cases from Tanjore, as given by the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Veterinary Hospital, Tanjore, is indicated below. The cow was purchased locally and she had no complaint then. Six months after purchase, she developed this disease. The cow was kept in a well-ventilated thatched shed with rough concrete flooring. Besides straw she received country linseed leaves, ginglily oil cake and rice bran. The lesion developed as a circumscribed thicken- ing of the skin, became denuded of hair at the. centre and developed into a raw sore. It had an itching sensation and the animal rubbed herself against any hard object. Such sores cropped up one by one and were confined to the neck, dewlap and part of the hump. Some got dried up with the application of any bland oil dressing while some persisted. The owner told me that he used to rub curds (sour butter milk) on the sores to give some relief. The heifer was brought by the owner four months previously at Rayaperiampatti near Tiru- kattupalli of Tanjore taluk, Tanjore district. Two months after purchase she developed this disease. The lesion developed in a similar manner as described above. On pressure a sero-sanguinous liquid exuded. This heifer was kept in a thatched shed with mud flooring and she was maintained on straw only and was allowed to graze outside. The history and symptoms of the cow treated at Chingleput is given by the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, in charge, Veterinary Hospital is as under : 21 February 1941. This cow showed nodular eruptions which broke open to form ulcers on or about 21 January 1941. She was admitted as an out-patient and the ulcers were treated. Fresh ulcers cropped up when old ones healed up. The smears were reported to contain Trypanosomes by the Principal, Madras Veterinary College. On the whole, about a dozen nodules appeared on the body, viz. sides of the neck, shoulder blades, base of the tail and inside the thighs. A study of the morphology of these trypanosomes has revealed peculiar features, not met with in any trypanosome so far known as affecting cattle. The parasites are 25-35µ long and have a well developed undulating membrane and a free flagellum. The undulating membrane originates 178
PLATE XVI [ Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 FIGS. 1 & 2. Sections of growth from eye-lid of a bullock showing sections of Thelazia species [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Section of the skin of a bullock showing microfilariæ in skin lesions [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Trypanosomes from skin lesions
M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO 179 at a place near the posterior end but no structure representing a blepharoplast or parabasal body can be made out at the starting of the flagellum. The nucleus is situated a little behind the middle of the body and close to the nucleus, placed either anterior or posterior to it, is present a circumscrib- ed chromatin body, probably the blepharoplast. The location of this structure which stains deeper than the nucleus is unique and makes one surmise about the identity of the parasite. The morpholo- gical features of this trypanosome do not resemble those of any known species. It may possibly be a developmental form of Trypanosoma theileri, if not entirely new to science (Plate XVI, fig. 4). A very careful examination of several blood smears from the peripheral blood of all the three animals obtained simultaneously with those from skin lesions failed to reveal T. evansi of T. theileri. A histological examination of pieces of skin snipped off the lesions did not show any micro- filariae, contrary to the finding of such larval helminths associated with skin lesions in cattle [Srivastava, 1939]. In the circumstances the pos- sibility of this trypanosome playing a pathogenic role in the causation of skin lesions is mooted. (In Plate XVI, fig. 4 no tissue cells have been drawn but only R.B.Cs. have been included to give comparative idea of the size of the Trypanosomes). Further work is warranted when similar cases present themselves hereafter. Cancer of the horn and eye of cattle (a) Since publishing a report on the finding of ova of Schistosoma nasalis in the so called cancer growths of the horn [Rao, 1935], it has been possi- ble to find ova in sections of horn growth from a few more bovines. The nasal discharge from these animals also revealed ova of Schistosoma nasalis. (b) Sometime ago, while examining sections of an epitheliomatous growth from the eye-lid of a bullock, a section of nematode worm was seen. Opportunity was taken to study serial sections and a reconstruction of the sections of worms revealed that it was a species of Thelazia (Plate XVI, figs. 1 and 2). The writer wishes to record this interesting finding. The section of the healthy portion of the eye-lid showed microfilaria in a capillary vessel of the dermis. What relation these microfilariae have to the worm or to the lesion, is worthy of investigation. The presence of worms, of their products, such as ova, in the so-called cancerous growths of the horn and the eye of cattle makes it necessary to confine more attention on the causation of such lesions in bovines. Paucity of information on the subject makes one presume that parasitologists have not paid adequate attention to this very important question. The author also places on record his finding of unsheathed microfilariae in skin lesions of many cattle. Such lesions consist of nodular eruptions and corrugations of the skin, the scrapings from which did not reveal any mange mites. This confirms Srivastava's [1939] finding of similar microfilariae in skin lesions of cattle in Bombay Province. Photomicrograph (Plate XVI, fig. 3) of section of skin showing the microfilariae is appended. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Many thanks are due to S. N. Vaidyanathan, Veterinary Assistant Surgeon and P. Doraiswami Mudaliar, the College Artist for help rendered. I am indebted to the Hon'ble Miriam Rothschild for getting the flukes from the tiger identified. REFERENCES Laveran, A. (1902). Sur un nouveau trypanosoma does bovides (tryanosoma theileri)C. R. Acad. Sci. 134, 512 Rao, M. A. and Ayyar, L. S. P. (1933). Schistosoma suis N. Sp. A schistosome found in pigs in Madras. Indian J. Vet. Sci. Anim. Husb. 3, 321-4 Rao, M. A. and Mudaliar, S. V. (1934). Some observations on the trypanosomes of cattle in South India. Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 4, 362-95 Rao, M. A. and Swaminatha Ayyar, R. (1935). Ova of schistosomes in faeces of a dog. Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 5, 1-5 Rao, M. A. (1935). Further observations on bovine nasal schistosomiasis. Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 5, 266-73 Rao, M. A. (1937). A preliminary report on canine schisto- somiasis in the Madras Presidency. Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 7, 109-12 Srivastava, H. D. (1939). Cutaneous microfilariasis in Indian Cattle (Preliminary report). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 9, 389-91 Swaminathan, R. (1934). Indian Vet. J.11.112-4
ABSTRACTS Menstruation frequency and its relation to concep- tion in dairy cattle: GEORGE W. TRIMBERGER (1941). Jour. Dy. Sci. 24, 819 MENSTRUATION and its relation to conception varies considerably in mammals. The time in the sexual cycle when monstruation occurs varies between species and sometimes within a species. Human menstruation extends over an exceptionally long period and usually starts midway between successive ovulations. It seems to be largely a function of the uterus although other reproductive organs share to some extent the vascular congestion exhibited by the uterus at menstruation. There seems some disagreement as to whether menstrua- tion in the human indicates positively that fertilization has not taken place. A pronounced flow of blood continues for about ten days in the bitch, immediately after which coitis is most suc- cessful. Blood is not generally present in the proestral discharge of the mare. Ewes usually show no discharge, as is always true of the sow. The cow menstruates usually two days after heat; the uterus is involved as is also that portion of the vagina above the urethra. Some authors report that the appearance of the menstrual flow after coitis is a positive indication that conception did not take place; others do not accept this as fact while they feel it is a valuable sign. Data for this study were collected at the University of Nebraska herd. Menstruation refers to the external discharge of a bloody fluid, usually mucus mixed with blood, from the genital tract following oestrus. Obser- vations were made on 100 heifers and 100 cows which were not served during oestrus and 100 heifers and 100 cows which were ' inseminated ' during oestrus. The frequency and amount of discharge was noted and recorded; the amount being rated as slight, moderate, or pronounced. Observations were made at six regular intervals daily for five days after oestrus. The 100 heifers not served all menstruated, whereas of the 100 cows not served only 61 menstruated. Mens- truation occurred in 81 of the 100 heifers bred at oestrus. The number of conceptions which occurred in this group of 100 heifers was 61 of which 52 or 85.25 per cent menstruated. Of the 39 heifers of this group which did not conceive, only 74.36 per cent menstruated. Of the 100 cows bred at oestrus, 61 menstruated and 72 con- ceived of which 50 or 69.44 per cent menstruated. Of the 28 cows of this group which did not conceive, only 11 or 39.29 per cent menstruated. It appears, on the basis of this study, that the common belief among stockmen that menstruation following service indicates failure of conception is erroneous. [J. N. W.] The causes of stillbirth in swine and an attempt to control it: S. A. ASDELL AND J. P. WILLMAN (1941). Jour. Ag. Res. 63, 345. APPROXIMATELY 5 to 8 per cent of the young pigs born in the United States are still-born, that is they die just before or during birth. One report each for Slovakia and New Zealand indicate 3.2 and 9.6 per cent respectively of still-born pigs in those countries. McPhee and Zeller, it is reported, found that stillbirth was related to litter size, both the smallest (1 to 2) and the largest (15 or more) litters showing the highest mortality at birth. Accurate records and the autopsy of still-born pigs, together with the injection of pituitrin in certain cases to prevent delayed birth, were practices followed by the authors in carrying out the present study with Berkshire, Chester White and Duroc-Jersey pigs at Cornell Uni- versity. Mummified embryos were not counted. Of 1,882 pigs born from 1930 to 1935 inclusive, 6.6 per cent were dead. Little breed difference was found. The percentage of stillbirths increased with size of litter due, the authors believe, to the increased duration of the birth process. The percentage of stillbirths also increased with an increase in the age of the sow. A seasonal varia- tion in stillbirth rate was found, with 9.2 per cent in the spring and 4.9 per cent in the fall. A slightly higher death rate of females suggested a sex difference in sus- ceptibility. An incomplete tendency for still-born pigs to be immature was noted. Over one hundred pigs were dissected and an attempt made to determine the cause of death. The authors say that some cases could be little more than guess work because of the difficulty, for example, of knowing what size of an organ is lethal. They report the causes of death, however, as follows: immaturity, 8; disproportionate organ weights, 18: pathology, 19: endocrine disturbance and oedema, 19: deformities of skeleton, 5; accidental death, 13; and no obvious reason for death, 45. No Brucella suis infection was found in the herd during the study. The extent to which death was due to hereditary causes cannot be stated. Histological examination of lung sections showed that in many cases death occurred before infla- tion. This, together with the higher incidence of death in the latter half of large litters, indicated quite clearly that the prolonged birth process was an important cause of the trouble. Starting in 1936, pituitrin was used for five farrowing seasons to observe the affect of hastened birth. At first 2 c.c. U. S. P. IX and later 1 c.c. U. S. P. XI pituitrin was injected subcutaneously in the soft part of the neck as soon as the first pig was born. During this time the mortality rate of 1,148 pigs was 2.9 per cent, indicating one possible means of controlling stillbirth in pigs. A check on these findings, however, for five farrowings starting in the fall of 1938, consisting of the injection with pituitrin of each alternate sow, did not confirm this means of reducing stillbirth. During the check period 4.3 per cent of 352 pigs born to injected sows and 2.4 per cent of 545 pigs born to sows not injected were still- born. [J. N. W.] Variations in bull semen and their relation to fertility: E. W. SWANSON AND H. A. HERMAN (1942). Jour. Dy. Sci. 24, 321 WITH the wide-spread practice of artificial insemination in dairy cattle goes the need of determining the fertility and longevity of bull semen at the time of collection. Different workers have used different criteria, such as initial motility, duration of motility, rate of glycolysis, initial respiration rate, examination of the stained sper- matozoa, the proportion of abnormal spermatozoa, pH of the semen and spermatozoan head length. The variation in the performance of different bulls, however, must not be overlooked in fixing limits for any such factors. Normal variations in the semen of several bulls and their relation to fertility are reported herein. 180
ABSTRACTS 181 Ten Jersey, Guernsey and Friesian bulls, from one and one-half to nine years of age, which were in regular service were studied. Both natural and artificial services by these bulls to cows of good breeding histories, together with conceptions, were recorded. Pregnancies were determined by examination or the non-recurrence of oestrus. Semen was collected in an artificial vagina; examinations were made within 10 to 30 minutes without cooling. Samples were divided, one part being examined and one being stored at 40 °F. Volume, consistency, pH and spermatozoa concentration were recorded. Smears, stained with aqueous Rose Bengal solution, were examined at 1075 × magnification. Motility was rated from 0 to 5 at intervals at 100 °F. at 250 × magnification. Samples numbering 256 were examined, wide varia- tions for each bull being found. The least variation was shown by initial motility. This character seemed to be roughly correlated with the duration of 2 motility. There was generally a motility duration of less than 24 hours for samples whose initial motility was 3 or less. The percentage of abnormal spermatozoa varied considerably. The variation for any one bull was confined largely to a particular abnormality such, for example, as colled tails or pyriform heads. The pH of the semen of a bull also varied, and seemed to be associated with consistency and concentration of spermatozoa. Contrary to what previous workers had claimed the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa in the semen showed very little relationship to fertility in the bulls studied. Some with a high percentage of abnormal sperm, 40 per cent or more, were good breeders, and vice versa. This was not true, however, in the case of each bull. The volume of the ejaculum was related to the relative size of a bull within its breed, but not to his fertility. The concentration and pH of the semen gave no indication of fertility. Initial motility seemed to be no more closely related to fertility than any other character studied. The duration of good motility, however, was more significantly correlated with breeding efficiency in the bulls than any other factor. Semen which maintained a motility of 2 (50 per cent or more motile) for 36 hours when stored undiluted at 40°F. showed the highest fertility; if this rating was not maintained for 24 hours, fertility was poor. It is suggested, although not syste- matically considered in this study, that in cases requiring storage of the semen the more viable semen might show to greater advantage. [J. N. W.]
CONTENTS (VOL. XIII, PART II) June 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal PAGE Original articles FLUORINE INTOXICATION OF CATTLE IN INDIA (WITH PLATES VIII & IX AND ONE MAP) B. N. Majumdar, S. N. Ray and K. C. Sen 95 SOYA BEAN MEAL SUPPLEMENTS FOR CHICKENS . . . A. J. Macdonald and S. Bose 108 ANALYSIS OF WEIGHT RECORDS OF ETAH GOATS (WITH TWO TEXT-FIGURES) C. K. Dilwali . . . 115 SPOILAGE IN DRIED SHRIMPS ...... K. Gopinath . . . 121 A PRELIMINARY NOTE ON SOME INDIGENOUS METHODS OF EGG PRESERVATION (WITH PLATE X) T. S. Krishnan. . . 127 A SIMPLE ' RAM-KO ' METHOD FOR THE ESTIMATION OF FAT IN MILK (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) C. S. Ram Ayyar and Zal R. Kothavalla 133 SOME OBSERVATIONS ON RICKETS IN PUPS . . . . K. Raghavachari . . 137 THE RELATION OF THE CANDLING APPEARANCE OF EGGS TO THEIR THICK WHITE PERCENTAGE (WITH PLATE XI AND ONE TEXT-FIGURE) T. S. Krishnan . . 141 STUDIES ON THE COMPOSITION OF THE BLOOD OF FARM ANIMALS IN INDIA, I.ORIGINAL ARTICLES TREE LEAVES AS CATTLE FODDER I. THE SEASONAL VARIATION IN THE COMPOSITION OF SOME EDIBLE TREE LEAVES By S. A. MOMIN and S. C. RAY, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 12 December 1942) (With two text-figures) IN India during times of fodder shortage, green tree leaves are fairly extensively used for feeding cattle, goats and sheep, but although the fodder supply is often supplemented in this way, no systematic investigation appears to have been made to study the composition and feeding value of edible tree leaves. During the last year and a half, an investigation has been undertaken in this laboratory to study the composition, digestibility and feeding value of the leaves of some of the trees which are known to be used for feeding cattle. In part I of this article is reported the seasonal variation in the composition of the leaves as determined by chemi- cal analysis carried out at regular intervals from October 1940 to September 1941. The following trees were selected for the study :184 Tree Leaves as Cattle Fodder, I Period 4 . April May Dry hot summer June Period 5 . July August Hot humid summer with rain September It was found possible to classify the leaves into three main groups according to the trend of varia- tion in their chemical composition as follows :S. A. MOMIN AND S. C. RAY 185 lowest value in period 4, and then again showed a sharp rise in period 5. With the advent of the winter, the percentage lime content dropped again and showed its lowest value in the middle of period 1. In contradistinction to that of the lime, the percentage value of phosphate in beri and neem leaves was lowest in period 3. The phosphate value in imli behaved slightly differently; its lowest value was reached in period 1. In all cases, however, the highest value of phosphate was recorded in period 5. The seasonal variation in the composition of the organic and mineral constituents of beri, neem and imli leaves s graphically shown in Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Seasonal variation in the composition of tree leaves The seasonal variation in the composition of leaves of the third group did not follow the trend of change of either group 1 or group 2. Among themselves also there was no uniformity in the variation. These leaves, as will be evident from the data presented in Table I, showed a compara- tively narrow seasonal variation in the composition of their constituents. TABLE I Seasonal variation in the composition of leaves of aam and jaman 186 Tree Leaves as Cattle Fodder, I Tree fodder. Dry matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre Nitro- gen free extract (Minimum) Bans . . . 28.7 15.96 1.22 18.38 32.94 Paker . . . 17.6 8.48 1.80 12.82 44.83 Shisham . . 25.1 11.22 2.03 12.48 42.97 Pipal . . . 14.6 10.58 2.09 12.22 41.99 Neem . . . 30.9 13.08 1.43 9.99 52.72 Beri . . . 38.2 13.26 1.48 10.39 55.02 Imli . . . 26.6 12.77 2.13 16.79 47.80 Aam . . . 38.0 7.02 1.63 21.34 45.56 Jaman . . . 29.8 6.58 1.05 16.98 56.26 (Average) Bans . . . 42.0 22.31 2.34 23.25 38.64 Paker . . . 40.6 10.18 2.67 22.77 52.24 Shisham . . 40.5 16.65 3.18 22.23 49.40 Pipal . . . 35.8 13.99 2.71 22.36 46.02 Neem . . . 36.0 15.04 3.02 13.77 57.03 Beri . . . 41.2 15.41 2.69 13.96 57.90 Imli . . . 32.0 15.42 3.89 21.95 50.57 Aam . . . 44.0 8.08 2.71 28.03 50.57 Jaman . . . 37.1 7.94 2.60 20.67 61.68 The composition of tree leaves as fodders In Table II is set out the maximum, minimum and average value of each constitutent of the individual tree leaves analyzed during one full year of collection. The data presented in Table II offer the oppor- tunity of comparing the quality of the tree leaves with those of common fodders and feeding stuffs on the basis of their chemical composition [Sen, 1938]. The average dry matter content in tree leaves may be considered as fairly high for green fodders, in fact in most cases it is 50 per cent higher than any green grass or other cultivated green forage. The range of variation in the dry matter values is also wide as can be judged from the maximum and minimum figures. The high crude protein content is an unique feature in tree leaves. With the exception of aam and jaman, the average percentage of crude protein in the leaves is almost two to three times that of the best quality cultivated and indigenous grasses, such as napier, guinea, dub, anjan, etc. The amount of this constituent in fact compares very favourably with that from leguminous forages, such as berseem, cowpea, lucerne, senji and shaftal. The maxi- mum value of 31:47 per cent crude protein in bans leaves is comparable to the crude protein content of a concentrate such as linseed cake. The range of variation in the crude protein content of some of the leaves, e.g. bans, paker, shisham and pipal is fairly wide; the maximum value is practically double that of the minimum. Com- pared with that of other green roughages, the percentage ether extract of leaves may also be considered high. The importance of this rela- tively high value is, however, perhaps of little significance since the greater portion of ether extractable matter appeared to be chlorophyll and other pigments. In spite of their high dry matter content and apparent coarseness, the leaves showed a lower crude fibre content than that of the common green fodders. As a matter of fact, at their more succulent stage, the leaves contain practically the same amount of crude fibre as concentrates such as cakes and grains. The per- centage of nitrogen free extracts in the leaves may also be considered high for green forages. TABLE III The maximum, minimum and average composition of the mineral constituents of leaves (On dry basis) Tree fodder Total ash Lime (CaO) Phosphate (P2O5) Lime/ Phosphate (Maximum) Bans . . . 18.35 3.00 1.07 3 Paker . . . 17.56 3.22 1.01 3 Shisham . . 9.50 5.39 0.96 5 Pipal . . . 20.73 7.57 1.05 7 Neem . . . 13.79 5.73 0.72 8 Beri . . . 13.97 5.55 0.87 6 Imli . . . 11.42 4.09 0.79 5 Aam . . . 13.93 5.89 0.41 13 Jaman . . . 10.27 2.35 0.48 5 (Minimum) Bans . . . 8.51 0.93 0.24 4 Paker . . . 8.33 1.14 0.42 3 Shisham . . 6.44 1.17 0.28 4 Pipal . . . 10.69 2.89 0.34 8 Neem . . . 8.49 2.18 0.33 6 Beri . . . 6.75 2.09 0.36 6 Imli . . . 6.52 1.93 0.36 5 Aam . . . 8.09 1.71 0.23 7 Jaman . . . 4.94 1.26 0.16 8 (Average) Bans . . . 13.28 1.56 0.53 3 Paker . . . 12.14 2.50 0.62 4 Shisham . . 8.56 3.38 0.55 6 Pipal . . . 15.06 4.64 0.52 9 Neem . . . 10.61 4.09 0.49 8 Beri . . . 10.24 3.08 0.62 5 Imli . . . 8.12 2.80 0.51 5 Aam . . . 10.02 3.21 0.32 10 Jaman . . . 7.05 1.93 0.28 7 In Table III is shown the composition of the minerals in the leaves, namely total ash, lime and phosphate. There is nothing remarkable in the composition of the ash; the maximum, the minimum and the average values may be con- sidered to be within normal variation met with in
S. A. MOMIN AND S. C. RAY 187 any kind of forage. The tree leaves are, however, conspicuous for their high lime content. The average values are comparable with those in leguminous fodders. Some of the maximum values, particularly that of pipal, shisham, neem, beri and aam are almost two to three times the average lime content of a common leguminous fodder like berseem. The high value for lime is, however, not shared by phosphate. This consti- tuent in leaves is relatively low, as a result of which the ratio of lime to phosphate in tree leaves is unusually high. The palatability of tree leaves During the course of the experiment, the palata- bility of the leaves collected at different intervals was tested by showing a small quantity of each kind of leaf to the same four animals. The result of the test shows that the tree leaves could be listed in the following order of palatability:188 Tree Leaves as Cattle Fodder, I APPENDIX TABLE A Neem (Azadirchta indica) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 38.7 17.39 1.43 12.87 56.22 12.09 5.14 0.39 March 10 . . 39.9 13.39 2.41 9.99 60.42 13.79 5.73 0.33 April 24 . . . 35.6 13.08 4.66 12.14 57.32 8.49 2.18 0.66 June 11 . . . 30.9 15.94 3.21 14.34 57.70 8.81 3.54 0.39 July 28 . . . 33.2 15.28 4.11 14.91 55.87 9.83 3.03 0.72 September 14 . . 36.3 13.43 2.60 21.50 52.72 9.75 3.98 0.48 October 30 . . 36.0 16.01 3.76 11.97 56.40 11.86 4.53 0.48 December 2 . . 37.7 15.78 1.94 12.42 59.57 10.29 3.65 0.53 TABLE B Pipal (Ficus religiosa) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 41.7 12.20 2.37 21.15 43.55 20.73 7.57 0.34 March 10 . . 14.6 22.60 2.85 12.22 45.95 16.38 3.12 1.05 April 24 . . . 35.0 14.68 3.86 24.64 48.49 10.69 2.89 0.41 June 11 . . . 28.0 12.68 2.97 25.38 47.70 11.27 3.68 0.55 July 28 . . . 37.6 13.46 2.72 21.87 46.82 15.13 5.55 0.52 September 14 . . 31.8 13.14 3.68 29.32 41.99 11.18 3.87 0.46 October 30 . . 54.1 10.58 2.34 25.14 47.09 14.85 4.58 0.47 December 2 . . 44.0 12.58 2.09 19.16 46.61 19.56 5.87 0.40 TABLE C Paker (Ficus infectoria) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 43.5 8.79 2.50 21.98 52.20 14.54 2.93 0.42 March 10 . . 17.6 15.69 1.80 12.82 61.06 8.63 1.14 1.01 April 24 . . . 41.9 11.72 2.66 25.46 51.83 8.33 1.72 0.43 June 11 . . . 37.9 8.90 2.38 24.90 53.63 10.19 3.22 0.68 July 28 . . . 40.1 8.48 3.34 25.79 44.83 17.56 2.75 0.88 September 14 . . 42.6 9.39 2.92 23.80 51.20 12.69 .. .. October 30 . . 52.3 9.79 2.28 25.91 50.90 11.12 2.92 0.45 December 2 . . 49.1 8.68 3.44 21.52 52.27 14.09 2.84 0.51
S. A. MOMIN AND S. C. RAY 189 TABLE D Beri (Zizyphus jujuba) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 42.8 18.18 3.87 10.51 56.21 11.23 4.60 0.52 March 10 . . 52.2 13.26 3.90 10.39 58.48 13.97 5.41 0.41 April 24 . . . 38.2 13.66 2.68 11.86 61.92 9.88 3.64 0.36 June 11 . . . 38.8 15.09 1.89 17.60 56.66 8.76 2.09 0.76 July 28 . . . 39.0 14.62 2.25 16.15 60.23 6.75 2.84 0.77 September 14 . . 38.5 13.51 .. 18.37 55.02 12.34 5.55 0.81 October 30 . . 39.5 17.58 2.78 11.98 59.86 7.80 2.86 0.47 December 2 . . 40.6 17.38 1.48 14.83 55.13 11.18 2.68 0.87 TABLE E Shisham (Dalbergia sisso) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 44.2 11.22 2.59 20.27 56.91 9.01 3.71 0.29 March 10 . . 25.1 24.10 2.03 12.48 54.75 6.64 1.17 0.96 April 24 . . . 36.8 20.18 4.93 21.85 45.03 8.01 2.27 0.28 June 11 . . . 33.4 16.95 2.66 23.74 48.51 8.14 2.28 0.47 July 28 . . . 39.0 16.50 3.36 27.72 42.97 9.45 3.86 0.82 September 14 . . 53.5 17.68 3.39 25.11 45.02 8.80 5.39 0.60 October 30 . . 48.4 12.44 2.67 24.12 51.27 9.50 4.73 0.54 December 2 . . 43.6 14.11 3.76 22.48 50.72 8.93 3.58 0.45 TABLE F Jaman (Engenia jambolena) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 37.9 7.54 3.02 16.98 64.61 7.85 2.35 0.23 March 10 . . 34.1 8.29 2.67 18.50 63.86 6.68 1.82 0.35 April 24 . . . 37.4 6.88 2.58 24.0 56.26 10.27 1.45 0.24 June 11 . . . 42.0 6.58 3.43 18.81 66.24 4.94 1.81 0.18 July 28 . . . 40.0 6.78 3.35 20.84 63.02 6.01 2.32 0.24 September 14 . . 34.4 8.54 1.05 21.21 61.53 7.67 2.22 0.36 October 30 . . 41.5 8.37 3.16 20.14 61.29 7.04 2.26 0.16 December 2 . . 29.8 10.55 1.55 24.91 56.62 5.95 1.26 0.48
190 Tree Leaves as Cattle Fodder, I TABLE G Aam (Mangeferus indica) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 50.8 7.02 2.79 22.19 54.07 13.93 2.72 0.34 March 10 . . 47.3 7.15 1.92 21.34 56.51 13.08 2.64 0.33 April 24 . . . 38.0 8.19 2.53 31.23 49.96 8.09 1.71 0.31 June 11 . . . 40.7 7.90 3.78 26.89 53.34 8.09 2.27 0.23 July 28 . . . 39.7 8.11 4.08 30.00 48.08 9.73 5.89 0.34 September 14 . . 42.7 8.35 1.63 32.28 45.56 11.18 4.52 0.23 October 30 . . 44.7 9.34 2.95 29.61 48.56 9.18 3.21 0.35 December 2 . . 48.1 8.60 2.08 29.66 48.46 10.94 2.63 0.41 TABLE H Imli (Tamarindus indica) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 31.5 17.44 5.00 19.90 47.88 9.78 3.23 0.52 March 10 . . 42.1 14.88 5.44 16.79 51.47 11.42 4.09 0.43 April 24 . . . 28.7 15.20 2.91 23.07 51.94 6.88 1.93 0.49 June 11 . . . 30.9 13.87 4.27 21.99 52.90 6.97 2.49 0.56 July 28 . . . 30.1 14.78 4.80 25.13 47.80 7.49 3.55 0.49 September 14 . . 26.6 12.77 2.13 27.83 50.75 6.62 1.95 0.58 October 30 . . 32.7 17.04 4.19 23.89 48.19 6.69 2.38 0.36 December 2 . . 33.8 17.41 2.38 17.02 53.64 9.18 2.81 0.37 TABLE I Bans (Bamboosae indica) Date of collection Dry matter Per cent composition on dry basis Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Ash Lime Phosphate January 18 . . 49.6 15.96 3.15 24.68 37.86 18.35 3.00 0.32 March 10 . . 28.7 31.47 1.22 21.95 36.85 8.51 1.15 1.07 April 24 . . . 48.2 23.58 1.29 21.97 44.09 9.07 1.27 0.69 June 11 . . . 35.5 29.14 2.58 19.12 34.04 15.12 0.98 0.64 July 28 . . . 30.2 24.58 2.57 27.56 32.94 12.35 0.93 0.61 September 14 . . 33.6 19.42 1.83 30.00 33.85 14.90 1.86 0.39 October 30 . . 57.1 18.19 3.74 22.38 42.41 11.84 1.34 0.25 December 2 . . 53.3 16.16 2.32 18.38 47.07 16.07 1.92 0.24
TREE LEAVES AS CATTLE FODDER II. DIGESTIBILITY COEFFICIENT AND NUTRITIVE VALUE OF SOME TREE LEAVES By CHET RAM and S. C. RAY, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 12 December 1942) IN published literature there are but few re- ferences to the feeding value of leafy fodders from trees. This is perhaps due to the fact that tree leaves are little used in European countries for feeding cattle. Morrison [1937], however, men- tions that in some parts of the U. S. A., where cultivation is sparse, leaves of some trees, such as ash, birch and elder form no small part of the forage consumed by farm animals. These tree leaves when lopped at the right time are not only eaten by the stock with relish but are also fairly digestible and comparable to ordinary hay in feeding value. In India, Lander and Dharmani [1927] conducted a feeding trial with ensiled shisham leaves, and found that, whereas the crude protein in this feeding stuff is fairly well digested (51.8 per cent), the digestibilities of crude fibre and nitrogen-free extracts are low (34.0 and 50.0 per cent respectively). Moreover, as the total consumption of shisham silage is poor, it cannot form by itself a maintenance ration. In part I of this article, Momin and Ray [1942] have reported the seasonal variation in the chemical composition of some edible tree leaves. The data on chemical analysis have indicated that tree leaves are rich in nutrients and in a number of cases their composition is superior to many of the well known non-leguminous fodders. In order that more definite information may be obtained upon their actual feeding value, digestibility trials have been carried out with the following three kinds of tree leaves :192 Tree Leaves as Cattle Fodder, II smaller aliquot was sent to the laboratory for moisture estimation. The dry leaves collected every day after the moisture determination were mixed up into a composite sample at the end of the digestibility trial for chemical analysis. The unconsumed residues of the leaves were similarly treated for sampling and subsequent analysis. The chemical composition of the feeding stuffs and the residues under paker, beri and pipal feedings is given in Table I. The food consumption per day under paker, beri and pipal feedings is shown in Table II. The results of the digestibility determinations under paker, beri and pipal feedings are detailed in Tables III, IV and V respectively. TABLE I Percentage composition of feeding stuffs and residues (On dry basis) Particulars Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract 1. Wheat bran . 90.34 10.79 3.92 19.81 55.82 2. Wheat bhusa . 92.85 3.03 0.99 43.30 45.53 3. Paker leaves . 91.22 9.60 3.38 28.33 49.91 4. Pater leaves resi- due from H. 51. 87.32 6.63 2.71 30.82 47.18 5. Beri leaves . 89.28 8.59 1.74 30.13 48.82 6. Beri leaves resi- due from H. 45. 89.59 7.89 1.60 30.35 49.75 7. Beri leaves resi- due from H. 48. 88.88 7.62 1.41 32.84 47.01 8. Pipal leaves . 86.00 11.87 3.32 27.42 43.39 TABLE II Food consumption per day (On dry basis) Animal Particulars Amount given Residue left Amount consumed H. 48 . gm. gm. gm. (Under paker feeding) Leaves . . . 1691 78 1013 Wheat bran . . 845 ... 845 Wheat bhusa . 2117 128 1989 Total . ... ... 4447 H. 51 . Leaves . . . 1691 229 1462 Wheat bran . . 845 ... 845 Wheat bhusa . 2117 609 1508 Total . ... ... 3815 Animal Particulars Amount given Residue left Amount consumed (Under beri feeding) H. 45 . Leaves . . . 2447 332 2115 Wheat bran . . 852 ... 852 Wheat bhusa . 2145 544 1601 Total . ... ... 4568 H. 48 . Leaves . . . 2447 281 2166 Wheat bran . . 852 ... 852 Wheat bhusa . 2145 601 1544 Total . ... ... 4562 (Under pipal feeding) H. 45 . Leaves . . . 1927 18 1909 Wheat bran . . 801 ... 801 Wheat bhusa . 2002 200 1802 Total . ... ... 4512 H. 48 . Leaves . . . 1927 12 1915 Wheat bran . . 801 ... 801 Wheat bhusa . 2002 172 1830 Total . ... ... 4546 TABLE III Digestibility coefficient of paker leaves Particulars Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract gm. gm. gm. gm. gm. (Heifer 48) Consumed fromCHET RAM AND S. C. RAY 193 TABLE IV Digestibility coefficient of beri leaves Particulars Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract gm. gm. gm. gm. gm. (Heifer No. 45) Consumed from194 Tree Leaves as Cattle Fodder, II The digestibility coefficient and the nutritive value of tree leaves. In the design of an experiment for determining the digestibility of a feed by the process of elimination, it is desirable that not more than one other feed of known nutritive value, in addition to the feed under test, should be included in the experimental ration. At the same time, however, it is necessary that the combination should ensure the bodily integrity (to be evidenced from steady maintenance of body weight and nitrogen equilibrium). When, however, the bodily integrity cannot be safeguarded, the digestibility determination has to be carried out with more than one extra feed in the ration. In such a case, however, the digestibility determination of the test feed may not be very accurate, because more than one indeterminable associative effect will influence the digestion of the test feed. In the present investigation, as has been mentioned earlier, the digestibility coefficient in the tree leaves was determined from a ration which con- tained two other feeds, namely wheat bran and wheat bhusa. In spite of this limitation, the data obtained are important and interesting. In Table VI, a consolidated statement has been given on the digestibility coefficients of the leaves. TABLE VI Average digestibility coefficient of tree leaves Name of the leaves Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract 1. Paker . . 56 62 32 58 2. Beri . . . 36 62 27 34 3. Pipal . . 59 36 22 52 The data presented in Table VI at once show that the apparent richness of nutrients in tree leaves, as determined by chemical analysis, gives a very false idea of their feeding value. The extremely low digestibility of crude fibre and somewhat less so of crude protein and nitrogen-free extracts are particular features in the feeding of tree leaves. In spite of comparatively higher palatibility, the beri leaves compare poorly with the other two kinds on account of their exceptionally low digestibility for crude protein and nitrogen-free extracts. Because of the low digestibility coefficients of their important nutrients, these leafy fodders are decidedly inferior to common cultivated fodders of similar chemical composition [Sen, 1938]. This is clearly evident from the data presented in Tables VII and VIII. TABLE VII Digestibility coefficient of some cultivated fodders and the tree leaves Name of the green fodder Composition (on dry basis) Digestibility coefficient Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Crudo protein Ethor extract fodder fibre N-free extract Oats . . . (Avena saliva) 9.24 1.80 34.82 44.78 72 50 76 79 Bajra . . . (Pennisetum typhoid- eum) 8.88 1.74 23.96 57.74 62 67 60 69 Sun-flowor . . (Helianthus animus) 11.94 3.44 23.98 45.26 72 44 20 79 Paker leaves . (Ficus infectoria) 9.60 3.38 28.33 49.91 56 62 32 58 Beri leaves . . (Zizyphus jujuba) 8.59 1.74 30.13 48.82 36 62 27 34 Pipal leaves . (Ficus religiosa) 11.87 3.32 27.42 43.39 59 36 22 52 TABLE VIII Digestible nutrients and nutritive value of some common fodders and the tree leaves Name of the green fodder Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Total digestible nutrients Starch equivalent Nutritive ratio lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. Bajra ..... 5.51 1.17 14.38 39.84 62.64 48.7 11.4 Oats ..... 6.65 0.90 26.46 35.38 70.51 50.3 10.6 Sun-flower . . . . 8.60 1.51 4.80 35.75 52.55 38.6 6.1 Paker leaves . . . 5.38 2.10 9.06 28.95 48.11 25.4 9.0 Beri leaves . . . . 3.09 1.08 8.13 17.00 30.65 13.2 9.9 Pipal leaves . . . 7.00 1.19 6.03 22.56 38.27 22.4 5.5
CHET RAM AND S. C. RAY 195 As the feeding value of some well-known tree leaves is now known, the question arises as to how leafy fodders can best supplement the feed requirement of livestock, particularly at a time of scarcity. A perusal of the figures of digestible nutrients per 100 lb. of dry material in the leaves (Table VIII) will show that in energy value leafy fodders are only comparable to a poor type of dry roughage, such as mature mixed hay and cereal straws. Unlike these roughages, however, leafy fodders contain a fair amount of digestible crude protein. This distribution of nutrients suggests that tree leaves can be used in a ration both as a roughage and a concentrate, and this virtue may conveniently be exploited in feeding cattle at a time of famine and general scarcity of feeding stuffs. SUMMARY The digestibility determinations of some tree leaves, viz. paker, beri and pipal, collected during the dry summer months of May and June have been carried out. The results show that the digestibility coefficients of crude protein, crude fibre and nitrogen-free extracts are very low; 36, 27 and 34 respectively for beri leaves, although this leafy fodder was found to be the most palat- able of the three types tested. The digestibility coefficients of protein in paker and pipal are 56 and 59 respectively; these figures are compara- tively low for fodders of a similar chemical composition. The coefficient of digestibility of crude fibre in paker and pipal is also very low, 32 and 22 respectively. The coefficient of digestibility of nitrogen-free extracts in paker and pipal is fairly high (58 and 52 respectively), but these figures are comparatively low for fodders of a similar chemical composition. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors wish to thank Dr K. C. Sen, Officer-in-Charge, Animal Nutrition Section, for his interest in the work. REFERENCES Lander, P. E. and Dharmani, L. C. (1927). Mem. Dep. Agri. India Chem. Series 9, 63 Momin, S. A. and Ray, S. C. (1942). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 13, 183 Morrison, F. B. (1937). Feeds and Feeding, 28th edn. 319 Sen, K. C. (1938). Misc. Bull. No. 25, I.C. of A. R., New Delhi.
GREEN BERSEEM AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR CONCENTRATES FOR ECONOMIC FEEDING OF DAIRY CATTLE By. N. C. DAS GUPTA, Research Officer, Cattle Feeding Research Scheme, Jhansi United Provinces (Received for publication on 1 November 1941) BERSEEM (Trifolium alexandrinum), a native of Egypt, was first introduced in India in 1904 and since 1910 it has occupied an important place in crop rotation in the Government Cattle Farms and in certain localities its cultivation has been taken up even by the cultivators. With a view to making a scientific study of berseem as a fodder crop, feeding trials to find out its nutritive value and the economy of the replacement of expensive concentrates with home grown berseem were taken up by the Cattle Feeding Research Scheme of the United Provinces, financed by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. Berseem is quite rich in protein and contains, on an average, about 18 per cent on dry basis. Prescot [1920] while conducting some trials with sheep has found that the digestibility of the protein of ber- seem is about 75 per cent. Lander and Dharmani [1936] working with Montgomery heifers have re- corded the digestibility of berseem protein as high as 82 per cent and they are of opinion that it is a maintenance ration and is decidedly a better fod- der than green senji (Melilotus parviflora). Sayer [1934] has also found berseem to be an excellent fodder for milch cows. To find out the food value of this important fodder crop by long period feeding tests and to ascertain the possibility of berseem replacing the concentrates for economic feeding of cattle, ex- periments were conducted during the berseem seasons of 1938-39 and 1939-40 with Hissar cows and Murrah buffaloes for growth and milk yield. PART I. EFFECT OF REPLACEMENT OF A MIX- TURE OF CONCENTRATES BY GREEN BERSEEM ON GROWTH Three well matched groups, each comprising of two Hissar heifers and two young Murrah buffaloes were selected in January 1939, for this test and distributed into different groups (Table I). Same roughage was fed to all the animals, each getting 11 lb. of jowar silage and wheat straw ad lib. During the preliminary feeding period all the animals received concentrate mixture for their protein requirement. The mixture contained 50 parts linseed cake, 20 parts wheat bran and 30 parts barley. To 100 parts of this concentrate mixture, 2 parts of mineral mixture were added. For experimental feeding, group I was supplied with concentrate mixture. For group II, 50 per cent of the concentrate mixture was replaced by berseem on the basis of protein, and similarly 75 per cent of the protein equivalent of concen- trate mixture was replaced by berseem for group III. These three feeding treatments have been denoted as T1, T2 and T3 respectively while dis- cussing the results. The experiment was con- tinued for 17 weeks. The amount of protein supplement was adjusted from time to time accord- ing to changes in the liveweight and the animals were not allowed to leave any residue from either silage, berseem or concentrates given to them. Daily records of liveweight and consumption of feeds were maintained. The weekly average live- weights during the experimental period have been recorded in Table I. TABLE I Distribution of animals into groups and their average liveweight in lb. (Experiment I) Group I Group II Group III Concentrate mixture alone 50 per cent of concentrate protein replaced by berseem 75 per cent of concentrate protein replaced by berseem Breed . . . . 1 H 2 H 3 M 4 M 5 H 6 H 7 M 8 M 9 H 10 H 11 M 12 M Age on 31st Jan. 1939 (YrN. C. DAS GUPTA 197 TABLE I198 Green Berseem as Substitute for Economic Feeding of Dairy Cattle TABLE II Distribution of animals into different groups and their average liveweight in lb. (Experiment II) Group I Group II Group III Concentrate mixture alone 50 per cent of concentrate protein replaced by berseem 75 per cent of concentrate protein replaced by berseem Breed . . . . 1 H 2 H 3 H 4 M 5 M 6 M 7 H 8 H 9 H 10 M 11 M 12 M 13 H 14 H 15 H 16 M 17 M 18 M Average age of breed . 1 yr 7 m 13 d 1 yr 3 m 13 d 1 yr 7 m 7 d 1 yr 3 m 21 d 1 yr 7 m 12 d 1 yr 3 m 25 d Basal liveweight . . 426 391 362 594 365 400 437 382 356 500 472 420 440 389 343 517 442 439 Average liveweight of breed during basal period 393 453 392 464 391 466 Average live weight for week endingN. C. DAS GUPTA 199 The statistical analyses of the data show that the variation due to feed is highly significant, the growth rate being 9.78, 6.46 and 5.17 lb. per week respectively for full concentrate and the concent- rate replaced to the extent of 50 and 75 per cent by berseem on the basis of protein, standard error being ± 0.52. The results corroborate the obser- vations of the previous test200 Green Berseem as Substitute for Economic Feeding of Dairy Cattle TABLE III Average intake of nutrients and the relation of intake of dry matter with liveweight (lb.) Particulars Full concentrate 50 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem 75 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem Experiment I Experiment II Experiment I Experiment II Experiment I Experiment II Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Wheat straw . . . 3.24 3.81 3.20 3.64 3.08 2.50 2.38 2.86 2.32 2.64 2.41 2.57 Jowar silage . . . 4.18 4.18 2.81 2.81 4.18 4.15 2.84 2.80 4.18 4.18 2.91 2.81 Berseem . . . . ... ... ... ... 2.43 2.42 2.11 2.32 3.57 3.64 3.19 3.37 Concentrates . . . 5.11 5.06 5.08 5.35 2.55 2.56 2.58 2.74 1.27 1.33 1.36 1.38 Total intake . . . 12.53 13.05 11.09 11.80 12.24 11.63 9.91 10.72 11.34 11.79 9.87 10.13 Average liveweight . . 528 579 440 505 534 538 422 502 527 554 417 492 Intake per 100 lb. live- weight 2.372 2.254 2.521 2.334 2.293 2.163 2.348 2.136 2.151 2.129 2.367 2.059 Liveweight increase per day 1.30 1.55 1.34 1.49 1.03 1.10 0.86 1.10 1.05 0.97 0.76 0.73 Total intake of protein . 147.14 148.13 88.71 92.73 145.99 143.80 85.75 91.13 140.45 145.91 86.07 90.95 Total intake of starch equi- valent 667.70 677.99 362.68 380.38 635.65 620.56 296.98 315.83 598.91 617.04 271.77 284.02 TABLE IV Percentage composition of feeds on a dry basis Feed Organic matter Protein Ether extract Fibre N. F. E. Total carbohy- drates Experiment I Wheat straw . . . . . . 89.39 1.93 0.88 37.87 48.72 86.59 Jowar silage ..... 90.94 2.98 1.38 33.39 53.19 86.58 Linseed cake . . . . . . 91.83 32.12 8.62 10.14 40.95 51.09 Bran . . . . . . . . 93.52 13.91 2.57 12.27 64.77 77.04 Barley . . . . . . . 96.10 10.71 1.94 5.25 78.20 83.45 *Berseem 1st four weeks . . . . 83.14 20.14 2.02 19.62 58.22 77.84 2nd four weeks . . . . 85.82 19.06 1.96 20.11 56.87 78.98 3rd four weeks . . . . 86.34 19.50 1.97 21.46 57.07 78.53 4th four weeks . . . . 86.20 16.76 1.92 22.95 58.37 81.32 Experiment II Wheat straw . . . . . . 90.40 2.04 0.66 39.85 47.87 87.72 Jowar silage . . . . . . 89.20 5.40 1.08 35.26 47.46 82.72 Linseed cake . . . . . . 91.70 31.90 9.46 9.30 41.04 50.34 Bran ........ 94.10 14.07 2.46 10.27 67.30 77.57 Barley ....... 90.66 13.34 1.11 5.47 76.68 82.15 *Berseem 1st four weeks . . . . 83.59 23.40 1.57 16.51 42.12 58.63 2nd four weeks . . . . 83.85 21.83 1.67 19.69 40.66 60.35 3rd four weeks . . . . 83.85 20.27 1.50 28.56 33.52 62.08 *Composition of oven dried samples
N. C. DAS GUPTA 201 TABLE V Per cent protein of fresh berseem Experiment I Experiment II Period Average dry matter Average protein content Period Average dry matter Average protein content 30-1 to 19-3-39 . . . 11.2 3.45 8-1 to 28-1-40 . . . 10.1 3.33 20-3 to 2-4-39 . . . 14.4 3.86 29.1 to 18-2-40 . . 8.0 2.44 3-4 to 16-4-39 . . . 14.1 2.20 19-2 to 17-3-40 . . 10.0 1.75 17-4 to 28-5-39 . . . 17.3 3.07 The animals were not allowed to leave any residue from the amount of silage, concentrate or berseem given to them. Incidentally, the intake of dry matter per head from either silage and con- centrate or silage, concentrate and berseem in the three treatments was nearly the same during the first test; but in the second test it decreased slight- ly with increased replacement of concentrates with berseem. Hence it may be expected that the consumption of wheat straw should be nearly the same or slightly higher for the animals getting berseem to have the same dry matter consumption per 100 lb. of liveweight. But Table III shows contrary figures; the intake of wheat straw and consequently that of total dry matter per 100 lb. of liveweight decreases with increased intake of berseem. This indicates that berseem, as it is bulky, satiates the animals with less intake of dry matter. Of course, it is of interest to note that the consumption of feed per 100 lb. of liveweight is slightly more in all the three treatments for Hissar breed, though the liveweight increase per day in the first two treatments is higher for the Murrah. The slight lower consumption of wheat straw which is poor in nutrients [Sen, 1938] cannot account for the lower increase in liveweights of the animals of berseem groups. Results of the digestibility trials conducted dur- ing both the tests discussed in the sequel also show that the lower gain of the Murrah breed in the third treatment cannot be accounted for by any differ- ence in the digestibility of the ration. Nutritive value of berseem The gain per pound of digestible protein and starch equivalent has been shown in Table VI. To arrive at these figures the total intake of loth digestible protein and starch equivalent during the period of experiment and the corresponding total gain in liveweight have been taken into considera- tion. TABLE VI Treatment Gain in weight per lb. of digesti- ble protein intake (lb.) Gain in weight per lb. of S. E. intake (lb.) Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Experiment I Full concentrate . . . 1.64 2.02 0.23 0.27 50 per cent concentrate replac- ed by berseem 1.29 1.46 0.19 0.21 75 per cent concentrate replac- ed by berseem 1.40 1.23 0.21 0.18 Experiment II Full concentrate . . . 1.65 1.83 0.26 0.27 50 per cent concentrate replac- ed by berseem 1.09 1.29 0.20 0.23 75 per cent concentrate replac- ed by berseem 0.98 0.87 0.20 0.18 The Murrah utilized both digestible protein and starch equivalent better than the Hissar, except in the third treatment where most of the nutrients have been supplemented by berseem. This indi- cates that when only the breed is considered ber- seem appears to be more efficacious for Hissar than for Murrah. Digestibility of total feed under the three conditions of feeding In order to study if the variation in the rate of growth in groups I, II and III is due to the differ- ence in digestibility of the nutrients of the total ration under the three treatments, digestion tests were conducted towards the end of each feeding experiment. The computed digestibility coefi- cients of the total ration are set out in Table VII. The figure for each species is the average of four animals.
202 Green Berseem as Substitute for Economic Feeding of Dairy Cattle TABLE VII Digestibility coefficients of the total ration N. C. DAS GUPTA 203 of growth should be proportionate to S. E. if the protein is of the same value. From Table IX, it may be seen that in experiment I Hissar and Murrah animals of group III received about 10 per cent and 9 per cent less S. E. than those of group I, but the rate of growth was much lower in comparison to S. E. intake, being about 19 and 38 per cent respectively. Similar variation may be noticed in experiment II as well. With the same protein level, such variations indicate poorer biological value of berseem protein for production of growth as compared to a mixture of concent- rates. TABLE IX Liveweight increase as influenced by the quality of digestible nutrients Groups Breed Live- weight increase D. P. intake L. W. increase per lb. of D. P. S. E. intake L. W. increase per lb. of S. E. (lb.) (lb.) (lb.) (lb.) (lb.) Experiment I (17 weeks) I Hissar . . . . . . . 155 94.4 1.64 667.7 0.23 II Do . . . . . . . 122 94.8 1.29 635.7 0.19 III Do . . . . . . . 125 89.2 1.40 598.9 0.21 I Murrah . . . . . . . 184 91.3 2.01 678.0 0.27 II Do. . . . . . . . 131 89.9 1.46 620.6 0.21 III Do. . . . . . . . 115 78.8 1.23 617.0 0.19 Experiment II (10 weeks) I Hissar . . . . . . . 94 56.9 1.65 362.7 0.26 II Do. . . . . . . . 60 55.7 1.09 297.0 0.20 III Do. . . . . . . . 53 54.6 0.98 271.8 0.20 I Murrah . . . . . . . 104 57.2 1.83 380.4 0.27 II Do. . . . . . . . 77 57.0 1.29 315.8 0.23 III Do. . . . . . . . 51 58.4 0.87 284.0 0.18 Economic value of feeding berseem instead of con- centrates A practical stock-man is interested in the rela- tive efficiency of rations as affecting the cost per unit of production. It is possible to add a few extra pounds to the liveweight of an animal with choicest feeds, but it is not always economical. The aim of a breeder is to have a thrifty normal growth. Cost of production of growth by the different treatments has been calculated in Table X. TABLE X Cost of production of growth due to the different treatments Groups Breed Amount of wheat straw con- sumed (lb.) Cost at Rs. 0.6098 per 100 lb. (Rs.) Amount of Jowar silage con- sumed (lb.) Cast at Rs. 0.1524 per 100 lb. (Rs.) Amount of berseem con- sumed (lb.) Cost at Rs. 0.1439 per 100 lb. (Rs.) Amount of con- centrate con- sumed (lb.) Cost at Rs. 3.324 per 100 lb. (Rs.) Total cost (Rs.) L.-W. increase (lb.) Cost per 100 lb. increase (Rs.) Experiment I (17 weeks) Fall concentrate Hissar . 408.0 2.49 1322 2.02 ... ... 645.9 21.46 25.97 155 16.76 Murrah . 480.3 2.93 1320 2.01 ... ... 644.3 21.41 26.35 184 14.32 Average 444.1 2.71 1321 2.01 ... ... 645.1 21.44 26.16 170 15.54 50 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem Hissar . 388.6 2.37 1322 2.02 1988 2.86 321.0 10.67 17.92 122 14.69 Murrah . 314.9 1.92 1314 2.00 1988 2.86 321.4 10.68 17.46 131 13.32 Average 351.7 2.15 1318 2.01 1988 2.80 321.2 10.68 17.70 126 14.00
204 Green Berseem as Substitute for Economic Feeding of Dairy Cattle TABLE XN. C. DAS GUPTA 205 EXPERIMENTAL In January 1939, 12 animals were divided into three groups containing two Hissar cows and two Murrah buffaloes in each group. Each animal of a group was comparable in age and days in milk to an animal in each of the other two groups Effect of berseem on milk yield The average daily milk yield of each animal under the three treatments during the 16 weeks of experiment has been recorded in Table XII. Animal number 2 Hissar in group I was abnormal from the ninth week of experiment. The milk yield figures shown for this animal from week ending March 27 are computed. TABLE XII Distribution of animals into different groups and their milk yield in lb. Group I Group II Group III Breed . . . . 1 H 2 H 3 M 4 M 5 H 6 H 7 M 8 M 9 H 10 H 11 M 12 M Age on 1st January 1939 6yr 11m 7yr 2m 5yr 4m 11yr 0m 6yr 11m 8yr 11m 5yr 3m 10yr 5m 6yr 9m 9yr 6m 5yr 6m 11yr 3m Average age. of group . 7 years 7 months 7 years 10 months 8 years 3 months Days in milk on 1st Jan- uary 1939. 6 77 63 81 8 83 78 34 12 92 39 64 Average days in milk . 57 days 51 days 52 days Liveweight (lb.) . . 814 788 1185 1146 698 868 1155 1192 932 788 1122 1132 Average liveweight (lb.). 983 1027 991 Initial milk yield . . 6.4 12.3 19.9 20.8 15.4 9.9 14.9 22.5 14.6 15.9 18.8 16.5 Average initial milk yield 16.85 15.67 16.45 Milk yield per day for week ending206 Green Berseem as Substitute for Economic Feeding of Dairy Cattle It was not possible to find out the difference, if any, between the breeds due to the inadequate number of animals of each breed in a group. The experiment was repeated in 1940 to determine the effect due to breed and to confirm the above find- ings. Nine Hissar cows and nine Murrah buffaloes were distributed into three comparable groups, after a basal feeding period of two weeks. The distribution of animals into different groups is shown in Table XIII. TABLE XIII Distribution of animals into different groups Breed Age on 1-1-40 Days in milk Number of lactation Liveweight lb. Milk yield lb. Group I Hissar . . . . . . 5 0 86 2 800 13.00 Do. . . . . . . 6 5 42 3 910 11.50 Do. . . . . . . 8 2 15 3 929 17.75 Average . . . . . . 6 6 48 .. 880 14.00 Murrah . . . . . . 5 3 70 2 1172 18.25 Do. . . . . . . 6 3 80 3 1257 20.00 Do. . . . . . . 6 5 110 3 982 15.00 Average . . . . . . 6 0 87 .. 1137 17.75 Average for group I . . . . 6 3 67 .. 1009 16.00 Group II Hissar . . . . . . 5 0 86 2 735 8.00 Do. . . . . . . 6 7 19 3 795 18.00 Do . . . . . . 8 5 40 3 1055 17.50 Average . . . . . . 6 8 48 .. 861 14.50 Murrah . . . . . . 5 4 17 2 1049 13.25 Do. . . . . . . 6 4 136 3 1036 16.00 Do. . . . . . . 6 5 86 3 1014 22.50 Average. . . . . . . 6 0 80 .. 1033 17.25 Average for group II . . . 6 4 64 .. 947 16.00 Group III Hissar . . . . . . 4 10 32 2 717 9.25 Do. . . . . . . 7 0 48 3 879 17.00 Do. . . . . . . 7 9 17 3 982 16.75 Average. . . . . . . 6 6 32 .. 859 14.50 Murrah. . . . . . . 6 3 108 2 1021 13.50 Do. . . . . . . 6 4 80 3 1010 16.00 Do. . . . . . . 6 5 35 3 1044 22.40 Average . . . . . . 6 4 74 .. 1025 17.25 Average for Group III . . . . 6 5 53 .. 942 16.00 The experiment was split into three periods. The treatments, (I) full concentrates, (II) half the protein of the full concentrate ration replaced by green berseem and (III) three-fourth of the protein replaced by green berseem were tried on all the groups in cyclic order. The plan below illustrates the lay out. N. C. DAS GUPTA 207 TABLE XIV Average milk yield of each animal during different treatments (lb.) Period Week ending Full concentrate 50 per cent concentrate replaced by bersweem 75 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Period I . Group I Group II Group III 8-1-40 11.5 12.5 19.3 18.0 15.0 19.8 17.5 8.0 17.0 21.5 13.0 15.7 16.5 16.0 8.7 21.7 15.5 12.0 15-1-40 10.8 12.5 20.0 17.8 14.8 20.0 17.0 8.0 16.5 20.5 12.8 15.5 16.2 15.0 8.5 19.8 15.2 11.7 22-1-40 10.2 12.2 20.5 18.2 15.0 20.0 16.8 8.0 15.5 20.0 12.0 14.9 15.5 14.0 8.0 20.0 14.3 11.0 29-1-40 9.8 11.5 20.8 18.0 15.0 17.8 16.7 8.0 14.5 19.5 11.2 150 15.5 13.0 7.2 19.5 13.8 9.8 5-2-40 8.8 11.5 20.0 18.0 14.8 19.5 16.0 7.8 15.5 19.5 12.0 14.5 15.2 12.0 7.2 19.0 13.7 10.0 Group III Group I Group II Period II 12-2-40 15.7 11.5 7.0 19.0 13.7 10.0 8.0 11.0 17.3 17.8 14.3 18.5 15.0 7.0 14.3 17.3 11.3 13.7 19-2-40 16.0 11.0 7.2 19.8 13.3 10.2 7.5 10.8 16.0 17.2 14.2 18.0 13.8 6.8 13.0 17.2 10.2 12.8 26-2-40 14.5 11.0 7.3 20.0 14.0 10.8 7.2 10.5 16.0 17.0 14.0 18.2 13.7 6.5 12.5 16.8 10.0 12.0 4-3-40 15.0 11.0 5.2 19.0 14.2 10.0 6.5 9.0 16.5 15.5 13.8 17.3 13.8 6.7 12.2 16.0 9.5 11.5 11-3-40 15.2 10.5 4.0 17.0 14.0 10.0 7.3 9.0 16.0 15.8 14.0 18.0 13.7 7.0 12.3 16.0 9.5 11.5 Group II Group III Group I Period III 18-3-40 12.5 7.0 11.5 16.0 9.7 11.0 14.0 9.7 4.3 17.7 13.3 7.7 5.0 9.0 16.0 14.0 13.0 17.0 25-3-40 12.8 6.0 10.8 15.8 10.0 7.5 12.8 9.3 4.2 17.2 130 7.5 4.0 8.8 16.0 15.0 12.5 16.8 1-4-40 13.2 6.0 11.0 16.0 10.2 8.2 12.0 8.8 4.7 15.8 12.0 7.3 4.0 9.0 15.5 15.2 12.2 15.8 8-4-40 13.0 6.2 11.0 15.8 9.8 10.3 12.0 8.7 4.8 15.8 11.0 6.8 4.0 9.0 15.2 14.0 12.2 15.7 15-4-40 12.0 5.8 10.0 15.7 8.3 9.2 11.7 8.3 4.7 15.7 11.0 6.8 4.5 9.2 15.0 12.8 11.0 15.0 Total milk yield 3659.6 4551.4 3509.8 4618.6 3507.0 4442.9 Grand total 8211.0 8128.4 7949.9
208 Green Berseem as Substitute for Economic Feeding of Dairy Cattle The results obtained have been recorded in Table XV. Each figure in the table is the average of 15 analyses except the figures for fat which are aver- ages of 90 estimations. TABLE XV Per cent composition of milk as influenced by the replacement of concentrate with green berseem Breed Treat- ment Total solids Ash Protein Fat Hissar . . . T1 13.72 0.706 3.21 4.79 Do. . . . T2 13.85 0.691 3.10 4.84 Do. . . . T3 14.05 0.705 3.26 4.97 Murrah . . . T1 17.05 0.778 3.66 7.37 Do. . . . T2 16.94 0.800 3.72 7.01 Do. . . . T3 17.01 0.750 3.69 7.02 The common belief, that green feed decreases the percentage of nutrients in the milk, is not evident from the table. Results obtained show that when the concentrates are replaced even to the extent of 75 per cent by green berseem which necessitat- ed, on an average, feeding of 36 lb. of green stuff to a Hissar and 52 lb. to a Murrah per day, there is no appreciable effect on the percentage composi- tion of the milk. Daily liveweight record of the animals showed no difference due to the different treatments. The food consumption The average daily intake of the different feeds on dry basis by an animal under each of the treat- ments has been summarized in Table XVI and their composition in Tables XVII and XVIII. TABLE XVI Average intake per day per cow under different treatments on dry basis (lb.) 50 per cent concent- rate replaced by berseem 75 per cent concent- rate replaced by berseem Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Grass hay . . . . . . . 11.7 17.3 8.6 16.7 11.1 16.5 Grass silage . . . . . . 3.9 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 Berseem . . . . . . .. .. 3.9 5.3 5.8 8.5 Concentrate . . . . . . 8.0 11.0 4.0 5.4 2.0 3.0 Total . 23.6 32.2 20.3 31.2 22.7 31.8 TABLE XVII Per cent composition of feeds on dry basis N. C. DAS GUPTA 209 TABLE XIX The daily intake and excretion and the digestion coefficient of the total ration Breed Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Fibre Total carbohydrate N. F. E. Intake (gm.) Excre- tion (gm.) Digesti- bility Intake (gm.) Excre- tion (gm.) Digesti- bility Intake (gm.) Excre- tion (gm.) Digesti- bility Intake (gm.) Excre- tion (gm.) Digesti- bility Intake (gm.) Excre- tion (gm.) Digesti- bility Digesti- bility Group I Hissar . . . 7142 2950 58.69 694 346.9 50.00 164.7 42.73 74.09 2158 886 58.99 6283 2595 58.69 58.47 Do. . . . 8330 3119 62.56 951 382.7 59.74 222.4 49.91 77.56 2036 927 54.45 7127 2718. 61.87 64.82 Murrah . . . 11501 4900 57.31 1303 591.2 54.67 310.1 56.90 78.41 3150 1464 53.53 9888 4293 56.46 57.87 Do. . . . 11116 4800 56.84 1139 535.2 58.91 273.8 54.41 80.71 3231 1453 55.04 9703 4278 55.91 57.14 Average digestibility . . .. .. 58.85 .. .. 55.83 .. .. 77.54 .. .. 55.50 .. .. 58.23 59.53 Group II Hissar . . . 8258 3339 57.88 1002 436.0 58.78 186.1 50.10 73.08 2545 1008 58.98 7070 2914 57.78 57.90 Do. . . . 6748 2658 60.60 680 310.1 54.36 131.1 38.84 70.41 2230 899 59.69 5937 2332 59.06 61.39 Murrah . . . 12949 4862 62.81 1365 581.3 57.41 278.9 85.76 66.97 4088 1674 55.95 11159 4256 66.82 71.41 Do. . . . 10123 4371 56.85 1129 504.1 55.43 216.0 62.34 71.14 3209 1512 52.89 8734 3551 53.43 53.70 Average digestibility . . .. .. 59.53 .. .. 56.49 .. .. 70.40 .. .. 56.83 .. .. 59.27 60.85 Group III Hissar . . . 7869 3209 59.21 835 390.6 53.21 140.5 59.61 57.57 2601 1074 60.09 6894 2785 59.60 59.29 Do. . . . 8967 3503 60.94 1145 451.3 60.59 188.5 76.40 59.32 2909 1293 55.43 7633 3037 60.22 63.08 Murrah . . . 10593 4001 62.24 1184 481.7 59.29 199.8 78.20 60.84 3558 1498 57.90 9674 3471 62.65 67.75 Do. . . . 12628 4864 61.48 1470 602.0 59.06 245.6 102.70 58.16 4189 1830 56.32 10912 4204 61.49 64.69 Average digestibility . . .. .. 60.97 .. .. 58.04 .. .. 58.97 .. .. 57.18 .. .. 60.84 63.70
210 Green Berseem as Substitute for Economic Feeding of Dairy Cattle Similar to the growth test, the digestibility of organic matter, crude protein and total carbohy- drates remained almost the same for all the groups and ether extract was better digested when the amount of concentrate, and hence the amount of TABLE XX Treatment Amount of ether extract intake (lb.) Average digesti- bility Digestibi- lity Intake Group I . . 242.8 77.54 0.32 Group II . . 203.0 70.40 0.34 Group III . . 193.6 58.97 0.30 ether extract, was more in the ration. From Table XX it is noticed that the ratio between the digestibility and intake of fat remains nearly the same for all the three groups irrespective of the ration as observed in the case of growth test. Comparative food value of green berseem for milk production with Hissar and Murrah breeds The average total intake of protein and starch equivalent by an animal of the different groups have been computed in Table XXI. The average milk production of Hissar and Murrah animals has been correlated with the intake of D. P. and S. E. in Table XXII which shows that though there is some difference due to breeds, the values of D. P and S. E. are nearly the same for the treatments for each breed. TABLE XXI Intake of total digestible protein and starch equivalent by the animals of different groups (lb.) Breed Group I Group II Group III Protein Starch equivalent Protein Starch equivalent Protein Starch equivalent Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Grass hay . . . 26.63 38.81 358.0 521.7 24.23 38.13 325.8 512.9 25.22 7.39 388.9 505.4 Grass silage . . . 17.44 17.78 135.8 136.1 17.40 17.55 133.1 134.3 17.26 17.20 132.0 131.7 Concentrate . . . 163.80 225.20 612.0 840.5 81.16 110.90 302.7 413.1 41.87 57.53 156.3 230.1 Berseem . . . . .. .. .. .. 80.98 110.90 226.8 311.2 121.80 167.20 341.2 469.5 Total protein . . . 207.87 281.79 .. .. 203.77 277.48 .. .. 206.15 279.32 .. .. Total digestible protein and starch equivalent. 112.9 159.5 1105.8 1498.3 115.3 156.6 988.4 1371.5 117.3 165.4 968.4 1336.7 TABLE XXII Milk yield as affected by the quality of nutrients Treatment Milk (lb.) D. P. intake (lb.) Milk yield per lb. of D. P. (lb.) S. E. intake (lb.) Milk yield per lb. of S. E. (lb.) Hissar T1 . . . 1217 112.9 10.74 1106 1.10 T2 . . . 1171 115.3 10.16 988 1.19 T3 . . . 1171 117.3 9.98 968 1.21 Murrah T1 . . . 1517 159.5 9.51 1498 1.01 T2 . . . 1539 156.6 9.82 1372 1.12 T3 . . . 1481 165.4 8.96 1337 1.11 The rate of growth per unit of nutrients (Part I) was found higher for Murrah and naturally it is expected that for milk yield also the rate of production would be higher for this breed. Table XXII, which shows contrary figures, cannot give a true indication of the rate of production as a pound of milk from buffalo is not comparable with a pound of cow's milk due to the difference in the composition. The analyses of 54 samples of milk from each breed gave the following average figures (Table XXIII) for the two breeds. The fat figures are averages of 324 estimations,
N. C. DAS GUPTA 211 TABLE XXIII Percentage average composition of milk of Hissar and Murrah breeds Breed Total solids Ash Protein Fat Hissar . . 13.93 0.69 3.18 4.87 Murrah . . 16.92 0.77 3.80 7.00 TABLE XXIV Average yield of fat per unit of starchequivalent Treatment Milk yield lb. Per cent fat Yield of fat lb. S.E. intake lb. Yield of fat per lb. of S. E. lb. Hissar T1 . . . 1217 4.79 58.3 1106 0.053 T2 . . . 1171 4.84 56.7 988 0.057 T3 . . . 1171 4.97 58.2 968 0.060 Murrah T1 . . . 1517 7.37 111.8 1498 0.075 T2 . . . 1539 7.01 107.9 1372 0.079 T3 . . . 1481 7.02 104.0 1337 0.078 Milk of buffalo is richer in all the ingredients, specially in total solids and fat. When the amount of fat produced per unit of nutrients is taken into account it is observed that the production of fat is also higher with the Murrah breed (Table XXIV). To arrive at the figures for the yield of fat, the actual composition of the milk during the experi- ment has been utilized. Economic value of berseem for milk production The comparative cost of production of milk with the three rations tested during both the experi- ments has been calculated in Table XXV. The average milk yield and the cost of the total feed consumed by an animal in each treatment have only been taken into account for arriving at the following figures. Animal number 2 H in the first experiment has not been considered as it behaved abnormally and consequently the figures for the corresponding animals, viz. 6 H and 9 H of the other groups have also been left out. It is evident from the table that the cost of production of milk decreased with the increased replacement of con- centrate by berseem, being Rs. 1.89, 1.67 and 1.47 under the three treatments tested during the first experiment and Rs. 2.81, 2.14 and 1.88 during the second test. TABLE XXV Average cost of production of milk due to the different treatments Treatment Hay consu- med lb. Cost at Rs. 0.4573 per 100 lb. Rs. Grass silage consu- med lb. Cost at Rs. 0.1524 per 100 lb. Rs. Berseem consu- med lb. Cost at Rs. 0.1716 per 100 lb. Rs. Concen- trate consu- med lb. Cost at Rs. 2.591 per 100 lb. Rs. Total cost Rs. Total milk produ- ced lb. Cost of produc- tion per 100 lb. of milk Rs. Experiment I Full concentrate . . . . 1641 7.50 1127 1.72 ... ... 968.5 25.11 34.83 1816 1.89 50 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem 1489 6.81 1114 1.70 2584 4.54 483.9 12.54 25.59 1532 1.67 75 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem 1414 6.47 1106 1.68 3734 6.56 243.5 6.31 21.02 1428 1.47 Experiment II Full concentrate . . . . 1711 7.89 1137 1.74 ... ... 1112.2 28.83 38.45 1367 2.81 50 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem 1661 7.59 1128 1.72 3174 5.57 646.6 14.16 29.04 1355 2.14 75 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem 1643 7.50 1113 1.70 4756 8.36 282.5 7.33 24.88 1326 1.88
212 Green Berseem as Substitute for Economic Feeding of Dairy Cattle Comparative cost of production of milk as influenced by the breeds Table XXVI shows that the cost of production of milk is slightly higher with Murrah breed in all the treatments but when the quantity of fat pro- duced is taken into consideration, the cost per 100 lb. fat is less with Murrah showing that, as in the production of growth, Murrah breed is more econo- mical for the production of butter fat as well. TABLE XXVI Cost of production of fat by the different breeds Treatment Total milk produced lb. Total fat produced lb. Total cost of feed Rs. Cost of production of 100 lb. milk Rs. Cost of production of 100 lb. fat Rs. Hissar Full concentrate . . . . . . 1217 58.3 32.53 2.67 55.8 50 per cent concontrate replaced by berseem . 1171 56.7 24.38 2.08 43.0 75 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem . 1171 58.2 20.93 1.78 36.0 Murrah Full concentrate . . . . . . 1517 111.8 44.38 2.93 39.7 50 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem . 1539 107.9 33.69 2.20 31.2 75 per cent concentrate replaced by berseem . 1481 104.0 28.82 1.95 27.7 SUMMARY Feeding tests to find out the food value of ber- seem as compared to concentrate mixtures on growth and milk yield have been conducted during the berseem seasons of 1939 and 1940. The different rations compared were (i) protein supple- ment in the form of concentrate mixture, (ii) half the protein of concentrates replaced by the protein of berseem and (iii) three-fourths of the required protein supplied by berseem. These three treat- ments were tested with two breeds, Hissar and Murrah, to study the different effect, if any, due to the feeds upon these breeds. It was observed that the concentrate mixture produces better growth than either 50 or 75 per cent of its replacement with berseem, whereas the difference between the latter two treatments is not statistically significant. Food value of berseem appears to be slightly higher for the Hissar cattle than for the Murrah buffaloes. For growth the protein of berseem seems to be of a lower value than that of a mixture of concentrates and it appears that the biological value of berseem is lower the younger the animal is. Feeding of berseem for growth is more economi- cal than concentrates when animals are above two years of age. The intake of dry matter per 100 lb. liveweight is slightly more for Hissar and the results indicate that the rearing of Murrah breed is comparatively economical. The data show that berseem is as efficient for production of milk by both the breeds as the concentrate mixture. No difference in the composition of milk is notic- ed when green berseem is fed even to the extent of 36 lb. per day to a Hissar cow and 52 lb. to a Murrah buffalo. Biological value of protein of berseem appears to be the same as that of concentrates for milk production. Cost of production of milk decreased with the increased replacement of concentrates by home grown berseem. Milk of Murrah is richer in nutrients and this breed can produce the same quantity of fat at a lower cost. Digestibility of organic matter, crude protein and total carbohydrates are nearly the same for the three rations compared. Ether extract is better digested when the amount of concentrate mixture is more in the ration which appears to be due to higher content of ether extract in the total ration. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Acknowledgement is due to the Imperial Coun- cil of Agricultural Research for financing the Practical Cattle Feeding Research Scheme, U. P., which offered scope for this work. The author
N. C. DAS GUPTA 213 thanks Mr C. Maya Das, I. A. S., Director of Agri- culture, U. P., for his sympathy and keen interest and to the Deputy Directors of Agriculture, Bundelkhand Circle, Jhansi, for providing all the facilities and helpful suggestions. The author also acknowledges, with thanks, the helps received from Dr S. K. Mukerji and Dr R. R. Agarwal, Research Assistants. Thanks are also due to Messrs H. P. Srivastava and G. S. Dutta, Assist- ants, for looking after the experimental animals throughout the trials. REFERENCES Lander, P. E. and Dharmani, L. C. (1936). Indian. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 6, 117 Prescot, J. A. (1920). Sultanic, Agric. Soc. Bull. No. 5 Sayer, W. (1934). Agric. & Livestock in Ind. 4, 21 Sen, K. C. (1938). I. C. A. R. Misc. Bull. No. 25 Warth, F. J. (1930). Mem. Dep. Agric. in India 11, 78
COMPARATIVE VALUES OF PROTEINS FOR CHICKENS By A. J. MACDONALD, Poultry Research Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 23 January 1943) THE necessity of including adequate amounts of protein of high biological value in the ration of growing chickens is now recognized wherever poultry-keeping is a well-developed and specialized occupation. In India, however, the need for feeding chickens on well-balanced rations, es- pe cially during the early stages of growth, is not widely appreciated, particularly in the villages. As the feeding of badly balanced rations to chickens results in high mortality rates, poor growth, delayed sexual maturity and poor utilization of the food consumed, it is essential to carry out experim ental work in order to discover cheap and reliable rations. In earlier experiments, Macdo- nald [1941] found that cereal rations in con- junction with calcium and green food could be effectively balanced by feeding separated milk ad libitum during the early stages of growth. From six weeks onward satisfactory results were obtained by feeding cereals and liberal amounts of calcium and green food, together with separated milk and water in separate containers. It was also found that soya bean meal plus salt might be used with fairly satisfactory results whenever milk supplements were expensive or difficult to obtain. Later, Macdonald [1942] found that a supplement of earthnut meal and salt, though not so good as separated milk, could be used with a fair measure of success. In the experiment under report, it was decided to test out the relative values of supplements of separated milk, soya bean meal, earthnut meal and meat offal. The feeding of meat offal to poultry is at present practised by a limited number of poultry keepers, but so far no precise information is available in regard to its value, either in this country or abroad. METHODS Stock. A total of 345 day-old, White Leghorn chicks, hatched in December, 1941, were divided into five comparable groups and fed on the ex- perimental diets for a period of 20 weeks. Feeding. All the birds were fed on mash and grain rations. Supplementary calcium, as broken limestone was fed ad libitum and succulent cut green food was fed in adequate amounts once daily during the whole experiment. A basal mash consisting of wheat bran 50 parts, yellow maize meal 30 parts and ground oats 20 parts was fed to all the groups. During the first eight weeks, the grain ration consisted of equal parts of broken yellow maize, jowar and cheena and from eight weeks onward the grain ration consisted of equal parts of broken yellow maize, wheat and paddy. The grain was fed four times a day during the first week and thereafter it was fed in the morning and evening, according to appetite. Group 1 was not given any protein-rich supple- ment, but the mash was supplemented by one per cent common salt. Group 2 received the basal mash plus 0.5 per cent common salt throughout, along with separated milk only to drink from 0-12 weeks and separated milk and water in sepa- rate containers from 12-20 weeks. Group 3 was fed on a mash consisting of 82 parts basal mash supplemented with 17 parts earthnut meal and one part common salt. Group 4 was fed 74 parts basal mash supplemented by 25 parts soya bean meal and one part common salt. Groups 1-4 were fed dry mash ad libitum in suitable sized hoppers throughout the experiment. Group 5 was fed the basal mash plus one per cent common salt throughout, together with meat offal (cleaned intestines of animals from the slaughter house). The meat offal was run through a mincing machine and cooked for one hour in a small quantity of water prior to mixing with the mash. The meat offal and the liquid residue after cooking were mixed along with the required quantity of mash and the whole mixture fed in a crumbly state. The wet mash required for one day was made up in the morning and equal amounts were fed at 8 a.m., 11 a.m. and 2 p.m. From 0-12 weeks the birds received the wet mash mixture in the pro- portion of 3/4 lb. meat offal to 1 lb. of dry mash. From 12 weeks onward ½ lb. of meat offal was added to every 1 lb. of dry mash. Table I gives the average composition of the mashes and grains fed during the experiment. The average composition of the separated milk was moisture 90.3 per cent and crude protein 3.7 per cent. The average composition of the meat offal was moisture 75 per cent and crude protein 15.3 per cent. 214
A. J. MACDONALD 215 TABLE I Percentage composition of foods Feeding stuff Moisture Fibre Crude protein Ether extract Nitrogen free extract Ash Groups 1 & 5 Parts Basal mash . . . 99.0 10.7 9.8 10.9 5.1 58.3 5.2 Salt . . . 1.0 Group 2 Basal mash . . . 99.5 10.6 9.8 11.0 5.0 58.6 5.0 Salt . . . 0.5 Group 3 Basal mash . . . 82.01 10.2 9.0 17.3 5.5 52.8 5.2 Earthnut meal . . 17.0 Salt . . . 1.0 Group 4 Basal mash . . . 74.01 10.2 9.0 17.4 7.9 50.4 5.1 Soya bean meal . . . 25.0 Salt . . . 1.0 Chicks grain Yellow maize . . . 1 9.5 4.1 9.8 3.2 70.5 2.9 Jowar . . . . 1 Cheena . . . 1 Growers gram Yellow maize . . . 1 9.5 4.9 9.8 4.0 69.0 2.8 Wheat . . . 1 Paddy . . . 1 Rate of growth. The chickens were weighed individually at each weighing and the average weights of the males and females in each group at fortnightly intervals are given in Table II. The cockerels were removed from the experiment at eight weeks. TABLE II Average weights in ounces Group 1 2 3 4 5 Sex Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Day-old . . . 1.34 1.37 1.33 1.34 1.33 1.36 1.35 1.33 1.36 1.33 2 weeks . . 2.5 2.6 3.7 3.6 3.0 2.9 3.1 2.9 3.4 3.4 4 weeks . . 4.2 4.3 7.2 6.8 5.5 5.6 5.9 5.6 7.5 7.3 6 weeks . . 7.0 7.2 12.3 11.4 10.2 9.9 10.1 9.4 14.0 13.2 8 weeks . . 9.4 0.9 18.9 17.0 15.1 13.5 15.4 14.0 23.0 20.4 10 weeks . . 13.7 22.9 18.6 17.5 26.7 12 weeks . . 17.3 28.6 23.0 20.8 32.7 14 weeks . . 20.7 32.3 20.8 28.1 37.3 16 weeks . . 24.3 36.0 32.8 31.3 41.1 18 weeks . . 27.9 39.6 35.8 32.8 42.8 20 weeks . . 30.4 43.1 38.1 36.3 44.0
216 Comparative Values of Proteins for Chickens At eight weeks the average weights in ounces of the males and females in groups 1A. J. MACDONALD 217 The percentage protein consumption figures for group 1, ranging from 10.6 in period 1 to 10.4 in period 5, were very much lower than those in the other four groups. The figures for groups 3 and 4 were very similar in the different periods, being at their maximum during periods 1 and 2 and at their minimum during the later part of the experi- ment. In group 2 the percentages of protein consumed were 15.7 per cent in period 1, 14.1 in period 2, 15.8 in period 3 and 13.6 in periods 4 and 5. Group 5 consumed higher levels of pro- tein throughout than group 2, especially during periods 1218 Comparative Values of Proteins for Chickens of feeding, since the milk fed group was fed on dry mash, whereas the meat offal group was fed wet mash. Until further experiments have been carried out, it is only possible to conclude that both separated milk and meat offal supplements are very valuable in the ration of growing chicks and that meat offal, which is normally cheaper than separated milk, can be used more extensively than it is at present. CONCLUSIONS (1) The feeding of chicks on a cereal diet with a protein content of approximately 10.5 per cent in conjunction with a supplement of salt and adequate amounts of green food and calcium results in poor growth especially during the early stages. (2) The addition of common salt to cereal diets is very beneficial in improving the growth rate and lowering mortality. (3) In the absence of animal proteins, supple- ments of soya bean meal and salt or earthnut meal and salt can be used with fair success. (4) Soya bean meal and earthnut meal are of equal value as protein supplements in the ration of chicks. (5) Separated milk or meat offal are more valu- able as protein supplements for chicks than soya bean meal or earthnut meal. (6) Meat offal can be used as an effective subs titute for separated milk in the ration of chicks ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author acknowledges the valuable assis- tance given him by Dr S. Bose, who carried out all the analyses of foods used. REFERENCES Macdonald, A. J. (1941). The Indian J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 11, 207 Macdonald, A. J. (1942). Indian J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Hush. 12, 190 Prentice, J. H. and Baskett, R. G. (1932). J. of Agric. for N. Ireland 3, 1 Prentice, J. H. (1933). J. Agric. for N. Ireland 4, 1 Robertson, G. Scott, Orr, J. B., Prentice, J. H. and Mac- donald, A. J. (1930). The Scottish J. Agric 13, 1
THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION AND VITAMIN A POTENCY OF COW'S MILK AND BUTTER FAT UNDER INTENSIVE GREEN FEEDING AND THE CAROTENE METABOLISM OF DAIRY ANIMALS By B. C. RAY SARKAR and K. C. SEN, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 4 August 1942) IN a previous paper [Sen and Ray Sarkar, 1942], a study was made of the effect of different levels of carotene ingestion in the form of green feed on the carotene and vitamin A potency of milk and butter fat, and it was found that, with the ingestion of a carotene-rich diet, both the carotene and vitamin-A contents of butter fat tended to reach a maximum value. An increase in the blood plasma carotene and its vitamin A content was also observed. With an intake of about 869128 I.U. per day, the average vitamin A potency per pound of butter fat was about 9745 I.U., the carotene portion providing approximate- ly 27 per cent of the total potency. In view of the fact that occasionally, pooled milk from the Institute Hariana herd, which was allowed free grazing in addition to considerable green rations, showed a higher vitamin A value than that of stall-fed animals, it was felt that a further investi- gation was needed to determine the effect of a very heavy ingestion of carotene on the vitamin A output in the milk of the local Hariana animals. Along with this, the variation, if any, in the che- mical composition of the milk and the butter fat, consequent upon this heavy green fodder ingestion, required study. Accordingly, a detailed experi- ment was planned and the present paper contains the results so far obtained. Dean and Hilditch [1933] studied the factors which influenced the component fatty acids of butter and showed that there was a variation in the iodine and Reichert-Meissl values of the milk fat of cows when fed on pasture during the summer or fed indoors during the winter. The iodine value was higher in the first case but the Reichert-Meissl value was lower. Das Gupta [1939] observed an increase in the Reichert- Wollny and iodine values, associated with a high carotene content of the butter when the animals were on abundant green pasture. Doctor et al [1940] also noticed a rise in the Reichert value of butter fat on feeding greën grasses, when the caro- tene and vitamin-A content increased as well. Makhijani and Banerjee [1938] studied the effect of feeding different amounts of guinea grass to cows on the carotene content of ghee and blood serum. There was no change in the vitamin A content of ghee in this particular experiment but from the data on the carotene content of blood serum, it appears that there was a definite rise after green fodder ingestion. Bal and Shrivastava [1940] reported the periodic fluctuation in the carotene content of cow and buffalo butter fat due to a variable feeding of green fodder. This paper deals with the following points : (a) The change in the chemical composition of milk and butter fat due to the heavy green fodder ingestion. (b) The effect of heavycarotene ingestion through different grasses, on the carotene and vitamin-A content of milk fat. (c) The computation of the carotene balance, and (d) The change in the blood plasma carotene and vitamin A content, consequent upon a change in the carotene intake. EXPERIMENTAL The investigation was divided into two parts In the first part, the effect of a variable ingestion of berseem and oat grass during the months of December and January was studied. In the second part, the result of a moderately heavy ingestion of dub grass during the monsoon month of August was investigated. The two sets of experiments were carried out with different ani- mals, all of the Hariana breed, under stall feeding conditions. The animals were milked twice daily, and free exercise was allowed for one hour both in the morning and in the afternoon after milking. The amount of concentrate mixture (wheat bran 40 parts, gram husk 20 parts, groundnut cake 20 parts, rape cake 10 parts and gram chuni 10 parts) was regulated according to the milk yield and varied from 7.5 lb. to 11.5 lb. daily, but, in one experiment mentioned later, it had to be cut out completely for a few days, because of an ad libitum green fodder feeding. An estimation of the carotene and vitamin-A in milk and plasma and in butter fat was carried out, according to the procedure detailed in the previous paper. The chemical composition of milk and butter fat was determined by the methods given by the Asso- ciation of Official Agricultural Chemists of U. S. A. [1935]. The Wij's method was used for iodine number determination. The carotene content of feeds and faeces was estimated by the usual method adopted in this laboratory [Seshan and Sen, 1942], 219
220 Vitamin A Potency of Cow's Milk and Butter Fat I. Effect of replacement of a carotene-poor ration (dry hay) by a carotene-rich ration (oat grass and berseem) on the compositon of milk Four cows were arranged in two groups of two in each. Group I consisted of animals, No. 70 (B. W. 900 lb.) and No. 42 (B. W. 942 lb.), each of which was in the third month of lactation, the number of lactations being six and nine, and the daily milk yields being 20.5 lb. and 14 lb. respectively. Group 2 consisted of animals No. 64 (B. W. 1044 lb.) and No. 21 (B. W. 908 lb.), which were in the first and third month of lactation, the number of lactations being six and nine, and the milk yields being 23 lb. and 12.5 lb. re- pectively. For a fortnight before the start of this experiment, all the cows had received the regular herd mixture and hay containing very little green material. The feeding experiment was divided into three periods. Period I. The animals continued to receive hay and the proportionate amount of concentrate mixture, according to their milk yields, for a further period of ten days. Milk samples were collected from individual animals after this on the last day the last seven days also being used as the faecal collection period. A daily analysis of the feed was not considered necessary, as, it being a poor source of carotene, the rate of carotene destruction in the ration was not appreciable. The hay contained 0.64 mg. of carotene per pound of material and the concentrate mixture 0.17 mg. per pound. The faeces in aliquots from seven days' collection was analysed for the computation of carotene balance. A composite sample of butter was prepared from the mixed milk of all the four animals from the last day's milk samples by separating the cream from the milk with the help of a cream separator. The cream was then shaken in a closed bottle at a temperature of about 15ºC. for nearly two hours when the fat completely separated from the liquid. It was washed several times with fresh water, pressed inside a muslin cloth and then preserved in the refrigerator. This material was used for the determination of the Reichert-Meissl value, the Polenske value and the saponification and iodine numbers. The individual milk samples were also analysed for fat, total solid, solids-not-fat, protein and ash. On the day the milk samples were collect- ed, all the animals were bled and the plasma was analysed for both carotene and vitamin A. Period II. After the collection of milk, faeces and blood samples in period I, the feeding was continued for another 13 days, but the hay was replaced by 60 lb. of green berseem in the rations of the animals of group I and by 60 lb. of green oat grass in the rations of the animals of group 2. The milk and faeces were then collected, as in the previous period, and ana- lysed. The animals were not, however, bled at this stage, nor was a composite butter made. The average carotene contents of the berseem and of the oat grass, which were analysed daily, were 25.13 mg. and 21.55 mg. per pound of the green material respectively, the dry matter per- centages being 13.26 and 17.38. Period III. The feeding experiments were continued for another 13 days during which the animals of group 1 received 120 lb. of green berseem and those of group 2, 120 lb. of green oat grass daily. During this period the green feeding was in reality ad libitum and consequently no concentrate mixture was given. After the feeding period was over, the usual last day's milk and faecal samples from the last seven day's collection from all the animals were analysed. Butter was also prepared as before from the milk of individual animals and subsequently analysed. The animals were also bled for the determination of plasma carotene and vitamin A. The carotene contents of green berseem and oat grass during this feeding period were on the average 13.75 mg. and 17.33 mg. per pound respectively, the per- centage dry matter being 12.45 and 13.66. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS No significant change has been found to take place in the chemical composition of milk of the two groups of animals in the three periods (Tables I and II). Although a decrease in the milk yield (36 per cent in the case of the animals of group 1 and 32 per cent in the case of No. 21 of group 2) was found in the third period, this was not unexpected, partly because of the lactation period crossing the peak at this time, and partly because of the supply of insufficient nutrient, especially the starch equivalent, owing to the withholding of concentrates. This, however, did not affect our experiment in any way, as it was designed to study the composition of milk under these very conditions. The animals tended, therefore, to maintain a constant composition of milk except in the case of No. 42 in period III where the change in fat percentage appears to be due to causes other than that of green fodder ingestion. A similar conclusion was arrived at from the data of Das Gupta [1942] who fed Hissar cows and Murrah buffaloes with varying amount of green berseem and found no significant change in the amounts of total solids, ash, protein and fat percentage of the milk. In Table III, the data are given showing the change in the chemical composition of butter fat under heavy green feeding. It will be noticed from the results that in the case of both berseem and oat grass feeding,
B. C. RAY SARKAR AND K. C. SEN 221 there was a tendency for the R.M. and Polenske values and iodine number to increase, whilst the saponification number remained more or less constant. These results agree with those of Das Gupta [1939] who determined the Reichert- Wollny and iodine values and partly with those of Dean and Hilditch [1933] who determined only iodine values. The increase in the unsaturation might be attributed to the large intake of unsatu- rated carotene or to the fatty constituents of green feed or to the lower plane of nutrition [Davies, 1939]. It is also noticed that under similar feeding conditions, the young animals (Nos. 70 and 64) secreted fat with higher R.M., Polenske and saponification values and lower iodine value than that from older animals (Nos. 42 and 21). TABLE I Effect of berseem feeding on the chemical composition of milk Period Animal No. Dry matter consump- tion per day lb. Milk yield per day lb. Fat produc- tion per day gm. Fat (per cent) Total solid (per cent) Solids. not-fat (per cent) Protein (per cent) Ash (per cent) I 70 30.5 19.0 396.8 4.60 13.03 8.43 3.16 0.75 (Berseem-nil) . . . . 42 24.7 14.0 311.4 4.90 13.05 8.15 3.30 0.77 Average 27.6 16.5 254.1 4.75 13.04 8.29 3.23 0.76 II 70 18.3 21.0 445.0 4.85 13.29 8.44 3.27 0.78 (Berseem-60 lb.) . . . . 42 15.2 14.0 297.0 4.85 13.21 8.36 3.46 0.74 Average 16.8 17.5 371.0 4.85 13.25 8.40 3.37 0.76 III 70 14.9 12.5 280.9 4.95 13.60 8.65 3.20 0.79 (Berseem-120 lb.) . . . . 42 14.9 8.5 289.3 7.50 15.79 8.29 3.23 0.76 Average 14.9 10.5 285.1 6.23 14.70 8.47 3.22 0.78 TABLE II Effect of oat grass feeding on the chemical composition of milk Period Animal No. Dry matter consump- tion per day lb. Milk yield per day lb. Pat produc- tion per day gm. Pat (per cent) Total solid (per cent) Solids. not-fat (percent) Protein (percent) Ash (per cent) I 64 29.4 23.0 605.6 5.8 13.90 8.10 3.24 0.80 (Oat grass-nil) . . . . 21 22.7 11.0 239.7 4.8 13.32 8.52 3.08 0.70 Average 26.1 17.0 422.7 5.3 13.61 8.31 3.16 0.75 II 64 20.8 23.5 544.0 5.3 13.73 8.43 3.32 0.80 (Oat grass-60 lb.) . . . 21 17.2 12.0 272.0 5.2 13.77 8.57 3.20 0.78 Average 19.0 17.8 408.0 5.3 13.75 8.50 3.26 0.79 III 64 16.4 22.5 531.2 5.2 13.23 8.03 3.30 0.72 (Oat grass-120 lb.) . . . 21 16.4 7.5 170.3 5.0 14.00 9.00 3.01 0.79 Average 16.4 15.0 350.8 5.1 13.62 8.52 3.16 0.76 It will be observed that, with the three different levels of carotene ingestion in the case of animals of group 1 (Table IV222 Vitamin A Potency of Cow's Milk and Butter Fat the levels of intake were 23356.0 I.U., 2147957.0 I.U. and 3453032.0 I.U. and the carotene potency varied from 705.4 I.U. to 2257.2 I.U. (average), the vitamin A potency increased from 5064.3 I.U. to 8516.4 I.U. (average) and the total po- tency increased from 5769.7 I.U. to 10773.6 I.U. (average) and the percentage activity due to caro- tene in this group varied from 12.2 to 20.1. TABLE III Composition of butter on low and high carotene rations Sample Animal No. Average carotene Intake mg. Reichert- Meissl Value Polenske value Sponification number Lodise number Mixed butter . . . . . . 70 14.30 (23746 I.U.) 22.2 1.0 226.0 37.0 64 42 21 Individual samples . . . . . 70 25.7 1.9 227.2 39.4 42 1650.74 (2740228 I. U.) 24.0 1.1 225.0 10.8 Average ... 24.9 1.5 226.1 40.1 Individual samples . . . . 64 ... 25.5 1.8 227.6 37.0 21 2080.14 (3453032 I.U.) 18.9 1.0 224.7 44.7 Average ... 22.2 1.4 226.2 40.9 TABLE IV Effect of feeding berseem on the carotene and vitamin A content of butter Period Animal No. Average dally carotene intake I.U. Potency per lb. of butter fat Per cent activity due to carotene Carotene I.U. Vitamin A I.U. Total I.U. I 70 27024.0 709.2 5068.6 5777.8 12.3 42 21248.0 742.3 5150.3 5892.2 12.6 Average 24136.0 725.8 5109.5 5835.2 12.4 II 70 2504608.0 2653.9 8187.4 10841.3 24.5 42 2504608.0 2449.3 8782.2 11231.5 21.8 Average 2504608.0 2551.6 8484.8 11036.4 23.1 III 70 2740228.0 3555.4 8711.4 12266.7 29.0 42 2740228.0 2641.3 8498.9 11140.2 23.7 Average 2740228.0 3098.4 8605.2 11703.5 26.5
B. C. RAY SARKAR AND K. C. SEN 223 TABLE V Effect of feeding oat grass on the carotene and vitamin A content of butter Period Animal No. Average daily carotene intake I.U. Potency per lb. of butter fat Per cent activity due to carote Carotene I.U. Vita.min A I. U. Total I.U. I 64 25730.0 896.8 5149.6 6046.4 14.8 21 20982.0 514.0 4978.9 5492.9 9.4 Average 23356.0 705.4 5064.3 5769.7 12.2 II 64 2147967.0 2476.2 8215.6 10691.8 23.2 21 2147957.0 2232.2 8711.4 10943.6 20.4 Average 2147957.0 2354.2 8463.5 10817.7 21.8 III 64 3453032.0 2181.4 8144.8 10326.2 21.1 21 3453032.0 2138.9 8993.7 11132.6 19.2 Average 3453032.0 2160.2 8569.3 10729.4 20.1 TABLE VI Recovery of carotene and vitamin A in the butter fat of cows fed on betseem Animal No. Average daily carotene intake I.U. Total recovery per day Per cent recovery per day Carotene I.U. Vitamin A I.U. Total I.U. Carotene Vitamin A Total 70 27024.0 619.8 4134.7 4754.6 2.29 15.30 17.59 42 21248.0 514.1 3623.9 4138.0 2.42 17.06 19.48 Average 24136.0 567.0 3879.3 4446.3 2.35 16.07 18.42 70 2504608.0 2601.4 8022.4 10623.8 0.10 0.32 0.42 42 2504608.0 1602.2 5743.8 7346.0 0.06 0.23 0.29 Average 2504608.0 2101.8 6883.1 8984.9 0.08 0.27 0.36 70 2740228.0 2340.8 5389.9 7730.7 0.09 0.20 0.29 42 2740228.0 1808.3 5403.3 7211.6 0.07 0.20 0.27 Average 2740228.0 2074.6 5396.6 7471.2 0.08 0.20 0.27
224 Vitamin A Potency of Cow's Milk and Butter Fat TABLE VII Recovery of carotene and vitamin.A in the butter fat of cows fed on oat grass Animal No. Average daily carotene intake I.U. Total recovery per day Per cent recovery per day Carotene I.U. Vitamin A I.U. Total I.U. Carotene Vitamin A Total 64 25730.0 1196.3 6868.2 8064.5 4.65 26.69 31.34 21 20982.0 270.6 2628.7 2899.3 1.29 12.53 13.82 Average 23356.0 733.5 4748.5 5481.9 3.14 20.33 23.47 64 2147957.0 2967.6 9846.9 12814.5 0.14 0.46 0.60 21 2147957.0 1337.5 5219.1 6556.6 0.06 0.24 0.30 Average 2147957.0 2152.6 7533.0 9685.6 0.10 0.35 0.45 64 3453032.0 2715.9 9529.7 12245.6 0.08 0.28 0.36 21 3453032.0 863.7 3373.9 4237.6 0.03 0.10 0.13 Average 3453032.0 1789.8 6451.8 8241.6 0.05 0.19 0.24 TABLE VIII Carotene balance of the animals at different levels of berseem feeding Period Animal No. Average daily intake of carotene mg. Average daily output (mg.) Balance mg. Per cent excretion in faeces I (Berseem-nil) . . 70 16.28 17.25 2.86 20.11 B. C. RAY SARKAR AND K. C. SEN 225 TABLE IX Carotene balance of the animals at different levels of oat grass feeding Period Animal No. Average daily carotene mg. Average daily output (mg.) Balance mg. Per cent excretion in In faeces In milk Total I 64 15.50 23.30 4.86 28.16 226 Vitamin A Potency of Cow's Milk and Butter Fat TABLE XII Recovery of carotene and vitamin A in the butter fat of cows fed on dub grass Animal No. Average daily carotene intake I.U. Total recovery per day Per cent recovery per day Carotene I.U Vitamin A I.U. Total I.U. Carotene Vitamin A Total 75 1752960 1434.9 4192.7 5627.6 0.08 0.24 0.32 77 1752960 2053.4 5545.3 7598.7 0.12 0.32 0.44 78 1962120 1281.5 4238.9 5520.4 0.07 0.22 0.29 Average 1822680 1589.9 4659.0 6248.9 0.09 0.26 0.34 TABLE XIII Carotene balance on dub grass feeding Animal No. Average daily carotene intake mg. Average daily output (mg.) Balance mg. Per cent excretion in faeces In faeces In milk Total 75 1056 557.5 3.39 560.89 +495.11 52.8 77 1056 668.3 4.58 672.88 +383.12 63.3 78 1182 618.8 3.33 622.13 + 559.87 52.4 Average 1098 614.9 3.76 618.66 + 479.34 56.0 It may thus be seen that an increase in the ingestion of carotene from approximately 24000 I.U. to 300,00,00 I.U. raised the total potency of butter from about 6000 I.U. to approximately 10,000B. C. RAY SARKAR AND K. C. SEN 227 effect was, however, produced upon the plasma carotene as in the case of butter. II Effect of heavy dub grass (Cynodon dactylon) feeding on the carotene and vitamin A potency of butter Three cows, Nos. 75, 77 and 78, each in the sixth month of lactation and yielding 12 lb., 12 lb., and 15 lb. of milk respectively, were chosen for this experiment. The investigation was started in the month of August when the animals were already getting, in addition to their concentrate (7.5 lb.) and hay ration, some pasture by grazing. In order to increase the amount of carotene ingestion, the hay was eliminated from the diet, and all the animals were given an excess of green dub grass, both in the morning and in the afternoon, for a period of 20 days. The aver- age daily consumption of the fresh grass was 37.3 lb. A daily estimate of the carotene intake was made for the last ten days of the experiment, and faeces was also simultaneously collected for calcu- lating the carotene balance. Milk samples from individual animals were also collected for the last three days and kept separately in the refrigerator. The first collection was analysed individually and then composite milk samples were prepared from the last two days' collection for each animal. A separate study of the carotene and vitamin A potency showed that ten days feeding was suffi- cient to bring the level of carotene and vitamin A in the milk to an equilibrium [Loy et al., 1937]. The dub grass contained 29.4 mg. of carotene per lb. of the green material, the dry matter content being 27 per cent. This high dry matter content was due to a short spell of dry weather during the period of investigation. In Tables XI and XII data are given showing the effect of the dub, grass feeding on the potency and on the amount of recovery of carotene in butter fat. It will be seen that, with an ingestion of a little less than 2 million I.U. of carotene from an average daily consumption of 37.3 lb. of fresh dub grass, the total potency was about 10,000 I.U. per pound of fat, the carotene contributing about 25 per cent of the total potency. With this amount of in- gestion, the total recovery was only 0.34 per cent of the intake. Thus the values of both the total protency of butter fat and the percentage recovery on an intake of about 2 million I.U. are more or less the same in the case of dub grass, berseem and oat grass feeding. The carotene balance data of the animals on heavy dub grass feeding are shown in Table XIII. It will be seen that, when the average intake was 1098 mg,. all the animals were in positive carotene balance, the average excretion through faeces being 56.0 per cent of the intake. The retention is, therefore, somewhat greater than that in the case of berseem or oat grass, which were fed at a higher level. SUMMARY 1. The chemical composition of milk (fat, solids-not-fat, total protein, ash) remains constant when a dry ration is replaced by heavy green fodder feeding. The R. M., Polenske and iodine values of the butter fat, however, appear to increase while the saponification number is not affected. 2. An ingestion of carotene from 1.5 million to 3.0 million I.U. produces an identical maximum potency (10,000-11,000 I.U.) per lb. of fat and thus, an excessive feeding of green fodder does not lead to any profitable results so far as vitamin A potency of butter fat is concerned. Feeding of 35 lb. of berseem, dub grass or a little over 45 lb. of average mixed green fodder or pasture grass would be sufficient to produce this potency. On this level of intake, the carotene digestion is roughly 30 per cent while the carotene recovery in milk is about 0.09 per cent of the total intake. The carotene contributes about 24 per cent of the total vitamin A potency of butter. REFERENCES Bal, D. V. and Shrivastava, R. C. (1940). Nagpur Univ. J. No. 6, 133 Davies, W.L. (1939). The Chemistry of Milk; 2nd edn. Chapman & Hall Ltd., London, 66 Das Gupta, N. C. (1942). Private communication Das Gupta, S. M. (1939). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 9, 249 Dean, H. and Hilditch, T. (1933). Biochem. J. 27, 889 Doctor, N. S., Banerjee, B. N. and Kothavalla, Z. R. (1940). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 10, 63 Loy, W. C., Hilton, J. H., Wilbur, J. W. and Hauge, S. M. (1937). J. Dairy Sci. 20, 31 Makhijani, J. K. and Banerjee, B. N. (1938). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 8, 13 Sen, K. C. and Ray Sarkar, B. C. (1942). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 12, 179 Seshan, P. A. and Sen, K. C. (1942). J. Agric. Sci. 32, 194
OBSERVATIONS ON A CONTAGIOUS KERATITIS OF INDIAN SHEEP By P. N. NANDA, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, and M. ABDUSSALAM, Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore (Received for publication on 6 March 1942) (With Plate XVII) DURING the past few years, there have occurred frequent outbreaks of a severe form of keratitis in flocks of all the three breeds of sheep bred at the Hissar Cattle Farm. Two of these breeds, the Bikaneri and Lohi, are purely indigenous and the third is a cross between the Australian Merino and the Bikaneri. A perusal of the available literature shows that this disease has not, so far, been re- corded as occurring in India but an almost identi- cal affection is known, though under different names, from many parts of the world. Coles [1931] described it from South Africa and for the first time demonstrated the constant occurrence of a Rickettsia in the conjunctival epithelium of affected sheep. In the same year, Edgar studied the disease in Australia, and since then a number of other workers have recorded it from different parts of the world. Hopkirk [1934] encountered it in New Zealand, Donatienet Lestoquard [1937] in Algeria, Cordier et Menager [1937] in Tunis, Melbrant [1939] in French Congo, Pigoury [1937] in the Levant, Johnson [1938] in the United States, Viera and Castelo [1940] in Uruguay, and Lafe- nêtre [1938] in France. Nicolas [1914] quotes Repiquet [1897] as having encountered, what appears to be the same disease, in France and Hughes in England; Coles [1933] also stated that the disease was prevalent in Europe. CLINICAL OBSERVATIONS At Hissar, the disease is more commonly en- countered in spring and early winter, when flies (Musca spp.) are most abundant in the sheep baras,* but outbreaks in other parts of the year are not unknown. Young animals below one year have been more commonly noticed to suffer but older animals are also attacked fairly frequently. Clinically the disease begins as a conjunctivitis; there is a marked redness and swelling of the con- junctiva lining the eyelids, with profuse lacry- mation. In the course of a day these symptoms become more aggravated, lacrymation becomes more profuse and the sclerotic conjunctiva shows an intense diffuse reddening with injected blood vessels standing prominently on it. At this stage, there is marked photophobia and partial protru- sion of the membrana nictitans over the eye-ball. The discharge then becomes purulent and a kera- titis develops fairly rapidly, rendering the cornea at first hazy and then milky white and opaque. The animal becomes somewhat dull and depressed and feeding (grazing) is markedly impaired, pro- bably on account of loss of sight; this results in a rapid loss of condition. The severity of symp- toms usually passes off in about a week to ten days; photophobia and swelling of the conjunctiva is reduced and the discharge becomes watery again. The corneal opacity and diffuse redness of the conjunctiva, however, persist for a longer period. In the great majority of cases, recovery is the rule and the eye becomes normal again in about three weeks. The cornea gradually clears and the eye- sight is restored but the conjunctiva may present a granular appearance for a long time, in rare cases, the cornea ulcerates, the progressive ulceration tending to produce keratocele and perforation with all its sequalae and loss of the eye. In most cases the disease affects only one eye at first and the other eye follows suit in the course of a few days. Rarely, however, both the eyes are affected simultaneously. In large flocks the disease may continue for months, three or four animals being attacked at a time. Quite often, the outbreaks starting in early winter have been noticed to continue till the follow- ing spring. More commonly, however, a large number of animals are attacked at a time and the outbreak is over in six to eight weeks' time. ETIOLOGY Coles [1931, 1] demonstrated the constant occur- rence of a rickettsoid organism in the conjunctival epithelium during early stages of the disease. He has given an excellent and well illustrated description of the organism and has provisionally named it as Rickettsia conjunctivae. This protista has since been found in association with the disease in Algeria, Congo, Tunis, the Levant, Uruguay and America by the workers who have encountered the disease in those countries (loc. cit). At Hissar also, the present writers invariably found in the con- junctival epithelium of all cases in early stages, an organism morphologically indistinguishable from Rickettsia conjunctivae Coles, 1931, (Plate XVII). A brief description of our methods and material is as follows. In the beginning of September 1940, an out- break of the disease among the stud rams at this Farm afforded us an opportunity to examine the conjunctival scrapings for infection, Six cases * Fenced enclosures for housing sheep 228
Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part III ] PLATE XVII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Photomicrograph showing Rickettsia conjunctivae in an infected conjunctival cell. Notice the pre- sence of neutrophils in the smear. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Infected eye of a Hissar Dale ram showing keratitis (opacity of the cornea).
P. N. NANDA AND M. ABDUSSALAM 229 of the disease were available, one in an Hissar Dale ram and five in Bikaneris. Two animals of the latter breed were in an advanced stage and well on the way to recovery. The other four were more or less early cases. Conjunctival scrapings were obtained by means of slides with well ground edges from the lining of lids and nictitating membrane and spread in the form of thin smears on clean dry slides. These were air dried, fixed in methyl alco- hol, and stained by Giemsa's method. Under the oil immersion objective of the microscope, Ricket- tsia conjunctivae Coles could be detected in a large number of epithelial cells in all the four early cases. Besides the usually heavily infected conjunctival cells, one could also see clean epithelial cells, neutro- philes and a few red blood corpuscles. In the two advanced cases, no Rickettsia were found and in place of neutrophiles, lymphocytes predominated. This is in conformity with the observations of Coles [1931, 1]. The casual protista, Rickettsia conjunctivae, is markedly pleomorphic and in Giemsa stained pre- parations we could see spherical or sub-spherical solid forms, ring forms, imperfect rings or 'horse- shoe' forms, triangles with rounded angles and bipolar forms. Their dimensions varied from 0.4 µ to 1.8 µ at the maximum diameter. In smears prepared in acute stages of the disease, most of the cells were found to be infected and a majority of them were packed with the parasite; in some cells it was diffusely scattered or lay in clumps which had no tendency to hug the nucleus. With Giemsa's stain the protista takes a pale blue or lilac colour, the solid forms and the 'poles' of the bipolar and triangular forms taking a reddish hue. No degeneration of the invaded cell was found. Donatien and Lestoquard [1938] have studied the developmental cycle of this protista in experi- mentally infected animals. TRANSMISSION The natural mode of transmission of the disease is unknown but the comparative frequency of out- breaks in those parts of the year when flies (Musca spp.) are abundant at Hissar, suggests that these insects may be responsible for its natural dissemi- nation. Another possible mode of (mechanical) transmission is the long grass on which the sheep graze in certain seasons. Edgar [1931] has also noticed that contact infection in Australian sheep occurred only when sheep were grazed onlong grass; it did not occur when they were kept on short pas- ture. Artificially, the disease is readily transmissible from cases in the early stages, to healthy animals. Conjunctival scrapings of an early case were dilut- ed with sterile normal saline solution and inoculat- ed sub-conjunctivally in two healthy lambs and intra-ocularly in a third one. These healthy lambs were six months old and were obtained from a flock in which the disease was not known to have occurred previously. Two days after these in- jections all the three lambs developed lacryma- tion and conjunctivitis followed by other typical symptoms of the disease. Later the experiment was repeated in a simpler manner. The conjunc- tival surface of an affected eye was touched with a finger which was immediately rubbed in the healthy eyes of another lamb. On the third day this lamb also developed typical symptoms of the disease. It is evident from these experiments that the disease is readily transmissible mechanical- ly with an incubation period of two to three days. Edgar [1931] was also able to transmit the disease by instillation of infected lacrymal secretion into healthy eyes but he failed to affect transmission with filtrates of infected tears obtained by passage through Seitz, Berkfeld, Chamberland F. and Plaster of Paris Candles. By centrifuging dilute lacrymal secretion at 3,000 r. p. m. for two hours he obtained a non-infective supernatant portion and an infective deposit. DIAGNOSIS Clinical diagnosis of this disease is simple and is based on the occurrence of typical symptoms in a large number of sheep in the same flock. It can, however, be easily confirmed by microscopic exami- nation of Giemsa stained conjunctival scrapings obtained from an early case, when a large number of conjunctival cells will be found to contain Rickettsia conjunctivae. It must, however, be distinguished from another, apparently harmless, intra-cellular organism of the conjunctival epi- thelium of sheep encountered by Coles [1931, 2] in South Africa and by Donatien et Lestoquard [1939] in Algeria. According to Coles [1931, 2] this organism is distinguished by its less marked pleomorphism, somewhat larger size and that it does not occur in clumps; a deeply staining mate- rial in the body of the organism is arranged more or less in the form of a quarter to half moon, the rest of the organism staining very faintly. Unlike R. conjunctivae it shows no red with Giemsa, but the half moon part stains deep blue and the rest, a very faint blue. The present writers have not encountered this organism at Hissar. The presence of melarim granules in the epi- thelial cells of the conjunctiva should also be kept in mind, since they may be mistaken for Rickettsia. They can, however, be readily distinguished by their brown colour and by being visible in unstained preparations.
230 Observations on a Contagious Karatitis of Indian Sheep PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY Coles [1933] called the disease an 'Irido-cyclitis' and Australian workers have named it as an oph- thalmia. The present writers have not investigated the changes inside the eye-ball, although they certainly occur during acute stages of the disease. In the absence of more definite information about changes in the deeper tissues we prefer to call the disease a 'keratitis' after its most obvious mani- festation. TREATMENT In most cases the disease is benign and the affected animals recover without treatment. We have, however, found the keeping of affected animals in a dark stable and the use of a collyrium containing 1 per cent zinc sulphate and 2 per cent boric acid, quite beneficial. The keeping of affected animals in dark stables does not only obviate the trouble due to photophobia but also keeps away the flies, thus reducing chances of fur- ther spread of the infection. THE DISEASE IN OTHER ANIMALS At the Hissar Farm, animal species other than sheep, i.e. cattle, goats, equines, camels, etc. are also kept at no great distance from sheep, but this disease (or an affection similar to it) has not been observed to occur among them, with the possible exception of cattle. In cattle one occasionally observes outbreaks of a mild conjunctivitis cha- racterized by congestion of the conjunctiva and profuse lacrymation from one or both eyes. There is, however, no keratitis or opacity of the cornea. This disease has also been observed in some other districts of the Punjab and is locally known as dhalka. We have not examined conjunctival scrapings from these cases in cattle but have repeatedly looked for worms (Thelazia rhodesi) in the lacrymal/sac with negative results. It is possible that this disease is also a rickettsial infec- tion. The disease is, however, very much milder, than in sheep and European cattle, Coles [1936] and Donatien and Lestoquard [1937, 2] have found a variety of R. conjunctivae in the eyes of cattle and Coles [1935 and 1940] has described a similar organism from goats and fowls. Edgar [1931] was unable to transmit the disease from sheep to horses, cattle, goats, pigs, rabbits and guinea-pigs. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Before concluding, we wish to express our grati- tude to Mr J. S. Garewal, I.V.S., Principal, Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore, for laboratory faci- lities and to Mr Gurbux Singh, L.V.P., for assis- tance in transmission experiments. REFERENCES Coles, J. D. W. A. (1931, 1). 17th Rep. Dir. Vet. Serv. & Anim. Ind., Union of S. Africa, 175-86 Coles, J. D. W. A. (1931, 2). 17th Rep. Dir. Vet. Serv. & Anim. Ind., Union of S. Africa, 187-9 Coles, J. D. W. A. (1933). Vety. Rec. 45, 165-6 Cordier, G. and Menager, J. (1937). Bull. Soc. Path. exot. 30, 224-7 Donatien, A. and Lestoquard, F. (1937, 1). Bull. Soc. Path. exot. 30, 18-20 Donatien A. and Lestoquard, F. (1937, 2). Bull. Soc. Path exot. 30, 451-2 Donatien, A. and Lestoquard, F. (1938). C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 206, 1057-8 Donatien, A. and Lestoquard, F. (1939). Rev. Med. Vet. 90 123-5 Edgar, G. (1931). Dept. Agric. N. S. Wales, Vet. Res. Rep. 6, 22-35 Hopkirk, C. S. M. (1934). New Zealand J. Agric. 48, 224-5 Johnson, L. V. (1938). Proc. Soc. exp. Biol., N. Y. 38, 42-3 Lafenetre, H. (1938). Rev. Med. Vet., Toulouse 90, 323-4 Malbrant, R. (1939). Bull. Soc. Path. exot. 32, 907-8 Nicolas, E. (1914). Vet. and Comp. Ophthalmology, London (English translation). Pigoury, L. (1937). Bull. Soc. Path. exot. 30, 621-4 Repiquet (1879). Journal de Lyon, 1879 (quoted by Nicolas, 1914) Viera, O. and Castelo, M. (1940). Rev. Med. Vet. B. Aires 22, 30-43 Note. Since writing of the above, one of the authors has seen an outbreak of the disease in a flock of Lohi sheep at Shahdara near Lahore and several stray cases in the clinic of the Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore,
PHOSPHORUS IN MILK I. THE PHOSPHORUS PARTITION IN THE MILK OF COW, GOAT, SHEEP AND HUMAN BEINGS By K. P. BASU and K. P. MUKHERJEE, Biochemical Laboratory, Dacca University (Received for publication on 19 January 1943) THE importance of phosphorus in nutrition is well known. Investigators have, therefore, from time to time examined the nature of phosphorus compounds in cow's milk which is the most im- portant food for infants and growing children. References to earlier investigations are given by Graham and Kay [1933]. In India some work on the compounds of phosphorus in buffalo milk has been done by Acharya and Devadatta [1940, 1941]. Lack of a rapid & accurate technique has hampered work in this line. For removing proteins & fats from milk, we have, following the procedure of Sanders [1931], added to it trichloracetic acid (upto 8 per cent strength). This procedure was also adopted by Graham and Kay [1933] in their investigations on cow's milk. Although these investigators have confirmed the presence of organic phosphorus compounds, they could not determine their na- ture. Attempts have been made by Lang and Miethke [1932], Hochheimer [1932-33] and Bomskov [1932] to partition the phosphoric esters into fractions on the lines used by Lohman [1928] for the partition of the organic phosphorus compounds in muscle, but the findings of the investigators are by no means in agreement. We investigated the phosphorus distribution of milks of different animals232 Phosphorus in Milk, I (2) Labile phosphoric esterK. P. BASU AND K. P. MUKHERJEE 233 TABLE II. Phosphorus distribution in sheep's milk P given as mg. P per 100 c.c. milk In the mean values figures within brackets represent the various phosphorus fractions expressed as percentages of total phosphorus. Sample No. Total P Acid-soluble P Acid.insoluble P Total Inorganic (Ba-preci- pitable) Ester (difference between total and inorganic) Labile (not preci- pitated by Ba) Total Lipin Casein (difference between total and lipin) 1 100 67.5 52 15.5 16 32.5 12 20.5 2 99 70 63 7 8.25 29 9 20 3 100 69 52.5 16.5 16.5 31 12 19 4 98 69.5 62 7.5 8 28.5 10.5 18 5 100 70.5 60 10.5 11 29.5 10.5 19.5 6 100 69.5 53 16.5 16.5 30.5 12.5 18 Mean . . 99.5 69.3 (69.6) 57.1 (57.3) 12.3 (12.3) 12.7 (12.7) 30.1 (30.2) 11.1 (11.1) 19.1 (19.2) TABLE III Phosphorus distribution in goat's milk P given as mg. P per 100 c.c. milk In the mean values figures within brackets represent the various fractions expressed as per- centages of total phosphorus. Sample No. Total P Acid.soluble P Acid-insoluble P Total Inorganic (Ba-preci- pitable) Ester (difference between total and inorganic) Labile (not perci- pitated by Ba.) Total Lipin Casein (difference between total and lipin) 1 102.5 79 70 9 10 23.5 6.5 17 2 100 76.5 62 14.5 15 23.5 6 17.5 3 125 100 75 25 25 25 7 18 4 100 76.5 65 11.5 12 23.5 6.5 17 5 103 78 70 8 9 25 8 17 6 99.5 76 65 11 11 23.5 7 16.5 Mean . . 105 81 (77.1) 67.8 (64.6) 13.1 (12.5) 13.7 (13) 24 (22.9) 6.8 (6.4) 17.1 (16.3)
234 Phosphorus in Milk, I TABLE IV Phosphorus distribution in buffalo's milk P given as mg. P per 100 c.c. milk In the mean values figures within brackets represent the various phosphorus fractions expressed as percentages of total phosphorus. Sample No. Total P Acid-soluble P Acid-insoluble P Total Inorganic (Ba-preci- pitable) Ester (difference between total and inorganic) Labile (not preci- pitated by Ba) Total Lipin Casein (difference between total and lipin) 1 125 88.5 66.5 22 23 36.5 15 21.5 2 133 94.5 71.5 23 22.8 38.5 17.5 21 3 132 93.5 72 21.5 23 38.5 19 19.5 4 120 85.5 65 20.5 20 34.5 16.5 18 5 124 88 66 22 22 36 17 19 6 118 81 62 19 20 37 20 17 Mean . . 125.3 88.5 (70.6) 67.1 (53.5) 21.3 (17) 21.8 (17.4) 36.8 (29.3) 17.5 (13.9) 19.3 (15.4) TABLE V Phosphorus distribution in human milk P given as mg. P per 100 c.c. milk In the mean values figures within brackets represent the various phosphorus fractions expressed as percentages of total phosphorus. Sample No. Total P Acid-soluble P Acid-insoluble P Total Inorganic (Ba-preci- pitable) Ester (difference between total and inorganic) Labile (not preci- pitated by Ba) Total Lipin Casein (difference between total and lipin) 1 38.5 28 9 19 20 10.5 5.5 5 2 32 22.5 5 17.5 18 9.5 4 5.5 Mean . . 35.25 25.25(71.6) 7(19.8) 18.25(51.7) 19 (53.8) 10 (28.3) 4.75 (13.4) 5.25 (14.8) DISCUSSION Although the method of Graham and Kay [1933] for the partition of phosphorus in milk was an improvement on that of Lenstrup [1926], it did not, as the authors themselves realised, yield any information regarding the nature of compounds grouped as ester phosphorus. Besides studying systematically the phosphorus distribution in various milks, this investigation is an attempt to elucidate the nature and distribution of ester phosphorus in milk by the application of the method developed by Needham to study the nature of ester phosphorus in the chick embryo. Needham's procedure would detect and estimate hexose monophosphate, hexose diphosphate and adenyl pyrophosphate. None of these compounds, however, were detected by us in the milks investi- gated in appreciable amounts. In our investiga- tions the entire barium soluble phosphorus of the trichloracetic acid extract underwent sponta-
K. P. BASU AND K. P. MUKHERJEE 235 neous hydrolysis on standing with the molybdate reagent for half an hour at room temperature (28ºPHOSPHORUS IN MILK II. AVAILABILITY OF PHOSPHORUS OF THE MILK OF COW, GOAT AND BUFFALO By K. P. BASU and K. P. MUKHERJEE, Biochemical Laboratory, Dacca University (Received for publication on 19 January 1943) THE importance of the minerals, calcium and phosphorus in growth and metabolism is too well known to merit a further discussion. Sherman and his collaborators [1922, 1935] as also Rose and MacLeod [1923] and Fairbanks and Mitchell [1938] have shown that calcium from different sources, specially that from vegetables is not as well utilized as that from cow's milk. The differ- ence in the utilization of calcium from differ- ent food materials raises the question whether the phosphorus of all food-stuffs are equally available. Much work has been done on the availability of phytin phosphorus [Bruce and Callow, 1934; McCance and Widdowson, 1935; Lowe and Steenbock, 1937; Palmer and Mottram, 1939; Harrison and Mellanby, 1939; Kreiger and Steenbock, 1940] and most of these investigations show that phytin phosphorus is very poorly utilized by human beings and animals. Williams, MacLeod and Morrel [1940] have compared the availability to the animals of the phosphorus of a low and of a high phosphorus hay and have found that the phosphorus of the low phosphorus lespedeza sericae or alfalfa hay is less available to the rat for growth and bone development than the phosphorus of a high phos- phorus hay of the same type. The importance of milk and milk products in the nutrition of the infant and the growing animals as well as in the dietary of large masses of adult population requires that special attention should be given to this secretion as a source of phosphorus. The present investigation was carried out to determine the availability of phosphorus in three commonly used varieties of milk, viz. that from goat, buffalo and cow. Of these the buffalo milk has a higher phosphorus content (125 mg. per 100 c.c. of milk). The cow milk contains 97 mg. per 100 c.c. and the goat milk 100 mg. per 100 c.c. The total solid contents of the buffalo milk is also much higher than those of the cow and the goat milk and hence the phosphorus content of dried buffalo milk is lower than in dried cow and goat milk. Very little work has appeared on the availability of phosphorus of milk from buffalo, goat or cow. Henry and Kon as well as Auchinachie [1937] observed a retention of about 80 per cent of the phosphorus and calcium in cow's milk ingested by experimental rats. The availability of the phosphorus of these milks was investigated by experiments with young rats. Young healthy albino rats which had been reared on the usual diet of the laboratory were placed on three different diets in which goat milk, cow milk and buffalo-milk were respectively the only source of phosphorus. At seven weeks of age the rats were killed and the utilization of phosphours was determined and compared. This method would throw light on the relative value of the different milks in promoting growth and retention of phosphorus in young growing rats and probably, therefore, in growing children. During the experimental periods the rats were so kept within the room so that all the rats were exposed to the same conditions of light. EXPERIMENTAL The different varieties of milks were obtained from the Government farm at Dacca. Six seers of different varieties of milk were evaporated to dryness on the water-bath. The whole dried milks were separately finely ground, the whole lots were thoroughly mixed and finally stored in stopperd glass jars in a refrigerator. The same lots of milk were used throughout the investigation. The powdered milks used in preparing diets were analyzed. In all cases Ca was determined by the McCrudden method [1911-12] by precipi- tating Ca. as oxalate at pH. 4.8K. P. BASU AND K. P. MUKHERJEE 237 experimental diets for three weeks. Table II gives the composition of the experimental diets and of the salt mixture. The diets, were so planned that they contained almost the same percentage of cal- cium, phosphorus and proteins. The calcium : phos- phorus ratio was always maintained at the same value. The phosphorus of the diets was derived entirely from cow, goat or buffalo milk under investigation. Reliable results regarding the avail- ability of phosphorus from a particular source are obtained by employing a diet the phosphorus of which is derived entirely from the foodstuff under investigation and in this respect the diets employed in this investigation are to be preferred to those employed by William, MacLeod and Morrell [1940]. The diets were preserved in suoppered glass jars and stored in a refrigerator. Vitamins A, D and also B complex were given twice a week to the experimental rats. The animals were so chosen that the average initial weights of the group of rats to be compared were approximately the same. In all cases litter mates of the same sex were compared. Food and distilled water were supplied to the rats ad libitum and records were kept for the food supplied, any food spilled was carefully separated from the faeces and collected. In each case the total amount of food supplied was taken into consi- deration while calculating the total food intake. Records were kept of the growth of the animals during the experiments and are shown in Table III. It was observed that all the animals con- sumed less amount of food and consequently showed less growth than in the case of usual optimal intake of food. But all the animals consumed nearly the same amount of food and the average growth rates of rats on the milk diets was the same. At seven weeks of age the rats were weighed, killed with chloroform, brushed to remove any adhering food particles from the fur. The gastro- intestinal tract was dissected out and the contents removed. The weight of the contents substracted from the final live weight gave the net weight which was used as a basis in calculating the per- centage of body phosphorus of seven weeks old rats. The alimentary tract was discarded though the phosphorus content of the intestinal tract was not negligible but was low in comparison with that of the food remnants. The animals were ashed in \ill\ica basin first over a low flame and finally in an electric muffle furnace adjusted so that it maintained a temperature between 550º238 Phosphorus in Milk, II Composition of the salt mixture Sodium chloride . . . 4.40 parts. Magnesium sulphate . . . 5.45 K. P. BASU AND K. P. MUKHERJEE 239 the laboratory were placed on three diets in one of which all the phosphorus was supplied entirely by dried cow milk (whole) and in the case of two other diets by the dried goat milk (whole) and dried buffalo milk (whole) respectively to provide the same amount of phosphorus (0.18 per cent) and the same Ca/P ratio (1.39 : 1). The diets also contained the same percentage of proteins. At 7 weeks of age the animals were killed and their bodies analyzed for phosphorus. Comparison of the availability of phosphorus in the milks of different animals (whole dried) was made by calculating for each an utilization factor which is the ratio of phosphorus retention to intake. The values of utilization factors expressed in percent- age for female rats were 81.7 for buffalo milk diet, 83.7 for goat milk diet and 82.1 for cow milk diet. It was observed that the phosphorus of cow milk, goat milk or buffalo milk (when dried) is well utilized and utilized to the same extent. This is also probably true for liquid milks as well. A smaller intake of buffalo milk which contains about 25 per cent more phosphorus than the other two varieties would, therefore, produce the same results as larger amounts of cow and goat milk so far as phosphorus requirements are concerned. REFERENCES Auchinachie (1937). Quoted from Milk and Nutrition, 1937 Basu, K. P. and Mukherjee, K. P. (1943). Indian. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 13, 232 Bruce,H.M.and Callow, R. K.(1934). Biochem J.28, 517 Das and Guha (1936). Ind. J. Padiatries. 3, 1 Fairbanks, B. W. and Mitchell, H. H. (1938). J. Nutrition 16, 79 Fincke, M. L. and Sherman, H. C. (1935). J. Biol. Chem. 110, 421 Harrison, D. C. and Mellanby, E. (1939). Biochem. J. 33. 1660 Henry and Kon (1937). Quoted from Milk and Nutrition 1937 Kreigher, C. H. and Steenbock, H. (1940). J. Nutrition 20, 125 Lowe, J. T. and Steenbock, H. (1936). Biochem. J. 30, 1126 McCrudden, F. H. (1911-12) J. Biol. Chem. 10, 187 Palmer and Mottram (1939). Biochem. J. 33, 512 Rose, M. S. and MacLeod, G. (1923). J. Biol. Chem. 57, 305 Sherman, H. C. and Hawley, E. (1922). J. Biol. Chem. 53, 375 Williams, D. E., MacLeod, F. L., and Morrel, E. (1940). J. Nutrition 20, 391 Youngburg and Youngburg (1930). J. Lab. Clin. Med. 6, 158, quoted in Practical Physiological Chemistry by Hawk, P. B. and Bergeim, O.; 11th edition, 1938, p. 764
SKRJABINEMA OVIS (SKRJABIN, 1915) WERESCHTSCHAGIN, 1925, AN OXYURID PARASITE OF THE GOAT (CAPRA HIRCUS) IN INDIA By S. N. VAIDYANATHAN, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Parasitology Section, Madras Veterinary College (Received for publication on 9 November 1942) ABDUSSALAAM [1938] appears to be the only worker who has recorded Skrjabinema ovis in India. His collection consisted of two female worms which were recovered alive from a speck of mucus passed by a one-year-old fat-tailed sheep suffering from diarrhoea at Jahania (Punjab). According to him, the specimens are in conformity with the Russian and British specimens, in all important measurements. During the contagious caprine pleuro-pneumonia experiments conducted at the Madras Veterinary College, the writer, in 1939, while collecting parasites from goats, came across members, both males and females, of an oxyurid parasite indis- tinguishable from Skrjabinema ovis in the colon of several goats; so opportunity is taken to record, for the first time, their incidence in goats in India. The following is a brief description of the worm, from typical specimens of the Madras collection. A very marked feature is the difference in size of the sexes. The male measures up to 3.50 mm. and the female 7.00 mm. A small buccal cavity bounded by a complicated arrangement of lips and interlabia of the tri-radiate type can be made out. The head end bears a cuticular inflation which is more marked in the female than in the male. A pair of lateral alae, bearing fine stria- tions, run along from behind this inflation. The lateral alae are less prominent in the male than in the female. In the female the alae extend almost the entire length of the worm, except for a short distance from the hind end. The lateral alae in the male appear to be contiguous with a caudal alar expansion. The oesophagus is cylindrical, with a large spherical bulb posteriorly. The cylindrical portion measures 0.35 mm. in the male and 0.60 mm. in the female. The diameter of the posterior bulb is 0.12 mm. and 0.20 mm. in the male and female respectively. The caudal alar expansion of the male is almost circular in shape and held in position by a pair of pre and post anal processes. The preanal processes are much larger of the two and bear at their tips a small papilla each. The papillae at the end of the processes protrude outside the alar expansion. Between the bases of the processes and situated adanally, may be seen a pair of swellings behind the cloaca, each bearing three minute papillae. The tail of the male ends in a short, conspicuous spike. A single stout spicule measuring 0.08 mm. glides on an accessory piece 0.023 mm. long. The female has a distinct tail measuring 0.80 mm.; the vulva is situated anterior to the middle of the worm. It leads into a broad vagina, directed obliquely forward. Pathogenesis According to Abdussalaam [1938], 'the diarrhoea and other symptoms in the host animal at Jahania (Punjab) were too severe to be attri- butable to the presence of this parasite'. Monnig [1934] considers they are 'apparently not patho- genic, but may be mistaken for young forms of other nematodes'. The writer did not observe any symptoms in the goats, from which these speci- mens were obtained, that could be attributed to this parasite. Incidence Out of 70 goats subjected to a random examination as many as nine had Skrjabinema ovis. These were found mostly amongst the younger lots. The percentage incidence of Skrjabinema ovis in goats, judging from the supply for the contagious caprine pleuro-pneumonia experiments, from different localities, not only in and around Madras but also places far off, suggests the possible distribution of this parasite throughout this part of the country. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The writer is indebted to Rao Sahib M. Anant Narayan Rao, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, for kindly confirming the identity of the specimens. REFERENCES Abdussalaam, M. (1938). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 8, 15-7 Monnig, H. O. (1934). Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, London 240
REUTILIZATION OF USED AGAR MEDIA, I By E. V. SESHACHARYULU and ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA, Imperial Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 22 January 1943) MILK agar suggested by the Ministry of Agricul- ture [1934] is commonly employed for determining the number of bacteria in milk by the plate method. Due to the present war conditions the prices of the constituents of this medium, namely peptone, lemco and agar, have enormously increased and there is already a great shortage of agar in this country. The reutilization of used agar has been the sub- ject for serious investigation in the present war time. The foremost workers in this field are Huang, Shen and Tang [1941] who have recom- mended the addition of used agar, that was pre- viously washed for 24-28 hours in running water, to fresh agar in the ratio of 1 : 3. Macmorine [1942] reclaimed agar from the used stuff by che- mical methods. He claims that this reclaimed agar has no bactericidal effect and can be safely used. These workers have, however, ignored the other constituents of the used media, namely lemco and peptone, as the continuous washing of used agar in running water adopted by the former work- ers removes the soluble constituents, peptone and lemco and in the method used by Macmorine to reclaim agar, he autoclaved the agar solution with potassium oxalate and potassium carbonate which completely decompose peptone and lemco. Por- tions of peptone and lemco undecomposed by bacteria may still remain in the used media. Even the break-down products of peptone and lemco may also serve as energy materials for bac- terial growth, provided that no toxic substances are formed. With a view, therefore, to ascertaining whether once used agar media as a whole can be reutilized for estimating the bacterial counts of milk, the present investigation was undertaken. It is hoped that the information obtained in this work will be found useful by laboratories engaged in the routine bacteriological examination of milk. Milk agar (Ministry of Agriculture) and nutrient agar recommended by the Ministry of Health [1929] were tried out in this investigation. The counts obtained by the use of once used media of these types as reclaimed by the present authors were compared with their respective fresh media. The samples of milk examined for total bacterial counts by the plate method were from (a) individual cow's and buffalo's, (b) cow herd and buffalo herd milk, (c) mixed milk (cows' and buffaloes'), (e) milk handled by town dairies, (e) village produced milk and (f) pasteurized milk. The experiments were first carried out with milk agar and once used milk agar and then with nutrient agar and once used nutrient agar. On the whole 324 samples were examined in the former case and 151 samples with the latter media. Experimental One hundred and eighty ml. of tap water were added to used agar medium*, collected from 40 petri dishes, in a beaker. The solid medium was melted and boiled for one minute. Next it was passed through a pad of sterile cotton wool, wetted with boiling water, and then kept in an air oven at a temperature of 95°-100°C. for 1½ to 2 hours. After this, the requisite amount of tap water was added to make up for the loss caused by the evaporation, boiled for one minute and then filtered through a double layer of clean muslin cloth wetted with boiling water. The pH of this medium was then adjusted to 6.8. After this it was filled in 8 to 10 ml. portions in sterile test tubes and sterilized at 15 lb. pressure for 25 minutes. The dilution technique of the Ministry of Agri- culture [1934] was used. The platings were done in duplicate and the averages of the duplicates were taken for the counts in each case. The arithmetic means, standard deviations and co- efficients of variation of the counts obtained for each set of samples by the use of milk agar and once used milk agar and nutrient agar and once used nutrient agar are given in Tables I and II. The differences between the arithmetic means of the counts and their standard errors in each case are also given in the same tables. * Ten ml. of fresh medium were originally used in each petri dish. 241
242 Reutilization of used Agar Media, I TABLE I Results obtained with milk agar and once used milk agar Source of the samples No. of samples. A. M. (colony counts per ml. of milk) S.D. C.V. per cent S. E. of the differences between A.M. (a & b) Differnces between A.M. (a and b) Individual cow's milk (I. D. I. Farm) 40 (a) 6250 2049.27 32.79 458.74 17.5 N.S. (b) 6267.5 2053.82 32.77 Individual Buffalo's milk (I.D.I. Farm) 40 (a) 7940 2762.05 34.79 616.61 35 E. V. SESHACHARYULU AND ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA 243 DISCUSSION The foregoing results (Tables I and II) show that the arithmetic means of the counts obtained by the use of fresh and once used agar media agree very closely and in all cases the differences between the two means are not only not significant but are also negligible in comparison with their respective standard errors. A similar close correspondence exists between the standard deviations and co- efficients of variation of the counts obtained by using fresh and once used media respectively. It is therefore seen that the used media do not possess any bactericidal properties and give as good a count as the fresh ones. Hence it can be confi- dently stated that the used agar media which are being discarded can be successfully made use of in the routine bacteriological examination of milk by the plate method. The technique employed in re- utilizing the used agar media is very simple and inexpensive. The advantage of this method over that of the previous workers is that in this case not only the agar but also the other constituents of the media, namely peptone and lemco, can be reutilized. In a bacteriological laboratory where a number of milk samples are to be tested daily by the plate method the saving resulting from reutilization of the used media would be considerable. This is of particular value at present when due to conditions created by war the media constituents have not only become very expensive but difficult to obtain as well. It may also be mentioned that the re- conditioned media has been observed to be as good as the original ones in respect of the extent of growth and clearness of the colonies and the ease of counting them. Samples of sterile once used nutrient agar were sent to the Veterinary Research Officer, Mysore, Serum Institute, Bangalore, for testing and the report received of his results was equally encourag- ing. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. The possibilities of utilizing once used milk and nutrient agar media for determining the num- bers of bacteria in milk by the plate method were investigated. 2. The once used agar media give as good a count as the fresh ones without showing any bactericidal properties. 3. The reconditioned media are in no way in- ferior to the fresh ones in respect of the colony growth, clearness of the colonies and the ease of counting them. 4. The technique employed in utilizing the used media is simple and inexpensive. The special ad- vantage of this method is that all the constituents of the media are reutilized without waste. 5. The utilization of the used media has not only a special advantage in war time, but also in peace time, as it will result in great economy in carrying out routine tests in a laboratory. REFERENCES Huang, Y. W., Shen, T. H. and Tang, F. F. (1941). Chinese Med. J. 59.176 Macmorine, G. Hilda, (1942). Can Public Health J., 23, 39 Ministry of Agriculture (1934). Bull. 42, 5th Ed Ministry of Health (1929). Memo. 139/Foods
ON THE PARENTERAL ADMINISTRATION OF SEA-WATER IN THE TREATMENT OF CANINE MANGE-SARCOPTIC AND FOLLICULAR By K. VENKATACHALAM, A. N. RATNAGIRISWARAN, M. R. SUBRAMANIA SASTRY, R. RAMASWAMY and C. K. VELAYUDHAN NAYAR. Research Unit, Medical College, Madras (Received for publication on 24 November 1942) (With Plate XVIII) THE idea that some alteration in the mineral constituents of the blood may be responsible for some mental disturbances and the knowledge that the mineral constituents of sea water are more or less the same as those of the blood led to the consi- deration that the injection of sterile sea water may prove beneficial in the treatment of some of the mental diseases. Before venturing to try its use- fulness on human patients, steps were taken to find out whether an injection of sterile sea-water into the animal organism would cause any systemic disturbances. Intravenous injections were there- fore given to dogs which were chosen as the subject of the experimental investigation. In the course of such trials, one of the experimental dogs which accidentally happened to be a mangy one was found to be completely rid of its skin disease. All raw patches healed up, hairs began-to grow in the denuded patches, and the animal began to put on flesh and weight gradually. This finding prompted an inquiry into the effi- cacy of sea water on cases of mange confirmed under the microscope. Cases of sarcoptic mange, num- bering about 20 were first treated and all of them responded well to the treatment. Their general condition too improved. These results encouraged us to try the same treatment in cases of follicular mange also. The prognosis of this disease is generally considered not to be a favour- able one, though it is said that spontaneous reco- very (without any treatment) may occur not infre- quently. Numerous remedies are mentioned by various authors. Some of them have been found to give relief generally in the scaly form, and not in the pustular form with numerous necrotic foci and large abscess formations. The pustular form is known to baffle all kinds of treatment invariably, and there have been numerous instances where cases with extensive infections over the body have been declared incurable and recommended for des- truction considering it humane to end their suffer- ing. The pathogenesis of the disease is that the mites enter the hair follicles and sebaceous glands and produce a chronic inflammation with proliferation and thickening of the epidermis and loss of hair. A secondary bacterial invasion, usually by staphy- lococci, takes place leading to the formation of pustules or abcesses. The wandering of the para- sites aided by the biting and scratching by the affected animals cause the infection to spread over the body. But, artificial infection from one animal to the other is rarely successful and this fact along with the reported incidence of spontaneous reco- very indicates that the condition of the host is a strong factor in determining its susceptibility. It is also maintained by some authors that Demodex is a very prevalent parasite and occurs in practi- cally all dogs, but produces mange only when the general health and condition of the animals are markedly affected by some debilitating disease or other causes, or when the natural resistance of their skin is weakened by some wrong treatment or other means [Monnig, 1938]. It is therefore clear that if sea, water should prove to be efficacious in the treatment of this malady it would really be a boon to the ailing animal king- dom. A few microscopically confirmed cases of this disease were therefore procured for carrying out the necessary trials. Sea-water in doses of 5 to 10 c.c. daily for dogs weighing about 20 to 30 lb. were given intravenously and no systemic distur- bances were observed. Some difficulty was ex- perienced at times in getting the needles into the vein on account of extensive raw patches and puck- ered and tumified condition of the skin especially over the limbs. To obviate this difficulty, the mode of administration was changed and intra- peritoneal injections were given every alternate day in doses of 10 c.c. Even daily injections were subsequently found to be tolerated. Half a c.c. per kilogramme of body weight was the average dose. The dose for under-sized and over-sized dogs was regulated on this basis, the maximum being 20 c.c. for the heaviest animal. Experience showed that it was necessary to exercise caution in treating highly debilitated animals, cases weighing less than 2 lb. and pups below the age of 6 months, since very small dogs and highly emaciated or famished ones and those suffering from bad form of nephri- tis were found to succumb probably owing to the difficulty in computing the proper dose for such patients. Microscopical examinations of the scrapings of the affected animals taken from time to time in the course of the treatment revealed live parasites in 244
PLATE XVIII [ Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim Husb., Vol. XIII, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Before treatment [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] After treatment PHOTOS OF A DOG WITH FOLLICULAR MANGE TREATED WITH SEA-WATER
K. VENKATACHALAM AND OTHERS 245 the drying and healing stages of the lesions, dead ones at the later stages of the healing process and none at the end of the treatment. These indicate that sea-water has so altered the tissue conditions as to make the soil unsuitable for the parasites to live in. About 30 cases in the different stages of the disease were treated both in this laboratory and outside. Two small dogs, two emaciated ones and one with nephritis succumbed and all the rest were found cured after 20 to 30 injections. Their gene- ral condition also improved, and the disease never recurred in any of them. The improvement in the general condition began to manifest generally a week or ten days after the cessation of treatment. This remedy was then tried on microscopically positive cases of follicular mange in some of the local institutions. The results of such trials in- variably tallied with our observations. The reports received from those quarters indicate that the disease never recurred in any of the cases treated, except in one case which was a long standing one and which required three courses of 20 injections with an interval of ten days between each course, that in early cases only one course was found suffi- cient though some required two courses and in certain long standing cases even three courses were necessary, and that no ill effects were noticed but on the other hand a definite improvement in the general condition of the patients was seen. Photos of a typical case of the pustular form of follicular mange with numerous bald patches and abscess formations almost all over the body giving rise to offensive sanguino-purulent discharge and with numerous ulcers and necrotic foci, taken both before and after treatment are shown in Plate XVIII. It weighed nearly 10 kg. As a precautionary measure it was given only 3 c.c. to start with by the intravenous route and later on intra-peritoneally as well as subcutaneously on account of the small- ness of its size and its debilitated condition. The treatment was continued for nearly three months and a half. It became perfectly all right after prolonged treatment with this remedy. It improved very well in condition. There was no sign of any recurrence of the disease even after the lapse of a pretty long period after it was discharged cured. A Hallikar bull suffering from ringworm with sores all over the body was also treated. The bull had two courses of injections intravenously with a dose of 40 c.c. and 60 c.c. respectively. It was under treatment for about four months and was completely cured. No other treatment was adopted in this case. CONCLUSION The results of the trials made so far with sterile sea-water on cases of Sarcoptic and follicular mange have been very encouraging. The report about the successful treatment of a ringworm in a bull suggests the possibility of its usefulness in the treatment of this malady also. Its efficacy in the treatment of other varieties of mange as Psoropticy Chorioptic, etc. and in different species of animal are worth trying. It is left to the clinicians to try it extensively in different forms of skin affections and in different species of animals and study its effects ; but in computing the dose for various kinds of animals, care must be taken to assess the individual requirements, taking into consideration the general condition of the patient, its size, age and weight. Usually one course of 20 daily in- jections intraperitoneally may be enough for dogs Occasionally two or even three courses may be re- quired depending upon the severity of the disease If more than one course is found necessary, an interval of ten days may be allowed between two courses. Attempts are being made to minimize the period of treatment with a view to obviating the tediousness that is likely to be caused to owners of patients by the present lengthy course of treat- ment. The sea water for these trials was procured from the sea beyond 100 yards from the coast with the help of fishermen. The fact that favourable results were obtained so far by the use of this remedy through a paren- eral administration and not through a local appli- cation clearly shows that the cure brought about by sea-water has been effected by improving the general health and condition of the host and there by altering the weakened state of the tissues in such a way as to make the soil unsuitable for the parasites to live in. It would thus appear that an invasion by Demodex parasite is likely to take place only when the soil is made suitable for its growth and multiplication by a deterioration in the general health and condition of the host or a weak- ened condition of the skin. The observation that artificial infection of healthy animals has not al- ways been successful substantiates this view. Further, the statement that spontaneous recovery may occur sometimes also supports the above fact, since such a recovery may be attributable to an improvement in the general health of the animals consequent on favourable changes in their living conditions. The results of our treatment thus lend support to the view held by Monnig that 'the condition of the host is a strong factor in determining its susceptibility to an infection by Demodex'. The conditions that favour an invasion by these parasites, and the physiological changes which sea- water induces so as to make the soil unsuitable for
246 Sea-Water in the Treatment of Canine Mange-Sarcoptic & Follicular the parasites to live in, still remain to be investi- gated. SUMMARY 1. The injection of sea-water intraperitoneally as well as intravenously has been found to effect a complete cure of cases of sarcoptic and follicular manges in canine patients. About 20 cases of the former variety and about 30 cases of the latter variety were treated both in this laboratory and outside with success. 2. The general condition of the affected animals has invariably been found to be greatly improved as a result of treatment with this remedy. 3. A dose of ½ c.c. per kg., of body weight, the maximum being 20 c.c. for the heaviest animal, has been found to be tolerated generally, and the mode of administration is intraperitoneal given every alternate day or even every day. Caution should, however, be exercised in treating highly debilitated animals and those previously suffering from nephritis and cases weighing less than 2 lb. or pups below the age of six months. 4. A case of ringworm in a bull was also treated with success. It had two courses of injections intravenously, with a dose of 40 c.c. and 60 c.c. respectively. The period of treatment was four months. 5. The results of treatment made so far confirm the view that the condition of the host is a strong factor in determining its susceptibility to an infec- tion by Demodex. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Thanks are due to the Principal, Madras Veteri- nary College and his staff, Dr P. Srinivasa Rao of Wallajan Road, Madras, Mr Ramaswamy Naidu of Gopalpuram, the Superintendent, Livestock Research Station, Hosur Cattle Farm, and his staff for all the help rendered by them in carrying out the investigations and to the Principal, Madras Medical College, the Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras and the Director of Veterinary Services, Madras, for their interest in the work. Thanks are also due to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research under whose aus- pices and financial help this research was carried out at the later stages. REFERENCE Monnig, H. O. (1939). Veterinary Heliminthology and Entomology' Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, London p. 384-5
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE INTERNAL BODY TEMPERATURE IN GOATS By M. NAZIR SADIQ, L.V.P., Punjab Veterinary College (Received for publication on 8 August 1942) (With one text-figure) THE internal temperature of an animal represents the temperature of the blood. It is usually taken in the domestic animals per rectum and sometimes in the female per vulvum. The average normal range of internal body tem- perature in goats is, according to Malkmus, [1937] between 102.2°F. and 104.9°F, but Wooldridge [1934] places it between 101.0°F. and 104.0°F. These observations are on goats found in Euro- pean countries and, evidently, they do not apply in the case of Indian goats, in which a marked varia- tion is observed. It has been observed in the case of goats used for the production of goat-tissue- vaccine at the Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore, that a lower range exists in their internal body temperature. This brief note deals with the writer's observa- tions on the range of normal temperature in Indian goats. Goats used for observations Young healthy Indian goats, nearly one year old, purchased for the production of goat-tissue- vaccine at the Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore, were used for this purpose, the temperature being recorded per rectum. The animals were kept at rest as far as possible. The thermometers used were the Zeil (London) thermometers with ½ minute recording time. The actual time spent in the recording of a temperature was 1 minute instead of ½ minute. The morning temperatures recorded Out of 1174 morning temperatures recorded in 366 goats during the last three years (April 1939 to March 1942), it was found that:248 Internal Body Temperature in Goals Some of the factors influencing the internal body tem- perature Exercise. (a) 10 minutes walk raised the tem- perature in a goat by 0.4ºF. (b) 5 minutes run raised it by 0.4ºF. (c) The same goat when again made to run at a good speed for another 5 minutes, recorded a still further rise in temperature, at an average of 0.3ºF. Excitement. When the temperature was taken in a goat after every 3 minutes, it was found that it rose by 0.8ºF. to 1.2ºF. in a short time (15 minutes to 20 minutes) and then remained stationary. Rectal and vaginal temperatures No difference was found between rectal and vaginal temperatures. In some cases, the rectal temperature was taken before the vaginal tempera- ture while in others the vaginal temperature before the former. Seasonal variations The external atmospheric temperature has a well marked influence on the body temperature. It is comparatively higher in the hot weather than in the cold weather as shown below :ON CERTAIN INSTANCES OF FISH MORTALITY IN TANKS AND PONDS IN THE PUNJAB By. HAMID KHAN, M.Sc., LL.B. PH.D. (Cantab.), F.A.Sc., Game Warden, Punjab (Received for publication on 30 March 1942) SEVERAL instances of mortality of fish in rivers, streams, tanks and ponds in India have been re- corded before and after the monsoon rains. Some of the main causes of such mortality are : putre- faction of dead leaves, weeds and grass in stagnant waters; excessively muddy water choking the gills of the fish [Day, 1878; Chopra, 1926]; excessive amount of CO2 [Sewell, 1927]; deficiency of oxygen caused by putrefaction of organic matter and pro- bably also to the poisonous by-products of putre- faction and sudden changes in water at or near the height of the hot weather [Pruthi, 1932]. Excessive CO2 and deficiency of oxygen ac- cording to Pruthi have almost the same effect on organisms, i.e. asphyxia, but the conditions which bring about the increase in CO2 and the decrease in oxygen may be entirely different. Sewell [1927] and Pruthi [1932] consider 8.3 c.c. per litre of CO2 to be lethal for the fish. Powers [1938] attributes the sudden mortality of fish generally to abnormally high CO2 tension of the water and remarks that 'Death is not caused by asphyxiation but by a derangement brought by alternate compensation of the blood to higher and then to lower CO2 tension of the water. 'The author [Khan, 1940] demonstrated by experi- ments that carp-fingerlings confined in an airtight container show signs of asphyxiation if the dissolved oxygen available in water per fish becomes reduced to 0.05 c.c. per litre and that accumulation of free carbon dioxide up to 4.98 c.c. was not responsible for the asphyxiation of the fingerlings. During the study of physical and chemical en- vironments of fish in tanks and ponds at Lyallpur and Batala, where fish culture is in progress, some interesting instances of fish mortality were ob- served which will be of interest to pisciculturists in rural areas, as they illustrate the ease with which fish life in tanks and ponds can be destroyed by inadvertence and demonstrate the need for precaution if fish farming is to be a success. METHODS The determination of dissolved oxygen was carried out by Winkler's method as given by American Public Health Association [1936], and of absorbed oxygen by Forchammer's process as described by Stocks [1932]. Amount of CO2 was determined by Seyler's method as given by Kemmerer, Bovard and Boorman [1924]. Samples of water from the bottom of the tank were collected in a wide-mouthed glass bottle of one litre capacity, fitted with rubber cork, having two glass tubes; one for the entry of the water and the other for the escape of displaced air from the bottle. To the second glass tube was attached a 10 or 12 feet long rubber tubing fitted with a clamp. The bottle, fitted in an iron frame, was lowered into the tank and the rubber tubing, which projected outside the surface of water, was kept closed by tightening the clamp. As soon as the bottle reached the bottom of the tank, the clamp was loosened, the air from the bottle escaped through the rubber tubing and was replaced by water, which filled the bottle. Soaking of wheat or wheat straw. (i) On 9 May 1939 soaking of wheat straw in the Student Farm Tank at Lyallpur reduced the dissolved oxygen and increased the CO2 to such an extent that fish came to the surface gasping for air and were saved in time by removal of the straw and addition of fresh water. Temperature of water was 83°F. and its gaseous contents at 11-30 a.m. showed that dissolved oxygen ranged from 0.041 c.c. per litre at surface to 0.137 c.c. per litre at bottom, while absorbed oxygen was 0.61 to 0.64 parts per 100,000, free CO2 13.651 c.c. per litre to 12.893 c.c. per litre and fixed CO2, 31.347 c.c. per litre to 32.864 c.c. per litre at surface and bottom res- pectively. The water was, thus, poor in dissolved oxygen, rich in organic matter and had plenty of free CO2. (ii) On 28 June 1939, a cart load of threshed wheat straw (toori) fell in the Agricultural Farm tank at Lyallpur and remained there for five hours. Next morning all the fish had come to the surface; eight were found dead and 105 were immediately removed to another tank. Tempera- ture of water was 90°F. and dissolved oxygen in the surface water was entirely lacking, while at the bottom of the tank it was 0.351 c.c. per litre. On 1 July 1939, at 8 a.m. temperature being 85°F., the dissolved oxygen was found lacking both at the surface and bottom, absorbed oxygen was 1.09 parts per 100,000, while free CO2 ranged from 5.814 c.c. per litre at the bottom to 6.067 c.c. per litre at the surface. As the conditions did not improve, the tank had to be emptied, cleaned and refilled with fresh water. (iii) Soaking of wheat in gunny bags in the Botanical Garden tank at Lyallpur, stocked with larvicidal fish, produced similar effects as soaking of wheat straw, and caused heavy mortality of the fish. 249
250 Fish Mortality in Tanks and Ponds in the Punjab Accumulation of dead leaves, weeds, etc. On 17 April 1939, in the Student Farm tank at Lyallpur, which received dead leaves from overhanging trees, fish had come to the surface early in the morning. The temperature of water was 80° F. and its gaseous analysis gave results shown in Table I. TABLE I Time Tempe- rature Dissolved CO2 c.c. per litre Free CO2 c.c. per litre Surface Bottom Surface Bottom 7 a. m. 80°F 0.077 0.061 5.056 7-078 10 a. m. 82°F 1.072 0.232 7.331 7.331 12 a. m. 85°F 1.197 0.395 4.195 5.309 5 P. m. 85°F 2.253 1.566 3.792 4.803 As the day advanced, the conditions improved and the fish returned to the bottom. Excess of weeds in a tank or pond has often been found to reduce the dissolved oxygen during the night, but it increases during the day under the influence of the sun. Addition of fresh water, swimming. splashing of water and removal of excessive weeds invariably improve the conditions in such tanks. High temperature1. One of the tanks at the Agricultural Farm at Lyallpur received on 12 June 1938, a supply of hot stagnant water that had been standing in the supply drain after a heavy rainfall on the previous day. The tempera- ture of water rose from 82°F. to 92°F. All the fish came to the surface gasping for air and 102 were picked up dead. These were Labeo rohita (Hamilton), Labeo micropthalmus Day, and Cirrhina mrigala (Hamilton). The water of the tank was found to contain insufficient dissolved oxygen and excess of CO2. Its contents were as given in Table II. TABLE II Date and time Dissolved CO2 CO2 c.c.p.l Surface Bottom Free Fixed Surface Bottom Surface Bottom 12 June 0129 to 0.066 to 8.039 7.836 27.934 27.176 10 pm. 0.201 0.074 ... ... ... ... 13 June 7 a.m. 0.048 Nil 7.204 4.929 28.187 29.072 5 p. m. . 0.776 1.037 5.61 5.435 26.544 25.783 14 June 7 a. m. . 0.353 0.311 5.688 5.308 27.049 26.544 5 p. m. . 5.298 1.38 ... ... ... ... 1The stagnant water, though it was not chemically tested, did not appear to contain any such,impurity as could have any deleterious effect on the fish. The conditions improved with the addition of fresh water on the 14 June. Frost. A curious incident was observed in a tank at Batala, where on 14 January 1942, at 6 a.m. hundreds of carp, namely Labeo rohita, (Hamilton), Cirrhina mrigala (Hamilton) and Catla catla (Hamilton), ranging in weight from 2 to 12 lb. were found floating upside down and un- conscious near the banks as if frozen to death. As soon as the sun came out the fish revived and re- turned to deeper waters. Four were picked up dead. The night between 13 and 14 January 1942 had been bitterly cold and frosty: the temperature of water normally 56°F. had fallen to 49°F. Consequently, the fish that had come to the surface during the night, presumably be- cause the surface water usually contains more dissolved oxygen, were stupefied by the unusual cold and frost. The gaseous contents of the water of the tank on the day of incidence were not known but the analysis of the water on the next day, i.e. 15 January, showed that dissolved oxygen on the surface was 1.974 c.c. per litre and at the bottom 1.88 c.c. per litre while free CO2 ranged from 3.792 c.c. to 10.112 c.c. per litre on the surface and 3.539 to 11.378 c.c. per litre at the bottom. SUMMARY The ease with which fish life in tanks and ponds can be destroyed by inadvertence is illustrated by the following instances :HAMID KHAN 251 REFERENCES American Public Health Association (1936). Standard Methods for Examination of water and sewage. Ed. 8th New York. Chopra, B. (1926). Journ. Proc. As. Soc. Bengal (N. S.) 22, 203-10 Day, F. (1878). Journ. Linn. Soc. London (Zool.) 13, 198-215 (Original not seen) Kemmerer, G., Bovard, J. F. and Boorman, W. R. (1924). Bull. U. S. Bur. Fish, 39, 51-140 Khan, H. (1940). Indian. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 10, 372-81 Powers, E. B. (1938). Trans. Amer. Fish. Soc. 67, 271-81 Pruthi, H. S. (1932). Revue Hydrobiol. Hydrographic 26, 242-57 Sewell, R. B. S. (1927). Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, 22, 177-201 Stocks, H. B. (1932). Water analysis for Sanitary and Technical purposes, London, 37-42
RESEARCH NOTE THE TERMINOLOGY AND PRESENTATION OF ANIMAL NUTRITION DATA ON A COORDINATED PROCEDURE [This note was prepared by a specialist committee consisting of DR P. E. LANDER, Mr I. B. CHATTERJEE and DR K. C. SEN and contains information collected from various publicationsABSTRACTS Dieases causing encephalitis in cattle. S. H. McNUTT (1942). Cornell Vet. 32, 127-34 THE author discusses the differential diagnosis of ence- phalitis-like conditions, e.g. rabies, aujeszky's disease, malignant catarrhal fever, listerellosis and sporadic bovine encephalomyelitis. Except listerellosis which is caused by a bacterium, the other conditions described are attributable to virus infections. True encephalitis may be confused with toxaemic and metabolic affections such as ketosis, milk- fever, etc. Certain poisonous substances in mouldy corn or in forage particularly during drought give rise to toxaemic symptoms associated with degenerative changes in the brain, which are apt to be mistaken for encephalitis. Poisoning, however, results in death quicker than ence- phalitis. Of the virus diseases, rabies is perhaps the only one which is at times difficult to identify clinically, but laboratory methods lead to its easy diagnosis. Malignant catarrhal fever and aujeszky's disease are two other highly fatal encephalitis-like diseases of cattle caused by viruses. A brief description of these two diseases and methods of diagnosis are given. Many species of domestic animals are susceptible to listerellosis, but the disease is not as serious among cattle as it is among sheep and goats. Histological and bacte- riological examinations of brain and cord are essential aids to diagnosis. The author describes a newly recognized sporadic disease of cattle causing encephalomyelitis characterized by perivascular inflammatory reaction and thrombosis of the smaller vessels of the brain and cord. The causal agent is probably a virus and is present in the brain, lymph nodes, liver, spleen, nasal exudates, urine, milk and exudates of the pleural and peritoneal cavities, but not in the blood stream. The presence of sero-fibrinous exudate in pleural or peritoneal cavity or in both is a diagnostic feature. Details of observation on the disease are given. [J.A.I.] The host specificity of sheep and cattle helminths, with particular reference to the use of cattle in cleansing sheep pastures. F. H. S. ROBERTS (1942). Austr. Vet. J. 18, 19-27 As there are a number of helminths common to both cattle and sheep Hall, Tetley and Monning consider that grazing together of these animals would exert a baneful influence on the degree of infestation in sheep. Bray, on the other hand, maintains that the grazing together of these animals woud result in a mutual benefit from the standpoint of parasitic infestation. Bray's hypothesis postulates that the parasites of cattle and sheep are not interchangeable and, if we carry it a little further, it might be expected that by rotating cattle with sheep the degree of infestation in sheep pastures would be materially reduced. Roberts tried to verify this hypothesis by experiments in Queensland Lambs infested with (1) H254 ABSTRACTS Foot-Rot in sheep: A transmissible disease due to infection with Fusiformis nodosus (n. sp.). Studies on its cause, epidemiology and control. W. I. B. BEVERIDGE (1942). Bull. Coun. Sci. Industr. Aust. 140 THE author discusses Foot-Rot of sheep in rainy areas in South Australia and the nature of the causal organism. The incidence of the disease is highest on lush pastures. A possible predisposing factor is percutaneous infection with larvae of Strongyloides papillosus. The author refutes the claim that Fusiformis necrophorus or Treponema podovis is the cause of Foot-Rot, and states that a gram negative, non-motile, non-sporing and anaerobic bacillus, F. nodosus (n. sp.) is the causal factor. This organism grows on plate cultures only in the presence of horse serum, and surface colonies etch in this medium. Sheep serum inhibits the growth and the best growth is obtained on cystine V.F. agar medium in an atmosphere of 10 per cent CO2. An atypical spirochaete (S. penortha) and a motile fusiform organism are commonly found in association with this organism. The disease is readily transmitted experimentally. The lesion is typified by a slow separa- tion of the horny parts of the foot as the result of an un- derrunning infection of the soft tissue. Differential diag- nosis is made clinically or by the detection of the causal organism in smears from the diseased part. The author concludes that F. nodosus is the primary causal agent and that S. penortha is probably a ' specific' accessory cause. The motile fusiform is regarded as a secondary invader. These findings were confirmed by studies on Foot-Rot in U. S. A., New Zealand and England. A scheme for control measures is described, which con- sists in removing all affected animals and carriers, es- pecially in summer when the disease is quiescent. Green pastures are decontaminated by leaving them unstocked for 2-3 weeks. Large scale field trials for eradication of the disease gave satisfactory results. [W.M.K.] The need for pantothenic acid and an unidentified factor in reproduction in the domestic owl. M. B. GILLIS, G. F. HEUSER AND L. C. NORRIS (1942). J. Nutri. 23, 153 THE role of pantothenic acid in the nutrition of the hen is not so well established as that of the chick. The authors in the present investigation have presented evidence which shows that pantothenic acid is required for reproduction in hens. Five groups, each having twelve White Leghorn pullets, were selected for uniformity in egg production, body weight and general physical condition. The males were rotated frequently among the different groups, in order to eliminate differences in breeding capacity. The basal diet contained an adequate amount of all the known vitamins, other than pantothenic acid. The pantothenic acid contained in the cereal portion of the basal diet was destroyed by heating in an oven for 36 hours at a tem- perature of 120°C. The liver extract used in the experi- ment was also heated in an oven for the same length of time as the cereals. The birds in all groups were fed on the basal diet for a preliminary period of eight weeks. This was followed by two experimental periods of 10 weeks each, during which time the different groups received various combinations and amounts of pantothenic acid, heated liver extract and heated yeast filtrate. At the end of the preliminary period, the hatchability of all groups of eggs was zero which proved that the basal diet was deficient in a factor or factors necessary for reproduction. The result obtained during the experimental period showed that heated yeast filtrate and heated liver extract, when added to the basal diet, were ineffective in promoting hatchability. The addition of pantothenic acid alone to the basal diet increased hatchability from zero to 10-30 per cent. The hatchability was increased to 50-60 per cent when pantothenic acid was added to the basal diet along with heated liver extract. This proved that for reproduction the hens required besides pantothenic acid an. unknown heat stable factor or factors present in heated liver ex- tract. The heated liver extract alone had no influence on, hatchability, except in the presence of pantothenic- acid. [S.B.] Refrigerated brine sprays for cooling dressed poultry. M. H. SWEET AND G. F. STEWART (1942). The U. S. Egg and Poultry Magazine 48, 261 (8 Refs.) THIS paper describes experiments undertaken to discover a rapid, practical method for cooling dressed, undrawn poultry. From a review of the literature the authors conclude that prompt cooling of undrawn poultry is a primary essential in quality preservation and that much loss in storage is incurred through improper cooling. The factors which affect the cooling rates are the amount and distribution of fat and the weight and surface area per unit of volume. Since the thermal conductivity of fat is only 30 per cent that of water, a layer of subcutane- ous fat acts as an insulator and thereby retards the cooling process. With air cooling (temperature of 35°F.) it took 8 hours to cool 2½ lb. Leghorn cockerels to 36°F. With roasters weighing 53/4 lb. the corresponding time was only 11 hours. The adverse effect of fat on cooling is clearly shown for fat fowls weighing 63/4 lb. required 16 hours to cool to 36°F. Other lots of fowls were cooled by spraying with water at 33-35°F until the internal temperature dropped to 35-38°F. The birds were hung so that the spray struck the thigh region and flowed down over the body, wings and head. With water cooling the time required to cool was reduced to 20-27 per cent of that in air at 35°F. However, this method even though resulting in a consider- able saving of time in cooling was too costly for commercial plants. Cooling birds in a brine spray at 32°F. for periods of 15-60 minutes followed by cooling in a room at 35°F reduced the cooling time over that in air at 35°F. but prov- ed slower than cooling in a continuous water-spray at 33- 35°F. In other experiments it was found that by spray- ing the dressed carcasses with refrigerated brine (22-28°F.) for periods of 10-60 minutes and then hanging in air at 35°F. (cold shock method) the total cooling time was- less than when continually in air at 35°F. but longer than when continually in spray at 35°F. In another series of experiments with roasters it was found that brine spraying at 20°F. for 25 minutes gave even quicker cooling results than continuous water spraying at 35°F. By using a continuous water spray (33-35°F) turkeys of 15-25 lb. weight were cooled to 36°F. in seven to ten hours, but from the commercial aspect this period was too- long. From the results of the study it would appear that the most rapid and practical method for cooling turkeys would be a 20-21°F. brine spray for 20-30 minutes followed by a rinse with cold water and storage in air at 35°F. [A.J.M.]
The Maynard Ganga Ram Prize APPLICATIONS are invited for the award of the Maynard Ganga Ram Prize of Rs. 3,000 for a discovery or an invention or a new practical method which will tend to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The Prize is open to all, irrespective of caste, creed or nationality and Government servants are also eligible for it. Essays and theses are not accepted. The prize will be awarded for something practi- cally achieved as a result of work done after the prize was founded in 1925. Competitors in their applications must give a clear account of the history of their invention or discovery and must produce clear evidence that it is the result of their own work. In the case of an improved crop details of parentage, evolution and history and a botanical description are necessary. The Managing Committee reserves to itself the right of withholding or postponing the prize if no satisfactory achievement is reported to it, or to reduce the amount of the prize or to divide it if the quality of the entries justify this decision. Entries should reach the Director of Agricul- ture, Punjab, Lahore, not later than 31 December 1945. GIPDCONTENTS (VOL. XIII, PART III) September 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal PAGE Original articles TREE LEAVES AS CATTLE FODDER, I. THE SEASONAL VARIA- TION IN THE COMPOSITION OF SOME EDIBLE TREE LEAVES (WITH TWO TEXT-FIGURES) S. A. Momin and S. C. Ray 183 TREE LEAVES AS CATTLE FODDER, II. DIGESTIBILITY COEFFI- CIENT AND NUTRITIVE VALUE OF SOME TREE LEAVES Chet Ram and S. C. Ray . 191 GREEN BERSEIM AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR CONCENTRATES FOR ECONOMIC FEEDING OF DAIRY CATTLE N. C. Das Gupta . . 196 COMPARATIVE VALUES OF PROTEINS FOR CHICKENS A. J. Macdonald . . 214 THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION AND VITAMIN-A POTENCY OF COW'S MILK AND BUTTER FAT UNDER INTENSIVE GREEN FEEDING AND THE CAROTENE METABOLISM OF DAIRY ANIMALS B. C. Ray Sarkar and K. C. Sen 219 OBSERVATIONS ON A CONTAGIOUS KERATITIS OF INDIAN SHEEP (WITH PLATE XVII) P. N. Nanda and M. Abdussalam 228 PHOSPHORUS IN MILK, AND THE PHOSPHORUS IN THE MILK OF COW, GOAT, SHEEP AND HUMAN BEINGS K. P. basu and K. P. Mukherjee 231 PHOSPHORUS IN MILK, II. AVAILABILITY OF PHOSPHORUS OF THE MILK OF COW, GOAT AND BUFFALO K. P. Basu and K. P. Mukherjee 236 SKRJABINEMA OVIS (SKRJABIN, 1915) WERESCHTSCHAGIN, 1925, AN OXYURID PARASITE OF THE GOAT (CAPRA HIRCUS) IN INDIA S. N. Vaidyanathan . 240 REUTILIZATION OF USED AGAR MEDIA, I. . . . . . . E. V. Seshacharyulu and Zal R. Kothavalla 241 ON THE PARENTERAL ADMINISTRATION OF SEA-WATER IN THE TREATMENT OF CANINE MANGEORIGINAL ARTICLES STUDIES ON PROTEIN METABOLISM I. INVESTIGATIONS UPON THE ENDOGENOUS NITROGEN METABOLISM OF CATTLE By NARAIN DAS KEHAR, R. MUKHERJEE and K. C. SEN, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 12 December 1942) A KNOWLEDGE of the nutritive value of proteins of different feeds is necessary for utilizing the avail- able supplies to the best advantage. This is specially desirable in this country where the ration of cattle consists mainly of straws, with little or no concentrates. The first step in the determina- tion of the quality of dietary proteins according to the Thomas-Mitchell method is the estimation of the endogenous urinary nitrogen and metabolic faecal nitrogen. The former is the minimum constant level of urinary nitrogen output attained by animals after prolonged subsistence on a nitro- gen-free, but otherwise adequate, diet. For the successful determination of its value for bovines, one is confronted with the very difficult task of devising a nitrogen-free ration, adequate in all respects including the roughage content, and feed- ing the animals required amounts of this ration for a sufficiently long period. The observations of some workers [Hart et al., 1912; Bull and Grind- ley, 1919; Honcamp et al., 1923; and Hutchin- son and Morris, 1936] who attempted such investi- gations on bovines are not very satisfactory, as the rations fed by them were not sufficiently low in nitrogen; in some cases the experimental ration was fed for an insufficient duration. In the present investigation, attempts have been made to study the endogenous nitrogen metabolism of Indian bullocks fed on a very low nitrogen ration for a prolonged period. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS For studying the endogenous nitrogen metabo- lism, the ration should contain either all the diges- tible nitrogen in an entirely utilizable state or no nitrogen at all. It is, however, difficult at this stage of our knowledge on the protein metabolism of cattle to compute a ration, which will satisfy the former condition. It seems essential, therefore, to use a ration as free from nitrogen as possible under practical feeding conditions. (i) Roughage. In devising a nitrogen-free ration for cattle, the chief difficulty was encountered in the supply of a nitrogen-free roughage. The high cost of regenerated cellulose and agar-agar and the frequent impaction of rumen caused by paper pulp [Hutchinson and Morris, 1936] precluded their use. Bagasse, which is very poor in crude protein (about 1 per cent on dry basis) and is occasionally eaten by animals, was considered as a suitable roughage, provided its protein content was further reduced. Various processes, which included the treatment of bagasse with sodium chloride, sodium carbonate, sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid and sulphuric acid at different temperatures and in various concentrations, were tried. In a num- ber of trials, the desired denitrification could not be effected, while in others, though the nitrogen content was reduced to a very low level, a pulpy mass was obtained which formed into hard balls on drying, thus rendering it unsuitable for feeding. The best method, one which reduced the amount of crude protein to 0.08 per cent and did not affect the texture, proved to be the soaking of bagasse in eight times its weight of 5 per cent sodium hy- droxide solution for 24 hours, prior to its boiling for three hours. The mass was thoroughly washed several times with water, and then once with a 0.1 per cent solution of hydrochloric acid. The material was finally washed with water to free it from the last traces of acid. This was then dried and separated into shreds. In the low-N ration untreated wheat bhusa or cold alkali-treated wheat bhusa was used instead of hot alkali-treated bagasse. The method of treatment in this case was similar to that adopted by Beckmann et al. [1919] and consisted in soaking the straw with eight times its weight of 1.25 per cent caustic soda for 24 hours, washing it free from alkali and drying in the sun. (ii) Concentrates. It was considered that starch, which has in recent years been used by Smuts [1935] and Smuts and Marais [1938] for sheep, and by Hutchinson and Morris [1936] for cows, would form a suitable concentrate for animal require- ments, but in an exploratory experiment on two bullocks it was found that the animals developed an apathy for starch after a few days of feeding. Even dextrinized starch or a loaf made of starch was little relished. Sago was then tried in different forms and, after several discouraging trials, it was found that a coarsely ground pop-sago was preferred by the animals to other preparations. The pops were made by heating sago in an open iron pan. 257
258 Studies on Protein Metabolism, I (iii) Supplements. The following supplements were added to the concentrate :NARAIN DAS KEHAR, R. MUKHERJEE & K. C. SEN 259 TABLE I Daily urinary nitrogen excretion of hybrid bullocks on low-nitrogen and nitrogen-free rations Ration N con- tent of diet per cent Date of collec- tion Animal No. Body weight kg. Urinary N Total gm. Per kg. body weight gm. Low-N No. 2 0.15 25-6-41 to 6-7-41 1 257 5.92 0.023 Do. . 0.15 Do. 5 282 5.65 0.020 Do. . 0.15 Do. 6 241 6.02 0.025 N-free . 0.02 8-7-41 to 12-7-41 1 256 4.60 0.018 Do. . 0.02 Do. 5 269 5.12 0.019 Do. . 0.02 Do. 6 240 5.29 0.022 TABLE II Daily urinary nitrogen excretion of Hariana bullocks on low-nitrogen and nitrogen-free rations Ration N con- tent of diet per cent Date of collec- tion Animal No. Body weight kg. Urinary N Total gm. Per kg. body weight gm. Low-N No. 1 and 2, 0.20 6-11-41 to 13-11-41 10 535 10.69 0.020 Do. . 0.20 Do. 11 421 8.84 0.021 Do. . 0.20 Do. 13 397 7.95 0.020 N-free . 0.02 15-11-41 to 22-11-41 10 532 9.57 0.018 Do. . 0.02 Do. 11 410 9.03 0.022 Do. . 0.02 Do. 13 370 6.67 0.018 TABLE III Daily variation in the urinary volume and nitrogen excretion on low-nitrogen and nitrogen-free diets No. of animal No. 10 No. 11 No. 13 Period Date Amount of urine excreted in 24 hours c.c. Total nitrogen excreted gm. Nitrogen excreted per kg. body weight gm. Amount of urine excreted in 24 hours c.c. Total nitrogen excreted gm. Nitrogen excreted per kg. body weight gm. Amount of urine excreted in 24 hours c.c. Total nitrogen excreted gm. Nitrogen excreted per kg. body weight gm. Low-N . 6-11-41 2380 10.33 0.019 7106 8.95 0.021 10270 10.68 0.025 7-11-41 1750 11.55 0.021 3502 8.69 0.020 4627 7.68 0.019 8-11-41 1930 11.27 0.020 2645 9.26 0.022 1688 7.77 0.019 9-11-41 2144 11.79 0.021 2868 9.58 0.022 868 5.52 0.014 10-11-41 2057 9.38 0.018 4091 9.41 0.022 1341 6.46 0.018 11-11-41 3341 10.76 0.020 C430 9.78 0.023 2427 7.62 0.019 12-11-41 2982 9.96 9.019 4878 7.90 0.019 2718 6.85 0.017 13-11-41 3659 10.47 0.020 6430 7.14 0.018 18420 11.05 0.027 Average . ... ... ... 0.020 ... ... 0.021 ... ... 0.020 N-free . 15-11-41 5959 12.39 0.023 8327 5.85 0.014 6595 6.23 0.016 16-11-41 4647 11.04 0.021 4244 8.82 0.022 3127 6.72 0.017 17-11-41 4047 10.02 0.019 8069 8.36 0.021 1934 5.94 0.021 18-11-41 3664 9.08 0.017 2434 9.13 0.023 12380 9.54 0.024 19-11-41 2656 8.87 0.017 3249 9.72 0.024 9797 7.62 0.020 20-11-41 2010 8.93 0.017 2503 8.59 0.021 2916 5.07 0.013 21-11-41 1787 9.19 0.017 4585 11.71 0.029 2074 7.01 0.018 22-11-41 1296 7.01 0.013 4951 10.15 0.025 2769 5.23 0.014 Average . ... ... ... 0.018 ... ... 0.022 ... ... 0.018
260 Studies on Protein Metabolism, I TABLE IV Urinary nitrogen, sulphur and partition products during low-nitrogen and nitrogen-free periods Period and date Total N in urine Urea N gm. Ammonia N gm. Creatinine N gm. Creatine N gm. Total S gm. S: N 1: Neutral S gm. Neutral S : N I: Urea N as per cent of Total N Creatinine N as per cent of Total N Hybrid bullock No. 1 Low-N 28-6-41 to 30-6-41 . . . . 5.45 0.49 1.25 1.66 .. 0.331 16.5 .. .. 90 30.5 N-free 8-7-41 to 12-7-41 . . . . 4.60 .. 0.53 1.44 .. 0.274 16.8 0.180 25.6 .. 31.3 Hybrid bullock No. 5 Low-N 28-6-41 to 30-8-41 . . . . 5.06 0.38 0.87 1.91 .. 0.342 14.8 .. .. 7.5 37.8 N-free 8-7-41 to 12-7-41 . . . . 5.12 .. 0.83 1.79 .. 0.331 15.5 0.216 23.7 .. 35.0 Hybrid bullock No. 6 Low-N 28-6-41 to 30-6-41 . . . . 5.45 0.46 0.67 1.70 .. 0.503 10.8 0.235 23.2 8.4 31.2 N-free 8-7-41 to 12-7-41 . . . . 5.28 .. 0.84 1.64 .. 0.381 139 0.266 19.8 .. 31.1 Hariana bullock No. 10 Low-N 6-11-41 to 13-11-41 . . . . 10.69 0.65 .. 3.07 0.08 0.608 17.6 .. .. 6.1 28.7 N-free 15-11-41 to 22-11-41 . . . . 9.57 0.26 .. 3.79 0.05 0.438 21.8 0.303 31.6 2.7 39.6 Hariana bullock No. 11 Low-N 6-11-41 to 13-11-41 . . . . 8.84 1.05 0.05 2.56 0.07 0.631 14.0 .. .. 11.9 29.0 N-free 15-11-41 to 22-11-41 . . . . 9.03 0.60 .. 2.75 0.04 0.559 16.2 0.449 20.1 6.6 30.5 Hariana bullock No. 13 Low-N 6-11-41 to 13-11-41 . . . . . 7.95 0.59 0.01 1.98 0.04 0.826 9.6 .. .. 7.4 24.9 N-free 15-11-41 to 22-11-41 . . . . 6.67 0.27 .. 2.31 0.02 0.522 12.8 0.385 17.3 4.0 34.6
NARAIN DAS KEHAR, R. MUKHERJEE & K. C. SEN 261 It will be observed that the average endogenous nitrogen values per kg. body weight of bullocks, 1, 5 and 6, during the low-nitrogen period were 0.023, 0.020 and 0.025 and during the nitrogen- free period 0.018, 0.019 and 0.022 gm. res- pectively. The average endogenous nitrogen value of the three animals for the nitrogen-free period was 0.020 gm. per kg. body weight. The nitrogen excretion during the nitrogen-free period was al- most constant from day to day. During the entire course of this experimental period the animals took an adequate amount of food and remained in good condition. Second experiment The urinary nitrogen data of Hariana bullocks are given in Table II. These values represent the average of the duplicate determinations carried out independently by two workers. The daily varia- tion in urinary volume and nitrogen excretion of these bullocks are shown in Table III. It will be observed that the average values of endogenous nitrogen excretion for the last eight days of the low-nitrogen period and for the eight days of nitro- gen-free periods of bullocks, 10, 11 and 13, are 0.020, 0.021 and 0.020 and 0.018, 0.022 and 0.018 respectively. The average for all the three ani- mals during the low-nitrogen period is 0.020 gm. per kg. body weight and 0.019 gm. during the nitrogen-free period. These values for the nitro- gen-free period appear strikingly similar to those obtained in the case of the hybrid bullocks, not- withstanding the possible error resulting from vary- ing quantities of urine excreted by the bullocks, since it is not possible to empty their bladders by catheter. It was also observed that, when the low-nitrogen period is sufficiently extended, the approximate minimum level of endogenous nitro- gen excretion is reached. This seems to be borne out by the results given in Table III. The above observations suggest that, in the case of adult bullocks when the urinary nitrogen is calculated per unit of body weight, the breed characteristics seem to have little influence on the endogenous nitrogen catabolism. Urinary partition products In order to check any onset of body catabolism of the animals on the protein-free diet, the non- protein nitrogen and sulphur fractions in the urine were estimated, and the results of Hariana and country bullocks are given in Table IV. It will be seen that in none of the six animals was there any increase of urea in the nitrogen-free period as compared with that in the low-nitrogen period. This indicates the absence of tissue cata- bolism during the nitrogen deprivation period and that the caloric requirements of the animals were met with from carbohydrates and fats. This fact is also supported by the presence of only small traces of creatine, which in large quantities would indicate tissue catabolism. The values obtained for sulphur for both the groups of bullocks also tend to support the same hypothesis. In comparing the endogenous nitrogen values in bullocks with those of previous workers on cattle it will be seen from Table V that our values are the lowest so far recorded. The variable results obtained by different work- ers may be mainly due to the varying amounts of absorbable nitrogen of unknown biological value in the rations or their inadequate consumption. Apparently the ' deposit protein ' is only eliminat- ed after a considerable period of nitrogen-low feed- ing. A reasonably long feeding period on low- nitrogen diet is of extreme importance in eliminat- ing subsequent errors caused by such deposits, the extent of which depends on the level and duration of protein feeding prior to the commencement of feeding nitrogen-free rations. In the case of pigs, McColum and Steenbock [1912] have pointed out that often two or three weeks are required before a minimal excretion of urinary nitrogen is establish- ed. In our experiments it took three to four weeks to attain the endogenous urinary nitrogen level. These observations may explain the high figures obtained by Hutchinson and Morris [1936], as they allowed only six days of preliminary feeding before collection and six to nine days for the actual experi- mental period. In addition, it may be remarked that their diet contained fairly high amounts of nitrogen. Attention is drawn to another important aspect of the question. Terroine and Sorg-Matter [1927] and Smuts [1935] have shown that endogenous protein catabolism is related to the basal meta- bolism. It is now known that the basal metabolism of Indians is lower than that of Europeans and Americans, and it is therefore likely that Indian animals have a lower basal metabolic rate than those of temperate regions. A lower endogenous nitrogen level than that found by foreign workers is, therefore, to be expected in Indian animals. Further work will, however, throw more light on this point. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS A ' nitrogen-free ' diet for cattle containing as low as 0.02 per cent nitrogen on dry basis has been devised, and the nitrogen and sulphur meta- bolism of bullocks fed on this ration was studied. The endogenous urinary nitrogen excretion of bullocks was found to be about 0.020 gm. per kg. body weight.
262 Studies on Protein Metabolism, 1 TABLE V Comparison of the results of the present experiment on N-free diet with those of certain other workers on the urinary N excretion of cattle on low-N diets Type of animals Ration Body weight kg. Daily N-intake gm. Daily urinary N No. of animals averaged Author Total gm. Per kg. body weight gm. Growing heifers . . Wheat straw, corn starch, cane sugar, calcium phosphate and salt 172 5.7 5.68 0.033 2 Hart et al. (1912) Young calf . . . 145 .. 6.48 0.045 1 Steenbock et al. (1915) Steers . . . . Clover hay and corn (1:5) .. .. .. 0.047 2 Bull and Grindley (1919) Cows in milk . . . Oat straw, corn, potato flakes, molasses, dried beet pulp, and salts 412 87.0 16.3 0.038 2 Honcamp et al. (1923) Dry cows . . . .... 464 46.5 14.5 0.031 2 Copenhagen investigators (1923) (of. Mitchell, 1929) Steers . . . . Alfalfa hay and paper pulp (2:3) .. .. .. 0.046 3 Titus (1926) Cows . . . . Straw, flaked maize. starch and linseed oil 435 25.8 16.8 0.038 2 Hutchinson and Morris (1936) Adult hybrid bullocks . 'N-free' ration . 255 0.5 5.00 0.020 3 Kehar et al. Adult Hariana bullocks . 'N-free' ration . 437 0.9 8.42 0.019 3 Ditto Experimental evidence indicates that, when the low-nitrogen ration used in this investigation is fed for a reasonably long period, the endogenous level of urinary nitrogen excretion is approximately reached. In future experiments, therefore, this diet can be used in place of the absolutely nitrogen- free diet. Breed characteristics do not appear to affect the endogenous nitrogen catabolism markedly. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe authors wish to express their thanks to Chaudhary Raghbir Singh for his assistance in the feeding and care of the experimental animals and to Mr V. V. S. Murty and Mr A. K. Pal for helping in the analytical work. REFERENCES Association of the Official Agricultural Chemists, U. S. A. (1935). Methods of Analysis. 4th edn. Washington, 129 Beckmann, E., Liesche, O., Netscher, H. and Platzmann, K. (1919). Z. Angew. Chem. 32, 81 Bull, S. and Grindley, H. S. (1919). J. agric. Res. 18, 241 Crampton, E. W. (1941). Abs. in Vet. J. 97, 283 Folin, O. (1914). J. Biol. Chem. 17, 469 Hart, E. B., Humphrey, G. C. and Morrison, F. B. (1912). J. Biol. Chem. 13, 133 Honcamp, F., Koudela, St. and Muller, E. (1923). Bio- chem. Z. 143, 111 Hutchinson, J. C. D. and Morris, S. (1936). Biochem. J. 30, 1682 Kellner, O. (1926). The scientific feeding of animals. Translated by W. Goodwin, 2nd revised ed. Duck- worth, London Kjeldahl, J. (1883). Z. Anal. Chem. 22, 366 McCollum, E. V. and Steenbock, H. (1912). Wisc. Agri. Expt. Stat. Res. Bull. 21, 53 McElroy, L. W. and Goss, H. (1939). J. Biol. Chem. 130, 437 McElroy, L. W. and Goss, H. (1940, 1). J. Nutrition 20, 527 McElroy, L. W. and Goss, H. (1940, 2). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 45, 296 McElroy, L. W. and Goss, H. (1940, 3). J. Nutrition 20, 541 Mitchell, H. H. (1929). Bull. Nat. Res. Coun. 67, 7. Smuts, D. B. (1935). J. Nutrition 9, 403 Smuts, D. B. and Marais, J. C. S. (1938). Ond. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Ind. 11, 131 Steenbock, H. Nelson, V. E. and Hart, E. B. (1915) wisc. Agri. Expt. Stat. Res. Bull. 36, 19. Terroine, E. F. and Sorg-Matter, H. (1927). Arch. Int. Physiol. 29, 121 Titus, H. W. (1926) New Menico Agri. Enpt. Stat. Bull. 153, 52. Van Slyke, D. D. and Cullen, G. E. (1916). J. Biol. Chem- 24, 117 Wegner, H. W., Booth, A. N., Elvehjem, C. A. and Hart, E. B. (1940). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 45, 769
STUDIES ON PROTEIN METABOLISM II. THE EFFECT OF MUSCULAR WORK ON ENDOGENOUS PROTEIN CATABOLISM IN CATTLE By NARAIN DAS KEHAR, R. MUKHERJEE, V. V. S. MURTY and K. C. SEN, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 12 December 1942) FROM the available literature it appears that no work on the effect of muscular exercise on the endo- genous protein catabolism of cattle has been attempted. Kellner [1926], however, found that protein catabolism was uninfluenced by work pro- vided the diet was adequate in energy. On the other hand, Morrison [1937] suggested that about double the supply of digestible protein is required for a horse at hard work as compared with an idle one. Ramiah et al. [1939] in their investigation on bullocks found that muscular work was followed by an increase in the metabolism of protein. In view of the discordant results obtained by different observers on the effect of work on protein catabolism and the great scientific and practical importance of this problem, it was considered expedient to study the effect of muscular work on the endogenous protein metabolism of bullocks, the chief draft animals in India. Our plan of work is very similar to that of Mitchell and Kruger [1928] on rats who state that the only known method of investigating the extent of destruction of tissue protein under any experi- mental conditions is the determination of the nitrogen content of the urine on a nitrogen-free, but otherwise adequate, diet so that the exogenous catabolism is entirely eliminated or is reduced to an insignificant minimum. Moreover, the pre-work feeding period on the nitrogen-free diet should be of sufficient length to remove the ' deposit protein ' from the tissues, since this stored nitrogen would otherwise render the interpretation of results as difficult as would dietary nitrogen. EXPERIMENTAL METHODSAdult working bullocks of the Hariana breed weighing 800 to 1,200 lb. were used in this in- vestigation. Before putting them to this experiment the animals were fed on low-N and N-free rations for 45 to 50 days, so that their urinary nitrogen excretion had already reached the endogenous level. The details of pre- paration and feeding of these rations have been described in Part I of this series. The rations were designed to supply about 6.0 lb. and 12.8 lb. starch equivalent during the rest and work periods respectively per 1,000 lb. body weight according to the Kellner[1926] standard. The animals were given the work ration 24 hours previous to the work period and they continued to get this ration on the work days. The extra energy in the work ration was supplied in the form of sago and sugar. During the work period, the animals were made to draw loaded country carts with iron rims for six hours a day (9 a.m. to 12 noon and 1 p.m. to 4 p.m.) over a distance of 57,100 ft. The total weight of the cart and the load thereon was 2,127 lb. The methods of collection and analysis of urine adopted in this experiment are the same as those given in Part I of this series. Twenty-four hours' samples of urine were analysed for nitrogenous constituents, except during the work periods of bullocks 1 and 2, when 12 hours' samples were analysed separately. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION It will be seen from Tables I, II and III that urinary volume as well as urinary nitrogen and creatinine fluctuated from day to day. This may be partly due to the fact that catheter could not be used and the bladder was not emptied comple- tely at intervals of 12 or 24 hours. Taking these daily variations into consideration, it will be observ- ed from Table I that the daily total nitrogen excre- tion of bullock 1 during the pre-work period was approximately of the same quantity as that during the work and post-work periods. The nitrogen excretions in the case of other bullocks are also similar, except for an increase in the nitro- gen excretion in the post-work period in the case of bullocks 2, 3 and 5, which may have been due to fasting catabolism, as the animals during this period showed acute symptoms of tympanites and refused their food. The results of 12 hours' samples of urine (Table I) collected during the two periods, viz. (i) from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. covering six hours of work and (ii) from 8 p.m. to 8 a.m. showed that there was no increased excretion of urinary nitrogen dur- ing the course of 72 hours after the animals were first put to work or 40 hours after the last hour of work. The urea, creatine and creatinine figures also support the above conclusions. The ratio of creatinine N to total urinary N did not decrease markedly from the pre-work level (except in the 263
264 Studies on Protein Metabolism, II TABLE I Effect of muscular work on total urinary nitrogen and partition products Period Date Volume of urine c.c. Total N gm. Urea N gm. Ammonia N gm. Creatinine N gm. Creatine N gm. Creatinine N as per cent of total N Hariana Bulock No. 1 Pre-work . . . 14-11-41 8327 5.85 0.50 Nil 1.60 0.07 27.4 15-11-41 4244 8.82 0.38 NARAIN DAS KEHAR, R. MUKHERJEE V. V. S. MURTY & K. C. SEN 265 and the administration of MgSO4 to the other. Nevertheless, as it is generally accepted that sul- phur is eliminated earlier than nitrogen when break- down of body protein takes place [Wilson 1933, 1934], the sulphur figures for the pre-work and work periods may be considered sufficient for the present purpose. It may, therefore, be concluded from the data presented in Tables I, II and III that mus- cular work does not cause an appreciable increase in the endogenous protein catabolism of working bullocks when sufficient energy is supplied in their diet. TABLE II Effect of muscular work on total urinary nitrogen, sulphur and partition products Period Date Volume of urine c.c. Total N gm. Urea N gm. Ammo- nia N gm. Creati- nine N gm. Creatine N gm. Creati- nine N as per cent of total N Total S gm. Total sulphate gm. S:N 1: Neutral S:N 1: Hariana Bullock No. 3 Pre-work . 29-11-41 3344 6.91 0.27 Nil 2.35 Nil 34.0 0.46 0.12 16.1 21.6 30-11-41 4042 8.80 0.40 266 Studies on Protein Metabolism, II Our observations on bullocks agree with those of Mitchell and Kruger [1928] on rats. Experiments with the same object in view have not, however, been conducted by them on draft animals. But the finding of Kellner [1926] on horses, referred to earlier, tends to support the present conclusion. Ramiah et al. [1939] concluded from their experi- ments on cattle that muscular work increased the output of endogenous nitrogen. But, as the authors have not used a nitrogen-poor experimental ration, their work cannot be expected to answer the speci- fic question which is the subject of the present in- vestigation. SUMMARY Observations carried out on five adult Hariana bullocks indicate that muscular work may be per- formed with no appreciable increase in the excre- tion of urinary endogenous nitrogen, urea, creati- nine, creatine, total sulphur and total sulphate provided the increased caloric requirement during the work period is met with from carbohydrate and fats. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors desire to express their gratitude to Mr R. S. Chaudhry for superintending the feeding of the experimental animals. REFERENCES Hart, E. B., Humphrey, G. C. and Morrison, F. B. (1912). J. Biol. Chem. 13, 133 Kellner, O. (1926). The Scientific feeding of animals. Translated by W. Goodwin, 2nd revised ed. Duck- worth, London McCollum, E. V. and Hoagland, D. R. (1913). J. Biol. Chem. 16, 299 Mitchell, H. H. and Kruger, J. H. (1928). J. Biol. Chem. 76, 55 Morrison, F. B. (1937). Feeds and Feeding. 20th ed. The Morrison Publishing Company, New York Ramiah, P. V., Sundaram, M. and Narayanayya, Y. V. (1939). Current Sci. 8, 161 Wilson, H. E. C. (1933). J. Physiol. 77, 240 Wilson, H. E. C. (1934). J. Physiol. 82, 184
OBSERVATIONS ON THE FORMS OF BABESIA GIBSONI (PATTON) IN THE DOG; WITH A NOTE ON THE SYSTEMATIC POSITION OF THE PARASITE By H. N. RAY, M.Sc., Ph.D. (London), Research Officer (Protozoology), and J. A. IDNANI, G.B.V.C. Offg. Assistant Research Officer (Bacteriology), Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, (Received for publication on 19 November 1942) (With Plates XIX and XX) IN 1910, Patton [1910] discovered what he called Piroplasma gibsoni in the blood of hounds of the Madras Hunt, and subsequently he found a similar parasite in the blood of jackals. This protozoon has since been reported to occur in dogs in several parts of India. Rao [1927] in Madras described various forms of the parasite, occurring in the blood and organ smears of an infected case. According to his observations, the division of the parasite takes place in the blood, while its schizogony occurs mainly in the spleen. He also carried out some transmission ex- periments with the tick, Haemaphysalis bispinosa, but these yielded negative results. In this article it is proposed to describe the forms of Babesia (Piroplasma) gibsoni which the writers have found in the blood and internal organs of dogs artificially infected with the parasite. These forms may be grouped under two main heads: (1) ring forms and (2) thin elongated forms. It is probable that these differences indicate the occurrence of sexual dimorphism. It will be seen from what follows that the or- ganism does not strictly conform to the definition of the genus Babesia Starcovici of the family Babesiidae, for it has never been observed to occur in couples of pear-shaped, ring-shaped, or ellipti- cal individuals, although like other members of the genus, its propagation always appears to take place in the red blood cells. Shirlaw [1938], however, believes 'that P. gibsoni is essentially a parasite of the reticulo-endothelium'. Clinically also, the symptoms in B. gibsoni infection differ to a certain extent from those observed in babesiasis due to B. canis infection. An infection with B. gibsoni is frequently accompanied by progressive anaemia and a recurrent type of fever, while in cases affected with B. canis the fever is more or less continuous and is associated with jaundiced discolouration of the visible mucous membranes. Haemoglobinuria is characteristic of B. canis infection. Moreover, drugs, such as trypanblue and acaprin, which are specific against infection with B. canis, have no effect whatsoever in cases of B. gibsoni infection. For this reason, while considering the system- atic position of this parasite, a new family name, Pattonelliidae, is proposed and a new genus Pattonella provided for accommodating the orga- nism hitherto known as Babesia (Piroplasma) gibsoni. Enumeration of all the clinical features accom- panying this infection in dogs is beyond the scope of this article. Nevertheless, we have, under the head 'General observations', described certain interesting facts. MATERIAL AND METHOD The material for this study was obtained from dogs which at the time were being utilized for maintaining a strain of P. gibsoni at the Institute. Dogs showing a very heavy infection were usually selected for this work, and were destroyed and smears were made from their blood and various organs. In addition, pieces of the spleen, liver, kidney, lymph glands, lungs, brain and bone- marrow were fixed overnight in Bouin, Duboscq and Brasil's fluid in order to study the parasite in section. Sections were cut 6µ thick and stained with Heidenhain's iron-haematoxylin, Ehrlich's haematoxylin and May-Grunwald-Giemsa. Solution of eosin (1 per cent) in 90 per cent alcohol was used as a counter stain for haematoxylin preparations. Air-dried smears of blood, as well as those from the organs, were, as a routine measure, stained with May-Grunwald-Giemsa. Fixatives, such as Schaudinn's (with acetic acid) and Bouin's fluid (alcoholic), were also used for fixing the smears which were subsequently stained with the above-mentioned stains. The nucleus of the parasite, both in smears or sections, gave a positive Feulgen reaction when tested for the presence of thymonucleic acid in accordance with the method recommended by Ludford [1928]. Careful camera lucida drawings were made of the different stages encountered. Spencer's verti- cal camera and incandescent lamp were used in taking the photomicrographs. 267
268 Forms of Babesia Gibsoni (Patton) in the Dog GENERAL OBSERVATIONSIn the course of studies on the various forms of the parasite found in the vertebrate host, it was found that when the infective inoculum was intro- duced by the intravenous route the average in- cubation period with 55 dogs was eight days and a half (range 2 to 29 days), while in 48 dogs which received the inoculum subcutaneously, the average was 18.5 days (range 9 to 40 days). This difference in the period of incubation between the two groups of animals is perhaps only natural, for in the intra- venous method the parasites are brought directly in contact with the circulation of the host, and this facilitates their establishment in the red blood cells earlier than by the subcutaneous route. Another interesting feature noted was that in the majority of cases the presence of a large num- ber of parasites in the peripheral circulation was not attended by a very high temperature. For instance, about 30 per cent showed frequent para- sites, 14 per cent numerous parasites and only 2 per cent very rare parasites in their peripheral circulation when the temperature ranged between 100.8° F. to 104.0°F. On the other hand, when the animal recorded the highest temperature, its peripheral blood was found to be negative for parasites in 25 per cent of cases. Thus, in this particular behaviour also, this parasite appears to differ from the other members of the genus Babesia, in which we find the frequency of the parasite increasing with the rise of the body temperature. For example, it has often been found that a large number of parasites in the peri- pheral circulation was coincident with the high thermal reaction of cattle infected with B. bige- mina and dogs infected with B. canis. It may be presumed from this characteristic behaviour of P. gibsoni that, when the organism is undergoing rapid multiplication in the erythrocytes of the internal organs, such as the spleen and bone marrow, there is a severe tissue reaction which results in a relative increase in the body tempera- ture in the absence or presence of few parasites in the peripheral circulation. Moreover, as will be seen later, the red blood corpuscles, which con- tain the dividing individuals, apparently become heavy and therefore are mechanically held up in their respective places in the internal organs. The parasites appear in large numbers in the peri- pheral circulation only when the products of multiplication individually enter into fresh red blood corpuscles. However, by this time the severity of the tissue reaction may have abated and consequently have caused a relative decrease in the body temperature. In general practice, therefore, it is probably advisable to examine the blood smears when the animal shows both low and high temperatures. MORPHOLOGY OF THE PARASITEAs will be seen from later remarks, the parasite occurs in two distinct forms with a series of inter- mediate forms, apparently representing its develop- mental changes. These stages will be described in what is believed to be their proper sequence, although, in dealing with such a very minute orga- nism, it is impossible to dogmatize in this respect. (a) Ring forms. The common form of the para- site in the peripheral circulation has the shape of a signet ring, with the nucleus situated at the periphery. In smears or sections of the internal organs, particularly of the spleen and bone marrow, rounded or oval or spindle-shaped forms are encountered, with an increased amount of cytop- lasm and often with their nuclei in a process of division. Prior to division the nucleus of a ring or oval form, measuring 2.2µ to 4µ in diameter, shows a comparatively heavy chromatin (Plate XX, fig. 28). Later on, a bud-like structure appears in the proxi- mity of the mother nucleus (Plate XX, fig. 29). With further separation of this bud-like structure from the mother nucleus, it presents a picture illustrated in figs. 10, 17 and 18 on Plate XIX, and fig. 33 on Plate XX. Finally, one-half of the nuclear material thus divided, it is found to travel towards the other pole. Occasionally, the connect- ing filament, which stains pink or purple with May - Grunwald-Giemsa's stain, is seen to persist for sometime. Figs. 30 to 32 on Plate XX, and fig. 9 on Plate XIX, represent one, two and four parasites in the process of binary fission. As divi- sion progresses, the cytoplasm at the equatorial region constricts and ultimately separates (Plate XIX, fig. 17). The newly-formed daughter individuals, as they retract, appear to remain connected for sometime by means of a fine strand of cytoplasm (Plate XIX, figs. 15 and 16). This strand is often seen to be twisted until finally it gives way. A cytoplasmic strand broken off in this manner is frequently found to degenerate or remain scattered in the cytoplasm of the eryth- rocytes and appears as minute, irregular, blue- tinged bodies in May-Grunwald-Giemsa prepara- tions (Plate XIX, figs. 11, 13, 14, 16 and 17 and Plate XX, figs. 33, 34, 35, 38 and 40). Until the final stage of division is reached, the nucleus of a newly-formed individual is usually placed in the centre of the organism, while its body contains more cytoplasm than is usually found in the ring forms met within the peripheral circulation. In other words, the body now exhi- bits a comparatively condensed and solid appear- ance (Plate XIX, figs. 11, 12, 13 and 25 and Plate XX, figs. 34 to 41). The completion of the process of binary fission is marked by the migration of the nucleus towards the circumference of the cytoplasm
Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part IV] PLATE XIX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
PLATE XX [ Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
H. N. RAY AND J. A. IDNANI 269 which is now reduced to a mere ring (Plate XIX, fig. 14 and Plate XX, fig. 42). Whether repeated binary fission of one or more parasites at one and the same time gives rise to large number of organisms in one red blood cell has yet to be considered. In our preparations we came across a single ring form being transformed into a dividing stage, this being manifested by the increase in the amount of its cytoplasm and com- paratively enlarged nucleus. A reference to fig. 13 on Plate XIX, and figs. 33, 34, 36, 38 and 40 on Plate XX, shows that, while most of the parasites are in a resting stage, there are some which are in the stage of division. In all the subsequent stages, the chief features noted were the central position of the nucleus and an initial increase, and later a proportional decrease in the amount of cytop- lasm as the fission progressed. In the final stage, as mentioned above, the nucleus migrates towards the periphery, and the cytoplasm is reduced to a mere ring. These stages presented themselves in an orderly sequence, and this pointed to the conclusion that a single parasite by means of re- peated binary fission gives rise to 32 daughter individuals and not 16 as stated in our previous note [Ray and Idnani, 1938]. The blood corpuscle containing this large number of parasites ultimately bursts and liberates the daughter individuals which measure from 0.5µ to 1.5µ in diameter (Plate XX, fig. 43). On very rare occasions, com- ponents of four nuclei were seen in one individual. In such cases the body of the parasite assumed a quadrangular form (Plate XIX, fig. 18). Whatever the shape of the dividing individual, the general impression obtained by careful exami- nation of the different stages is that the process of multiplication is chiefly by binary fission and not by budding, the latter being common with the organisms described under the genus Babesia. Corpuscles carrying the parasites in the initial stage of multiplication (Plate XIX, figs. 4 to 7)were not uncommon in the peripheral circulation, but the erythrocytes showing parasites in the advanced dividing stage were extremely rare in this situation. The rarity of such forms in the peripheral circula- lation can perhaps be attributed to the fact that such corpuscles became heavy and were therefore not easily carried to the periphery with the blood stream. The infected red blood cells, particularly those which contained the dividing forms, often became enlarged and irregular in shape. The dividing forms of the parasite were mostly seen in impression smears of the spleen, bone marrow and liver. It was also possible to demonstrate the organism in sections of these organs (Plate XIX, figs. 27 and Plate XX, fig. 44). This observation, however, is not in agreement with the statement made by Shirlaw [1938] that no ring forms can be found in the section preparations of P. gibsoni infected dogs. (b) Thin elongated forms. Concurrently with the ring or oval forms, thin elongated forms of the parasite, which could at once be distinguished from the former by their slander body and elon- gated shape, were encountered. The nuclear end in this form is slightly brbader than its other end (Plate XIX, fig. 24). Prior to division it appears to assume an amoeboid shape, and, while still in this condition, the nucleus shows an evidence of break- ing up into eight, sixteen or more nuclei. This, how- ever, was at first thought to be an evidence of schizogony and was described as such by the writers in a note to the Indian Science Congress [1938]. On careful examination, however; we found that in this form too the multiplication occurred by binary fission, the only difference being that the newly-formed daughter individuals instead of diverging as in the other form remained very close to each other and thus gave a false impression of schizogony (Plate XIX, fig. 19). Individuals, which differentiate themselves from such a mass, were thin elongated bodies, with the nucleus situated at one end270 Forms of Babesia Gibsoni (Patton) in the Dog in a healthy animal is brought about by blood inoculation. The latter can readily be explained by the fact that the inoculum, in addition to carrying the gametocytes, also carries the parasite in a stage of fission, and this latter alone, in due course, is able to produce a fresh infection (like malaria and some other species of arthropod-borne protozoan parasites). It should, however, be emphasized that this point can only be clarified by actual study of the stages of this parasite in the body of the invertebrate host. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON THE SYSTEM- ATIC POSITION OF THE PARASITE By H. N. RAY, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Lond.)SINCE Starcovici [1893] created the genus Babesia, its precise systematic position and its relationship with certain allied genera have been subjected to a critical examination by several workers in this field. Thus Franca [1917, 1918]CONTENTS (VOL. XIII, PART III) September 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal PAGE Original articles TREE LEAVES AS CATTLE FODDER, I. THE SEASONAL VARIA- TION IN THE COMPOSITION OF SOME EDIBLE TREE LEAVES (WITH TWO TEXT-FIGURES) S. A. Momin and S. C. Ray 183 TREE LEAVES AS CATTLE FODDER, II. DIGESTIBILITY COEFFI- CIENT AND NUTRITIVE VALUE OF SOME TREE LEAVES Chet Ram and S. C. Ray . 191 GREEN BERSEEM AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR CONCENTRATES FOR ECONOMIC FEEDING OF DAIRY CATTLE N. C. Das Gupta . . 196 COMPARATIVE VALUES OF PROTEINS FOR CHICKENS A. J. Macdonald . . 214 THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION AND VITAMIN-A POTENCY OF COW'S MILK AND BUTTER FAT UNDER INTENSIVE GREEN FEEDING AND THE CAROTENE METABOLISM OF DAIRY ANIMALS B. C. Bay Sarkar and K. C. Sen 219 OBSERVATIONS ON A CONTAGIOUS KERATITIS OF INDIAN SHEEP (WITH PLATE XVII) P. N. Nanda and M. Abdussalam 228 PHOSPHORUS IN MILK, I. THE PHOSPHORUS PARTITION IN THE MILK OF COW, GOAT, SHEEP AND HUMAN BEINGS K. P. Basu and K. P. Mukherjee 231 PHOSPHORUS IN MILK, II. AVAILABILITY OF PHOSPHORUS OF THE MILK OF COW, GOAT AND BUFFALO K. P. Basu and K. P. Mukherjee 236 SKRJABINEMA OVIS (SKRJABIN, 1915) WERESCHTSCHAGIN, 1925, AN OXYURID PARASITE OF THE GOAT (CAPRA HIRCUS) IN INDIA S. N. Vaidyanathan 240 REUTILIZATION OF USED AGAR MEDIA, I E. V. Seshacaryulu and Zal R. Kothavalla 241 ON THE PARENTERAL ADMINISTRATION OF SEA-WATER IN THE TREATMENT OF CANINE MANGEORIGINAL ARTICLES STUDIES ON PROTEIN METABOLISM I. INVESTIGATIONS UPON THE ENDOGENOUS NITROGEN METABOLISM OF CATTLE By NARAIN DAS KEHAR, R. MUKHERJEE and K. C. SEN, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 12 December 1942) A KNOWLEDGE of the nutritive value of proteins of different feeds is necessary for utilizing the avail- able supplies to the best advantage. This is specially desirable in this country where the ration of cattle consists mainly of straws, with little or no concentrates. The first step in the determina- tion of the quality of dietary proteins according to the Thomas-Mitchell method is the estimation of the endogenous urinary nitrogen and metabolic faecal nitrogen. The former is the minimum constant level of urinary nitrogen output attained by animals after prolonged subsistence on a nitro- gen-free, but otherwise adequate, diet. For the successful determination of its value for bovines, one is confronted with the very difficult task of devising a nitrogen-free ration, adequate in all respects including the roughage content, and feed- ing the animals required amounts of this ration for a sufficiently long period. The observations of some workers [Hart et al., 1912; Bull and Grind- ley, 1919; Honcamp et al., 1923; and Hutchin- son and Morris, 1936] who attempted such investi- gations on bovines are not very satisfactory, as the rations fed by them were not sufficiently low in nitrogen; in some cases the experimental ration was fed for an insufficient duration. In the present investigation, attempts have been made to study the endogenous nitrogen metabolism of Indian bullocks fed on a very low nitrogen ration for a prolonged period. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS For studying the endogenous nitrogen metabo- lism, the ration should contain either all the diges- tible nitrogen in an entirely utilizable state or no nitrogen at all. It is, however, difficult at this stage of our knowledge on the protein metabolism of cattle to compute a ration, which will satisfy the former condition. It seems essential, therefore, to use a ration as free from nitrogen as possible under practical feeding conditions. (i) Roughage. In devising a nitrogen-free ration for cattle, the chief difficulty was encountered in the supply of a nitrogen-free roughage. The high cost of regenerated cellulose and agar-agar and the frequent impaction of rumen caused by paper pulp [Hutchinson and Morris, 1936] precluded their use. Bagasse, which is very poor in crude protein (about 1 per cent on dry basis) and is occasionally eaten by animals, was considered as a suitable roughage, provided its protein content was further reduced. Various processes, which included the treatment of bagasse with sodium chloride, sodium carbonate, sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid and sulphuric acid at different temperatures and in various concentrations, were tried. In a num- ber of trials, the desired denitrification could not be effected, while in others, though the nitrogen content was reduced to a very low level, a pulpy mass was obtained which formed into hard balls on drying, thus rendering it unsuitable for feeding. The best method, one which reduced the amount of crude protein to 0.08 per cent and did not affect the texture, proved to be the soaking of bagasse in eight times its weight of 5 per cent sodium hy- droxide solution for 24 hours, prior to its boiling for three hours. The mass was thoroughly washed several times with water, and then once with a 0.1 per cent solution of hydrochloric acid. The material was finally washed with water to free it from the last traces of acid. This was then dried and separated into shreds. In the low-N ration untreated wheat bhusa or cold alkali-treated wheat bhusa was used instead of hot alkali-treated bagasse. The method of treatment in this case was similar to that adopted by Beckmann et al. [1919] and consisted in soaking the straw with eight times its weight of 1.25 per cent caustic soda for 24 hours, washing it free from alkali and drying in the sun. (ii) Concentrates. It was considered that starch, which has in recent years been used by Smuts [1935] and Smuts and Marais [1938] for sheep, and by Hutchinson and Morris [1936] for cows, would form a suitable concentrate for animal require- ments, but in an exploratory experiment on two bullocks it was found that the animals developed an apathy for starch after a few days of feeding. Even dextrinized starch or a loaf made of starch was little relished. Sago was then tried in different forms and, after several discouraging trials, it was found that a coarsely ground pop-sago was preferred by the animals to other preparations. The pops were made by heating sago in an open iron pan. 257
H. N. RAY AND J. A. IDNANI 273 Fig. 33. Three parasitesTHE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF STAR GRASS (CYNODON PLECTOSTACHYUM) AT DIFFERENT STAGES OF GROWTH AND THE NUTRITIVE VALUE OF MATURE STAR GRASS HAY By N. L. MATHUR and S. C. RAY, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar ( Received for publication on 12 December 1942) SEN [1942] drew attention to the possibilities of star grass (Cynodon plectostachyum) as a fodder for the cattle in India. Sometime ago, through the courtesy of this worker, the writers received a consignment of star grass hay for determination of the digestibility coefficient and the nutritive value of this material. They also received four samples of star grass, cut at three, four, six and seven months of age, for complete chemical analysis. In this note are reported the results of (1) the chemical analysis of the grass at the four different stages of progressive maturity, and of (2) the feed- ing experiment with the hay obtained from the last cut (seven months' growth). CHEMICAL COMPOSITION The samples of star grass cut at different stages were analysed for their organic and inorganic constituents. The results of the analysis are shown in Table I. TABLE I Composition of star grass at different stages of growth Sample Approxi- mate age (months Percentage expressed on dry matter basis Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Total carbo- hydrates Ash Cal- cium Phos- phorus 1st cut . . 3 88.14 12.19 1.65 26.60 47.70 74.30 11.86 0.97 0.36 2nd cut . . 4 88.79 9.44 0.90 30.36 48.09 78.45 11.21 0.75 0.33 3rd cut . . 6 91.78 7.19 0.86 32.72 51.01 83.73 8.22 0.52 0.30 4th cut . . 7 89.18 5.44 0.90 37.60 45.24 82.84 10.82 0.53 0.24 Up to the third cut the organic matter pro- gressively increased. In the last cut, however, the value of the organic matter slightly decreased owing to a proportionate rise in the ash content. The percentage value of crude protein moiety significantly decreased with advancing maturity. The decrease in protein content was over 22 per cent between the first and the second cut, about 24 per cent between the second and the third cut and over 24 per cent between the third and the last cut. A comparatively high value of ether extract was recorded in the sample from the first cut. This value fell abruptly by almost 50 per cent in the second cut and remained at much the same low level in subsequent cuts. With pro- gressive maturity, as expected, the crude fibre content showed a steady increase. The other fraction of the carbohydrate moiety, namely the nitrogen-free extract, showed a similar tendency to increase up to the third cut, but thereafter there was an abrupt drop in this value. The analytical data presented in Table I also show that for a non-leguminous forage, star grass is richly provided with such essential minerals as calcium and phosphorus. The percentage value of calcium showed a gradual decrease with ad- vancing maturity up to the third cut. The cal- cium contents of the comparatively mature grass in the third and in the last cut were much the same. The phosphorus value of the grass progressively decreased with the increasing maturity of the plant. As compared with a less than 10 per cent decreased in the value during each of the first two intervals, the phosphorus content dropped by 20 per cent in the interval between the third and the last cut. It is of interest to note that though the interval between the third and the last cut was only one month, during this short period the quality of the grass suffered significantly owing to a decrease in the percentage values of such important consti- tuents as crude protein, nitrogen-free extracts and phosphorus. DIGESTIBILITY AND NUTRITIVE VALUE For the purpose of this experiment, two hill bulls of 3 and 4 years of age respectively were used. The weights of these animals were 244 and 252 274
N. L. MATHUR AND S. C. RAY 275 lb. The total feeding period covered eight days, of which the first three were regarded as the preli- minary period. During the last five days, 24 hourly collections of excreta were made. It was not possible to increase the number of animals un- der experiment nor to prolong the feeding period owing to the fact that only a very limited amount of hay was available for experimentation. In Table II is given the chemical composition of the feeding stuffs used. The food consumption per day and the digestibility determinations of the feeds are set out in Tables III and IV. The digestibility was determined by the method of elimination by feeding wheat bran, the digestibi- lity coefficient of which was taken from Sen [1938]. It was observed subsequently, however, that the grass hay could have been used as a single feed without wheat bran as a concentrate. TABLE II Percentage composition of feeding stuffs (on dry basis) Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Total carbohy- drates 1. Star grass 89.18 5.44 0.90 37.60 45.21 82.84 2. Wheat bran 89.53 10.94 4.60 17.25 57.34 74.59 TABLE III Food consumption per day (on dry basis) Animals Star grass Wheat bran Total consump- tion gm. gm. gm. Hill bull No. 1 2,641 602 3,243 Hill bull No. 2 2,416 602 3,018 TABLE IV Digestibility coefficient of star grass Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Total carbohy- drate gm. gm. gm. gm. gm. gm. Hill Bull No. 1 Consumed from276 Chemical Composition of Star Grass TABLE V Nitrogen balance Output (gm.) Animal Intake gm. Faeces gm. Urine gm. Total gm. Balance Hill Bull No. 1 . 335 15.8 10.6 26.4 + 7.1 Hill Bull No. 2 . 31.6 14.0 10.1 24.1 +7.5 The average digestibility coefficient of the important constituents of star grass hay, such as crude protein, ether extract and total carbohy- drates have been found to be 43.5, 56.5 and 51.5 respectively (Table IV). For a mature hay these digestibility coefficients may be considered fairly high. In Table VI, the composition and the digestibility coefficients of some of the mature, pure varieties of indigenous grass hay [Sen, 1938] have been shown along with those of star grass hay for comparative study. In Table VIII, the quantity of individual digestible nutrients, total digestible nutrients and starch equivalent per 100 lb. of dry material and the nutritive ratio of the indigenous grass hay and those of star grass hay have been shown. Though the starch equivalent value of star grass hay is slightly lower than the other grass hays, the facts of its comparative richness in digestible crude protein and its high palatability seem to suggest that star grass hay, when fed alone, can serve as a maintenance ration, especially if the grass is harvested at a slightly younger stage than that of the sample used in the present experi- ment. TABLE VIPercentage composition and digestibility coefficient of some pure variety indigeneous and star grass hay Name of the grass Percentage composition Digestibility coefficient Musel grass (Iscilima laxum) . . . 3.15 0.97 84.60 12 17 55 Spear grass Andropogon contortus) . 2.97 0.96 87.07 Nill 36 57 Anjan grass (Andropogon annulatus) . 4.87 0.83 84.12 35 30 59 Kollukattai grass (Pennisetum cenchroides) 6.38 0.68 83.01 47 23 60 Star grass (Cynodon plectostachyum) . 5.44 0.90 82.84 44 57 52 TABLE VII Digestible nutrients in some pure variety indigenous and star grass hay (Per 100 lb. dry material) Name of grass Crude protein lb. Ether extract lb. Total carbohy- drate lb. Total digestible nutrients lb. Nutritive ratio lb. Starch equivalent lb. Musel grass . . . . . . 0.38 0.16 46.53 47.27 123.9 26.1 Spear grass . . . . . . 0.00 0.34 49.62 50.38 .. 28.1 Anjan grass . . . . . . 1.71 0.25 49.63 51.90 30.3 32.4 Kollukattai grass . . . . . 3.00 0.61 49.81 53.17 17.7 33.2 Star grass . . . . . . . 2.39 0.51 43.08 46.62 19.5 24.4 SUMMARY With progressive maturity, the percentage crude protein value of star grass suffered significant losses, whereas after an initial fall, the ether ex- tract value remained stationary and the total carbohydrate value progressively increased up to six months of age. Between the grass sample cut at six months of age and that cut at seven months, a significant difference in composition was noticeable. The former was definitely super- ior in quality to the latter. The digestibility trial conducted with mature star grass hay showed that the hay is very pala- table and the digestibility coefficient of its im- portant constituents are also fairly high. The results of the digestibility experiments suggested that the mature star grass hay by itself could form a maintenance ration. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors wish to thank Dr K. C. Sen, Officer in-charge, Animal Nutrition Section, for his interest in this work. REFERENCES Sen, B. (1942). Indian Fmg. 3, 421 Sen, K. C. (1938). Misc. Bull. No. 25, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi.
EFFECT OF INVERSION OF TUBES AT DIFFERENT INTERVALS ON THE REDUCTION OF METHYLENE BLUE IN MILK By E. V. SESHACHARYULU and ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA, Imperial Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 11 January 1943) DUCLAUX [1887] was the first to observe the reducing action of milk on dyes and Neisser and Wechsberg [1900] made use of the methylene blue reduction in milk for judging the hygienic value and keeping quality of milk. Barthel and Orla Jensen [1912] devised a technique to carry out this test which was used on the continent and in Eng- land. In the United States and Canada, the standard technique suggested by the American Public Health Association [1934] was employed for the grading of milk. Wilson [1935] suggested a modification in per- forming the methylene blue reduction test which involves the inversion of test-tubes once at half- hourly intervals. This modified method has now been generally accepted. Frayer [1937] and Johns [1938] have supported Wilson's modifica- tion, whereas Thornton [1937] has opposed its adoption on the basis that the inversion of the tubes at half-hourly intervals complicated the technique. Johns [1939] has shown that since there was satis- factory agreement in the reduction times when the tubes were inverted at intervals of ½, 1 or 2 hours, a two-hourly inversion of methylene blue tubes gave the same result as half-hourly inversion, thus answering Thornton. Davis [1939], commenting on Johns's results, has remarked 'if this is generally true, one of the chief objections to the methylene blue test largely vanishes'. No further work appears to have been carried out either supporting Johns's results or contradicting them. The authors of this article, therefore, undertook the investigation in question to ascertain whether the findings of Johns have a general applicability to different kinds of milk. The kinds of milk examined in this investigation were; (a) individual cow's and buffalo's milk, (b) cow herd and buffalo herd milk, (c) mixed milk (cows and buffaloes), (d) milk handled by town dairies, (e) village pro- duced milk, and (f) pasteurized milk. On the whole 218 samples were examined. Experimental The technique employed for carrying out the methylene blue reduction test was just the same as suggested by Wilson with the exception that the methylene blue tubes containing the same sample of milk were inverted once at ½, 1, 1½, 2, 2½ and 3 hour intervals. Complete decolorization of the methylene blue was taken as the end point. All the experiments were done in duplicate. No difference in reduction time between the dupli- cates was found. The average methylene blue reduction times in minutes and their differences at different intervals of inversion are given in Tables I and II. TABLE I TABLE II Average methylene blue reduction times in minutes Differences in reduction times in minutes at different intervals of inversion at different intervals of inversion from those at half-hourly intervals Kinds of milk Number of samples ½ hour 1, 1½ and 2 hours 2½ hours 3 hours 1, 1½ and 2 hours 2½ hours 3 hours Individual cow's milk (I. D.I. Farm) 30 456.9 456.9 470.7 475.8 Average . 0 13.8 18.9 Maximum . 0 24.0 32.0 Minimum . 0 9.0 14.0 Individual buffalo's milk (I. D. I. Farm) 30 396.0 396.0 410.9 415.9 Average . 0 14.9 19.9 Maximum . 0 19.0 25.0 Minimum . 0 10.0 14.0 Cow curd milk (I. D. I. Farm) . 34 326.8 326.8 339.1 343.5 Average . 0 12.3 16.7 Maximum . 0 18.0 25.0 Minimum . 0 6.0 12.0 Buffalo curd milk (I. D. I. Farm) 31 306.1 306.1 318.8 323.8 Average . 0 12.7 17.7 Maximum . 0 20.0 31.0 Minimum . 0 8.0 18.0 Mixed milk (cows and buffaloes, I. D. I. Farm) 31 326.8 326.8 341.1 346.2 Average . 0 14.3 19.4 Maximum . 0 25.0 35.0 Minimum . 0 7.0 11.0 Milk handled by town dairies 20 301.3 301.3 313.0 316.8 Average . 0 11.7 15.5 Maximum . 0 22.0 25.0 Minimum . 0 4.0 8.0 Village produced milk 20 227.9 227.9 240.5 248.6 Average . 0 12.6 20.7 Maximum . 0 18.0 34.0 Minimum . 0 10.0 13.0 Pasterisized milk (I. D. I. Farm) 22 448.8 448.8 457.5 457.5 Average . 0 8.7 8.7 Maximum . 0 10.0 10.0 Minimum . 0 5.0 5.0 I. D. I. Imperial Dairy Insti- tute 277
278 Reduction of Methylene blue in milk DISCUSSIONThe foregoing results show that there is no difference either in the average, maximum or minimum reduction times when the methylene blue tubes are inverted at ½, 1, 1½ or 2 hour inter- vals with all the samples of milk examined. It may also be mentioned that the individual reduc- tion times are same in all the cases of the samples of milk examined, when the tubes are inverted at the same above intervals. These results support the findings of Johns. The reduction times in the case of 2½ hour inversion interval are always greater than those of half-hourly inversion. The average increase in the reduction times between ½ and 2 hour intervals of inversion in all cases except paste- urized milk varies from 11.7 to 14.9 minutes, the maximum difference in times being 18 to 25 minutes and the minimum 4 to 10 minutes. The reduction times of the samples of milk when the tubes are inverted once in every three hours are also more than those of half hour inversion interval, the average increase in times varies from 15.5 to 20.7 minutes and the maximum and minimum from 25 to 35 and 8 to 14 minutes respectively. This is not the case with pasteurized milk. The in- crease in the reduction times between ½ and 2½ hour inversion intervals in the case of pasteurized milk are less than those of raw milk samples and the average increase in time is 8.7 minutes, the maximum and minimum being 10 and 5 minutes respectively. It is seen from the tables that the average increase in the reduction time between ½ and 3 hour intervals of inversion is the same as that of ½ and 2½ hour inversion intervals as there is no difference in the reduction times when the tubes are inverted once at intervals of 2½ and 3 hours in the case of pasteurized milk. In his modified technique, Wilson suggests half- hourly inversion of methylene blue tubes. This requires more frequent attention by the worker. The results obtained in this investigation show that there is no need to invert the tubes every half hour since there is agreement in thereduction times when the tubes are inverted once at intervals of ½, 1, 1½ and 2 hours. It can, therefore, be safely concluded that instead of inverting the methylene blue tubes at half-hourly intervals, they can be inverted once in every two hours without in any way affecting the accuracy of the results. This holds good with all types of milk as the results tabulated above point out. In many cases when the tubes were inverted at intervals of 2½ and 3 hours the decolorization of the methylene blue took place from the top to the bottom unlike those of ½, 1, 1½ and 2 hour inver- sions where the reduction was uniform. This may be explained by the fact that in the case of 2½ and 3 hour inversions the cream layer rising to the surface carried away with it most of the micro- flora to the top where the reduction as a rule first commences. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS (1) The effect of inverting the methylene blue tubes at different intervals on the reduction of the dye in milk has been studied. (2) There is absolutely no difference in the re- duction times when the methylene blue tubes are inverted once at ½, 1, 1½ or 2 hour intervals. Hence, the inversion of the tubes every half hour as suggested by Wilson is not necessary and the tubes can with advantage be inverted at two hour intervals. This holds good with all types of milk namely, (a) individual cow's and buffalo's milk, (b) cow herd and buffalo herd milk, (c) mixed milk (cows and buffaloes), (d) milk handled by town dairies, (e) village produced milk, and (f) pasteurized milk. (3) The reduction times of the samples of milk examined when the tubes are inverted at an inter- val of 2½ hours are greater than those of half-hourly inversion and the average increase in times varies from 11.7 to 14.9 minutes, the maximum and minimum being 18 to 25 and 4 to 10 minutes respectively. (4) Three-hour inversion intervals also show greater reduction times than half-hour inversion interval, the average increase being 15.5 to 20.7 minutes while the maximum difference in reduc- tion times varies from 25 to 35 minutes and the minimum from 8 to 14 minutes, and (5) In the case of pasteurized milk the increase in reduction times between ½ and 2½ hour inversions is less than in the case of raw milk, and the average increase is 8.7 minutes, the maximum and mini- mum being 10 and 5 minutes respectively. No difference in reduction times is observed between 2½ and 3 hour inversions. REFERENCES A. P. H. A. Standard Methods of Milk Analysis, Sixth Edition, 1934. (American Public Health Association, New York) Barthel, C. and Orla Jensen (1912). Milchw. zbl. 41, 417. Duclaux, E. (1887). Le Lait, Etudes Chimiques et Micro- biologiques, 2nd Ed., 1894. Paris. J. B. Bailliero et Fils. Davis, J. G. (1939). Food Manufacture 6, 196 Frayer, J. M. (1937). Dyes and methods as they affect the Methylene Blue Reduction Test. Vermont Agric. Exper. Sta. Bull., 424 Johns, C. K. (1938). J. Dairy Sci. 21, 227 Johns, C. K. (1939). Amer. J. Pub. Health 29, 239 Thornton, H. R. (1937). J. Dairy Sci. 20, 693 Wilson, G. S. (1935). Med. Res. Council, Spec. Rep. Serise, No. 206, 215 (H. M. Stationery Office, London)
BERSEEM HAY280 Berseem hay for Dairy Cattle The animals were not allowed to leave any residue from concentrate, berseem or jowar. The amount of food consumption and liveweight increase of the individual animal was recorded daily. The experiment lasted for a period of 17 weeks. The distribution of the animals into groups and their average liveweight during the different weeks of the tests are given in Table I. TABLE I Distribution of animals into different groups and their liveweight in lb. Treatments . . . . . . Group I Group II Group III Concentrate mixture 50 per cent conc. protein replaced by berseem hay 75 per cent conc. protein replaced by berseem hay Breeds . . . . . . Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Hissar Murrah Serial number . . . . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Average age in months . . . 18 12 18 12 18 12 Average increase in liveweight dur- ing basal period 40 37 38 36 40 40 Average liveweight at the close of the basal period . 395 332 395 442 416 417 382 382 348 510 409 354 393 370 366 407 426 447 Average liveweight of breed . . 374 425 371 424 376 427 Average liveweight during the ex- periment for week endingN. C. DAS GUPTA 281 coefficient. Table II represents the rate of growth, their statistical analysis and summary. TABLE II Rate of growth of heifers per week (lb.) 282 Berseem hay for Dairy Cattle the corresponding difference in the increase of liveweight is 28 and 54 lb. (Table I). This varia- tion in the liveweight cannot be accounted for by the slight lower intake of wheat straw which is of poor nutritive value. It is of interest to note from Table III that the dry matter consumption of Murrah heifers per 100 lb. of liveweight is lower than that of Hissar. Similar observations have been made by Das Gupta [1943] while conducting feeding trials. Digestibility of the ration of the different groups A digestion experiment, for a period of 10 days with two Hissar and two Murrah heifers from each group, was conducted towards the end of the experiment to find out the difference in the digesti- bility of the nutrients of the total ration due to the replacement of concentrates by berseem hay. The figures are shown in Table IV. TABLE IV Average digestion coefficient of the nutrients of the different groups Particulars Organic matter Crude protein Fat Fibre N. F. E. T. C. Hissar Full concentrate . . . . . 63.3 66.1 76.7 51.6 71.5 62.5 50 per cent conc. 50 per cent berseem . . 62.5 61.0 65.7 57.4 64.9 62.4 25 per cent conc. 75 per cent berseem . . 61.1 57.9 57.7 58.5 63.0 61.4 Murrah Full concentrate . . . . . 65.4 67.6 77.7 53.1 68.5 64.3 50 per cent conc. 50 per cent berseem . . 65.1 62.6 70.5 57.1 68.6 65.0 25 per cent cone. 75 per cent berseem . . 63.7 60.2 60.3 57.7 67.5 64.1 There is no difference in the digestibility of the total carbohydrates due to the different rations. The digestibility of protein has decreased with an increase in the quantity of berseem hay in the ration indicating that berseem hay protein is less digested than that of the concentrate mixture. Fat has also been less digested by the berseem groups but this seems to be mainly due to the lower amount of fat present in the total feed. Though the calculated level of protein supplied to each group was the same, the intake of digestible pro- tein decreased with the replacement of concentrate due to the lower digestibility of berseem hay protein. It appears that the rate of growth in the case of berseem hay groups was influenced by the lower intake of digestible protein. Berseem hay for Hissar and Murrah breeds The percentage composition of the different feeds and the gain per pound of digestible protein and starch equivalent of the three rations have been compared in Tables V and VI to study the effect of the quality of nutrients on the live- weight increase of the two breeds. The digesti- bility figures obtained from the digestion experi- ment have been used to calculate the different nutrients digested during the total period of experiment. TABLE V Percentage composition on a dry basis Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Fibre N. F. E. T. C. Wheat straw . . . . . . 88.80 2.25 0.982 34.08 51.49 85.57 Green jowar . . . . . . 90.51 4.88 1.531 30.39 53.71 84.09 BerseemN. C. DAS GUPTA 283 TABLE VI Liveweight increase as affected by the quality of nutrients Groups Breed Basal L. W. lb. L. W. increase lb. Digestible protein intake lb. L. W. increase per lb. of D. P. lb. Starch equivalent take lb. L. W. increase per lb. of S. E lb. I Hissar . . . . . 374 175 103.8 1.69 714.4 0.25 II 284 Berseem Hay for Dairy Cattle For the experimental feeding group I was allowed to continue the basal ration. For the second and third groups 50 and 75 per cent of the required concentrates were replaced by berseem hay on the basis of protein. The calves were weaned and the buffaloes were milked twice daily and individual record of milk yield was maintained. The experiment continued for 11 weeks. Table VIII gives the average milk yield per day during the experiment. TABLE VIII Average daily milk yield per animal of different groups (lb.) Week ending Group I Group II Group III 1 B 2B 3B 4B 5 B 6B 7B 8B 9B Basal . . . . . 19.12 20.62 19.27 19.87 22.25 17.25 21.00 21.50 15.87 4-9-39 . . . . 17.25 20.25 18.50 18.25 20.75 16.00 17.50 17.15 14.25 11-9-39 . . . . 18.00 20.25 17.50 18.25 21.50 16.50 17.50 18.25 13.50 18-9-39 . . . . 17.75 19.00 18.25 17.50 21.00 16.25 17.00 17.00 13.00 25-9-39 . . . . 16.50 17.75 17.75 17.50 20.25 15.00 15.25 15.25 11.75 2-10-39 . . . . 16.00 17.50 17.00 17.25 19.75 14.50 14.75 14.50 11.25 9-10-39 . . . . 16.25 16.75 16.50 17.50 19.75 14.50 14.00 14.00 10.75 16-10-39 . . . . 15.75 17.00 16.00 17.00 17.75 14.25 13.00 13.50 9.75 23-10-39 . . . . 15.50 17.00 15.75 16.50 18.25 14.00 12.50 12.76 10.00 30-10-39 . . . . 15.25 16.50 16.25 17.00 17.75 14.26 12.25 12.50 10.00 6-11-39 . . . . 14.50 15.75 15.75 15.75 16.25 13.50 11.25 11.50 9.50 13-11-39 . . . . 15.00 15.25 15.75 15.75 15.00 13.25 10.00 10.25 8.25 Total 177.75 193.00 185.03 188.25 208.00 162.05 155.00 157.25 122.00 Average 16.16 17.54 16.82 17.11 18.90 14.72 14.09 14.29 11.09 The adjusted analysis of variance of the average milk yield indicates significant results, the order being group I-group II&gt;group III. The calcula- ted average yield is 16.81, 16.81 and 13.26 lb. per day for the three groups with a standard error of 0.2049. Regression of decrease in milk yield shows that the rate of decrease per week for each animal is in the same order as that of the analysis of the average milk yield. The rate of decrease is 0.331, 0.380 and 0.092 lb. for group I, group II and group III respectively with a standard error of 0.07678. However, the error is rather high, being 16 per cent. The average intake of dry matter by the animals of the different groups was 3.35, 3.36 and 3.41 lb. per 100 lb. of liveweight showing no variation in the consumption due to the different treatments. The record of liveweight also shows that there was no significant difference in the average varia- tion in liveweight of the animals of the three groups during the experiment. Table IX shows the relevant figures for liveweight. TABLE IX Average liveweight of buffaloes at the start and close of the experiment No. of replica- tions Initial liveweight in lb. Final liveweight in lb. T1 T2 T3 T1 T2 T3 1 1,045 1,051 1,095 1,059 1,098 1,120 2 1,014 1,103 1,022 1,035 1,149 1,043 3 1,149 1,059 920 1,190 1,110 996 Mean . 1,069 1,071 1,012 1,095 1,119 1,053 Standard error per animal = 12.33 lb. Composition of milk as affected by different rations Milk samples were analysed at regular interval during the experiment. Data obtained are tabu- lated in Table X where each figure represents the average analysis of six consecutive milkings. Fat content and consequently total solids increased with the advance in the lactation period for all the groups. No appreciable difference in the composi- tion of milk is noticed due to the different treat- ments.
N. C. DAS GUPTA 285 Economic value of berseem hay for production The cost of production of 100 lb. increase in body weight by the three different rations is given in Table XI The price of berseem hay has been calculated from the average cost of cultivation, harvesting, hay making and the amount of hay produced per acre. At Madhurikund Farm (Muttra), where the growth test was conducted, the rate per 100 lb. was found to be Rs. 0.963 and for milk test at Bharari (Jhansi) it was Rs. 1.134. This difference in the price is mainly due to the yield per acre of green berseem at the two farms. The rate of growth with berseem hay is satis- factory though not so good as that with the ideal concentrate mixture. During the 119 days of the experiment an average animal of group II gained 153 lb. and that of group III gained 127 lb. in liveweight, the average daily gain being 1.29 and 1.06 lb. per head respectively, which is much more than what a farmer can ordinarily expect. Table XI shows that production of liveweight is also economical with both Hissar and Murrah breed when concentrate mixture is replaced by berseem hay to the extent of 75 per cent. Similarly the cost of milk production has been compared in Table XII. TABLE X Percentage composition of milk of the different groups Date Group I (T1) Group II (T2) Group III (T3) Fat Ash Protein Total solids Fat Ash Protein Total solids Fat Ash Protein Total solids Basal . . . . 5.06 0.70 2.93 14.03 5.10 0.74 2.97 14.33 4.50 0.70 3.26 14.57 22/25-9-41 . . . 5.63 0.68 3.32 14.81 5.30 0.70 3.07 14.62 5.70 0.67 3.00 14.82 27/29-10-41 . . . 6.13 0.71 3.26 15.41 5.90 0.67 3.26 15.15 6.40 0.67 3.22 15.65 8/12-11-41 . . . 6.88 0.74 3.74 16.70 6.20 0.76 3.44 15.59 6.82 0.72 3.49 16.04 TABLE XI Comparative cost of production of growth with concentrates and concentrates replaced by berseem hay Treatment Consump- tion of wheat straw lb. Price at Rs. 0.6098 per 100 lb. Consump- tion of jowar lb. Price at Rs. 0.1524 per 100 lb. Consump- tion of berseem hay lb. Price at Rs. 0.9634 per 100 lb. Consump- tion of concen- trate lb. Price at Rs. 3.324 per 100 lb. Total price of feed Live- weight in- crease lb. Cost per 100 lb. in- crease Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar Full concentrates 370.6 2.26 911.8 1.39 .. .. 614.2 20.40 24.05 175 13.74 50 per cent conc. replaced by berseem hay 199.3 1.21 909.3 1.38 451.0 4.40 307.5 10.23 17.22 148 11.63 75 per cent conc. replaced by berseem hay 157.4 0.96 918.3 1.40 655.3 8.31 154.2 5.12 15.79 128 12.34 Murrah Full concentrates 247.7 1.51 918.3 1.40 .. .. 628.1 20.88 23.79 187 12.73 50 per cent conc. replaced by berseem hay 166.4 1.01 914.3 1.39 492.8 4.74 330.5 10.98 18.12 158 11.40 75 per cent conc. replaced by berseem hay 95.9 0.58 917.5 1.39 703.6 6.77 164.0 5.46 14.20 126 11.36
286 Berscem Hay for Dairy Cattle TABLE XII Comparative cost of production of milk with concentrates and concentrates replaced by berseem hay Treatment Consump- tion of grass hay lb. Price at Rs. 0.6602 per 100 lb. Consump- tion of green grass lb. Price at. Rs. 0.1524 per 100 lb. Consump- tion of berseem hay lb. Price at Rs. 1.134 per 100 lb. Consump- tion of concen- trates lb. Price at Rs. 2.591 per 100 lb. Total cost Total milk- pro- duced lb. Price of 100 lb. of milk Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Full concentrates 1876 8.58 878.2 1.34 .. .. 818.3 21.21 31.13 1296 2.40 50 per cent conc. replaced by berseem 1774 8.11 875.6 1.34 676.6 7.67 413.2 10.78 27.90 1312 2.18 75 per cent conc. replaced by berseem 1617 7.40 871.6 1.33 934.2 10.59 192.7 4.99 24.31 1045 2.38 As in the case of the growth test the cost of production of milk is maximum with the con- centrates. The best result was obtained when berseem hay replaced 50 per cent of the concen- trates on the basis of protein. The data available indicate that further replacement of concentrates by berseem hay may not prove economical with Murrah breed. SUMMARY Experiments were conducted to find out the comparative feeding value of concentrate mixture and concentrate mixture replaced by berseem hay to the extent of 75 per cent on the basis of protein, for growth and milk production. The effect on growth was studied with Hissar and Murrah (buffalo) heifers. Though concentrate mixture is more efficacious than berseem hay for growing heifers, satisfactory rate of growth is obtained even when 75 per cent of concentrate protein is replaced by hay protein. With the increased replacement of concentrate mixture by berseem hay the digestibility of protein decreased, indicating lower digestibility of berseem hay protein compared to the concentrate mixture. For growth the nutrients of berseem hay appear to be of lower value for the Murrah as compared to the Hissar breed. Results show that production of liveweight is economical with both Hissar and Murrah breeds when concentrate mixture is replaced by berseem hay to the extent of 75 per cent. The data obtained indicate that milk yield is not affected if 50 per cent of concentrate protein is replaced by berseem hay protein. Further re- placement may give lower milk yield. It appears that the composition of milk does not vary when concentrates of the ration are replaced by berseem hay. The cost of production of milk is lower up to 50 per cent replacement of concentrates by berseem hay. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Acknowledgement is due to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for financing the Cattle Feeding Research Scheme, United Provinces, which offered scope for this work. The author thanks C. Maya Das, Esq., I.A.S., Director of Agriculture, United Provinces, for his sympathy and keen interest, and the Deputy Director of Agriculture, Bundelkhand Circle, Jhansi, for providing all the facilities. The author also acknowledges, with thanks, the help received from Dr S. K. Mukerji and Dr R. R. Agarwal, Research Assistants. Thanks are also due to Messrs. H. P. Srivastava and G. S. Dutta, Assistants, for looking after the experimental animals throughout the trials. REFERENCES Billings (1905). N. J. Bull. 190 Caldwell, R. E. (1913). Ohio Bull. 267 Das Gupta, N. C. (1943). Indian J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 13, 196 Fraser, W. J. and Hayden, C. C. (1910). Ill. Bull. 146 Hart, E. B. and Humphrey, G. C. (1919). J. Biol. Chem. 38, 515 Hart, E. B. and Humphrey, G. C. (1920.) Ibid, 44, 189 Hayden, C. C. (1918). Ohio Bull. 327 Henderson, G. S. (1916). Agric. Res. Inst. Pusa, Bull. 66 Morrison, F. B. (1936). Feeds and Feeding, 20th edition, 1004 Relwani, L. L. (1919). Dep. Agric. Bombay, Bull. 91 Sayer, W. (1934). Agric. & Livestock in India. 4, 21
THE OCCURRENCE OF BOVINE CONTAGIOUS PLEUROPNEUMONIA IN ASSAM* By V. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Assam (Received for publication on 12 September 1942) (With one text-figure) CONTAGIOUS bovine pleuropneumonia or ' Lung Plague ' is undoubtedly one of the most serious cattle diseases causing considerable losses. Bal- drey and Williams [1909] and Hutyra and Marek [1926] mention the occurrence of the disease in India; Edmonds and Walker [1929] doubt its existence in this country while Edwards [1927] considers that India has escaped its ravages. Similarly, a perusal of the available annual reports of the Provincial Civil Veterinary Department indicates that opinion was always divided as to the existence of the disease in India. In the last few years some work has been done, in collaboration with the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, to investigate the disease, as it occurs in Assam. Efforts were made to study in detail the incidence and epidemiology of the condition. The first outbreak that the writer had the opportunity to investigate was in Deosiri grazing area, Goalpara district, in the month of January 1940. A study of the epidemic was undertaken, and suitable materials were collected for examination at the Imperial Veteri- nary Research Institute, Mukteswar, and for preliminary transmission experiments at Gauhati. As more outbreaks occurred in other centres, further material was obtained for experimental work, and additional information relating to the disease was collected. The disease has so far been investigated in three districts of Assam. Careful field observations suggest the specific and contagious nature of the infection. A few forms of pneumonia of different etiology are known to occur in cattle, but the specific nature of this condition was really noteworthy. Almost identi- cal clinical syndromes in affected animals in various centres of outbreak, similar courses of the disease with high mortality and uniform post mortem lesions strengthened the suggestion of its contagious nature and specificity. Transmission experiments carried out in Assam gave sufficient evidence that the disesae can be reproduced in cattle, and that goats were resistant, thus confirming the observations in the field. The causal organism of the disease, as it occurs in Assam, has been isolated at the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, from natural cases, the first one being from Deosiri area. The organism was reported to belong to the same group as that of Pleuropneumonia Contagiosa, i.e. Borrelomyces peripneumoniae. A strain of the organism ob- tained from Sibsagar was also found to be immu- nologically identical with the original Assam strain. There seems to be substantial evidence now to show that the disease, as it occurs in Assam, is the same Contagious bovine pleuro- pneumonia as, occuring in other parts of the world. Besides, in India this disease seems to have been in existence only in the province of Assam. Geographical and climatic conditions of Assam It appears necessary to give a brief description of the natural features and geographical and climatic conditions of the province to appreciate fully the epidemiology of the disease. Assam is essentially a land of hills and valleys abounding in forests and ample vegetation. It is a land-locked province forming the north-eastern frontier of India, al- most touching Tibet, China and Burma. The general topography presents numerous undulations consisting of hills and dales. There are two main valleys288 Bovine Contagious Pleuropneumonia in Assam summer is shorter still. Due to heavy rainfall and annual floods, large areas of low-lying land are inundated, and several areas remain waterlogged and are open for grazing during the winter only. Nature of the epidemic and locality affected Outbreaks of bovine contagious pleuropneu- monia have been observed only in the Assam valley and that too in certain localities lying on either bank of the Brahamaputra and its major tributaries. In the map of Assam (Fig. 1) the affected localities of bovine contagious pleuro- pneumonia are shown. Particulars regarding the outbreaks are given in Table I. TABLE I Serial No. Locality of the outbreak Name of district Date of prevalence 1 Deosiri grazing area Goalpara January 1940 2 Sobanshah village Kamrup June 1940 3 Patakata char, an island in the bed of the Brahmaputra Goalpara August 1940 4 Bordangi forest reserve Goalpara September 1940 5 Barchandra village Kamrup September 1940 6 Patabari forest reserve Goalpara January 1941 7 Majuly area Sibsagar May 1941 8 Kokilamori village Sibsagar October 1941 9 Kadamialgaon village Lakhimpur January 1942 10 Lowly village Kamrup February 1942 11 Dikhowmukh area Sibsagar March 1942 12 Tarabari village Darrang May 1942 13 Kamalabari village Sibsagar June 1942 Data collected in these outbreaks as well as information obtained from other sources indicate that there is no particular season for the incidence of the disease. However, some of the outbreaks have been observed about a week or two after heavy rains. There is also evidence to suggest the possibility of endemic and soil-borne nature of the infection in some of the outbreaks. The disease usually breaks out in the same area or in its neighbourhood from time to time. However, full information regarding periodical nature of its incidence could not be obtained, but there is reliable evidence of its spread in a slow and steady manner. The epidemic is characteristic in its slow and progressive course. In the early stage of the out- break, deaths are not so very frequent or in large numbers, with the result that one might overlook the existence of the infection. The slow and insidious nature of its course in the herds usually extends from four to six months and occasionally even to a period of about a year. Cattle of both sexes and of all ages are equally susceptible. The mortality amongst the affected cattle ranged from 60 to 70 per cent. Cattle are the primary victims, and buffaloes contract the infection, though rarely, at the later stage of the epidemic. In certain outbreaks, no death was observed among buffaloes, in spite of the fact that they were living in the infected locality. Goats and sheep, howsoever intimately in contact with the infected cattle, seem to be resistant to natural infection. The disease has been found prevalent in districts on either bank of the Brahamaputra. In the affect- ed areas, there are some differences in local fea- tures and in the method of maintenance of cattle. To have a correct appreciation of these factors, it is proposed to describe the outbreaks in the three districtsV. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN 289 disease had prevailed in a neighbouring busti about four months earlier. Cattle of both the places usually came in contact during grazing. Information was forthcoming to show that some of the khutis and villages lying on the eastern side of this area had sustained severe losses in previous years, the disease having been known to occur for some years past and to spread to two neighbouring forest reserves290 Bovine contagious Pleuropneumonia in Assam and people generally live nearby. Hence unlike Khutis, cattle population in this area is not con- centrated in one locality, but scattered in small groups, mainly for cultivation. In this area there were about 450 head of cattle, including 150 buffaloes. In the course of two months there were 24 attacks, out of which 15 died. The disease spread in Majuly area, slower due to the scattered condition of cattle population which restricts frequent contact. Here too, cattle movement is very common. It is a practice in this area as well as in villages adjacent to the banks of the Brahamaputra, to remove the cattle to chars in the month of June. The bullocks are kept for field work in the villages. Cattle are brought back in November when the grazing areas are free from inundation. There are two charsV. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN 291 Characteristic lesions are noticed in the thoracic cavity. It contains a large quantity292 Bovine Contagious Pleuropleumonia in Assam (d) At Patabari two goats were kept intimately in contact with two sick calves in the same shed, feeding and drinking water being common. One calf died on the third day and the other ten days later. The goats kept under observation for three weeks remained normal. The experimental reproduction of the condition in goats was unsuccessful. That goats were not susceptible to natural infection has been ascer- tained in all the outbreaks where investigation was undertaken. Hence, the infection appears to possess specific pathogenicity to bovines. In this connection it will be of interest to refer for comparative study to contagious pleuro- pneumonia of goat occurring in Madras, the etiological agent of which has been designated as Borrelomyces peripneumoniae capri [Longley, 1940]. In regard to experimental transmission, it is stated that cattle do not appear to be susceptible to inoculations of massive particulate inocula con- sisting of pneumonic lung, along with the effusion of affected goats. In the field conditions also, the disease was known to affect goats only [Visva- nathan, 1937]. Similar experience has been reported in East Africa too. Mettam [1929] states that ' the specificity of caprine contagious pleuropneumonia may be proved by the im- possibility of infecting other animals than goats with pathological material '. Conversely, goats were found to be resistant or insusceptible to inoculations with pleuropneumonia material of the bovine origin in Assam. Hence, it seems evident that the causal agents of bovine and cap- rine pleuropneumonia, though belonging to the same group, capable of manifesting a pathological condition apparently similar, are different- posses- sing specific species infectivity. LABORATORY FINDINGS As a routine, micorscopical examination of smears of affected parts, exudates, effusions, etc. was carried out. Preliminary cultural test was also undertaken locally. No organism of any significance could be found. Coliform and bipo- lar organisms (Pasteurella ?) and Cocci were observed. Heart blood cultures were usually sterile. It would appear necessary to refer to the isolation of Pasteurella organisms in these cases. Shirlaw [1939] refers to the striking similarity between the pulmonary lesions of contagious bovine pleuropneumonia and the more subacute lesions in haemorrhagic septicaemia. The usually rapid course, so characteristic of haemorrhagic septicaemia in Assam, is conspicuously absent in the outbreaks of bovine pleuropneumonia. Even the isolation of bipolar organisms from the lesions of the lung and pleura would generally be deemed as secondary or terminal invader. Requisite material and full information were sent to the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for detailed research. It was reported that the etiological agent of bovine Pleuro- pneumonia, as it occurs in Assam, has been isolat- ed and that "it (causal organism) passes with ease through Berkefeld 'V' filter and is readily culti- vable on serum agar. It has been maintained by passage in hill bulls. * * * * There is a probability that this organism belongs to the same group as that causing Pleuropneu- monia Contagiosa, i.e. Borrelomyces peripneu- moniae". Further, fresh material from outbreaks in differ- ent districts of Assam, as far apart as possible, was called for by the I.V.R.I. Hence suitable material was sent from Majuly area, Sibsagar district. The affected locality is situated nearly 300 miles north-east of Deosiri area. As a result of the laboratory tests, it was reported that this strain was found immunologically identical with the original Assam virus obtained from Deosiri area. TREATMENT AND CONTROL Treatment was attempted in animals in the early stage of the disease with NovarsenobillonV. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN 293 DISCUSSION It would appear that in India contagious bovine pleuropneumonia has been in existence only in the province of Assam. The disease has a great bearing upon the cattle wealth of the province. Mortality figures rank almost next to those of Rinderpest. Since intensive investigation has been carried out and the causal organism has been isolated, measures of control by way of vaccination will soon be undertaken. It is fortunate that the disease has not shown evidence of spreading to the neighbouring pro- vince of Bengal, lying immediately west of Goal- para district along the course of the Brahamaputra. In the past, as even at the present, large numbers of cattle have been imported into Assam from the neighbouring provinces and States. The ab- sence of exportation of cattle, appears to be the reason for the disease not having spread outside. Finally, it would be of interest to refer to the primary source of infection in Assam, as indicated by observations in the field. As already mention- ed, an attempt was made to trace the source of infection in all the outbreaks. Sufficient evidence was forthcoming to show that the disease had spread from some neighbouring villages where the disease prevailed earlier, or due to purchase or movement of cattle from the infected area. It is significant that the occurrence of the disease has been observed in villages and khutis on either bank of the Brahamaputra, in the charlands on the bed of the river and to a less extent in some localities situated near its major tributaries. In fact, the existence of the disease in Assam is usually confined to the districts lying on either side of the river, from Lakhimpur in the north, Sibsagar, Darrang and Kamrup along its course, to Goalpara on the west. It may be mentioned that the incidence of the disease has been known since 1913-14 and perhaps even earlier. It is remarkable that other parts of the province in the southern region including the Surma valley have been free from the infection. This might be due to the hill ranges lying south of the course of the river, restricting the movement of cattle. The occurrence of the disease in the riverain tracts of Lakhimpur districtTHE CERCARIAL FAUNA OF THE IRRIGATED TRACT OF THE NIZAM'S DOMINIONS, WITH SUGGESTIONS REGARDING THEIR RELATION- SHIP TO THE TREMATODE PARASITES IN MAN AND IN DOMESTIC AND OTHER ANIMALS* By G. D. BHALERAO, D.Sc., Ph.D., Research Officer (Helminthology), Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 5 March 1943) THE present communication is the result of the investigations carried out late in September 1941, and in parts of July and August 1942, in the irri- gated tract of the Nizam's Dominions. The area extends roughly from Nizamsagar to Nizamabad and covers a distance of about 80 miles. Al- though the investigations extended over a period of only five weeks during the early and late parts of the monsoon, they yielded a number of larval flukes which are of interest to the medical and veterinary world. Only five species of molluscs that occur abundantly in the area were examined. Of these Vivipara bengalensis was found to be quite clean, as it is in most other parts of India. The parasites obtained from the other four species are dealt with below. In a few cases, definite information regarding the evolution of the flukes was obtained, but in others it is only possible to suggest their probable development. FURCOCERCOUS CERCARIAE Cercaria of Schistosoma spindalis Liston and Soparkar [1918] worked out the life- history of Schistosoma spindalis, a blood fluke that occurs in cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats and men. Very recently the eggs of this parasite were report- ed to have been found in the fæces of a dog in this country. The cercariæ of this fluke were obtain- ed by Soparkar from the molluscs Indoplanorbis exustus and Limnaea acuminata in the vicinity of Bombay and were studied by him in detail in 1921. The writer obtained species of this cercaria from I. exustus in Achampet, Lingampally, Gunkal, Ibrahimpet and Rampur; from L. acuminata in Borlam and from L. luteola in Achampet, Ibrahim- pet, Bodhan and Yedpally. Of the molluscs examined at these places 4 to 70 per cent were infected with the cercaria. At Achampet the tank from which the snails were collected had two of its sides enclosed but access to the rest of the tank was free to animals. It was interesting to note that only 5 per cent of the molluscs on the bund- side of the tank were infected while those collected from the rest of the tank had an infection as high as 70 per cent. Cercariae indicae XXX This cercaria was originally obtained by Sewell [1922] from I. exustus and L. acuminata in Cal- cutta and from I. exustus in Wynaad. Rao [1934] obtained it from L. luteola and Indoplanorbis exustus in Madras and proved experimentally that these are the larval stages of Schistosoma nasalis, a parasite which produces 'snoring disease' of cattle in this country. The writer obtained this species of cercaria from L. luteola at Borlam and from L. luteola and I. exustus at Banswada. Cercariae indicae XXV This cercaria was first obtained by Sewell [1922 from Indoplanorbis exustus in a marshy ditch near Rambha station, Ganjam. It is a furcocercous cercaria of the Ocellata group. The writer obtain- ed it from I. exustus at Borlam. Cercaria insundlwessi Porter, 1938 This was first recorded by Porter [1938] in South Africa from Limnaea natalensis. The writer obtained it at Arepally in L. acuminata and at Achampet from L. luteola. This is a furco- cercous cercaria and represents a larval stage of some schistosome. Cercariae indicae II This was originally obtained by Kemp and Gravely [1919] from Indoplanorbis exustus at Calcutta. The writer obtained it from the samt host at Borlam and Yedpalli. 15 to 20 per cent of the molluscs examined were infected. XIPHIDIO-CERCARIAE Cercariae indicae XVII This was originally found by Sewell [1922] in I. exustus and L. acuminata in Mahim and in I. exustus in Calcutta. In the Nizam's dominions this was the most commonly occurring cercaria and the infection of the molluscs ranged from 2 to *Paper read before the Indian Science Congress, Section of Medical and Veterinary Research held at Calcutta, January, 1943. 294
G. D. BHALERAO 295 74 per cent. It was found in I. exustus at Acham- pet, Lingampally, Banjpally and Arepally; in L. luteola at Achampet, Rampur, Trimalapur, Bodhan, Yedpally and Nizamabad and in L. acuminata at Banswada. At most of these places the cercaria was found in a free state but at Bans- wada 74 per cent of the molluscs examined har- boured only the encysted stage. Cercariae indicae XXVIII This was originally obtained by Sewell [1922] from L. acuminata at Manipur and at Bombay. The writer obtained it from the same host at Borlam. Cercariae indicae X This was first obtained by Sewell [1922] from I. exustus in Calcutta and Wynaad. The writer obtained it from L. luteola in Bodhan and in Nizamsagar. The infection ranged from 0.5-15 per cent of the molluscs examined. This appears to be larval stage of some plagiorchid or dicroco296 Cercarial Fauna of the Irrigated Tract of the Nizam's Dominions DOUBLE INFECTIONS 1. C. indicae IX and C. indicae XVII were found in I. exustus in Achampet and in Ibrahimpet. This double infection was present in 5.20 per cent of the molluscs examined. 2. C. indicae XXVIII and C. indicae XXX in I. exustus at Rampur. 3. C. indicae XVII and C. indicae XXXV in Indoplanorbis exustus at Rampur. REFERENCES Bhalerao, G. D. (1933). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 3, 120-1 Chatterji, R. C. (1931). Zool. Anz. 95, 177-9 Kemp, S. and Gravely, F. H. (1919). Ind. J. Med. Res. 7, 251-64 Liston, G. and Soparkar, M. B. (1918). Ind. J. Med. Res. 5, 567-9 Porter, A. (1938). Pub. S. Afri. Inst. Med. Res. 42, 492 Rao, M. A. N. and Ayyar, L. S. P. (1932). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 2, 402-05 Sewell, S. (1932). Indian J. Med. Res. 10, (Suppl.), 1-370 Soparkar, M. B. (1921). Indian J. Med. Res. 9, 23-32 Srivastava, H. D. (1938). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 8, 381-5 Vaidyanathan, S. N. (1941). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 11, 243
EFFECT OF HEATING MILK OF INDIAN COWS AND BUFFALOES BY DIFFERENT PROCESSES By C. P. ANANTAKRISHNAN, NOSHIR N. DASTUR and ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA, Imperial Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 13 April 1943) HEATING milk before its consumption is uni- versally practised in India. The method and extent of heating no doubt varies from place to place. The most common practice is to bring the milk to the first boil and then keep it simmering over extended periods. In some places milk is stirred just before and during simmering to pre- vent frothing. Sometimes a few drops of water are added to break the froth and heating continued further, the former being repeated twice or thrice. Milk contains many constituents which are highly sensitive to heat and these no doubt would be affected by the milk being subjected to heat under the various processes. No systematic study has been carried out in this country to esti- mate the loss that occurs during processing as carried out under Indian household conditions. Valuable data are available on the nutritive value of raw vs. pasteurized milks [Stirling and Blackwood 1933; Milk Nutrition Committee, 1937], but on account of low temperatures employed during pasteurization these results are not applicable to Indian conditions. Andross [1940] in Scotland carried out some studies on the loss that occurs on first boiling and mentions that 10 per cent of the nourishment of milk is lost on boiling. The greatest loss occurred in the case of albumin (74.0 per cent), fat (23.5 per cent), proteins (13.5 per cent) and calcium (13.7 per cent). In all such studies in foreign countries the work has only been confined to cow's milk whereas cow's milk and buffalo's milk and mixed milk are peculiar to India and no data are available for them. In the present investigation the changes that occur in the chemical composition of milk when subjected to heat during some of the common methods of processing followed in this country such as first boil, boiling followed by simmering for 10 minutes and pasteurization have been investigated. EXPERIMENTAL As stated above the studies have been carried out with three types of milk, viz. cow's, buffalo's and mixed. The mixed sample was prepared so as to contain 60 per cent of buffalo's and 40 per cent of cow's milk, this being the relative pro- portion in which milk is produced from these two classes of animals under rural conditions in India in general. The milk used was obtained from the Imperial Dairy Institute farm and was used about four hours after production. In all cases six samples of each type of milk were examined, the untreated sample being always tested for comparison. (1) Methods of estimating the milk constituents The milk samples were analysed for the follow- ing :298 Effect of Heating Milk of Indian Cows and Buffaloes 3½ inch depth) with cover and heated over a gas flame to first boil. The temperature reached was about 95°C. and this required on an average 16 minutes to reach. After this the vessel was taken down and allowed to cool to room tempe- rature. The cooled milk was strained and used for analysis. The skin and residue sticking to the bottom and the sides were thus not included in the boiled milk sample but were examined separately. The results of these analyses are given in Tables I to IV, after correcting for the change in volume wherever necessary. B. Heating milk to first boil and simmering it for ten minutes. Milk samples were brought to first boil in the same manner as indicated under A above. After this the flame was lowered so as to allow the milk to simmer for 10 minutes (average temperature 93°C.). After cooling to room tempe- rature and straining, the samples were analysed. The results are shown in Tables V to VII and have been corrected for the decrease in volume in case of boiled samples. C. Pasteurization of milk (holding method). 500 ml. of milk were placed in a glass flask of 1 litre capacity in which a thermometer was immers- ed. The flask was placed in a water-bath at a temperature of 180°F. till the temperature of milk came to 150°F. This usually took about 5 minutes. The flask was then transferred to another bath at 145°.150°F.and kept for a total period of 30 minutes. After this, it was removed to a cold water bath and kept there at room tem- perature till the milk was quite cool. Both during the process of heating and cooling, milk was kept continuously stirred by rotating the flask. The cooled milk was filtered through a tea-strainer and used for analysis. The results of these experiments are given in Tables VIII to X. In the case of the heated samples corrections for changes in volume have been made. (3) Examination of skin and residue from boiled milk samples Boiling was carried out as indicated previously. The skin and residue left were weighed in wet con- dition and then dried to a constant weight. Fat (Rose-Gottlieb), protein and minerals were deter- mined in these samples and the results are given in Table IV. Each analysis was made in duplicate, from well-mixed sample collected from boiling six different samples of milk. DISCUSSION (i) Decrease in volume. As is to be expected the first visible result of applying heat to milk is to remove some of its moisture. The amount of moisture lost varies with the degree of heat employ- ed. At pasteurization temperature this loss amounts to less than 0.5 per cent of the original volume. When milk is brought to first boil in a closed vessel, the decrease in volume is 6.0 per cent and when this heating is continued for 10 minutes the loss increases to 11.0 per cent. In estimating the amount of various constituents actually available, as compared with the original milk, these losses have been taken into considera- tion. (ii) Total solids. Pasteurization temperature as employed here seems to cause almost no loss in any of the constituents of milk. The decrease in total solids as estimated in the present studies goes to constitute the denatured or precipitated matter sticking to the sides of the vessel together with the skin that forms on top of the heated milk. This may not be truly considered a loss, but it is a loss in the sense that these subs- tances cannot be redistributed evenly amongst all the other constituents of such milk once again. Under common household conditions, the skin is oftentimes fed to children and invalids and some- times totally discarded. Bearing these facts in mind, it will be observed from Table I to III that when milk is brought to first boil the loss in total solids amounts to nearly 6.5 per cent. As will be seen later on, this loss is composed largely of fat, proteins and minerals. When simmering is continued for 10 minutes, the loss is very nearly the same, viz. 7.1 per cent. This may be due to the fact that the longer time of heating destroys the creaming property of milk. On ther other hand, the continuous play of heat on the bottom of the container equalizes this effect. (iii) Fat. The loss of fat in boiling is higher than that of any other constituent of milk. A comparison of figures for raw and boiled milk shows that when milk is brought to first boil the loss occurs to the extent of 11.7 per cent, and if the milk is allowed to simmer it amounts to 9.5 per cent. This reduced loss in the latter case is in- teresting and may be ascribed to the fact already stated that longer boiling decreases the creaming property. During the ordinary process of boiling it is not possible to eliminate altogether the loss of fat by preventing skin formation. This was tested on three samples of mixed milk. The samples after being brought to the first boil in the ordinary way were transferred to a glass flask and cooled. The flask was kept under a tap and continuously rotat- ed to prevent the formation of skin. The milk samples showed on analysis an average loss of 5.4 per cent of fat after correcting for the decrease in volume, which amounted to 5.7 per cent. It may also be pointed out that all the three types of milk seemed to react almost the same way with regard to the loss of fat and other consti- tuents, though one would expect a natural
C. P. ANANTAKRISHNAN, NOSHIR N. DASTUR & ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA 299 gradation as buffalo, mixed and cow, depending on the fat content of each class of sample. It may also be pointed out that this skin forma- tion gives the consumer an impression, when milk is drunk hot, that it has become richer than what it would have been if it was taken in cold condition. This, however, has no scientific basis considering the losses already mentioned. (iv) Proteins. Milk contains two very heat labile proteins-albumin and globulin which are likely to be precipitated at the boiling temperature of milk. Wright [1924] has shown that there is no alteration in the caseinogen molecule even after autoclaving the milk at 120°C. for 30 minutes. Heating, however, is accompanied by physical changes in calcium caseinate thus affecting its reaction in coagulation by rennet, etc. As seen from the results in Table IV, the skin and the residue contain a considerable proportion of the proteins. On heating the milk to first boil, the decrease in proteins amounts to 5.1 per cent which increases to 5.8 per cent when it is kept further simmering for 10 minutes. Apart from small amounts of casein which may be entangled during the membrane formation, the main portion of this loss consists of lactalbumin and globulin. Andross [1939] finds a loss of 74.13 per cent in albumin content when milk is brought to first boil. Kieferle [1930] states that heating milk between 100°-115°C. for half an hour destroys 85.6 per cent of albumin. It will be clear from Tables I to VII that heating milk to the first boil, and secondly simmering the same for 10 minutes causes an average loss of 0.17 and 0.20 gram of the protein matter respectively, for every 100 ml. of milk. Taking the average albumin content of milk as 0.45 per cent (reckoned as 13 per cent of the total nitrogen) and assuming that the processing of milk results in the loss of albumin only in the skin and the residue, the total quantity of albumin lost and not made available for consumption would amount to 37.8 per cent in the case of first boil and 44.4 per cent in the case of simmering it for 10 minutes. On the other hand, if we presume that the loss is from both globulin and albumin these values would be considerably reduc- ed. These losses are, therefore, considerably lower than those given by Andross and Kieferle above. (v) Chloride and lactose. A study of the figures given in the previous tables show that these consti- tuents are least affected by heat. Their decrease amounts to about 2.1 per cent in case of both the heat treatments studied. The low destruction of lactose is quite under- standable in view of its known stability to heat up to 145°C. in the dry state. (vi) Acidity and pH. On boiling milk acidity decreases, though the figures for this decrease seem to vary considerably amongst themselves. These results are in agreement with the data given by Whittier and Benton [1926, 1927]. The pH was determined colorimetrically. This method, however, has several disadvantages when applied to a fluid like milk. (vii) Mineral constituents. Heating of milk is known to cause a partial precipitation of the buffer salts, the most noticeable changes being produced in case of Ca and P. The present data show that when milk is brought to first boil the total minerals decrease by 4.8 per cent and Ca and P by 4.1 and 5.5 per cent respectively. When further simmered for 10 minutes, the corresponding aver- age figures for ash, Ca and P are 6.8, 7.9 and 6.9 per cent respectively. Thus increased heating considerably increases the loss of minerals. The results of Mg determinations show a good deal of variation and they should, therefore, be inter- preted with caution. This is due to the difficulty in estimating it in such small amounts. (viii) Citric acid. Citric acid in milk occurs in combination with Ca and Mg. Rogina [1935] found no lowering in the citric acid content of milk either in the just boiled, or boiled for 15 minutes. In the present studies an average loss of 3.0 per cent of the original citric acid present, has been noted. (ix) Rennet coagulation of milk. The decrease in the coagulability of milk subjected to heat treat- ments is well known and is usually ascribed to the precipitation of the calcium salts. Moir [1931], however, correlates the decrease in the rate of re- nnin coagulation with the decrease in the amounts of soluble nitrogen in the whey. It has also been shown that more rapid coagulation takes place soon after heating, but as time progresses the time for coagulation becomes longer, and appears to be stabilized after about four-five hours [Mattick and Hallet, 1929]. In the present studies, time of rennet coagulation was measured after keeping the heated milk for about four hours. A study of the data in Tables VIII to X will indicate that though pasteurization temperature produces very little effect on the constituents of the milks studied, the time required for coagulation with rennet in- creases considerably from 42-55 per cent over that of the corresponding samples of raw milk. In the case of heated milk, the accuracy of the test suffers considerably due to longer time being taken for coagulation and also because the curd consists of much finer particles and has very open texture. However, the data bring out the fact that there is considerable difference in the time required to coagulate heated milk and raw milk. (x) Chemical composition of skin and residue. The results obtained are shown in Table IV. It will be noticed that the skin and residue in wet
300 Effect of Heating Milk of Indian Cows and Buffaloes state form only about 1.5=1.9 per cent of the volume of milk taken. These materials are rich in proteins, fat and minerals. On account, how- ever, of the high moisture percentage, which is mostly due to the retention of milk in the matrix of the substances, any variation in the composi- tion of these substances which may occur after first boil and continued simmering, is likely to be considerably masked and the data obtained thus show that the average composition in both the cases is very nearly the same. (xi) Composition of milk of Indian animals. At present very limited published data exist on this subject. Hence a comparison of the results amongst themselves and also with those collected by foreign workers will be interesting. Such a comparison must, however, be treated with cau- tion on account of the limited data available here. The high percentage of fat in Indian breeds of cattle is too well-known to need any repetition. The protein percentage of cow and buffalo milk are within the limits of foreign figures, but the average for buffalo (3.60 per cent) is slightly higher than that for the cow (3.36 per cent). The lactose content of buffalo's milk is distinctly higher than that of the cow. The average for buffalo's milk is 5.1 per cent which is considerably higher than the figures given in the literature (average 4.75 per cent). Davies [1940] has suggest- ed a close relationship between the lactose and chlorine content of milk, which is expressed by the formula : Lactose (per cent) + 13.5 × Cl (per cent)=6.26. If calculations are made for the figures for raw milk given in this paper, it is found that the average ratio for cow's milk comes to 5.78 for buffalo, 5.98 and for mixed 5.88. On heating, these average figures are decreased to 5.65, 5.86 and 5.82 respectively. Hence, it is seen that Davies' formula needs considerable revision before it can be made applicable to Indian conditions. Recently Raffaelli [1940] has shown that the ratio of lactose to ash in the milk of Italian cows varies from 5.95 to 7.20 with an average of 6.57 and for buffalo's milk, 5.60 to 9.20, averaging 6.86. This ratio (anhydrous lactose : ash) for Indian animals as obtained from the averages in the present studies works out to 6.07 for cows and 6.77 for buffaloes. Allen [1931-1932] has reviewed the existing lite- rature on the mineral constituents of milk. The average ash content of milk of foreign breeds of animals is 0.73 per cent. The data reported here show that the ash content of Indian breeds is just on the border-line or even less than this average. It will be worth investigating if this is due to inherited characteristics or deficiency in the food. The animals employed for this experiment can hardly, however, be expected to suffer from any such deficiencies. Cow's milk seem to contain lower percentages of both Ca (average 0.127 per cent) and P (average 0.092 per cent) than buffalo's, which on an average contains 0.163 per cent Ca and 0.101 per cent P. The latter figures closely approach the concentra- tion of these elements in the milk of foreign breeds of cows. The figures reported in the literature for citric acid content of milk vary within very wide limits, from 0.070 to 0.400 per cent, with an average of 0.180 per cent [Allen, 1931-32]. From the data given here it will be seen that the citric acid content of Indian animals is fairly high and the figures for cow's milk (average 0.225 per cent) are consider- ably higher than those for buffalo's milk (average 0.193 per cent). In India where heating of milk to high tempera- tures is so commonly practised, these figures are of special interest in view of the fact that citrates are known to stabilize milk towards heat and the addi- tion of soluble calcium salts renders milk less stable to heat [Allen, 1932]. SUMMARY (1) When milk is heated to first boil in a closed vessel (practice commonly followed in Indian houses), there is a decrease in its volume up to 6.0 per cent. This change in volume completely masks the change in composition, but when correction is made for the loss of moisture, milk is found to lose about 5 per cent of its important constituents. (2) When milk is allowed to simmer for 10 minutes after boiling, the effects are similar to those obtained with the first boil but the loss of moisture and other constituents with the former is higher. (3) Pasteurization (Holding method) causes very little change in the chemical composition of original milk. (4) Skin and residue obtained from boiled milk samples contain on an average 49.3 per cent fat, 28.1 per cent protein and 4.4 per cent ash. The last is rich in Ca and P. (5) Analysis of samples of mixed milk from Indian breeds reveals that lactose content of buffalo milk is noticeably higher. (6) Both for the cow and buffalo milks the lac- tose chloride relationship, usually found to hold good in other countries, is not applicable to Indian conditions. (7) Ash content of Indian milk, as compared with figures published for foreign breeds, is not very high. Both Ca and P figures for Indian cow are much on the lower side of the average of those pub- lished for foreign cows. (8) Milk of Indian animals is rich in citric acid, that from the buffalo being noticeably lower in this respect than from the cow.
C. P. ANANTAKRISHNAN, NOSHIR N. DASTUR & ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA 301 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors wish to express their thanks to the authorities of the Imperial Dairy Institute, for supplying milk samples used in the present studies. REFERENCES Allen, L. A. (1931-32). J. Dairy Res. 3, 1 Allen, L. A. (1932). Condensing & Drying of Milk, etc. Hannah Dairy Res. Inst. Bul. No. 3 Andross, M. (1940). J. Soc. Chem. Ind. 58, 252 Davies, W. L. (1939). Chemistry of Milk, 50 Golding, J. (1934). Analyst 59, 468 Kieferle, (1930). Handbuch der Milchwirtschaft, edited by Winker. Lampitt, L. H. and Rooke, H. S. (1936). Analyst 61, 654 Mattick, E. V. C. and Hallet, H. S. (1929). J. Agric. Sci. 19, 452 Methods of Analysis of the A. O. A. C. (1940). Milk Nutrition Committee (1939). Milk and Nutri- tion Moir, G. M. (1931). J. Dairy Res. 2, 68 Raffaelli, D. (1940). Ann. Chi. appl., Roma, 1940, 30, 34 ; D. S. A., 1940-41, 2, 238 Rogina, B. (1935). Ztsch. Untersuch. Zenbomittal, 69, 337 Stirling, J. D. and Blackwood, J. H. (1933). Milk in Relation to Pasteurization, Hanna Dairy Res. Inst. Bull. No. 5 Whittier and Benton (1926). J. Dairy Sci. 9, 481 302 Effect of Heating Milk of Indian Cows and Buffaloes TABLE III Analysis of mixed cow and buffalo milk brought to first boil (g.m./100 ml.) sample No. Dec- rease in volume ml.% Total solids Fat Pro- teins Chlo- ride Lac- tose +H2O Acidity (per cent lactic) Sp.gr. corrected to 60ºF. Ash Calcium as Ca. Phos- phorous as P. Magne- sium as Mg Citric acid Curd test (se- conds) at 30ºC. Remarks (c) Raw milk 1 .. 14.74 5.3 3.47 0.074 5.04 0.108 1.028 0.722 0.144 0.097 0.012 0.216 10 See re marks Table V. 2 .. 15.29 6.1 3.59 0.078 4.96 0.111 1.028 0.728 0.144 0.097 0.012 0.199 10 3 .. 14.59 5.5 3.59 0.079 4.86 0.106 1.028 0.701 0.142 0.099 0.012 0.191 11 4 .. 14.57 5.4 3.47 0.073 5.09 0.102 1.028 0.724 0.145 0.097 0.013 0.206 8 5 .. 14.29 5.1 3.48 0.085 5.00 0.101 1.029 0.720 0.146 0.097 0.010 0.201 10 6 .. 14.18 5.0 3.53 0.081 4.92 0.107 1.028 0.723 0.147 0.100 0.013 0.192 10 Average .. (14.61) (5.4) (3.52) (0.078) (4.98) (0.106) (1.028) (0.720) (0.144) (0.098) (0.012) (0.201) (10) (b) Heated milk 1 5.0 13.92 4.6 3.31 0.070 4.95 0.103 1.029 0.697 0.141 0.095 0.012 0.214 165 2 5.0 14.61 5.4 3.43 0.075 4.91 0.099 1.029 0.694 0.136 0.092 0.012 0.197 152 3 7.0 13.14 4.4 3.32 0.076 4.74 0.096 1.030 0.672 0.135 0.091 0.012 0.186 115 4 6.0 13.68 4.5 3.28 0.070 5.01 0.096 1.030 0.689 0.140 0.091 0.012 0.204 110 5 6.0 13.29 4.4 3.31 0.082 4.87 0.094 1.030 0.686 0.142 0.092 0.010 0.199 200 6 6.0 13.44 4.7 3.30 0.077 4.92 0.099 1.030 0.703 0.142 0.094 0.013 0.191 105 Average (6.0) (13.68) (4.7) (3.35) (0.075) (4.90) (0.098) (1.030) (0.690) (0.139) (0.092) (0.012) (0.198) (141) Per cent de crease from averages 6.0 6.4 13.0 4.8 3.8 1.6 7.5 .. 4.2 3.5 6.1 .. 1.5 TABLE IV Analysis of skin and residue (each sample collected from six different samples of boiled milk) Milk used Description Weight of wet residue g.m./100 ml. pH Moisture per cent in wet residue Dry skin and residue (g.m./100 g.m.) Fat Proteins Ash Calcium as Ca Phospho- rous as P Magnesium as Mg Skin and residue from heating to first boil Raw boiled Cow . 1.6 6.2 6.2 75.93 43.6 30.63 4.89 1.15 0.66 0.17 Buffalo . 1.8 6.2 6.2 72.39 46.6 29.23 5.12 1.33 0.61 0.16 Mixed . 1.1 .. .. 73.63 51.3 26.78 4.30 1.21 0.69 0.16 (Average) (1.5) (73.98) (47.2) (28.88) (4.77) (1.23) (0.65) (0.16) Cow . Skin and residue from heating to first boil and simmering for 10 minutes 1.9 6.2 6.2 73.16 50.2 28.19 4.14 1.08 0.66 0.14 Buffalo . 2.1 6.2 6.2 70.41 52.4 24.15 3.88 1.25 0.67 0.14 Mixed . 1.6 6.3 6.3 71.99 51.7 29.84 4.16 1.19 0.73 0.14 (Average) (1.9) (71.85) (51.4) (27.39) (4.06) (1.17) (0.69) (0.14)
C. P. ANANTAKRISHNAN, NOSHIR N. DASTUR & ZAL R. KOTHAVALL 303 TABLE V Analysis of mixed cow milk brought to first boil and simmered for ten minutes (g.m. /100 ml.) Sample No: Dec- rease in volume ml.% Total solids Fat Pro- teins Chlo- ride Lac- tose +H2O Acidity (per cent lactic) Sp.gr. corrected to 60ºF. pH Ash Calcium as Ca. Phos- phorous as P. Magne- sium as Mg Citric acid Curd test (se- conds). 30ºC. Remarks (a) Raw milk 1 .. 13.42 4.6 3.37 0.101 4.51 0.131 1.029 .. 0.697 0.132 0.089 0.014 0.222 .. 2 .. 13.10 4.4 3.22 0.093 4.50 0.120 1.029 6.2 0.692 0.132 0.082 0.015 0.229 14 3 .. 11.86 3.2 3.14 0.098 4.61 0.122 1.030 .. 0.690 0.115 0.076 0.015 0.226 12 4 .. 13.26 4.2 3.28 0.091 4.44 0.135 1.029 .. 0.721 0.129 0.096 0.015 0.216 .. 5 .. 13.32 4.3 3.49 0.100 4.25 0.131 1.030 6.2 0.727 0.134 0.091 0.015 0.200 17 6 .. 13.37 4.2 3.34 0.101 4.36 0.116 1.030 .. 0.717 0.126 0.082 0.014 0.210 16 Average (13.55) (4.2) (3.31) (0.097) (4.44) (0.126) (1.029) (0.707) (0.128) (0.086) (0.015) (0.217) (15) (b) Heated milk 1 12.0 12.68 4.3 3.13 0.099 4.37 0.120 1.032 .. 0.637 0.122 0.082 0.013 0.214 .. Curd test very in efin with heate milk 2 10.4 12.42 4.0 3.11 0.092 4.49 0.116 1.033 6.2 0.672 0.121 0.075 0.014 0.225 345 3 10.6 10.98 2.9 2.96 0.096 4.56 0.113 1.034 .. 0.633 0.109 0.073 0.014 0.216 277 4 10.4 12.54 4.0 3.09 0.091 4.38 0.124 1.032 .. 0.669 0.118 0.086 0.014 0.213 .. 5 11.4 12.40 4.0 3.23 0.096 4.21 0.128 1.033 6.2 0.661 0.124 0.083 0.014 0.191 540 11.6 12.51 3.9 3.10 0.099 4.31 0.109 1.032 .. 0.647 0.117 0.076 0.013 0.202 300 Average (11.1) (12.25) (3.8) (3.10) (0.095) (4.39) (0.119) (1.033) .. (0.653 (0.118) (0.079) (0.014) (0.210) (365) Per cent decrease from averages 11.1 9.6 8.1 6.3 2.1 1.1 5.6 .. .. 7.6 7.8 8.1 6.7 3.2 TABLE VI Analysis of mixed buffalo milk brought to first boil and simmered for 10 minutes (g.m/100 ml.) Sample No. Dec- rease in volume ml.% Total solids Fat Pro- teins Chlo- ride Lac- tose +H2O Acidity (per cent lactic) Sp.gr. corrected to 60ºF pH Ash Cal- cium as Ca Phos- phorous as P. Magne- sium as Mg Citric acid Curd test (se- conds at 37ºC Remarks (a) Raw milk 1 .. 14.94 5.7 3.43 0.068 4.98 0.101 1.030 .. 0.691 0.160 0.100 0.015 0.168 33 For curd test dilute rennet was used for both types of milk 2 .. 16.04 6.6 3.63 0.066 5.03 0.095 1.029 .. 0.712 0.166 0.096 0.016 0.174 57 3 .. 15.74 6.1 3.71 0.066 5.12 0.098 1.031 6.2 0.740 0.163 0.096 0.014 0.188 67 4 .. 15.15 5.7 3.60 0.066 5.06 0.087 1.031 .. 0.737 0.168 0.101 0.015 0.190 65 5 .. 15.75 6.3 3.50 0.060 5.18 0.103 1.030 .. 0.689 0.152 0.094 0.015 0.192 48 6 .. 14.66 5.1 3.60 0.064 5.06 0.107 1.031 6.2 0.692 0.166 0.905 0.015 0.187 47 Average .. (15.38) (5.9) (3.58) (0.065) (5.07) (0.098) (1.030) .. (0.710) (0.162) (0.097) (0.015) (0.183) (53) (b) Heated milk 1 13.4 14.16 5.1 3.20 0.068 4.89 0.090 1.037 .. 0.628 0.149 0.092 0.013 0.163 300 2 11.4 15.17 5.9 3.42 0.067 4.93 0.088 .. .. 0.661 0.153 0.091 0.015 0.169 255 3 11.0 14.61 5.5 3.50 0.063 4.91 0.083 1.033 .. 0.684 0.148 0.091 0.013 0.177 360 4 13.0 14.16 5.0 3.33 0.063 4.89 0.074 1.034 6.3 0.660 0.150 0.093 0.014 0.183 350 5 10.0 14.79 5.6 3.31 0.058 5.02 0.093 1.032 .. 0.658 0.143 0.088 0.014 0.179 255 6 10.0 13.86 4.8 3.43 0.065 4.91 0.096 1.035 6.2 0.654 0.152 0.089 0.014 0.183 .. Average (11.5) (14.46 (5.3) (3.36) (0.064) (4.92) (0.087) (1.034) .. (0.657) (0.149) (0.091) (0.014) (0.176) (304) Per cent decrease from averages 11.5 6.0 10.2 6.1 1.5 3.0 11.2 7.5 8.0 6.2 6.7 3.8
304 Effect of Heating Milk of Indian Cows and Buffaloes TABLE VII Analysis of mixed cow and buffalo milk brought to first boil and simmered for 10 minutes (g.m./100 ml.) Sample No. Dec- rease in volume ml.% Total solids Fat Pro- teins Chlo- ride Lac- tose +H2O Acidity (per cent lactic) Sp.gr. corrected to 60ºF pH Ash Cal- cium as Ca Phos- phorous as P. Magne- sium as Mg . Citric acid Curd test (se- conds) at 37ºC Remarks (a) Raw milk 1 .. 14.27 5.0 3.32 0.074 4.96 0.111 1.031 .. 0.685 0.149 0.091 0.016 0.200 52 For curd test dilute rennet was used for both types of milk. 2 .. 14.75 5.3 3.54 0.072 4.79 0.133 1.031 6.3 0.707 1.156 0.094 0.015 0.225 40 3 .. 14.55 5.1 3.52 0.079 4.87 0.111 1.031 .. 0.720 0.152 0.093 0.015 0.190 62 4 .. 14.41 5.2 3.28 0.069 4.94 0.122 1.030 .. 0.680 0.146 0.091 0.014 0.197 43 5 .. 15.49 6.2 3.69 0.081 4.77 0.199 1.030 6.3 0.715 0.156 0.100 0.016 0.195 65 6 .. 14.84 5.5 3.61 0.081 4.79 0.113 1.031 .. 0.703 0.156 0.094 0.015 0.197 65 Average .. (14.72) (5.4) (3.49) (0.076) (4.85) (0.118) (1.031) .. (0.702) (0.152) (0.094) (0.015) (0.201) (54) (b) Heated milk 1 10.0 13.53 4.5 3.16 0.072 4.88 0.105 1.032 .. 0.671 0.140 0.087 0.014 0.196 225 2 13.0 13.64 4.6 3.30 0.070 4.62 0.124 0.034 6.3 0.656 0.141 0.085 0.014 0.214 145 3 10.0 13.91 4.8 3.38 0.077 4.78 0.104 1.034 .. 0.694 0.140 0.088 0.014 0.189 225 4 12.0 13.57 4.5 3.06 0.067 4.83 0.115 1.034 .. 0.632 0.131 0.084 0.013 0.194 190 5 10.0 14.60 5.7 3.54 0.080 4.64 0.114 1.032 6.3 0.670 0.143 0.094 0.015 0.189 245 6 10.0 13.97 4.9 3.43 0.080 4.64 0.107 1.033 .. 0.660 0.143 0.089 0.014 0.195 240 Average (11.0) (13.87) (4.8) (3.31) (0.074) (4.73) (0.111) (1.033) .. (0.664) (0.140) (0.088) (0.014) (0.196) (217) Per cent decrease from averages 11.0 5.8 10.2 5.1 2.6 2.5 5.9 5.4 7.9 6.4 6.7 2.5 TABLE VIII Analysis of mixed cow milk heated to pasteurization temperature (Holding method) (g.m./100 ml.) Sample No. Dec- rease in volume ml.% Total solids Fat Pro- teins Chlo- ride Lac- tose + H2O Acidity (per cent lactic) Sp.gr. corrected to 60ºF. Ash Cal- cium as Ca. Phos- phorous as P. Magne- sium as Mg Citric acid Curd test (se- co nds) at 30ºC Remarks (a) Raw milk 1 .. 13.82 4.8 3.54 0.092 4.55 0.129 1.028 0.720 0.129 0.096 0.014 0.214 103 For both types of milk di- lute ren- net (1C. P. ANANTAKRISHNAN, NOSHIR N. DASTUR & ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA 305 TABLE IX Analysis of mixed buffalo milk heated to pasteurization temperature (Holding method) (g.m./100 ml.) Sample No. Dec- rease in volume ml. % Total solids Fat Pro- teins Chlo- ride Lac- tose +H2O Acidity (per cent lactic) Sp.gr. corrected to 60ºF Ash Calcium as Ca Phos- phorous as P Magne- sium as Mg Citric acid Curd test (se- conds) at 30ºC Remarks (a) Raw milk 1 .. 15.79 6.0 3.77 0.063 4.99 0.095 1.029 0.724 0.169 0.097 0.014 0.192 85 For both types of milk di- lute ren- net was used. 2 .. 15.52 5.9 3.40 0.062 5.09 0.091 1.028 0.721 0.157 0.094 0.013 0.182 68 3 .. 15.15 5.7 3.71 0.068 5.13 0.098 1.029 0.717 0.167 0.101 0.013 0.188 67 4 .. 15.55 6.3 3.60 0.068 4.99 0.094 1.028 0.706 0.162 0.097 0.014 0.206 80 5 .. 15.09 5.7 3.47 0.067 5.16 0.103 1.029 0.695 0.161 0.095 0.014 0.197 47 6 .. 15.43 5.9 3.47 0.068 5.02 0.106 1.029 0.701 0.165 0.097 0.013 0.189 53 Average .. (15.42) (5.9) (3.57) (0.066) (5.06) (0.098) (1.029) (0.711) (0.163) (0.097) (0.013) (0.192) (67) (b) Heated milk 1 .. 15.73 6.1 3.75 0.064 5.04 0.093 1.030 0.721 0.166 0.099 0.013 0.191 117 2 0.4 15.49 6.1 3.39 0.062 5.08 0.082 1.028 0.723 0.159 0 094 0.013 0.181 90 3 1.0 15.37 5.6 3.71 0.068 5.08 0.082 1.029 0.722 0.169 0.101 0.013 0.189 127 4 0.6 15.57 6.2 3.60 0.068 5.07 0.088 1.028 0.706 0.162 0.097 0.014 0.206 110 5 0.6 15.08 5.8 3.47 0.066 5.21 0.095 1.028 0.693 0.161 0.095 0.014 0.197 105 6 0.6 15.43 5.8 3.47 0.068 5.07 0.098 1.028 0.707 0.165 0.097 0.013 0.192 77 Average (0.5) (15.44) (6.0) (3.56) (0.066) (5.09) (0.086) (1.028) (0.712) (0.162) (0.097) (0.013) (0.192) (104) TABLE X. Analysis of mixed cow and buffalo milk heated to pasteurization temperature (Holding method) (g.m./100 ml.) Sample No. Dec- rease in volume ml.% Total solids Fat Pro- teins Chlo- ride Lac- tose H2O Acidity (per cent lactic) Sp. gr. corrected to 60ºF. Ash Calcium as Ca. Phos- phorous as P Magne- sium as Mg Citric acid Curd test (se- conds) at 30ºC. Remarks (a) Raw milk 1 .. 15.17 5.8 3.70 0.073 4.85 0.127 1.029 0.736 0.152 0.098 0.013 0.203 .. For both types of milk di- lute ren- net was used. 2 .. 14.71 5.3 3.66 0.066 4.72 0.122 1.029 0.742 0.154 0.096 0.013 0.199 87 3 .. 14.26 5.0 3.58 0.077 4.75 0.110 1.028 0.739 0.146 0.096 0.013 0.211 102 4 .. 14.64 5.6 3.65 0.088 4.59 0.106 1.028 0.717 0.142 0.093 0.016 0.185 77 5 .. 14.79 5.4 3.69 0.075 4.75 0.110 1.029 0.729 0.152 0.101 0.015 0.202 80 6 .. 14.40 5.1 3.65 0.068 4.93 0.120 1.029 0.711 0.146 0.092 0.014 0.202 66 Average .. (14.66) (5.4) (3.65) (0.074) (4.76) (0.116) (1.029) (0.729) (0.149) (0.096) (0.014) (0.200) (82) (b) Heated milk 1 .. 15.13 5.9 3.68 0.073 4.85 0.113 1.028 0.737 0.156 0.099 0.013 0.206 .. 2 0.6 14.58 5.3 3.64 0.066 4.71 0.120 1.029 0.738 0.156 0.098 0.012 0.199 113 3 .. 14.37 5.0 3.58 0.076 4.79 0.104 1.028 0.736 0.146 0.097 0.013 0.211 140 4 .. 14.64 5.6 3.69 0.078 4.54 0.106 1.028 0.718 0.142 0.092 0.015 0.186 175 5 0.6 14.75 5.4 3.67 0.075 4.83 0.106 1.028 0.741 0.152 0.100 0.015 0.203 110 6 0.6 14.46 5.1 3.65 0.068 4.88 0.110 1.029 0.708 0.146 0.091 0.014 0.203 85 Average (0.3) (14.65) (5.4) (3.65) (0.074) (4.77) (0.110) (1.028) (0.730) (0.150) (0.096) (0.014) (0.201) (125)
THE EFFICIENCY OF LIME AND WATER GLASS FOR EGG PRESERVATION By A. J. MACDONALD and T. S. KRISHNAN, Poultry Research Section, Imperial Veterinary Researoh Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 8 February 1943,) (With Plate XXI and two text figures) KRISHNAN [1943] demonstrated that indigen- ous methods employed to preserve eggs for a few days during the hot weather were of little value, while some were more harmful than benefi- cial. Lime is one of the oldestA. J. MACDONALD AND T. S. KRISHNAN 307 of their internal quality. At weekly intervals similar sets, each of 12 eggs, were removed from each group for internal quality determination. Though candling is still the only practical method of determining egg quality in unbroken eggs, this method of judgment is somewhat empirical and not very suitable for scientific investigations. In this investigation, the internal quality was measured by determining (a) the albumen index, (b) the yolk index, (c) the percentage of thick white, and (d) the depth of the air cell. The albumen index is the name given to the ratio of the height to the mean diameter of the firm albumen layer. When a high quality egg is broken out on to a smooth flat surface, the yolk is found to be in the centre of a compact layer of thick, jelly-like albumen. The firm al- bumen layer will have minimum area and maxi- mum height, with a sharp, smooth and oval outline. When the quality deteriorates, the thick white layer begins to flatten out losing height and increasing in area, till it ruptures and finally disappears due to complete lique- faction. Hence, the albumen index decreases with deterioration in quality. In very good quality eggs, the index is about 0.1. When the index figure drops to about 0.03, the thick albumen layer usually ruptures, when it is no longer possible to measure the albumen index. The albumen index figures were obtained by a slightly modified form of the method used by Heiman and Carver [1936]. The contents of the egg were gently broken out on to a smooth, flat glass plate and measurements made at the end of two minutes. The height of the firm albumen was measured by means of a sphero- meter. Although in the original method, this height was measured at only one point, it was con- sidered more accurate to take the average of three readings made at representative points on the flat surface of the thick white layer. For the determination of the mean diameter, the long axis of the thick white was measured with sliding calipers. At right angles to it and at the widest point, a second measurement was made. The average of these two figures gave the mean diameter (Plate XXI). The measurement of yolk index and of air cell depth were made according to the procedure outlined by Krishnan [1943]. The percentage thick white was estimated by the sieve method of Holst and Almquist [1931] as described by Macdonald and Krishnan [1942]. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Temperature and humidity Table I gives the average fortnightly figures of the temperatures and the relative humidity in the winter test, and the corresponding weekly figures for the summer test. During the first half of the winter test, the temperature was fairly low and the humidity comparatively high, both conditions being con- ducive to the maintenance of good egg quality. After about the middle of March, i.e., in the second half of the experimental period, the temperature rose considerably and the relative humidity fell to comparatively low levels, thus contributing to a rapid decline in egg quality. TABLE I Record of average temperature and relative humidity in the egg storage room during the experi- mental periods Winter test Summer test Period (fort- night ending) Average Tempera- ture ºF. Average relative humidity per cent Period (week ending) Average Tempera- ture ºF. Average relative humidity per cent 26-12-40 64.0 65 27-5-41 96.4 30 9-1-41 60.8 72 3-6-41 98.4 20 23-1-41 61.8 73 10-6-41 88.2 72 6-2-41 62.6 73 18-6-41 84.0 72 20-2-41 66.6 74 25-6-41 96.4 55 6-3-41 71.9 69 2-7-41 95.1 63 20-3-41 76.0 58 9-7-41 97.4 67 3-4-41 83.7 45 17-7-41 97.5 67 17-4-41 89.1 39 24-7-41 94.9 60 1-5-41 94.8 35 31-7-41 97.9 58 7-8-41 91.0 74 Throughout nearly the whole course of the sum- mer test, from about the end of May to the end of July, the average temperatures were com- paratively steady, ranging from 84.0ºF. to 98.4ºF. Due to monsoon showers the temperatures were lower during the third, fourth and tenth weeks of the experiment. The average relative humidity was low in the first two weeks but remained at fairly high levels (55 per cent or above) during the remainder of the experiment. EFFECT OF FERTILITY During the winter test no differences in be- haviour were observed between fertile and infertile eggs in any of the groups under test. This is due to the fact that the average temperature in the storage room during the first ten weeks was only about 63ºF. It is, therefore, evident that fertility doe s not appreciably affect the keeping quality of eggs, if the storage temperature is below the critical temperature for embryo develop- ment. Though the temperature in the storage room rose above this point and went up to 94.8ºF. in the second half of the experiment, no visible interference due to fertility was observed. This was probably due to the fact that the embryos in all the fertile eggs kept in storage had died within the first ten weeks, so that they behaved
308 Efficiency of Lime and Water Glass for Egg Preservation for all practical purposes as infertile eggs during the latter part of the experiment. In the summer test, however, the average temperatures in the egg storage room during the first and second weeks were 96.4ºF. and 98.4ºF. respectively. Since these temperatures were not far below the optimum incubation temperature, the embryos in the fertile eggs among the control group started developing, prominent blood rings being visible on candling after one week's storage. At the end of each of the two succeeding weeks, embryo development was much, more advanced. All fertile eggs among the controls were spoilt and had become unfit for table purposes, even at the end of the first week. Among the preserved eggs, the fertile ones showed prominent signs of embryo develop- ment (without blood), at each of the periodical candling tests. When these preserved fertile eggs were opened out for quality measurements, the yolks were found either already broken or they broke just after opening, generally at the germ spot region. Hence, these preservatives seemed unable materially to reduce the rate of embryo development under these particular experimental conditions. It was also noted that practically all fertile eggs used in this test showed embryo development (without blood) when stored for one day at ordinary room temperature. Since day- old eggs are about the best obtainable under normal conditions, the initial quality of the eggs used could only have been improved by placing new-laid eggs in cold storage. However, as cold storage is not practical under village conditions, the initial quality of the eggs at the commence- ment of the experiment is probably the very best obtainable in the field. In the summer test the figures recorded re- late only to infertile eggs, for all the fertile ones had to be rejected at the first test owing to embryo development. QUALITY FACTORS (a) Albumen index The progressive changes in the albumen index of the various groups of preserved and control eggs recorded at different stages in the winter and summer tests are given in Table II. The average albumen index at the commencement of the winter test was 0.078. After 14 days' storage, the figures dropped to 0.046, 0.062 and 0.065 in the control, lime and salt and lime water groups respectively. Among the controls there was a further rapid decline to 0.039 and 0.025 after four and six weeks storage. The latter figure only refers to three eggs, as the others were unfit for examination. At subsequent exami- nations, measurement of the albumen index could not be recorded on account of the rupture of the thick whites. The albumen index of both sets of preserved eggs had declined, after four weeks of' storage, to 0.052. Except for a slight rise in quality at six weeks, due probably to experimental error, the figures at each exami- nation progressively declined until the end of the 16th week. The recorded figures, 0.033 and 0.036, obtained at 14 weeks for eggs pre- served in lime and salt and lime water, respective- ly, showed a marked decrease from those of the corresponding groups at the end of 12 weeks. The albumen index figures at 16 weeks were very similar to those obtained at 14 weeks. No figures have been recorded for 18 weeks, as only two of the eggs in the lime preservative and one in the lime and salt preservative had their firm albumen layer intact. The thick white layer was broken in all eggs at 20 weeks TABLE II Albumen index figures for stored eggs Period of storage Winter test Period of storage Summer test Albumen index Albumen index Kept as controls Preserved in lime and salt Preserved in lime water Kept as controls Preserved in water glass Preserved in lime water Initial quality . . 0.078 0.078 0.078 Initial quality. . 0.064 0.064 0.064 2 weeks . . . 0.046 0.062 0.065 1 week .. 0.033 0.047 0.051 4 Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part IV ] PLATE XXI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Measurement of diameter and height of albumen (Courtesy of Poultry Science)
A. J. MACDONALD AND T. S. KRISHNAN 309 The initial quality of the eggs used for the summer test was somewhat below that of those employed for the winter one, the albumen index of the former being only 0.064 as against 0.078 of the latter. As already stated, the figures in this test only refer to infertile eggs. Amongst the control eggs, of the nine examined at the end of each week, only six at the end of the first and one each at the end of second and third weeks were found to be in sufficiently good condition to permit the measurement of the albumen index. Among the preserved lots, there was also a very sharp decline in quality during the first week from the initial 0.064 to 0.047 and 0.051 in the water glass and lime water groups respectively. From 1-4 weeks there was little change in the quality of the albumen index figures in both sets of preservatives. However, at six weeks it was impossible to measure the albumen index in the eggs stored in water glass but in the lime water preserved eggs determinations were made up to eight weeks. (b) Yolk index The yolk index figures recorded for the eggs stored during both tests are presented in Table III. The data show that the initial quality of eggs used in the winter test was better than that in the summer experiment, the average yolk index figures for the former being 0.459 and for the latter 0.395. During the winter trial, the yolk index of the control eggs decreased from 0.459 to 0.406 in two weeks and continued to drop steadily to 0.163 after 14 weeks of storage. Subsequently, all the yolks broke when the eggs were opened for examination. The average yolk index figures of eggs preserved in lime and salt decreased from 0.459 to 0.443 and 0.314 at the end of two and fourteen weeks of storage respectively. The corresponding figures at two and fourteen weeks for the eggs preserved in lime water were 0.451 and 0.332. Whereas among the control eggs all the yolks had broken after 16 weeks of storage, the preserved ones had approximately 75 per cent unbroken yolks at 20 weeks. The average yolk indices of the eggs preserved in lime and salt and in lime water were 0.216 and 0.253 respectively at the end of the experiment. Similar figures in the con- trol eggs were recorded after only 12 weeks of storage. TABLE III Variations in yolk index during storage Period of storage Winter test Period of storage Summer test Yolk index Yolk index Controls Preserved in lime and salt Preserved in lime water Controls Preserved in water glass Preserved in lime water Initial quality . . 0.459 0.459 0.459 Initial quality . . 0.395 0.395 0.395 2 weeks . . . 0.406 0.443 0.451 1 week . . . 0.215 0.271 0.297 4 310 Efficiency of Lime and Water Glass for Egg Preservation the yolk index figures remained fairly steady at about 0.175 and in the latter at about 0.190 during the next five weeks. (c) Percentage thick white Table IV gives a record of the thick white per- centages for the control and preserved eggs during the winter and summer trials. In the winter experiment, there was a continuous drop in the percentage thick white of the control eggs, from an initial 62.2 to 19.4 at the end of 14 weeks; thereafter, no measurements could be made as the albumen could not be separated from the yolk owing to rupture of the yolk sac. In the lime and salt group, the percentage thick white figure declined to 47.7 at six weeks. Sub- sequently, there was a slight rise in the next four weeks to 55.5, and thereafter it declined to 41.0 at 18 weeks. Among those preserved in lime water, there was a slight rise from 62.2 to 63.7 in the first fortnight and after that a fairly continuous decline to 42.5 at the end of 18 weeks. However, the general uniformity of decrease of this factor was departed from in two instances. At eight and sixteen weeks, the figures recorded were higher than those obtained at four and fourteen weeks. No figures have been recorded for either preservative for 20 weeks, as most of the yolks broke on opening out the eggs. TABLE IV Changes in percentage thick white due to storage Winter test Summer test Period of storage Percentage thick white Period of storage Percentage thick white Controls Stored in lime and salt Stored in lime water Controls Stored in water glass Stored in lime water Initial quality . . 62.2 62.2 62.2 Initial quality . . 50.8 50.8 50.8 2 weeks . . . 60.1 59.9 63.7 1 week . . 50.9 50.2 48.3 4 A. J. MACDONALD AND T.S.KRISHNAN 311 TABLE V Fluctuations in air-cell size observed during storage Winter test Summer test Period of storage Depth of air-cell in eggs (mm.) Period of storage Depth of air-cell in eggs (mm.) Controls Preserved in lime and salt Preserved in lime water Controls Preserved in water glass Preserved in lime water Initial quality . . 4.0 4.0 4.0 Initial quality . 3.7 3.7 3.7 2 weeks . . . 6.6 3.2 3.9 1 week . . . 8.1 3.1 3.1 4 312 Efficiency of Lime and Water Glass for Egg Preservation [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Record of temperature and relative humidity in the egg storage room. the start of the trials were about 65&deg;F. in the winter and about 96ºF. in the summer. The albumen index, yolk index and percentage thick white figures, obtained after one week's storage at room temperature in the summer test, were only reached after 5, 13 and 6 weeks respectively of storage during the winter test. In the summer test, even among the preserved infertile eggs, the quality, as measured by albumen index, yolk index and percentage thick white, after a fortnight of preservation in lime water, had deteriorated to the level reached by eggs pre- served in the same substance during winter only after 10, 20 and 12 weeks of storage respectively. In the winter test, the control eggs after eight weeks of storage had practically no larger air-cells than the controls stored for two weeks under summer conditions. While the comparatively low tem- perature and high humidity prevalent in the storage room during the first half of the winter test enabled the maintenance of egg quality over fairly long periods, the high temperature and low humidity prevalent during the initial weeks of the summer experiment had a very adverse effect on the keeping quality of the eggs. From a study of the graphs in Fig. 2 it will be seen that preservation of eggs in lime water, lime and salt or water glass was of definite benefit. While, however, in the more favour- able conditions of winter, storage in these pre- servatives might be carried out with advantage for about 18-20 weeks. in summer the period was reduced to about 10-11 weeks. No material difference in the efficiency of these three preservatives for storing eggs at either period of the year was observed. There was, however, a slight advantage in favour of lime water, which was confined to the slightly higher yolk indices of the eggs preserved in this material in both tests. Since lime water is the cheapest of the three preservatives used and is also the simplest to prepare and handle, it should normally be used in preference to the other two preser- vatives. The edibility of the control and preserved eggs was compared by boiling and tasting a few from each of the groups at the periodical examinations. In the winter test, equally good results were obtained with fertile and infertile eggs. It was noticed that control eggs remained fairly palatable till about 10-12 weeks, though at this age they were much below the standard of fresh, day-old eggs. The preserved ones, however, only reached the same low stage of palatability at the end of 20 weeks of storage. During the summer test, the fertile eggs in the control group were rejected as inedible, even at the end of the first week, owing to embryo development and the infertiles were found to be only just edible at the end of two weeks. When preserved, the fertile eggs were found to be very poor in eating quality at the end of two weeks, probably on account of embryo development,
A. J. MACDONALD AND T. S. KRISHNAN 313 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Progressive changes in the interior quality of eggs during storage.
314 Efficiency of Lime and Water Glass for Egg Preservation while the infertiles continued to be edible even after 11 weeks of storage, though by this time they were much less palatable than fresh eggs. Thus the preservation of eggs in lime or water glass lengthened the useful life of eggs, both during winter and summer. Fertile and in- fertile eggs with, or without, preservatives kept equally well in the winter, but in the summer fertile eggs soon became inedible under ordinary room conditions, and preservation with the materials under trial did not prove of much material value. As the practice of running males and females to- gether is almost universal under village condi- tions, intensive propaganda is necessary to induce owners to produce infertile eggs only during the hot weather, in order to prevent spoilage on account of embryo development. The desired result can only be obtained by demonstrating to the vil- lager that egg production is not affected by the presence or absence of the male, and that the pre- sence of the male during the hot season lowers the keeping quality of the eggs and interferes with market demands and prices. CONCLUSIONS (1) In northern India fertile and infertile eggs produced in the beginning of December remain edible for a period of about 10 weeks when stored under ordinary room conditions. During this period fertile eggs store equally as well as infertile eggs. (2) Fertile and infertile eggs produced in December and stored in lime and salt and lime water retain their physical characteristics, as judged by thick white percentage, albumen index and yolk index, much longer, even under ordi- nary room temperature, than eggs not placed in preservatives. Eggs in both these preservatives remain edible for about 20 weeks. During the cold weather, fertile and infertile, eggs keep equally well in both preservatives. (3) Fertile eggs produced in the hot weather become inedible, owing to embryo development, in less than one week when stored under ordi- nary room conditions. (4) The rate of deterioration of infertile eggs, as judged by depth of the air-cell, the thick white percentage, the albumen index and the yolk index, is much more rapid in the summer than in the cold weather. Under ordinary room conditions, infertile eggs become inedible, after about two weeks in the hot weather. (5) Infertile eggs preserved in lime water and water glass, even at room temperature, dur- ing the hot weather retain their physical charac- ters much better than non-preserved eggs. Eggs stored in these preservatives, though less palatable than fresh eggs, remain edible for a period of over 10 weeks. Storing fertile eggs in preservatives at room temperature is useless during the hot weather, as they become inedible in two weeks. (6) The three preservatives tested proved of equal value, save that eggs preserved in water glass retained their air-cell intact over a longer period. (7) As lime water is cheaper than the other preservatives, it can be recommended for general use in preference to either lime and salt or water glass. REFERENCES Heiman, V. and Carver J. S. (1936). Poul. Sci.15, 141 Holst, W. F. and Almquist, H. J. (1931). Hilgardia 6,49 Krishnan, T. S. (1943). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 13, 127 Macdonald, A. J. and Krishnan, T. S. (1942). Indian J.Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 12, 318
ON THE RELATIVE VALUE OF CERTAIN LARVIVOROUS FISHES FROM THE PUNJAB, WITH NOTES ON THEIR HABITS AND HABITATS By HAMID KHAN, M.Sc., LL.B., Ph.D. (Cantab.), F.A.Sc., Game Warden, Punjab (Received for publication on 16 January 1942) IT has been well recognized that fish play an important part in regulating and controlling the intensity of malarial infection. In India, from time to time, various zoologists and medical men have called attention to the fact that there are several species of fish in this country which feed on mosquito larvae [Sewell and Chaudhuri, 1912]. Of late years, literature has been slowly gathering in volume on the proved utility of Indian fish as mosquito destroyers. Much of this literature has been reviewed by Prashad and Hora [1936]. Of the later works, mention may be made of contributions by Sen [1937], Roy [1938], Hora and Nair [1938], John [1940] and Job [1941, 1, 2 and 3]. The Fisheries Department in the Punjab has been making free supply of larvivorous fish from its Fish Farms to various public bodies, Anti- Malarial Officers, and Public Health Departments for the last 12 years or so and also been conducting various experiments on the capacity of indigenous and exotic larvivorous fish for destroying mosquito larvae and on their tenacity to live in stagnant waters. An opportunity is now taken to present the results of these investigations in this paper. MATERIAL AND METHODS The material for study was collected from tanks situated on the estate of Punjab Agricultural College, Lyallpur, and lying in the vicinity of the Fisheries Laboratory where investigations were carried out. The tanks are brick laid, fed by canal water and are mainly used for storing water for cattle. They are all stocked with larvivorous fish, and it is interesting to note that mosquito larvae are rarely found in these tanks, though they may be present in abundance in the pools formed in the supply channel, which feeds the tanks. Sometimes when a tank is understocked, the larvae make their appearance and further introduction of these fish soon frees it of the mosquito menace. The tanks are rich in Crustacea, Rotifers, Diatoms and Euglena Corixa (Rhynchota), larvae of Coleop- tera, Diptera, Hymenoptera and a few Gastropods. Of the aquatic weeds, Hydrilla is met in two of the four tanks, while decayed leaves and algæ are present in all of them. The fish caught from the tanks were killed by pithing their head with a pair of forceps imme- diately on capture and brought to the laboratory for systematic examination of their gut contents. They were dissected on the day of their capture, the time that elapsed between the capture and dissection of the fish varied from 15 to 30 minutes. The fish were cut open ventrally, the gut removed on a slide and its contents gently squeezed out from one end and examined under the microscope.1 The number of mosquito larvae in a tank was determined by collecting the larvae with a hand net, each along four square feet surface area of the tank2. A small conical linen net, 12 inches wide at the mouth and 24 inches deep, with a bamboo handle was used. Counting of mosquito larvae was done by suction with a filter pump, which was attached to a tap and water allowed to run. At the suction end of the filter pump a bottle, fitted with a rubber cork with two glass tubes, was inserted. One glass tube was connected with the suction end of the filter pump and the other tube was used for collecting the larvae which were placed in a dissecting dish. The larvae as they were sucked into the glass bottle could easily be counted in a very short time. Gaseous analysis of water for determination of dissolved oxygen was done by modified Winkler's method as recommended by American Public Health Association [1936], and of absorbed oxygen by Forchammers' method [Stocks, 1932]. The amount of carbon dioxide was determined by Seylers' method as described by Kemmerer, Bovard and Boorman [1923-24] and pH values were found by Hellige Comparator. LARVIVOROUS SPECIES OF FISH IN THE PUNJAB The larvivorous fishes of the Punjab, according to the system followed by Prashad and Hora [1936], may be grouped into three main divisions : 1. Predaceous species, such as Cat-Fishes (Silu- roidea), and Murrel (Ophiocephalidae). Their utility as larvivores is marred by their predaceous habits, as in their adult stage they feed on smaller species of fish. Introduction of such fish in tanks where smaller species have been stocked is, there- fore, not recommended; 1. The stomachs of Colisa and Ambassis were cut open and their contents removed. The contents of intestine, however, were gently squeezed out for qualitative study of food. Job [1941, 2], recommends slitting open the gut for allowing the preservative to act on the gut contents. For qualitative and quantitative study it is desirable to cut open the gut, wash and remove the contents with a brush. As the present study was made on freshly killed fish, it was not considered necessary to cut open the gut for the action of the preservative. 2. An approximate estimate of the number of mosquito larvae and Crustacea present in the tanks was made by use of hand net. For determination of mosquito-larvae density, methods described by Christophers, Sinton and Covell [1936], and Job [1941, 1] are recommended. 315
316 Relative Value of Certain Larvivorous Fishes from the Punjab 2. Fry of larger carp, such as Rohu [Labeo rohita (Hamilton)], Mirgal [Cirrhina mrigala (Hamilton)], Theila [Catla catla (Hamilton)], and others. Utility of fry of large carps of the family Cyprinidae as larvivores has also been mentioned by Thomas [1927], Chatterjee [1933, 1934] and Prashad and Hora [1936]. When introduced into the tanks at Lyallpur and Chhenawan, the fry of carp definitely kept down the incidence of mosquito larvae. The capacity of carp fry to devour mosquito larvae was further demonstrated in the laboratory by feeding them on these larvae, and in the field by study of their stomach con- tents which, in addition to mosquito larvae, were found to contain Crustacea as well, thus de- monstrating the fact that the fry were top feeders. But the carp in their adult stage attain a large size, growing to 3 feet or more in length and become mostly bottom feeders. It is only in their early stage ranging in size from 2 to 8 inches, that they feed on mosquito larvae; 3. Small carnivorous species such as those be- longing to the families Anabantidae, Amb- assidae and Cyprinidae. These small species feed on mosquito larvae, and are cultivated in large number at the Departmental Fish Farm at Chhenawan. The various species, specially recommended for stocking tanks and ponds as an anti-malarial measure by the Department are: Colisa lalia (Hamilton), Colisa fasciata (Bloch & Schn.) (Anabantidae), Ambassis baculis (Hamilton) (Ambassidae), and Barbus (Puntius) sophore Hamilton (Cyprinidae)1. Gold Fish (Carassius auratus L.), an exotic species, is also known to destroy mosquito larvae. The fish is cultivated at Lyallpur and its introduction in ornamental tanks is strongly recommended. CAPACITY TO DESTROY MOSQUITO LARVAE A. In captivity (i) Feeding capacity2. One specimen of each of the species Colisa lalia and Ambassis baculis was kept in a bowl, containing 3¼ lb. of water and fed continuously for 12 days in the month of May, on known number of mosquito larvae each day. The larvae left uneaten in the bowls at the end of 24 hours were counted. Colisa lalia was found to have devoured 1,778 larvae during that period, or 148 larvae per day, and Ambassis baculis had eaten 1,632 larvae, or 136 larvae per day (Table I)3. Feeding capacity of Barbus (Puntius) sophore and Carassius auratus was determined by keeping three specimens of each species in separate bowls containing 4 lb. of tank water, and feeding them in April on known number of mosquito larvae each day. The larvae left uneaten in the bowls at the end of 24 hours were counted. Three Barbus (Puntius) sophore consumed in 15 days 4,101 larvae, giving an average of 90 larvae per fish per day, and three Gold Fish, in 15 days, consumed 6,238 mosquito larvae on an average of 138 larvae per fish per day (Table II). (ii) Feeding on non-living matter.HAMID KHAN 317 During the first quarter of the hour, the fish filled their stomachs with the larvae, in the second quarter the larvae passed on to the intestine, in the third quarter the food had moved on to the mid gut, and at the end of 90 minutes the larvae were seen in the posterior part of the gut as well. Similar experiments on the intensity of digestion in Panchax panchax1 were carried out by Hora and Nair [1938]. It is interesting to note that Colisa lalia exhibits as great an intensity of diges- tion as P. panchax, as in the experiment, 20 Colisa lalia had, between them, devoured 564 mosquito larvae in 1½ hours, out of which 511 were found in stomach and 53 in intestine, while 20 P. panchax [Hora and Nair, 1938], fed on mixed diet and dissected two at a time at intervals of 30 minutes, accounted for 280 mosquito larvae and pupae, 16 Chironomid larvae, 14 water mites, 13 Corixiid bugs and 1 May-fly nymph in five hours. (b) In another experiment ten starved Colisa lalia were fed for an hour on abundance of mosquito larvae and were then transferred to another receptacle containing clear water without any food. The fish were dissected in two lots of five specimens each after two hours and 3¼| hours respectively to find out the time taken by the food to pass from the stomach into the gut. In the first lot, one fish had four mosquito larvae in the stomach and the other had 10, while intestines in all the fish were full of digested remains of larvae. In the second lot, dissected after 3¼ hours, stomachs were empty, while intestines were full of digested remains. The food, obviously, had passed totally into the gut within three hours. (c) Four starved Colisa lalia were fed for 15 minutes on mosquito larvae and then put in a jar containing clean water at 8-30 a.m., tempera- ture of water being 90ºF. In two hours their excreta came out showing that the food had been digested. The fish dissected after two hours, i.e. at 10-30 a.m., had two mosquito larvae in its stomach and digested food in posterior part of the gut, while another specimen dissected at 11 a.m., i.e. 2½ hours after feeding, had its stomach empty and digested food in posterior part of the gut. In Colisa lalia, therefore, it may be said with some confidence that food takes two to three hours to travel from mouth to anus. B. In field (i) Feeding capacity. Capacity of the larvi- vorous fish to feed on mosquito larvae in tanks and ponds was studied by examination of their gu contents. The result of the investigations showt (Table III), that Colisa lalia is as active in the field as in the laboratory in devouring mosquito larvae. When introduced into a tank where mosquito larvae are to be found, these fish have invariably been found to feed on larvae. It is only occasionally that some algal filaments or other vegetation are found in their gut. Out of 112 guts of Colisa studied during the various months of the year, 32 contained algae or green vegetation. In August, specimens of Colisa, studied from one of the tanks at Lyallpur, had numerous green, round bodies and Diatoms. The contents of the guts looked like a green mass mixed with semi-digested remains of numerous Crustacea (Daphnia and Cyclops), and Rotifers. Study of these microscopic animals from the tank from which Colisa were netted showed that these Crustacea and Rotifers had green bodies in their guts. Evidently the green vegetation seen in Colisa was not eaten by it directly, but was the one consumed by the Crustacea and the Rotifers on which the fish had fed. In Ambassis, out of 109 guts examined, 15 only had any vegetation. The fish, however, feeds voraciously on Crustacea, especially Cyclops. Its cyclopscidal activities have recently been demonstrated by Job [1941, 1]. Barbus (Puntius) sophore is an active larvivorous fish for demonstration purposes in the laboratory, but its usefulness to destroy mosquito larvae in tanks and ponds is rather doubtful. Sen [1937] found that the food of these fish 'consists almost entirely of the plankton flora and filamentous algae, such as Spirogyra and Oscillatoria. Only a small proportion (less than 10 per cent) of the fish was found to have traces of animal food which consisted of minute Crustacea of the groups Copepoda and Cladocera'. The present investi- gation corroborates Sen's observations. The fish mostly feeds on mud, decayed vegetation, acquatic weeds, and occasionally relishes mosquito larvae. Out of 102 stomachs, studied during the year, 77 had green vegetation, algae and weeds The utility of carp minnows as controlling agent for mosquitoes is said to lie in their algivorous activities. These fish feed on algae and thus prove useful in reducing the food of the larvae [Prashad and Hora, 1936]. Roy [1938] also refers to the destruction of acquatic vegetation in the ponds in Java by Puntius javanicus, and remarks that 'where the fish are in sufficient numbers the vege- tation in the ponds disappears completely.' (ii) Number of fish required to stock a tank. In one of the tanks at Lyallpur, measuring 60 ft. by 50 ft., 30 Ambassis baculis and 30 Barbus (Puntius) sophore were introduced in March Three weeks later it was observed that mosqui- toes were breeding freely, and their population 1 Syn. Aplocheilus panchax (Hamilton).
318 Relative Value of Certain Larvivorous Fishes from the Punjab ranged from 4 to 17 larvae per sq. ft. surface area. The tank was, therefore, further stocked with 50 Colisa lalia, 75 Ambassis baculis and 50 Barbus (Puntius) sophore. Study of gut contents of two specimens of each species caught from the tank daily, for three continuous days, showed that the fish were devouring the larvae voraciously and that the mosquito population had declined (Table IV, a, b, c). On the third day it was found to be two larvae per 4 sq. ft. surface area. On the same day a fresh supply of 20 Colisa lalia, 50 Ambassis baculis and 50 Barbus (Puntius) sophore was introduced into the tank, and another lot of 50 Ambassis baculis was added to it on the 7th day. On the 16th day, the tank was free from mosquito larvae. The study of the gut contents of these fish was, however, continued till the middle of June. During this period it was observed, that in Colisa the mosquito larvae were present in 74 per cent of the fish examined, in the case of Ambassis, 58.8 per cent had them, while in Barbus (Puntius) sophore, 4.8 per cent had remains of mosquito larvae. The number of larvivorous fish put in the tank to free it of the mosquito larvae, excluding those taken out for study or picked out dead, was 300. This number included 130 Barbus (Puntius) sophore which are not active larvivores in the field. It may, therefore, be recommended that in order to achieve complete extermination of mosquito larvae in the shortest possible time, a population of one fish per 18 sq. ft. surface area of the tank is needed, i.e., about 2500 fish per acre are required to produce any tangible results. TENACITY TO LIVE IN STAGNANT WATERS It is an admitted fact that village ponds in almost all cases receive some sewage. In order to test the tenacity of the species to live in stagnant waters, certain experiments were carried out in the laboratory. It was observed that Colisa lalia lives comfortably in stagnant waters. When introduced in a bowl containing water from drain, it remained alive till the duration of the experi- ment, i.e. for one week, and did not show any sign of distress. Under similar conditions Ambassis baculis and Barbus (Puntius) sophore died within five hours. The temperature of water was 80ºF. In another experiment, specimens of Colisa lalia, Ambassis baculis and Barbus (Puntius) sophore were kept in separate bowls, of 7 litre capacity, containing ordinary tank water, water from city sewage, and sewage water mixed with tank water respectively. In tanks, which do not receive any sewage and are occasionally repleni- shed from canal, all these species live, flourish and breed without restriction. In sewage water, which has an offensive smell, and is dark in colour, these fish die sooner or later, while in sewage and tank water, mixed in equal proportion, Colisa continues to live but the other two species live only for a few hours. These results are tabulated as under :HAMID KHAN 319 HABITS AND HABITATS Chaudhuri [1911] outlined the necessary characteristics of fishes to be selected for the destruction of mosquito larvae, and Covell [1927] enumerated certain requirements, based on Chaudhuri's paper, as necessary for a really useful larvicidal form. Most of these characters and requirements are to be found in these larvivorous forms from the Punjab. These fish are small in size and range from 2 inches to 4 inches in length. They are hardy and flourish both in deep and shallow waters. They breed freely in confined waters, such as tanks and ponds. They are able to stand transport and handling, and have been transported successfully to long distances. They are difficult to catch and are able to escape their enemies to some extent. They are worthless and insignificant as food. Study of their stomach contents shows that they are top feeders and carnivorous. Breeding habits All the three indigenous species of larvivorous fish mentioned above have spawned successfully in tanks and ponds :320 Relative Value of Certain Larvivorous Fishes from the Punjab because digestion and disintegration of the food continued in them. Further, Sen did not conduct the investigations on the food of these fish for the whole of the year, but based his conclusions on the results obtained from a study for a month or so1. Sen's methods and techinque have been previously criticized by Hora [1937]. The present investigations show that in Colisa lalia the food consumed consists of mosquito eggs and larvae, Dipterous larvae, ColeopteraHAMID KHAN 321 Kemmerer, G., Bovard, J. F. and Boorman, W. R. (1923-24). North-Western lakes of the United States, Biological and chemical studies with reference to possi- bilities in production of fish. Bull. U. S. Bur. Fish. Washington, 39, 51-140 Mookerjee, H. K. (1939). Report of the scheme for the investigation of the life-history, bionomics and develop- ment of fresh-water fishes of Bengal. Imperial Council Agricult. Res. New Delhi, p. 7 Prashad, B. and Hora, S. L. (1936). A general review of the probable larvivorous fishes of India. Rec. Mal. Surv. India, 6, 4 Roy, D. N. (1938). On the control of malaria-mosquitoes in Bengal by use of predaceous fish and on the habits of two of them. .J. Mal. Inst. India 1, 405-16 Sen, P. (1937). On the food factors of the so-called mos- quito destroying fishes of Bengal322 Relative Value of Certain Larvivorous Fishes from the Punjab TABLE Monthly comparison of gut con baculis and Barbus Colisa lalia (Hamilton) Ambassis baculis (Hamilton) January February March April May June July August September October November December Total January February March April May June Number of guts exa- mined . . . 9 7 9 20 6 5 6 7 4 14 14 11 112 4 5 9 12 6 3 Gut contentsHAMID KHAN 323 III tents of Colisa lalia, Ambassis (Puntius) sophore Barbus (Puntius) Sophore (Hamilton) Remarks July August September October November. December Total January February March April May June July August September October November December Total 7 10 9 15 14 15 109 4 4 7 16 5 9 6 5 3 14 14 15 102 ... ... ... ... 36 3 39 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... The figures denote the number of organisms found in the guts. ... ... ... ... ... 5 88 ... ... 1 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 n n n n n n n ... ... ... n ... p p p n p p p n n n n n n n n ... ... d n p n n n n n n p n ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 9 99 28 ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n n n n n ... ... p p ... n ... p n p p ... n n n n n n n n ... ... ... p ... n ... p n p P ... n ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n n ... n ... ... ... ... n ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n n n n ... ... ... n n ... ... ... ... ... ... (4) (4) (4) (6) (10) (3) ... (5) (5) (3) (14) (13) (12) (79) These figures de- note the num- ber of guts. ... ... ... ... ... (4) (8) (15) (4) (4) (6) (12) (3) (6) (4) (3) (14) (10) (11) (77) Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil ... Nil Nil Nil 2 to 17 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil ...
324 Relative Value of Certain Larvivorous Fishes from the Punjab TABLE IV (a) Summary of gut contents of each Colisa lalia, caught from Student Farm Tank at Lyallpur during April, May and June, 1941 Name of month April May June Serial number of guts examined 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Mosquito: Larvae . . 4 6 16 16 22 n 16 15 11 12 11 9 18 11 17 65 16 3 ... ... 6 7 ... ... ... ... ... Crustacea: Eggs . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n ... ... n n n n n Young and adult . . d d n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n 14 61 p n n n n n n Diptera: Larvae . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... Coleoptera: Adult . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... Unidentified Larvae . ... ... 4 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 4 Rotifers: Eggs . .. ... n n n ... ... n n n n n ... ... ... n n ... n ... ... n n ... n n n n Young and adult . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 7 n ... n n n n Euglena . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n n n n n ... n n n ... Diatoms . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n ... ... n n n n n n ... Algae, seeds, etc. ... p p p ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... p p p p ... ... ... ... P Population of mos- quito larvae per 4 sq. ft. surface area . . 7 17 5 2 8 Nil 8 Nil Nil Nil TABLE IV (b) Summary of gut contents of each Ambassis baculis caught from Student Farm Tank at Lyallpur during April, May and June, 1941 Name of month April May June Serial number of guts examined 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Mosquito: Larvae. . 9 11 8 nd .. 1 25 8 10 6 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... Crustacea: Eggs . . ... n n ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n ... ... n ... ... Young and adult nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd Mollusca: Young and adult ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rotifers: Eggs . . n n ... n n n n n n n n 4 ... ... n ... ... Young and adult ... nd ... nd nd nd ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... nd nd nd Mud, gravel, sand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... p p ... ... ... Algae, seeds etc. . P ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... P p p ... ... Population of mosquito larvae per 4 sq. ft. sur- face area . 7 17 5 2 8 Nil Nil Nil pHAMID KHAN 325 Summary of gut contents of each Barbus (Puntius) sophore caught from Student Farm Tank at Lyallpur during April, May and June, 1941 Name of month April May June Serial number of guts examined 1 2 3 4 5 0 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Mosquito: Larvae . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Crustacea: Eggs . . ... n n ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n ... Young and adult ... n n n ... ... n n n ... ... ... 8 n n ... ... n n n ... Unidentified Larvae . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... d d ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... Mollusca: Young and adult ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Rotifers: Eggs . . ... n n ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Young and adult ... n n ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n n n Euglena . . ... ... ... ... n ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n n ... ... n n n n Diatoms . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... n n ... n n n n n n Mud, gravel, sand ... ... p p p p p p p p ... ... p p p ... ... ... ... ... ... Algae, seeds, etc. ... ... p p p p p p ... P ... ... p p P ... ... ... ... ... ... Population of mosquito larvae per 4 sq. ft. sur- face area . 17 5 2 8 Nil 8 Nil Nil Nil p-indicates presenca. d-semi-digested remains. n-numerous. The figures denote number of organisms found in the gut.
SORGHUM HELEPENSE PERS POISONING IN CATTLE AND SHEEP* By H. S. BAWA, M. R. C. V. S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Sind, Karachi (Received for publication on 20 March 1943) (With Plate XXII) IT is well known that a large number of grasses (Gramineae) forms an important source of palat- able fodder for livestock. When the young foliage is wilted or stunted by frost, injury or drought, some plants of this family become mark- edly poisonous to livestock on account of the formation of excessive quantities of a cyano- genetic glucoside which is readily converted into hydrocyanic acid by enzymotic action. Steyn [1929] considered this phenomenon to cause severe losses in livestock in the arid and semi-arid areas of South Africa ; Henrici [1926] found that certain grasses produced prussic acid very soon after the process of wilting had set in, whilst others did so at a later stage. Although considerable literature is available in other countries on the toxicity of different members of gramineae at different stages of their growth, little is known in India on plants other than Sorghum vulgare [Benson and Sobha Rao 1906; and Acharya 1933]. In this article, the poisoning of cattle and sheep by Sorghum helepense Pers, as observed under ordinary grazing conditions, is described. Sorghum helepense Pers (barwari grass, Ajmer- Merwara, dadam, N.-W.F.P., baru, Hindi) is com- mon throughout India. It is found in areas at all altitudes from sea level to a height of 7,000 feet. It is a tall gregarious, perennial grass (Plate XXII) common in cultivated and uncultivated soil and also in hedges and along the banks of water- courses. It, however, appears to thrive best on well-drained soil. It is usually found in wild state. Burtt-Davy [1903-04] considered it as one of the most precious weeds introduced by human agency. Bor [1941] has stated that it is very suitable for hay if cut when not more than 3 feet high and makes excellent silage. Whemer [1929] and Couch [1932], however, have pointed out that under drought conditions it may develop dan- gerous amounts of prussic acid. Manley [1932] and Mathews [1932] reported deaths of dairy cows and sheep by Sorghum helepense poisoning. Chopra and Budhwar [1940] instance Sorghum hele- pense as one of the two (the other being Sorghum vulgare), which, when wilted or stunted through drought condition, have caused serious outbreak of poisoning among livestock. They allege that it has been responsible for serious losses of recent years in the N. W. F. P. Ajmer-Merwara is a typically semi-arid area with an average rainfall of 10-12 inches. This grass grows in abundance in a wild state in Beawar, sub-division of Ajmer-Merwara. In the month of May when the shoots of Sorghum hele- pense were very young, sudden deaths of 35 sheep and two cows are reported in a herd that grazed on the area where Sorghum helepense was growing. Symptoms. The chief symptoms observed were acute colic, tympany, profuse salivation, great excitement, shivering, anxious look, dilatation of pupils, convulsions, coma and death within one to two hours after the ingestion of the grass. Cessation of respiration before that of the heart beat was noticed. Post mortem changes. The abdominal cavity was greatly distended with gas, salivation was profuse, and in some cases there was bucketful of saliva. Blood was bright red in colour, and cavities of the heart contained bubbles of gas. On opening, the carcase emitted a faint smell of bitter almonds. The entire gastro-intestinal tract was highly inflammed. There was marked congestion of the lung and brain. Diagnosis. A fresh sample of the grass was tested by [Henrici, 1926] alkaline picrate paper test. The colour changed from yellow to red in a very short time, indicating that the prussic acid content was fairly high. Besides, air dried samples were sent to the Officer in charge, Research Unit, Medical College, Madras, who reported that the plant contained 2.7 mg. and 5.95 mg. per 100 gm. of the dried plant of free and total hydrocyanic acid respecti- vely, which might be considered lethal. Treatment. No treatment could be given, as by the time the information of sudden deaths was received and the suspected area visited all the affected animals had died. Arrangements were made, in case of any further opportunity occurring' to bleed the animals to remove excessive prussic acid and administer sodium thiosulphate and sodium nitrite, as suggested by Hubert Bunyea [1935]. It has been repeatedly observed that when the plant is either young or the foliage is wilted, there is a large amount of cyanogenetic glucoside. Similar observations have been made by Hensen [1928], Steyn [1929], Manley [1932] and Mathews [1932]. Mature plant, however, does not produce any harmful effect. Kehar [1942] obtained *Under the grant of the Imperial Council of Agricul- tural Research, New Delhi. 326
Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part IV] PLATE XXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Sorghum helpense Pers (barwan grass)
H. S. BAWA 327 mature dried Sorghum helepense from Parachinar (N.-W.F.P.) where it was suspected to cause poison- ing in livestock and fed to bullocks, sheep and goats for a week without any ill effect. These observations are in conformity with those of Coleman [1934]. Schroder and Damman [1911], however, state that the yield of prussic acid decreases as the plant grows, but does not disap- pear entirely. SUMMARY Sudden deaths in cattle and sheep due to grazing on very young shoots of Sorghum helepense Pers are recorded. When mature plant is cut, stored and fed to livestock there is no ill effects. Conditions under which plant becomes poisonous are dis- cussed. Symptoms, post mortem findings, methods of diagnosis and treatment are dealt with. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The writer is indebted to Sri K. Vankotachalan, L.M. & S., Research Officer, Research Unit, Medi- cal College, Madras, for analysis; to Government Systematic Botanist, Coimbatore, for identifica- tion of the grass; and to the President, Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun, for supplying the photograph of the grass. Thanks are also due to Mr B. V. Raman, Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Beawar, for the help rendered and keen interest shown by him in the prosecution of this investigation. REFERENCES Acharya, C. N. (1933). Indian J. Agric. Sci. 3, 851-68 Balfour, A. (1903-04). Cyanogenesis in Sorghum Vulgare First report Welcome Re. Lab. Gordon, Mem. Cull Khartoun, 46 Benson and Subba Rao (1906). Bull Dept. Agr. Madras No. 55 Bor, N. L. (1941). Ind. Forest Rec. Botany N. Ser. II, 201 Burtt-Davy, J. (1903-04). Rep. Transval Dept. Agri. 261 Chopra, R. N. & Badhwar, R. L. (1940). Indian J. Agric. Sci. 10, 1 Coleman, F. F. (1934). Rep. Dept. Agri. Ind. 1933-34, 144-47 Couch, J. F. (1932). U. S. Dept. of Agri. Leaflet No. 88 Henrici, M. (1926). Preliminary Report upon the Occurrence of Hydrocyanic Acid in the Grasses of Bechuanaland XI and XII Rep. Dir. of Vety. Edu. & Res. V. of South Africa 331-64 Hensen, A. H. (1928). North Amer. Vet. IX, 24 Hubert Bunyea (1935). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 86, 656 Kehar, N. D. (1942). Personal communication Manlcy, F. H. (1932). Vety. Jour. 88, 261 Mathews, F. P. (1932). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 81, 663 Schroder, & Damman (1911). Che. Zig. 35, 1436 Steyn, D. G. (1929). 15th Rep. Div. Vet. Service, J. of S. Africa 777 Whemer, C. (1929). Dir. P. Flazen Staffe Verlag Von. Gustane Fisilur Tena
STUDIES ON ALSTONIA SCHOLARIS I. A PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION ON THE UTILIZATION OF THE BARK OF ALSTONIA SCHOLARIS AS A REMEDY AGAINST PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS IN ANIMALS By K. VENKATACHALAM and M. R. SUBRAMANIA SASTRY, Research Unit, Medical College, Madras (Received for publication on 23 March 1943) (With Plate XXIII) ALSTONIA SCHOLARIS belonging to the natural order Apocyanaceae is commercially known as Dita bark. It is also known as Chatin in Bengali, Saptaparna in Sanskrit, Satwin in Hindi and Marathi and Ezhilaippalai in Tamil. It is a tall, ever-green and a highly ornamental tree, widely cultivated throughout India and found in the sub-Himalayan tracts from the Jumna eastwards ascending to 3,000 ft. in Bengal, Burma and south India. Its bark is reported to be a valuable remedy as an antiperiodic in the treatment of malaria. This reported property of the bark led to the belief that it may prove useful in the treatment of similar protozoal infections in animals. The possibility of thus securing a local remedy for such protozoal infections induced the authors to undertake the investigation on this plant. Efforts were therefore made: (1) to isolate the active principle, (2) to find out whether it acts as a proto- plasmic poison, and (3) to study the pharmacological actions of the alkaloid on the circulatory system. Echitamine hydrochloride was isolated in the pure form. Its chemical properties tallied with those already described by previous workers, [Goodson and Henry, 1925]. Studies were first made to find out whether it acts as a protoplasmic poison. Its action was compared with that of emetine hydrochloride, quinine hydrochloride, hydrargyri perchloride and acidum carbolicum, which are known protoplasmic poisons. A culture of paramacea in hay infusion was used for the experiment. The results of the experiment indicated that even 1 per cent solution of echitamine hydrochloride did not affect the motility of the organisms in 16 minutes, whereas 0.2 per cent solution of emetine hydro- chloride and 0.5 per cent solution of quinine hy- drochloride killed them in 16 minutes, while 0.1 per cent solution of mercury perchloride and 0.5 per cent solution of carbolic acid killed them with- in a minute. It is, therefore, clear that echita- mine hydrochloride does not act as a protoplasmic poison in vitro and this is in conformity with the observations of Henry [1939] 'that the alkaloid does not exhibit any anti-malarial action in laboratory tests'. It is, however, possible that it may destroy the protozoal organisms in vivo by means of tissue reactions. A dose of 5 to 10 mg. of the alkaloid injected intravenously to anaesthetized animals produced a marked fall in blood pressure, followed by slow recovery (Plate XXIII, fig. 1). Several dogs, cats and monkeys were experimented upon, and this action was found to be constant. After severing both the vagii, an injection of echitamine produced the same fall in blood pres- sure indicating that the action is not through the vagal centre (Plate XXIII, fig. 2). The vagal terminals were subsequently paralyzed with atro- pine injections containing 0.165 mg. to 0.65 mg. according to the weight of the animal, given in divided doses. The paralysis was ensured by ascertaining the absence of any reaction on blood pressure to electric stimulus to the vagus. Echita- mine hydrochloride injected when the vagal terminals were completely paralyzed still pro- duced the fall in blood pressure, indicating that the action is not through the terminals also (Plate XXIII, fig. 3). The findings of White as quoted by Henry [1939] ' that the alkaloidal sulphate induces a fall in blood pressure in the anaesthetized cat which is unaffected by atropine ' are confirmed by the above experiments. Raymond-Hamet as quoted by Henry [1939] found' that this alkaloid exerted no sympatheco- lytic action in producing the fall of blood pressure. But no one seems to have attempted to study the action of the alkaloid on blood pressure, after removing the sympathetic vaso-constrictors. The effects produced by the drug, after paralyzing the sympathetic vaso-constrictors with ergotoxine, were therefore studied by us. An injection of echitamine after ergotoxine was found, con- trary to expectation, to produce a definite and prolonged rise in blood pressure instead of a fall (Plate XXIII, fig. 4). Several experiments were made on anaesthetized cats, dogs and monkeys, and the same effect was observed in all the cases. The cause for this rise of blood pressure when the vaso- constrictors are paralyzed and even when adrena- line produces a fall in blood pressure will form the subject of a subsequent paper. 328
Indian .J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part IV ] PLATE XXIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 shows fall of blood pressure after echitamine (note the fall of blood pressure after electric stimulation to vagus). FIG. 2 shows the echitamine fall of blood pressure after vagii section. FIG. 3 shows the echitamine fall of blood pressure after atropinisation (note the absence of blood pressure response to the same electric stimulation to the peripheral end of vagus after atropine). FIG. 4 shows the echitamine fall of blood pressure before ergotoxine, adrenaline reversal after ergotoxine and echitamine rise of blood pressure after ergotoxine.
K. VENKATACHALAM AND M. R. SUBRAMANIA SASTRY 329 SUMMARY 1. Echitamine hydrochloride has been isolated from the bark of Indian Alstonia scholaris. 2. It does not appear to act as a protoplasmic poison in vitro. 3. It induces a fall in blood pressure in anaes- thetized cats, dogs and monkeys, and this fall is unaffected by vagal section or atropinization. 4. Echitamine hydrochloride induces a rise in blood pressure, after the sympathetic vaso-cons- trictors are paralyzed with ergotoxine. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was carried out in the Laboratories of the Research Unit, Medical College, Madras, under the auspices of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research and we are highly grateful to the Council for the impetus and financial help given. Our thanks are due to the Principal, Medical College, Madras and the Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras, Madras, for affording all facilities and to the Director of Veterinary Ser- vices, Madras for his keen interest in the Scheme. Our thanks are also due to Sri R. Ramaswamy, the Chemist, and Sri C. K. Velayudhan Nayar, the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, employed in the scheme for their valuable help. REFERENCES Goodson, J. A. and Henry, T. A. (1925). J. Chemi. Soc. 127, 1643 Henry, T. A. (1939). The plant alkaloids (III edition J. & A. Churchill Ltd., London p. 603.
A UNIVERSAL APPARATUS FOR COLLECTING URINE OF BULLOCKS AT WORK By M. A. RASHID SHARRAR, B. Sc. (Agri.), Agricultural College and Research Institute, Lyallpur (Received for publication on 13 May 1943) (With Plate XXIV and one text-figure) IN studies on animal metabolism it is essential to collect very carefully the urine and dung voided by the experimental animals. In a previous publication, Lander and Akbar Ali [1934] have described an apparatus for collecting urine of bullocks at work. The apparatus there described can be successfully employed for bullocks working beamed implements, such as the country plough, the Meston plough and the Hindustan plough, but is not suited for use with beamless implements. The ordinary farm work done by buliocks includes the use of both beamed and beamless implements. The new apparatus, unlike the old one, is not limited in its application to animals using beamed implements alone, since it is attached directly to the abdomen of the animal, as shown in Plate XXIV. The improved apparatus described in this note can be employed for collection of urine, with- out any loss, from bullocks working with any type of farm implement. As the animal urinates, the urine passes into a wide funnel, placed below the sheath, and therefrom into a basin soldered under the funnel where it is collected. A glass gauge, with metallic protector on the side of the apparatus, indicates the level of urine in the apparatus at any time. The urine is drawn off periodically by means of a rubber tube attached to the bottom of the apparatus. This arrangement prevents the loss of urine and does not cause any inconvenience to the animal. The details, the dimensions and posi- tions of the various parts of the apparatus are clearly shown in Fig. 1. Plate XXIV shows the method of its attachment to bullocks at work. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Showing the details and dimensions of various parts of the apparatus 330
Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. XIII, Part IV ] PLATE XXIV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] The urine-collecting apparatus in use
M. A. RASHID SHARRAR 331 The apparatus has been prepared from ordinary thin tin sheeting of an empty kerosene oil tin. This material is light and almost rust resistant. Although this tin sheeting is not very thick, yet the apparatus has been so designed that on account of its round shape, the material provides maximum strength to the apparatus, without either making it in any way unwieldy or unbearably heavy. The apparatus may be painted with advantage, with a thin coat of white lead paint on its outer surface. Fig. 1 shows that it consists of one oval shaped funnel F which slopes into a tapering de- pression marked D (shown with dotted lines), ending into a small hole H. The depression D is situated towards one of the narrower ends of the oval funnel so as to avoid the bottom of the ap- paratus striking or rubbing against the hind legs of the animals as they walked. The urine that passes through this hole H collects into the basin below without either smearing the sheath or spilling. The rim of the funnel is lined with a leather border B to obviate the drawback of a metal part coming in contact with the body of the animal. The basin consists of three tin pieces. The two upper pieces, P1 and P2 are soldered together to form a waisted oval box, the upper edge of the plate P1 being soldered to the lower side of the funnel, leaving a margin of about 3/4" at the sides and about 2½" at the ends. The third piece P3 is scooped to form an oval bowl which is soldered to the lower rim of the plate P2. In the bottom of plate P3 a tin nozzle N, 2" long and ½" bore, point- ing sidewards, is soldered. A rubber tube is slipped on to this nozzle which is used for emptying the apparatus periodically. The gauge is formed by punching two holes, each 5/8" in diameter, one in the upper plate P1 and the other at the junction of the plate P2 and plate P3. Two tin tubes T1 and T2 each about an inch long are soldered into the punched holes. Bored rubber bungs, having pieces of L shaped glass tubing L1 and L2 fitted into them are fixed into the tin tubes T1 and T2 mentioned above. The two free ends of the glass tubes are connected together by means of a small India rubber tube R. This union of two pieces of glass tubing, instead of using only one piece, bent twice, not only safeguards against accidental breakage of the tube but also facilitates proper fitting. The protector M is a strip of tin loosely covering the glass tubes on, three sides, the two free ends projecting about a quarter of an inch above the level of the tubes L1 and L2. Small air hole A is formed by soldering, into the side of the apparatus, a small tin tube about an inch long and 1/8" bore to provide an exit for the escaping air. The apparatus is attached to the abdomen of the animal by means of straps. The apparatus gives complete satisfaction, is very light, and neither interferes with work of the bullocks nor touches the ground. The urine does not remain in the funnel, but is immediately conducted to the basin below, without loss through leakage or splashing. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The writer is grateful to Dr P. E. Lander, I.A.S., Agricultural Chemist to Government, Punjab, Lyallpur, for giving facilities for carrying out this work. REFERENCES Lander, P. E., and Akbar Ali (1934). Indian J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 4, 399-401
SELECTED ARTICLE LEPTOSPIRAL INFECTIONS By R. LOVELL (Reprinted from The Veterinary Record, Vol. 55, No. 15, April 1943) LEPTOSPIRAL jaundice (Weil's disease) has long been recognised in man and the infecting spiro- chaete Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae has been demonstrated in all five continents. Weil's disease, however, is not the only form of leptospiro- sis and diseases have been described which are rela- ted to it and caused by other leptospirae. Animals, too, may suffer from leptospirosis and the persis- tence and spread of some of the diseases are through their agency. Thus, the reservoirs of Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae are rats, and field mice, Mus norvegicus, Mus rattus alexandrinus and Microtus montebelloi, whilst the reservoir of Lept. canicola is the dog. The forms of leptospirosis in man can be classi- fied into several clinical groups. In the first group there are mild types of disease such as 'mud fever' and the Pomona or seven-day fever of Australia caused by Lept. grippotyphosa and Lept. pomona respectively. There is a con- nection between the first disease and floods, but none between Pomona disease, mud and water. The second clinical group includes infection with Lept. canicola and this usually causes neither jaundice nor death; the source of infection is the dog, the only known carrier. The third group consists of diseases caused by types of leptospirae known as Rachmat, Salinem, Swart van Tienen and Andaman A. These infections occur in Sumatra, Batavia, Macassar and Borneo; some are associated with rats and in some the carrier is unknown. Jaundice may occur and there are some deaths. The fourth group consists of Hasami fever caused by Lept. autumnalis and endemic in Nagasaki during the autumn and leptos- pirosis icterohaemorrhagia or true Weil's disease. In both conditions jaundice is frequent; the animal reservoir in the former is Apodemus speciosus and there is a fatality rate of 1.9 per cent, whereas in true Weil's disease this rate may be as high as 30 per cent. Weil's disease is mainly an occupational hazard and the risk of infection with Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae appears to be highest in persons whose work brings them into contact with water which is subject to pollution with rat urine. Substantial clinical differences, therefore, exist between the various forms of leptospirosis and there are epidemiological differences and different animals reservoirs. The leptospirac responsible also differ in their serological properties and in their degrees of virulence for guinea-pigs. From the aspect of animal pathology two types of infec- tion are important, those caused by Lept. ictero- haemorrhagiae and Lept. canicola. Okell, Dalling and Pugh [1925] gave an account of leptospiral jaundice as it occurred in the dog in this country and from three of ten cases they isolated leptospirae which agreed in every respect with a known rat strain of Leptospira icterohae- morrhagiae. They pointed out that up to 30 per cent of the adult rats in many areas both in England and abroad harbour virulent leptos- pirae in their kidneys and excrete them in their urine. In human outbreaks of Weil's disease a close relationship between man and rat can nearly always be established and they believed that the disease in dogs was caused mainly by contamina- tion of food and bedding with urine of carrier rats. Complete but temporary protection against the disease could be induced by the injection of potent anti-leptospira serum. It was shown later [Walch-Sorgdrager, 1939] that all strains of leptospirae cultivated from dogs were not identical for Klarenbeek and Schüffner working in Holland had found a strain which was reacted upon by its own antiserum to a titre of 1:10,000 whereas with a serum prepared against Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae the titre was 1 : 25. The new strain, known as Lept. canicola, is morpho- logically identical with Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae and can be cultivated in the same medium. Sero- logically and in its action on guinea-pigs it is different and it does not occur in rats. Its re- covery has, been recorded in Holland, Germany, Denmark and California. Okell, Dalling and Pugh described two clinical forms of leptospirosis in the dog, (a) the hyper- acute haemorrhagic type with a sudden onset and a rapid course, and (b) the icteric type in which the rapidity of the onset varies and there is jaun- dice of varying degree. Meyer, Stewart- Anderson and Eddie [1939] describe this latter form as the typical Weil's disease or 'yellows' in which the conjunctivae are coppery red in colour and the tongue and gums of the mouth are covered by yellowish crusts and erosions. Post mortem: the liver may or may not be enlarged and is pulpy and clay coloured; the portal lymph nodes are sprinkled with haemorrhages. The 332
R. LOVELL 333 pleural and peritoneal linings show petechiae- and both the intestinal and respiratory tracts are injected. Another clinical type showing haemor- rhagic gastro-cnteritis with little or no icterus resembles canine typhus or Stuttgart disease and is referred to as a haemorrhagic type by these American workers. There is marked dehydration and the mouth and anal openings are soiled. The Mucosa of the buccal cavity is dry and covered with diphtheritic deposits, and ulcers are present on the tongue and margin of the lips. The viscera are dark and the mucosa of the stomach, duode- num, colon and rectum is infiltrated and dark coloured. The liver is mottled and hyperaemic. Hyperaemia and streaking of the renal medulla is always apparent and the kidneys are slightly enlarged, and soft. The onset is sudden in both the icteric and haemorrhagic types of disease and the temperature is high; in the haemorrhagic or canine typhus type there is often a marked drop in the temperature on the second day and this is accompanied by anorexia, a marked thirst and occasionally by persistent vomiting. This type is seen predominantly in adult dogs and may be confused with 'black tongue', from which it may be differentiated by its rapid onset, the vomiting and great depression early in the disease. A chronic form of leptospirosis predominantly characterised by a nephritis, a high non-protein- nitrogen content of the blood and uraemia has been recognised in Holland. In the acute forms there is an incubation period of about five to seven days and a spirochaetae- mia. This is followed by a rapid clearing of the blood stream with a reinvasion of the blood and the formation of antibodies. As the antibodies increase more organisms are removed from the blood and become localised in the liver, kidneys, spleen, cardiac muscle and bone marrow. Jaun- dice is apparent in some cases and leptospirae are present in the urine towards the first week of illness and in non-fatal cases they are excreted for about two to four weeks. The kidney is probably the most important organ for diagnostic purposes and advantage can be taken of the development of antibodies, for they increase rapidly in animals that recover and remain at a significant titre for not less than a year [Gray, 1942]. Leptospirae in the living state may be studied with dark background illumination and they assume the appearance of bright filaments with fine spirals throughout their length giving serrated outlines. The ends are pointed and frequently curved and they are actively motile. Leptos- pirae may also be studied in films treated with Leishman and Giemsa stains and by Fontana's silver nitrate method. Various procedures of tissue impregnation with silver nitrate are also used and these have the advantage of conveying an idea of the numbers and distribution of the organisms in the tissues. Growth may be obtained in media containing a high percentage of blood or serum, the optimum temperature being from 30 to 37º C. The medium commonly used is that of Schüffner or a modification and contains 8 to 10 per cent sterile rabbit serum In a suitable natural environment pathogenic leptospirae may remain alive for months [Buchanan, 1927]. Direct culture is often not satisfactory and re- course is made to the use of guinea-pigs. Meyer et al. use guinea-pigs of 50 to 100 grammes weight and employ the intraperitoneal route. Emulsions of kidney and liver are injected and passaged through three to five series of animals. After the third or fourth passage the guinea-pigs lose weight and when killed show congested viscera, injected lymph glands and distended gall bladders. Gray [1942] uses guinea-pigs of 100 to 150 grammes and if there is any risk of the inoculum being contaminated then it may be applied to the depilated abraded skin of the abdomen. The taking of morning and evening temperatures gives an early and often the sole indication of infection, especially with primary inoculation of suspected tissues, and the organism may be virulent only after passage through two or three guinea-pigs. Agglutinins, lysins and complement fixing anti- bodies appear towards the end of the first week of disease increasing to a high level within five to eight weeks. They persist for many months and then decline over a period of one to three years. If living leptospirae are brought into contact with an active serum then both agglutination and lysis may occur, whereas if the leptospirae are formalinised agglutination occurs and lysis is slight. These reactions may be observed under a dark background and a test of this kind is now commonly used. The complement fixation and adhesion tests require a number of reagents and offer no advantage (Meyer et al.). Serological tests are useful for purposes of diagnosis and identification of the leptospirae and although cross reactions may occur there is usually a suffi- cient difference to detect the type of infection or the type of organism. Coffin and Stubbs [1942] point out that if accurate diagnosis is to be made then laboratory procedures must be employed and those avail- able are : (1) dark background examination of blood, urine and tissue juices; (2) study of specially stained tissue sections; (3) guinea-pig inocula- tions; (4) serological procedure; (5) cultural studies.
334 Leptospiral Infections Some of these methods are impracticable as routine measures and they adopted as a sero- logical test the microscopic agglutination test, using living suspensions of leptospira as antigens. Because animals once affected may possess signi- ficant serological titres years after the symptoms have subsided they considered an animal to be infective only if it showed: (a) typical or atypical symptoms with a rising titre or (b) typical or atypical symptoms with a positive culture. Some of the positive cases dealt with by these authors were also examined for a change in their blood picture and all showed a neutrophile leucocytosis. There was no difference between the symptoms and lesions of the icteric cases due to Lept. canicola and the active cases of Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae infection. They see no basis for the idea that there is a different symptom- atology for the two infections. Epidemiologically there is, however, a wide difference for with Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae the reservoir of infection is the rat, whereas not only has Lept. canicola not been found in rats, but it has so far been found impossible to make the rat a carrier [Walch-Sorgdrager, 1939]. In Lept. canicola infection there is a host to host infection aided by uncleanliness and contact with the urine of clinical, convalescent and chronic cases. There is little doubt that Lept. canicola is com- moner than Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae in dogs though the difference varies throughout the world. In Holland [Klarenbeek, 1938] there is a record of 94 cases of Lept. canicola and 57 of Lept. ictero- haemorrhagiae infection. Of the former 8 per cent were in dogs under one year of age, 3 per cent were jaundiced and 41 per cent were fatal. In the latter 20 per cent were under one year, 82 per cent were jaundiced and 51 per cent were fatal. In U.S.A. Meyer et al. investigated 88 cases of canine leptospirosis and all of the dog strains of leptospirae which were examined were Lept. canicola. Of the 88 cases studied 41 presented jaundice in varying degrees. Coffin and Stubbs [1942] diagnosed 15 cases in Philadel- phia, 13 of which were caused by Lept. canicola and two by Lept icterohaemorrhagiae. Gray [1942] has recovered Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae from four cases in Australia, where the isolation of Lept. canicola has not been recorded. Sero- logical tests of samples of dog sera present a similar distribution. Meyer et al. found 16 of 47 dogs from San Francisco, four of 28 dogs from Santa Rosa and 13 of 111 dogs from New York City to possess antibodies for leptospirae. Van der Walle [1939] examined 100 dogs in Antwerp and was able to demonstrate leptospira infection in 44. The percentage infected apparently in- creased with age and Lept. canicola was found in a proportion of about two to one of Lept. ictero- haemorrhagia. Raven [1941] tested 105 sera from dogs in rural communities of Pennsylvania and 50 from dogs in Philadelphia by the agglu- tination lysis reaction. Of these 38 per cent of the former and 28 per cent of the latter were positive either against Lept. canicola or Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae. A greater number were positive and had higher titres for the former than the latter. Greene [1941] demonstrated anti- bodies against Lept. canicola in the sera of from 19.4 to 46.7 per cent of dogs in Southern Cali- fornia and none in 100 sera from cats; one sample of cat serum agglutinated Lept. icterohaemor- rhagiae to a titre of 1 : 90. Coffin and Stubbs showed that 20 of 105 city and suburban dogs brought to the veterinary hospital of the Univer- sity of Pennsylvania reacted and only one of 59 hounds. In 86 per cent of the positive cases the reaction was stronger with Lept. canicola. The incidence of latent infection of the rat with Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae is well documented and evidence has been adduced by direct observa- tion of leptospirae, animal inoculation and sero- logical tests. Buchanan [1927] examined 166 wild rats in Scotland and 61 were shown to be infected; other observers have recorded similar findings in other countries. Schüffner [1941] examined tame rats and finding about 40 per cent infected, has emphasised the danger to which workers who handle rats are exposed. The presence of wounds on the hands is important and human volunteers were immunised with killed cultures of leptospirae. The interest in canine leptospirosis throughout the world is largely due to the fact that Lept. canicola as well as Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae may infect man. The latter type is well known as a human pathogen and although commonly spread through the agency of rats and mice there are on record four human cases of true leptospiral jaun- dice due to Lept. icterohaemorrhagiae transmit- ted directly by dogs [Petersen and Jacobsen, 1937]. So far 22 human infections with Lept. canicola have been recorded [Raven, 1941], 12 in Holland, one in Austria, six in Denmark, two in California and one in Copenhagen. Of the 12 reported from Holland none died and four showed meningitic symptoms. Severe symp- toms were not always recorded and jaundice hardly ever, although there was evidence of bile pigments in the blood serum. The serious renal symptoms and uraemic conditions so typical in dogs were not found in the human cases. Most of the patients had a dog and in several cases the dog was ill and in six of the cases the dog was shown to be infected with Lept. canicola. Often
R. LOVELL 335 dogs were slightly sick and no veterinary surgeon was called in [Walch-Sorgdrager, 1939]. Van der Walle [1939] records the recovery of Lept. cani- cola from the kidneys of a six-year-old fox-hound which had been regarded as healthy. There is at present no record of the isolation of Lept. canicola in this country. REFERENCES Buchanan, G. (1927). Spec. Rep. Ser. med. Res. Comm., 113 Coffin, D. L., and Stubbs, E. L. (1942). Univ. Pa., Bull. 42 (No. 87), 3 Gray, D. F. (1942). Aust. vet. F. 18, 2 Greene, M.R. (1941). Amer. F. Hyg. Sect. B. 34, 87 Klarenbeek, A. (1938). Zbl. Bakt. 142, 83 Meyer, K. F., Stewart-Anderson, B., and Eddie, B. (1939). F. Amer. vet. med. Ass. 95, 710 Okell, C. C., Dalling, T., and Pugh, L. P. (1925). Vet. F. 81, 3 Petersen, C. B., & Jacobsen, E. (1937). C. R. Soc. Biol. 126, 797 Raven, C. (1941). F. infect. Dis. 69, 131 Schüffner, W. (1941). Z. Immun Forsch. 99, 323 Van der Walle, N. (1939). Ned. Tijdschr. Geneesk 83, 740 Walch-Sorgdrager, B. (1939). Bull. Health Organisa- tion (League of Nations). 8, 143
ABSTRACTS The freezing point of milk. 1. The freezing point and solids-not-fat content of the milk of indivi- dual cows throughout a period of lactation. R. ASCHAFFENBURG AND P. L. TEMPLE (1941). Jour. Dairy Res. 12, 315 INVESTIGATIONS on the freezing point and solids-not-fat content of individual samples of milk from three short- horn cows throughout the greater part of a lactation are reported. The average values of the freezing point depressions for the morning milk from three cows were 0.546ºC., 0.546ºC. and 0.544ºC. respectively. For each animal, the freezing point depressions of the evening milk was on the average 0.002ºC. higher than that of the morning milk. The authors have confirmed the remark- able constancy of the freezing point, and the deviation less than 2 per cent from the average. The occurrence of the extreme values for the freezing point depression (0.529ºC.ABSTRACTS 337 6. Holding periods of 60 minutes at the above pas- teurization temperatures were not effective in changing the viscosity or whey separation of cultured skim milk, when compared with holding periods of 30 minutes. 7. Addition of pancreatic enzymes at a concentration of .1/15,000 lowered the viscosity of the cultured skim milk without increasing the possibility of whey separa- tion. But when the enzyme was added to whole milk, prior to separation, there was greater reduction in the viscosity than when the enzyme had been added directly to the skim milk. Less whey was produced when the enzyme had been added to the skim milk. Addition of the enzyme did not change the flavour of the cultured skim milk. 8. The amount of whey separated in the low range of acidity was directly related to the period of storage. 9. A storage temperature of 38ºF. proved to be more efficient in preventing the separation of whey for a period of one to three days than a higher storage temperature. More than one to three days of storage at 38ºF. had no apparent effect on the prevention of whey separation of the cultured skim milk. [E. V. S.] The inheritance of a haemophilia-like condition in swine : RALPH BOGART AND M. E. MUHRER (1942). J. Heredity 33, 59 HÆMOPHILIA, or a blood condition similar to it, has been observed in man for sometime, but not previously reported in animals. It is of interest in the latter as it then becomes possible to study the condition carefully without great concern for the life of the experimental subject. This paper reports the occurrence and inheri- tance of the condition in swine. The abnormality in man has been named and its mode of transmission known over a century. It is generally agreed that hæmophilia in man is sex-linked and re- cessive. Hæmophilia differs from 'purpura hemorr- hagica' by both a higher count of platelets which are abnormally stable and a retracting blood clot as com- pared to the non-retracting blood clot of the latter. The condition was first noted in Poland China pigs. Its incidence was found to be intensified by inbreeding. Poland China pigs including the bleeders and crosses of these bleeders with Chester Whites, Duroc Jerseys and Hampshires were studied. They involved 157 pigs from 24 matings of bleeders and carriers and 428 pigs from 60 matings of normal pigs. Laboratory tests based on 'the coagulation time of recalcified citrated blood plasma' were used to supplement prolonged bleed- ing time to distinguish between bleeder and normal pigs. Bleeder × bleeder matings gave pigs that were all bleeders after weaning. In lines in which bleeding was present, normal × normal or normal x bleeder matings gave both normal and bleeder pigs. If the abnormality were sex-linked, all boars from normal male ×bleeder female matings would be expected to be bleeders and all sows normal if the male in swine is heterogametic. No difference, however, was observed in the frequency of bleeders in either sex. Normal pigs consistently resulted from crosses of normal boars of a line in which bleeding was not observed × bleeder sows or the reci- procal cross. Hæmhorrages rarely occurred before pigs were two months of age, neither did the laboratory test distin- guish the bleeder from the normal. The severity of the abnormality increased with age until a mature hog might die as a result of a scratch on the snout or ear. Fatal hæmhorrages occurred from the gums, sinuses, lips, scratches on the nose and ears, internally, in the uterus and in the intestines. Ordinary ringing of the snout caused severe or even fatal bleeding. Castration after two months of age was always fatal, usually within five hours. Parturition was not always fatal to bleeder sows. Swollen joints were frequently found in bleeders, although not always a symptom of the abnormality. Intestinal hæmhorrage may be caused by parasites. Bleeding may continue six or seven days without mortality. Without reliable tests or observed hæmhorrages the bleeder pig could not be distinguished from the normal pig. The severity of hæmhorrage varied among bleeders; this variation was thought to be due to a modifiable recessive gene which is not sex-linked. [J. N. W.] Crossbreeding investigation in the production of California spring lambs: ROBERT F. MILLER (1935). Bull. 598, Agri. Exp. Sta., California SHEEP breeding in California has developed to supply spring lambs in April and May which were born in De- cember and January. Several types of ewes are commonly used with four standard mutton type sires to produce these fine lambs. In order to study the merits of the various sires, a six year experiment was carried out. Yearling rams of the Hampshire, Suffolk, Shropshire, Southdown, Romney and Rambouillet breeds were mated in rotation with lots of 20 Rambouillet ewes. These ewes are referred to as group A. Another group of first cross Romney-Rambouillet ewes, Group B, were mated in rotation in lots of 20 with Hampshire, Suffolk, Shropshire and Southdown rams. Breeding was started the first year in early July, thereafter on July 15, and continued about ten weeks. Lambing occurred from December to February 15 inclusive. Feed and care was the same for all animals during the study. At marketing time the lambs were weighed and hand picked into four grades, Choice, Good, Medium and Common, and so marked. They were then slaught- ered and regraded as carcasses after 3 or 4 hours in the cooler. Carcasses were later shipped to the New York City market where they were again graded before sale on the open market. Group A ewes produced an average lamb crop of from 127.4 to 137.4 per cent, whereas those of Group B pro- duced from 126.6 to 130.0 per cent lambs annually. The former ewes were slightly heavier at the start of the experiment, weighing, by lots, from 141.4 lb. to 146.3 lb. each as compared to an average weight by lots for Group B of from 137.0 lb. to 141.6 lb., and sheared 13.4 lb. to 13.6 lb. of wool annually as compared to 10.6 lb. to 11.0 lb. respectively. Lambs from group A weighed 11.2 lb. for singles and 9.3 lb. for twins at births as compared to 11.2 lb. and 9.0 lb. respectively for Group B lambs. In each case lambs from Hampshire rams were the heaviest if single; those from Suffolk rams were heaviest if twins. The average daily gain for group A lambs was greatest for those from Suffolk rams, whereas for Group B it was highest for Hampshire sired lambs. The pounds of lamb produced per Group A ewe was 99.0 for the Hampshire rams, 96.5 for Suffolk rams and 92.1 for Rambouillet rams; lambs of the first two made exceptionally good gains toward the end of the growing period. Figure for Group B ewes were all below 87.6 lb. Choice, Good and Medium lambs were marketed; Common lambs were classed as feeders and not marketed. Of the lambs in Group A, 93 per cent from Southdown rams were marketed, 88 per cent from Shropshire and Suffolk and 86 per cent from Hampshire. The percentage of choice lambs was also greatest from Southdown rams, viz. 34.05 per cent. In group B lambs from Southdown
338 ABSTRACTS rams were again the best market lambs with 89.2 per cent being marketed. Those from Hampshire rams followed with 87.5 per cent marketed. Lambs from Suffolk rams, Group A, yielded carcasses slightly heavier than those from the Hampshire rams. This order was reversed for Group B lambs. The dressing yield was highest, 51.6 per cent for Southdown sired lambs in Group A and for Hampshire sired lambs, 51.3 per cent, in Group B. Carcasses of Southdown sired lambs brought the highest price per cwt. in New York in each group, being $26.07 in group A and $26.37 in group B. The total value per carcass, however, was highest in each case for Hampshire sired lambs, viz. $10.10 in group A and $9.13 in group B. [J. N. W.] Preservation of bovine spermatazoa in yolk-citrate diluent and field results from its used SALLISBURY, FULLER AND WILLETT (1941). Jour. Dy. Sci. 24, 905 This is a report of an attempt to develop a buffer mixture for the preservation of bull spermatazoa which would correspond closely with natural semen buffers and to be used with egg yolk diluent. Samples of semen were divided into two parts upon collection. One part was diluted with four to five parts of a yolk-eitrate diluent. This diluent contained approxi- mately equal parts of M.15 sodium citrate and fresh egg yolk and was adjusted to pH 6.75. The other part was diluted at the same rate with the yolk-phosphate diluent of Phillips and Lardy. Samples were cooled to 5ºC. at the rate of 5ºC. each 10 minutes. Examina- tions for motility were made microscopically at 37ºC. immediately after collection and after two, four, six, eight and ten clays storage. Stored samples were warmed up to the temperature of examination at the rate of 10ºC. each 10 minutes. In order to see the spermatazoa it was necessary to further dilute the yolk-phosphate samples; the SGC-2 diluent of Milovanov was used for this purpose. Motility was rated to the nearest 10 per cent of activity motile spermatazoa. By the analysis of variance treatment of the data it was found that up to two and four days of storage there was no significant difference in motility between the citrate and phosphate diluents. After six and eight days, storage, however, the citrate sample showed much greater motility. The coefficient of variation in pH before and during storage were 1.12 per cent for the citrate buffer and 0.73 per cent for the phosphate buffer. The former is explained by the large pH variation of semen and the low buffer capacity of the citrate at the pH used. Field trials were made to compare the fertility of spermatazoa stored for different periods in the two dilu- ents. Alternate ejaculates from 2 Holstein and 3 Guern- sey bulls were preserved in the citrate and phosphate diluents. The two diluents gave almost comparable results up to the fifth day after which citrate seemed to have preserved spermatazoa fertility better than the phosphate. This difference, however, was shown to be insignificant when the chi-square analysis in a two by two table was applied. [J. N. W.] A Case of acute cutaneous glanders in man. G. PANJA and B. C. CHATTERJEE, Indian Medical Gazette 78, 150. THE authors describe an acute case of cutaneous glanders in man, the symptoms of which closely resembled those of small-pox. The patient, who ultimately died, was ad- mitted in the hospital as a case of small-pox, the chief symptoms being high temperature, coated tongue, reddish flush, eczematous lesions on the left palm, swollen and tender lymphatics in the forearm leading from the lesion, a big fluctuating abscess above the elbow and flaccid pus- tular lesions without umbilication of the arms, face and body; there was no enlargement of glands. Cultural, serological and pathological tests confirmed the micrôs- copical detection of Pf. mallei. No histôry as to how the patient contracted the disease is available. The authors observe that recorded cases of glanders in man in India are extremely rare and the only two instances are those of well-known veterinariansPRESS COMMUNIQUE To provide advanced training in veterinary science several courses of study are now conduct- ed at the Imperial Veterinary Research Ins- titute. The question of giving some form of recognition to students who undertake post- graduate studies at the Institute has been under consideration and the Government of India have decided that a student who puts in a period of not less than two years approved post-gra- duate study and who submits a thesis which is approved of by the Council of the Institute ap- pointed under the rules shall be admitted as an Associate of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute and shall be entitled to put the letters 'Assoc. I. V. R. I.' after his name. Further particulars as to the rules, etc. can be obtained from the Director, Imperial Veteri- nary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Bareilly, U. P. E. H. & L. Department. New Delhi, September 21, 1943. ANNOUNCEMENT Imperial Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore The Government of India have sanctioned a scheme for the Imperial Dairy Department by which the Imperial Dairy Research Institute at Bangalore will be taking two honorary research workers from July 1944 for carrying out advanced research work for a period of one year. The problems for research will be confined to those bear. on the chemistry and bacteriology of milk and milk products. Technology of milk pro- cessing and manufacture of milk products and Cattle Husbandry are coming within the purview of the present activities of the Institute. The workers will be exempt from payment of any fees but subject to the other conditions and rules of discipline prescribed at the Institute. They will also have to make their own, arrangements for boarding and lodging. The candidates will have the facilities of doing post-graduate work for the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees of the Bombay Univer- sity and other universities by whom the Institute has been recognised as a suitable centre for the purpose. Intending candidates who are Gra- duates of Indian or European Universities, and preferably with First class M.Sc. or B.Sc. Honours qualification may apply to the Director of Dairy Research, Bangalore, at an early date giving full particulars of their age, qualifications, research experience, nature of problem desired to be studied, etc. etc. 338 GIPDCONTENTS (Vol. XIII, Part IV) December 1943 The Editorial Committee of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles PAGE STUDIES ON PROTEIN METABOLISM, I. INVESTIGATIONS UPON THE ENDOGENOUS NITROGEN METABOLISM OF CATTLE N. D. Kehar, R. Mukherjee and K. C. Sen 25 STUDIES ON PROTEIN METABOLISM, II. THE EFFECT OF MUSCULAR WORK ON ENDOGENOUS PROTEIN CATABOLISM IN CATTLE N. D. Kehar, R. Mukherjee, V.V. S. Murty and K. C. Sen 26 OBSERVATION ON THE FORMS OF BABESIA GIBSONI (PATTON) IN THE DOG ; WITH A NOTE ON THE SYSTEMATIC POSITION OF THE PARASITE (WITH PLATES XIX AND XX) H. N. Ray and J. A. Idnani 26 THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF STAR GRASS (CYNODON PLECTOSTA. CHYUM) AT DIFFERENT STAGES OF GROWTH AND THE NUTRI- TIVE VALUE OF MATURE STAR GRASS HAY N. L. Mathur and S. C. Ray 27 EFFECT OF INVERSION OF TUBES AT DIFFERENT INTERVALS ON THE REDUCTION OF METHYLENE BLUE IN MILE: E. V. Seshacharyulu and Zal R. Kothavalla 27 BERSEEM HAY AN ECONOMIC FEED FOR REDUCING THE CON- CENTRATE REQUIREMENT OF DAIRY CATTLE N. C. Das Gupta . . 27 THE OCCURRENCE OF BOVINE CONTAGIOUS PLEUROPNEUMONIA IN ASSAM (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) V. R. Gopalakrishnan . 28 THE CERCARIAL FAUNA OF THE IRRIGATED TRACT OF THE NIZAM'S DOMINIONS, WITH SUGGESTIONS REGARDING THEIR RELA- TIONSHIP TO THE TREMATODE PARASITES IN MAN AND IN DOMESTIC AND OTHER ANIMALS G. D. Bhalerao . . 28 EFFECT OF HEATING MILK OF INDIAN COWS AND BUFFALOES BY DIFFERENT PROCESSES C. P. Anantakrishnan, Noshir N. Dastur and Zal R. Kothavalla 29 THE EFFICIENCY OF LIME AND WATER GLASS FOR EGG PRESER- VATION (WITH PLATE XXI AND TWO TEXT-FIGURES) A. J. Macdonald and T. S. Krishnan 30 ON THE RELATIVE VALUE OF CERTAIN LARVIVOROUS FISHES FROM THE PUNJAB, WITH NOTES ON THEIR HABITS AND HABITATS Hamid Khan . . . 31 SORGHUM HELEPENSE PERS POISONING IN CATTLE AND SHEEP (WITH PLATE XXII) H. S. Bawa . . . 3 STUDIES ON ALSTONIA SCHOLARIS, I. A PRELIMINARY INVESTIGA- TION ON THE UTILIZATION OF THE BARK OF ALSTONIA SCHOLARIS AS A REMEDY AGAINST PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS IN ANIMALS (WITH PLATE XXIII) K. Venkatachalam and M. R. Subramania Sastry 32 A UNIVERSAL APPARATUS FOR COLLECTING URINE OF BULLOCKS AT WORK (WITH PLATE XXIV AND ONE TEXT-FIGURE) M. A. Rashid Sharrar . 33 Selected article LEPTOSPIRAL INFECTIONS . . . . . . . . R. Lovell . . . . 33 Abstracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
