Vol. XXII, Part I March, 1952 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 6 or 9s. 6d. Rs. 2 or 3s. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA, 1952 ICAR . 6. XXII. 830
CONTENTS Vol XXII, Part I (March, 1952) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles Page STUDIES ON Dahi. I. INTRODUCTION AND HISTORICAL REVIEW H. Laxminarayana and K. K. Iya 1 STUDIES ON Dahi. II. GENERAL SURVEY OF THE QUALITY OF MARKET Dahi H. Laxminarayana, V. K. N. Nambudripad, N. V. Lakshmi, S. N. Anantaramiah and V. Sreenivasamurthy 13 STUDIES ON Dahi. III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID BACTERIA OF Dahi (WITH PLATES I-III) H. Laxminarayana, V. K. N. Nambudripad, V. Lakshmi- narasim, S. N. Anantaramiah, Y. Sreenivasamurthy and K. K. Iya 27 REDUCTION IN MILK YIELD IN INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE BY ARTHOPOD INVATION AND ITS CONTROL B. C. Basu, C. M. Sen Gupta and P. Balarama Menon 51 CLIMATE AND ANIMAL HEALTH I. SEASONAL VARIATIONS IN THE PULSE RATE, RESPIRATION RATE, BODY TEMPERATURE, BODY WEIGHT AND HAEMOGLOBIN IN NORMAL INDIAN CATTLE (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) D. N. Mullick and N. D. Kehar 61 Abstracts 69
CONTENTS VOL. XXII, PART II (June, 1952) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles PAGE SEASONAL VARIATIONS IN SEMEN QUALITY, AND HAEMOGLOBIN AND CELL VOLUME CONTENTS OF THE BLOOD IN BULLS (WITH PLATES IV-V) D. P. Mukherjee and P. Bhatta- charya 73 EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN PRODUCTION S. S. Prabhu and S. Guha 93 SEASONAL VARIATIONS IN ' REACTION-TIME ' AND SEMEN QUALITY OF SHEEP (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) D. D. Shukla and P. Bhatta- charya 109 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS III. FREEZING POINT, LACTOSE AND CHLORIDE CONTENT OF MILK SAMPLES FROM DIFFERENT FARMS IN INDIA Noshir N. Dastur, C. S. Dhar- marajan and R. Venkates- wara Rao 123 GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION AND SEA- SONAL INCIDENCE OF MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONG BOVINES IN THE PUN- JAB FROM 1944-45 TO 1949-50 (WITH THREE TEXT-FIGURES) Tulsa Ram 135 STUDIES ON THE MANGE MITES OF LIVE- STOCK IN INDIA B. C. Basu, P. Balarama Menon and C. M. Sen Gupta 143 THE PHARMACOLOGY OF GIGANTIN (WITH PLATES VI-X) V. Rathnasabapathy and V. Iswariah 151 Reviews EMBRYOLOGY OF THE PIG 161 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION AND ANIMAL PRODUCTION 161
Vol. XXII, Part II March, 1952 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20sh. Rs. 3 or 5sh. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA, 1953 ICAR . 6. XXII.2. 830
CONTENTS VOL. XXII, PART III (September, 1952) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of gricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles PAGE FIELD APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSE- MINATION IN CATTLE-1 P. Bhattacharya and S. S. Prabhu 163 SEASONAL VARIATION IN 'REACTION- TIME' AND SEMEN QUALITY OF GOATS D. D. Shukla and P. Bhattacharya 179 SEASONAL VARIATION IN HAEMOGLOBIN AND CELL-VOLUME CONTENTS IN RAMS AND GOATS (WITH TWO TEXT- FIGURES) D. P. Mukherjee and P. Bhatta- charya 191 AVIAN SALMONELLOSISVol. XXII, Part II March, 1952 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20s. Rs. 3 or 5s. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA, 1953 ICAR . 6. XXII.3. 830
CONTENTS VOL. XXII, PART IV (December, 1952) The Editorial Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this journal ORIGINAL ARTICLES PAGE. The Nutritive Value of the Indigenous grasses of Assam VI. The Grass Joy- Joha (Ischae- mum rugosum Salisb) as a Cattle. B. K. Das and N. C. Mukher- jee 239 The Utilisation of Mango-Seed Kernel and S. Bose, B. M. Thakral and 247 Jaman Seed Meal in a Simplified Poultry Ration for Growing Chicken S. Narayanan Physiological Studies On the Blood of Domes- tic Animals, IIIVol. XXII, Part II March, 1952 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20s. Rs. 3 or 5s. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA, 1953 ICAR . 6. XXII.4. 830
ERRATA Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Vol. XXII, Part II, June, 1952 Page Line For Read 111 Folio Heading D. P. Mukherjee and P. Bhattacharya D. D Shukla and P. Bhattacharya 113 ERRATA Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Vol. XXII, Part IV. December 1952. Page Line For Read Contents Under original arti- cles, 3 as a Cattle as a Cattle Feed 249 Folio Heading Thakur Thakral 253 Table II, Col. 4 3.69 ±15.24 369 ±15.24 253 Table II, Col. 4 38.5±4.42 385±4.42 378 13 from bottom 11, T, Orientis Walher 11, T. Orientis Walker 301,303,311, Folio Heading Burns Burns 313,315,317, and 319 303 12 from bottom 1040 1940 MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES STUDIES ON DAHI* I. INTRODUCTION AND HISTORICAL REVIEW By H. LAXMINARAYANA AND K. K. IYA, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 8 January 1951) DAHI (Sanskrit: dadhi) is an important fermentation product of milk used in this country since times immemorial as an article of diet, as a refreshing beverage and as an intermediary in the manufacture of desi butter and ghee. It has received great prominence in Hindu religious rites and numerous references to dahi can be found in the Vedas and other ancient Hindu scriptures. It also finds extensive use in the Ayurvedic system of medicine [Dutt, 1877]. As early as the second century A.D., the sages Charka and Sushruta [Kaviratna, 1922 ; Bhisha- gratna, 1907] described the nutritive value and therapeutic properties of dahi. Dahi is prepared by the lactic fermentation of milk. While the coagulum obtained by souring whole milk is generally called dahi, the term lassi is used to denote either a similar product made from skim milk or the popular drink prepared by beating dahi into a homogenous liquid. The liquid remaining after dahi is churned and the butter removed, is often called lassi, chass or mattha, and is thus different from butter milk, which is the by-product obtained from the churning of cream in the manufacture of creamery butter. Fermented milks Dahi may be regarded as the Indian counterpart of Yoghurt, Kefir, and other fermented milk preparations called by a variety of local names in different countries. Most of these fermented milks are stated to have originated in the south-eastern parts of Europe, the Middle East, India and other Asiatic countries, where the tropical or sub-tropical conditions necessitated the preservation of milk from under- going rapid spoilage by proteolytic and gas producing organisms; conversion of milk into a sour product by lactic acid fermentation offered the best means for the purpose. Accordingly, milk obtained from various species of animals, e.g., cow, camel, ewe, mare, buffalo and reindeer, has been utilised in this form since the earliest ages. Various methods of providing favourable conditions for the desired type of fermentation have been in vogue, e.g., (i) addition of previously soured milk or a small piece of decaying vegetable or animal matter to establish a pre- ponderance of lactic acid organisms in the milk, (ii) holding milk at high tempera- tures to permit natural souring to take place as a result of the action of organism *Investigations carried out under a Research Scheme financed by the Indian Council of Agricul- tural Research, New Delhi 1
2 STUDIES ON DAHI : I. INTRODUCTION [Vol. XXII, Part I derived from the utensil or atmosphere, or (iii) use of containers like skin bags, the unclean surfaces providing the requisite contamination of milk-souring organisms. In actual practice the fermentations are brought about by a mixture of organisms due to the primitive methods followed in the preparation of fermented milks. The numerous fermented milk preparations of different countries can be divided into two broad groups, namely, one in which acid production by lactic acid bacteria is the principal feature, with little or no alcohol formation, and the second in which alcoholic fermentation by yeasts plays an important part along with lactic acid fermentation. Some of the important fermented milks prepared in different parts of the world are indicated in Table I. TABLE I Fermented milks in different parts of the world * Name of fermented preparation Name of country where it is used Kind of milk used Distinctive characteristics Principal organisms taking part in the fermentation (a) Predominantly lactic acid fermentation with little or no alcohol production Yoghurt (Bulgarian milk) Bulgaria and Turkey Cow's buffalo's, sheep's, or goat's milk (pasteurised or partially evaporated) A thick curdled milk; highly acidic ; con- tains little or no alcohol Mainly lactic acid bacteria L. yoghurt, L. bulgaricus and S. thermophilus Mazun Armenia Cows, buffalo's or goat's milk .... L. bulgaricus, L. yoghurt, S. lactis, yeasts and Oidia Gioddu Sardinia Huslanka E. Carpathians Skyr Iceland Tarho Balkans Mezzoradu Sicily Taette Scandinavian countries Cow's milk (raw) Slimy consistency S. lactis var. hollandicus Piimae Finland Skim milk do. do. Saya Far Eastern coun- tries Raw milk Considerable amount of gas (CO2) and proteolysis S. lactis and lactobacilli (b) Alcoholic fermentation in addition to the usual lactic acid production. Kefir Caucasus, Southern Russia Cow's, sheep's or goat's milk Many cauliflower like grains present in a goat skin bag used for fermenting the milk; alcohol flavour S. lactis, S. kefir, L, casei; Saccharomyces kefir; lactose fermenting torulae ; contaminants such as E. coli A. cloacae, B. subtilis, etc. are also found Koumiss Siberia, Southern Russia Central Asia Mare's milk (raw) Preliminary acidic and later alcoholic fer- mentation (alcohol concentration up to 3 per cent); efferves- cent L. bulgaricus, torulae (lactose fermenting), B. lactic acidi Pauira Lapland do. do. do. * Rogers [1916], Gasser [1931], Corminboeuf [1933], The Associates of Rogers [1935], Tanner [1944]
March, 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA AND K. K. IYA 3 TABLE I4 STUDIES ON DAHI: I. INTRODUCTION [Vol. XXII, Part I, preparing Huslanka [Olsen-Sopp, 1912; Heinemann, 1911]. Taette is a sour milk used in Scandinavia and in which a slimy fermentation is caused by a variant of S. lactis called S. taette (probably S. lactis var. hollandicus). Piimae is a similar product prepared from skim milk in Finland [Gasser, 1931]. Saya is prepared in the East from unheated milk by first ripening with S. lactis and later with lacto- bacilli. A considerable amount of gas (probably CO2) is produced and proteolysis also occurs [Gasser, 1931; The Associates of Rogers, 1935]. The second group of fermented milks includes Kefir, Leben, Koumiss, and other less known products. Of these Kefir (or Kephyr) is one of the oldest varieties of fermented milk manufactured from the milk of cows, sheep or goats. It is believed to form a considerable part of the food of mountain dwellers of the Caucasus region, who prepare it in leather bottles made from goat skin. In this product the fermentation is brought about by Kefir grains which resemble miniature cauliflowers in shape and structure and consist of casein, yeasts and bacteria. Various species of microorganisms have been isolated from Kefir, e. g., S. lactis, S. kefir, Dispora caucasica (L. caucasicum Beijerinck), Streptobacterium casei, Saccharomyces kefir, lactose fermenting torulae, Oidium lactis, Bacillus subtilis and butyric acid bacteria [Corminboeuf, 1933, Burke, 1940, Orla Jensen, 1942, Tanner, 1944]. The lactic acid bacteria produce lactic acid while the yeasts produce about 1 to 1.2 per cent alcohol. Occasionally organisms resembling B. coli and B. cloacae are also said to be present and they produce gas as well as a slimy consistency in the kefir. The fermentation is usually carried out in closed bottles so that the gas is retained and the milk becomes effervescent. Koumiss (Kumys), used extensively in Siberia, Central Asia and Southern Russia, is also prepared by a preliminary acidic and subsequent alcoholic fermentation of unpasteurised mare's milk. It has a higher concentration of alcohol (about 3 per cent) than Kefir and is a highly effervescent drink. The fermentation is due to L. bulgaricus principally while lactose fermenting torulae and Bacterium lactis acidi (Leichmann) play a secondary part [Voitkevich, 1934; Tanner, 1944]. Pauira, a product similar to Koumiss is used in Lapland [Gasser, 1931]. Kuban, a product used in Southern Russia is made from pasteu- rised milk by a combined lactic and alcoholic fermentation. The microflora include a lactic streptococcus resembling S. lactis var. hollandicus, a lactic acid rod of the L. bulgaricus type and three types of yeasts [Bogdanoff, 1934]. Leben is another fermented milk prepared by Egyptians from the milk of cows, goats or buffaloes and the fermentation is brought about by the joint action of lactic acid bacteria and yeasts [Khoury and Rist, 1902]. Kaelder-milk (cellar milk) is a Norwegian product prepared by inoculating boiled milk with a special variety of ropy milk and keeping it cold. Large quantities of lactic acid (2.5 per cent) and some alcohol (0.5 per cent) are formed which enable the product to keep well [Rettger, 1923]. It is often used as a substitute for fresh milk by Norwegian peasants. Urda is a strongly alcoholic beverage prepared in the Carpathians from sheep's milk, and sometimes known as Sparkling whey. Whey champagne or Skuta is a similar product prepared in Chile by the fermentation of whey through the agency of lactose fermenting yeasts and some species of lactic acid bacteria [Rettger, 1923 ; Harvey and Hill, 1948]. Another variety of fermented milk containing up to 0.78 per cent of lactic acid and 7.1 per cent of alcohol is used in Turkestan under the name Busa [Chekan, 1922].
March, 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA AND K. K. IYA 5 In recent years special fermented milks under the name ' cultured milks' have become very popular in Europe and America. The most important of these are 'Bulgarian butter milk' and 'Acidophilus milk'. Bulgarian butter milk is prepared by souring skimmed or whole milk with a pure culture of Lactobacillus bulgaricus and the product is viscous and highly sour [Burke, 1938]. In the pre- paration of Acidophilus milk pure cultures of Lactobacillus acidophilus are used and the product is not as sour as Bulgarian butter milk [Knaysi, 1932]. It is greatly valued for its reputed therapeutic properties. Pure cultures of Streptococcus paracitrovorous are sometimes used for the development of desirable flavour in cultured milks. In order to improve the taste and nutritive value of the products various fruit juices and special flavouring substances are sometimes incorporated. Several modifications, involving the use of skimmed milk, whole milk, cream, condensed and dried milks or whey, and the manufacture of refrigerated or iced butter milk and dried butter milks constitute some of the latest developments in this field of dairy industry [Burke, 1938; Cronshaw, 1947]. It is evident that in the various fermented milk preparations lactic acid bacteria are the principal agents taking part in the fermentative processes. The fermenta- tion of lactose into lactic acid is the primary chemical change sometimes accompanied by the production of volatile acids and gas or a mild alcoholic fermentation brought about by yeasts. There may be a slight increase in the soluble nitrogen content due to the action of microorganisms on proteins. Van Slyke [1928] and recently Khambatta and Dastur [1950] investigated the various changes in the constituents of milk occurring during the process of souring. The lactic acid bacteria occurring in fermented milks can be divided into three main groups according to the latest taxonomical classification of Bergey [Breed and others, 1948]. The first group includes the common milk souring organism, Streptococcus lactis ; the high tempera- ture milk souring streptococcus, L. thermophilus; and S. cremoris, used for the ripening of cream. They produce mainly lactic acid by the fermentation of lactose, the final acidity reached being one per cent calculated as lactic acid. The second group includes the high acid producing lactobacilli, L. caucasicum, L. bulgaricus, L. acidophilus. L. casei and L. plantarum. The first two species are most common- ly associated with the sour milks, while L. acidophilus is primarily an intestinal organism, whose presence in fermented milks is considered of therapeutic signi- ficance. All these lactobacilli ferment lactose mainly to lactic acid, usually up to 2.5 per cent or rarely 3.5 per cent titratable acidity, and on account of their higher acid tolerance they always predominate over streptococci in course of time. The hetero-fermentative lactobacilli (Betabacteria), which grow slowly and produce acetic acid, propionic acid and other volatile compounds as well as carbon dioxide and hydrogen in addition to lactic acid, come under this group. The third group includes the so-called ' aroma bacteria'6 STUDIES ON DAHI: I. INTRODUCTION [Vol. XXII, Part I, some Mycoderma species) and fungi which are frequently present in sour milk products as the acidic environment is favourable for their growth. The yeasts produce smaller or larger amounts of alcohol together with carbon dioxide by the fermentation of lactose or its break-down products, glucose and galactose. Various types of fungi, of which species of Oidium are perhaps most frequently encountered, may cause secondary fermentations associated with the decomposition of casein and fat. Members of the genus Bacillus (aerobic spore-formers), butyric acid bacteria and coliform organisms are frequently responsible for the development of off-flavours, gassiness and other defects in the product and they are to be regarded as undesirable contaminants in fermented milk preparations. Some data available regarding the composition of a few fermented milks are presented in Table II. TABLE II Chemical composition of some fermented milks March, 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA AND K. K. IYA 7 Charaka, the great exponents of Ayurvedic system of. medicine in the 2nd century B.C., have referred to the value of curds in promoting appetite, in increasing the vitality, in curing dyspepsia, diarrohea, nasal catarrh, dysentery, intermittent fever and other diseases and in maintaining the balance of the three bodily humors viz., Vayu, Pittam and Kapham [Bhishagratna, 1907; Kaviratna, 1922]. They, however, warn that improperly prepared curds may be harmful to the system. Takra (butter milk prepared by adding one fourth part of water to whole milk curds) has been described as having cooling, appetizing and tonic properties and as useful remedies in cases of diarrhoea, dyspepsia, urinary diseases, etc. The above authors also consider that the habitual use of butter milk is conducive to better health and increases resistance to diseases, although it is not recommended for the weak or tuberculous patients nor for those suffering from fever and nervous de- bility. Metschnikoff [1901] and Douglas [1911] were perhaps the earliest European workers to indicate the value of fermented milks in intestinal disorders. Met- schnikoff put forward the theory that the decay of the human body was due to the absorption of toxins resulting from microbial protein decomposition in the intestines and that such putrefactive processes could be controlled by the use of butter milk, especially Bulgarian milk, resulting in imporved health and longevity. The Bul- garian bacillus (L. bulgaricus)8 STUDIES ON DAHI : I. INTRODUCTION [Vol. XXII, Part I variety for 20 days in sour milk. Mattick [1946] has made some interesting observa- tions regarding the destruction of tubercle bacilli in sour milk. While further in- vestigation in necessary for determining the bactericidal action of fermented milk on specific pathogens, the concensus of opinion is in favour of regarding sour milk as a poor culture medium for the growth of pathogens and as a much safer food pro- duct to handle than sweet milk even where sanitary methods are not practised. The food value of fermented milk is considered to be more or less similar to that of milk from which it is prepared. The sugar content is slightly reduced due to its fermentation into acid, alcohol or gas, while the casein is precipitated in a readily digestible condition. The increased digestibility of fermented milk is attri- buted to the finely divided state in which casein is available [Orla Jensen and Spur, 1924]. These milks are, therefore, frequently used in cases of gastric irritation when it is difficult to find foods which can be retained by the stomach. The lactic acid in these products is said to be completely metabolized to carbon dioxide and water in man and is not excreted in the urine nor does it have any effect on the acidMarch, 1952] LAXMINARAYANA AND K. K. IYA 9 TABLE III Chemical composition of dahi 10 STUDIES ON DAHI :March, 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA AND K.K. IYA 11 and proper utilisation of the starters for obtaining good quality dahi and (d) stan- dardize the technique of dahi manufacture. For convenience, the results of the investigation are presented in four parts (parts. II, III, IV and V) of the series. The first one deals with the qualitative survey of the available types of market dahi; the second one pertains to the isolation and taxonomical classification of lactic acid bacteria associated with dahi; the third one deals with the detailed biochemical studies on 'the pure cultures of dahi organisms; and the last one des- cribes the preparation and utilisation of starters for different purposes and standarization of technique of dahi manufacture. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This investigation was sponsored and financed by the Indian Council of Agri- cultural Research to whom the authors express their deep sense of gratitude. They also wish to thank Dr K. C. Sen, D.Sc., F.N.I., Director of Dairy Research, for the facilities offered at the Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore, during the course of this investigation and for his keen interest in the work. REFERENCES Agricultural Marketing Adviser, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India [1939]. Brochure on the Marketing of Milk in the Indian Union, Manager of Publications, Delhi Breed, R. S., Murry, E. G. D. and Hitchens, A. P., [1948] Bergey's, Manual of Determinated Bacteriology, VI Ed., Williams and Wilking Co., Baltimore, Md. Bhat, J. V. and Reporter, R. N. (1949). Indian J. Dairy Sci., 2, 99 Bishagratna, K. K. (1907). Sushruta, Samhita, 10, Kashi Ghose Lane, Calcutta. Bogdanoff, V. M. (1934). J. Dairy res., 5, 153 Burke, A. D. (1938). Practical Manufacture of Cultured Milks and Kindred Products, Olsen Pub. Co. Milwaukee, Wis. _-------------(1940). Milk Dealer 182 Chatterjee, G. C. (1910). Zentr. Bakt., 1, 53, 111 Cehkan, Van Deo (1922). Ibid., 11, 78, 74 Chitre, R. G. and Patwardhan, V. N. (1945). Curr. Sci., 14, 321 Corminboeuf, J. G. (1933). Sci. agric., 8, 466 and 596 Cronseaw, H. B. (1947). Dairy Information Dairy Industries Ltd., Fleet St., London, E. O. Davies, W. L. (1940). Indian Indigenous Milk Products, Thaker Spink & Co., Calcutta Douglas, L. M. (1911). (Cited by Burke) (1938), 6 Dutt, U. C. (1877). The Materia Medica of the Hindus, Thaker Spink & Co., Calcutta Fisher, B. C. (1920). J. Dairy Sci., 5, 60 Gasser, E. (1931). Inter Rev. Agric., 22, 595 T Gratz. O. (1930). Kistrlet-Kolemenyak, 3327, (Chem. Abstr., 1931, 25, 2776) Guigues, P. (1928). Bull. Sci. Pharmacol, 35, 642, (Chem. Abstr., 1929, 23, 647) Harvey, W. C. and Hill, H. (1948). Milk Products, 2nd Ed., H. K. Lewis & Co., London Heinemann, P. G. (1911). Science, 33, 630 Joshi, N. V. and Ram Ayyar, C. S. (1936). Indian J. vet Sci., 6, 141 Karnad, R. (1939). Ibid., 9, 349
12 STUDIES ON DAHI :STUDIES ON DAHI* II. GENERAL SURVEY OF THE QUALITY OF MARKET DAHI H. LAXMINARAYANA, V. K. N. NAMBUDRIPAD, N. V. LAKSHAMI, S. N. ANANTA- RAMAIAH AND V. SREENIVASAMURTHY, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 8 January 1951) THE object of the survey was to obtain information on the composition, flavour, texture and microbial content of dahi produced in different parts of the country. For this purpose, several zones, broadly representing the different climatic and other natural conditions in the country and also including areas famous for quality of dahi, were marked out on the basis of information supplied by provincial autho- rities and private sources. The research workers visited important urban centres as well as rural areas in the different zones and collected representative samples of dahi and lassi from dairies, halwais, street vendors, private houses and other sources. The programme for the collection of samples from different zones was so arranged as to cover all the seasons of the year. Altogether about 1,000 samples of dahi and lassi were secured for the investigation from the following centres (Table I). TABLE I Geographical distribution of dahi samples collected for the investigation Zone Centres Number of samples North Indian plains Patna, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga (Tirhut Valley), Gorakhpore 60 Allahabad, Banaras, Lucknow, Kanpur, Mathura, Agra 159 Delhi, Meerut, Aligarh, Khurja 104 Karnal, Ambala, Ferozepur, Hissar 72 Lahore, Lyallpur 50 Nagpur, Bhusaval 23 Hyderabad (Sind) 19 Ahmedabad, Baroda 26 Cuttack, Vijayavada 16 Sea Coast areas Bombay 116 Calcutta 74 Karachi 42 Madras 40 Deccan Plateau (South India) Poona 20 Hyderabad (Dn.) 24 Bangalore, Mysore, Mandya. Hassar 73 Coimbatore 17 Areas of high altitude Dehra Dun*, Hardwar, Rishikesh 45 Mahabaleswar 15 * Investigations carried out under a research scheme financed by the Indian Council of Agricul- tural Research, New Delhi. 13 4
14 STUDIES ON DAHI : IIMarch, 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al 15 After the samples were vigorously shaken to break the clumps of curd, small quantities (approximately 1 gm.) were weighed into sterile flasks, diluted suitably in saline and then plated in duplicate using milk agar. The plates were incubated at 37°C. for 72 hours and the colonies counted. The arithmetic average of duplicate plate counts was employed for calculation of total bacterial counts per gram of dahi. Chemical analysis of the samples Upon arrival at Bangalore, the samples of dahi were analysed for fat, ash, and protein by. employing modifications of the procedures described in A.O.A.C. [1940]. Samples which were received in an unsatisfactory condition due to clumping of fat, considerable whey separation, etc., as a result of the heavy joltings during transit, were not used for analysis. Lactose was determined only in dahi samples collected from places near about Bangalore and which had not been preserved with formalin. Fat. Fifty grams of dahi were mixed well with 2 ml. of strong ammonia and made up to 100 ml. with distilled water. Eleven ml. of the solution were taken and fat determined by the Gerber method. The fat percentage of dahi was cal- culated by multiplying the observed reading by two. Ash. A 10 gm. portion of the sample was used for determination of the ash by the usual procedure [A.O.A.C. 1940]. Protein. Total nitrogen was estimated by the usual Kjeldahl method, using a 5 gm. sample of dahi, and the percentage of protein was calculated employing 6.3 as the conversion factor. Lactose. Lactose was determined (according to Münsen Walker's gravimetric method) only for a few samples collected locally and from places near about Banga- lore. Due to the uncertainty of the age of the samples, and the long interval in transit, extremely low values were obtained for the samples particularly in the case of those obtained from distant places. Since such values of lactose were not considered to be of practical significance, the determination of this constituent for subsequent samples was discontinued. Methods of manufacture and other particulars of the samples Information regarding the history of the samples with special reference to the type of milk used, process of manufacture, etc., was recorded wherever possible. It was generally reported by those from whom the sample was collected that some 12 to 24 hours had elapsed since the addition of the starter to the milk. In the case of a number of samples, particularly those obtained from south India, the high degree of souring as well as yeasty smell shown by them indicated that the informa- tion regarding age of the samples was not accurate and that they were mucholder. There were considerable variations in the methods of manufacture, conditions of storage and in the methods of marketing of dahi. Either cow's milk, buffalo's milk, skimmed milk or mixtures of these were employed. Buffalo's milk was commonly used where dahi was mainly utilised for ghee manufacture. In Bengal, Bihar and eastern parts of Uttar Pradesh, cow's milk was almost always used for dahi making. The milk was usually brought to a boil and allowed to cool to 37° 4 A
16 STUDIES ON DAHI : IIMarch, 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al 17 The sale of dahi in containers exposed to atmosphere was a very common practice of the halwais in North India. Such shops were situated in crowded streets and dahi was kept in open shallow vessels exposed to dust, flies and to splashes of rain-water in monsoon. There was very little attention paid to the cleanliness of the hands or containers used at the time of selling either by the vendor or by the buyer. In the south, it was more common to find the villagers bringing curd into urban areas and selling it from door to door. Here too, there was a complete absence of hygienic practices in the handling of dahi. RESULTS The results of the preliminary examination of dahi samples in regard to texture, flavour and microscopic appearance are given in Table II. The percentage dis- tribution of the samples according to the characteristics shown by them is given in the table. The results of plate counts and acidity, which were also obtained during the preliminary examination of dahi at the sampling centres, are presented along with the results of chemical analysis in Table III. It was observed that a majority of the samples of dahi collected in South India were thin and watery in consistency with lumps of curd floating occasionally in them, irrespective of the time of year. They had also a pronounced acid smell as well as a sour taste, some of the samples being extremely sour. Very few samples collected in summer and not more than 10 to 30 per cent of those collected in winter (particularly those obtained near Madras or Mysore) possessed a good texture as well as the typical dahi flavour. In 15 to 25 per cent of the samples, peptonisation of the curd, gas formation and disagreeable flavours were noticed while estery or alcoholic flavours were noticed in a few instances. The samples of dahi collected from Poona, Bhusaval and Nagpur also contained a high proportion of sour dahi but most of them showed fairly good texture. On the other hand, the samples from Gujarat were generally very poor both in regard to body and in flavour, a few samples from Baroda being the only exceptions. About 50 per cent of the samples collected in Bombay showed good physical texture, sweet or mildly sour taste, and pleasant aroma. Some 30 per cent of them were sour and the rest were associated with various defects. There was not much difference between the winter and summer dahi, except that the latter included a greater number of samples (mostly collected during monsoon) having estery or alcoholic flavours as well as showing peptonisation and gas forma- tion. As regards the Calcutta samples, nearly 60 per cent of those collected in winter had very good texture together with a pleasant flavour, the rest were either watery or associated with off-flavours. Most of the summer samples had a poor texture. Some 30 per cent showed the characteristic flavour of dahi, 50 per cent were sour and about 10 per cent were associated with estery or alcoholic flavours. A large number of the Calcutta samples were also sweet to taste and in some cases this was reported to be due to the sugar added to them. Almost all samples collected from areas in Tirhut Valley, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Punjab, and Sind, irrespective of season, were characterized by good curd formation
18 STUDIES ON DAHI : IIMarch 1952 H. LAXMINARAYANA et al 19 TABLE III Bacteriological and chemical analysis of dahi samples (figures in the table represent the ranges of variation in the values) area (Ref : Table-I) Number of samples Total bacterial count per gm. of dahi (millions) Titratable acidity (per cent lactic acid) Fat (per cent) Ash (per cent) Protein (per cent) Lactose (per cent) Bausalore (W) 38 8820 STUDIES ON DAHI : IIH. LAXMINARAYANA et al 21 of Microbacterium) which formed yellow rings on the surface of dahi. Characteristic colonies of moulds belonging to Oidium, Cladosporium, Aspergillus, and Penicillium species as well as a few species of Actinomyces were also found in old samples. These organisms were probably dormant in the freshly made dahi. The greatest number of samples showing the above types of contaminants were found in Gujarat and a smaller number in south India. The variations in fat, protein, ash, and lactose contents as well as total bacterial counts and titratable acidities of the dahi samples collected from different areas are shown in Table III. The figures for lactose are available for a few samples only, as. its determination was discontinued for reasons explained earlier. In view of the extremely wide variations in the values, averages have not been drawn but only the ranges of variation have been given in all cases. It is seen (Table III) that the total bacterial counts as well as the results of chemical analyses are highly variable and cannot be correlated with either seasonal or geographical conditions. This may be due to the highly variable initial quality of milk used, the type of starter added, temperature of storage, age of the samples, etc. The total bacterial counts of the samples ranged from 13 to 22 millions per gram of dahi in the case of samples collected from Delhi and adjacent centres during winter while samples of a similar quality from Lahore showed counts varying from 319 to 590 millions. In the case of samples collected from Bombay, the counts ranged between 18 and 730 millions per gram of dahi. Since lactic acid bacteria derived from the starter constitute the predominant flora in dahi, the bacterial counts are influenced mainly by the types of starter organisms, temperature of storage and age of dahi. Due to uncertainty in regard to these factors very little reliance can be placed on the present data as an index of the quality of dahi or of the sanitary conditions during its production. On the other hand an estimate of the relative numbers of streptococci and lactobacilli might be of some value in determining the quality of the starter. Since the conditions in dahi are not favourable for the growth of coliform organisms or spore-forming bacteria, their presence in dahi samples may be expected to serve as an indication of unsatisfactory processing of milk, use of contaminated starter or insanitary conditions of manufacture and handling. Excessive numbers of yeasts or fungi may also be considered to be indications of poor quality of dahi. The values for titratable acidity and lactose are affected to the greatest extent by microbial activity. The initial acidity of the milk is also important in assessing the significance of titratable acidity of dahi. A very large percentage of the samples in south India have shown acidities exceeding 1.5 per cent (expressed as lactic acid), which accounts for their highly acidic taste. This is obviously due to the preponderance of lactobacilli in the starter used, age of the sample and the high temperatures to which the product was exposed during handling. The north Indian samples on the other hand, which were generally not more than 24 hours old at the time of sampling and also contained a preponderance of streptococci, had acidity values usually below 1.5 per cent. Most of the samples associated with pleasant aroma and sweet taste showed acidities ranging from 1.0 to 1.3 per cent. The figures for lactose content are available only for a limited number of samples collected 5
22 [STUDIES ON D AIH. LAXMINARAYANA et al 23 TABLE IV24 STUDIES ON DAHIH. LAXMINARAYANA et al 25 quality of milk and other factors in relation to the quality of dahi has been pointed out. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks are due to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for financing this investigation and to the Director of Dairy Research for giving facilities for carrying out the work at the Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore. The authors are grateful to Dr. K. K. Iya, Dairy Bacteriologist, for. his valuable sugges- tions. The help received from the laboratories of provinces and States in connection with the collection and examination of samples at various centres is gratefully acknowledged. REFERENCES A. O. A. C. (1940). Official and Tentative Methods of Analysis, 5th Ed., A. O. A. C., Washington D. C. Davies, W. L. (1940). Indian Indigenous Milk products, Thaker Spink & Co., Calcutta Joshi, N. V. and Ram Ayyar, C. S. (1936). Indian J. vet. Sci., 6, 141 Ministry of Health, England (1939). Memo, 139, Foods, H. M. S. O., London
STUDIES ON DAHI* III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID BACTERIA OF DAHI By H. LAXMINARAYANA, V. K. N. NAMBUDRIPAD, V. LAKSHMINARASIM, S. N. ANANTARAMIAH, V. SREENIVASAMURTHY, AND K. K. IYA, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 8 January, 1951) ( WITH PLATES I28 STUDIES ON DAHI. IIIMarch 1952 ] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al. 29 The identification of streptococci also has been somewhat confused particularly in the distinction between S. lactis and S. cremoris and between S. lactis and S. faecalis. S. cremoris was for a long time considered to be a variant of S. lactis but on the basis of the differences in their maximum growth temperatures, their tolerance of alkali and salt in the medium, their inhibition by methylene blue and their capacity to produce ammonia from peptone, they are now generally accepted as two distinct species [Yawger and Sherman, 1937]. Davis [1935, b] has drawn attention to the differences between the two species in respect of morphology, inhibition by lactate, and fermentation of maltose, dextrin, arabinose and mannite, most of which have been confirmed by Hunter [1946]. Shattock and Mattick [1943] found a close serological relationship between the two species although their phage reactions were different. Similarly, S. faecalis has been differentiated from S. lactis on the basis of its higher heat resistance as well as alkali and salt tolerance [Sherman and Stark, 1934]. Sherman et al. [1940] found S. lactis and S. faecalis to be serologically distinct, while Gunsalus et al. [1944] reported that S. lactis was a variant of S. faecalis. Sherman [1937] in his critical review of the literature on the taxonomy of strep- tococci pointed out certain significant differences in the cultural and physiological properties of these organisms which could be utilised for diagnostic purposes. The heterofermentative streptococci (genus leuconostoc) and the streptococci commonly employed in butter cultures have been reviewed by Hucker and Pederson [1930] and by Hammer and Babel [1943]. The Enterococci and related streptococci were studied by Sherman [1938]. In the classification of enterococci as well as their differentiation from lactic streptococci both physiological and serological reactions have been employed [Sherman, 1938; Graham and Bartley, 1939; Shattock and Mattick, 1943 ; Shattock, 1945; Evans and Chinn, 1947]. Bacteriophage specificity is another criterion that has been used for the differentiation of S. lactis, S. cremoris and S. faecalis [Shattock and Mattick, 1943 ; Hunter, 1946], but this test would appear to hold promise only for those species for which the specific phages have been isolated. It is also known that the bacteriophages are highly influenced by strain variations and other factors. Among the other characteristics, which have been used for distinguishing the different species of streptococci, may be mentioned the following : behaviour towards various oxidation-reduction indicators [Davis, 1938]; influence of pH [Davis and Thiel, 1939]; utilisation of lactate and citrate as sources of carbon [Foster et al., 1942 ; Campbel and Gunsalus, 1944]; production of ammonia from arginine [Niven et al., 1942] and production of carbon dioxide from glucose [Gibson and Abd-El-Malek, 1945]. Exceptional strains of S. thermo- philus, S. bovis and other species which gave variable results in respect of some of the above tests have been reported by Various workers [Wright, 1936 ; Nichols, 1939; Nichols and Hoyle, 1948]. In a recent study of the streptococci of milk, Abd-El-Malck and Gibson [1948] have outlined the most typical taxonomic character- istics of the different groups of streptococci. Davis and Rogers [1939 a and b] grouped different species of streptococci and Lactobacilli on the basis of their metabolic activities and later Davis [1940] outlined a broad scheme for simplifying the classification of the organisms on the above basis. Kitahara [1940] suggested a new classification of lactic acid bacteria based on morphology, sugar fermentations and other properties. In the Sixth Edition of Bergey's Manual [Breed, Murray and Hitchens, 1948] an attempt has been made 6 A
30 STUDIES ON DAHI : III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID, ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part I, to base the classification of the species on the most consistent and easily differentiable characteristics of the organisms reported by different workers and to reduce the number of independent species by assigning species rank only to such organisms which have been described fully and whose characteristics have been well established. In recent years some workers have suggested the classification of lactic acid bacteria on the basis of their specific nutritional requirements [Hucker et al., 1944; Dunn et al., 1947 ; Hoff-Jorgensen et al., 1947]. Although a knowledge of the vitamin and amino acid requirements may help in differentiating species which are closely related to each other, there is a possibility of encountering several anamolous results by this method. For example, L. delbruckii and L. casei, which are quite different from each other in their physiological as well as biochemical reactions, were considered to be no more than varieties of the same species because their nutritional requirements were similar [Dunn et al., 1947]. The former is a non-lactose fermenting organism occurring in molasses and growing at high temperatures while the latter is a lactose fermenting lactobacillus commonly found in dairy products and able to grow only at temperatures below 45°C. The nutritional requirements of an organism can, therefore, be considered useful only in providing supplementary evidence regarding its identity. It would thus appear that the taxonomical classification of lactic acid bacteria will have to be based only on such cultural, and physiological character- istics as have been considered to be stable and typical of the groups or species under question, having regard to the source from which the isolates were obtained and the conditions of their subsequent maintenance. A summary of the typical, well-established characteristics of different species of lactic acid bacteria which have been described by various workers [Orla Jensen, 1942; Sherman, 1937; Breed et al., 1948] and which have been considered to be important in the taxonomical classification of the organisms in this study is given in Table I. EXPERIMENTAL Isolation of lactic acid bacteria The original samples of dahi as well as stab cultures of the organisms made from dahi at various centres, secured in the manner explained in Part II [Laxmi- narayana et al., 1952] of this series, were used for the isolation of lactic acid bacteria. As soon as the samples were received, a microscopic examination was carried out to determine the predominant types of organisms present. Small amounts of well mixed samples were then transferred to sterile yeast dextrose litmus milk tubes. One set of tubes was incubated at 45°C., one at 37°C., and a third set at room temperature (24° to 30°C.). When the inoculated samples had coagulated or shown acid production, they were plated either immediately or after further transfers in order to eliminate yeasts and encourage the growth of specific types of lactic acid organisms. Immediate plating gave only the most active types of rods or cocci present in dahi. Repeated transfers resulted in obtaining pure cultures of organisms having their optimum near the respective temperatures of incubation. Rapid transfers of the cultures soon after curdling were helpful in securing a pre- dominance of streptococci over lactobacilli.
March 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al. 31 TABLE I (a) Summary of characteristics used for the classification of lactic acid bacteria STREPTOCOCCI Name of Species Growth temperature °C Action on litmus milk Maximum acidity in milk (Percentage lactic acid) Volatile acidity in milk CO2 from glucose NH3 from arginine Acetoin from citrate Tolerance to methylene blue NaCl Tolerance pH Tolerance Fermenta- tion of Heat resistance (63°C. for ½ hour) Remarks 10 45 __ 50 2 per cent 4 per cent 6.5 per cent 9.2 9.6 Suc- rose Ma tose I. S. thermophilus 0 + + AC* 1.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 + 0 + Milk or lactose media. S. bovis 0 + 0 Ar or 0.60 0 0 0 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 + + + Grows slowly in milk. II. S. lactis + 0 0 AC ARC 0.95 0 0 + 0 + + + 0 + 0 ± + 0 Mostly diplococci; grows at 40°C ; not inhibited by 0.3 per cent methylene blue. S. cremoris + 0 0 ARC 0.70 0 0 0 0 + + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Usually long chains no growth at 40°C. Inhibited by 0.3 per cent methylene blue. III. S. faecalis . + + ± ARC 0.80 0 0 + + + + + + + + + + + S. liquefaciens + + ± ARCP 0.95 ± 0 + + + + + + + + + + + Gelatine liquefied. S. durans . + + + AC .. 0 0 + + + + + + + + 0 + + Many strains form hemolytic coloni- es. IV S. dextranicum (S. paracitrovo- rus or S. kefir). + 0 0 A or AC (g) 0.27 0.90 + + 0 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . + + + Grows at 37°C. very slow-growth in milk; acetoin produced in milk; stimulated by yeast extract. L. citrovorum (S. citrovoro- us). + 0 0 a (g) slight + + 0 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 0 0 No growth at 37°C. very slow growth in milk. Acetoin produced in milk; stimulated by yeast extract. *The order in which the letters are placed indicate the chronological sequence of changes. A=»Acid; a =Slight acid ; C = Clot; R=Reduction of litmus; r = Slight reduction of litmus; P32 STUDIES ON DAHI: III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID, ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part I, TABLE I (b) Summary of characteristics used for thë classification of lactic acid bacteria LACTOBACILLI Group. Name of Specie Growth temperature Action on litmus milk Time of curdling milk Maximum acidity in milk (percentage of lactic acid) Volatile acidity + CO2 in milk Growth in 2 per cent lactate media Tolerance to methylene blue (0.1 per cent) NaCl tolerance Fermentation of Heat resistance 63°C. for ½ hour Remarks 10 15 22 45 50 2.5 per cent 5 per cent Suc- rose Mal- tose I. L bulgarieus . 0 0 + + + AC* 24 &gt;2.0 0 0 + 0 0 + 0 + Inhibited by 0.5 per cent bile salt. L aucasicum . 0 0 0 + 0 AC 24 &gt;2.0 0 0 0 . . + + + Best growth with yeast. L. lactis 0 0 + + + ARC 24-48 1.4-1.8 0 0 0 + 0 + + + March 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al. 33 When agar or purple lactose agar, fortified with one per cent yeast autolysate, was generally employed for pouring plates. Almost all organisms grew well on these media and formed clear colonies which were easy for picking. In later series of samples, yeast dextrose agar containing one per cent sodium citrate was employed for encouraging the growth of heterofermentative streptococci while tomato juice agar or wort agar was used for cultivating heterofermentative types of lactobacilli. The various media were prepared according to standard methods [Levine and Schoenlein, 1930 and Tanner, 1944]. The plates were incubated at 30°C., 37°C., and 45°C., for 3 to 4 days or longer until well developed colonies appeared. Small, discreet colonies with entire or irregular margins growing below the surface and show- ing acid production were recognized to be lactic acid organisms. Under the low power (x 40) of a compound microscope they appeared either as smooth, rough or filamentous colonies. Well isolated representative colonies from each of the plates were picked into yeast dextrose litmus milk tubes and incubated at temperatures at which the colonies had been cultivated. After the cultures showed evidence of growth they were examined microscopically and purified by further plating and repeated sub-culturing in milk. In all cases, the organisms were tested for catalase production (recognized by the evolution of gas bubbles when.1 per cent solution of hydrogen peroxide was added on to the agar colonies) in order to eliminate the catalase positive micrococci and other contaminants which might be mistaken for lactic acid bacteria. Only such cultures as were found to be catalase negative and as did not show appreciable surface growth on agar slants were presumed to be lactic acid bacteria [Orla Jensen, 1942] and taken up for further observations. A total of 720 isolates, including 290 streptococci and 430 lactobacilli, were obtained in the above manner. The isolates were maintained in milk at a low temperature (10° to 15°C.) and transferred once every ten days. Classification and identification of the organisms As the number of isolates to be examined was very large it was found convenient first to make a preliminary classification of the organisms based on well-recognized group characteristics and then select a limited number of representative strains for further study and identification. Preliminary grouping of the organisms All the isolates were subjected to the following tests for their preliminary classi- fication. Microscopic appearance. Microscopic appearance and arrangement of the cells of organisms in freshly curdled milk cultures were examined. Action on litmus milk. The cultures (soon after curdling) were inoculated into plain litmus milk and incubated at 37°C. Observations were made regarding acid production, clotting, reduction of litmus, gas production and proteolysis. Growth at different temperatures. Young cultures of the organisms were inoculated into plain litmus milk and yeast litmus milk and incubated at 10°C., 30°C., 37°C., 45°C., and 50°C. The rate of acid production (indicated by colour of litmus) and he time of curdling were noted. ...
34 STUDIES ON DAHI. IIIMarch, 1952] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al. 35 (c) Maximum titratable acidity (percentage of lactic acid) produced in milk. after 7 to 10 days incubation at 37°C. (v) Chemical tolerance [Sherman, 1937]. (a) Alkali tolerance of streptococci (growth in yeast dextrose broth adjusted to pH. 9.2 and 9.6). (b) Salt tolerance (growth in yeast dextrose broth containing 2 per cent 4 per cent and 6 per cent NaCl in case of streptococci and 2.5 per cent and 5 per cent NaCl for lactobacilli). (c) Methylene blue tolerance (growth and reduction of, methylene blue in yeast dextrose broth containing 0.1 per cent methylene blue)i (vi) Biochemical reactions (a)Fermentation of important sugars, alcohols and starch (production of acid and/or gas in yeast peptone broth containing one per cent of the fermentable carbohydrate and brom cresol purple as indicator); Changes observed upto 20 days. (b)Utilization of lactate as a source of carbon in yeast peptone broth containing two per cent Lactobacilli only, sodium lactate [Foster et al., 1942]. (c)Acetoin production from citrate in glucose free media [Abd-El-Malek and Gibson, 1948] for Streptococci only. (d) Production of carbon dioxide from glucose in semi-solid agar medium [Gibson and Abd-El-Malek, 1945]. (e) Reduction of nitrate to nitrite. (f) Indol production in peptone broth. (g) Ammonia production from arginine [Niven et al., 1942] for streptococci only. (h) Volatile acid production in milk cultures [Hammer, 1948]. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Preliminary classification of the organisms Altogether 290 streptococci and 430 lactobacilli were isolated from over 500 samples of. dahi [Laxminarayana et al. 1952]. They were found to form small, discreet colonies on lactose agar plate and under the low power of the microscope the colonies were observed to be round or oval, ranging from smooth to rough varieties. Surface growth on dextrose or lactose agar slant was very poor and the organisms grew well in agar stabs indicating their micro-aerophilic character. There was no evidence of catalase production and all the isolates were Gram positive with out showing any endospore formation or motility. On the basis of the preliminary tests the isolates could be classified into the following distinct groups with well defined characteristics (Table II). 8
36 STUDIES ON DAHI III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID, ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part I, Table II Preliminary classification of lactic acid bacteria isolated from dahi Group Number of isolates Growth at Action on lit- mus milkMarch, 1952 ] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al 37 Streptococci: S. thermophilics group (140 isolates) S. lactis 38 STUDIES ON DAHI. III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID, ETC. [Vol. XXlI, Part I The isolates-in L. casei group (Streptobacteria) appeared as short and thin rods occurring in pairs or short chains and showing granules occasionally. They showed growth at 10°C. and a few isolates grew at 45°C. also. Nearly 50 per cent of them were able to coagulate milk in 2 to 3 days at 37°C. while the rest took 10 to 14 days. Litmus was partially reduced and both maltose and sucrose were generally fermented. The remaining lactobacilli, which were characteristically slow acid producers have been included in L. brevis group. They generally resembled the isolates in L. casei group in their morphology. With the exception of a few organisms they did not grow at 45°C. but showed slow growth at 10°C. All the organisms fermented dextrose, lactose, sucrose and maltose. Half of them produced only slight acid in milk even after a month but in presence of yeast extract milk was observed to coagulate in 3 to 6 days. Slight gas production was observed in milk cultures of some of these isolates. The remaining 50 per cent of the isolates in this group were able to coagulate milk in 3 to 10 days and also showed high aroma and acetoin formation. The lactobacilli in L. bulgaricus group, particularly those included in sub-groups A and B of this group were found to occur in dahi produced in almost all parts of the country and these also formed the predominant flora of south Indian dahi samples. The organisms in L. casei group were found to be the predominant types of lacto- bacilli, occurring in north Indian samples of dahi, while the heterofermentative types included in L. brevis group were found mostly in good samples of dahi obtained from Calcutta, Darbhanga (Bihar) and Mathura (Uttar Pradesh). Thus, almost all the types of lactic acid bacteria, reported to be present in fermented milks [Corminboeuf, 1933; Tanner, 1944] were observed to occur in dahi. The heterofermentative streptococci described under S. dextranicum, group- IV, did not show any evidence of their ability to produce gas either in milk or in dextrose broth cultures in subsequent experiments. They also became more vigo- rous acid producers on repeated sub-culturing. These astrains were accordingly considered to be heterofermentative variants of the organisms in S. faecalis group. Similarly, in the case of the heterofermentative types of lactobacilli included under L. brevis, group III only 12 isolates gave evidence of gas formation. The rest of the organisms were, therefore, considered to be heterofermentative variants of the organisms in Group II. Detailed examination of selected isolates and their identification The results of detailed taxonomical studies on selected isolates (32 streptococci and 21 lactobacilli) are presented in Tables III (a and b) and IV (a and b). The organisms have been grouped according to the species with which they have been identified on the basis of their typical morphological, cultural and biochemical characteristics (vide Table I). Photomicrographs of some of the organisms are shown in Plates I, II and III. Certain common characteristics, associated with lactic acid bacteria as a group were observed for all the organisms. They were all Gram positive, non-motile
Indian J. Vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, part I ] PLATE I PHOTO MICROGRAPHS OF LACTIC ACID BACTERIA ISOLATED FROM DAHI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Streptococcus thermophilus (S. 197); Methylene blue [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Streptococcus thermophilus (S. 197); India ink and Methylene blue preparation showing capsules [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Streptococcus lactis (S. 69); Methylene blue [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. St eptococcus faecalis? (S. 209); Gram stain (All photographs are of organism magnified 950 times and are of preparations of milk cultures incubated for 24 to 48 hours at the optimum temperatures of the organisms, unless otherwise stated)
PLATE II [Indian J. Vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Lactobacillus bulgaricus (L. 96); Methylene blue [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. Lactobaillus bulgaricus (L. 86); 37°C. Methylene blue [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7. Lactobacillus lactis (L. 326); Methylene blue [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 8. Lactobacillus helveticus (L. 189); Methylene blue
March, 1952 ] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al 39 and non-spore forming organising and their colonies (deep or sub-surface) on agar were small, compact and round, oval or disc shaped. Under the low power of a microscope, the colonies of streptococci generally appeared smooth and round or oval shaped with entire margins, while in the case of lactobacilli both smooth as well as rough and filamentous types of colonies were encountered. Growth on agar slants was very scanty while good growth (filiform or beaded) was observed in a dextrose or lactose agar stab. None of the organisms was found to produce catalase, reduce nitrate to nitrite or produce indol Streptococci. It will be seen (Table III a and b) that the streptococci have been divided into four distinct species viz., S. thermophilus (10 isolates); S. lactis (6 isolates); S. faecalis (10 isolates); S. liquefaciens (3 isolates) and heterofermentative types tentatively indentified as S. faecalis (5 isolates). It was not possible to differentiate between the streptococci on the basis of their morphology or colony characteristics since all of them generally appeared as spherical or oval cells (0.6 to 1.0µ diameter) arranged in pairs or short chains and formed smooth colonies. Long chains of cells and capsulated forms were conspicuously shown only by two strains of S. thermophilus (S. 240 and S. 197) and one of S. lactis (S. 10). Significant differ- ences were, however, observed in respect of growth at different temperatures, action on litmus milk, production of volatile acid, acetoin formation from citrate and production of ammonia from arginine, which were of diagnostic value in the iden- tification of their species. With the exception of the isolates included under S. liquefaciens and heterofermentative members of S. faecalis groups, there was no appreciable production of volatile acidity in milk. None of the streptococci studied gave evidence of gas formation either in milk, in sugar broths or in semi-solid glucose agar media. All of them fermented dextrose (except for two isolates of S. ther- mophilus) and lactose but in regard to fermentation of other sugars considerable variations were encountered even in the case of organisms included in the same species. The organisms identified as S. thermophilus were all characterised by their ability to grow at 50°C., failure to grow at 10°C., resistance to pasteurisation (63°C. for 30 minutes), rapid acid production and coagulation of milk without reduction of litmus, inability to produce acetoin from citrate or ammonia from arginine and poor tolerance to high pH, NaCl and methylene blue. The time of coagulation of plain milk at 37°C. ranged from 6 to 24 hours and the organisms were able to curdle yeast dextrose milk in 4 to 6 hours at 45 to 47°C. A firm curd with very little whey separation and a mildly acidic flavour was formed. The maximum acidity produced varied from 0.8 to 1.0 per cent lactic acid. Most of them fermented sucrose but not maltose and dextrin. Three islolates (S. 240, S. 258 and S. 252A) may be considered to be most typical of the species, although S. 252A fermented maltose. Two of them (S. 240 and S. 258) fermented dextrose very weakly; in course of time they were found to have completely lost their ability to ferment this sugar, while their capacity to produce acid from lactose and sucrose remained unaltered. The occurrence of a number of isolates in the S. thermophilus group, showing a similar inability to ferment dextrose, has been indicated in the preliminary classification of the organisms. This anamolous metabolic behaviour of some
40 STUDIES ON DAHI. III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID, ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part I Table III(a) Cultural and physiological characteristics of streptococci isolated from dahi Species Isolates Growth at different temperatures (°C.) Heat resis- tance (63°C. for ½ hour) Action on litmus milk March, 1952 ] H. LAXMINARAYANA et al. 41 TABLE III (b) Sugar fermentations of streptococci isolated from dahi Species Isolates Arabi- nose xy- lose Rham- nose Dext- rose Man- nose Gala- ctose Levu- lose Suc- rose Mal- tose Lac- ctose Treh- alose Raffi- nose Dext- rin Sta- rch Inu- lin Sali- cin Sorbi- tol Man- nitol Gly- cerol S. thermophilus S. 240 0 0 ± 0 ± 0 0 + 0 + + + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 S.252A 0 0 ± 0 ± 0 0 + + + + + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 S. 258 0 0 0 + + ± + + 0 + ± ± 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 S. 98, 0 ± + + + 0 0 + 0 + + + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 S. 197, S. 71 S. 182 ± ± 0 + + 0 0 + 0 + ± 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 S. 13 0 0 0 + ± 0 + + 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ± S. 18 0 0 0 + + 0 0 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 S. 8 ± 0 + 0 0 0 + 0 + + 0 0 ± 0 0 0 0 0 S. lactis S. 157 0 0 0 + 0 + + 0 + + 0 0 + + 0 + 0 0 0 S. 69 0 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 + 0 0 + ± 0 0 0 0 0 S. 154, 0 ± 0 + 0 0 0 + 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 S. 10 S. 39 S. 57 0 0 0 + 0 + + 0 + + 0 0 + + 0 + 0 0 0 S. faecalis S. 190 0 0 0 + ± + + + -+ + + 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 S. 1 0 0 0 + ± 0 + + 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 + S. 30 0 0 0 + ± 0 + + 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ± S. 124 0 ± 0 + 0 0 ± + 0 + 0 + + 0 ± 0 0 0 0 S. 129 0 + 0 + 0 0 0 ± 0 + 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 S. 151, + ± 0 + + + + + + + + + + 0 0 + 0 0 + S. 223 S. 4, 0 0 0 + ± 0 + + 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ± S. 59, S. 168 S. liquefaciens S. 170 0 ± 0 + + + + + + + + + + + 0 + + + + S. 108 0 0 0 + + + + + + + + 0 + ± 0 + + + + S. 127 0 + 0 + + + + + + + + + + + ± + + + + S. faecalis(?) (Hetero- ferment- ative) S. 207, + + .. + + + + + + + + + ± 0 + ± + + S. 209, S. 253 S. 212, + + .. + + + + + + + + + ± 0 + ± + + S. 213 + = Positive (acid production); ± = variable or slight; 0 = Negative.
42 STUDIES ON DAHI. III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID. ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part I, strains of S. thermophilus deserves further investigation. Isolate S. 8 is an a typical strain since it was able to tolerate 4 per cent NaCl and 0.1 per cent methylene blue. Six isolates have been identified as S. lactis. They were distinguished from S. thermophilus in their ability to grow at 10°C. and failure to grow at 45°C. or survive (63°C. for 30 minutes, production of NH3 from arginine (except for one isolate, S. 10) and tolerance to pH 9.2, 4 per cent NaCl (except S. 10), and 0.1 per cent methylene blue. They were able to coagulate milk in 14 to 24 hours at 37°C. and produced a maximum acidity ranging from 0.75 to 0.90 per cent lactic acid. Isolate S. 157, which fermented maltose and dextrin but not sucrose, may be considered to be typical of the species. Two other isolates (S. 69 and S. 154) closely resembled the typical strain except for their inability to ferment maltose and the latter's ability to attack sucrose strongly. Isolate S. 10, which formed a ropy curd, showed long chains of cells and capsulated forms. It also failed to grow in 4 per cent NaCl, produce ammonia from arginine or ferment maltose and dextrin; it thus resembled S. cremoris more closely than S. lactis. This strain is probably similar to the organisms described by Joshi and Ram Ayyar [1936] and Karnad [1939] except that it showed ropiness. On the other hand, isolate S. 57 showed some relationship to S. faecalis by its ability to tolerate pH 9.6 and 6.5 per cent NaCl. The remaining streptococci (18 isolates) have been included in the Enterococcus group. They were able to grow at 10°C. as well as at 45°C. and, with the exception of 4 strains, showed growth even at 50°C. All of them survived pasteurisation (63°C. for 30 minutes) produced ammonia from arginine and produced acid in milk followed by reduction of litmus and coagulation of milk. With the exception of two isolates they also produced acetoin in sugar free citrate medium and did not show any inhibition at pH 9.6 or by 6.5 per cent NaCl and 0.1 per cent methylene blue. Ten of these have been identified as S. faecalis. They produced acid and coagulation of milk rapidly (8H. LAXMINARAYANA et al 43 produced very high amounts of volatile acidity in milk (25 to 33 ml. of N/10 NaOH per 250g. of culture) and fermented pentoses strongly, they were originally considered to be related to S. paracitrovorous (Leuconostoc), but their inability to produce gas from glucose, form acetoin from citrate in the absence of glucose or other source of carbohydrate [Campbell and Gunsalus, 1944] and produce amonia from arginine precluded their being placed in this category. On the other hand, they resembled the Enterococcus group more closely (particularly S. liquefaciens) in their ability to grow at high temperatures, resistance to pasteurisation (63°C. for 30 minutes) and their tolerance to alkaline pH, 6.5 per cent NaCl and 0.1 per cent methylene blue. S. liquefaciens has been reported to lose its proteolytic character and this organism as well as S. faecalis have been reported to produce volatile acidity in milk [Long and Hammer, 1936; Davis et al., 1939]. These isolates may therefore be regarded as heterofermentative variants of S. faecalis or S. liquefaciens or they may form a distinct species in the Enterococcus group of streptococci. Lactobacilli. The lactobacilli have been classified (Tables IV a and 6) into six different species, viz., L. bulgaricus (7 isolates), L. lactis (3 isolates), L. helveticus (2 isolates), L. casei (4 isolates), L. plantarum (3 isolates) and L. fermenti (3 isolates). The isolates included under the first three species (Thermobacteria) were character- ized by their ability to grow at 50°C., failure to grow at 15°C., resistance to pasteuri- sation (63°C. for 30 minutes) and rapid acid production and coagulation of milk in 13 to 40 hours at 37°C. Yeast dextrose milk was curdled in 6 to 10 hrs. at 45°C., and, with the exception of L. bulgaricus strains, all the isolates reduced litmus. The maximum acidity ranged from 1.7 to 2.2 per cent lactic acid. They formed a firm and highly acid curd with very little whey separation or volatile acid production and did not produce gas from glucose or show growth in 2 per cent lactate media. Their growth was not inhibited by 5 per cent NaCl but results regarding tolerance to 2.5 per cent NaCl and 0.1 per cent methylene blue were variable. All of them fermented dextrose and lactose vigorously. Their further differentiation was mainly based on slight morphological variations, their ability to reduce litmus, and differences in the fermentation of sugars particularly of maltose and sucrose. The strains of L. bulgaricus appeared as long slender rods (3.0-4.5X0.5-0.7µ) usually occurring singly and occasionally in long chains or filaments, showing metachromatic granules prominently when stained with aqueous methylene blue. Agar colonies of these organisms were of the rough type and were highly filamentous. Isolates L.96, L.393 and L.409 may be considered to be typical of the species except for their tolerance to 2.5 per cent NaCl and fermentation of arabinose; L.96 had the ability to ferment maltose slightly. One isolate (L.1) fermented arabinose and sucrose strongly and maltose slightly. These organisms appeared to be analogous to the lactobacilli associated with Yoghourt, Kefir and other fermented milks of the Mediterranean and Middle East countries although the very high values of acidity (2.5-4 per cent) reported by previous workers [Hammer, 1948] were not obtained with them. They are probably similar to the organisms described by Chatterjee [1910] under the name 'Streptothrix dadhi' and later by Ram Ayyar [1928]. Three isolates (L.326, L.376 and L.395) have been identified as L. lactis mainly on account of their ability to reduce litmus and ferment sucrose, maltose, arbinose and other sugars which are not attacked by L. bulgaricus. Morphologically they 9
44 STUDIES ON DAHI III. TAXONOMY OP THE LACTIC ACID, ETC. [VOL. XXII, PART 1 TABLE IV(a) Cultural and physiological characteristics of lactobacilli isolated from dahi Species Isolates Growth at different temperatures (°C.) Heat resis- tance (63°C. for½ hour) Action litmus milk H. LAXMINARAYANA et al 45 TABLE IV(b) Sugar fermentations of lactobacilli isolated from dahi Species Isolates Arabi- noise Xylose Dext- rose Galac- tose Levu- lose Suc- rose Mal- tose Lac- tose Treha- lose Raffi nose Dext- rin Starch Inulin Salicin Manni- tol L. bulgarieus L.96 + ± + 0 ± 0 ± + + 0 0 ± 0 ± 0 L.213, L.217 0 ± + + + 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 L.393, L.409 ± + + ± + 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 L.86 0 ± + 0 + ± 0 + + 0 0 0 0 0 0 L.1 + ± + 0 + + ± + 0 0 0 0 0 ± 0 L. lacti L.326, L.376 + + + + + + + + + 0 0 ± 0 + 0 L.395 + + + ± + + 0 + + ± ± 0 ± + 0 L. helveticus L.12 + ± + ± + 0 ± + + 0 0 0 0 ± 0 L.189 + 0 + 0 + 0 + + + 0 0 0 0 0 0 L. casei L.401, L. 401A + + + + + + + + + 0 + ± 0 + + L.84,L.134 + + + + + + + + + 0 0 0 0 + 0 L. plantarum L.157 ± + + + + + + + + + ± ± + + + L. plantarum (Heterofermentative) L.89 + + + + + + + + + 0 0 ± ± 0 0 L.73 + + + + + + + + + 0 0 ± 0 + 0 L. fermenti L.121, L.124 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 L.414 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 +=Positive (Acid production); ±=Doubtful or slight 0=Negative. 9 A
46 STUDIES ON DAHI III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID, ETC. [ VOL. XXII, PART I appeared to be slightly different from L. bulgaricus as they showed many curved and coiled forms and occasionally contained more numerous granules in the cells. In all other respects these organisms closely resembled the L. bulgaricus strains. Isolates L.12 and L.189, which have been identified as L. helveticus differed from the above two species in appearing as shorter and thinner cells arranged in pairs of palisade formation almost resembling the cells of L. casei. The colonies formed were generally of the 'smooth' type. The organisms were inhibited by 2.5 per cent NaCl but not by 0.1 per cent methylene blue. Arabinose and maltose were fermented while sucrose, raffinose and salicin were not attacked. The organisms included under L. casei and L. plantarum species (Streptobac- teria) were able to grow at 10°C. and with the exception of one isolate (L.157), at 45°C. None of them showed growth at 50°C. Resistance to pasteurisation (63°C. for 30 min.) was, however, variable. They produced acid in milk more slowly than the Thermobacteria and took 3 to 4 days or longer to coagulate milk at 37°C. Maximum acidity produced was 1.4 to 1.6 per cent lactic acid in the case of L. casei strains and less than one per cent in others. They did not show any gas formation from glucose and with the exception of two isolates (L.89 and L.73) they did not produce any volatile acidity in milk. They were able to grow in two per cent lactate and tolerate 2.5 per cent concentration of NaCl. All of them were inhibited by 0.1 per cent methylene blue. In morphology, they were clearly distinguished from L. bulgaricus and related strains by their appearance as very short and thin rods (1.5-2.5X0.2µ) occurring in pairs, chains, palisade formation and occasionally in long filaments. Granules were not prominent. In the case of L.157, two types of cellsH. LAXMINARAYANA et al 47 Three isolates (L.121, L.124 and L.414) were found to possess the characteristics of Betabacteria. They grew very slowly in milk producing only acid, and milk was not coagulated even when incubated for over one month at 30°C. (maximum acidity being 0.3 per cent lactic acid). Addition of yeast extract stimulated acid production and a weak curd was formed after 10 to 15 days. The organisms produced gas from glucose and high amounts of volatile acidity in milk. They grew in two per cent lactate medium but were inhibited by 2.5 per cent NaCl and 0.1 per cent methylene blue. In morphology they resembled L. casei strains except that slightly longer cells were also encountered. The colonies formed were of the smooth type. Dextrose and lactose were the only two sugars which were fermented to any appreciable extent. The organisms were able to grow at 45°C. (except for isolate L.414), but not at 15°C. In view of this property, as well as their inability to ferment arabinose, the isolates have been identified as L. fermenti. SUMMARY Studies on the isolation, characterization and classification of 290 streptococci and 430 lactobacilli, isolated from over 500 samples of dahi collected from different parts of India, are reported. On the basis of certain important characteristics, the isolates were broadly classified into different groups. The streptococci were divided into 4 groups, viz., S. thermophilus (140 isolates), S. lactis (28 isolates) S. faecalis (107 isolates) and S. dextranicum (15 isolates). The Lactobacilli, were classified into 3 groups, viz., L. bulgaricus (310 isolates), L. casei (88 isolates) and L. brevis (32 isolates). Representative isolates selected from each of the above groups were studied in detail for their species identification. The species of streptococci identified included S. thermophilus, S. lactis, S. faecalis, and S. liquifaciens while amongst the lactobacilli, L. bulgaricus L. lactis, L. helveticus, L. casei, L. plantarum and L. fermenti were encountered. Some heterofermentative streptococci and lactobacilli were identified as variants of S. faecalis and L. plantarum respectively. Amongst the streptococci isolated from dahi, S. thermophilus and S. faecalis were encountered most frequently while L. bulgaricus was the most commonly occurring lactobacillus in this fermented milk. The heterofermentative streptococci and lactobacilli were almost invariably associated with dahi of good aroma and other desirable qualities, obtained from centres in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are indebted to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for sponsoring this investigation. Thanks are also due to Dr K. C. Sen, D.Sc., F.N.I., Director, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore, for his kind interest in the work.
48 STUDIES ON DAHI III. TAXONOMY OF THE LACTIC ACID, ETC. [ VOL. XXII, PART I REFERENCES Abd-El-Malek, Y. and Gibson, T. (1948). J. Dairy Res., 15, 35 Albus, W. R. and Holm, G. E. (1926). Abs. Bact., 9, 142 Barber, F. W., and Frazier, W. C. (1945). J. Bact., 50, 637 Breed, R. S., Murray, D. G. D. and Hitchens, A. P. (1948). 'Bergey's Manual of Determinative Bacteriology', VI Ed., Williams and Wilkins Co., Baltimore Campbell, J. J. R. and Gunsalus, I. C. (1944). J. Bact., 48, 71 Chatterjee, G. C. (1910). Cent. f. Bakt., I Abt. orig. 53, 111 Corminboeuf, T. G. (1933). Sci. Agric., 8, 466 & 596 Curran, H. R., Rogers, L. A. and Whittier, E. O. (1933). J. Bact., 25, 595 Davis, J. G. (1935a). J. Dairy Res., 6, 121 H. LAXMINARAYANA et al 49 Laxminarayana, H. and Iya, K. K. (1952). Indian J. vet. Sci. XXII, 1-12 Laxminarayana, H., Nambudripad, V. K. N., Lakshmi, N. V., Anantaramiah, S. N. and Sreenivasamurthy, V. (1952). Ibid Lazicova, T. (1939). Cas. Ces. Lek, 19, 73. (Dairy Sci. Abs., 1940, 2, 52) Levine, M. and Schoenlein, H. W. (1930). 'A compilation of Culture Media for the Cultivation of Microorganisms', Williams and Wilkin Co., Baltimore Long, H. F. and Hammer, B. W. (1936). Iowa Agr. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 206 'Manual of Methods for Pure Culture Study of Bacteria' (1944). Biotech. Publications, Geneva N.Y. Nichols, A. A. (1939). J. Dairy Res., 10, 202 Nichols, A. A. and Hoyle, Margery (1948). J. Dairy Res., 15, 409 Niven, C. F., Smiley, K. L. and Sherman, J. M. (1942). J. Bact., 34, 651 Okulitch, Olga (1939). Canad. J. Res. (C), 17, 171 Orla Jensen, S. (1919 and 1942). 'The Lactic Acid Bacteria' 1st and 2nd Ed. Royal Danish Academy of Sciences, Copenhagen Pederson, C. S. (1936). J. Bact., 31, 47 REDUCTION IN MILK YIELD IN INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE BY ARTHROPOD INVASION AND ITS CONTROL By B. C. BASU, C. M. SEN GUPTA AND P. BALARAMA MENON, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 16 October 1950) IT is well known that ectoparasites when present in large numbers cause annoyance and irritation to animals. Sometimes their intensity is so great that the animals are worried day and night. The annoyance caused by them is manifested in various ways. At times the cows are so frightened by the attack of Lyperosia exigua that while grazing they huddle together so as to give one another as much protection as possible. They scatter themselves to prevent the attack from sand-flies, the animals keep constantly walking and thus keeping their condition down. Buffalo flies cause sores about the eyes, dewlap and body of the animals and thus cause constant worry to them. Constant biting of ticks makes them irritated and weak due to loss of blood. The use of insecticidal sprays to save cows from the attack of the biting flies is now considered one of the effective methods in all progressive countries of the world. The use of the fly trap can be of value only on a small scale as in a dairy farm where cattle are quiet and can easily be trained to go through. Moreover, fly traps cannot be of any use in ridding the animals of parasites like lice, ticks, etc. The factors which determine the production of milk are so numerous that a large number of controlled observations are considered necessary to find out an exact relationship between the invasion of ectoparasites and the production of milk. Various opinions have already been expressed on the effect of ectoparasites on milk production and on the fattening of cattle. Freeborn et al. [1925] appear to be the first whose attention was drawn to this problem and they conducted a large series of experiments on scientific lines to evaluate varying popular belief about it. From their series of experiments it was shown that 9.26 per cent of the loss in milk flow was caused by stable flies (Stomoxys calcitrans), 3.33 per cent by house flies (Musca domestica), 1.4 per cent by horn flies (Siphona irritans) and 4.11 per cent by the use of certain repellent sprays. Later on Bishopp [1930] recorded that the farmers estimated 40 to 60 per cent reduction in milk yield as due to stable fly invasion. It is not quite clear from his report if this estimate was based on scientific data. Sen [1939] carried out experiments on five Sahiwal cows and concluded that an appreciable increase in the yield of milk could be effected by controlling Lyperosia exigua and Musta crassirostris in India. Belschner [1945] recorded a drop of 15 to 50 per cent in milk yield and from a few months to a few years delay in fattening of cattle due to an attack of buffalo flies, Lyperosia exigua alone, though he felt that the statement needed confirmation by careful planned experiments. Later on, Bruce and Decker 51 10
52 REDUCTION IN MILK YIELD IN INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE [VOL. XXII, PART I [1947] in their well planned experiments showed that there was a high degree of inverse correlation between changes in milk production and fly abundance. Thus there is no doubt that fly worry does result in a drop in milk production and some delay in fattening. Considering the seriousness of shortage in milk production in India and the very limited number of experiments conducted on the subject, this problem was taken up by the Indian Veterinary Research Institute with a view to finally assess the amount of loss in milk production in this country due to arthropod invasion and to find out a suitable control measure to combat the arthropods at a very low cost. The results so far obtained from the present series of experiments are recorded below. Further work on the subject is in progress. MATERIAL AND METHODS The insecticidal sprays used are as follows: A High speed Diesel oil...... 92 parts Pyrocide 20...... 5 parts Pine oil...... 3 parts B Ext. Pyrethrum Liquid (2 per cent) .... 5 parts Kerosine oil...... 95 parts C DDT......... 1 gm. Kerosine oil......... 15 c.c. Water......... 1000 c.c. D Ext. Pyrethrum Liquid (2 per cent) . . . . 5 c.c. DDT......... 0.5 gm. Kerosine oil......... 95 c.c. The animals were mostly of Hariana breed from the farm and had nearly the same lactation period. The sprays were applied all over the body excepting eyes and udder by a mish sprayer every day at six O'clock in the morning. The parts which received more attention were the neck and the wither. Approximately 60 c.c. of the mixture was used per animal per day. The operation was continued daily for one month and separate controls were kept for each series of experiments. Five such series of experiments were conducted, and the milk records not only for the period during which the spraying operations were carried out but also for one month both preceding and following the operation were kept. The five series of experiments were conducted during the different seasons of the year, viz., the hot, the monsoon, the post-monsoon and the cold months. January and February were taken as cold months, April and May as hot months, August and September as monsoon period and October and November as post-monsoon months of Izatnagar, Bareilly. Incidentally it may. be mentioned that the area has extremes of climate, the temperature varying from a maximum of 115° F. in hot months to a minimum of 41° F. in cold months. The rainfall during monsoon months is usually 42.15 inches.
B. C. BASU et al 53 The ectoparasites commonly recorded in the area on cattle are: (1) Musca (mostly nebulo Wied.) (2) Musca crassirostris Stein (3) Lyperosia exigua de Meij. (4) Stomoxys calcitrans (Linn.) (5) Hippobosca maculata Leach (6) Hyalomma aegyptium Linn. and (7) Boophilus australis Fuller. Nos. 6 and 7 were found more or less throughout the year though in the months of January and February they w more prevalent. Nos. 1 to 4 were found frequently attacking the animals. In order to evaluate the increase or decrease in milk yield the following pro- cedure was adopted. In each group the milk record was reduced to the number of pounds per cow per month for the periods during which spraying operation was conducted as well as for one month both preceding and following. In Tables I to V the milk yield per cow per month preceding the application of spray was taken as the base and in Tables VI to IX the figures for the period when the spraying was done was taken as the base. Over these bases the percentage of milk yield was calculated and was compared with the controls to find out the apparent increase or decrease in milk yield. Experiment 1 Twenty animals used for this experiment were divided into four groups, three groups receiving one of the sprays A, B and C and Group E served as control. The spraying operation was performed in hot weather for one month during April to May 1948 when the density of ectoparasites was at a low level. The result of the experiment is presented on Table I. It may be seen from the Table that there was an apparent increase of 4.7 to 10.3 per cent in milk yield over the controls. TABLE I Effect of various insecticides on milk yield during hot season. Group receiving the spray Number of animals in the group lb. per com per month for a period Per cent of base Per cent apparent increase over control 11-3-4854 REDUCTION IN MILK YIELD IN INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE [VOL. XXII, PART I large numbers. The result of this experiment is given below in Table II. Here also there was an apparent increase of 2.2 to 11.0 per cent in milk yield over the controls. TABLE II Effect of various insecticides on milk yield during monsoon season Group receiving the spray Number of animals in the group lb. per cow per month for the period Per cent of base Per cent apparent increase over control 19-7-48B. C. BASU et al 55 Experiment 4 Fifteen animals used for this experiment were divided into five groups of three animals each, the first four groups receiving sprays A, B, C and D and the last group E remaining as control. The spraying was done for one month during January- February 1949. Lyperosia exigua (de Meij.), Stomoxys calcitrans (Linn.) and Musca (mostly nebulo Wied.) were present. The result of this experiment is tabulated on Table IV from which it may be seen that there was an apparent increase of 3.2 to 9.4 per cent in milk yield over controls. TABLE IV Effect of various insecticides on milk yield during cold season Group receiving the spray Number of animals in the group lb. per cow per month for the period Per cent of base Per cent apparent increase over control 20-12-4856 REDUCTION IN MILK YIELD IN INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE [VOL. XXII, PART I The record of milk yield for one month of the cows under the various experiments following the application of the spray is presented on Tables VI to IX. It will be noticed that the improvement in milk yield has been maintained in all the series of experiments even though spraying had actually been stopped by them. This can only be attributed to the continued effect which the spray had in keeping the ectoparasites in check and the consequent improvement in the milk production. The data of milk yield for the period after spraying for Experiment 4 has not been tabulated as the milk record figures were not available, some of the animals being sent outside for other purposes. TABLE VI Effect on milk yield following application of various insecticides during hot season Group receiving the spray Number of animals in the group lb. per cow per month for the period Per cent of base Per cent of apparent increase over control 10-4-48B. C. BASU et al 57 TABLE VIII Effect on milk yield following application of various insecticides during past monsoon season. Group receiving the spray Number of animals in the group lb. per cow per month for the period Per cent of base Per cent of apparent increase over control 9-10-4858 REDUCTION IN MILK YIELD IN INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE [VOL. XXII, PART I TABLE X Per cent apparent increase or decrease in milk yield over control in all experiments with the group receiving spray A B C D Season During spray After spray During spray After spray During spray After spray During spray After spray +4.7 + 3.4 +6.0 +1.9 +10.3 B. C. BASU et al 59 help to our country to become self sufficient in milk supply if this large quantity of milk which is lost annually due to arthropod invasion could be restored by using proper control measures. Much more work will have to be done to find out the most optimum spray fluid, the per capita cost of which could be kept at a low level so as to make it economically feasible for the average farmer or villager to use it on his cattle without any risk. SUMMARY Five series of experiments were conducted in different months of 1948-49 on 95 dairy cows with four insecticidal sprays in order to ascertain the effect of ecto- parasite control on milk yield. The experimental animals of each series were divided into four groups and each group was treated with a different insecticidal mixture for a period of one month. About 60 c.c. of the mixture was sprayed daily on each animal and the cost of this quantity was calculated to be slightly less than an anna. The milk record was maintained for the period during which the spraying operation was carried out and for one month both preceding and following the opera- tion. Equal number of control animals were also kept for each series of experiment. The use of the sprays not only reduced the ectoparasites but was also found to result in an appreciable increase in yield of milk. Of the four different sprays, A, B, C and D the spray D which is a mixture of pyrethrum and DDT was found to be more effective and has given consistently good results. The effect of the various insecticides was studied in relation to the various seasons also. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors express their thanks to Dr S. Datta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for giving all possible facilities for conducting this work. They are specially grateful to Dr. P. Bhattachary O.C., A.G.S., for allowing them to use the experimental herd attached to his section. REFERENCE Belschner, H. G. (1945). The southward spread of the buffalo fly (Lyperesia exigua) and contro methods adopted in Queensland Aust. et. J. 21, 3, 56-60 Bishopp, F. C. (1913). The stable fly, U. S. D.A. Farmer's Bull. 540 Bruce, W. N. & Decker, G. C. (1947). Fly control and milk flow. J. Econ. Ento. 40, 4, 530-36 Freeborn, S. B., Wm M Regan and Falger, A. M. (1925). The relation of flies and fly sprays to milk production. J. Econ. Ent. 18, 779-90 Sen, S. K. (1939). The possibilities of cattle fly sprays in India. Indian J, vet. Sci, 9, 4, 339-48
Indian J. Vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, part I ] PLATE III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 9. Lactobacillus cassi (L. 134); Dextrose broth; Gram stain [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 10. Lactobacillus plantarum? (L. 89) Gram stain [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 11. Lactobacillus plantarum (L. 89); Dextrose broth; Methylene blue stained showing granules [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 12. Lactobacillus plantarum (L. 89); Crystal violet stained showing capsules.
CLIMATE AND ANIMAL HEALTH I.-SEASONAL VARIATIONS IN THE PULSE RATE, RESPIRA- TION RATE, BODY TEMPERATURE, BODY WEIGHT AND HAEMOGLOBIN IN NORMAL INDIAN CATTLE By D. N. MULLICK AND N. D. KEHAR, Animal Nutrition Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 7 June 1950) (With one text figure) PHILLIPS [1950] pointed out that livestock improvement work is fundamental to the improvement of agriculture in any country, both to ensure proper balance in the diets of the people and to ensure adequate humus for the soil. In order to obtain animals which will give optimum returns of milk, eggs, meat and wool or work under different climatic conditions, it is necessary to concentrate not only on the inheritance of high rates of production but also the ability to maintain these high rates under conditions prevailing in different areas. Rhoad [1941], Brody [1945, 1948], Phillips [1948, 1950], Lee [1949] and Mullick [1950] have also stressed the importance of climatic factors for the improvement of livestock. Lee and Phillips [1949] further emphasised that among such conditions which tend to limit the development of innate potentialities, the most important are high temperature, parasitic infection, nutritional deficiencies or irregularities and limited facilities for management. Although considerable work has been done on the genetical and nutritional aspects of this problem, the studies on the seasonal variation and physiological reaction have been few and uncorrelated. A systematic investigation was, therefore, started to study the health and general condition of animals as affected by environmental conditions, viz., air tem- perature and moisture and to find out a suitable physiological index for heat tolerance which would be of help in distributing animals in different regions of the Indian Union according to environmental conditions. EXPERIMENTAL Six adult steers were selected for these studies. The animals were fed the same maintenance ration for the whole period of observation. Pulse rate was counted from the coccygeal artery and respiration rate from the flank movements. The animals were fed after recording body weight and rectal temperature. Drywet bulbs and maximum-minimum thermometer readings were obtained from the standard thermometers between 2 to 3 p.m. on three consecutive days in each month. Blood hæmoglobin was estimated by the acid hematin method of Newcomer [1922], by ear vein puncture. 61 12
TABLE I Observation on pulse rate, respiration rate, body temperature, body weight and haemoglobin of the steers Months Air temperature °F. Relative humidity per cent Pulse rate (2) per minute Respiration (2) rate per minute Body (2) temperature March, 1952] D. N. MULLICK AND N. D. KEHAR 63 TABLE III Partial correlations of different physiological reactions Variables RH held constant Variables AT held constant AT×P 0.312 RHXP 64 CLIMATE AND ANIMAL HEALTH [Vol. XXII, Part I, Pulse. The same table shows that the maximum and minimum pulse rates were 59 in June and 45 in July, with an annual average of 52 beats per minute. "With the onset of the rainy season, the pulse rate declined by 15 and it took some time for the animals to get used to the change in weather when the pulse rate gradually returned to normal. The variations in the rate between months and animals were highly significant according to analysis of variance (Table II). Using partial correlation coefficient whereby, the effect of one variable could be held constant, the correlation between air temperature and pulse rate became not significant whereas when the air temperature was held constant, the relationship between relative humidity and pulse rate was highly significant with a reverse order (Table III). A comparison of the multiple regression co-efficient in the regression equation for the pulse rate in Table IV, appears to suggest that one degree rise in air tem- perature is about three times as important as one per cent decrease in relative humi- dity so far as their influence on pulse rate is concerned. Respiration Table I shows that the maximum and minimum respiration rates were 35 in June and 10 in February, with an average of 19.6 per minute. With the onset of the monsoon there was a decline in rate from 35 to 10 per minute and it remained practically the same throughout this period. The analysis of variance showed that the changes due to months and between the animals were highly significant. The partial correlation coefficient showed that both the values due to air tem- perature and relative humidity were highly significant and the latter had an opposite effect on the respiration rate. An examination of the regression coefficient shows that every degree increase in air temperature was responsible for 8 times as much increase in the rate of re- spiration as was caused by one per cent increase in relative humidity. Body temperature The maximum and minimum body temperatures were 101.6° F. in May and 100.3° F. in February with an average of 101.0° F. There was no variation between the months but within the animals the changes were significant by the above method. The value between air and body temperature was significant when humidity was held constant but when air temperature was kept constant it was not significant though it had an opposite effect (Table II). Table III shows that each degree rise in air temperature is about four times as efficient as one per cent decrease in relative humidity in the change in body tem- perature. Humidity seems to lower the body temperature. Body weight The maximum and minimum body weights (Table I) were 402 in April and 359 in July with an average of 380 pounds. There were significant variations both between the months and the animals.
March, 1952] D. N. MULLICK AND N. D. KEHAR 65 The correlation coefficients showed that a significant relation exists between the atmospheric temperature and live weight. The same was true in the multiple regression equation (Table IV) where humidity was the dominant factor for reducing the body weight. Haemoglobin The maximum and minimum values were 12.0 in February and 8.4 in August with an average of 10.0 gm. hæmoglobin per 100 ml. of blood (Table I). The variations due to months and animals were highly significant. The correlation between air temperature and hæmoglobin was highly significant and both the temperature and the moisture exercised an influence in lowering the values. The same was true also in multiple regression equation but the air tem- perature had more influence than moisture. DISCUSSION The above results indicate that air temperature appears to be a major factor for influencing variations in pulse rate, respiration rate, body temperature, body weight and hæmoglobin content in animals (Tables III and IV). From Table I, it appears that relative humidity below 80 per cent plays a minor role in influencing variations in the physiological reactions. These observations are in agreement with those of Rhoad [1936], Regan and Gaalaas [1945], Seath and Miller [1946], Richardson [1938], and Reik and Lee [1948]. An examination of Fig. 1 reveals that changes in the air temperature and relative humidity were closely related to variations in the constituents recorded. The trends indicate that a clear correlation exists between air temperature and the physiological reactions. Pulse rate and body temperature changes show that only a small relationship existed with air temperature. It is noted that the most variable physiological reaction with the change in the air temperature is the respiration rate. In comparatively less sweating animals, like cattle, one of the physical mechanisms is to compensate for their inability to sweat by the acceleration of the respiration rate. Thus this rate is first affected due to the changes in the environmental conditions long before the changes in other physiological mechanisms occur. The present investigation has shown that the change in the respiratory rate reflects even the minute changes in the air temperature. It appears, therefore, that respiration rate is the most sensitive index of the animal's feeling of discomfort. In an attempt to express the rather complex physiological value in a single figure, Rhoad [1944] has devised a formula for calculating heat tolerance in cattle. This formula better known as 'Iberia formula' has been widely used for assaying the heat tolerance of animals in other countries. After critical examination, it is found that there are some limitations in applying it to the animals in the tropics. The atmospheric temperature in the shed (85-95° F. or higher) may have to be worked out in the tropics according to the adaptability of the animals under existing conditions. This can be seen by comparing the results of the studies undertaken by Seath and Miller [1947] and the present authors, as both have been made under 13
CLIMATE AND ANIMAL HEALTH [VOL XXII, PART I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Air temperature, relative humidity, pulse rate, body temperature, body weight, and hæmoglobin for variations of the animals
[NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted 68 CLIMATE AND ANIMAL HEALTH] [VOL. XXII, PART I, hæmoglobin were recorded with rise in air temperature. Change in the respiration rate was most conspicuous. It appeared that a relative humidity above 80 per cent had some influence in causing the variations of the reactions. Analysis of variance, partial correlation coefficient and multiple regression equations were used for statistical analysis of the data. It appears that the respiration rate is one of the indices for assaying heat toler- ance of animals. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors wish to acknowledge the suggestions of Mr. A.R. Roy, the Statisti cian, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi in the statistical analysis. REFERENCES Brobeck, J. R. (1948). Food intake as a mechanism of temperature regulation. Yale Jour. Bisl. Med. 20, 245 Brody, Samuel (1945). Bioenergetics and growth. Reinhold publishing Corp, New York, U.S.A. ABSTRACTS Immunity in cattle vaccinated with Brucella abortus strain 19 by the subcutaneous and intracaudal routes during calfhood. BUDDLE, M. B. (1948). Aust. Vet. J. 24, 262-271 IN this paper a comparison has been made of the immunity of groups of heifers vaccinated during calfhood with Brucella abortus strain 19 vaccine by subcuta- neous and intracaudal routes. The two vaccinated groups together with an untreated control group were exposed to a single ineffective dose of virulent Brucella abortus organisms through conjunctiva during their first pregnancy. The intracaudal route had been shown, previously, to be more efficient for agglutinin production, than either the subcutaneous or intradermal routes, using a lesser dose. The other advantages claimed are that the inoculation into the tip of the tail presents little technical difficulties, and there is freedom from severe and persistent local reactions. Also there is economy in the use of the vaccine. The present studies in this paper were undertaken70 ABSTRACTS The feeding of gammexane and D. D. T. to bovines. WILLIAM, S. G. (1938). Bull. Entomol. Res. 39, 423-434 A SERIES of experiments with oral feeding of Gammexane D. 929 showed that dose of 0.5 gm./kgm. on two successive days proved rapidly toxic to bovines. The main toxic symptom exhibited by the animal were, hypersensitivity of the skin muscular tremors, general paralysis followed by death. A dose of 0.25 gm./kgm. on two successive days followed by 0.125 gm./kgm. on 3rd and 4th days was well tolerated and killed feeding Glossina palpalis and ticks. This dosage protected the calves against re-infestation of ticks for 41 days. Two calves given four weekly doses of 0.25 gm./kgm. and 0.125 gm./kgm. were protected against re-infestation of ticks for a period of 20 days and 12 days respectively where as weekly doses of 0.1 gm./kgm. have failed to produce any ticki- cidal effect. A D D T powder (containing 83 per cent of the para-para Isomer), when fed to calves in doses of 0.5 gm./kgm. and 0.25 gm./kgm. respectively failed to kill feeding Glossina palpalis. [D. N.] Beneficial effect and economic importance of using all colostrum produced in calf raising. KAESER, H. E. and SUTTON, T. S. (1948). J. Dairy Sci. 31, 523-532 THE authors' investigations were to determine the effects of intermittent colos- trum feeding for the duration of milk feeding period of six months. The term Colostrum is used for the first three days secretion immediately following parturi- tion. The high nutritive value of colostrum for the new-born calf is well known. The vitamin A content of colostrum is many times that of normal milk. It is also high in riboflavin which is also essential for the calf. Yet with all these qualities and knowledge the surplus colostrum is not used for calf raising in many dairies. Seventy-six calves born in the Ohio State University dairy herd during one year period from five different major breeds were used for observations. The calves of either sex were divided into two comparable groupsABSTRACTS 71 noticed directly due to extra colostrum feeding. The amount of colostrum received by each calf, the blood plasma vitamin A and carotene level and the gain in body weight are all tabulated. It was found that calves receiving more than 200 lb. of colostrum maintained higher levels of vitamin A in the blood plasma and made greater cumulative weight gains than those received less than 200 lb. During this experiment over 4000 lb. of surplus colostrum was used in feeding the calves in group I and thus same quantity of marketable milk was saved. It is estimated that even if half the surplus colostrum from the 26 million dairy cows in the U.S.A. is utilized in calf raising it will save 650 million lb. of marketable milk. The surplus colostrum can also be frozen and stored wherever it is possible and used when required. Thus the economic importance of using all colostrum in raising calves has been fully demonstrated by these experiments. [M.K.S.] Breeding chickens for resistance to caecal coccidiosis. PALAFOX, A. L., ALICATA, J. E. and KAXTMAN, L. (1949). World's Poult. Sci. J. 5, 2, 84-87 THE authors started breeding work with the foundation stocks comprising White Leghorn hens having the highest rate of survival in progeny against caecal Coccidiosis and a susceptible line of the same breed having the lowest rate of survival of progeny. In breeding of these two lines revealed that the dams selected for high resistance to Caecal Coccidiosis transmitted high resistance to their F1 progeny. Similarly dams selected for low resistance transmitted only low resis- tance to their progeny. Resistance or susceptibility in the F1 progeny was tested experimentally at four weeks of age by inoculating with approximately 120,000 sporulated oocysts of Eimerla tenella. However, in the resistant line the individual variation of the degree of resistance in the progeny of resistant dams mated to the same sire was considerable indeed. In another attempt reciprocal matings between the resistant and susceptible lines showed that neither line was homozygous for the character. Further selection amongst resitant birds was therefore indicated to obtain homozygosity. In the F2 progeny of the resistant line increased resistance was demonstrated whereas in the unselected control lot it was intermediate between the resistant and susceptible lines. It is suggested, therefore, that resitance to Caecal Coccidiosis is dependent, at least in part, on inherited multiple factors. Coccidiosis amongst rearing stock in specialised farms in India is all too common. From the foregoing results it seems breeding chickens for natural resistance to Cocci- diosis is a profitable line of approach to the problem of solving poultry mortality. [S.G.I.] The Galactopoietic effect of Iodinated Casein: Dose Response Relationships during Prolonged Treatment. LEECH, F. B. (1950). J. Endocrinology, 7, 42-53 FIFTYNINE cows were fed daily with iodinated casein in different dosage levels of 15, 20, 25 g. for 28 weeks from 3 months after calving except in cows which become dry before time. The increase in milk yield lasted for a period of 8 weeks after which the response to the two lower doses quickly disappeared. The response of the group receiving 25 g. of iodinated casein was maintained at a
72 ABSTBACTS reduced level throughout. The treatment did not effect the proportions of butter fat and non-fatty solids in the milk. There was some effect on the heart rate but in general the cows showed no other symptoms indicative of Hyper thyroidism. Loss in body weight was directly proportional to the dose administered. This loss in weight gradually disappeared. There was no significant effect on the health of the animals or on their reproductive activity. Long continued use of thyroactive materials is not recommended. The probable role of thyroxine in augmenting the milk yield has been discussed. [S. K. De.] Comparative Nutrition of Farm Animals. H. R. GUILBERT and J. K. LOOSLI (1951) J, Anim. Sci. 10, 22-41 THE present report on the comparative nutrition of farm animals was under- taken by the authors in view of the discrepancies, pointed out by Maynard in the feeding standards for livestock recommended by the Committee on the Animal Nutrition of the National Research Council, in 1942. The relevant literature, and the concepts contributing to the procedure adopted by the authors, have been reviewed. The concept of physiologically equivalent age has been used to compare the recommended nutritional requirements of different species of animals that fit with the physiologically equivalent age curve. The total feed capacities of the different species are in general, proportional to the fractional power of bodyweight as the maintenance requirement and the basal heat production. There is no fundamental difference in the efficiency of feed utilization for growth, that depends on body size as such. There are no differences in the recommended dietary allowances for protein, calcium, phosphorus for different species but the ratio of these nutrients to energy intake changes with advancing age. The recommended requirements for thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, and pantothenic acid, indicated a constant direct relation with intake of energy irrespective of the different stages of development, and is consistent with their function in enzyme systems associated directly or indirectly with the metabolic rate. It is also pointed out that the vitamin requirements of vitamin A and carotene are directly propor- tional to the bodyweight in mammals. This applies to poultry, as well, but the requirement is somewhat higher than mammals. The existing knowledge about the nutritional requirements of vitamin D, would point out to a lack of any relation either with the body weight or feed consumption. The generalized recommended nutritional requirements for farm animals, as a per cent of the total digestible nutrients in relation to per cent mature weight, is presented, which with the existing knowledge or the results of future research is capable of being translated into suitable feeding standards for practical use. The authors suggested an investigation into the feasibility of expressing the relationship of the various nutrients with the metabolizable energy rather than with the total digestible nutrients in order to bring the data for ruminants and non- ruminants into closer accord. The field of comparative nutrition is fertile and there is ample scope for studying the similarities, which are more likely to be more pro- nounced, than differences, that exist among the different species of farm animals. [V. N. M.] MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES SEASONAL VARIATIONS IN SEMEN QUALITY, AND HAEMOGLOBIN AND CELL VOLUME CONTENTS OF THE BLOOD IN BULLS By D. P. MUKHERJEE and P. BHATTACHARYA, Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 10 July 1951) (With Plates IV74 SEASONAL VARIATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XXII, Part II, characteristics of semen should be uniform and controlled. Unless sexually mature animals of the same age and breed are taken for experimentation and are kept under uniform managerial and dietary regime during the entire experimental period, seasonal influence, if any, on the various characteristics of semen may be masked, minimised or exaggerated. Indian bulls (Bos indicus) belong entirely to a different species from the experi- mental animals of the previous workers. - Climatic conditions in this country also are greatly different from those in places where the experiments were conducted. For these reasons and in view of the contradictory results obtained by the various workers it was considered worth while to study the trend of seasonal influence on semen characteristics of Indian bulls. Seasonal variations in the composition of blood of Indian dairy cattle have been observed by Pal et al. [1945]. Attempts have, therefore, been made in this study to determine the relationship, if any, of the seasonal changes in the blood with the variations in the semen characteristics. MATERIAL AND METHODS The experimental animals comprised of six Kumauni hill bulls. All the bulls were of four years of age excepting one (No. 187) which was seven years old at the commencement of the experiment. During the entire experimental period the bulls were kept under uniform managerial and dietary regime. The ration supplied to each bull consisted of a concentrate mixture containing crushed gram 30 parts, crushed barley 50 parts, wheat bran 20 parts and common salt 1 oz. Concentrate mixture was fed according to body-weight. The quantity given per day to the bulls was as follows: Bull number Average body weight Concentrate given .200 500 lb. 4 1b. 187 and 240 450 lb. 3 lb. 194,195 and 248 400 lb. 2 1b. In addition to the above concentrate each animal received 10-lb. of roughage and was allowed free grazing for six hours a day. The bulls selected were in good health having good sex desire and sex ability. During the pre-experimental period they were trained to mount an anoestrous hill cow confined in a service crate and to ejaculate semen in the artificial vagina. In order to estimate the monthly variations in semen quality and quantity of individual bulls, fortnightly collections of two successive ejaculates at an interval
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE & P. BHATTACHARYA 75 of 10 to 15 minutes were made from each bull. Each sample of semen was examined for the following characteristics:Vol. XXII, Part II, the entire experimental period 1946-47 A M J J A S O N D 112.33 36.17 30.0 76.46 103.28 54.67 51.53 78.21 91.88 M M M M Th. M Th. M Th. M M M 3.38 3.42 3.13 3.10 3.56 3.29 3.40 3.54 3.27 2.20 2.00 2.02 2.31 2.82 2.33 2.30 2.49 2.14 6.20 6.26 6.33 6.37 6.33 6.34 6.34 6.33 6.48 720.42 665.63 670.83 636.00 569.58 500.42 456.46 711.04 676.42 1,450.25 1,272.13 1,195.84 1,428.36 1,834.62 1,180.97 1,069.31 1,721.14 1,386.99 5.79 6.33 5.04 3.25 5.63 3.96 5.75 5.75 6.33 9.34 9.59 8.70 8.25 7.90 7.42 8.18 8.24 8.07 44.95 45.95 42.67 40.13 38.14 38.99 40.73 41.55 41.03 86.7 92.7 93.5 85.6 85.9 85.4 79.0 68.9 61.7 22 31 50 81 80 65 72 64 62 0.00 1.01 5.25 16.89 6.11 4.01 5.17 0.04 0.21
76 SEASONAL VARIATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE I Monthly averages of 'reaction-time', semen and blood characteristics of the bulls and the meteorological data during the entire experimental period 1945-46 1946-47 J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S 0 N D Reaction-time (in seconds) 91.46 40.63 65.63 69.12 69.73 117.50 48.58 81.71 97.0 52.29 141.75 95.83 62.96 82.13 33.46 112.33 36.17 30.0 76.46 103.28 54.67 51.53 78.21 91.88 Appearance of semen M M M M Th. M Th. M Th. M Th. M Th. M M M M M M M M M M M Th. M Th. M Th. M M M Initial motility of spermatozoa 4.19 3.85 3.63 3.65 3.54 3.08 3.48 3.21 3.75 3.69 3.75 3.92 3.23 3.38 3.38 3.38 3.42 3.13 3.10 3.56 3.29 3.40 3.54 3.27 Volume of semen (in c.c.) 2.05 2.52 2.22 2.03 2.17 2.40 2.44 2.33 2.00 1.93 1.91 1.87 2.27 2.03 2.24 2.20 2.00 2.02 2.31 2.82 2.33 2.30 2.49 2.14 pH of semen 6.18 6.15 6.32 6.3 6.21 6.24 6.32 6.11 6.12 6.19 6.24 6.23 6.51 6.52 6.29 6.20 6.26 6.33 6.37 6.33 6.34 6.34 6.33 6.48 Sperm concentration (in millions per c.c. of semen) 698.54 625.0 788.33 658.33 591.66 532.29 564.79 511.70 561.87 609.08 680.88 676.88 720.0 698.13 704.79 720.42 665.63 670.83 636.00 569.58 500.42 456.46 711.04 676.42 Total number of spermatozoa (in millions) 1,318.67 1,549.51 1,772.95 1,417.39 1,338.65 1,467.31 1,492.77 1,275.68 1,178.99 1,165.85 1,296.33 1,309.17 1,713.84 1,482.89 1,422.13 1,450.25 1,272.13 1,195.84 l,428.36 1,834.62 1,180.97 1,069.31 1,721.14 1,386.99 Percentage of abnormal sperma- tozoa 4.63 5.88 5.71 5.13 2.63 3.71 2.58 4.38 4.79 8.63 5.33 5.63 9.25 7.00 3.96 5.79 6.33 5.04 3.25 5.63 3.96 5.75 5.75 6.33 Haemoglobin (gm. per 100 c.c. of blood) 8.79 8.91 8.82 8.89 8.77 8.29 7.89 7.82 7.37 7.63 7.88 8.12 8.90 8.85 8.76 9.34 9.59 8.70 8.25 7.90 7.42 8.18 8.24 8.07 Percentage of cell volume 45.65 45.48 43.49 42.92 43.27 40.04 38.14 32.99 35.52 36.96 37.56 42.01 45.33 43.99 41.76 44.95 45.95 42.67 40.13 38.14 38.99 40.73 41.55 41.03 Air temperature (°F.) 60.9 67.1 73.3 84.8 88.5 89.5 83.7 84.9 82.7 77.1 68.6 59.1 58.9 64.2 75.3 86.7 92.7 93.5 85.6 85.9 85.4 79.0 68.9 61.7 Percentage of humidity 59 61 34 42 47 61 85 79 83 68 66 67 71 63 45 22 31 50 81 80 65 72 64 62 Rainfall (in inches) 0 0 0.01 0.68 1.72 4.59 22.21 8.59 13.94 5.03 0 0 1.32 0.75 0.96 0.00 1.01 5.25 16.89 6.11 4.01 5.17 0.04 0.21 M=Milky Th. M=Thin milky
JUNE, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 77 RESULTS Data regarding the average 'reaction-time', semen and blood attributes of the bulls together with the meteorological data of each month are presented in Table I. Examination of the data reveals that there did not exist any relationship between the 'reaction-time' and the quality of semen produced by the bulls in each month. Average 'reaction-time' in 1945-46 was the shortest in February and longest in November. There was, however, no appreciable difference between these months in majority of the semen characteristics. In 1946-47 the 'reaction-time' was the lowest in June and highest in April. The over-all quality of semen during these two months of that year were diametrically opposite; semen samples of April were decidedly superior to June samples. Colour of the semen samples produced by the bulls during the experimental period were either yellow or milky white. Yellow samples were the characteristic feature of the bull 187. They were thin in consistency and were of low sperm con- centration. The semen samples produced by the remaining five bulls were generally milky white in colour. The consistency was either very thin giving a cloudy appear- ance or like that of milk, or thick giving a milky creamy appearance. Creamy samples, of which there were a few, contained very high concentration of sperma- tozoa. Milky samples were of higher sperm concentration than cloudy or yellow samples. In working out the average colour and consistency for the month as presented in the table, the characteristics of the majority of the samples for the month were only considered. From the table it is apparent that sperm concentration of thin milky samples ranged from 456.5 to 591.7 millions per c.c. and that of milky samples from 609.1 to 788.3. There was no marked monthly variation in the initial motility of spermatozoa and the volume of semen. The latter, however, showed some de- crease from October to December during the first year of the experiment. No marked monthly variation was noticed in pH. The average pH value of semen samples during the first year was lower than that of the second year. In 1945-46, sperm concentration and haematological constituents decreased from May to September and in 1946-47 from July to October. Meteorological data of these periods show high air temperature associated with high relative humi- dity and rainfall. Total number of spermatozoa was calculated by multiplying the total volume with the sperm concentration. Inspection of the data presented in the table shows that in this characteristic there existed variations from month to month. These variations were statistically analysed. The, implication of the analysis has been discussed later on. In the first year, percentage of abnormal spermatozoa was minimum during May to July and maximum during October. In the second year it dropped down to minimum in March, July and September and maximum was reached during January. Average monthly variations in 'reaction-time', in semen characteristics and in blood constituents are presented in Plate IV, and that of air temperature, relative
78 SEASONAL VARIATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XX11, Part II, humidity and rainfall in Plate V. From Plate IV it is apparent that the curve for 'reaction-time' is not uniform and does not show any definite seasonal trend. Initial motility curve shows a tendency to follow the curve for sperm concentration. The curve for volume reached its peak in August 1946 and minimum in December 1945-46. The curve for pH shows an opposite trend to- that of sperm concentra- tion. The curves for sperm concentration, haemoglobin and cell volume run parallel to one another and show definite seasonal trends. From Plate V it is evident that with the rise of air temperature, relative humidity and rainfall, there was decrease in the sperm concentration and in the two blood constituents studied. Low air temperature associated with high humidity as found in the month of December of both the years had depressing effect on sperm concentration and blood consti- tuents. The curve for total number of spermatozoa does not uniformly resemble the curve representing sperm concentration. The curve for abnormal spermatozoa has two peaks, one in October 1946 and the other in January 1947. TABLE II Average 'reaction-time', semen and blood characteristics of the bulls and the meteorological conditions in different seasons Autumn (August to October) Winter (November to January) Spring (February to April) Summer (May to July) Reaction time (in seconds) 73.42 93.63 67.23 63.07 Colour and consistency of semen Th. M. M. M. M. Volume of semen (in c.c.) 2.28 2.12 2.21 2.22 Initial motility of spermatozoa 3.48 3.60 3.53 3.29 pH of semen 6.25 6.32 6.29 6.28 Sperm-concentration (in millions per c.c.) 534.85 693.96 699.17 610.20 Total number of spermatozoa (in millions) 1,284.24 1,457.86 1,515.85 1,365.85 Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa 5.52 6.15 5.58 3.92 Haemoglobin contents in blood (grams per 100 c.c. of blood) 7.72 8.33 8.93 8.58 Percentage cell volume 37.22 42.19 43.76 41.70 Percentage of humidity 74.5 64.83 44.5 59.16 Rainfall (in inches) 7.14 0.26 0.40 8.45 Air temperature (0°F.) 82.95 62.95 75.23 88.91 Th. M.=Thin milky M.=Milky
PLATE IV [Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, Part II] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, Part II] PLATE V [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
June, 1952[ D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 79 Table II shows variations in average 'reaction-time', semen and blood character- istics of the. bulls and the meteorological conditions during the four seasons. The figures given in the table are the averages for. two consecutive experimental years. Perusal of the table reveals that there did not exist any correlation between the 'reaction-time' and the quality of semen in different seasons. 'Reaction-time' was longest in winter and shortest in summer. Very little difference in volumes and pH of semen existed during the seasons. Sperm concentration, total number of spermatozoa, haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood were lowest in autumn and highest in spring. Initial motility of spermatozoa was lowest in summer and highest in winter. Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa was conspicuously low in summer. Relatively, little difference was observed among the remaining three seasons. In winter and spring when the semen was rich in sperm concentra- tion, the samples had a milky appearance. In summer and autumn the ejaculates contained lesser number of spermatozoa and their appearance varied from milky to thin milky. Relative humidity and rainfall were highest in autumn and lowest in spring. Average air temperature in autumn was almost as high as in summer. Air temperature in spring was moderate. Statistical analysis of the results The data summarised in Table I and II, and the average quality of semen pro- duced by the individual bulls during the entire experimental period have been subjected to analysis of variance to determine whether or not the variations as found in semen qualities, blood constituents and meteorological data were real or due to chance. The summary of the results of the statistical analysis has been presented in Table III. TABLE III Summary of the analysis of variance of semen and blood characteristics of the bulls and meteorological data Source of variation Factors for analysis Between bulls Between years Between seasons Interaction between seasons and years Between months within seasons Reaction-lime ** ° ° ° ° Volume of semen ** ° ° ° ° Initial motility of spermatozoa ** ** ° ° ° pH of semen ** ** ° ° ** Sperm-concentration ** ° ** ° ° Total number of spermatozoa ** ° ° ° ° 3 A
80 SEASONAL VARIATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE IIIJune, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 81 TABLE IV Critical difference of five per cent level of variable factors between bulls Value of C.D. Averages of bulls arranged in ascending order Reaction-time (in seconds) 36.81 240 194 248 187 195 200 (42.17) (52.64) (57.67) (83.23) (100.43) (109.94) Volume of semen (in c.c.) 0.34 248 195 194 200 240 187 (1.56) (2.07) (2.10) (2.11) (2.43) (3.00) Initial motility 0.27 187 248 194 200 240 195 (2.55) (3.04) (3.73) (3.75) (3.86) (4.02) pH of semen 0.08 195 240 200 187 194 248 (6.21) A(6.22) (6.24) (6.33) B(6.34) (6.39) Sperm concentration (in millions per c.c.) 114.92 187 248 200 240 195 194 (308.95) (410.20) (628.44) (757.76) (806.05) (895.83) Total number of spermatozoa per ejaculate (in millions) 318.74 248 187 200 194 195 240 (690.44) (1,041.35) (1,351.35) (1,724.33) (1,745.32) (1,882.65) Percentage of haemoglobin (in gm. per 100 c.c. of blood) 0.24 187 200 248 195 240 194 (8.04) (8.06) (8.12) (8.34) (8.70) (9.10) Percentage of cell volume 1.49 187 248 200 195 240 194 (39.12) (40.25) (40.94) (41.10) (42.90) (43.90)
82 SEASONAL VARIATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE V Critical difference at 5 per cent level of variable factors between years Value of C.D. Averages of years arranged in ascending order Initial motility of spermatozoa 0.12 1946.47 1945-46 (3.33) (3.64) pH of semen 0.04 1945.46 1946-47 (6.22) (6.36) Percentage of haemoglobin 0.14 1945-46 1946-47 (8.27) (8.52) Percentage of cell volume 0.87 1945-46 (40.37) 1946-47 (42.10) TABLE VI Critical difference at 5 per cent level of variable factors between seasons Value of C.D. Averages of seasons arranged in ascending order Initial motility 0.22 Summer (3.29) Autumn (3.48) Spring (3.54) Winter (3.66) Sperm concentration per c.c. of semen. 93.84 Autumn (534.85) Summer (610.20) Winter (693.96) Spring (699.17) Percentage of abnormal sperma- 1.24 Summer (3.92) Autumn (5.52) Spring (5.58) Winter (6.15) Percentage of haemoglobin in blood. 0.20 Autumn (7.72) Winter (8.33) Summer (8.58) Spring (8.93) Percentage of cell volume 1.21 Autumn (37.22) Summer (41.70) Winter (42.19) Spring (43.76) Percentage of humidity 18.66 Spring (44.50) Summer (59.16) Winter (64.83) Autumn (74.50) Average rainfall 6.40 Winter (0.26) Spring (0.40) Autumn (7.10) Summer (8.45) Average air temperature 7.86 Winter (62.95) Spring (75.23) Autumn (82.50) Summer 88.91)
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 83 It is apparent from the table that the ' reaction-time' of bulls did not show any relationship with the quality of semen produced by them. The quality of semen of bulls under the same bar, which did not show significant variation in their average ''reaction-time' varied considerably. For instance, the semen quality (as judged by initial motility, sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa) of bull 248, whose ' reaction-time ' did not vary significantly from bulls 240 and 194, was significantly inferior to that of those two bulls. Bulls 195 and 200 did not vary in their ' reaction-time' but there was a significant variation in all their semen attributes except pH, motility and volume of semen ; bull 200 was inferior to bull 195. Similarly, the semen of bull 187 which did not significantly vary from bull 194 as regards ' reaction-time ', was inferior to this bull. It seems, therefore, that in bulls the ' reaction-time ' which is an indication of sex-vigour is independent of sperm production and the quality of semen. Regarding volume of semen, bull 187 gave the largest quantity and bull 248 the smallest. Bull 195 was inferior to bull 240. The rest of the bulls did not vary among themselves. Although the volume of semen from bull 187 was much higher than from the rest, the initial motility and sperm concentration in this bull were the lowest. It seems that the amount of the accessory glands secretions in this bull was much more than in others, presumably it was due to this particular animal being three years older than the rest. Initial motility of bull 248 was significantly higher than bull 187 but lower than the remaining bulls. Bull 194 was inferior to bull 195. The variation among bulls 194, 200 and 240 was not significant. As regards pH of semen there were two distinct groups. Group A included bulls 195, 240 and 200 and Group B included 187, 194 and 248. The semen quality (as judged by sperm concentration, initial motility and total number of sperma- tozoa) of all the animals in Group A was decidedly superior to that of bulls 187 and 248 of Group B. The reason why the semen of bull 194 showed higher pH inspite of higher concentration and total number of spermatozoa may be found in the fact that during December 1946 to April 1947 the animal suffered from, inflamma- tion of the seminal vesicles. Due to this inflammation the semen samples during this period were found to be very alkaline and contained leucocytes ; furthermore the initial motility of spermatozoa was also low during this period. It appears, therefore, that in animals showing the normal range of pH of semen, those with comparatively higher pH value are poorer in sperm concentration, total number of spermatozoa and initial motility. Sperm concentration in bull 200 was significantly higher than in bulls 187 and 248. Bull 240 was inferior to bull 194. It will be seen that there was a direct relationship between the sperm concentration and initial motility of spermatozoa. Sperm concentration and initial motility were observed to be lower in bull 187. Bull 200 which was decidedly better than bulls 187 and 248 for sperm concentra- tion gave samples with higher initial motility. Between bulls 240 and 195 there was neither significant variation in sperm concentration nor in initial motility.
84 SEASONAL VARIATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XXII, Part II, As has been stated before the total number of spermatozoa was calculated by multiplying the density of the ejaculate by its volume. It was expected, therefore, that in bulls, showing significant differences in volume but not in sperm concentra- tion the total number of spermatozoa with larger volume of ejaculate would be higher. This was found to be true in bulls 248 and 187. Sperm-concentration of these two bulls did not vary. However, as bull 187 was much superior to bull 248 in volume, the total number of spermatozoa was significantly greater than that of 248 which had the lowest semen volume. There was no significant variation in the total number of spermatozoa between bulls 187 and 200. This was perhaps due to the fact that the volume of semen of the latter was significantly less than that of the former although its sperm concentration was significantly higher. Bulls 194 and 195 did not vary in this characteristic as there was neither significant variation between their semen volumes nor between their sperm concentrations. Between bulls 195 and 240 there was not significant variation in sperm concentra- tion. Although there was a significant variation in their volume of semen, the variation was not so great as between bulls 187 and 248. It was prehaps due to this reason that no significant variation in the total number of spermatozoa between bulls 195 and 240 was observed. Regarding the blood constituents it will be seen from the table that there was a very close relationship between cell volume and haemoglobin contents. Bulls having higher concentration of haemoglobin also had higher cell volume in blood. Judged by these two characteristics, the quality of blood of bull 187 was poorest. Furthermore, the semen quality of this bull as regards initial motility and sperm concentration was very poor and the pH of semen was high. Bull 248 was signi- ficantly inferior to bulls 240 and 194 for blood as well as for semen attributes. Bull 194 which showed highest concentration of haemoglobin and cell volume in blood also showed highest sperm concentration in semen. Its total number of sperma- tozoa did not vary significantly from that of bull 240 which showed the highest number of spermatozoa. From the records of bulls 187, 194 and 248 it appears that there was a direct correlation between semen and blood quality of bulls. Had it been really so, bulls 200 and 248 which did not vary significantly in their blood constitutions should not have varied in their semen quality as well. But bull 248 was the poorest of all for volume and total number of spermatczoa. The pH value of semen was also high and there was not significant variation in sperm concentration between 248 and 187 which had the lowest sperm concentration. Similarly, bull 195 did not vary significantly in blood picture from bull 248 but its semen quality was decidedly superior to bull 248. Table V shows C. D. at 5 per cent level of variable factors between years. From the table it will be seen that during the first year of the experiment the initial motility of spermatozoa was significantly higher than in the second year, whereas, the pH value in the second year was more than in the first year. Blood samples of the animals during 1946-47 were richer in haemoglobin and cell volume than in 1945-46. It is apparent, therefore, that although the general conditions of the
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 85 animals improved during the second year as shown by higher haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood, their semen quality deteriorated as indicated by higher pH value of semen and lower initial motility of spermatozoa. No satisfactory explanation for this deterioration in semen quality seems possible without detailed studies of the various contributory factors for semen production. Critical difference of the variable factors between seasons is given in Table VI. From the table it is apparent that there was no significant variability in the initial motility and sperm concentration between summer and autumn. For initial motility summer and for sperm concentration autumn was the worst season. For haemoglobin and cell volume in blood, autumn was decidedly inferior to the rest of the seasons. Haemoglobin varied from season to season but no significant varia- tion in cell volume was found between winter and summer. For the two blood constituents and for sperm concentration, autumn was the worst and spring the best season. Autumn differed significantly from spring in relative humidity and rainfall; these in the former season being 30.0 per cent and 6.74 inches respec- tively more than in the latter. There was, however, no significant variation in the average air temperature between the two seasons. It appears, therefore, that sperm concentration in semen as well as the two blood constituents improved con- siderably when the environmental temperature was moderate and humidity low. TABLE VII Percentage distribution of abnormal spermatozoa in different seasons Seasons Abnormali- ties of head. Abnormalities of middle piece Abnormalities of tail Beaded middle piece Other ab- normalities Tailless Bent tail Coiled tail Other abnorma- lities Autumn 2.66 2.7 0.95 12.65 9.33 2.54 2.46 Winter 2.83 2.04 0.25 8.33 15.75 3.46 2.91 Spring 2.12 2.33 0.25 8.37 12.33 3.16 4.66 Summer 2.66 2.25 0.45 11.08 3.91 1.83 1.79 As regards abnormal spermatozoa, summer differed significantly from the rest of the seasons. In summer percentage of abnormal spermatozoa was low. Per- centage of abnormal spermatozoa during the different seasons of the year is given in Table VII. The most common types of abnormalities have been tabulated under different heads and those which were not common have been put under one group ' other abnormalities'. It will be seen from the table that in winter and spring ' bent tail' spermatozoa increased considerably, whereas autumn and summer favoured 4
86 SEASONAL VARIATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XXII, Part II, the formation of tailless ones. Percentage of ' coiled tail' spermatozoa was higher in winter and spring and lower in autumn and summer. The rest of the abnor- malities did not show any marked variation from season to season. The fall in the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa in summer might be due to the fact that during this season the ' bent tail' sperms were minimum although the tailless ones were as high as in autumn. Consideration of critical difference of pH. and blood constituents between months has not been attempted as the samples obtained from each bull in a month were too small to yield any valid conclusion. DISCUSSION As has been stated above, statistical analysis of the data on ' reaction-time' revealed that it was not influenced by season. Salisbury [1944] also did not find any significant monthly variation in bulls with regard to this character. ' Reaction-time' is an indication of sex desire or libido and sex vigour. Sex desire as judged by ' reaction-time' varied considerably in bulls, but it did not give any indication as regards their sperm production. This observation is in agree- ment with those reported by McKenzie and Berliner [1937] in rams, and Anderson [1939] in bulls. Various workers have shown that sex desire in males is controlled by male hormone (testosterone). Injection of testosterone to immature, castrated or hypo- physectomised animals increased their sexual desire as shown by the erection of male genitalia and increased frequency of copulation [Hamilton, 1937; Shapiro, 1937 ; Stone, 1939; etc.]. It appears therefore, that the production of testosterone in the matured bulls of the present experiment was not influenced by such external factors as air temperature, relative humidity and rainfall. Volume From the analysis of variance of total volume of semen it is seen that there was highly significant variation among bulls in their total output of semen per ejaculate. This character, however, was not variable from month to month or from season to season. The present result agrees with those reported by Phillips et al. [1943], Swanson and Herman [1944], Salisbury [1944] and Anderson [1946] but is contrary to those obtained by Erb et al. [1943] and Mercier and Salisbury [1946]. Total volume of semen is mainly dependent on the secretions of the accessory reproductive organs. It is now well-known that these secretions are dependent upon testosterone liberated by the interstitial cells of the testes. The measure- ment of the total volume of semen, therefore, as pointed out by Bogart and Mayer [1946] reflects the functional capacity of the interstitial cells. Results obtained in this experiment show that there was individual variation in the functional capacity of the interstitial cells of the testes in bulls but it was not influenced by seasons. This observation, therefore, lends further support to the view that proudction of testosterone is independent of the external factors studied in this experiment.
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P.BHATTACHARYA 87 pH of semen The hydrogenion-concentration has been recognised by several investigators as one of the many characteristics of semen for evaluation of its quality. From analysis of data for individual bull, pH of semen did not seem to have any special significance except that it indicated in a general way other qualities such as, sperm concentration, initial motility and total number of spermatozoa. The pH value of semen was usually found to lie between 6.22 to 6.34. Higher pH value was associated with low values of other semen characteristics and vice versa. During the latter part of the experimental period, the pH value in one bull, however, was found not to lie within the range but was 6.8 or above. As mentioned earlier this was due to an infection in its seminal vesicles. Anderson [1945,a] also observed that in conditions involving pathology of genital organs the reaction of semen was characteristically alkaline. Results obtained in this experiment on the effect of season on pH are in agree- ment with those reported by Erb et al. [1942], but not with those obtained by Swanson and Herman [1944], Anderson [1945,b] and Raps and Cannon [1947]. It may be mentioned here, that there existed a highly significant seasonal variation in sperm concentration. As the sperm concentration of semen in individual bulls was negatively correlated with the pH of semen, it was to be expected, therefore, that a seasonal trend in pH should also exist. The results, however, did not show any such trend. This might be due to the fact that pH was determined in this investiga- tion with B. D. H. capillators by colorimetric method. Admittedly, the values obtained with this method would be less accurate than what they would have been if determined by glass electrode pH meter. But it appears that as pH is a general indication of semen quality it failed to show any definite seasonal trend. Initial motility Initial motility as estimated by direct microscopical examination is dependent upon the activity of spermatozoa as well as the sperm concentration. Variations in sperm concentration will, therefore, reflect on the degree of initial motility. Analysis of the present data showed highly significant variation among bulls and between different years, and significant variation among seasons. The results, on the whole agree with those reported by Erb et al. [1948], Sawnson and Herman [1944], Salisbury [1944] and Anderson [1945,b] but differ from the findings of Phillips et al. [1943] and Mercier and Salisbury [1946] who reported no significant seasonal variation in the initial motility.Sperm concentration Determination of this characteristic is essential in order to appraise the fertiliz- ing capacity of the semen sample. Result of analysis of data on sperm concentra- tion showed that it was highly variable among bulls and among seasons. This agrees with the results reported by previous workers except Anderson [1941] and Swanson and Herman [1944]. 4A
88 SEASONAL VARLATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XXII, Part II Estimation of sperm concentration at regular intervals as was done in this experi- ment, provided a direct indication of the rate of spermatogenesis. Spermatogenesis is controlled by the activity of the follicle stimulating hormone of the anterior pituitary gland. For full manifestation of its activity, however, the secretions of other endocrines are also necessary. Very recently it has been demonstrated that in some farm animals the seasonal variations in fertility and semen characteristics correspond with the seasonal activity of the thyroid gland and that this seasonal effect can be controverted by artificially administering thyroid hormone in summer and one of the depressant thiouracil drugs in winter [Berliner and Warbritton (1937) Bogart and Mayer 1946]. It seems, therefore, that decrease in sperm con- centration in summer and autumn may be due to mild hypothyroidism produced due to the prevailing high environmental temperature and relative humidity. Total number of spermatozoa Sperm concentration is indicative of spermatogenetic activity but does not give a true evaluation unless the total number of spermatozoa per ejaculate is also con- sidered. The total number of spermatozoa per ejaculate when calculated from data of two successive ejaculates from an individual animal gives rather an accurate picture of semen quality of the animal for the particular period when the semen was collected. Analysis of data for total number of spermatozoa in different bulls showed no seasonal influence on this character. The present result is in disagree- ment with those reported by Erb et al. [1942] and Phillips et al. [1943] but is in agreement with that reported by Mercier and Salisbury [1946]. The latter authors, however, expressed doubts about their results because the frequency of semen collection in their study was not rigorously controlled. Consequently, they believed that the variation due to seasons in this respect might have been obscured. They have, therefore, suggested that ' before the question is satisfactorily answered it will be necessary to establish a rigorous schedule for semen collection throughout a year '. In this investigation, a definite schedule throughout the two consecutive years was followed in collecting semen samples, and yet no significant variation among seasons or among months within seasons was observed. Abnormal spermatozoa The result obtained in this respect show that bulls did not differ significantly in production of abnormal spermatozoa. Regarding the effect of seasons it was found that summer differed from the rest of the seasons in producing low percentage of abnormality. Highly significant seasonal variations in abnormal spermatozoa of bulls have also been reported by Erb et al. [1942], Phillips et al. [1943], Swanson and Herman [1944] and Mercier and Salisbury [1946]. During winter and spring more bent and coiled tail sperms were produced, whereas in summer and autumn more tailless ones. Phillips and his collaborators while working with bulls and rams [1943,a; and 1943,b] reported a high percentage of abnormality in tails during winter. But they did not mention the types of the tail abnormalities observed. They considered that cold weather might have adversely effected the tails after the collections were made. To test the validity of this view a few fresh samples
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 89 of bull semen in small test-tubes were put into chipped ice for about half an hour immediately after collection and later on examined for the percentage of ' bent tail' sperms. Samples thus treated did not show any increase in the appearance of bent tails or coiled tails. Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1949] have shown that these are not true abnormalities but are immature forms of spermatozoa. It seems, therefore, that during winter and spring when the rate of spermatogenesis is high, a considerable number of immature spermatozoa are carried along with the normal spermatozoa in the male reproductive tract before they come to ampullae for final ejectment. Blood constituents From Plates IV and V, it is clear that the two blood constituents, viz., haemo- globin and cell volume were inversely related to the changes in air temperature. Higher the temperature the lesser was the haemoglobin and cell volume contents in blood. Manersa et al. [1940] also found that haemoglobin index was higher in winter and lower in summer in Philippine cattle. For both haemoglobin and cell volume the result reported herein agrees with that reported by Pal et al. [1945] in dairy cows in India. During summer air temperature is high as compared with body temperature. As soon as high air temperature comes in contact with skin, some heat is absorbed by peripheral blood which subsequently passes through the heat regulating centre. On coming in contact with blood of higher temperature this centre operates to dis- pose off the extra heat and as a result the red and white blood corpuscles and plate- lets go to their reserve places, i.e., spleen and liver. The increased blood plasma in the dialated capillaries evaporates off in the form of perspiration and keep the body cool. Secretions of thyroid and adrenal are also inhibited [Kuno, 1935]. During autumn, high environmental temperature with high humidity perhaps prevent the dissipation of the exrta body heat by retarding body evaporation and thus the physiological adjustment is to a large extent upset. In consequence, there is a general derangement of the body functions including the spermatogenesis of the testes and hence the low concentration of spermatozoa during autumn. SUMMARY Seasonal variation in ' reaction-time', semen characteristics, haemoglobin and cell volume contents in the blood of six Kumauni hill bulls were studied during two consecutive years. Highly significant variation was observed among bulls in average ' reaction- time ', all attributes of semen studied except in the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa and the two blood constituents. Reaction-time' did not show any definite seasonal trend and bore no relation- ship with sperm production. Colour and consistency of semen was found to be thin milky in autumn and milky in the other three seasons.
90 SEASONAL VARIATION IN SEMEN QUALITY [Vol. XXII, Part II, No significant seasonal variation in average semen volume and total number of spermatozoa was observed. Highly significant variation was observed in the average initial motility between years; the first year being superior to the second year. It also varied significantly among seasons ; summer showing significantly lower motility than winter. The pH of semen showed highly significant variation between years and between months within seasons. pH during the first year was lower than in the second. Highly significant variation in sperm concentration was observed among seasons; autumn showing significantly lower concentration than winter and spring. Among seasons highly significant variation was found in the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. In summer the percentage of abnormal sperma- tozoa was less than in other seasons. Some forms of tail abnormalities such as, bent tail and coiled tail were found to be more preponderant in winter and spring. In autumn and summer, tailless forms were slightly more in comparison with the other two seasons. Haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood were highly variable among bulls, between years, among seasons and among months within seasons. The two blood constituents were higher in the second year than in the first. Among seasons, spring was found to be the best and autumn the worst for these characteristics. The quality of semen and the blood of the bulls were significantly superior in spring, i.e., February to April and significantly inferior in autumn, i.e., August to October. Spring was marked with moderate air temperature, lowest humidity and scanty rainfall. Whereas, autumn recorded as high an air temperature as in summer associated with high humidity and rainfall. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are indebted to Mr. A. Roy of the Statistical Branch of Indian Council of Agricultural Research for his valuable suggestions regarding statistical treatment of the data. REFERENCES Anderson, J. (1939). Vet. J. 95, 457-473 --------------(1941). Vet. Rec. 53, 197-205 -----------(1945,a). Imp. Bur. Anim. Breed. Tech. Comm., 4 and 7 --------------(1945,b). J. agric. Sci. 35, 184-196 Berliner, V. R. and Warbritton, V. (1937). Proc. Am. Soc. Anim. Prod., 137-142 Erb, R. E., Andrews, F. N. and Hilton, J. H. (1942). J. dairy Sci. 25, 815-826
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 91 Green, W. W. (1940). Proc. Am. Soc. Anim. Prod. 33rd Ann. Meet., 207-210 Hamilton, J. B. (1937). Endocrinology. 21, 649 (Citation from Sex and Internal Secretion (1939) by Allen, Danforth and Doisy, Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, Page 1219) Kuno (1935). Quoted by Samson Wright (1938) from Applied Physiology. Oxford Medical Publication Lasley, J. F. and Bogart, R. (1943). Res. Bull. Mo. Agric. Exp. Sta. No. 376 McKenzie, F. F. and Berliner, V. (1937). Res. Bull. Mo. Agric. Sta. No. 265 Manersa, M., Reyes, N. C., Gomez, F., Zialcita, L. P. and Falcon, P. R. (1940). Emp. Jour. Expt. Agric. 8, 97-100 Mercier, E. and Salisbury, G. W. (1946). Corn. Vet. 36, 301-311 Mukherjee, D. P. and Bhattacharya, P. (1949). Proc. Zool. Soc. Bengal, 2, 149-160 Napier, L. E. and Das Gupta, C. R. (1941). Haematological Technique, Thaker, Spink and Co., Calcutta Newcomer, H. S. (1923). J. Biol. Chem. 55, 569 Phillips, R. W., Knapp, B., Heemstra, L. C. and Eaton, O. N. (1943,a). Amer. J. Vet. Res. 4, 115-119 Phillips, R. W., Schott, R. G., Eaton, O. N. and Simmons (1943,b). Corn. Vet. 33, 227-235 Pal, A. K., Momin, S. A. and Mullick, D. N. (1945). Indian J. vet. Sci. 15, 119-122 Raps, G. and Cannon, C. Y. (1947). J. dairy Sci. 30, 933-938 Shapiro, H. A. (1937). Nature. 139, 588 (Citation from Sex and Internal Secretion (1939) by Allen Danforth and Doisy. Page 1219, Pub. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore) Stone, C. P. (1939). Endocrinology, 24, 165 (Citation from Imp. Bur. Anm. Breed. Tech. Comm. 27 (1945) by Anderson, J.) Salisbury, G. W. (1944). J. dairy Sci. 27, 551-562 Swanson, E. W. and Herman, H. A. (1944). J. dairy Sci. 27, 303-310 Shukla, D. D. and Bhattacharya, P. (1947). In press. (Abot. Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong. Part 3, 215-216) Weatherby, E. J., Reece, R. P. and Bartlett, J. W. (1940), Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod. Proc. 33, 224
EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN PRODUCTION By S. S. PRABHU AND S. GUHA, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar,s Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 12 June 1951) THE importance of regular exercise for breeding bulls is mentioned in all standard books on animal husbandry. Bartlett and Perry [1939] reported that daily exercise lasting for one hour at the rate of 2½ miles per hour increased semen output by 51 per cent. Kelly [1940] observed that 30 minutes exercise at 2½ miles per hour greatly increased the quality of the semen. He found that motility rose from 5 to 45 per cent before exercise to 60 to 100 per cent after exercise. With- out exercise motility ceased at 3 to 24 hours, while with exercise it was maintained up to 22 to 39 hours. The report of Hamilton and Symington [1939] showed that daily exercising increased the volume of ejaculate, sperm concentration and motility, while Dunlop [1941] laid great stress on plenty of exercise for producing larger ejaculates containing more sperm of higher activity. In recent years, increased attention is being paid to the environment as one of the major factors conditioning the physiological reaction of animals. The breed of the animal also is known to play an equally important part. With the higher air temperature and humidity ranges prevailing in this country, it was thought worthwhile to investigate whether the conclusions on the effect of exercise on semen production arrived at by the foreign workers held good in 'toto', or at least in part, under the environmental 'stresses' met here. The immediate object of undertaking these studies was to arrive at some tested standards for exercising the bulls kept for routine use at artificial insemination centres. In the present paper are reported the results of three series of experiments conducted on a lot of 8 Kumauni-hill bulls. Experimental procedure Eight Kumauni-hill bulls receiving a uniform and standard diet were divided at random into 2 groups. The treatments were alloted to the 2 groups at random and at the end of a certain period which varied with the experimental series94 EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN [Vol. XXII, Part II, collections, thus group 1 which received exercise before collection on the first day, received no exercise at the second day of collection and exercise again on the third day of collection and so on. The experiment lasted for two weeks. Normally, only two collections in a week are made from routine artificial insemination bulls. The decision to have more collections in a week and confine the experiment to only two weeks was taken in order to eliminate effect of season on semen production. Daily interchanging of treatments between groups reduced the chances of long term cumulative effects, if any, of exercise on semen production, so that only the point at issue namely immediate effect of exercise on semen production and reaction time, could be studied. Experiment II. The experiment was planned to test the long term effect of lack of exercise on semen production and reaction time and was conducted on the same bulls as used in experiment I. The treatments as before consisted of exercise for one hour at the rate of three miles an hour and no exercise. As before the 'Switch-back' design was employed. The treatments were interchanged at the end of a period of one month and, unlike the first experiment, per week only one collec- tion with two ejaculates collected in rapid succession was made. The experiment lasted for four months. Experiment III. This was designed to test two levels of exerciseJune, 1952] S. S. PRABHU AND S. GUHA 95 TABLE I Showing bull-wise average characteristics of semen and reaction times observed in experiment I First ejaculate Bull number Treatment Volume (c.c.) Initial motility Sperm concen- tration M/C Per cent of abnormal sperm Reaction time (seconds) Total sperm in ejaculate (Millions) 2 Exercise 1.50 3.88 595 8.75 92 767 No exercise 1.55 3.63 943 5.00 191 1,275 8 Exercise 1.93 3.00 583 6.75 64 1,459 No exercise 1.05 3.25 648 5.75 112 710 16 Exercise 1.55 3.38 908 8.00 73 1,505 No exercise 0.46 1.63 230 7.50 103 107 40 Exercise 1.28 1.88 360 7.75 32 604 No exercise 1.24 2.13 268 7.25 55 344 1 Exercise 0.88 2.75 613 5.25 97 523 No exercise 1.40 2.75 295 9.00 79 417 18 Exercise 1.31 2.00 310 3.00 133 562 No exercise 1.85 1.25 227 5.75 19 368 35 Exercise 1.73 2.00 265 6.00 90 525 No exercise 2.20 3.25 488 6.00 64 1,065 39 Exercise 1.28 2.75 595 8.50 23 786 No exercise 2.80 3.63 845 5.50 70 2,340 Average Exercise 1.43 2.71 529 6.75 75.5 841 No exercise 1.57 2.69 493 6.47 87 828 5A
96 EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE IJune, 1952j S. S. PRABHU AND S. GUHA 97 TABLE II Analysis of variance I Ejaculate Source of Variation Volume Motility Sperm concentration Per cent of ab- normal sperm Reaction time Total sperm in ejaculate d.f. M.S. E. d.f. M.S. E. d.f. M.S. E. d.f. M.S. E. d.f. M.S. E. d.f. M.S. E. Between treatments 1 0.2957 2.356 1 17847.12 2.10 1 127033.92 .. 1 5.7992 1.13 1 16872240.5 .. 1 365736297 .. Error 6 0.1255 6 8491.14 5 195212.63 5 5.1171 6 22402002.5 6 1889490615 II Ejaculate Between treatments 1 1.1566 5.026 1 18430.03 2.68 1 177844.88 .. 1 57.6856 1.76 1 80361521 4.52 1 2148991240 2.14 Error 6 0.2301 6 6871.53 5 127148.03 5 32.7121 6 17776563 6 1001171897
98 EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN [Vol. XXII, Part II, From Table I and Table II it will be seen thatJune, 1952] S. S. PRABHU AND S. GUHA 99 TABLE III Showing bull-wise average characteristics of semen and reaction times observed in Experiment II First ejaculate Bull numbers Treatment Volume (c.c.) Initial Motility Sperm con- centration M/C Percentage of abnormal sperm Reaction time (seconds) Total sperm in ejaculate (million) Initial pH. 60 Exercise 0.49 3.63 1,522 4.13 58 765 5.93 No exercise 0.50 3.31 1,289 4.88 81 627 5.90 61 Exercise 2.34 3.25 633 5.38 93 1,640 601 No exercise 3.70 3.06 494 3.75 88 1,788 5.96 2 Exercise 1.88 4.06 1,046 4.00 77 2,125 5.88 No exercise 2.18 400 1,038 4.38 102 2,242 5.89 25 Exercise 1.49 313 460 6.38 43 680 5.94 No exercise 1.46 3.06 399 8.13 28 678 6.00 63 Exercise 1.43 3.40 976 5.34 54 1,295 5.90 No exercise 1.04 3.25 725 7.13 88 798 5.93 64 Exercise 1.21 2.69 470 9.13 82 676 6.23 No exercise 1.43 3.06 454 9.88 71 903 6.01 1 Exercise 1.29 2.06 209 3.88 23 373 6.39 No exercise 1.63 3.09 515 5.13 115 1,115 6.04 8 Exercise 2.19 3.94 761 5.25 76 1,770 5.49 No exercise 2.39 4.13 944 4.88 91 2,367 5.81 Average Exercise 1.54 3.27 760 5.44 63 1,166 6.03 No exercise 1.79 3.37 732 6.02 83 1,315 5.94
100 EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE IIIJune, 1952] S. S. PRABHU AND S. GUHA 101 (which in effect amounts to the same thing) of the data grouped by experimental period as a single observation for statistical treatment. It was argued against this procedure that possibly averaging of observations within a period smoothened out actual effects, if any, due to treatment within that period. This would appear to be so when one considered the possibility of treatment effect being shown only towards the end, if the period was fairly short or after the expiry of some time, if the period was a long one. Keeping these points in view, an attempt was made to study the effect of the nature of grouping of observations in the experimental periods on the statistical analysis. Analyses were made by first taking only the last observa- tion within an experimental period before change of treatment, then the average of similar last two observations and finally the average of all the four observations within an experimental period. The corresponding results are shown separately for each characteristic in columns A, B and C of Table IV. The relative precision of TABLE IV Showing the error M. S. (Experiment II) Semen characteristics First ejaculate Second ejaculate Pooled average of the 1st and 2nd ejaculates d.f. M.S. d.f. M.S. d.f. M.S. Volume A 6 13.11 6 12.65 12 12.88 B 6 10.64 6 8.30 12 9.47 C 6 5.25 6 8.52 12 6.88 Initial motility A 6 15.49 6 8.62 12 12.05 B 6 1.57 6 7.03 12 4.29 C 6 1.08 6 2.05 12 1.56 Sperm concentration A __ __ __ B 6 2265486 6 1468490 12 1866988 C 6 540594 6 716676 12 628635 Percent of abnormal sperm. A 6 158.66 6 19.58 12 89.12 B 6 85.82 6 43.45 12 64.63 C 6 34.31 6 23.88 12 29.09 Reaction time A 102 EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN [Vol. XXII, Part II, the more precise estimate. Since the error of the mean is dependent on the error M. S., the least value of the error M. S., would also correspond to the best estimate. In Table V are shown the 3 groups of error M. S's found for each criterion studied. Their examination show the existence of a clear 'trend'.* Thus the error M. S. values progressively decreased with the increase in the number of observations averagedJune, 1952] S. S. PRABHU AND S. GUHA. 103 TABLE V Analysis of variance (II Experiment) Source of variation Volume Initial motility Sperm concentration Per cent of abnormal sperm Reaction time Total sperm in ejaculate Initial pH D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. Between treatments 1 0.0002 .. 1 7.2603 4.63 1 2867188 4.56 1 206.2814 7.08* 1 56811.9143 3.54 1 33489 .. 1 1.0414 5.06 Between ejaculates 1 4.1371 .. 1 7.1824 4.58 1 159746 .. 1 0.0105 .. 1 31619.0633 1.97 1 28729600 8.31 1 0.0876 .. Treatment and Ejaculate 1 5.9220 .. 1 33.194 9 21.18** 1 1434682 2.28 1 0.0138 .. 1 473.8240 .. 1 2521744 .. 1 0.7310 3.55 Error 12 6.8870 .. 12 1.5667 12 628635 .. 12 291006 12 16012.2575 12 3455764 12 0.2055 .. * Significant at 5 per cent level ** Significant at 1 per cent level
104 EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN [Vol. XXII, Part 11, TABLE VI Showing average bull-wise characteristics of semen and reaction times observed in experiment III First ejaculate Second ejaculate Bull Numbers Treatment Volume (c.c.) Initial motility Sperm concentration (M/C) Percent of abnor- mal sperm Reaction time (seconds) Total sperm in cjacu- late (Million) Initial Volume (c.c.) Initial motility Sperm concentration (M/C) Percent of abnor- mal sperm Reaction time (seconds) Total sperm in ejacu- late (Millions) Initial pH 40 1 hour exercise 0.78 3.78 1204 2.89 125 714 6.08 0.45 2.17 1307 4.00 132.00 637 6.18 2 hours exercise 0.53 3.38 1461 7.38 64 1021 6.48 0.99 2.20 485 9.00 89.60 284 6.60 25 1 hour exercise 2.10 3.22 581 6.78 20 1264 5.98 2.08 3.33 516 4.67 11.89 1095 5.99 2 hours exercise 1.68 2.63 280 4.75 12 579 5.90 1.74 3.75 681 3.63 9.25 1177 6.15 61 1 hour exercise 2.66 3.28 609 4.00 69 1458 6.08 2.66 3.06 618 4.22 103.11 1638 6.11 2 hours exercise 1.50 4.00 1203 4.00 71 1791 6.20 1.38 3.19 1186 5.38 137.00 1654 6.40 2 1 hour exercise 2.08 4.11 1127 3.56 84 2551 5.93 1.96 3.57 964 3.29 171.83 2018 6.09 2 hours exercise 1.73 4.56 1154 2.63 121 2032 6.13 1.83 3.13 925 5.25 138.33 1644 6.30 63 1 hour exercise 0.95 2.63 1757 15.38 146 1539 6.31 0.90 2.92 1817 12.83 102.17 1744 6.32 2 hours exercise 1.37 3.28 1136 8.00 78 1841 6.02 1.33 3.28 709 9.78 47.67 902 6.04 8 1 hour exercise 3.30 4.38 1122 6.25 152 3238 6.10 3.11 4.14 1056 5.86 171.83 3238 6.26 2 hours exercise 1.66 3.78 744 4.78 86 1234 5.99 2.49 4.44 1203 6.00 75.56 2996 5.93 64 1 hour exercise 1.23 3.31 586 7.50 87 704 6.20 0.89 3.75 1186 9.38 85.00 1117 6.33 2 hours exercise 2.07 3.33 920 10.78 54 2018 6.02 1.54 3.67 994 10.22 40.44 1763 6.04 1 1 hour exercise 1.50 3.19 484 3.88 43 882 6.05 2.06 3.75 916 7.25 58.25 1741 6.19 2 hours exercise 1.51 3.93 641 3.29 95 932 5.94 1.97 3.92 738 4.83 138.50 1305 6.00 Average 1 hour exercise 1.83 3.49 934 6.28 91 1544 6.09 1.76 3.34 1047.5 6.44 104.5 1653.5 6.17 2 hours exercise 1.51 3.61 942 5.70 73 1431 6.085 1.66 3.45 865 6.76 85 1466 6.18
June, 1952) S. S. PRABHU AND S. GUHA 105 TABLE VII Analysis of variance experiment III Source of variation Volume Initial motility Sperm concentration Per cent of abnormal sperm Reaction time Total sperm in ejaculate Initial pH D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. D.F. M.S. F. Between treatments 1 0.6765 1.33 1 0.2209 .. 1 120756 .. 1 0.2601 .. 1 5786.6449 1.96 1 361502 .. 1 0.0001 .. Between ejaculates 1 0.0010 .. 1 .. .. 1 870 .. 1 0.8409 .. 1 12.4962 .. 1 13865 .. 1 0.0342 1.93 Treatment x and ejaculate 1 0.8385 1.65 1 0.0006 .. 1 145924 .. 1 3.3358 .. 1 14.4020 .. 1 22575 .. 1 0.0012 .. Error 12 0.5062 .. 12 0.2403 .. 12 243757 .. 12 9.3656 .. 12 2942.5839 .. 12 669040 .. 12 0.0177 ..
106 EFFECT OF MUSCULAR EXERCISE ON SEMEN [Vol. XXII, Part II, (vi) Total sperm in an ejaculate. As in the case of the initial motility, the total sperm was higher for the non-exercised group than in the exercised group in the first ejaculate and vice versa in the second ejaculate. The overall means for the two treatments were: Exercise=1181 millions and Non-exercise 1246 millions. The difference was not statistically significant. The between ejaculate difference however, was found to be significant at 5 per cent level. (vii) Initial pH. The mean pH was lower in the non-exercised lot as compared to the exercise lot in the first ejaculate, while there was no difference in the second ejaculate. The overall means for the exercised and non-exercised bulls were 6.02 and 5.98 respectively. The difference was statistically significant at 5 per cent level. From the foregoing, it would appear that the attributes most likely to be affected due to lack of regular exercise are initial pH, per cent of abnormal sperms, sperm concentration and motility. In the first two attributes, the differences are statistically significant, while in the rest, they approach the 5 per cent level of signi- ficance. Experiment III. The data are summarised in Table VI. The figures in the table are averages of all observations within a period. Using the averages of all observations within a period, analysis appropriate to 'switch-back' design was under- taken separately for the first and second ejaculates, for each of the attributes under study. As the error mean squares (carrying 6 d.f each) in the two ejaculates turned out to be homogenous (as determined by F. test) in all cases, a pooled analysis over both ejaculates was carried out. The results are given in Table VII. Examination of Tables VI and VII shows : (i) Volume. In both ejaculates on an average one hour exercised animals gave slightly larger ejaculates than the two hour exercised ones, the respective overall means being 1.79 c.c. and 1.58 c.c. The difference was not statistically significant. (ii) Initial motility. The mean motility rating was higher in both ejaculates, for the two hour exercised animals. The overall means for the one hour and two hour exercised groups were 3.41 and 3.53 respectively. The difference was not statis- tically significant. (iii) Sperm concentration. In the first ejaculate, the average sperm concentration of animals in the 'one hour exercise' group was lower and in the second ejaculate higher than in the 'two hour exercise' lot. The actual overall means were 990 M/C for the one hour and 903 M/C for the two hour groups respectively. The differ- ence was not statistically significant. (iv) Per cent of abnormal sperm. The average percentage of abnormal sperms was higher in the one hour than in the two hour group in the first ejaculate and vice versa in the second ejaculate. The overall means of the one hour and two hour exercised groups were 6.36 per cent, 16.23 per cent, respectively. The difference was not statistically significant. (v) Reaction time. In both ejaculates bulls in 'one hour exercise' group on an average took longer time than those in the 'two hour exercise' group. The overall respective means are 97 and 79 seconds. The difference was not statistically signi- ficant.
June, 1952] S. S. PRABHU AND S. GUHA 107 (vi) Total sperm in an ejaculate. In both the caculates, bulls in the one hour exercise group gave larger number of sperm than those in the two hour group, the respective overall means being 1598 and 1448 millions respectively. The difference did not approach the 5 per cent level of significance. (vii) Initial pH. In both ejaculates, there was hardly any difference in the values of pH of the semen of bulls in the two groups. On the whole, no significant differences in the various attributes of semen quality and reaction time were found between the animals subjected to the two levels of excercise, showing clearly that no material advantage was gained by increasing the rate of exercise from one to two hours daily. SUMMARY 1. Experiments were undertaken on Kumauni hill bulls to study the effect of immediate, long term (one month) and two levels of exercise (one hour and two hours on semen production. The exercise (when otherwise stated) consisted in leading the bulls on a marked pathway at the rate of 3 miles an hour for approximately an hour. 2. With the exception of semen volume, on significant difference was observed in the semen characteristics and reaction time of bulls receiving and not receiving exercise just prior to collection. Bulls receiving no exercise for a period of one month showed significant changes in intial pH and percentage of abnormal sperms while changes in sperm concentration and motility rating approached 5 per cent level of significance. There was no significant difference in the quality of semen and reaction times of bulls receiving one hour and two hour daily exercise. It has been concluded that while lack of exercise for long periods is detrimental to sperm production, increase in the daily level of exercise from one to two hours is not likely to materially improve semen production and reaction time. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are indebted to Dr P. Bhattacharya, the Officer-in-Charge of the Animal Genetics Section, for providing the necessary facilities in conducting these studies and to Messers A. R. Roy and V. N. Amble of the Statistical Section, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for help and advice in the statistical treatment of the data. Their thanks are due to the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for all help and encouragement. REFERENCES Anderson, J. (1945). Semen of animals and its use for Artificial Insemination Imp. Bar. Anim. Gen., Edinburgh Bartlett, J. J. W. and Perry, E. J. (1939). Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod. Proc. 32 243-245. Brondt, A. E. (1938). Ioxa Agri. Expt. Sta. Res. Bull., 234 Branton, C., Bratton, R. W. and Salisbury, G. W. (1947). J. Dairy Sci., 30(12), 1003-1013 Cochran, W. G., Autrey, K. M. and Cannon, C. Y. (1941). J. Dairy Sci., 24(11), 937-951 Dunlop, W. L. (1941), Arysh. Digest., 27(8) 7 Hamilton, J. G., and Symington, E. L. (1939). Canad. J. Comp. Med., 3, 337 Kelly, P. L. (1940). Hoard's Dairym., 85, 40 Sriedecor, G. W. (1946), Statistical Methods. The Lowa State College Press, Ames, Lowa
SEASONAL VARIATION IN 'REACTION-TIME' AND SEMEN QUALITY OF SHEEP BY D. D. SHUKLA AND P. BHATTACHARYA, Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 30 July 1951) (With one text-figure) THERE is a distinct breeding season when the testes show maximum reproductive activity in the males of wild forms of domesticated animals [Marshal, 1922]. In the domesticated animals, however, probably as a result of changed environmental conditions attending the process of domestication, the males have become conti- nuous breeders. Radulescu [1933] studied spermatogenesis in rams during all months of the year and found continuous spermatogenesis. Roux and Hoffman [1935] observed that rams do not become impotent during any part of the year. Though spermatogenic activity goes on throughout the year, its extent and rate have been found to depend on environmental temperature. Thus, McKenzie and Berliner [1937] at Missouri found that in Shropshire and Hampshire rams high summer temperature induced a decrease in the numbers of normal and an increase in that of abnormal spermatozoa. Green [1940] observed low sperm concentration and rise in the proportion of abnormal spermatozoa from June to August in Shrop- shire rams at Minnesota. From January to May the semen quality was best in these rams. Gunn et al. [1942] observed marked seasonal degeneration in rams in Australia during hot weather and a gradual recovery in cooler season. Phillips et al. [1943, b] have made similar observations in Hampshire, Karakul, Shropshire and South down rams at Maryland. In Kenya, seasonal variations in the semen of rams have been observed by Anderson [1945]. One singular fact which emerges out of the review of the literature is that climatic conditions influence very greatly the spermatogenic activity of rams and that high environmental temperature dec- reases the spermatogenesis. In the present study an attempt has been made to determine the seasonal varia- tions of semen characteristics of indigenous rams. This was considered worthwhile in view of the fact that the climatic conditions in India are very different from those of other countries and also the sheep of this country belong to distinctly different breeds from those on which similar studies have been conducted. MATERIAL AND METHODS Experimental animals consisted of 9 rams, 2½ to 4 years of age of the type common- ly met within Uttar Pradesh. They were selected for good health and sex ability. Before the commencement of the experiment, they were trained to mount an anoe- strous ewe and ejaculate semen in the artificial vagina. 109 7
110 SEASONAL VARIATION IN REACTION TIME [Vol. XXII, Part II, Throughout the experimental period the animals were tied separately in well ventilated sheds and were kept under uniform dietary regime. The concentrates supplied consisted of the following ingredients : June, 1952] 111 1946-47 J J A S O N D Reaction-time (in seconds) 29 32 29 24 18 18 16 Colour and consistency T. C. T. C. T. C. T. C. T. C. Th. C. Th.C. Volume of semen (in ml.) 4 0.68 0.69 0.62 0.57 0.56 0.54 0.67 Initial motility 9 4.9 4.7 5.0 4.9 4.7 4.8 4.5 pH of semen 3 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.4 Sperm concentration (in rl per ml. of semen) 2,591 2,204 1,997 1,855 1,906 2,429 3,236 Total number of spermat millions) 2 1,740 1,838 1,415 1,130 1,119 1,359 2,233 Percentage abnormal s1 tozoa. 7.3 3.9 5.0 7.7 6.9 6.8 10.3 8
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 111 TABLE 1 Average monthly variation in 'reaction-time' and semen characteristics of rams 1945-46. 1946-47 J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D Reaction-time (in seconds) 36 27 38 33 22 27 39 47 40 31 30 33 23 24 22 20 23 29 32 29 24 18 18 16 Colour and consistency Th. C. Th. C. Th. C. Th. C. Th. C. T. C. T. C. T. C. T. C. T. C. Th. C. Th. C. Th. C. Th. C. Th. C. T. C. T.C. T. C. T. C. T. C. T. C. T. C. Th. C. Th. C. Volume of semen (in ml.) 0.57 0.76 0.76 0.75 0.60 0.64 0.56 0.54 0.47 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.56 0.59 0.61 0.63 0.54 0.68 0.69 0.62 0.57 0.56 0.54 0.67 Initial motility 4.3 4.7 4.8 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.9 4.0 4.3 4.9 4.3 4.8 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.7 4.9 4.9 4.7 5.0 4.9 4.7 4.8 4.5 pH of semen 6.l 6.1 6.2 6.2 6.0 6.4 6.4 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.0 6.0 6.4 6.4 6.3 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.4 Sperm concentration (in millions per ml. of semen) 3,751 4,038 3,553 4,951 2,841 2,371 2,025 1,666 1,901 1,909 3,159 3,685 2,593 3,016 3,268 2,158 2,291 2,591 2,204 1,997 1,855 1,906 2,429 3,236 Total number of spermatozoa (in millions) 2,423 3,141 2,857 3,891 2,033 1,579 1,205 901 1,015 1,305 1,710 2,133 1,472 1,931 2,171 1,447 1,302 1,740 1,838 1,415 1,130 1,119 1,359 2,233 Percentage abnormal sperma- tozoa. 11.5 3.0 2 .6 3.0 2.4 3.5 9.0 17.1 5.2 2.8 3.9 7.2 7.2 4.7 4.3 7.1 4.1 7.3 3.9 5.0 7.7 6.9 6.8 10.3 T. C.=Thin creamy Th. C.=Thick creamy 8
112 SEASONAL VARIATION IN REACTION TIME [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE II Seasonal variations in average ' reaction-time ' and semen characteristics of rams Reaction time (in seconds) Colour and Consis- tency of semen Volume of semen (in c.c.) Initial motility of spermatozoa pH of semen Sperm concentration (in millions per c.c. of semen) Total no. of spermatozoa (in millions per ejaculate) Percentage of abnormal sperma- tozoa per ejaculate Autumn (August to October) 23.4 T. C. 0.55 4.78 6.3 1,872 1,148 7.45 Winter (November to January) 19.1 Th. C. 0.57 4.62 6.2 3,142 1,892 7.81 Spring (February to April) 22.0 Th. C. 0.69 4.78 6.2 3,497 2,573 4.11 Summer (May to July) 27.8 T. C. 0.62 4.89 6.4 2,787 1,617 5.03 T. C.=Thin creamy Th. C.=Thick creamy
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 113 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG, 1. Showing the month variation. 9
114 SEASONAL VARIATION IN REACTION TIME [Vol. XXII, Part II, Average monthly variations in 'reaction-time' and in semen characteristics are presented in fig. I. From the figure it will be seen that the curve for 'reaction- time' did not show any definite monthly variation. Curve for volume showed a tendency to follow those for sperm concentration and total number of sperma- tozoa. Curves for initial motility and pH did not show wide monthly fluctuations. There is, however, an indication that the average pH was high during the second year than during the first year. The curves for sperm concentration and the total number of spermatozoa are more or less of the same type, showing a definite monthly variation. There was a gradual decrease in both of these characteristics from April to September after which there was a progressive increase. During the second year, as opposed to pH of semen, both of these characteristics were low in comparison with the first year. The curve for abnormal spermatozoa has two peak points in the first year, one in January and the other in August, and in the second year, one in September and the other in December. The high percentage of abnormal sperma- tozoa in August and September was due to preponderance of tailless spermatozoa, whereas in December and January it was due to bent tail ones. For the purpose of studying the effect of seasons on 'reaction-time' and semen quality the local seasons were distinguished as follows : August to October . . . . . Autumn November to January...... Winter February to April....... Spring May to July........ Summer Average 'reaction-time' and characteristics of semen of the rams in different seaons are presented in Table II. Perusal of the table reveals no relationship between the 'reaction-time' and the quality of semen produced in different seasons. There was not much difference in the average 'reaction-time' between autumn and spring; but judged by all the attributes of semen studied, the quality of semen in autumn was decidedly inferior to that in spring. Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa in autumn and winter was comparatively higher than in other two seasons. This was because in autumn and winter large numbers of tailless and bent-tail sperma- tozoa respectively were found in the ejaculates. Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947] who studied the seasonal variations in semen and blood qualities of bulls during the same period, when this experiment was conducted, found that relative humidity and rainfall were highest in autumn and lowest in spring. Average air temperature in autumn was almost as high as in summer. Air temperature in spring was moderate. It seems, therefore, that when air temperature was moderate with scanty rainfall and lowest humidity as in spring the semen quality of rams improved. Whereas, in autumn when the air temperature was very high with high humidity and rainfall the semen quality deteriorated. The data on 'reaction-time' and on semen characteristics were subjected to analysis of variance. The summary of the results of analysis are presented in Table III. The table shows that in 'reaction-time' and in all characteristics of semen studied (except in initial motility of spermatozoa) there was highly significant
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 116 TABLE III Summary of the result of analysis of data on ' reaction-time' and semen characteristics of rams Factors for analysis Source of variation Between Animals Between Years Between seasons Interaction between seasons and years Between months within seasons Reaction-time ** ** ° ° ° Volume of semen ** ° ** ** ° Initial motility of spermatozoa ° ° ** ** ** pH of semen ** ** ** ** ** Sperm concentration ** ** ** ** ** Total number of spermatozoa ** ** ** ** ** Percentage of abnormal sper- matozoa per ejaculate. ** ° ** ** ** ** Significant at one per cent level. ° Not significant. variation among rams. Between the two experimental years 1945-46 and 1946-47, the variations observed in 'reaction-time', pH of semen, sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa were highly significant, whereas the variations observed in volume of semen, initial motility and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa were due to chance and not real. Variations between seasons and due to interaction between seasons and years were highly significant in all the characteristics of semen. Between months within seasons highly significant variations were found in initial motility, sperm concentration, total number of spermatozoa and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. To test the differences between rams, between years and between seasons with regard to the variable semen characteristics as presented in Table III, critical difference (C.D.) at five per cent level of the variable characteristics have been worked out and are presented in Table IV to VI. The average figure shown under the same bar in these tables did not vary at five per cent level. 9 A
116 SEASONAL VARIATION IN REACTION TIME [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE IV Critical difference at 5 per cent level of probability in ' reaction-time ' and variable semen characteristics among rams Variable characteristics Value of C.D. Averages of the rams are arranged in ascending order. Reaction-time 47 30 46 49 74 65 3 67 27 11.0 (11.1) (17.3) (18.9) (20.9) (25.6) (36.3) (38.1) (38.6) (55.6) 30 46 49 3 65 67 74 47 27 Volume of semen 0.12 (0.87) (0.52) (0.54) (0.55) (0.63) (0.63) (0.72) (0.75) (0.82) 47 27 49 65 46 3 67 74 30 pH of semen 0.08 (6.08) (6.20) (6.21) (6.26) (6.20) (6.32) (6.34) (6.41) (6.42) 508 30 67 74 3 65 46 27 49 47 Sperm concentration (1,795) (1,880) (1,971) (2,120) (2,417) (2,472) (2,747) (2,895) (3,782) 30 3 67 46 74 49 65 27 47 Total number of spermato- zoa. 613 (667) (1,182) (1,190) (1,345) (1,468) (1,559) (1,764) (2,229) (3,074) 65 07 47 74 27 40 30 49 3 Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. 24 (4.6) (4.8) (5.0) (5.1) (5.4) (6.6) (6.8) (6.9) (9.0) TABLE V Critical difference at five per cent level of probability between years Variable characteristics Value of C. D. at 5 per cent level The averages of the years are arranged in ascending order Reaction-time 3.5 1946.47 1945-46 (22.7) (35.6) 1945-46 1946-47 pH of semen 0.03 (6.2) (6.4) 1946-47 1945-46 Sperm concentration 237 (2,462) (2,987) 1946-47 1945-46 Total number of spermatozoa 289 (1,599) (2,016)
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 117 TABLE VI Critical difference of variable semen characteristics at 5 per cent level of probability between seasons Variable characteristics of semen Value of C.D. Averages of the seasons are arranged in ascending order Autumn Winter Summer Spring Volume of semen 0.07 (0.55) (0.57) (0.62) (0.69) Winter Autumn Spring Summer Initial motility 0.09 (4.62) (4.65) (4.78) (4.89) Winter Spring Autumn Summer pH of semen 0.04 (6.2) (6.2) (6.3) (6.4) Autumn Summer Winter Spring Sperm concentration 335 (1,872) (2,787) (3,142) (3,497) Autumn Summer Winter Spring Total number of spermatozoa 408 (1,148) (1,617) (1,892) (2,573) Spring Summer Autumn Winter Percentage of abnormal sper- matozoa 1.58 (4.11) (5.03) (7.45) (7.81) Table IV shows C.D. at five per cent level of the variable characteristics between rams. This table "further shows that the 'reaction-time' of rams did not bear any relationship with the quality of semen produced by them. The quality of semen of rams under the same bar which did not show significant variation in their average 'reaction-time' varied considerably. For instance, the quality of semen (as judged by sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa) of ram 47, whose 'reaction- time' did not vary significantly from rams 30, 46 and 49, was significantly superior to that of these animals. Ram 74 had the average 'reaction-time' significantly less than rams 3 and 67, but the' average sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa of these rams did not vary significantly. Ram 27, whose average 'reaction-time' was significantly more than that of the rest of the rams, had average sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa lower than only ram 47. Volume of semen of ram 30 was lower than of all other rams. Rams 46, 49 and 3 had significantly lower semen volume than rams 74, 47 and 27. Rams 65 and 67 had lower semen volume than rams 47 and 27. The rest of the rams did not vary significantly among themselves. Average pH of semen of ram 47 was significantly lower than of the rest of the animals. It is also evident from the table that the average sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa of ram 47 were significantly higher than those of the rest of the rams. Semen of ram 27 had significantly lower pH than of rams 46, 3, 67, 74 and 30. Its average sperm concentration was higher than of these animals
118 SEASONAL VARIATION IN REACTION TIME [Vol. XXII, Part II, except ram 46 with, which it did not differ significantly. Similarly ram 49, which, had significantly lower pH than rams 3, 67, 74 and 30, had significantly higher average sperm concentration than all these rams. It is apparent, therefore, that low pH of semen in rams was associated with higher sperm concentration and vice versa. As has been stated before, total number of spermatozoa per ejaculate was obtained by multiplying total volume of semen and the sperm concentration per unit volume. It was expected, therefore, that in rams with higher total volume and sperm con- centration the total number of spermatozoa will be higher. This was found to be true in the case of ram 47, which had a higher volume of semen than all other rams excepting ram 27 and also had the highest sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa. Rams 27, 47 and 74 did not significantly vary in their total volume of semen. But as there was significant variation in their sperm concentra- tion their total number of spermatozoa also significantly varied. Rams 46, 49 and 65 did not significantly vary in their total number of spermatozoa. This was because there was neither significant variation in their total volume of semen nor in their sperm concentration. Rams 30, 3 and 67 did not vary in their total number of spermatozoa although there was significant variation in semen volume between ram 30 and the other two. This might be due to small range of variation between these rams in their sperm concentration. As regards the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa the table shows that ram 3 differed significantly from the rest of the animals. Critical difference of variable factors between years is presented in Table V. From the table it is apparent that during the second year the rams took significantly lesser time to mount an anoestrous ewe as shown by the 'reaction-time'. The quality of semen during the second year deteriorated as is evident from higher pH, lower sperm concentration and the total number of spermatzoa than in the first year. The decrease in the average 'reaction-time' in the second year might be due to the fact that the trained rams after a few months of semen collection at a particular place became so familiar with the place that as soon as they were brought to the place and near an ewe they anticipated service and therefore took lesser time to ejaculate semen in artificial vagina than in the initial stage of the experiment. No satisfactory explanation for the deterioration in semen quality during the second year of the experiment seems possible unless the various contributory factors for. semen production are studied in detail, Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947] also observed deterioration in semen quality of bulls as shown by higher pH and lower initial motility in the second year of their experiment. Critical difference of the variable semen characteristics between seasons has been presented in Table VI. From the table it is evident that the average volume of semen in autumn and winter was significantly lower than in spring. Initial motility in winter and autumn was lower than in spring and summer. Average pH of semen during winter and spring was significantly lower than in autumn and summer. In autumn sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa were lower than in other seasons. In autumn and winter the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa was higher than in spring and summer. This was due to the appearance of increased numbers of tailless spermatozoa in autumn and 'bent tail' spermatozoa in winter in the ejaculates. From the table it is evident that the semen quality
June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 119 in rams, judged by pH, sperm concentration and the total number of spermatozoa, deteriorated in autumn and improved in spring. DISCUSSION Reaction-time. The study of 'reaction-time' was undertaken with a view to determine if there was any correlation between sex vigour of the animal and its fertility. Result obtained in this experiment showed that sex vigour and sperm production were quite independent of each other. From the records of individual rams it has been found that rams with high sex vigour were not necessarily good semen producers. Further, it has been found that seasons did not greatly influence the sexual behaviour of rams as they did the sperm production. These results agree with those of McKenzie and Berliner [1937] with rams, Anderson [1939] and Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947] with bulls. Volume. Volume of semen was found to be variable among rams and during the seasons. Phillips et al [1943, b] also found significant variation among rams but they did not find significant variation between seasons. McKenzie and Berliner [1937] observed that volume of semen in rams decreased during the periods of high environmental temperature. This observation is in agreement with the results obtained in the present experiment. Under the same climatic conditions in which experiment was performed, Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947] observed no such seasonal variation in volume of bull semen. It is apparent, therefore, that the decrease in semen volume in rams during the periods of high temperature associated with high humidity and rainfall might be due to the reason that rams are more susceptible to climatic stress than the bulls. Motility. Motility rating was determined in this experiment by direct micro- scopical examination. - Obviously this method of estimation not only depends on motility of spermatozoa but on sperm concentration as well. This might be the reason why in autumn when the sperm concentration was lower than in spring the initial motility was also found to be lower. There was no direct proportional increase in initial motility with the increase in sperm concentration during the different seasons. Had it been so, in winter and autumn when there was no significant variation in initial motility there should have been no variation in sperm concentra- tion as well. But the result indicated that in autumn sperm concentration was significantly lower than in the rest of the seasons. Again in summer initial motility was significantly higher than in spring but sperm concentration showed just the reverse trend. Initial motility rating as has been done in this experiment is the most emperical method of evaluating semen quality. At best it can indicate a good sample from a bad sample. Grading of fairly good samples by this method alone is almost impossible. This might be the reason why, although there was highly significant variation in sperm concentration among rams and between years, initial motility failed to show any significant variation either among rams or between years. Phillips et al. [1943, b] obtained significant variation between rams within breed as well as between seasons which is in disagreement with the result of the present investigation. Our result is, however, in agreement with what has been reported by Phillips and his co-workers [1943, a] in bulls. Hyderogenion concentration. From the records of individual animals it has been found that semen samples with higher pH. value were usually poorer
120 SEASONAL VARIATION IN REACTION TIME [Vol. XXII, Part II, in sperm concentration. McKenzie and Berliner [1937] also found that the normal ejaculates, of rams with sperm concentration higher than 1000 millions per c.c. were usually acidic and sometimes gave a value as low as 5.9 and never above 7.3. Comstock and Brady [1937] gave the pH. of normal semen of ram as 6.9 and abnormal as over 7.0, Terril [1937] observed that ejaculates giving an acid reaction to litmus were definitely superior to those giving an alkaline reaction. In the present investigation, although it has been found that rams with higher pH of semen had lower sperm concentration, the correlation was not directly proportional. Determination of pH in semen has been recognised by various workers on semenology as one of the methods of evaluating semen quality as it indirectly gives an indication of sperm concentration in semen. Higher pH of semen in generally associated with lower sperm concentration, and vice versa. This was found to be true between years and between seasons. In autumn and summer when the air temperature was higher than in winter and spring the pH value of semen was higher associated with lower sperm concentration. This observa- tion is confirmatory to the results obtained by McKenzie and Berliner [1937] in rams under heat treatment. They observed that semen in rams under heat treat- ment became more and more alkaline. Gunn and his co-workers [1942] also observed that semen of rams whose tests were subject to scrotal insulation always became alkaline. Sperm concentration. Result of analysis of data on sperm concentration showed that it was highly variable among rams between years and among seasons. Highly significant variation between rams within breeds and between seasons have also been observed by Phillips et al. [1943]. They found the highest sperm concentration in winter and lowest in fall. McKenzie and Berliner [1937] observed a low level of sperm concentration in the Shorpshire during August and September and a sudden increase in October, which lasted till December. In this experiment highest sperm concentration was observed in spring and lowest in autumn. This result is in' complete agreement with that obtained in bulls by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947]. Berliner and Werbritton [1937] made histological studies of the organs June, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 121 and Berliner a distinct increase in total number of spermatozoa was observed from October to January in Shorpshire and August to November in Hampshire. According to Phillips and his associates, total spermatozoa was highest in winter and lowest in fall. Both the above groups of workers found spring to be the second best season. Abnormal spermatozoa. The result obtained in this respect show that ram 3 varied significantly from the rest of the rams. Regarding the effect of seasons, it was found that in autumn and spring the average percentage of abnormal sper- matozoa was significantly more than in spring and summer. It has been stated before that in autumn the tailless spermatozoa and in winter the bent-tail ones were more than in other seasons. Autumn was marked for its high temperature, humidity and rainfall. During this season the semen quality was also poorer than in other seasons. Phillips and McKenzie [1934] observed that there was a marked increase in the production of abnormal spermatozoa following heat treatment of rams and within three weeks practically no spermatozoa were present. McKenzie and Berliner [1937] also found that heat applied to scrotum either experimentally or by local inflammation decreased spermatogenesis and increased abnormal spermatozoa. The predominance of tailless spermatozoa in autumn as found in this experiment might be due to high environmental temperature. The increase in the percentage of tail abnormalities in winter as observed in this experiment was also reported in bulls and rams by Phillips et al. [1943, a and 1943 b]. But they did not mention the types of the tail abnormalities. This experiment showed that the predominant tail abnormality in winter was the bent-tail one. Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947] also observed the increase in bent-tail spermatozoa in the ejaculates of bulls in winter. They have further shown that the bent-tail spermatozoa in the ejaculates of farm animals are really immature ones and have suggested that in winter, when the rate of spermatogenesis was comparatively higher than in autumn, more of immature spermatozoa like bent-tail ones were carried along with normal spermatozoa in the male reproductive tract before they came to ampullae for final ejectment. SUMMARY Seasonal variation in 'reaction-time' and semen characteristics of nine rams were studied for two consecutive years. Highly significant variation was observed among rams in average 'reaction-time' and all attributes of semen studied except in the initial motility. 'Reaction-time' did not show any definite seasonal trend and bore no relationship with the quality of semen produced. Between years highly significant variations were found in 'reaction-time'; pH of semen, sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa. Between seasons highly significant variations were found in all characterisitcs of semen except in 'reaction-time'. The semen quality in autumn was poorer than in other seasons. Spring was found to be the best season for semen quality. Between months within seasons highly sigificant variation was found in intial motility of spermatozoa, sperm concentration, total number of spermatozoa and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. 10
122 SEASONAL VARIATION IN REACTION TIME [Vol. XXII, Part II, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are indebted to Mr. A. Roy, Statistician of the Indian Council of Agricultural Researh for, valuable suggestions regarding statistical treatment of the data, and Dr. D. P. Mukherjee for valuable assistance. REFERENCES Anderson, J. (1939). Vet. J. 95, 457 Anderson, J. (1939). J. agric. Sci. 35, 185 Berliner, V. R., and Warbritton, V. (1937). Proc. Am. Soc. Anim. Prod., 137 Brogart, R and Mayar, D. T. (1946). Mo. Agri. Expt. Sta. Res. Bull. 402 Comstock, R. E., and Brady, D. E. (1937). Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod., 30th Ann. Meet, 233 Erb, R. E., Andrews, F. N., and Hilton, J. H. (1942). J. Dairy Sci. 35, 815 Green, W. W. (1940). Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod. 33rd Ann. Meet, 207 Gunn, R. W. C., Sanders, R. N., and Granger, W. (1942). Bull. Coun. Sci. Industr. Res. Aust. 148 Marshal, F. H. A. (1922). The physiology of Reproduction. Longmans, Green and Co., London, 2nd edition McKenzie, F. F., and Berliner, V. (1937). Res. Bull. Mo. Agri. Expt. Sta., 265 Mukherjee, D. P. and Bhattacharya, P. (1947). Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong. Part 3, 215 In press (Abst). Mukherjee, D, P. and Bhattacharya, P. (1949). Proc. Zool. Soc. Bengal 2, 149 Phillips, R. W., and McKenzie, F. F. (1934). Missouri Agri. Exper. Sta. Res. Bull. 217 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS III-FREEZING POINT, LACTOSE AND CHLORIDE CONTENT OF MILK SAMPLES FROM DIFFERENT FARMS IN INDIA By NOSHIR N. DASTUR, C. S. DHARMARAJAN AND R. VENKATESWARA RAO, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore ( Received for publication on 23 May 1951) IN a previous communication [Dharmarajan, Venkateswara Rao, Menon and Dastur, 1950], results of analysis of nearly 1,300 samples of milk produced at the Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore, from herd and individual animals were discussed. It was shown that the average value for the freezing point of cow and buffalo milk was identical, viz.124 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS III [Vol. XXII, Part II, values for freezing point obtained were corrected by subtracting 0.02°C. from the observed values. Similarly, chlorine percentage found was corrected by the amount contributed by the added preservative. In Tables 1 and II, only corrected figures are given. The average data for milk of different breeds of animals are sum- marised in Table III. TABLE I Freezing point, lactose and chlorine in cow milk samples from different farms in India Sample number Place of origin Breed. Number of animals in the herd Samples analysed after days Freezing point June, 1952] N. N. DASTUR, C.S. DHARMARAJAN AND R. V. RAO 125 TABLE I126 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS III [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE IJune, 1952] N. N. DASTUR, C. S. DHARMARAJAN AND R. V. RAO 127 TABLE I128 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS III [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE IJune, 1952] N. N. DASTUR, C. S. DHARMARAJAN AND R. V. RAO 129 TABLE I130 COMPOSITION OP MILK OP INDIAN ANIMALS III [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE II Freezing point, lactose and chlorine in buffalo milk samples from different farms in India Sample number Place of origin Breed Number of animals in the herd Samples analysed after days Freezing point June, 1952] N. N. DASTUR, C. S. DHARMARAJAN AND R. V. RAO 131 TABLE II132 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS III [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE IIIJune, 1952] N. N. DASTUR, C. S. DHARMARAJAN AND R. V. RAO 133 SUMMARTY Two hundred and two samples of cow and thirty-seven samples of buffalo milk collected from different parts of the country were analysed for freezing point, lactose and chlorine. The average freezing point depression of all the samples was 0.548ºC., no difference being noticed in the values for cow and buffalo milk samples. Nearly 97 per cent of the samples gave a freezing point depression higher than 0 530ºC. The average lactose and chlorine contents were respectively 5.28 per cent and 0.072 per cent for cow milk, and 5.27 per cent and 0.061 per cent for buffalo milk. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are grateful to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for providing a special grant for carrying out the above studies. REFERENCES Davies, W. L. (1939). Chemistry of Milk, 50. Chapman and Hall, Ltd., London Dharmarajan, C. S., Venkateswara Rao, R., Menon, M. N. and Dastur, Noshir N. (1950). Indian J. vet. Sci., 20, 35 Venkateswara Rao, R., Dastur, Noshir N. and Dharmarajan, C. S. (1950). Indian J. Vet. Sci., 20, 263
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION AND SEASONAL INCIDENCE OF MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONG BOVINES IN THE PUNJAB FROM 1944-45 TO 1949-50 By TULSA RAM, L.V.P., M.Sc., Ph.D., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar (Received for publication on 16 July 1951) (With three text-figures) THE information regarding the occurrence of main contagious diseases among cattle in the Punjab was published in Indian Farming, Volume 3, March, 1946. This, however, related to the Joint Punjab and for the period from 1932-33 to 1934-44. The data, now presented in this article, relate to the Punjab (India) and for a period of six years from 1944-45 to 1949-50. The Punjab State now comprises of thirteen districts divided into two revenue divisions of Jullundur and Ambala. The data have been collected from the reports of outbreaks received from the field staff through their respective Divisional Superintendents, TABLE I Incidence of the main contagious diseases in bovines year-wise Name of disease Number of outbreaks 1944-45 1945-46 1946-47 1947-48 1948-49 1949-50 Rinderpest 581 725 759 1,573 777 127 Haemorrhagic septicaemia 1,111 1,026 807 114 705 472 Foot and mouth 147 517 718 88 296 1,067 Black quarter 115 59 36 5 23 11 From Table I presenting data for 6 years and Fig. 1 showing yearly distribution of contagious diseases since 1932-33, it is observed that rinderpest occurs in cycles. The first peak occurred in 1932-33 and 1933-34; second peak occurred after three years, i.e. in 1937-38 and 1938-39 and the third peak began in 1944-45, which lasted upto 1947-48 and since then it is on the decline. From the trend the next peak cycle can be predicted with some accuracy and thus mass prophylactic vaceination against rinderpest could be carried out a year earlier to prevent its causing heavy losses. 135 13
136 MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONG BOVINES [Vol. XXII, Part II, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Yearly distribution of contagious diseases.
June, 1952] TULSA RAM 137 The year 1947-48 was unprecedented in the history of the Punjab in which movement of livestock along with human population took place on mass scale due to the partition of the Province resulting in the spread of rinderpest also on mass scale throughout the State. The incidence of other contagious diseases, on the other hand, was lowest in the same year, most probably, due to the break down of communication and transport systems and preoccupation of the people in domestic worries due to the upheavel. Great variation in the number of reports in the case of all other infectious diseases was observed from year to year, depending upon movement of livestock, rainfall and other environmental factors. Lall [1946] reported that rinderpest was on the decline in the Punjab since 1932-33. However, observations recorded above do not agree with his findings. In so far as other diseases of bovine are concerned, the above observations are in conformity with those recorded by him. Seasonal incidence The number of outbreak reports of each disease received each month for all the years from 1944-45 to 1949-50 were pooled together to determine the seasonal incidence. Table II below shows the result. TABLE II Number of outbreaks of main contagious diseases in bovines month-wise Name of disease January February March April May June July August September October November December Rinderpest 914 277 206 269 164 257 236 244 288 338 654 695 Haemorrhagic septicaemia 246 156 129 91 79 73 235 1258 1178 400 183 207 Foot and mouth 43 26 78 401 826 819 218 90 121 102 63 47 Black quarter 8 11 10 30 17 25 20 49 33 22 12 12 Table II and Fig. 2 indicate that February and March arc comparatively the healthiest months each year when the total number of reports of all epidemic diseases is the lowest. Rinderpest. This disease is encountered more frequently during winter months, i.e., November to January. Foot and mouth disease. The number of outbreaks of this disease begins to increase in early April, reaches its peak in May, stays in June and shows an abrupt decline from July onwards. In other words, with the onset of rains it declines fairly rapidly and is lowest during winter months. Haemorrhagic septicaemia. The highest number of outbreaks of this disease occurs during and soon after the summer rainy season; thus it is at its climax during the months of August and September and may commence as early as July and later 13A
138 MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONG BOVINES [Vol. XXII, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Seasonal distribution of main contagious diseases in the Punjab.
June, 1952] TULSA RAM 139 extend to the month of October depending upon the length of rainy season. The disease also shows tendency to flare up occasionally after winter rains during the months of December and January. Black quarter. In the case of black quarter, the outbreaks are fairly evenly distributed throughout the year but some increase is noticed during the months of August and September. It is thus observed that each calendar year starts with rinderpest at its peak in January followed by comparatively healthy period for two months, i.e., February and March. Foot and mouth disease makes its appearance and holds sway from April to June, and then haemorrhagic septicaemia flares up with the onset of rainy season and holds the field upto September and October, when Black quarter also breaks out and takes its toll. In the end rinderpest starts increasing again in November and thus the cycle repeats itself each year. The above conclusions in respect of various diseases are in agreement with those recorded by Lall [1946] except in the case of Foot and mouth disease, in which he mentioned that the disease started declining from June onward and was at low level in rainy season, where as observations recorded above indicate that the disease stays in June and July marks the decline of the infection and is low in winter months. In this respect observations recorded in this paper are in conformity with those reported by Hutyra and Marek [1949]. The above observations are supported by statistical analysis and finding the value of 't' and testing its significance. In the case of rinderpest Mean value for peak months of November, December and January ........ =754-3 Mean value for other 9 months . . . . 754.3 140 MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONG BOVINES [Vol. XXII, Part II, Table III indicates the distribution of contagious diseases district-wise. The number of reports of outbreaks received in case of each disease in each district is an average of last 6 years period. As the cattle population varies considerably from district to district, the number of outbreaks per 1,00,000 cattle was calculated to get comparative idea on uniform basis. TABLE III District-wise distribution of contagious diseases in bovines and effect of rainfall on them Name of district Total cattle population Average rainfall per annum during last 6 years in inches Average number of reports received per annum per 1,00,000 cattle Total No. of out breaks per 1,00,000 cattle Remarks R. P. H. S. F.M. B.Q. Ferozepur 7,48,080 12.9 7.3 8.4 5.1 0.1 20.9 Hissar 4,89,893 15.1 8.4 5.5 7.5 1.6 23.9 Rohtak 5,33,948 15.9 6.8 7.8 7.8 2.1 24.5 Gurgaon 5,28,446 21.2 7.5 6.6 8.1 1.3 23.5 Karnal 7,43,823 21.8 10.6 3.7 5.8 0.4 20.5 Amritsar 5,44,641 22.4 13.0 24.3 4.7 0.03 42.0 Ludhiana 4,11,802 27.5 12.5 15.4 5.2 0.4 33.5 Jullundur 5,03,529 29.0 12.6 14.2 11.9 0.5 39.2 Hoshiarpur 6,26,416 36.1 11.4 12.7 4.2 0.4 28.7 Ambala 5,16,808 40.2 10.0 8.9 11.3 0.3 30.4 Gurdaspur 6,36,067 45.7 10.9 13.5 3.8 0.04 27.7 Kangra 7,08,116 71.7 17.8 4.0 5.2 0.2 27.2 Simla 21,417 39.9 24.8 0 88.8 0.8 114.4 From Table III, it is observed that the first five districts have an average rainfall of 17.4 inches per annum and the total number of outbreaks is 22.5 per annum per 1,00,000 animals. In the next five districts the average rainfall is 31.0 inches per annum and the total number of reports is 34.8 per annum per 1,00,000 animals. In the last two districts the average rainfall is 58.7 per annum and the total number of reports is 27.5 per annum per 1,00,000 cattle. Thus moderate rainfall between 22 in. to 40 inches in the Punjab is more favourable for occurrence of epidemic diseases than rainfall below 22 in. and above 40 inches. In so far as individual contagious diseases are concerned, rinderpest is observed to continue increasing with increasing rainfall; while on the other hand, Black quarter shows decline with increasing rainfall. The incidence of hemorrhagic septicaemia and Foot and mouth disease is more in medium rainfall as compared with both low and high rainfall. Table IV clearly illustrates the above statement.
June, 1952] TULSA RAM 141 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Incidence of contagious diseases on regional basis according to the rainfall Histograme Scale 1 in. =400 outbreaks.
142 MAIN CONTANGIOUS DISEASES AMONG BOVINES [Vol. XXII, Part II, TABLE IV Incidence of contagious diseases according to rainfall Average rainfall in inches Average number of reports per annum per 1,00,000 cattle R.P. H.S. F.M. B.Q. Total 17.4 8.1 6.4 6.9 1.1 22.5 31.0 11.9 15.1 7.5 0.3 34.8 58.7 14.4 8.8 4.2 0.1 27.5 Effect of rainfall is also further apparent when the state is divided into four regions according to rainfall and the effect of rainfall determined on each disease separately. 1. Above 40 inches. 2. 30 in. to 40 inches. 3. 20 in. to 30 inches. 4. Below 20 inches. The number of outbreaks in each region has been calculated per 1,00,000 cattle popultion in each region and is given in Table V. TABLE V Regional distribution of the State according to rainfall and its effect on incidence of contagious diseases Regions according to rainfall Number of reports per 1,00,000 cattle R.P. H.S. F.M. B.Q. 1. Above 40 in. 87 51 26 2 2. 30 in. to 40 in. 67 65 53 2 3. 20 in. to 30 in. 66 73 42 3 4. Below 20 in. 45 45 39 7 From Table V and Fig. 3 also it is observed that foot and mouth disease and haemorrhagic septicaemia outbreaks are more in region numbers 2 and 3 with rainfall between 20 to 40 in. than in regions 1 and 4 in which the rainfall is above 40 in. and below 20 in. respectively. Black quarter outbreaks are more in low rainfall region than in any other region. Rinderpest outbreaks are also lowest in region 4 with rainfall below 20 in., but it is higher in region 1 as well with rainfall above 40 in. which may, most probably, be due to greater susceptibility of hill cattle to this disease. REFERENCES Lall. H. K. (1946). Indian Fmg. 3 Hutyra and Marek (1949). Special Pathology and Therapeutic of the Diseases of Domestic Animals I, 396-397
STUDIES ON THE MANGE MITES OF LIVESTOCK IN INDIA By B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON and C. M. SEN GUPTA, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 14 August 1951) SKIN diseases originate from various causes. In livestock in India the most im- portant of them is the infestation with various types of mites. This is a serious problem for the veterinarian as a large number of livestock is infested with none or more species of mites and effective treatment entails considerable inconvenience. The disease is known under various names viz., itch, scab, mange, scabies and a number of local names. About two dozen species or varieties of species are known to infest domestic animals and among them are some of the most serious pests of livestock. Pillers [1921] estimated a loss of 102,616 per annum due to mange in horses in the United Kingdom. To prevent this loss the United Kingdom and Canada have enforced legislation compelling livestock owners to report cases of mange in horses and sheep to the authorities for remedy. Previous literature Owing to the inaccessibility of literature an annotated review of the works of twenty-four authors on the subject is given. Literature on mange reveals that life history of any of the burrowing mites causing scabies in man and animal has not been thoroughly worked out [Gordon et al 1943]; that work on treatment of various acariasis infection is very meagre and the stage in their life history when they are infective to healthy hosts is not yet known. The only available account is by Gordon et al [loc. cit.] who made limited observations on the life histories of Notoedres in white rats and Sarcoptes scabei in man and found that they are identical. They further suggested. that the larval and nymphal stages are infective to healthy animals. Recently, Palimpsestov [1947] did valuable work on the subject and observed that sarcoptids of both sexes pass through four active and four passive stages. Mellanby et al [1942] in a series of controlled experiments proved that temperature had definite effect on the adult of Sarcoptes scabei. He re- corded the thermal death point for these mites and showed that atmospheric humi- dity had no effect on it. But Troitzkii [1947] showed that air humidity had a great effect on the incidence of mange in sheep though air temperature had no effect on it. Gillain [1942] recorded that Sarcoptes scabei infection of pig could be experimentally transmitted to man and also recorded its spontaneous cure. Unsworth [1946] isolated demodectic mange parasite from ten per cent of the apparently healthy dogs. He failed to transmit demodectic mange infection by direct contact. Varenne [1946] reported successful transmission of sarcoptic mange from cattle to man. Imperial Chemical Industries (Veterinary Bulletin, 1950) record easy transmission of goat mange to man during cold months in Baluchistan. 143 14
144 STUDIES ON MANGE MITES OF LIVESTOCK [Vol. XXII, Part II, Sen [1934] gave a review of the different methods of treatment of follicular mange in dogs. Basu [1944] gave a general account of the various types of mange mites in India along with their standard treatment. Roy and Ghosh [1944] found that oil of turpentine had properties lethal to Saccoptes scabei. Turpentine was found to reach and kill mites in their burrows without preliminary cleaning of the skin. Taylor [1945] showed that one per cent solution of Benzene hexachloride in olive oil or liquid paraffin was more effective than benzyl benzoate or tetraethyl thiurium mono-sulphide and DDT in the treatment of Notoedres acariasis. Psoroptes mange in cattle and horses were successfully treated with a sulphur lime dust by Gladenko [1946] and Fortushnuif [1947]. Tretyakova [1947] reported effective treatment of Psoroptes mange in horses with a powder made from a fused mixture of sulphur and naphthalene. Braun and Schuermann [1947] reported poor effect of Gesarol (DDT) on Acarus scabei and on scabies. The curative effect was, however, not superior to that of benzyl benzoate emulsion. Benzene hexachloride and Gammazene were found efficient in curing sheep scab [Kemper, 1948 and Dowhing, 1948], scaly legs [Griffiths and O'Rourke, 1949], sarcoptic mange in camels [Draz, 1947] and cattle mange (Brander). Phenothiazine ointment was found useful in treatment of demodectic mange [McCay and Udall, 1949]. Penicillin was successfully employed in treating demodectic mange [Floric and Gratecos, 1947]. Distribution and seasonal incidence From the record of clinical material received from the various States and the reports of State Governments and of the Disease Investigation Officers it is clear that mange infestation is more or less common in livestock throughout India. Regarding seasonal incidence of various species of parasitic acariasis causing skin diseases of livestock some preliminary observations were made at Izatnagar in 1947 and 1948 and it was found that mange infestation was definitely seasonal and restric- ted to a few months in the year viz., October to March. Sarcoptes scabei var. caprae, the mite responsible for sarcoptic acariasis in goats was widely prevalent in our area (Izatnagar) and its incidence was very high during the winter months. Generally all types of mange infestation in livestock are worst in cold weather. The head and the ears are usually the initial points of infection. Later on, the disease extends backwards over the body and limbs. During the period October 1947 to February 1948 the incidence of mange observed in goats varied from 33 per cent to 77 per cent, the peak being in December. During this period out of 79 goats ex- amined for mange 59 animals showed mange infestation. As regards the follicular mange infestation in dogs, 3 out of 16 dogs examined showed follicular mange infesta- tion in 1948 in the month of November within the Indian Veterinary Research Institute premises. In all the three cases, the area affected was found hairless and the skin appeared deadened and grayish. Some critical observations on various species of mange mites were made during the period November 1949 to March 1950 and their incidence in various species of animals is reported in Table I.
June, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. B. MENON AND C. M. SEN GUPTA 145 TABLE I Incidence of mange at Izatnagar during November 1949 to March 1950 Species November 1949 December 1949 January 1950 February 1950 March 1950 No. ex- amined No. + No. ex- amined No. + No. ex- amined No. + No. ex- amined No. + No. ex- amined No. + Goat 10 1 39 10 36 6 16 3 29 2 Sheep 146 STUDIES ON MANGE MITES OF LIVESTOCK [Vol. XXII, Part II, Experiment 1 DDT.June, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. B. MENON AND C. M. SEN GUPTA 147 During the experiment the experimental goats were kept in separate sheds away from the rest of the animals to prevent extraneous contamination and reinfestation. Four of these received eight injections on alternate days of approximately 40 c.c. per hundred pounds body weight of sterile sea water which was obtained from the sea at Madras. The goats were weighed before and after the experiment. The quantity of sea water administered varied according to the body weight of the animal. Likewise, another group of four mange goats in two batches received a series of seven and six injections of a 2.3 per cent solution of sodium chloride in distilled water, i.e., the strength in which sodium chloride was present in the sea water used. In both the groups, half the number of animals received the inoculum intravenously and the other half intraperitoneally. No improvement was noticed in the condition of the animals treated. All of them died later on due to continued ill health and resulting weakness. The result of this experiment is tabulated in Table II. TABLE II Effect of administration of sea water and sodium chloride on sarcoptic mange. Group Goat number Body weight commence- ment of experiment Number of injec- tions received Method of injection Quantity of inoculum Body weight after experiment Result Sea water group 26 42 lb. 8 intravenous 17.5 c.c. 48 lb. No improvement. Scrapings positive for Sarcoptes. 40 40 148 STUDIES ON MANGE MITES OF LIVESTOCK [Vol. XXII, Part II, Tobacco leaves and lime were soaked in water for 48 hours and the infusion wrung through a piece of coarse muslin. Nicotine content of the tobacco leaves was es- timated at 2.3 per cent. The tobacco-lime infusion at 1.0 per cent strength did not show any effect on mange mites or sheep ked but proved effective against biting lice. No harmful effect was noticed in any of the sheep dressed with this infusion. SUMMARY Studies on the seasonal incidence and treatment of mange in various domestic animals have been conducted at Izatnagar and the following observations are recorded: Mange infestation is definitely seasonal and is almost restricted to a few months in the year viz., October to March, as observed at Izatnagar. During the period November 1949 to March 1950, out of a total number of 130 goats, 52 sheep, 165 cows, 138 buffaloes, 32 horses, 53 dogs and 7 cats examined for mange, 22 goats 2 buffaloes and 4 dogs were found positive. Sarcoptes scabei and Demodex folliculorum were the common species of mites responsible for mange in domestic animals at Izatnagar. Different strengths of DDT, Gammexane, Derris root powder and tobacco-lime infusion were tried on Sarcoptic mange in goats and psoroptic mange in sheep. DDT had no action against sarcoptic mange mites but a 0.5 per cent suspension was found effective against psoroptic mange. A derris wash was practically ineffective against Sarcoptis mites but was found successful in Psoroptes (one out of two tried) The wash in 0.1 per cent and 0.2 per cent strengths proved effective against biting lice and sheep ked respectively. A. 2 per cent solution of Gammexane (D.025) proved to be an effective cure for sarcoptic mange in goats. Tobacco-lime infusion at 1.0 per cent. strength had no effect on mange mites or sheep ked but was effective against biting lice. Intravenous and intraperitoneal injections of sea water and sodium chloride (2.3 per cent) had no beneficial effect on sarcoptic (8 cases tried) or demodectic mange (one case tried). Mange infestation is more or less common in livestock throughout India. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The writers wish to express their grateful thanks to Dr. S. Datta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute and Dr. H. N. Ray, O.C., S.P., for providing necessary facilities for this work. They are thankful to Dr. N. D. Kehar, O.C., A.N.S., for having the sample of sea water analysed in his laboratory. REFERENCES Basu, B. C. (1944). Skin diseases due to mites. Indian Fmg. 5, 4, 182. Brander, G. C. (1950). Treatment of cattle mange. I.C.I. Vet. Bull. Braun, W. and Schuermann, H. (1947). Effect of Gesarol (DDT) on the Acarus scabei and on scabies. I. C. I. Vet. Bull.
June, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. B. MENON AND C. M. SEN GUPTA 149 Downing, W. (1948). The control of Psoroptic scab on sheep by benzene hexachloride and DDT. Vet. Rec. 42, 59, 581-2 Draz, O. (1947). The use of Gammexane in the treatment of sarcoptic mange in camels. Vet. Rec. 39, 59, 548 Florio, R. and Gratecos, M. (1947). Penicillin in demodectic mange. Rev. Med. Vet. 98, 529-3 Fortushnuif, V. A. (1947). Treatment of Psoroptes mange in horses by means of sulphur lime dust. Veterinariya 24, 1, 9-11 Gillain, J. (1942). Gale du pore a Sarcoptes scabei var. parvula. Bull. agric. Congo Belge, 33, 1-2, 112-13 Gladenko, I. N. (1946). Treatment of Psoroptes mange in cattle by means of sulphur lime dust Veterinaryiya, 23, 12, 12-14 Gordon, R. M., Unsworth, K., and Seaton, D. R. (1943). The development and transmission of scabies as studied in rodent infections. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasit. 37, 3-4, 174-94. Griffiths, R. B. and O'Rourke, P. J. (1949). Successful treatment of scaly leg with gammexane. Nature, 164, 4158, 65 Kemper, H. E. (1948). Progress report of Benzene hexachloride for the destruction of sheep scab mitesTHE PHARMACOLOGY OF GIGANTIN* By V. RATHNASABAPATHY, B.V.SC., and V. ISWARIAH, B.A., M.B.B.S., M.R.C.P. (Received for publication on 17 April 1951) (With Plates VI152 THE PHARMACOLOGY OF GIGANTIN [Vol. XXII, Part II, Perfusion of mammalian hearts and experiments with isolated bits of plain muscles as uterus and sheep's carotid artery were done in an improved type of apparatus, invented by Vareed and Venkatachalam [1943] which are in use in this laboratory for over ten years giving very satisfactory results. The heart perfusion apparatus consists of a double walled flask of two litres capacity and a double sur- faced condenser about 90 centi-meters long. The heart cannula is fixed to the lower end of the condenser. Water at constant temperature is carried through the double surfaced condenser and the double walled flask. A thermometer inserted into the heart cannula registers the temperature of the perfusion fluid. Injections of drugs are usually made into the bulb of the heart cannula which has got a capacity of about 10 c.c. Drugs injected into the heart cannula are thus diluted ten times in the bulb. The apparatus for perfusing isolated uterus, intestines, etc., consists of a jacketed cylindrical bath of 100 c.c. capacity with three-way stop cock at the bottom and a jacketed two litres flask, connected together. Water at constant temperature is run through the outer jackets. Drugs when added into the bath are diluted 100 times. Perfusion of kidney was done in the Dixtion's apparatus. Experimental data Toxicity. A precised L.D. 50 was not worked out. But it was found that a intravenous dose of 0.3 mg. per kg. was invariably fatal to majority of the dogs in 15 to 30 minutes. The toxic symptoms may be divided for convenience into three groups. In lethal doses there was frequent emesis of biletinged frothy fluid, distressed look, great exhaustion and death in about 15 to 20 minutes. The heart beat was highly accelerated with indistinct sounds resulting in fibrillation and cardiac failure. Pulse and respiration were accelerated throughout but respiration was dyspnoeic and oral. On post mortem the liver was highly congested, enlarged and friable. The cortex of the kidney was slightly congested. There was nothing abnormal in other organs. All the tissues were subjected to histopathological examination. Except the liver and kidneys, all the other tissues were normal. In the liver there was widening sinusoidal spaces, the branches of the portal veins were engorged. But there was no definite change in the liver parenchyma. The blood vessels in the cortex of the kidney were engorged and the glomerular tufts were congested. Tubu- lar epethelia showed clowdy degeneration. In doses that are toxic, but not lethal, there was frequent emesis of bile-tinged frothy fluid, dyspnoea, distressed look, brady-cardia, weak pulse and accelerated respiration. But gradual recovery took place in an hour. In physiological doses, i.e., 0.05 mg. per kg., there were no apparent changes in the rate of respiration and heart beat; but the beats were more powerful, pulse full and strong.
[Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXII Part II PLATE VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A record of the carotid blood-pressure, respiration and spleen volume of a dog of 2.4 kg., under paraldehyde anaesthesia. Note the persistent rise in the B. P. and the correspond- ing decrease in the spleen volume, after an injection of 0.25 mg. of gigantin. There is no change in respiration. S.V.PLATE VII [Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXII, part II] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A record of the carotid blood-pressure, intestinal movements and kidney volume of a dog of 4 kg., under paraldehyde anaesthesia. Note the rise of blood pressure and the corresponding decrease in the volume of kidney after 1 mg. of gigantin intravenously. There is no change in the intestinal movements. TimeJune, 1952] V. RATHNASABAPHATY AND V. ISWARI 153 TABLE I. Controls with similar quantities of alcohol alone did not show any appreciable effect. Serial number Intravenous dose mg. per kg. Number of experiments Toxicity 1 0.3 6 Lethal in 50 per cent of the cases 2 0.25 2 Lethal in 50 per cent of the cases 3 0.20 2 Extremely toxic not lethal 4 0.15 2 Toxic 5 0.10 2 Less toxic 6 0.05 2 Physiological, non-toxic 7 Control 0.3 c.c. alcohol per kg. 3 Nothing abnormal Gigantin in 0.05 mg. per kg. doses given intravenously and repeated daily at 24 hours' interval for 7 days did not show any indication of cumulative toxicity. The experimental animals were killed on the 8th day by ether. Post mortem and histopathological examination of tissues did not reveal any abnormalities. HEART AND CIRCULATION Action on Blood pressure. A study of the effect of the drug on the general blood pressure of 16 dogs and two cats showed that there was always a sustained rise of blood pressure by about 10 to 15 m.m. of mercury, for about 30 minutes, after physiological doses ranging from 0.01 to 0.1 mg. per kg. (Plate VI). In toxic doses, i.e., 0.1 mg. per kg. and above, the blood pressure rose by about 15 m.m. of mercury above normal; but it soon became irregular and suddenly dropp- ed to the base line and was arrested. To study the site of action of the drug a cat under chloralose anaesthesia was decerebrated by Elliot's method [1937] and a dose of the drug was given through the femoral vein. A sustained rise in the carotid blood pressure was noticed as before decerebration (Plate VII). An anaesthetised bitch weighing 2.3 kg. was sympatholysed by the administration of 15 mg. of ergotoxine ethane sulphonate and confirmed by giving 0.02 mg. of adrenaline, which produced the Dale's reversal. 0.25 mg. of gigantin given at this stage produced the usual rise of carotid blood pressure as before sympatholysis. Action on the heart in situ In a myocardiogram of an anaesthetised dog weighing 3 kg. gigantin in dose of 0.07 mg. per kg. stimulated all the chambers of the heart. There was an initial increase in the rate and amplitude of both the auricles and the ventricles followed by a slowing. The heart chambers returned to normal in about 30 minutes. Sever- ing of both the vagi and atropinisation did not alter the action of the drug in any manner. 15A
154 THE PHARMACOLOGY OF GIGANTIN [Vol. XXII, Part II, On Isolated hearts Perfusion of two isolated kittens' hearts with 10 c.c. of 1: 4,00,000 concentra- tion of gigantin in the Locke's perfusion fluid followed by Normal Locke's did not produce any change in the rate of the heart beat but the amplitude was very slight- ly increased in the systolic level. TABLE II Gigantin on the rate and amplitude of isolated kittens' hearts Concentration of the drug in the perfusion fluid. 1 in 4,00,000 1 in 2,00,000 Time Rate Amp. Rate Amp. Before drug 84 24 50 19 After drug 84 21 . . . . After 1 minute 84 25 70 21 After 2 minutes 84 25 80 23 After 3 minutes 82 27 65 26 After 5 minutes 84 26 40 25 After 10 minutes . . . . 40 25 After 15 minutes . . . . 30 24 Rate :[Indian J. vet. Sci Vol. XXII, Part II] PLATE VIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A record of the myocardiogram of a decerabrate cat under chloralose anaesthesia. Note the stimula- tion of the auricle and the ventricle and the rise in carotid blood-pressure after an injection of 1 mg. of gigantin. (Down strokes are contractions.) TimePLATE IX [Indian. J. vet. Sci. Vol XXII, Part II] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A record of the ventricular movements of a perfused kitten's heart, with 1 : 2,00,000 concentration of gigantin in the perfusion fluid. (TimeJune, 1952] V. RATHNASABAPHATY AND V. ISWARI 155 minute. The auricles and the ventricles were beating in unision so far. After this the ventricles were reduced in rate, while the auricles were maintaining their normal rate. There was a single ventricular response for every two or more auricular beats. After some time, complete block developed resulting in the ventricles having their own rhythm and final arrest in diastole (Plate X). The drug 1 : 2,00,000 concentration caused an initial increase, then a slowing of the rate of the heart. By perfusion with normal Locke's solution at this stage, apparently the normal rhythm of the heart was restored. But on repeating the dose, heart block was produced in three minutes, the ventricles responding for every two or more auricular beats only. The ventricles become irregular and were arrested. Similar changes were noticed even in the auricles with regular or irregular intermissions. Finally, they were also arrested some time later than the ventricular stand-still. It was found that the chambers responded to mechanical stimuli as a pin prick or pinching with fine forceps showing that the heart muscle was not dead and if only adequate stimuli reach them, from the pace maker they would continue to beat. Contractility. In a physiological dose of gigantin, the heart was initially acce- lerated but the amplitude was diminished. This phase was only transient. Soon the rate was slowed while the amplitude was increased. The systolic contractions were quicker and steeper whereas the relaxations were slower than normal. The slowing was due mainly to a long rest in the normal pause. The increase in ampli- tude was due to systole, the diastole being normal. These changes in the con- tractility were observed in the auricles also but not to a marked degree as seen in the case of the ventricle (Plate IX, Fig. c). Cardiae out-put. In a physiological dose of the drug, the rate of the heart was slowed but the amplitude and force of contraction were increased. The systolic contraction was marked with no change in the diastole. The long pause in diastole facilitated complete filling of the ventricle and the powerful systolic contractions emptied the heart perfectly. Thus the out-put per beat may be said to be increased. The slowing of the rate was thus compensated for by the increased pulse volume and the out-put per minute might not be altered considerably by the drug. Fixation and Cumulative effect. A dose of 0.05 mg. of gigantin given in the bulb of the heart cannula slowed the heart and increased the force and contractions. After about 30 minutes the heart was apparently normal, when a dose of 0.025 mg. was injected again into the heart cannula. This repetition produced not only a slowing of the heart but also caused auriculo-ventricular heart block in about three minutes. The ventricles responded once for every 2 or more auricular systole. Finally due to complete block they developed ectopic beats and were arrested. Thus a return of the heart to apparent normality was not an indication of the com- plete elimination of the drug, but showed that some drug has been left behind and were eliminated very slowly. Electro-cardiogram of normal dogs taken in all the three leads after 0.05 mg. per kg., of Gigantin intravenously showed only bradycardia.
156 THE PHARMACOLOGY OF GIGANTIN [Vol. XXII, Part II, On the vessels. Onchometric records were taken of the volumes of spleen and kidney. The spleen volume showed a slight fall (Plate VI). The kidney volume was also reduced to a slight degree. In larger doses a definite reduction in the volume of the kidney was observed (Plates VI and VIII). Liver and kidney were removed from the body and perfused using perfusion apparatus of Dixon at body temperature. Dogs under paraldehyde anaesthesia were bled through the carotid artery at the same time injecting saline through the femoral vein. When the fluid coming out of the carotid cannula became pale, the animals was opened up and the organ removed. This served to wash out the blood from the organs and prevented blood clotting inside. A cannula was placed in the main artery, any collateral branch was ligatured and the organ placed over a Buchner's funnel inside the Dixon's apparatus. The perfusion was then started with oxygenated Locke's fluid containing defibrinated blood from the same animal. The stroke of the pump was adjusted to a convenient height so as to deliver on an average about 0.5 c.c. per stroke. The perfusion fluid flowed out of the organ through the vein and was caught in the graduated vessel provided for the purpose. The time taken for the out flow of 50 c.c. was recorded by means of a stop-watch and when several readings were more or less constant a dose of gigantin was injected into the rubber tubing just above the arterial cannula. The time taken for the out flow of 50 c.c. was again recorded, several readings being taken in order to obtain the maximum effect. Table III gives the results of the experiment. TABLE III Organ perfused Dose of gigantin in mg. Average time for out flow of 50 c.c before injection Maximum retarda- tion after injection for 50 c.c. Minutes Seconds Minutes Seconds Liver 0.25 3-11 4-2 0.25 7-13 2-37 Kidney 0.25 5-0 3-18 0.15 5-52 0-7 0.25 4-30 0-6 The out flow from the liver was markedly delayed with a dose of 0.25 mg. the maximum delay noticed being 4 minutes and 2 seconds. Same results were ob- tained with kidneys. Only in one case 0.25 mg. produced a maximum retardation by 3 minutes and 18 seconds. In all subsequent instances the retardation time was very little. Perfusion of isolated kitten's heart through the coronary vessels was done to find out the effect on the coronary vessels. The out flow through the coronary veins was collected in a graduated apparatus for three minutes and measured. When
Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXII, Part II] PLATE X [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A record of the movements of the ventricle of a perfused kitten's heart, with 1 : 2,000 concentration of gigantin in the perfusion fluid. (TimeJune, 1952] V. RATHNASABAPHATY AND V. ISWARI 157 several readings were constant a dose of gigantin was given into the heart cannula and the amount of fluid collected for 3 minutes was measured for comparison. It was found that the drug did not produce any change in the volume of fluid collected in a unit of time as shown in Table IV. TABLE IV Organ perfused Dose of drug given mg. Venous out flow in 3 minutes before injection in c.c. Venous out flow in 3 minutes after injection in c.c. Kitten's heart 0.05 22 22 0.05 22 22 Action of gigantion on isolated bits of arteries was studied using the carotid artery of sheep. This was obtained fresh from the slaughter house immediately after the sheep were slaughtered. The carotid artery was cut spirally to a length of about 1 inch and left in a constant temperature bath with oxygenated Locke's fluid for about 30 minutes. One end of the bit was tied to a fixed point below and the other connected to an Evan's frontal lever writing on the drum. The capacity of the bath was 100 c.c. 0.04 mg. of adrenaline added to the bath, constricted the arterial muscle by a nervous action. The bath was changed and 0.5 mg. of gigantin was added. The vessel constricted but the relaxation was very gradual unlike in the case of adrenaline. After changing the bath the nerve terminals of the vessel were paralised with ergotoxine-ethane-sulphonate by adding 0.18 mg. to the bath. The bath was changed and symptholysis was confirmed by a dose of adrenaline added to the bath. But a dose of gigantin did produce a constriction of the vessels by a direct action on the arterial muscle. Action on other plain Muscles The intestinal movements of an anaesthetised dog was recorded by the balloon tambour method. A dose of 0.06 mg. per kg. given intravenously did not produce any appreciable change in the normal intestinal movements (Plate VIII). Uterus. The record of the movements of an isolated uterus of rabbit in the constant temperature bath showed a good contraction both before and after sympa- tholysis with ergotoxine, when 0.5 mg. of gigantin was added to the bath. Diuresis. Diuresis in an anaesthetised dog was measured both before and after gigantin. A volume 250 c.c. of a 10 per cent solution of cane sugar was given early in the morning by stomach tube and the animal allowed plenty of water to drink. It was anaesthetised by paraldehyde, the abdomen opened and the ureter of one kidney was cannulated and the urine made to drop on an Inchley's drop re- corder, which was connected to a Mary tambour. Every drop was recorded on the drum and the time record was also made simultaneously. When the drops per minute were uniform a dose of gigantin was given intravenously and the number of drops per minute was counted after the drug. Rate:158 THE PHARMACOLOGY OF GIGANTIN [Vol. XXII, Part II, It was found that there was a transient increase in the number of drops recorded after a dose of 0.25 mg. of the drug given intravenously. This however was not sustained. Action on respiration Respiratory records taken by tracheal cannulation showed that the drug did not produce any change in the normal respiration; but where it was already depressed a stimulation was recorded. DISCUSSION Gigantin given intravenously to anaesthetised dogs produced a persistent rise of blood pressure which is not abolished by ergotoxine or decerebration. From the above experimental data, it is thought that the rise is due to the action both on the heart and the splanchnic vessels. The action on the heart is direct on the musculature and independant of the central or peripheral nervous mechanism as the same is produced in isolated and atropinised hearts. Both hearts in situ and isolated behave similarly to gigantin. In all doses the rate is accelerated in the beginning, later slowed. The amplitude is normal in the early part but later increased. The increase is due mainly to the increase in the systolic level, the diastole being either normal or slightly deficient. The initial increase followed by as showing of the rate of the heart under gigantin may be due to some changes effected in the pace maker, for, the whole heart muscle is involved in this action. The irregularities of the rhythm in the toxic phase is probably due to the heart block, for the ventricles beat once for every two or more auricular beats. This is followed after a time by a complete block when the ventri- cles develop their own rhythm, become irregular and get arrested. The final stand- still of the ventricles is due to the failure of effective stimuli reaching them and not due to the death of the muscle, since the muscle responds to mechanical stimuli even after the ventricular arrest. The conduction thus is first impaired in the auriculoventricular bundle and at a later stage in the auricular fibres. The impulses started by the pace maker thus fail to arouse the auricle, as at a previous stage impulses which reach the auricles fail to reach the ventricles. The auricles and ventricles in the absence of impulses to contract develop ectopic rhythm and when a number of successive impulses fail, prolonged and final stand still results. Finally the pace maker may be slowed and arrested. The two factors which comprise the action of gigantin are slowing and increased contractility. The slowing is mainly due to a long rest in the normal pause. The increased contractility is shown by the increased systolic level, the diastole being normal or very slightly deficient. Further the systolic contractions were also power- ful and complete for in the individual beats after gigantin, the systolic excursion of the liver is quicker, steeper and higher than normal. When the diastole is normal, while the contraction is greater the extent of movement and the volume of blood expelled are of course greater.
June, 1952] V. RATHNASABAPHATY AND V. ISWARI 159 In a physiological dose the work of the heart is greatly improved. Work done in a unit of time is the product of the rate of beat and pulse volume. When the rate is slowed under the influence of the drug, the out-put per beat (pulse volume) is the chief point at issue and this depends upon the relative development of systolic contractions and diastolic relaxations. If the contractions become more complete and relaxations unchanged the pulse volume is naturally greater. Though the out-put was not measured in these experiments, but only the muscular contractions it may be inferred that the pulse volume is increased correspondingly. But the work done per minute might not be increased as the increase in pulse volume is compensated for by the slowing. In a diseased or irregular heart where more rest is ensured without affecting the minute volume, it may be said that the drug increases the efficiency of the heart. In toxic doses, there is no question of efficiency for when heart block develops it is obvious that the out-put per minute is definitely less. Gigantin seems to posses cumulative properties for the same physiological dose repeated when the heart apparently returns to normal produces toxic symptoms. The apparent return of normality is therefore not an indication that the whole drug has been eleminated but something is left behind which in conjunction with a subsequent physiological dose, makes up a toxic dose. In addition the drug gets fixed in the heart muscle as seen by the persistence of the action of the drug on isolated perfused heart, even by subsequent perfusion with normal Locke's solution for a prolonged time. As seen from the experimental data the rise of blood pressure may be ascribed partly due to constriction of the blood vessels of the splanchnic area. The volume of spleen and kidney showed a marked decrease. Perfusion of isolated organs, liver and kidney indicate a constriction of the vessels leading to a diminished out- flow of the perfusion fluid from the veins. The action on the kidney vessels were however slight. The coronary vessels were neither dilated nor constricted. The action on the vessels is direct on the muscular tissue of the arteries and not nervous in action, as the same is produced in isolated bits of arterial muscles even after sym- patholysis by ergotoxine. To find out if it has got uniform action on all plain muscles, it was tried on the uterine and the intestinal muscles, and it is seen that it has direct action on the uterine musculature only and has no action on intestinal musculature. The transient increase in diuresis produced by the drug is probably due to the concomittant rise of the general blood pressure and increased flow of blood through the kidneys which is not of great therapuetic value. Gigantin has no action on normal respiration. But it has been observed that it stimulates the respiration both in rate and depth where it is already depressed. The slowing of the heart, increased contractility, cumulation are all charac- teristics of the digitalis series of drugs and in these gigantin resembles them. 16
160 THE PHARMACOLOGY OF GIGANTIN [Vol. XXII, Part II, SUMMARY The Pharmacology of gigantin on the mammalian cardio-vascular mechanism has been studied in detail. By a direct action on the musculature of the heart and the vessels it produce a persistant rise of blood pressure. The efficiency of the heart is increased in physiological doses. The action on the heart is analogous to digitalis. Gigantin has also a direct motor action on the plain muscle or the uterus. But it has no action on the plain muscle of the intestines. The Coronary vessels are not constricted by the drug. It has no action on normal respiration. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors' thanks are due to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research under whose auspicies this work was carried out, and to the Director of Animal Husbandry, Madras, for his keen interest evinced in this work. They are -deeply indebted to Sri K. Lakshman Rao, B. Sc. (Pharm.) Research Assistant (Chemical) for the valuable technical help in the preparation of gigantin and to Dr. Govinda Reddy, N.B.B.S., M.D. Professor of Pathology, Madras Medical College, Madras, for his help in the histopathological examination of various tissues in toxicity experiments. REFERENCES Pitchandi (1948). J. Proc. Inst. Chem. 2034 Watt (1893). Dictionary of the Economic products of India Rathnasabhapathy V., Lakshman Rao, K. Krishnaswamy, A., and David, J. C. (1949). Indian J. med. Res., 37, 4 October 1949. Rathnasabhapathy V., David J. C. and Iswariah V., (1951). Indian J. vet Sci. 21 (II), 1951. Venkatachalam K., Vareed C and Ratnagiriswaran A. N., (1943). Indian J. med. Res. 22-1 Elliot (1937)., (By J. H. Burn).
REVIEWS EMBRYOLOGY OF THE PIG BY BRADLEY M. PATTEN (Published by the Blakiston Company, Philadelphia and Toranto P. P. XIII and 352 with 186 illustrations in the text containing 412 figures of which 6 are in colour. Price 35s.) THE pig has been a subject of extensive embryological research and there is already plenty of published material on the subject. But no other book deals with the subject so effectively as the publication under review. The present work has the merit of presenting in a simple form the fundamental processes of mammalian development based on pig with special emphasis on the sequence of embryological events. The fact that this is the third edition of the book is a clear indication of its popularity and increasing demand. In the present edition the subject matter has been brought up-to-date and a number of new illustrations including some excellent coloured plates have been incorporated to enhance the usefulness of the book. The book is divided into 13 chapters of which 5 have been devoted to the early stages of development in mammals. The seventh chapter which deals with the structure of pig embryos of 9 to 12 m.m. in length containing several illustrations is an exceedingly interesting and instructive chapter. The remaining chapters describe the organogeny in a lucid form. An account of the histogenesis of bone has been included in the twelfth chapter. The last chapter contains a description of the development of teeth, face and jaws. The bibliography given at the end of the text is quite comprehensive. It is, however, felt that a chapter dealing with the delicate technique of prepar- ing embryological material for laboratory study would have been a welcome addition. To the students of Veterinary and allied sciences it should be an exceedingly useful publication. (C.V.G. C). ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION AND ANIMAL PRODUCTION BY DR. SAMPATH KUMARAN (Published by F. E. Livengood, Mission Press, Jabalpore) DR Sampath Kumaran's book on Artificial Insemination and Animal Produc- tion is a recent addition to the very limited literature available on the subject which is authored and published in India. As such, his publication is welcome. 161 17
162 REVIEWS [Vol. XXII, Part II, The author has taken considerable pains in giving a very exhaustive review of the work so far done on various phases of Animal Production including the use of the technique of Artificial Insemination, Physiology of reproduction, hormone therapy and breeding practices, etc. In covering such a wide field of subjects, he has not ignored to show the relative progress of work carried out in India. The book would be found informative to those who have interest in these allied subjects. To the undergraduate student, it would also be of considerable help as a reference book particularly in regard to the practical application of artificial insemination. I would, therefore, commend to every educational institution as also to students undergoing courses in Animal Husbandry to encourage such a publication by owing a copy of the book. (P.N.N.) MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES FIELD APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE164 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part III, use was taken up on a country-wide scale, it was, however, deemed essential to perform a larger number of inseminations under representative field conditions obtaining in the country. This was found necessary in view of the practical diffi- culties met with in the field [Vaidya and Bhattacharya, 1945]. With this end in view four regional centres under the control of the Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar were established at the following sta- tions: (1) Calcutta Centre at Bengal Veterinary College (started functioning from November, 1945). (2) Montgomery Centre at Sir Datar Singh's Farm (started functioning from December, 1945). (3) Patna Centre at Bihar Veterinary College (started functioning from January, 1946). (4) Bangalore Centre at Indian Dairy Research Institute (started functioning from January, 1947). The Calcutta Centre and to some extent the Bangalore centre also worked under conditions obtaining in large cities; whereas the other two were, practically, under rural or semi-rural environments. The work at the first two centres materially suffered during the communal disturbances before and after the partition. The Montgomery centre had to be closed down in August 1947, owing to partition of India. The results reported in this article cover the period starting from the opening of the centres upto the end of 1946. Bulls used and their training. There were in all 26 bulls at the three centres (16 Bos indicus and 10 Bos bubalis). The Bos indicus bulls belonged to the following breeds: Sahiwal, Hariana, Nagori, Tharparker and Indo-European Cross-bred. The Bos bubalis bulls were of the Nili and Murrah breeds. The bulls were of different ages when brought into the scheme and with the exception of two, were previously used to hand service. No difficulty was experienced in ultimately training them to serve in the artificial vagina. It was observed, however, that older bulls took longer time for training. The three Sahiwal bulls purchased from Delhi were slow at service and as such were found to be unsuitable for artificial service. Number of Collections Full particulars of collections from the bulls stationed at the three centres are given in Table I. The details include information on the number of collections made, the average volume of semen obtained per collection from each bull, breed, and species. Out of the 27 bulls, 10 gave less than 10 collections, 3 less than 20, while the maximum number of collections constituting 87 per cent of the total number came from the remaining 14 bulls. The largest number of collections (84) were made from the Tharparker bull No. 57-2, stationed at the Patna Centre. Even this number falls short by twenty of the number of possible collections from a normal routine of two collections per week. Considering the number of bulls, the total of
September, 1952] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 165 TABLE I Showing details of collections at the 3 Artificial Insemination Centres Name of centre Serial number of Bull Brand number Breed Total number of collections per Average volume (c.c.) of semen collection per Bull Breed Species Bull Breed Species 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Montgomery 1 K 600 Sahiwal 17 95 95 2.71±0.11 3.72±0.11 3.72±0.11 2 J77/2.8 30 3.94±0.23 3 M.12/1.2 28 4.16±0.19 4 M.24/2.8 20 3.68±0.18 5 M.P. 1 Nili 35 135 135 2.43±0.12 2.41±0.06 2.41±0.06 6 M.P. 2 40 2.23±0.12 P. A. 60 2.49±0.11 Patna 8 158166 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part III, 'possible' number of collections works out at 1456. The number of collections actually made were 533, i.e., less than one per bull per week. The low number was due mainly to the lack of adequate demand for semen, and also in some measure to the inherent defect in the bulls themselves, and their inconsistent behaviour after being in use for sometime. The actual number of bulls maintained at each centre could have been reduced considerably, if it had been possible to select more active and pretrained bulls. Average Volume of Ejaculum per Collection The average volume of semen per collection varied according to species and breed, and within a breed, from animal to animal. Bos bubalis bulls on an average gave 2.63±0.07 c.c. of semen as compared to 3.10±0.05 c.c. given by the Bos indicus bulls. The difference is statistically significant. In Bos bubalis, the average for the Nili breed was 2.41±0.06 c.c. and for the Murrah breed 3.54±0.06 c.c. per collection. In both the breeds within breed differences, however, are not significant. In the Bos indicus breeds, the Sahiwal topped the list with 3.72±0.11 c.c.; next came the Tharparker with 3.10±0.07 c.c. followed by the Nagori and Indo-European Cross-bred with 2.84±0.11 c.c., 2.43±0.19 and 2.35±0.13 c.c. per collection res- pectively. Differences amongst breeds are statistically significant. The bull to bull differences amongst Sahiwal and Tharparker are also statistically significant. The highest average volume was given by a Sahiwal Bull (M 12/1.2) stationed at Montgomery centre (4.11±0.19 c.c.), the lowest by the Indo-European Cross-bred bull No. 1 from Calcutta with 2.35±0.13 c.c. With the B. bubalis bulls, Ayyar [1944] observed an average volume of 3.00 c.c. per collection in the 16 collections made from 2 bulls, while Shukla and Bhattacharya [1949] found the average volume from 24 collections to be 1.84±0.99 c.c. The results reported herein are from 162 collections made from 5 bulls. The average worked out is slightly higher than that reported by Ayyar [1944] and significantly higher than the figure reported by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1949]. In case of Bos indicus bulls, the average volume for Sahiwals is given as 3.80±0.35 c.c. per collection by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1949]. This figure is not significantly different from 3.72±0.11 c.c. found in our study. The former figure is an average of 18 collections made from a single bull, while the latter is from 95 collections made from 4 different bulls. Data regarding Tharparker and Nagori and Indo-European Cross-bred bulls are new and have not been reported previously. No attempt is made here to compare the results with those of foreign breeds. In view of the small number of bulls studied under each breed, the conclusions drawn above should be taken as tentative subject to confirmation on the basis of further observations on a larger number of bulls. Month to month variation in average volume in the different breeds is brought out in Table II. Preservation of Semen In the early stages of the work at the centres, the ejacula were preserved 'neat' and used as such. Diluted semen was used in two centres later on. At Patna, neat semen had been used throughout.
September, 1952] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 167 TABLE II Showing month to month variation in average semen volume Month Centre Montgomery Patna Calcutta B. indicus (Sahiwal) B. bubalis (Nili) B. indicus (Thar- parker) B. bubalis (Murrah) B. indicus X-bred I (Nagori) X-bred II December 3.3 2.9 1.7 . . 1.8 . . 1.8 January 2.3 1.9 16 . . 1.6 . . 2.1 February 2.5 2.1 2.4 . . 1.9. . . 1.2 March 2.6 2.8 2.3 . . 2.0 . . 2.0 April 3.4 3.5 3.5 . . 2.8 2.4 2.6 May 4.5 3.4 3.2 . . 3.0 2.6 2.1 June 4.3 1.6 3.0 . . 2.4 2.8 1.8 July 5.1 1.9 3.3 2.5 2.9 3.7 2.1 August 4.4 2.6 3.7 3.9 1.7 3.4 3.3 September 3.4 1.7 3.6 4.0 1.9 2.8 2.4 October 5.5 2.3 4.6 3.7 3.0 2.9 2.6 November 3.6 2.5 3.7 3.5 3.5 3.3 2.8 December 3.0 2.9 3.2 3.7 2.1 3.0 3.2 Inseminations The insemination was done by using an all glass syringe fitted with a long ebonite nozzle and a Russian model vaginal speculum. This method was used at all the centres in spite of the disadvantage and loss of time involved in disinfecting the speculum and nozzle after each operation. This is a serious consideration where very large number of animals are to be inseminated in a short time. However, this method was adopted as the number of animals coming to the centres during the year under report was never unwieldy and because of the special advantage offered by the method. namely, the detection of disorders of the reproductive tract like vaginitis, cervicitis, etc., and finding out whether the semen deposited inside the cervix was later on expelled or not. Complete details as to the number of inseminations performed from the different bulls at the three centres, including details regarding the number of inseminations per collection, are given in Table III. It will be seen from the table that on the whole a larger number of cows than buffaloes have been inseminated. It is of
168 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part III, interest to note that while at Montgomery, the cow to buffalo insemination ratio is in favour of buffaloes, at Patna it is contrarywise. At Calcutta, the number of buffaloes inseminated is negligible. These figures, however, should not be taken as depicting a true picture of the actual species-wise demand at the three centres. At Calcutta, for example, the absence of buffalo insemination is mainly due to the poor response of the purchased bulls. Two buffalo bulls were purchased from Rohtak and transferred to Calcutta. One of them was young and the other though mature and ready for service, possibly due to the sudden change, in the environmental conditions, could with great difficulty be made to take notice of females even on heat. It was used to natural service and repeated attempts failed to train him to ejaculate in the artificial vagina. At Patna, only towards the end of the year as reported herein buffalo bulls could be procured for use. The situation at Montgomery may justifiably be taken as a true reflection of the popular demand. To start with, Hissar, Sahiwal and Nili semen was available without difficulty and in sufficient quantities to meet the local demand. Yet, only seventeen out of a total of 482 animals were inseminated with Hissar semen. The reason was each 'chak' had Hariana bulls of their own supplied by the Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab. The demand for Nili semen was great, as no bulls of this breed were readily available to the villagers and there were instances when the villagers brought their buffaloes on heat from over a distance of ten to twelve miles. The Sahiwal semen was in general demand as the farm, where the centre was located, had a reputation of possessing prepotent, pedigreed Sahiwals. The figures of this centre, therefore, may be taken as representing a cross-section of the actual demand in this tract. At Patna, only Tharparker semen was available. Tharparkers, though recommended by the provincial livestock authorities for general use, are not popular with the traditional gwallas in the city who show a strong fancy for cross-bred animals locally known as the 'Taylor breed'. If a bull of this breed was available to the centre, there is little doubt that the insemination figures would have considerably improved. The largest number of Bos indicus females were inseminated from a bull stationed at Patna (Bull No. 57-Breed Tharparker with 384 inseminations). The largest number inseminated with semen from a buffalo bull was at Montgomery (Bull No. P. A. with 385 inseminations). It will be shown elsewhere that the figures could have been at least trebled, if sufficient number of animals were made available for insemination. Alternately, a fast moving vehicle at the disposal of the centre would have gone a long way in making larger number of inseminations possible. From the economic aspects of the centres work, the figures given in Table III are revealing. It will be seen that at Montgomery, though ten bulls were at the disposal of the centre, the majority of the cows were inseminated from only four bulls. These four bulls accounted for 67.9 per cent of total number of animals served. At Patna, out of 1216 inseminations, four out of seven bulls accounted for 77.3 per cent of the total animals served. At Calcutta, three bulls out of the four served 84.9 per cent of the cows. These figures indicate that about two bulls of a given breed, provided they are found satisfactory for artificial insemination work, are adequate for a centre of this type. As for the number of inseminations per ejaculum, as already explained, the limiting factor had been the small number of animals coming to the centre for in- semination. Thus though 'neat' semen alone was used at Patna throughout, the
September, 1952] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 169 TABLE III Showing details of inseminations performed at the 3 Artificial Insemination Centres Name of Centre Serial number of Bull Brand number Breed Total number of insemination per Average number of inseminations per collection per Bull Breed Species Bull Breed Species 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Montgomery 1 K 600 24(17) 1.41 2 J 77/2.8 163(30) 5.43 Sahiwal 465(95) 3 M.12/1.2 164(28) 5.86 4.89 482(100) 5.70 4 M.24/2.8 114(20) 4.82 5 H 161.17 Hissar 17(5) 17(5) 3.40 3.40 6 M. P.1 69(35) 1.97 7 M. P. 2 151(40) 3.78 8 M. P. 3 Nili 28(2) 734(145) 734(145) 14.00 5.06 5.06 9 M. P. 4 101(8) 12.63 10 P. A. 385(60) 6.42 Patna 11 158170 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part III, average number of animals inseminated from an ejaculum was practically the same as at the other two centres using diluted semen. The average figure for three centres works out at about five animals per ejaculum. Even with the low rate of dilution followed by the centres namely 1: 3, this figure could easily have been trebled. In Russia, the first country to explore and utilise extensively the immense possibilities of artificial service, the number of animals inseminated at each centre, after seven years of organised work,works out at 239 per centre [Badirjan, 1938; Neumann, 1939]. In Denmark, where the work was started in 1936 and the progress had been very rapid, the number of cows inseminated per bull in 1944 comes to 699 [Twinch, 1946]. In the United States artificial insemination bulls were serving 342,012 cows which works out at 526 cows per bull [Twinch, 1946]. In England, the technique became popular only during the later years of World War II. Accord- ing to the figures published by the British Ministry of Agriculture [1946], between June, 1945, and June, 1946, on an average one bull was serving 142 cows. At the three Government of India Centres, with eleven effective bulls, 2198 inseminations in all were performed. Taking the service rate into consideration, which is 1.3 for all bulls, the number of cows per bull comes to 146. In view of the fact that it being only the first year's effort and that considerable time was spent in equipping the laboratories of the centres, training the bulls and in educating the conservative farmers to accept the new technique, the figure is very encouraging. TABLE IV Month to month variation in the total number of inseminations Month Cows Buffaloes Montgomery Patna Calcutta Montgomery Patna Calcutta December, 45 10 2 11 34 . . . . January, 46 8 29 13 39 . . . . February, 46 4 23 14 13 . . . . March, 46 33 23 26 31 . . . . April, 46 48 50 50 36 . . . . May, 46 73 89 75 23 . . . . June, 46 49 92 60 20 . . . . July, 46 58 115 56 34 1 . . August, 46 53 125 21 60 21 . . September, 46 40 113 26 117 44 . . October, 46 49 117 41 161 49 . . November, 46 48 83 64 159 35 . . December, 46 59 113 92 134 48 . .
September, 1952] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 171 The figures in Table IV indicate the seasonal 'trend' in the activity of the centres. But as this is the first year's work, no attempt is being made to draw any conclusions at present. Conception Rate The success of the artificial insemination can be measured through the resulting conception rates. Rowson [1944] has described three ways of calculating conception rates : (i) By adding all inseminations irrespective of whether the animals became pregnant or not, and dividing this number by the number of pregnant animals. (ii) By adding up all the inseminations of the pregnant cows and dividing by the number of pregnant cows. (iii) By calculating the percentage of conceptions resulting from the first, second and third, and subsequent inseminations. American and British workers generally estimate inseminations required per conception on the basis of 'non-returns' i.e., on the number of animals not presented for 'repeat' insemination on completion of 5th month after insemination. In this country, however, it often happens that when a cow repeats heat after an insemina- tion, she is taken to a private bull, even for a number of times, and is not brought for artificial insemination on account of recalcitrant prejudice. At other times, false information is given that she is pregnant from an insemination, so as to escape any further attempts for being convinced to take recourse to artificial insemination. It has therefore been thought best to use only the correctly checked actual calving data for all the inseminations made, for calculating the success of artificial insemina- tion technique in field practice. Table V shows the number of services required per conception at the 3 artificial insemination centres. They were comparatively high for the Calcutta centre. The average overall rate for Bos-bubalis bulls was 1.39 as compared to 1.36 for the Bos indicus bulls. The difference is negligible. As the rate depends to a large extent on the individuality of the bulls and of the cows mated to them, no attempt has been made to test the differences statistically. However, among the Bos indicus bulls, the lowest rate was shown by Sahiwal bull No. K600 at Montgomery, and the highest was that by the Indo-European cross-bred bull No. 2 at Calcutta. Among the buffaloes, Murrah bull B439 at Patna had the lowest, and the Nili bull MP3 at Montgomery had the highest service rate. Anderson [1939], after a careful examination of literature on reported fertility of bulls, concludes that when a single service or insemination was allowed during one heat period, highly fertile bulls when used with normal, regularly breeding cows, required about 1.5 to 2.0 services per conception and this should be regarded as normal. With the exception of the Calcutta centre, the number of services per conception at the other two centres are less than 1.5. As the animals inseminated usually came from the surrounding villages, this high fertility requires elucidation. The possible explanation might be found in the fact that the animals were brought
172 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE Vol. XXII, Part ITT, TABLE V Showing details of number of services required per conception at the 3 Artificial Insemination Centres Name of centre Serial number of Bull Brand number Breed Total number whose claving data are Average service rate per conception per Known Unknown Holding Bull Breed Species 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Montgomery 1 K 600 24 0 21 1.14 2 J. 77/2.8 142 21 102 1.39 Sahiwal 3 M. 12/1.2 155 9 117 1.32 1.34 4 M. 24/2.8 106 8 79 1.34 1.33 5 H 161.17 Hissar 16 1 13 1.23 1.23 6 M. P. 1 69 0 51 1.35 7 M. P. 2 136 15 100 1.36 8 M. P. 3 Nili 24 4 16 1.50 1.42 1.42 9 M. P. 4 78 23 59 1.32 10 P. A. 335 50 227 1.48 11 158September, 1952] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 173 to the centres from long distances and as such in a large number of cases, the insemi- nations took place during the later phase of oestrus. According to Hammond [1927] ovulation takes place 12 to 17 hours post oestrum. The sperm takes on an average 5½ hours (lesser in heifers) to travel to the place of fertilization [Brester et al., 1940]. They survive for about thirty hours in the female tract [Trimberger and Davies 1943; Laing, 1945], so that, if insemination is carried out towards the end of oestrum, there is a greater chance of fertilisation taking place than if insemination is performed during early oestrum. Laing [1945 b, c] observed consistently better service rate among the free service group, i.e., where the bull was allowed to run with the herd, than in the hand service group, except during the winter months, when the duration of heat is short. He comes to the conclusion that the better conception rate in the free service group is due to the service synchronising with the end of oestrum, and thus close to ovulation. This conclusion is supported by much higher fertility in herds where the bulls always run with the herd, than in these where 'hand service' is practised, and the improved conception rates observed by the Russian workers using double spaced inseminations [Andreev, 1937 ; Kurillov, 1937]. In this connection, the possibility of a certain percentage of the cows brought to the centre receiving stray natural service either before, or after artificial service due to the carelessness of the owners, has also to be borne in mind. Among foreign countries, the most successful results with artificial insemination are reported from Russia and Denmark. Smirnov-Ugrjumov [1945], reporting the work of an artificial insemination centre serving several collective farms in Russia, gives the percentage conceiving with fresh and stored (upto 24 hours) semen at 96.6 per cent. Sorensen [1938] reports a percentage of 87.6 with 1.68 inseminations per conception among 1,070 cows inseminated by him in Denmark. Holm [1945] gives a range of 58174 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part III, for nine bulls, and for the Cambridge centre as 1.31 to 1.86 for five bulls by Towson [1944]. The average estimated fertility for all centres in England is given as 66.2 per cent by the figures published by the British Ministry of Agriculture [1946]. In Italy, Vighenzi [1946] states that in five years 5,796 inseminations were needed to fertilise 3,747 cows which give an average service rate of 1.6. The average service rates so far observed at the three Government of India centres are decidedly better than the American, British and Italian figures. In Table VI is given a comparative study of the relative influence of volume, age and treatment of semen on fertility. The available data have been divided into two main groups according to species. Each in turn is further divided into two sub-groups, according to the volume of semen injected. Each sub-group in turn is arranged vertically into four main classes according to the age of the semen used. Figures for neat and diluted semen are presented separately. From Table VI (on page 175), it will be seen that slightly higher fertility is obtained when 1.0 c.c. of semen is used instead of 0.5 c.c. This is true irrespective of treatment (neat or dilute) of semen. This is in keeping with the findings of Walton [1933] who observed a decrease in percentage of conception with a decrease to 0.5 c.c. or an increase to 5 c.c. above the optimum 1 c.c. and contrary to the observations reported by Kozlova [1935] and Herman [1939]. The former found no significant difference in the calving percentage of cows inseminated by the cervi- cal method with 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 c.c. of semen, while the latter reported very little difference in the conception rates when quantities varying from 0.1 to 6.0 c.c. were used for artificial insemination. Comparing on like basis, it is observed that, with a single exception (which may as well be due to the fewer number of inseminations included), the diluted semen gave better results than neat semen. Further, there was no apparent decrease in fertility with age of semen up to- 76 hours at Montgomery and Patna centres. At Calcutta Centre, however, there is an indication of lowered fertility with the use of aged semen. The latter results confirm the findings of Milovanov and Kulesova [1945], who found a reduction of 15 to 20 per cent in the number of pregnancies after 48 to 96 hours of storage at 5° to 8°C, and Underbjerg, Davis and Spangler [1942] who, using both diluted and neat semen, found a marked increase in service rates with semen stored for more than 24 hours. As opposed to this, and in line with the findings at Montgomery and Patna Centres, Willett, Fuller and Salisbury [1940] observed no important deviation upto 96 hours, with semen stored in yolk- phosphate diluent. Their data covered 1,500 inseminations and as in our studies, only sperm not less than +++ motility rating were used. Salisbury [1941, 1943, and 1944] reported a high percentage of conception with semen stored in yolk- citrate and yolk-phosphate diluents for as long as 5 days ; further, using different rates of dilution no detectable effect on fertility level with dilution rate as high as 1 : 100 (without the addition of sulpha drugs) was observed by Salisbury [1946]; Salisbury et al. [1943; 1945]. With the addition of sulpha drugs, the dilution rate could be further increased [Salisbury and Bratton ; 1948]. In view of the fact that our data are incomplete in many respects, and the number of inseminations performed using stored semen is comparatively small, no conclusions are drawn at present on the influence of age of stored semen on fertility.
September, 1952] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 175 TABLE VI. Showing relationship between volume, age and, treatment of semen and fertility. Species Volume injected in c.c. Name of A.I. Centre 1 hour Average Service rate per conception Above 1, but less than 24 hours Above 24, but less than 48 hours Above 48, but less than 76 hours. Neat Diluted Neat Diluted Neat Diluted Neat Diluted 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Bos bubalis 0.5 Montgomery 1.63 1.47 .. 1.40 .. 1.28 .. .. Patna 1.29 .. 1.36 .. 1.29 .. 1.38 .. Calcutta .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1.0 Montgomery 1.40 .. 2.20 1.57 .. 1.23 .. 1.32 Patna .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Calcutta .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 0.5 Montgomery 1.30 1.14 1.42 .. 1.40 .. 1.38 .. Bos indicus Patna 1.30 1.26 1.38 .. 1.29 .. 1.32 .. Calcutta .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1.0 Montgomery 1.18 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1.23 Patna 1.23 1.30 1.25 .. .. .. .. .. Calcutta .. 1.66 .. 1.46 .. 2.59 .. 2.16
176 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part III, SUMMARY Results of 2,935 inseminations made from 601 ejaculates collected from thirteen Bos indicus and eight Bos bubalis bulls stationed at the Montgomery, Patna, and Calcutta field artificial insemination centres run by the Animal Genetics Section of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute are analysed and discussed. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors wish to thank Mr. D. B. Mukherjee, Ch. Chetram, and Sardar Gajjan Singh, the Officers in-Charge of the Calcutta, Patna, and Montgomery artificial insemination centres respectively, for much help in introducing artificial insemination in the field. The basic data collected by them have been used in the preparation of this article. Thanks are also due to the Civil Veterinary Departments of Bengal, Bihar, and Punjab for their wholehearted co-operation; to Sir Datar Singh, Vice- President, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, to Mr. S. K. Sen, Director of Animal Husbandry Department, Bihar, and to Major J. M. Lahiri, Principal of Veterinary College, Bengal, for their personal interest and for providing full facilities in conducting the work ; to Major Williamson for the help, advice, and co-operation ungrudgingly given by him in setting up the artificial insemination centres, and to the Director of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, for help and advice at all stages during the progress of the work. REFERENCES Anderson, J. (1939). Investigations on the Semen of Fertile and Sterile Bulls. Vet. J., 95, 457-473; 96, 18-27 September, 1952] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 177 Guha, S., Kohli, M. L., and Bhattacharya, P. (1947). A review of Artificial Insemination work with cattle at Izatnagar. Proc. 34th Ind. Sci. Cong. Hammond, J. (1927). Reproduction in the Cow. Camb. Uni. Press, Cambridge Handerson, J. A. (1939). Artificial Insemination under Field Conditions, Vet. Rec., 29, 135-143 Herman, H. A. (1939). Some Factors Affecting the Efficiency of Artificial Insemination of Dairy cows. Probl. Am. Soc. Anim. Prod. 32nd Meet., 245-250 Holm, J. G. (1945). (The Co-operative Cattle Breeding Associations using Artificial Insemina- tion; Report for 1944.) Arhus., vii, xii, 96. (Abstract A. B. A., 14, 21, 1946) Ivanov, E. A. (1907). De la fecondation artificialle chez les mammifere. Arch. Sci. Biol., 12, 377-511 Kozlova, M. (1935). Optimum Doses of undiluted Semen for Artificial Insemination of cows. Probl. of An. Hus., 4-5. (Translated from Russian by Victor Berliner) Kurillov, V. S. (1937). New Principles of the Organization and technique of mating of cows. Probl. Zivotn., No. 334178 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part III, Smirnov-Ugrjumov, D. V. (1945). Experience in the Organisation of an Artificial Insemination Centre serving several Collective Farms. Trud. Lab. iskusst. Odemen. Zivotn. (Mosk.), 2, 43-48. (Abstract in A. B. A.) Synder, W. E. and Baltzer, A. C. (1945). Preliminary Results of Artificial Insemination through a Co-operative enterprise. Quart. Bull. Mich. Agric. Exp. Sta., 27, 310-312 Trimberger, G. W. and Davies, H. P. (1943). Res. Bull. Neb. Agric. Exp. Sta. No. 129 (Citation from Laing, 1945 a) Twinch, H. (1946). Progress in the Application of Artificial Insemination in other countries. Proc. Brit. Soc. Anim. Prod. V meet., 51-58 Underjberg, Davis, H. P., and Spangler, R. E. (1942). Effect of dilutors and Storage upon Fecundity of Bovine Semen. J. Anim. Sci., 1, 149-155 Vaidya, G. W. and Bhattacharya, P. (1945). Artificial Insemination and its bearing on the Livestock Industry of India. Indian Fmg., 6, 561-565 Vighenzie, D. (1946). 5 years of Artificial Insemination at the Rorre de' Picenadi Centre. Zootec. e Vet., 1, 104-109 (English Summary) (Abstract in A. B. A., 15, 178, 1947) Wialton, Arthur (1933). The technique of Artificial Insemination. Imp. Bur. An. Genetics, Edinburgh Willett, E. L., Fuller, H. K., and Salisbury, G. W. (1940). Preservation of Bovine Spermatozoa in Yolk Phosphate Diluent and Field Results from its use. Cornell Vet., 30, 507-513 Wright, N. C. (1937). Report on the Development of the Cattle and Dairy Industries of India. Published by Manager of Government of India Publications, New Delhi
SEASONAL VARIATION IN 'REACTION-TIME' AND SEMEN QUALITY OF GOATS By D. D. SHUKLA AND P. BHATTACHARYA, Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 16 January 1952) (With one text-figure) IN recent years several investigations have been carried out into the influence of seasons on the semen quality of farm animals. It has been found by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947] and Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947] working with Indian bulls and rams respectively that the semen qualities of the animals vary in different seasons. They have found that high air temperature associated with high relative humidity and rainfall as found in autumn (i.e., from August to October) has an adverse effect on semen quality of these two species of farm animals. Little information is available regarding the seasonal influence on semen quality of goats. Phillips et al., [1943] studied the seasonal variation in bucks of Saanen and Toggenburg breeds at Maryland (U. S. A.). Their observations were, however, limited to only two bucks, one of each breed. In view of the scanty information available in respect of the indigenous goat, it was considered desirable to study the effect of different seasons on its semen quality. MATERIAL AND METHODS. Experimental animals consisted of eight goats purchased from the local market They were all mature bucks between two to three years of age at the commencement of the experiment. Before the commencement of the experiment they were trained to mount an anoestrous doe and ejaculate semen in artificial vagina. Throughout the experimental period the animals were kept under the same managerial and dietary conditions as reported for rams by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947]. Two collections of semen at an interval of 15 minutes were made from each animal every fortnight for two consecutive years, and under the same climatological conditions under which Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947] and Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947] respectively observed seasonal variations in the semen quality of bulls and rams. Each semen sample was examined for the following characteristics : (1) Colour and consistency. (2) Volume of semen. (3) Initial motility of spermatozoa. (4) pH of semen. (5) Sperm concentration per ml. of semen. (6) Total number of spermatozoa and (7) Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. 179 4
180 SEMEN QUALITY OF GOATS [Vol. XXII, Part III, Besides the above mentioned physical characteristics, ' reaction-time' of the animals was also noted as in rams [Shukla and Bhattacharya]. Colour and consistency were determined by the visual appearance of semen. Volume was measured upto 1/100 of ml. Initial motility was scored according to the criteria of Erb et al., [1942]. Hydrogenion concentration of semen was determined by B. D. H. capillator. Sperm cencentration was determined by the usual haemacyto- meter method. For the determination of percentage of abnormal spermatozoa the method as adopted by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947] was followed. For the study of the effect of seasons on 'reaction-time' and semen quality, the local seasons were distinguished as follows :September, 1952] D. D. SHUKLA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 181 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
182 [September, 1952 182 SEMEN QUALITY OF GOATS [September, 1952 TABLE I Average monthly variation in 'reaction-time' and semen characteristics of goats 1945-46 1946-47 J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D Reaction.time (in seconds) 98 68 44 66 30 43 45 66 58 62 59 45 56 49 47 50 38 45 22 48 46 42 43 40 Colour and consistency of semen Th.C. Th.C. Th.C. Th.C. T.C. T.C. T.C. T.C. T.C. T.C. Th.C. Th.C. Th.C. Th.C. Th.C. Th.C. T.C. T.C. T.C. T.C. T.C. T.C. Th.C. Th.C. Volume of semen (in ml.) 0.68 0.72 0.64 0.69 0.61 0.67 0.76 0.65 0.57 0.46 0.49 0.51 0.57 0.55 0.61 0.78 0.63 0.75 0.78 0.78 0.64 0.65 0.67 0.65 Initial motility of sperm- atozoa 4.5 4.6 4.6 5.0 4.6 4.6 4.7 3.8 4.4 4.2 4.5 4.2 4.4 4.8 4.6 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.5 4.7 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.8 pH of semen 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.2 6.4 6.4 6.5 6.2 6.2 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.2 6.3 0.3 6.5 6.4 6.5 6.4 6.4 6.4 Sperm concentration (in millions per ml. of semen) 2967 2743 3804 4045 2595 2039 2023 1726 2149 2522 2314 2786 3350 3718 3045 3812 3240 2784 1820 2064 1789 2014 2329 3226 Total No. of spermatozoa (in millions) 1852 1799 2375 2524 1532 1412 1555 1078 1132 959 967 1532 1770 2079 1641 2983 1823 2092 1718 1715 1153 1438 1447 1922 Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa 11.1 5.4 2.4 3.0 3.9 4.4 5.8 5.9 7.2 6.7 6.7 5.2 7.1 6.5 5.1 7.4 6.9 10.2 5.7 5.9 5.1 5.8 6.3 10.3 T.C.=Thin creamy. Th.C.=Thick creamy.
Indian Journal of Page Line Content 1 gri " 2nd article SA. o " 4 from bottom (w 187 8 from bottom D 219 folio heading S. 221 " 223 " 237 Bottom Line In (M 185 Table IV 3 16 (4 185 Table IV 6 16 107 MGIPCERRATA. Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Vol. XXII, Part III, September 1952. Page Line For Read Content 1 gricultural Agricultural " 2nd article Seasonal Variation in 'reaction time' and semen quality of goats. Seasonal Variation in 'reaction time' and semen, quality of goats (with one text figure) " 4 from bottom (with plates XVI-XIX) (with plates XVII-XX) 187 8 from bottom Discussgin Discussion 219 follo heading S. B. V. Rao, S. Narayanan, D, R, Ramnani and J. Das S. B. V. Rao. 221 .. .. " 223 .. " " 237 Bottom Line In spring (M.R.M.) In spring. 185 Table IV 164 168 164 168 3 (4.50) (4.65) (4.55) (4.65) 185 Table IV 164 137 160 168 1 2 3 169 164 137 160 168 1 2 3 169 6 1076) 1253) 1505) (1540) (1712) (1954) (2085) (2565) (1076) (1253) (1505) (1540) (1712) (1954) (2085) (2565) MGIPCSeptember, 1952] D. D. SHUKLA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 183 Seasonal variation in average 'reaction.time' and. semen quality of the goats are presented in table II. It will be seen from the table that the 'reaction.time' in summer was much less than in other seasons and there did not exist any relationship between the average 'reaction.time' and the quality of semen produced by the goats in different seasons. The average 'reaction.time' in summer was the least, while the quality of semen, judged by its colour, consistency and sperm concentration, was not better than in winter and spring. In autumn, winter and spring, when there was no marked variation in the 'reaction-time', the quality of semen varied very greatly, autumn being inferior to that of winter and spring. The quality of semen in spring seemed to be better except in volume than in other seasons. Percentages of abnormal spermatozoa in winter, autumn and summer were higher than in spring. High percentage of abnormality in the ejaculates during, winter was due to the presence of more bent tail spermatozoa and in autumn and summer due to tail.less ones. TABLE II Seasonal variation in avrage 'reaction.time' and semen charactristics of goats Autumn (August to October) Winter (November to January) Spring (February to April) Summer (May to July) Reaction-time (in seconds) 53.0 57.2 54.7 38.4 Colour and. consistency T.C. Th.C. Th.C. T.C. Volume of semen (in ml.) 0.63 0.60 0.67 0.71 Initial motility of spermatozoa 4.43 4.51 4.71 4.65 pH of semen 6.3 6.3 6.2 6.4 Sperm concentration (in millions per ml.) 2,044 2,829 3,528 2,417 Total number of spermatozoa (in millions) 1,246 1,582 2,235 1,689 Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa 6.26 7.84 4.79 6.12 T.C.=Thin creamy Th. C.=Thick creamy The summary of the results of analysis of variance of the data on 'reaction.time' and. semen qualities is presented in table III. From the table it is apparent that goats varied in 'reaction.time' and all the characteristics of semen studied. Highly significant variations in 'reaction.time', pH. of semen and total number of sperma- tozoa were found between the years. The variations in semen quality as observed among seasons (Table II) were real except in case of pH which was a chance variation. Variations due to interaction between seasons. and years were highly significant for 'reaction.time' and pH of semen, and for initial motility it was only significant. Between months within seasons highly significant variations were found in sperm 4A
184 SEMEN QUALITY OF GOATS [Vol. XXII, Part III, concentration and total number of spermatozoa and significant variation in initial motility. TABLE III The results of analysis of data on 'reaction-time' and semen characteristics of goats Factors for Analysis Source of variation Between Animals Between years Between seasons Interaction between seasons and years Between months -within season Reaction-time ** ** * ** 0 Volume of semen ** 0 * 0 0 Initial motility ** 0 ** * * pH of semen * ** 0 ** 0 Sperm concentration ** 0 ** 0 ** Total number of spermatozoa ** ** ** 0 ** Percentage of abnormal sper- matozoa ** 0 * * 0 ** Significant at five per cent level *Significant at one per cent level 0 Non significant With a view to test the differences between goats, between years and between seasons, critical differences (C. D.) at five per cent level of probability of the variable characteristics were worked out. These are presented in Tables IV to VI. In the tables, the average figure under the same bar did not vary at five per cent level. Table IV shows C. D. at five per cent level of the variable characteristics of semen between goats. It is apparent from the table that the average 'reaction-time' of goat 169 was significantly lower than of all others except 168. There was no signi- ficant variation between goats 168 and 164 but their 'reaction-time' was significantly lower than of goats 2, 160, 1, 137 and 3. Goat 3 showed the highest' reaction- time'. The table also shows that there was no relation between the 'reaction-time' and the quality of semen produced by the goats. For instance goats, 2,160, 1 and 137 did not vary in their 'reaction-time' but the quality of semen produced by them varied very greatly. Similarly, goats 168 and 169 did not vary in 'reaction-time', but their quality of semen as judged by volume, initial motility, sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa varied significantly. Goat 3 as the table shows took maximum time to mount an anoestrous female but its semen quality was not poorer than that of others. The volume of semen of goat 164 was significantly lower than of the rest. Goats 160, 168, 137 and goat 1 had significantly lower semen volume than goat 2 and 169. The latter, however, had the highest semen volume.
September, 1952] D. D. SHUKLA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 185 Table IV Critical difference at five per cent level of probability in 'reaction-time' and variable semen characteristics of the goat Variable characteristics Value of C.D. Average of goats are arranged in ascending order. Reaction.time 16.3 169 168 164 2 160 1 137 3 (15.0) (16.3) (31.6) (56.2) (56.2) (61.2) (64.5) (106.0) Volume of semen 0.15 164 160 168 137 1 3 2 169 (0.29) (0.53) (0.53) (0.56) (0.61) (0.63) (0.78) (1.12) Initial motility 0.14 160 164 168 169 137 2 3 1 (3.50) (4.50) (4.65) (4.70) (4.73) (4.83) (4.85) (4.86) pH of semen 0.15 3 164 1 2 160 168 137 169 (6.2) (6.2) (6.3) (6.3) (6.4) (6.4) (6.5) (6.5) Sperm concentration 473 137 169 2 160 1 168 3 164 (2223) (2272) (2504) (2841) (2864) (2885) (3311) (3755) Total number of 500 164 137 160 168 1 2 3 169 (1076) (1253) (1505) (1540) (1712) (1954) (2085) (2565) Percentage of abnor- mal spermatozoa 2.46 169 2 1 137 168 3 164 160 (3.17) (4.26) (4.50) (4.69) (4.88) (5.40) (6.30) (17.03) TABLE V Critical difference at five per cent level of probability between years Variable characteristics Value of C.D. The averages of the years are arranged in ascending order Reaction.time (8.2) 1946.47 1945.46 (43.7) (58.1) pH of semen 0.07 1946.47 1945.46 (6.4) (6.3) Total number of spermatozoa 251 1945.46 1946.47 (1559) (1815)
186 SEMEN QUALITY OF GOATS [Vol. XXII, Part III, TABLE VI Critical difference of variable characteristics at five per cent level of probability between seasons Variable characteristics Value of C.D. Summer Autumn Spring Winter Reaction-time 12.2 (38.4) (53.0) (54.7) (57.2) Volume of semen 0.09 Winter Autumn Spring Summer (0.60) _ (0.63) (0.67) (0.70) Initial motility 0.04 Autumn Winter Summer Spring (4.43) (4.51) (4.65) (4.71) Sperm concentration 473 Autumn Summer Winter Spring (2044) (2417) (2829) (3528) Total number of spermatozoa 355 Autumn Winter Summer Spring (1246) (1582) (1689) (2235) Percentage of abnormal sperma- tozoa 1.73 Spring Summer Autumn Winter (4.79) (6.12) (6.26) (7.84) As regards the initial motility of all the animals, goat 160 showed the least moti- lity of spermatozoa. The sperm concentration of this goat was inferior to goat 3 and 164 which had the highest sperm concentration. The low initial motility of goat 160 in spite of high sperm concentration might be due amongst other causes to the highest percentage of abnormal spermatozoa found in this animal. Initial motility of goat 164 did not significantly differ from that of 168, but it was significantly lower than the rest, except goat. 160. The low initial motility of this goat inspite of the highest sperm concentration than of the rest of the animals might also be due to the presence of a high percentage of abnormal spermatozoa which are likely to be less motile than the normal ones. Goats 2, 3 and 1 had high initial motility which might be due to the fact that goats 2 and 1 had high sperm concentration as well as low percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. The reason for goat 3 showing high initial motility inspite of high abnormality of spermatozoa might be its high sperm con- centration. The higher initial motility of goats 137 and 169 in comparison with 160 and 164 might be due to their lower percentage of abnormal spermatozoa in spite of their lower sperm concentration than of the latter goats. It seems that initial motility rating, as has been done in this experiment by direct microscopical examina- tion, depends not only on sperm concentration but also on the abnormality of sper- matozoa. Abnormal spermatozoa are comparatively less motile than the normal ones and an increase or decrease in their numbers might also affect the motility of spermatozoa.
September, 1952] D. D. SHUKLA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 187 Average pH of semen of goats 3 and 164 was significantly lower than that of others. Associated with low pH, high sperm concentration was found in them. Again, goats 137 and 169 having higher pH than others showed the lowest sperm concentration. It seems, therefore, that high pH was associated with lower sperm concentration in goats. Total number of spermatozoa has been calculated by multiplying sperm concen- tration per ml. of semen and the total volume of the ejaculate. It was expected, therefore, that the goat having the smallest semen volume but higher sperm concen- tration would show the lower total number of spermatozoa. This has been found to be true in case of goat 164. Goat 169 had the highest volume of semen and inspite of its low sperm concentration it had the total number of spermatozoa signi- ficantly higher than all except goat 3. Goats 160, 168 and 1 did not vary in their total number of spermatozoa as there was neither significant variation in their total volume of semen nor in their sperm concentration. Between goats 2 and 3 there was no significant variation in total number of spermatozoa probably because the difference in their volume was very little and non-significant ('although there was significant variation in their sperm concentration'). Critical difference at five per cent level of variable factors between years is presented in Table V. From the table it is observed that during the second year of the experiment the goats took significantly lesser time to mount an anoestrous female and ejaculate semen in artificial vagina. This observation is in complete agreement with that in rams by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947]. The semen samples in the first year had lower pH than in the second year, but the total number of spermatozoa in the second year was significantly more than in the first year. Shukla and Bhatta- charya [1947] found that in rams semen quality deteriorated in the second year of the experiment as indicated by higher pH, lower sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa. There is, however, no such clear indication in this experi- ment. Critical difference at five per cent level of 'reaction-time' and semen character- istics between seasons is presented in Table VI. From the table, it is evident that in summer, the 'reaction-time' was the least of all the seasons. There was, however, no relationship between the 'reaction-time' and the quality of semen produced by goats in differenet seasons. Volume of semen in winter was significantly lower than in the other seasons. Semen samples as judged by initial motility, sperm concentration and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa, were found to be the best in spring and worst in autumn. DISCUSSGIN Reaction-time. The average 'reaction-time' in goats has been found to be higher than that observed in rams by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947]. This variation in 'reaction-time' might be due to the difference in species between goats and rams. As found in rams, there did not seem to exist any correlation between the sex-drive and sperm production. Summer which is the period of decline in sperm concentration shows lower average 'reaction-time' and in winter which is next best season for average sperm concentration records the highest 'reaction-time.'
188 SEMEN QUALITY OF GOATS [Vol. XXII, Part III, Volume of semen. No work has been done on seasonal influence on the volume of semen in goats, excepting that of Phillips et al., [1943] who used only two bucks in their experiment. The data, therefore, could not indicate clearly the seasonal trend. The results obtained in this study are not in agreement with the observations of Phillips and his co-workers. According to them highest average volume was obtained in fall but in this experiment highest average volume was found in summer. Spring was found to be the worst period by Phillips et al., for semen volume whereas in this experiment the lowest semen volume was observed in winter. Initial motility. Results obatined in the present experiment on seasonal influence on motility of spermatozoa is in general agreement with those found in rams by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947]. But they differ from the findings of Phillips and his co-workers [1943] in goats who obtained highest average initial motility in fall and lowest in winter. In this experiment spring which showed highest initial motility was also found to be the best season for sperm concentration. Autumn was found to be the worst season for initial motility as well as for sperm concentration. Initial motility which has been estimated in this experiment by direct microscopical examination is the most empirical method of determining motility. It is dependent not only on sperm concentration but also on abnormal spermatozoa as found in some of the individual goats. Further more, cold air tempe- rature as obtained in winter decreases the initial motility. As between winter and summer there was no significant variation in sperm concentration and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa, the low initial motility in winter might be due to cold environmental temperature. HydrogenSeptember 1952] D. D. SHUKLA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 189 Total number of spermatozoa. The result of analysis of data on total number of spermatozoa showed that it was lowest in autumn and highest in spring. This result agrees with that obtained in rams by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947] but is contrary to the findings of Phillips et al., [1943] who obtained highest average total number of spermatozoa in summer and lowest in spring. The difference in our result from that of Phillips et al., might be due to difference in climate of the two places or due to limited number of data on which the results of Phillips and his collaborators were based. Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. Results obtained on seasonal variation of the occurrences of abnormal spermatozoa are similar to those reported in rams by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947]. In summer and autumn the tailless spermatozoa and in winter the bent tail spermatozoa were more in the ejaculates. The bent tails have been indentified by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1949] as immature forms of spermatozoa. So it seems that in winter, when the rate of spermatogenesis was higher than in autumn and summer, more of these immature spermatozoa were carried into the male reproductive tract before they came to ampullae for ejectment. During autumn and summer, when the semen quality was found to be poorer, the tailless spermatozoa were found more in number and this might be due to high environmental temperature. SUMMARY Seasonal variation in 'reaction-time' and semen characteristics of eight goats were studied for two consecutive years. Highly significant variations were observed among goats in 'reaction-time' and in all the characteristics of semen studied except its pH which varied only signi- ficantly. 'Reaction-time' in summer was found to be significantly less than in the other seasons. 'Reaction-time' was found to be independent of sperm production. Between years highly significant variations were found in 'reaction-time' pH'. of semen and total number of spermatozoa. Between seasons highly significant variations were found in initial motility sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa and significant variations in 'reaction-time', volume of semen and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. The semen quality was found to be poorer in autumn and richer in spring. Between months within season highly significant variations were found in sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa and significant variation in initial motility. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to Mr. A. Roy, Statistician, Indian Council of Agricultural Research for his guidance in the Statistical analysis of data presented in this paper. They are also grateful to Dr. D. P. Mukherjee of Animal Gonetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for many helpful criticism and assistance. 5
190 SEMEN QUALITY OF GOATS [Vol. XXII, Part III, REFERENCES Erb, R.E. Andrews, F.N. and Hilton, J. H. (1942). J. Dairy Sci. 25, 815 McKenzie, F. F. and Berliner, V. (1937). Res. Bull. Mo. Agri. Expt.Sta. 265 Mukherjee, D. P. and Bhattacharya, P. (1947). (Abst. Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong. Part 3 : 215) In Press Mukherjee, D. P. and Bhattacharya, P. (1949). Proc. Zool. Soc. Beng. 2, 149 Phillips, R. W., Schott, R. G., Eaton, O. N. and Simmons, V. L. (1943) Corn. Vet. 33(3), 227 Shukla, D. D. and Bhattacharya, P. (1947). (Abst. Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong. Part 3) In Press
SEASONAL VARIATION IN HAEMOGLOBIN AND CELL. VOLUME CONTENTS IN RAMS AND GOATS By D. P. MUKHERJEE and P. BHATTACHARYA, Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 5 January 1952) (With two text.figures) MUKHERJEE and Bhattacharya [1947] have shown that there exists a seasonal variation in semen qualities and haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood in bulls. Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947 and 1948] have also observed seasonal trend in the semen quality of rams and goats. The present study was undertaken to determine if the two blood constituents, viz., haemoglobin and cell volume, in sheep and goat follow a seasonal trend as in bulls, and if so, how far this trend follows the seasonal changes in the semen of these species of animals as reported by Shukla and Bhattacharya. MATERIAL AND METHODS Blood samples were drawn from the jugular vein once a fortnight from each of the 9 rams and 8 male goats for determining the haemoglobin and cell volume contents. Haemoglobin was determined by the method of New Comer [1923] and cell volume by that of Napier and Das Gupta [1941]. During the entire experi- mental period the animals were kept under uniform nutritional and managerial conditions as have already been reported by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1947]. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Month to month variations in haemoglobin and cell volume in the blood samples of rams and goats are shown in Table I. TABLE I Monthly variation in average haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood in ram and goats Months Bams Goats Hb. gram per 100 c.c. of blood C. V. Per cent Hb. gram per 100 c.c. of blood C. V. Per cent January 7.77±0.27 34.83±1.38 6.79±0.20 31.67±l.29 February 7.35±0.23 34.62±0.71 6.63±0.66 31.74±l.30 March 7.91±0.23 34.12±0.93 7.09±0.13 31.01±0.57 191
192 SEASONAL VARIATION IN RAMS AND GOATS [Vol. XXII, Part III, TABLE ISeptember, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 193 For haemoglobin, the month of May was the best in both the species. Although the average air temperature was high (92.7°F.) during this month, the relative humidity was almost the lowest and rainfall negligible. Data collected under Tables I and II are graphically represented in Fig. 1 and (Fig. 2). It will be seen from the figures that with the increase in the air temperature, humidity and rainfall there was a concomitant decrease in the haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood in both rams and goats. The trend of variation in the two blood constituents due to external factors was almost similar to that of bulls as reported previously. The data summarised in Table I were subjected to analysis of variance and the results of analysis are presented in Table III. TABLE III Summary of the analysis of variance of blood characteristics of rams and goats Factors analysed for Variance Source of Variation Between Rams or between Goats Between seasons Between Months within season Percentage of Hb. ** ** ** 194 SEASONAL VARIATION IN RAMS AND GOATS [Vol. XXII, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Monthly variation in average haemoglobin and cell. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Monthly variation average temperature humidity and rainfall.
September, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 195 two blood constituents, critical difference (C. D.) at five per cent level between seasons was worked out and the results are presented in Table IV. TABLE IV. Critical difference at five per cent level of haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood in rams and goats in different seasons Value of C.D. Average of seasons arranged in ascending order Percentage of Hb. in blood of rams 0.24 Autumn Winter Summer Spring (6.92) (7.71) (7.72) (7.74) Percentage of Hb. in blood of goats 0.28 Autumn Winter Summer Spring (6.25) (6.60) (6.69) (6.92) Percentage of C. V. in blood of rams 1.22 Autumn Summer Spring Winter (32.96) (33.96) (34.21) (35.07) Percentage of C. V. in blood of goats 0.92 Autumn Summer Winter Spring (27-87) (29.78) (30.58) (31.23) In the table, seasons under the same bar did not vary significantly. It is seen from the table that the blood samples were poorest with regard to the two charac- teristics in autumn. In spring, the two blood constituents of goats and haemoglobin contents in rams were highest. Although, the percentage of cell volume in the blood of rams was highest in winter it did not differ significantly from that in spring. Table V shows variation in average air temperature, humidity in different seasons. TABLE V Variation in average air temperature, humidity and rainfall in different seasons during the year 1946-47 Autumn Winter Spring Summer Average air temperature (°F.) 88.43 63.03 75.40 90.60 Average humidity (in per cent) 69.00 65.66 45.33 54.00 Average rainfall (in inches) 5.09 0.52 0.57 7.38
196 SEASONAL VARIATION IN RAMS AND GOATS [Vol. XXII, Part III, Spring was characterised by a moderate air temperature and lowest humidity and rainfall, whereas, autumn had a very high air temperature with highest humidity and high rainfall (Table V). Data regarding sperm concentration per c.c. of semen and total number of spermatozoa per ejaculate in different seasons, as obtained by Shukla and Bhatta- charya [1948] are given in Table VI. It is evident from the table that like the blood constituents, the sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa were also lowest in autumn and highest in spring in both the species. TABLE VI *Seasonal variation in sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa in rams, goats during the year 1946-47 Rams Goats Sperm Concentration per c.c. of semen (in millions) Total number of spermatozoa (in millions) Sperm con- centration per c.c. of semen Total number of spermatozoa Autumn 1919 1221 1950 1456 Winter 2752 1696 2968 1713 Spring 2814 1850 3525 2234 Summer 2362 1627 2615 1878 *Data obtained through the courtesy of Mr. D. D. Shukla and Dr. P. Bhattacharya The results presented above show that the trend of variation in the two blood constituents and semen characteristics during different seasons in rams and goats were parallel. Furthermore, the trend of seasonal variation in the two blood constituents were the same as that reported in bulls by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947]. Thus, it appears that the effect of season upon the blood and semen quality was similar in bulls, rams, and goats. In these species of farm animals, high air temperature associated with high humidity and rainfall as found in autumn brought about a deterioration in the semen and blood characteristics studied. In spring, when the atmospheric temperature was moderate with low humidity and scanty rainfall, the semen qualities improved and the blood also became richer in haemoglobin and cell volume. It seems, therefore, that the mechanisms by which air tempera- ture, humidity, and rainfall affect reproductive function and blood constituents in bulls, also come into play in rams and goats.
September, 1952] D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 197 SUMMARY Seasonal variation in haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood from 9 rams and 8 male goats were studied for one year. Haemoglobin and cell volume contents of blood were highly variable among animals and among seasons. In both rams and goats haemoglobin content was found to be highly variable between months within seasons. Cell volume of blood in goats was found to vary significantly between months within season but it was not so in case of rams. It was found that in these animals, the seasonal trends in semen attributes and blood constituents were similar. The quality of semen and blood was found to be superior in spring, i.e., from February to April and inferior in Autumn, i.e., from August to October. REFERENCES Napier, L. E. and Das Gupta, C. R. (1941). Haemotological Technique. Thacker, Spink & Co., Calcutta New Comer, H. S. (1923). J. Biol. Chem. 56, 569 Shukla, D. D. and Bhattacharya, P. (1947). (Abst. Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong. Part 3, 215-216.) In press Shukla, D. D. and Bhattacharya, P. (1948). (Abst. Proc. Ind. Sci. Cong. Part 3, 24 & 25.) In press
AVIAN SALMONELLOSIS STUDIES ON SALMONELLA GALLINARUM By S. B. V. RAO, S. NARAYAN, D. R. RAMNANI and J. DAS, Poultry Research Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 14 September 1951) (With Plates XI to XVI) THE first outbreak of Salmonellosis due to a motile organism in a commercial flock of fowls in India was recorded in 1949 by Iyer et al. [1950]. Prior to this only once S.gallinarum was recovered from a single hen [Cooper and Naik, 1931]. However, duck Salmonellosis was reported in the Army Development Farms by Rao [1946]. Hitherto India had been free from S. pullorum/gallinarum infection in chickens though the disease is prevalent all over the world. An extensive survey initiated by this Section in 1945 revealed little evidence of its presence in most part of India. In the year 1950, three outbreaks of Salmonellosis occurred in widely separated areas in India. Two of these were due to paratyphoid organisms, while the third one was caused by S. gallinarum, the fowl typhoid organism. Fowl typhoid is a disease of young adults rather than of old birds and much less of baby chicks. Brookes and Rhodes [1923] found that certain strains of S. gallinarum produced in young chicks lesions indistinguishable from those of S. pullorum infection. In North-Central U. S. A. the disease mainly affects young adults and rarely chicks [Bushnell, 1948]. In England it is most common in adults but has also been recorded in baby chicks [Menzies, 1947]. In South Africa the disease is erratic, attacking exclusively one breed on a farm or only chicks, and in others adults [Coles, 1948]. In Hawaii, sporadic outbreaks of acute form in chicks and chronic form in adults are reported [Fitzgerald, 1947]. In Australia adult mortality due to S. gallinarum is unknown [Leynen, 1939]. Beudette [1925], and Komarov [1932] isolated S. gallinarum from the yolks of chicks and ovaries of the adult hens. This made them believe that contact infection might result between mature birds and carriers, and that the infection might be passed through the eggs. Beach and Davis [1927] concluded that trans- mission through the egg was possible in the light of their studies on S. gallinarum in baby chicks and the ovarian lesions in adults, the latter being indistinguishable from those caused by S. pullorum. Egg transmission studies were made by Simms [1945], the organism being isolated from yolks of fertile eggs, dead embryos, ailing baby chicks and from the ovaries of reactor hens. S. gallinarum closely resembles S. pullorum and it is difficult to differentiate them. Van Heelsbergen [1929], Manninger [1930], Miessner [1930], Haupt [1930], Wagner [1934] and other European workers have considered the two organisms identical. Smith [1915] and Smith and Ten Brock [1915] worked exhaustively on 199 7
200 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA GALLINARUM [Vol. XXII, Part III, the two organisms and, while recognising their similarity as regards their antigenic structure, noted the difference in the carbohydrate fermentation, such as gas produc- tion by S. pullorum and fermentation of maltose by S. gallinarum. Hadley et al. [1917] reported infection in adult fowl due to non-gas producing type of pullorum. The gas producing type has come to be known as S. pullorum 'A' and non-gas producing type as S. pullorum 'B' Muslow [1919] found that certain strains of S. pullorum fermented maltose and hence suggested dulcitol as a better differen- tiating sugar. Hendrickson [1927] concurred with Muslow in using serum water as a basic medium for sugars. He attributed Maltose fermentation by S. pullorum to the materials and methods employed for the cultivation of the organism and suggested peptone water instead. He considered S. gallinarum as maltose, dulcite and dextrain positive. Van Roekel [1937] isolated strains of S. pullorum which fermented maltose within a few hours. Hinshaw [1941] showed by fermentation of carbohydrates that there were several sub-species in S. pullorum and S. gallinarum groups, like S. pullorum intermediate, type 'A', which produced acid and gas in maltose, dulcite and arabinose, and S. pullorum intermediate 'B' which produced acid only in maltose, dulcite and arabinose, but none of the two fermented xylose in addition, like S. gallinarum. Experimental work Epidemiology. In the beginning of 1950 an acute outbreak of fowl typhoid occurred in a large poultry farm. First the adults and later the baby chicks were affected perhaps in consequence of hatching from the carriers. This made a study of its various aspects possible for the first time in India. The disease spread rapidly into the majority of the breeding pens. The birds in full lay were found droopy ruffle feathered, off feed and reluctant to move. Some had matted fluff due to greenish diarrhoea which developed in birds that lingered on for a few days. The temperature was 1° to 3° F. above normal, comb and wattles became cyanotic and death supervened after a couple of days of ailment (Plate XI. fig. 1.) The early cases were peracute for the first two weeks and later the rate of mortality decreased and the coarse also became protracted, the symptoms being- pallor of the comb and wattels and profuse green diarrhoea. Pending diagnosis, the spread of the disease was checked by depopulation of the visibly affected birds and sanitation. The probability of food poisoning was eliminated by biological and cultural tests. Post-mortem findings. Over a hundred birds were autopsied. No special lesions were noticed in peracute cases and the blood was negative under the micros- cope for organisms. In cases of delayed mortality a common though not constant lesions was a linear band of haemorrhage varying from 2 to 3 m.m. in width n the sub-mucosa of the proventriculus near the gizzard-end. Occasionally there were necrotic ulcers in the horny epithelium of the gizzard. Liver was enlarged and friable containing numerous yellow or grey necrotic foci, almost similar to the lesion seen in diffuse lymphomatosis. Pericardium showed serofibrinous adhesion and in the heart wall large necrotic foci as big as the seeds of garden peas were observed. The spleen was enlarged being more than thrice the normal size with numerous small areas of necrosis, or at times studied with multiple nodules. Acute cases showed a severe haemorrhagic follicular enteritis, while in more prolonged cases circular
Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXII, Part III ] PLATE XI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A peracute case of Fowl typhoid.
PLATE XII [Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXII, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Liver, gizzard, proventricular and heart lesions in adult fowl. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Lung and heart lesions in baby chicks.
Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXII, Part III ] PLATE XIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Rabbit septicaemic lesions on heart, stomach and intestines.
PLATE XIV [Indian J. vet. Sci, VOL. XXII, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Necrotic lesions of intestines, liancer haemorrhage in proventriculus, enlarged spleen, and follicular enteritis in the adult fowl.
September, 1952]. S. B. V. RAO, S. NARAYANAN, D. R. RAMANI AND J. DAS 201 ulcers were observed in the affected portions particularly near the terminal part of the intestines. The gall bladder was usually distended with very dark green bile and the same was noticed in the fluid evacuations. About the third week, involve- ment of the ovaries were noticed in a few cases. Most of the ova were healthy but one or two bluish or greenish angular ova could be noticed on minute examina- tion. (Plate XII, fig. 2 and Plate XIV, fig. 5.) After the cessation of mortality, cases of ruptured liver and yolk peritonitis were often seen in the post-mortems for over six months as a sequel to the disease, Such livers presented a mass of cicatrices of healed lesions with chalky deposits. After a removal of the reactors, from survivors of the flock, cases of yolk peritonitis decreased, but those of ruptured livers persisted. The liver cultures were however negative for Salmonella. Histopathology. The average blood picture of adults in peracute cases showed the following counts, Erythrocytes 2,300,000 per c.mm. Leucocytes 138,000 202 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA GALLINARUM [Vol. XXII, Part III, were no characteristic symptoms or lesions, though the organism could be regularly recovered from the liver and heart blood. When the course was prolonged, the chicks were found to huddle around the hover, while a few isolated themselves showing marked dyspnoea and droopiness. Diarrhoea was not always present in chicks less than a week old, but older ones had greyish fluid evacuations and pasting of the vent. In acute cases no lesions were seen, but in more protracted ones the liver showed multiple pin-point haemorrhages, green and yellow stripes of discolouration, or miliary necrotic foci in varying degree. Unabsorbed yolk with a greenish sheen, lesions of greyish white necrotic nodules on heart wall and distortion of its shape were also observed. In some, stripes of petichiae in the proventriculus at the gizzard-end, lung lesions ranging from a slight congestion to pneumonia and rare lesions of irregular necrosis, or scattered white nodules were found. Experimental infection assumed a peracute form and hence lesions were not observed. (Plate XII, fig. 3.) Experiments with chronic carriers of Salmonella gallinarum Twenty eight reactors were reared in isolation for four months for experimental observation. When autopsied there were four 'no lesion' cases, which were negative for cultural tests as well. Among the rest there were six (one cock and five hens) whose end titres ranged from 1 to 20 to 1 to 80. The remaining birds were all showing high titres up to 5,180 and were culturally positive. The cock bird showed healed heart and liver lesions, but was culturally negative. Severe chronic ovarian lesions (Plates XV and XVI, figs. 6 and 7) were found in the last group, while the low reacting hens showed but one or two aberrated ova with abnormal yolk contents. Organism were however regularly recovered from them. Summary of lesions in chronic carriers. The lesions which [were sequel to ovarian dysfunction were typical of Salpingitis, as described by Bunyea [1926] caused by S. pullorum, and were seen in fowl typhoid as well. Egg production of Reactors. The average egg production of the farm flock was over 60 per cent during February, March, April and May, but for the same period the reactors averaged 19.5 per cent during the first month but later the production dwindled down to zero in the course of a further three months, when they were des- troyed for examination. Incidence of the disease in hatches from carrier eggs. A pen of 24 reactor hens were mated to a reactor cock and 48 eggs from this pen were collected. The shells were disinfected in 5 per cent warm solution of dettol and dried, and placed in a small incubator and the resulting hatch was brooded in isolation. The results of the incubation were as follows:Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXII, Part III ] PLATE XV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. Mis-shapen ova cystic ovary.
PLATE XVI [Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXII, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7. Chronic yolk peritonitis and cystic ovary.
September, 1952] S. B. V. RAO, S. NARAYANAN, D. R. RAMANI AND J. DAS 203 Four out of the six chicks were seropositive after 12 days but heart blood and liver cultures were sterile. The organism was recovered from the livers of the two chicks which were seronegative. BACTERIOLOGY Isolation of the organism from the heart blood and liver. The organism was isolated from acute cases from the heart blood and livers, of chicks and adults dying after a brief period of illness. The colonies, on plain agar appeared as fine granular pin-point in 24 hours and developed into smooth glistening translucent hemispheres in 48 hours of incubation, and later they varied from round to angular. The heart blood usually yielded a pure culture, while liver cultures sometimes required sieving through brilliant green broth and plating on to Macconkey media. Isolation from the ovaries of the reactors. In cases of abnormal ovum, culture was obtained by searing the ovisac puncturing and pipetting out the whole con- tents into brilliant green broth, about 200 c.c. per ovum, and incubating for 48 hours and then plating on to Macconkey for recovery of the organism. Where lesions were not well marked and the ovary was found arrested in its growth, the bunch of the immature ova was tritutated and transferred to a large quantity of tetrathionate broth from 200 to 500 c.c. depending, upon the size of the bunch and incubated for 24 to 48 hours before recovery by plating on to Macconkey. By these two methods 19 out of 24 ovaries of reactors yielded positive cultures. Isolation of the organism from eggs of the Reactors. Thirty-six eggs from a pen exculsively of carriers were cultured in five batches. The eggs were opened after washing in 5 per cent dettol, dipping in alcohol, flaming lightly, and opening into a sterile petri dish. The whole yolk was spooned out into 200 c.c. of broth, and incubated for 48 hours, while the white was discarded. The organism was recovered on Macconkey plate. 13 out of the 36 eggs thus cultured gave positive results which proves that over 36 per cent of the eggs laid by carriers might be infected. Isolation from the intestines of baby chicks and adults. Materials from the duode- num of baby chicks with white diarrhoea, and from adults showing enteritis were incubated in separate isolation experiments in terathionate broth to which brilliant green in 1 to 50,000 proportion had been added. After 48 hours of incubation the organism was recovered on Macconkey media in the usual way, but several sievings were continued through the special media before pure culture was obtained. Indentification of S. gallinarum. In all cases of isolation on Macconkey plates fine white colonies were picked up and. sown on agar slants serially. Those colonies which yielded non-motile gram negative slender rods were tested for their antigenic specificity by the rapid serum method of Stafseth and Carbutt [1940] before sub- mitting to principal sugar tests for confirmation. Pathogenicity. Rabbits and guinea pigs were killed in 48 hours by the sub- cutaneous route, evincing septicaemic lesions of an acute haemorrhagic type on heart, stomach, and intestines (Plate XIII, fig. 4). It proved fatal to pigeons after five days by the intramuscular route. The pigeon went down on both legs and was supporting itself on its out-spread wings on the fourth day. The post-mortem findings were, large areas of necrosis in the pectoral muscles at the site of inoculation
204 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA GALLINARUM [Vol. XXII, Part III, and acute arthritis of wing and limb joints. Both white and black rats were resis- tant. A mortality of 50 per cent was observed in adult fowls when infected by intra-muscular route, birds succumbing from 7 to 11 days. Three healthy bird kept successively in the same cage where previously sick birds had been confined became sero-positive in 11 to 15 days but the infection was sub-clinical. 18 hour broth culture of the organism in dilution corresponding to Brown's standard opacity tube 1, in 0.1 c.c. dose subcutaneously, proved cent per cent fatal in 3 to 5 days, to six one day old baby chicks. Oral dosing of the culture suspension in 0.5 c.c. dose was equally fatal in 5 to 8 days, in a day-old chick, with two survivors among the ten birds infected, which also became sero-positive after eleven days. Three incontact chicks with the above lot died of the disease in 7 to 10 days, organisms being recovered from-them. Oral dosing of the culture suspension described above, along with a 16 per cent sodium solution of sulphamezathine in drinking water at 0.2 per cent level of the active drug for one week in a lot of 20 day-old chicks failed to prevent mortality. 16 died within a week and two of the rest were sero-positive. Organism was re- covered from all the dead chicks. Morphology. The strain of the organism isolated from the adults produced typical disease in chicks and vice-verse. The two strains were identical as regards their behaviour on routine laboratory media. They exhibited the following characters :September, 1952] S. B. V. RAO, S. NARAYANAN, D. R. RAMANI AND J. DAS 205 Tube test using the antigen S.p.l7A (a standard Hull Que strain of Salmonella pullorum received through the courtesy of the Dominion Animal Pathologist, Canada) was positive to complete titre with the natural serum from the reacting bird, similarly both chick no. 586 and adult no. 399 antigens reacted to complete titre with the immune serum prepared from stock culture S.p. 17A. The same serum S.p.l7A absorbed with chick and adult antigens was found to be completely free of the homologous agglutinins, conversely the adult no. 399 serum absorbed with the homologous antigen failed to agglutinate S. p. 17A and chick antigens. Reciprocal absorption test using rabbit anti-serum prepared in the laboratory resulted in com- plete absorption of agglutinins for the no. 399 organism as well as the standard stock pullorum organism. DISCUSSION The course and Post-mortem lesions.206 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA GALLINARUM [Vol. XXII, Part III, Both strains differ from the intermediate type 'B' of pullorum by the fermen- tation of xylose and dextrin and from intermediate type 'A' by the non-production of gas as well as fermentation of xylose and dextrin. Therefore the chick and adult strains are identical and belong to the same species S. gallinarum. (Table I.) TABLE I Carbohydrate fermentation reactions Sugars Standard pullorum organism (S.p. 17A) No. 586 Chick organisms No. 399 Adult organism Lactose September, 1952] S. B. V. RAO, S. NARAYANAN, D. R. RAMANI AND J. DAS 207 A virulent strain of the organism was isolated from eggs, baby-chicks and tissues of the adult fowl, and classified as S. gallinarnm. The outbreak was controlled and the disease was eradicated by blood testing of the stock. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT We gratefully acknowledge the helpful guidence of Mr. S. G. Iyer, Officer-in- Charge, Poultry Research Section at every stage of the work. REFERENCES Literature Beach, J. R. and Davis, D. E. (1927). Quoted by Barger, and Card, L. E. Disease of poultry (1947) 125. Bailliere, Tindell & Cox., London Beudette, F. R. (1925). J. A. V. M. A., 67, 741, Sixth Edition. Billiere, Tindell & Cox, London Bunyea, H. (1926). J. A. V. M. A., 70, 645 Bushnell, L. D. ( ). Diseases of poultry by Biester, H. E. and Schwarte, L. H. Second edition (1948) IOWA State College Press, Ames, IOWA. 279-287 Coles, J. D. W. ( ). Quoted by Blount, W. P. Diseases of poultry (1947), p. 481, Bailliere Tindell & Cox, London Cooper, H. and Naik, R. N. (1931). Indian J. vet. Sci. I, 99 Fitzerald, J. C. ( ). Quoted by Blount, W. P. Diseases of poultry (1947) p. 512, Baillier Tindell & Cox, London Hadley et al. (1917). Haupt, H. (1930). Quoted by Bushnell, L. D. Hendrickson, J. M. (1927) Hinshaw, W. R. (1941) Quoted by Bushnell, L. D., J. A. V. M. A., 70, 629 Hinshaw, W.R. and Taylor, T. J. (1933) J. A. V. M. A., 82, 645 Iyer, S. G., Rao, S. B. V. and Narayanan, S. (1950). Indian Poult. Gaz., 34, 12 Klein, E. (1889). Quoted by Bushnell, L. D. Komarov, A. (1927). Vet. Rec., 12, 1455 Leynen (1939). International Review of Poult. Sci. XI Lucet, A. (1891). Manninger, R. (1929) Quoted by Bushnell, L. D.Ibid Menzies, D. W. Quoted by Blount, W. P. Diseases of poultry (1947). p. 415, Bailliero, Tindell & Cox, London Miessner, H. (1930). Moore, B. A. (1895) Quoted by Busnnell, L. D. Mulsow, A. W. (1919). Jour. Inf. Dis., 25, 135 Pfeiler, W. (1920). Pfeiler, W. & Roepke, W. (1917). Quoted by Bushnell, L. D. Roberts, E., Severens. J. M. and Card, L. E. (1939, a). Proc. of the VII World Poultry Congress, Cleveland, 431 8
208 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA GALLINARUM [Vol. XXII, Part III Rao, S. B. V. (1946). Indian vet. J., 22, 279 Rao, S. B. V. (1950). Under publication Severens, J. M., Roberts, E. and Card, L. E. (1942). Poult. Sci., 21, 478 Simms, B. T. (1946, a). Quoted by Bushnell, L. D. Smith, Th. (1915). J. med. Res.; 31, 547 Smith, Th. and Ten Broek, C. (1915). J. med. Res., 51, 503 Stafseth, H. J. and Corbutt, A. C. (1940). Amr. J. vet. Res., 1, 76 Van Heels Bergen (1929). Van Roekel, H. (1937). Van Straaten and Te Hennepee Quoted by Bushnell, L. D. (1918). Younie (1941). Canada J. Comp. Med., 5, 164
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION AND YEARLY AND SEASONAL INCIDENCE OF MAIN CONTAGIOUS DIS- EASES IN THE MADHYA PRADESH By N. C. KAUSHASH, M.R.C.V.S., Deputy Director of Veterinary Services (Diseases), Madhya Pradesh (Received for Publication on 21 December 1951) (With four text-figures) ALL the available records relating to the main contagious diseases in Madhya Pradesh, with the exception of merged states for which no records could be had prior to 1950, were collected for the fifteen, year period from 1936 to 1950 and ana- lysed, and the yearly, seasonal, divisional and regional incidences as per rainfall and agricultural tracts respectively have been worked out. YEARLY INCIDENCE The total number of outbreaks in the different districts of the state were added up annually for the period mentioned above and are presented in tabular and graph forms below:210 MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES [Vol. XXII, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. l a. Yearly incidence. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1b. Yearly incidence.
September, 1952] N. C. KAUSHASH 211 SEASONAL INCIDENCE The outbreaks of all the diseases were compounded monthwise to determine the seasonal incidence :212 MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES [Vol. XXII, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2a. Seasonal Distribution. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2b. Seasonal Distribution.
September, 1952] N. C. KAUSHASH 213 1. Rinderpest214 MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES [Vol XXII, part III, Both rinderpest and foot and mouth diseases are more common in Chhattis. garh division due probably to it being a rice growing calcium deficient area where cattle do not thrive thus leading to regular import of cattle from outside for replace- ment with consequently more chance of dissemination of infection, and, also, in part, to the greater relative density of cattle population in the division. Haemorrha. gic septicaemia occurs more in Berar where the rainfall is on the whole low (32 in.September, 1952] N. C. KAUSHASH 215 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Regional distribution of rainfall in the Madhya Pradesh (excluding merged states).
216 MAIN CONTAGIOUS DISEASES [Vol. XXII, part III, TABLE V Incidence of diseases according to Agricultural zones OUTBREAKS Agricultural zones Rinderpost Haemorrhagic septicaemia Blackquarter Anthrax Foot and Mouth Per 10,000 bovines Per 100 Sq. miles Per 10,000 bovines Per 100 Sq. miles Per 10,000 bovines Per 100 Sq. miles Per 10,000 bovines Per- 100 Sq. miles Per 10,000 bovines Per 100 Sq. miles 1. Cotton tract (7 Districts). 10.4 14.0 13.1 16.1 5.0 6.3 1.2 1.6 47.0 59.0 2. Wheat tract (6 Districts). 12.2 18.0 7.5 11.07 7.1 10.5 0.8 1.2 32.6 47.9 3. Rice tract (6 Districts). 15.7 22.8 6.9 10.0 0.76 1.1 1.5 2.2 44.2 04.5 Rinderpest and anthrax are more common in the rice tract, haemorrhagic septicaemia in the cotton tract, blackquarter in the wheat tract, and foot and mouth disease in the cotton and rice tracts. The incidence of blackquartcr is very low in the rice tract. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT I wish to acknowledge the help rendered by Shri S. P. Kaduskar, Laboratory Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, in collection of information and compilation of tables, etc.
AN IMPROVED SALMONELLA ANTIGEN FOR THE RAPID WHOLE BLOOD AGGLUTINATION TEST By S. B. V. Rao, Poultry Research Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 14 September 1951) THE occurrence of Salmonella pullorum/gallinarum, S. aertrycke, and certain members of other paratyphoid groups in commercial poultry flocks in widely separated areas since 1949 for the first time in this country, has created a serious hazard to the growing poultry industry, and a potential menace to public health, and has made the study [Rao et al., 1950] of the various aspects of the disease possible and its control imperative. Fifty-two strains of Salmonella pathogenic to man have been so far isolated- in the U. S. A. from dried eggs, chickens and turkeys [Soloway et al., 1947]. Even S. pullorum, which was considered host-specific to chickens only, has been incri- minated in several cases of human food poisoning. [Mitchell, Garlock and Brokkahn, 1946 and Judefind, 1947.] The control plans of Salmonella pullorum/gallinarum primarily aim at the elimination of the infected bird by any one of the accepted blood test methods, viz. the slow tube, the rapid serum, or the whole blood agglutination test. On the contrary, paratyphoid (motile) organism, usually not being yolk borne, does not seem to create such a serious 'carrier' problem as its spread is by shell contamination or by penetration of the shell during incubation [Schalm, 1937, and Wilson, 1944]. The yolk-borne nature of S. typhimurium infection recorded by Wilson [1949] is considered as exceptional and rare, the motile organism as a rule being localized in the intestine and occasionally in the gall bladder [Buxton and Gordon, 1947]. The egg-shells become infected by contaminated faeces. Blood tests are found useless as agglutinin production by the carrier birds is erratic and therefore unreliable for diagnostic purpose. The disease, however, is controlled for all practical purposes by incubator fumigation and farm sanitation [Buxton, 1948]. In rare cases where direct yolk transmission is proved it would be necessary to test each bird with '0' and 'H' antigen from the specific organism by the slow tube method, combined with incubator fumigation [Dobson, 1950]. Such special tests are not carried out as a routine by most laboratories because of the complexities of the antigenic structure involved and the difficulty of obtaining a satisfactory antigen which will produce. reliable agglutination results [Van Roekel, 1950]. As for S. pullorum/gallinarum infection, whole blood rapid plate agglutination test or simply 'spot test' is perhaps the only method capable of easy application in the field, and hence much work has been done to improve the specificity and the keeping qualities of the antigen. For instance, an alcoholised antigen, issued by the Poultry Diagnosis Laboratory Department, "Weybridge, has been prepared from 217 10
218 IMPROVED salmonella antigen, ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part III a single strain of S. pullorum containing the full complement of XII2 factor, variants being few in the prevailing strains examined in England. An antigen, containing three standard and two yonie (variants) strains, is used in Canada as the prevalence of the three components of XII factor [Edwards and Burner, 1946] and their quan- titative Variants especially. of XII2 amongst the strain's isolated has been recognised [Gwatkin, 1945 and Gwatkin and Bond; 1945]. Lately, an effort is being made to incorporate a strain or strains of S. pullorum containing both XII2 and XII3 antigenic components [Van Roekal, 1950]. Experimental work has also been directed to increase the agglutinability and secure a higher yield of the organism on special media like the Veal infusion agar enriched with glycerine and sulphur [Macdonald 'K' antigen, 1946], or glycerine and sodium-thiosulphate as used by Weybridge Poultry Department Laboratories [Dobson, 1950]. A review of literature since Bunyea, Hall and Dorset [1929] applied the whole blood test for detection of pullorum carriers, reveals a diversity of views both as regards the. method and accuracy though the trend of research has been towards increasing the efficiency by improving the specificity, agglutinability and keeping qualities of the antigen. Edwards and Hull [1929] have reported that even slide serum tests were not satisfactory in birds whose end titres were lower than 1 to 80. In most laboratories the diagnostic titre is 1 to 40; and in some 1 to 20 for the hen and 1 to 10 for the cock [Gaiger and Davis, 1946]. Lubbehosen and Beach [1935] and Hinshaw, Harr and Niemeyer [1940] con- sidered the test was not efficient enough to be used exclusively, while Stafseth [1938], Reid [1938] Barger and Torry [1933] and Winter [1939] recorded goods correlation between the tube and plate tests. Linn, Leask, Gunderson and Slack [1944] concluded that the routine standard 'spot' antigen then in vogue in the U. S. A. would detect titres as low as 1 to 10 in the majority of cases and was superior to Macdonald's 'K' antigen [1941], grown on special media for detecting low titre birds. Gordon [1947] has recorded very close agreement between the whole blood spot and the tube tests with the alcoholic antigen now in use in England. Diverse views and methods of the workers show that antigens vary in sensitivity; yet when a suitable one is used the results closely agree with the tube tests. To obtain further information on the subject it was found necessary to compare and select, from the available information, the one that could make finer distinctions in the reading of doubtful reactions, and adapt it for use so that there might be unifor- mity in testing birds all over this country. EXPERIMENTAL Material and Methods. As a preliminary work the following antigens were selected for comparison with the one locally produced, herein called Experimental No. 3. 1. Antigen of Schaffer et al. [1931]. Culture media. Beef infusion agar pH 7.2 incubated for 72 hours at 37.5°C. Suspending fluid 1 per cent formaline (0.4 per cent actual formalde- hyde in 0.85 per cent sodium chloride solution) Dye used. Crystal violet 1 per cent solution, 3 c.c. per 100 c.c. of antigen.
September, 1952] S. B. V. RAO, S. NARAYANAN, D. R. RAMNANI AND J. DAS 219 2. Antigen of Coburn and Stafseth [1931]. Culture media. Beef and chicken infusion agar pH. 7.2 incubated for 72 hours at 37.5° C. Suspending fluid220 IMPROVED salmonella antigen, ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part III serum by venous puncture. These had been picked up previously from the flock in the fourth monthly test by the same antigen which was then under trial. TABLE I End titre of serum of birds which were exclusively positive to the experimental antigen No. 3 No. of birds 1168 1653 237 68 7082 458 End titre 1:60 1:47 1:40 1:16 1:32 1:20 Comparison by the standard tube agglutination was made as a check by a single tube of 1 to 80 dilution in all cases (Table I) and also in different lower dilutions in the above cited special cases of six birds. The close agreement in low dilutions with the tube tests indicates the high antigenic specificity of the experimental antigen No. 3. The results were further checked by autopsy of the reactors and cultural tests, and these were again found to be mostly in agreement with the tube tests with the exception of four birds in which there were no discernable lesions and the cultural tests also proved negative. The experimental antigen No. 3 when stored in darkness at 60° F. under re- frigeration was found to be efficient up to 145 days. The rapidity of agglutination was influenced by temperature up to 40° C. beyond which it did not hasten the reactions. Below 20° C. the agglutination was retarded. Mechanical features of the test Glass slides 2 in. x 3 in. were used in place of glass plates as these could be easily picked up after stirring, and rocked a few times to hasten reaction. Finely drawn pipettes were employed for the delivery of a droplet of. antigen to ensure constancy in measurements. A thin glass rod was used to wipe off a constant quantity of blood from the snipped end of a serration of a comb. The blood droplet was about half the size of the antigen drop. DISCUSSION The experimental antigen No. 3 proved to be more sensitive than the other two antigens, as it detected low titre birds with titres ranging from 1: 16 to 1: 60. These low titre ones have subsequently been confirmed to be infected, by post-mortem findings as well as by cultural tests. Following factors in the preparation of the antigen might have combinedly contributed towards its efficiency: (1). Special medium, which produces a higher yield of organism with greater antigenic specificity, (2). 12 per cent hypertonic saline Suspending fluid which hastens the flocculation, by reducing the electric potential of the antigen, (3). The final pH. of the antigen before use adjusted to 6.5 or 8.0 which makes it more agglutinable, and (4). Phenol and formaline used in low concentration of 0.125 per cent, as with.
September, 1952] S. B. V. RAO, S. NARAYANAN, D. R. RAMNANI AND J. DAS 221 TABLE II Recreations of Carrier fowls to the antigens, cultural tests, and autopsy lesions Serial num- ber Bird No. Antigen No. 1 Antigen No. 2 Exptl. antigen No. 3 Single tube test 1 to 80 End titre Ovarian culture Autopsy lesions 1 1147 + + + + + + + + + + Not put up + Sacculated leathery cystic ovary. 2 1445 + + + + + + + + 222 IMPROVED salmonella antigen, ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part II TABLE IISeptember, 1952] S. B. V. RAO, S. NARAYANAN, D. R. RAMNANI AND J. DAS 223 a concentration of 0.2 to 0.3 per cent and pH. adjusted to 8.0 or 8.2 the flocculent precipitate is prevented [Caseman George and Rettger, 1930]. The reaction graded No. 3 may be termed 'sandy' which is classified by some workers as non-specific, but in the opinion of the author is a result of weak agglutinin level in the blood, since the infection has been confirmed subsequently by post- mortem findings as well as cultural tests. Such a reaction has also been considered in an earlier work as indicating either an old quiescent infection or a very recent one by Linn, et al. [1944]. SUMMARY An improved antigen for Salmonella pullorum/gallinarum with a high antigenic specificity has been developed for use in the rapid whole blood agglutination plate test. It consists of a single strain of the organism colony selected from glucose glycerine agar plate, and grown on beef infusion agar containing sodium thiosulphate and glycerine, and suspended in 12 per cent sodium chloride solution, with 0.125 per cent formaline and 0.125 per cent phenol, killed and adjusted to a turbidity of 100 times Brown's opacity standard tube No. 1, and stained with addition of 0.03 per cent crystal violet and a final pH of 6.5 or 8.0 just before use. This antigen proved superior to the two earlier ones, by detecting, carrier birds particularly of low titres ranging from 1 to 16 to 1 to 60. The antigen has its qualities preserved up to 145 days under 60° F. refrigeration. ACKNOWLEDGMENT I am deeply indebted to Dr S. Datta, D.Sc, M.R.C.V.S., Director, Indian Veterinary Research Instisute for his continued interest and encouragement and to Mr S. G. Iyer, Officer-in-Charge, Poultry Research Section, for his helpful guidance. It is also a pleasure to express thanks to Mr D. R. Ramnani for his assitance. REFERENCES Barger, E.H. and Torry, J.P. (1933). J.A.V.M.A. 82. 84-92 Bergey, D.H. (1948). Manual of Determinative Bacteriology, Sixth edition. Bailliere, Tindal & Cox Bunyea, H., Hall, W.J. and Dorset, M. (1929). J.A.V.M.A. 75. 408-410 Buxton, A. (1948). Proceeding of the Eighth World Poultry Congress 619-603 Buxton, A. and Gordon, R.F. (1947). J. Hyg. (Cambs) 45: 265 as quoted by Buxton Coburn, D. R. & Stafseth, H.J. J.A.V.M.A. 79 : 241-243 Caseman, E.P. & George Valley (1930). J. Immunol 18. 353 Dobson (1950). Private communication Edwards, P.R. & Hull, F.E. (1929). Kontucky Ag. Ex. St. Res. Bull. 296 Edwards, P.R. and Brunner, D.W. (1946). Cornell Vet. 36. 318 Gaiger and Davis (1948). Vet. Pathy Bacty. Third Edition. 237 Gwatkin, R. (1945). Canada J. Comp. Med. 9. 183 Gwatkin, R and Bond, E. W. (1945). Canada. J. Pub. Hlth, 36. 160 Hinshaw, W.P., Harr, J.R. and Niemeyer, W.E. (1940). Cornell Vet. 30. 30-35 Judefind, T.F. (1947). J. Bact. 54. 667-668
224 IMPROVED salmonella antigen, ETC. [Vol. XXII, Part III Linn, R.H., Leask,. W.H., Gunderson, M.F. and Slack, J.M. (1944). Am. J. Vet, Res.5.159-163 Lubbehusen, R.E. & Beach, J.R. (1935). J.A.V.M.A. 86. 620-625 Mitchell, R.B., Garlock; F.C. and Brok-Khan (1946). J. Inf. Dis. 79. 7-62 Macdonald, A.D. (1941). Conference of N.L.P. Imp. Plna. June 17-20. Chicago. III Rep. by Anim. Husb. Div. Baius. Dept. Agric. 122-127 Macdonald, A.D. (1947). K. Antigen for the detection of Pullorum Dis. Rao, S.B.V., Narayanan, S., Ramnani, D.R. and Das, J. (1950). Avian Salmonellosis (Under publication) Reid Roger, D. (1938). J. Bact. 35. 62 Stafseth, H.J. (1938). Vet. Med. 33. 6-9 Schaffer, J.M., Macdonald, A.D., Hall, W.J. and Bunyea, H. (1931). J.A.V.M.A. 79. 236-240 Soloway, M., Vernon, H., Mc. Farlane, Spaulding, E.H., Cacillia, C. (1947). Amer J. P. Hlth. 37 (8) 971. Quoted by H.E. Coresline. Eighth World Poultry Congress (1948) 604 Schalm, O.W. (1937). J. Inf. Dis. 61. 208 Van Rokel (1950). Private communication Winter, A.R. (1939). Poult. Sci. 18. 26-30 Wilson, J.E. (1944). Vet. Rec. 56. 521 Wilson, J.E. (1947). Vet. J. 103. 101 Wilson, J.E. (1948). Vet. Rec. 60. 615 Wilson, J.E. (1949). Vet. J. 195. 403 Wilson, J.E. (1950). Vet. Rec. 31. 62 ...
CALOTROPIS-STANDARDISATION AND BIOLOGICAL ASSAY By V. RATHNASABAPATHY, B.V.Sc., and V. ISWARIAH, B.A., M.B.B.S., M.R.C.P. (Published from the Research Unit Indigenous Drugs, Department of Pharmacology, Madras Medical College, Madras) (Received for publication on 19 January 1952) (With Plates XVII to XX) CALOTROPIS GIGANTEA, commonly known by the following names in various Indian languages, arka (Sanskrit); madar (Hindi); akand (Bengali); erukku (Tamil); and jelledu (Telugu); has been dealt with in detail in most of the indigenous medical literature and is highly spoken of as a very good alterative and tonic, [Watt, 1893 and Chopra 1933]. A preliminary study made by the senior author and his colleagues on the various parts of the plant namely, the leaves, the flowers and the root bark, revealed that the leaf powder in small repeated doses exerted a tonic effect on the ruminants. Active principles were isolated from the leaves and the milky juice (madar juice) and they were found to be identical in their physiological activities, except that the one obtained from the latter was more potent. Both of them produced a sustained rise of blood pressure when given intravenously to anaesthetised dogs [Rathnasabapathy, Lakshman, Krishnaswamy and David, 1949]. Pitchandi in 1948, isolated the active principle of the madar juice in a pure crystalline form and proposed the formula C24 H36 09 provisionally and suggested the name 'Gigantin' to the substance thus obtained. The pharmacology of gigantin has been thoroughly investigated by the authors both on the amphibians and the mammals and its action on all the organs with special reference to the cardio-vascular system has been worked out in detail. It was shown that the drug, by a direct action on the musculature of the heart and blood vessels produces a persistent rise of blood pressure; the efficiency of the heart is increased in physiological doses and that the action on the heart is similar to that of digitalis [Rathnasabapathy, David and Iswariah 1951]. With all these beneficial actions of a good drug, gigantin has its disadvantages as a good pharmaceutical preparation. As it is insoluble in water it is unsuitable for easy parenteral administration and as the quantity obtained is not commensurate with the labour and cost involved in its preparation, it is uneconomical for manufac- ture on a large scale. It was therefore considered profitable to utilise the leaves of Calotropis gigantea, which have got active principles having the same physio- logical activity as gigantin, in the form of tincture after standardisation. The close resemblance of calotropis and digitalis in their biological activities, suggested that tincture calotropis can be assaved in the same manner as tincture digitalis. 225
226 CALOTROPIS-STANDARDISATION AND BIOLOGICAL ASSAY [Vol. XXII, Part III, METHODS Standardi ation. The first standard prepared by the authors consists of a mixture of ten different samples of the leaves of Calotropis gigantea, collected from the city of Madras and its neighbourhood, dried at the room temperature of about 28°C. for about ten days, powdered to pass through a No. 60 sieve, dried in an electric hot air oven between 55°C. and 60°C. for six hours, ampouled in sterile containers and stored in the frigidaire. The moisture content of the standard powder was determined and found to be 2.45 per cent. Unit. The unit of the first standard was defined as the acitvity contained in 0.1 gm. of the standard calotropis leaf powder prepared and kept in this laboratory, (The Department of Physiology, Madras Veterinary College, Madras.) Biological Assay. The standard is now available for any one to compare an unknown sample of leaf to see how far this sample differed in acitvity from that of the standard. Among the various methods of comparison available namely the frog, guinea pig and cat methods, the cat method as used for the Third International Digitalis Standard by the World Health Organisation (7) was tried in this laboratory and found to be very satisfactory. In this method, the mean of the lethal dose of the sample being tested for a series of cats, expressed per Kg. body-weight was compared with the mean obtained for the standard powder. In brief the procedure adopted was as follows :September, 1952] V. RATHNASABAPATY AND V. ISWARIAH, 227 TABLE I Cat Assay of Standard Tincture Calotropis serial number Date of experiment Description of cat. Weight in Kg. Initial B.P. mm. of Hg. Amount of Tr. in c.c. to arrest the heart Time taken for arrest of heart, in minutes Average per Kg. in c.c. Mean average Standard deviation 'd' Standard deviation of mean or standard error 1 29-11-50 F 2.15 90 27 27 12.56 13.48 228 CALOTROPIS-STANDARDISATION AND BIOLOGICAL ASSAY [Vol. XXII, Part III, The tincture was injected as a continuous flow from the burette at the rate of about 1 c.c. per minute until the heart stops beating as indicated by the blood pressure record falling to the zero line. The time was noted at the beginning when the injection was started and when the end point was reached by a stop watch. Similarly the quantity of solution which was necessary to kill the cat was measured from the burette. A typical graph in the cat assay is shown in Plate XVII. A total of 14 cats were used in the assay of standard and the mean of the results as calculated was 13.48±0.5619 (Table I). It is suggested that any sample to be tested should be treated in the same way and the mean of the results of not less than six cats should be determined for comparison with the standard. The potency of the sample being tested, expressed in relation to that of the standard preparation, is determined by dividing the figure for the average lethal dose of the standard preparation by the figure for the average lethal dose of the sample being tested. It may also be expressed in per cent of the standard by multi- plying the potency by hundred. Pharmacology of Tincture Calotropis. The actions of Tincture calotropis are very similar to that of gigantin. 0.05 to 0.1 c.c. per Kg. body-weight of the tincture produces a sustained rise of blood pressure when given intra-venously to anaesthetised dogs, even after sympatholysis by ergotoxine and paralysis of the vagal terminals by atropinisation (Plate XIX). The volume of the spleen decreased considerably corresponding to the rise of blood pressure. Myocardiogram experi- ments in mammals showed that the systolic level of the ventricles and the auricles were considerably increased with the diastole being normal or slightly deficient, consequently the output per beat must have been more (Plate XVIII). On respiration, the tincture decreases the rate but increses the depth (Plate XX). Fixation of the Dose. After repeated trials with varying doses of the tincture, it has been assessed that 0.3 c.c. per Kg. body-weight is a safe therapeutic oral dose for canines. 0.6 c.c. per Kg. body-weight is slightly toxic. Retching and emesis should be taken as the first sign of toxicity in the therapeutic administration of the drug. On an average 2 to 12 minims has been fixed as the dose for canines depending on the size and this repeated twice daily for about 20 days did not produce any toxic symptoms. DISCUSSION The introduction of standards in the form of dry stable preparation makes comparative methods possible, for every estimation of an unknown sample becomes a comparison with a standard to see how much stronger or how much weaker it is. Since the mixture of the leaf powder was made from different samples, its activity is presumed to be equal to the mean activity of the sample of calotropis. It is possible to establish an international standard from samples obtained from various parts of the world and this may be taken up soon after the therapeutical usefulness has been well established by clinical trials. There is no evidence that cats vary in sensitiveness to the drug at different times of the year and it is therefore unnecessary to make simultaneous tests of the unknown and the standard. A determination of the average lethal dose per Kg. cat
Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXII, Part III] PLATE XVII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Biological assay of Tr. calotropis on a cat. A record of the carotid blood pressure of a cat. 2.5 Kg. under chloralose anaesthesia. Respiration artificial. Tr. Calotropis 1 in 20 was injected through the femoral vein at the rate of about 1 c.c. per minute till the heart was completely arrested. Time marking.PLATE XVIII [ Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXII, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A record of the carotid blood pressure and myocardiogram of a dog, 4 Kg. under paraldehyde anaesthesia, after atropinisation. Note the persistent rise in blood pressure when 0.4 c.c. of Tr. Calotropis was given intravenously. The systolic levels of the heart beats are increased whereas the diastole is normal. Up-strokes are systole. L. A.Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL, XXII, Part III ] PLATE XIX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A record of the carotid blood pressure of a dog 5 Kg. under paraldehyde anaesthesia after severing the vagi and atropinisation. Note the rise of blood pressure when 0.4 c. c. of Tr. Calotropis was given intravenously. Time.PLATE XX [ Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXII, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A record of the carotid blood pressure and respiration of a dog 4 Kg. under paraldehyde anaesthesia. Note the rise in blood pressure when 0.3 c.c. of Tr. Calotropis was administered intravenously. Also note the increase in the depth and slowing in the rate of the respiration. Upper tracing.September, 1952] V. RATHNASABAPATY AND V. ISWARIAH 229 of the standard leaf can be made at one time and determination of unknown samples of the leaves can be made at later dates. The results of these determinations are compared with the results previously obtained for the standard. The dose fixed is in respect of the tincture prepared from the standard powder according to the B.P. method and as it has similar actions as digitalis it will be a cheap but good substitute for digiltalis. Attempts are being made to establish the therapeutic usefulness of the drug by clinical trials. SUMMARY The first standard for Calotropis has been prepared and is kept in this laboratory and is available to be compared with unknown samples. The unit of the standard has been defined as the activity contained in 0.1 G. of the standard powder. A suitable method of comparison by biological assay has been indicated. The actions of the tincture has been found to be similar to those of gigantin, the active principle of madar juice. The dose of the tincture has been fixed for canines. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author's thanks are due to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, under whose auspices this research was undertaken and to the Director of Animal Husbandry, Madras and the Dean, Government General Hospital and Madras Medical College, Madras, for their keen interests evinced in this work. They are also deeply indebted to Sri. K. Lakshman Rao, B.Sc (Pharmacy), Research Assis- tant, Indigenous Drugs Research Scheme, for his valuable technical help throughout. REFERENCES Watt (1893). Dictionary of the economic products of India Chopra, R. N. (1933). Indigenous drugs of India Rathnasabapaty, V., Lakshman Rao, K., Krishnaswamy, A., and David, J. C. (1949). Indian J. Med. Res. 483-494 Pitchandy, N. (1948). July. Inst. Chem. 20, 34. 1948 Rathnasabapaty, V., David, J. C., and Iswariah, V. Indian. J. vet. Sci. 12 (2) 1951 ABSTRACTS MILLER, G. D., FRYE, J. B., Jr., BUCH, B. J., Jr., HENDERSON, P. J. and RUSOFF, L. L. Effect of Sprinkling on Dairy Cattle J. anim. Sci. (1951) 10, 4, 961-968 TWO comparable groups of 16 lactating cows (8 Holsteins and 8 Jerseys each were used in a double-reversal experiment to study the effect of cooling by sprinkling on respiration rates, body temperatures and grazing performances. Although both breeds used the shower more as the temperature increased, the Holsteins remained under the shower an average of about 9 per cent more than Jerseys. The average amount of time spent under the shower for both breeds was 2 and 3 times as great at a temperature range of 85° to 90°F. and 92° to 97°F. res- pectively, as at a temperature range of 80° to 85°F. Respiration rates were slightly higher for Jerseys than Holsteins, while the reverse was noted for body temperature. The respiration rate of Holsteins and Jerseys having access to shower were 18 and 13 per cent. lower, respectively than for those with only shade. However, the respiration rates of the two groups were very nearly the same after a walk of one-fourth of a mile to the byres. Sprinkling was effective in producing a lower body temperature for both breeds. Holsteins and Jerseys being sprinkled had body temperatures of 0.7°F. and 0.4°F. lower respectively than did those with only shade. There was an increase of 0.5°F. for each of the breeds, after a walk of one mile to the byres, irrespective of the treatment. With the temperature range of 80°-85°F., both breeds spent 63 per cent of their time grazing and the use of the shower appeared to have no significant effect on grazing rate. But the grazing rate decreased as the temperature increased and at a temperature range of 92°F. to 97°F. the Holsteins and Jerseys grazed 69 and 68 per cent less respectively, than they did at a range of 80° to 85°F. Although sprinkling was effective in cooling the cows as borne by the decreas- ing respiration rates and body temperature and increasing grazing rates, there appeared to be no relationship between the amount of milk produced and treatment. (D.N.) P. MAHADEVAN Effect of Environment and Heredity on Lactation (1951), J. agric. Sci. Vol. 41, 80 VARIOUS environmental factors render it difficult to evaluate the potential breeding worth of animals. In the case of dairy cattle this involves the statistical analysis of production figures of cows in relation to known environmental factors and the subsequent standardisation of these production figures with a view 231 13
232 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXII, Part III, to eliminating as far as possible the effects of the environmental influences. The records of twelve pedigree herds of Ayreshire cattle numbering about 5,000 were standardized in this way and employed to obtain the estimates of heritability and to study the rate of genetic gain due to selection. The unit of measurement of production employed was the yield during the first 180 days of the lactation period, thus eliminating the effect of the variation in length of current calving interval on milk yield. The effect of the month of calving on milk yield varied significantly between herds, and it was shown that correction factors for month of calving should be cal- culated on a within herd basis. The average difference in 180 day yield between summer and winter calvers of all herds was about 10 per cent in favour of winter calvers. The milk yield of the cow was found to be influenced both by the number of her previous lactations and also by her age at calving. It is found that precentage of correction is the most satisfactory among the types of corrections employed by previous investigators for age. There was a positive correlation between milk yield and length of preceding calving interval. From an economic point of view, the optimum length of calving interval was found to be 400 days for the first lactation and one year for the sub- sequent ones. Corrections for the preceding calving interval like those for age were most satisfactory when they were proportionate and not additive. No significant differences were found among the first three records of a cow in their ability to indicate her actual production capacity. The probable performance of a cow in any lactation was predicted as accurately from the lactation immediately preceding it as from the average of a number of previous lactations. The average repeatability of milk yield was 0.46 and heritability was of the order 0.25 to 0.30. The probable effect on herd improvement of selecting breeding females was found to be very small, extremely little genetic progress being attained by this method in the twelve herds. (T.M.P.) RAYMOND N., DOETSCH AND WILLIAM M. SCOTT, (1951). Bacteriological Aspect of market milk as Consumed in the House hold. Milk Plant Monthly, 40, 24 THE authors have conducted a bacteriological analysis of market milk received and stored in the house-hold with a view to secure data on the quality of milk as it is consumed in the average homes. A total number of 140 samples collected from different homes in certain parts of New York City, U. S. A., covering different economic levels of the community have been examined for standard plate count, coliform count and for the incidence of the Genus Proteus. Out of 140 samples analyzed, only 20 samples (14 per cent) showed over 30,000 plate count per ml. and only 9 (6 per cent) had 10 or more coliform bacteria per ml. Though the samples from unopened quarts contained some coliform bacteria, those taken from the bottles
September, 1952] ABSTRACTS 233 previously opened showed high coliform count. Only 4 out of 9 samples from pitchers or glass tumblers showed the presence of coliform. Presence of the Genus Proteus was not noticed in any of the samples. It was further observed that the nature of the container, either of glass or of card board, and the atmospheric tem- perature had no significant influence on the plate count. The authors conclude that the samples as a whole were surprisingly good from a bacteriological point of view ; they ascribe this to the general educational level of the community with regard to concepts of sanitation and cleanliness in the handling of milk and to the extensive use of electric refrigerators for storing the milk. (V. S.)
REVIEWS THE FEEDING OF FARM ANIMALS IN INDIA BY P. E. LANDER, M.A., F.R.I.C., D.Sc, I.A.S. (Issued by the Indian Council of Agricultural ResearchSeptember, 1952] REVIEWS 235 to animals. A list of hill and plains fodder trees and plants with their merits and demerits as famine fodders are indicated and for this account alone the manual is valuable and indispensable. The cattle being generally poor milkers in this country are uneconomical to maintain. The fact however remains that the majority of cattle do not get either adequate food or of the right type. The manual gives a detail and general plan for the feeding of milch and draught animals and other livestock including horses, mules, sheep, goat, pigs, camels and poultry. The computing of rations for different class and types of animals on most econo- mical basis are then dealt with, all of which if followed carefully will greatly help in the rural uplift and improve the economic conditions. The manual is a valuable reference book written systematically in simple English. Dr. Lander, the author, has many years, experience of, and research in, animal nutrition in India. He was Agricultural Chemist in the Government of the United Punjab and later Principal of Lyallpur Agricultural College, and as such the publication is an authoritative statement of the present position of livestock nutrition in the country and meets the need for a handy, informative and reliable book on the subject. The manual is well printed and is recommended to those who require an authoritative book on the feeding of farm animals including poultry. (M.R.M.) NOTES FOR INTRODUCTORY COURSES IN GENETICS By CHARLOTTE AUERBACH, PH.D., D.Sc. Published by Oliver and Boyd Edinburgh and London (1951, 3rd ed., pp. 42, Price 2s.) HERE is a concise and easy-to-understand booklet dealing with the basic concepts and laws of genetics. These ' Notes ' are the outcome of a successful teacher's experience extending over a long period, of the needs of the elementary students attending short courses on the subject. The object of this booklet is, as has been explained by the author herself; in the foreward, is not to replace any text book on the subject or to serve as a popular introduction to the science but is intended to sup- plant the notes, usually taken by the students themselves so that they can adequately devote their attention to the discussions. This object has been well fulfilled. The science of Genetics is full of teminologics which require great accuracy and clarity in understanding. As such, this booklet should be most welcome to the students as it will relieve them from tedious note-takings. The author is to be complimented for achieving both brevity and clarity in dealing with basic concepts and laws of genetics. Technical terms have been very well defined. Many important topics have been explained very 'lucidly in a concise form. Meiosis, though without details, is well explained in para. 8, the Mendel's laws in paras. 11 and 23, blood groups in para. 18 and sex determination in para. 19. The booklet is full of illustrative examples. The elementary Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Veterinary and Medical students will find the two short appendices at the end, very useful. (P.B.)
236 REVIEWS [Vol. XXII, Part III, SUCCESSFUL POULTRY MANAGEMENT By MORLEY A. JULL. (Published by McGraw Hill Rural Activities Series, 437 pp. 500) THE author is a national authority in poultry work in the U. S. A. He is well known as a teacher and poultry author to the students of Animal Husbandry and Agriculture all over the Globe. The book should be extremely useful to the graduate students, farmers, com- mercial poultry producers, hatchery men, feed and equipment manufacturers, and as a matter of fact to every poultry minded man. The title of this book is most appropriate as in all the pages is emphasized the fact that success in poultry farming is mainly a matter of efficient management. The book presents to poultry keepers up-to-date information on husbandry practices and marketing methods affecting returns from the poultry business, large or small. Production of eggs and table fowls economically and how to market these highly perishable commodities to the fullest advantage are discussed in detail and in a popular manner. The author stresses on factors affecting the quality of eggs and poultry meat because the producers hardly appreciate their role in determining prices paid for poultry products in the course of marketing. Illustrations are most apt, carefully selected and represent an outstanding feature of the book. The various facts and working details are drawn from research and the wealth of knowledge gained by poultry raisers. What kind of stock to keep, is treated in a unique and different manner. New score cards are included for judging hens on the basis of laying potentialities and for breeding stock for standard bred and utility characters. Practical suggestions are also enumerated for broiler as well as egg production. Special emphasis is placed on the nutrition of chickens as feed costs represent about 60 per cent. of the total cost of production. Culling birds of all classes to maintain the efficiency of stock at a high level is discussed under different headings in a manner which laymen can easily follow. The Indian poultry keeper is badly in need of an up-to-date text book on poultry keeping and this book of Dr. Jull should serve the purpose well. (S.G.I.) PRINCIPLE OF MILK PRODUCTION By WILLIAM BARBOUR NEVENS. (Published by the McGraw Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1951, pp. 443, Price 5.00) THIS is the first edition of an introductory book on the subject. Through this compact volume of 443 pages the author has directed his efforts to cater the basic knowledge required for collegiate students on the principles of milk production, as also to provide the dairy farmer a reference book to serve as a guide in the esta- blishment and day to day management of a profitable milk-production enterprise. The text is comprised of 7 parts and 26 chapters. Part I begins with a survey of the importance of dairy in Agriculture. Part II contains 11 chapters dealing with milk production records, calculation of balanced rations and feeding of dairy
September, 1952 REVIEWS 237 cattle, general consideration in selection, systems of breeding, artificial insemination and management of dairy cattle. Part III contains a description of important dairy- cattle breeds and selection of individual animals on the basis of physical characteris- tics. Part IV contains 4 chapters devoted to a systematic treatment of such im- portant aspects as the structure and development of cow's udder, mechanism of milk secretion, constituents of milk and factors influencing them and clean milk produc- tion. Part V having 2 chapters deals with the marketing of dairy products from the farm, the price and price plans and the economics of milk production. Part VI contains 5 chapters on the soil management, pasture systems, production and conserva- tion of fodder crops. ' Lastly, a chapter is devoted to the designing of bars and milk houses. Prof. Neven's book is written in simple and good style and the subject matter has been interpreted with great latitude. Special topics such as the simple and practical method of calculating balanced rations, good soil management and grass- land farming, not commonly presented in a book of this type, enhances the value of this publication. It is a useful book for the collegiate student, teacher and all those interested in dairying. The printing and get-up of the book speak of the obvious thoroughness of the American publishers and printers. (K.C.S.) FARMER AND STOCK BREEDER YEAR BOOK 1952 (Published by Farmer and Stock Breeder Publications Limited, 76th edition (1951) Dorset House, Stamford Street, London, S.E.I. Price 10s. 6d., net postage 6d. pp. 412, over 170 illustrations) MORE useful information than ever before is included for stock breeders and those interested in any phase of livestock and general farming. The table of contents includes a valuable breeders' table238 REVIEWS [Vol. XXII, Part III, The reference section is perhaps the most valuable of all as it gives full information to all interested as to who is who in official and semi-official organisations and insti- tutions, principal shows, Artificial Insemination centres, Insurance, weather, rations, composition of feeding stuffs, British farming records, statistics, prices, pedigree sales and buyer's guide, etc. If for no other reason, the book is worth more than its value or all the information in one place that anyone interested in livestock may obtain and be proud to possess. The book is well printed and bound. Fine quality paper is used throughout. A galaxy of all kinds of advertisements on farming are included. The book is of value and interest to all concerned with any phase of livestock industry. (M.R.M.) NOTE. XVORIGINAL ARTICLES THE NUTRITIVE VALUE OF THE INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF ASSAM VI. THE GRASS JOY-JOHA (ISCHAEMUM RUGOSUM SALISB) AS A CATTLE FEED By B. K. DAS AND N. C. MUKHERJEE, Animal Nutrition Research Scheme, Gauhati (Received for publication on 27 December 1951) IN a series of papers, recently Talapatra [1949 and 1950] showed that although the indigenous grasses are deficient in some of the indispensable mineral elements like calcium and phosphorus yet they could profitably be introduced in the dietary of cattle in various forms; in the case of the aquatic grasses, however, he and his associate [Talapatra et al, 1949] observed that green feeding led to considerable worm troubles, while the mature hay from these grasses could be fed to any type of cattle without the least fear of helminthic infection. Most of the investigations so far reported from this laboratory seem to indicate that the animals thriving on the indigenous grasses suffer from a sort of chronic calcium deficiency, because of the very low content of this mineral in the herbage. Recently we have come across a kind of semi-aquatic grass which appears to be fairly rich in. both calcium and phosphorus even at the flowering stage. This is commonly known as Joy-Joha (Ischaemum rugosum Salisb). It is an annual grass, tall, erect or ascending in robust tufts and branching at the base. The branches are often 2-nate, compressed, very glabrous and swollen at the top. Leaf-blades are soft, flat, linear or almost lanceolate. The culms are 6 to 39 inches tall. It looks more or less like 'Bao' (spring) paddy. It is available from June to November and flowers during the middle of October, when the other grasses in this part turn woody and fibrous. As the weather is generally favourable for hay making in October, it can be conserved by the ' Tripod System ' in large quantities. An attempt has been made in the present paper to study the chemical compo- sition and the nutritive value of this grass when fed both as a green fodder and a hay at the flowering stage. (a) As a green fodder (flowering stage ) Four adult Assamese bullocks weighing about 570 lbs. were taken and fed exclu- sively with the grass for a period of 31 days; and as usual urine and faeces were collected during the last 10 days. Residues left during the collection period were kept separately for each animal and accounted for. The chemical composition, the dry matter consumption, the digestibility co- efficients and the calcium, the phosphorus and the nitrogen balances have been shown in the following tables. 239
240 INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF ASSAM, VI [ Vol. XXII, Part IV, TABLE I The chemical composition of Joy-Joha (on dry basis) Nutrients Whole plant Stem (residue) Crude protein 7.13 4.03 Ether Extract 2.50 1.27 Ash 10.07 7.87 Crude fibre 29.80 35.18 Nitrogen free extract 50.50 51.6 Total carbohydrates 80.30 86.78 Organic matter 89.93 92.13 Calcium (Ca) 0.38 0.24 Phosphorus (P) 0.31 0.18 The chemical composition of the grass even at the flowering stage indicates a fairly high proportion of protein while the content of calcium and phosphorus having an ideal Ca/P ratio is much higher than those previously reported from this laboratory. TABLE II Dry matter consumption of green Joy-Joha Animal number Body weight (lb) Dry matter consumed (lb) Dry matter consumed per 100 lbs of body- weight (lb) Average (lb) 1 565 11.05 1.96 3 570 10.60 1.86 4 564 10.92 1.94 1.89 5 557 10.38 1.81 The average dry matter consumption of 1.89 lbs per 100 lbs of body weight indicates that the grass is highly palatable as a green fodder even at the flowering stage.
December, 1952] B. K. DAS AND N. C. MUKHERJEE 241 TABLE III Digestibility coefficients of the organic nutrients Animal number Amount supplied in feed Amount left in residue Intake Excreted in faeces Amount digested Digestibility coeflicients Average digestibility coefliclents Dry Matter (gm.) (gm.) (gm.) (gm.) (gm.) per cent 1 7067 2057 5010 2173 2837 57 3 7007 2258 4809 1901 2908 61 4 7067 2115 4952 2061 2891 58 58 5 7067 2355 4712 2044 2668 57 Crude protein 1 503-9 82.9 421.0 161.0 259.9 62 3 503.9 91.0 412.9 147.8 265.1 64 4 503.9 85.2 418.7 171.4 247.3 59 62 5 503.9 94.9 409.0 160.4 248.6 61 Ether extract. 1 176.7 26.1 150.6 54.8 95.8 64 3 176.7 28.7 148.0 41.8 100.2 72 4 176.7 26.9 149.8 41.2 108.0 73 71 5 176.7 29.9 146.8 39.5 107.3 73 Crude fibre 1 21060 724.1 1381.9 528.0 853.9 62 3 2106.0 794.8 1311.2 452.4 858.83 66 4 2106.0 744.5 1361.5 500.8 860.7 63 63 5 2106.0 829.0 1277.0 504.9 772.1 60 N-free extract 1 3568.8 1061.4 2507.4 1080.0 1427.4 57 3 3568.8 1165.1 2403.7 944.8 1458.9 61 4 3568.8 1091.3 2477.5 995.5 l482.0 60 59 5 3568.8 1215.1 2353.7 983.2 1370.5 58 Total carbohydrates 1 5671.8 1785.5 3889.3 1808.0 2281.3 59 3 5674.8 1959.9 3714.9 1397.2 2317.7 62 4 5674.8 1835.8 3839.0 1496.3 2342.7 61 60 5 5674.8 2044.1. 3030.7 1488.0 2142.7 59 The data in Table III show that the protein digestibility from the green Joy. Joha even at the flowering stage is quite satisfactory. The digestibility of ether extract however is very high and is not generally to be experienced with ;the indigenous grasses. The digestibility of crude fibre appears to be normal. As regards N free extract andtotal carbohydrates all the animals behaved uniformly.
242 INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF ASSAM, VI [Vol. XXII, Part IV, From the average digestibility coefficients, the starch equivalent has been calculated according to the method of Kellner and is shown below along with some of the cultivated fodder plants. The average dry matter is 28.27 lbs per 100 lbs of the green feed fed to the animals. TABLE IV Digestible nutrients in Joy-Joha (flowering) as compared to cultivated fodder plants December, 1952 ] B. K. DAS AND N. C. MUKHERJE 243 It may be seen from the above data that definite positive balances of calcium and phosphorus are assured under Joy-Joha feeding. The heavy retention of nitrogen is perhaps purely of a temporary nature and is generally observed with adult animals kept on a high plane of nutrition. The positive calcium and phos- phorus balances observed in this case are not generally found with most of the indi- genous grasses in this part of the country particularly when fed as a single feed, [Talpatra, 1949, 1950]. It may possibly be due to a high intake of protein. A liberal intake of protein and the nature of protein seem to have some influence on the absorption of both calcium and phosphorus [Lehmann et al 1942, Mc Cance et al 1942, Desikachar, H. S. R. and Subrahmanyan. V. 1949]. Better assimilation of minerals is sometimes attributed to improved crude fibre digestibility [Maynard, 1937]. In this case the crude fibre digestibility also may probably have some effect on the positive retention of calcium and phosphorus. (b) Joy-Joha as hay (flowering stage) The grass was turned into hay by the well-known ' Tripod System'. The hay retained good green colour and no sign of decomposition was noticed. Three adult Assamese bullocks weighing about 525 lbs were taken and fed exclusively with the hay for a sufficiently long period which was then followed as usual by a ten day period of collection of both faeces and urine. Residues left during the collection period were kept separately and accounted for. The chemical compo- sition, the dry matter consumption, the digestibility coefficients and the calcium, the phosphorus and the nitrogen balances have been shown in the following tables. TABLE VI Chemical composition of Joy-Joha hay (on dry basis) 244 INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF ASSAM, VI [Vol. XXII, Part IV TABLE VII Dry matter consumption of Joy-Joha hay Animal number Body weight Dry matter consumed Dry matter consumed per 100 lbs of body-weight Average (lb) (lb) (lb) (lb) 1 525 7.5 1.4 3 532 7.5 1.4 4 523 7.7 1.5 1.4 Contrary to expectation, the same grass when turned into hay almost at the same stage of growth was not much relished, as indicated by the decreased consump- tion of dry matter. It may be seen that the dry matter consumption was, de- creased by about 25 per cent. TABLE VIII Digestibility coefficients of the organic nutrients of Joy-Joha hay Animal number Dry matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Total carbo- hydrates 1 50 44 56 65 47 54 3 56 46 60 68 54 60 4 49 36 50 65 47 54 Average 52 42 55 66 49 56 A perusal of the data in Table VIII shows that the digestibility figures for a mature grass-hay are quite satisfactory. From the average digestibility coefficients the net energy value of Kellner has been calculated and shown along with some of the well-known hays of the country. Names of hays Digestible nutrients per 100 lb. of the raw stuff D.P. (lb) S.E. (lb) Joy-Joha hay 2.4 26.7 Arali hay 2.0 23.9 Anjan hay 1.5 29.2 Bolaram hay 2.0 27.8 Jowar hay 2.5 24.8 Guinea grass hay 1.9 19.9 Usar hay 2.31 17.5 Ambala hay 2.2 23.5
December, 1952] B. K. DAS AND N. C. MUKHERJE 245 It is evident from the above figures that the Joy Joha hay is comparable to most of the well-known hays of the country. Calcium, phosphorus and nitrogen balances under Joy-Joha hay feeding.246 INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF ASSAM, VI [ Vol. XXII, Part IV, part of the country, positive balance of both calcium and phosphorus were assured when the grass was fed as a green fodder. Joy-Joha hay at the flowering stage was not much relished by cattle. The hay prepared from the grass at the flowering stage contains 6.63 per cent of crude protein. The digestibility coefficients of crude protein, ether extract and total carbohydrates are 42, 55 and 56 respectively. The digestible protein and the starch equivalent (Kellner) per 100 lbs of the stuff are 2.4 and 26.7 lbs respectively. A positive retention of calcium is not assured but the hay provides a mainte- nance ration with regard to both protein and phosphorus. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are greatly indebted.to Shri L. K. Handique, B.Sc, Agri. (Edin.), Director of Agriculture, Assam and Dr S. K. Talapatra, B.Sc, Ph D., Professor of Animal Nutrition, College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, U. P., Mathura, for their valuable suggestions and interest in the work. They also extend their thanks to Dr S. K. Mukherjee, Curator of Herbarium, India Botanic Garden, Calcutta, for ascertaining the species of the grass. REFERENCES Desikachar, H.S. R. and Subrahmanyan. V. (1949), Indian J. Med. Res. 37, 85-90 Lehmann, H. and Pllak. L. (1942). J. Physio. 100, 17 Mc Cance, R. A., Widdowson, E. M., and Lehmann, H. (1942). Biochem. J. 36, 686 Maynard, L. A. (1937). Animal Nutrit. 123 and 139. (1st edition) Talapatra, S. K. and Dev Goswami, M. N. (1949) Indian. J. Vet. Sci. XIX, I Talapatra, S. K. (1950) Indian J. Vet. Sci. XX, IV
THE UTILISATION OF MANGO-SEED KERNEL AND JAMAN SEED MEAL IN A SIMPLIFIED POULTRY RATION FOR GROWING CHICKEN By S. BOSE, B. M. THAKRAL AND S. NARAYANAN, Poultry Research Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 1 February 1952) IN view of the acute food shortage in the country, investigations into the proper utilisation of the waste materials in the poultry ration are of great importance for the poultry industry in India. In a previous investigation Bose, Thakral and Narayanan [1950] concluded that mango-seed kernel, which is generally thrown away as a waste material, could be utilised by replacing as much as 20 per cent of yellow maize meal in the laying ration with beneficial results. The inclu- sion of Jaman seed meal, on the other hand, had great depressing effect on the egg production. The present investigation has been undertaken to study the effects of the addition of mango-seed-kernel and jaman seed meal to a simplified poultry ration for growing chickens. EXPERIMENTAL A total of 45 Rhode Island Red chicks hatched in May, 1950, were divided into three comparable groups and fed on the experimental diets for a period of eight weeks. The birds were fed on all-mash rations in a wet crumbly state according to appetite in the morning, noon and afternoon. Broken limestone, succulent green food and fresh clean water were supplied ad lib. during the experimental period. Group I was fed on the basal ration consisting of yellow maize meal 55 parts, wheat bran 25 parts, groundnut cake meal 19 parts and common salt 1 part. Group II received all-mash ration in which 20 per cent of yellow maize meal of the basal ration was replaced by mango-seed-kernel. Group III was fed on all-mash ration in which 20 per cent of yellow maize meal of the basal ration was replaced by jaman seed meal. Cooked meat offal was mixed with the mash and fed to the birds in all the three groups as protein supplement at the rates of 1 part of meat offal for every 2 parts of the mash. The quantity of meat offal required every day was cooked for about an hour in a small quantity of water and run through a mincing machine prior to mixing with the mash. 247
248 MANGO-SEED KERNEL AND JAMAN SEED MEAL [ Vol. XXII, Part IV The average percentage chemical composition of the experimental ration is shown in Table I. TABLE I The average chemical composition of the experimental growing rations on dry basis Feed Crude protein Ether Extraot Ash Carbo- hydrates MashDecember, 1952] S. BOSE, B. M. THAKUR AND S. NARAYAN 249 TABLE III Food consumption and utilisation Weeks AVERAGE FOOD CONSUMPTION PER BIRD PER DAY (oz) FOOD CONSUMPTION IN OUNCES PER OUNCE LIVE-WEIGHT GAIN Group I Group 11 Group III Group Group II Group III 1 0.17 0.24 0.21 7.93 11.20 7.35 2 0.27 0.28 0.33 1.80 2.06 2.20 3 0.43 0.40 0.46 2.08 2.00 2.30 4 0.42 0.47 0.51 3.10 2.63 2.98 5 0.71 0.73 0.94 2.26 2.56 3.55 6 0.93 0.98 1.44 2.71 2.05 3.63 7 1.23 1.55 1.43 3.19 3.09 646 8 1.60 1.75 2.10 6.05 6.62 4.32 The general health of the birds in all the three groups, as judged by handling and appearance, was satisfactory. The mortality percentage during the experi- mental period for groups, I, II and III were 6.6, 0, 13.2 respectively. The statistical examination of the data of Tables II and III are shown in Table IV. TABLE IV Statistical analysis (Analysis of variance) Sample Magnitude of variation Remarks Table II250 MANGO-SEED KERNEL AND JAMAN SEED MEAL [ Vol. XXII, Part IV DISCUSSION At eight weeks the average weights in ounces of the males in Groups I, II and III were 15.1, 14.1 and 15.2 respectively. The corresponding figures for females were 13.3, 13.7 and 13.4. Although the experiment was carried out in the monsoon season, which is not very suitable for growing chickens in the Northern India, it is remarkable that the rate of growth of the chickens compared very favourably with the rate of growth usually obtained during the winter months. At no stages of growth there was any significant difference between the average weights of Group I, II and III. Both mango-seed-kernel and Jaman seed meal can, therefore, replace 20 per cent of the yellow maize meal in growing ration without any detri- mental effect. This is rather interesting because similar experiments carried out on laying hens [Bose, Thakral and Narayanan, loc. cit.] revealed that jaman seed meal had great depressing effect on egg production. The factor present in jaman seed meal, which adversely affected egg production, had therefore no detrimental effect on the growth of chickens. The average food consumptions were satisfactory and very similar for all the three groups. The utilisation of the experimental rations in ounces per ounce live weight gain did not show any significant difference. SUMMARY The inclusion of mango-seed-kernel and jaman seed meal by replacing 20 per cent of yellow maize meal separately in a normal growing ration showed no detri- mental effect. The rate of growth, food consumption and food utilisation were similar in all the three groups. REFERENCES Bose, S., Thakral, B. M. and Narayanan, S. (1950). The effect of the addition of mango-seed kernel and jaman seed meal in a simplified poultry ration for egg production. (1) Proc. Indian Sci. Cong. Poona, 1950. (2) Indian Poult. Gaz., 24, 4, 12-17.
PHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES ON THE BLOOD OF DOMES- TIC ANIMALS III. THE NORMAL BLOOD PICTURE OF THE KUMAONI BULLOCK* By V. N. MURTY AND N. D. KEHAR, Animal Nutrition Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar. (Received for publication on 30 January 1952) THE importance of the study of the normal blood composition of animals in nutritional and physiological research has been emphasized by Sen and Roy [1933], Kehar [1940] and Kehar et al. [1940, 1945, 1951a, 1951b]. The factors likely to cause variations in blood from the normal range may be of food, breed or climate. Mullick and Pal [1943] observed variations in the blood composition of Hariana and Dhanni breeds. Since extensive nutritional investigations are carried out on Kumaoni bullocks, which are commonly found in the lower Himalayan ranges and are very economical and docile, it was considered desirable to study in detail their normal blood components. EXPERIMENTAL Twenty four healthy adult Kumaoni bullocks were selected for analysing the morphological, organic and inorganic constituents of blood. They were main- tained on the Institute basal ration consisting of rape cake and wheat bhoosa throughout the experimental period. The observations were recorded during the TABLE I Showing the morphological constituents of Kumaoni bullock as compared to Hariana and Dhanni bullocks Constituents KUMAONI BULLOCK HARIANA BULLOCK DHANNI BULLOCK Maximum Minimum Mean with standard error Mean [Kehar and Murty, 1945] Mean [Mullick and Pal, 1943] Mean [Mullick and Pal, 1943] Haemoglobin gms/100 ml. blood 9.2 6.2 7.4±0.18 11.0 10.8 12.5 Red blood corpuscles252 THE BLOOD OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS, III [ Vol. XXII, Part IV summer months. Blood was drawn from the jugular vein before the morning feed was given. The morphological constituents and blood sugar (total reducing sub- stances) were estimated in the whole blood. Neutral potassium oxalate was used as the anticoagulant and the necessary correction made in calculating the cell volume. The inorganic constituents, viz., calcium, inorganic phosphorus, magne- sium, sodium, potassium and chlorides, and proteins were estimated in blood serum. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The morphological constituents were determined by the methods described by Napier and Das Gupta [1946]. The range and the average with standard error of these constituents are shown and compared with those of the other breeds of cattle in Table I. It is evident from the Table I that the Kumaoni bullocks, as compared to the Hariana and Dhanni bullocks, recorded significantly lower values for all the haematological constituents studied except the white blood corpuscles. Haemoglobin. The method of Newcomer as described by Hawk, Osler and Summerson [1947] was used in estimating the haemoglobin content of the animals. It varied from 6.2 to 9.2 with an average value of 7.4±0.18 gms. per 100 ml. of blood. This figure is definitely lower than the one reported by Kehar and Murty [1945] and Mullick and Pal [1943] for Hariana and Dhanni bullocks respectively. Red blood corpuscles. The mean red blood corpuscular count was 6.5±0.24 within a range of 4.4 and 8.4 millions per cubic millimeter of blood. Kehar and Murty [loc. cit.] and Mullick and Pal [loc. cit.] recorded average values of 7.7 and 8.0 millions per c.mm. of blood respectively for the Hariana bullocks. The latter authors gave a value of 7.9 millions per c.mm. in the blood of the Dhanni bullocks. White blood corpuscles. The maximum and minimum count for the white blood corpuscles were 11.9 and 6.4 thousands per cubic millimeter of blood with an average value of 8.4±0.33. This figure is in agreement with the value given by Mullick and Pal [loc. cit.] for the Hariana bullocks, but is higher than the values reported for the Dhanni bullocks. Corpuscular volume. The average corpuscular volume was 35.3±1.34 per sent with a range of variations from 24.6 to 46.2. Corpuscular values (calculated). The average mean corpuscular volume is 54.6±1.1 cubic microns with a range of 43.4 to 63.5 cubic microns. The mean corpuscular haemoglobin varies between 10.1 and 14.3 micro micro grammes, with an average of 11.6±0.29. The maximum and minimum corpuscular haemoglobin concentration is 25.3 and 19.0 per cent respectively, with an average of 21.2±0.40. All the corpuscular values are lower than those reported by Kehar and Murty [loc. cit.] for the Hariana bullocks. Organic and inorganic constituents. The range and the average with standard error of the organic and inorganic constituents as compared to those of the two breeds of bullocks are presented in Table II. Sugar (total reducing substances). Blood sugar was determined by the method Hagedorn and Jensen as described by Hawk et al., [loc. cit.].
December, 1952 ] V. N. MURTY AND N. D. KEHAR 253 TABLE II Showing the organic and inorganic constituents of Kumaoni bullock as compared to Hariana and Dhanni bullocks. Constituents KUMAUNI BULLOCK Mean with standard error HARIANA BULLOCK DHANNI BULLOCK Maximum Minimum Mean [Kehar and Murty, 1945] Mean [Mullick and Pal, 1943] Mean [Mullick and Pal, 1943J Organic constituents Super (Total reduring mrntincrs) mg/100 ml. bood. 102.3 70.6 88.1 ±2.06 75.6 82.6 88.3 Serum protein gm/100 ml. serum 8.9 5.1 6.79±0.25 8.61 .. .. Inorganic constituents Calcium mgm/100 ml. serum 11.4 9.4 10.5 ±0.10 10.4 10.5 11.1 Inorganic phosphorus) mgm/100 ml. serum. 8.3 4.8 6.8±0.20 4.26 Magnesium phosphorus mgm/100 ml. serum, 3.19) 1.71 2.35±0.11 2.78 2.40 2.40 Sodium phosphorus mgm/100 ml. serum. 4.89 25.3 3.69 ±15.24 .. .. .. Potassium phosphorus mgm/100 mlsserum. 16.5 11.9 14.0±0.28 .. .. .. Chlorides phosphorus mgm/100 ml. serum. 4.12 34 38.5±4.42 .. .. .. The range of blood sugar was from 70.6 to 102.3 with an average value of 88.1± 2.06 mg. per 100 ml. of blood. Mullick and Pal [loc. cit.] noted 88.3 and 82.6 mg. per 100 ml. of blood of Hariana and Dhanni bullocks respectively. While Kehar. and Murty [loc. cit.] reported a lower value of 75.6 mg. per 100 ml. of blood for Hariana bullocks. Serum proteins. These were estimated by the well known Kjeldahl method as described by Hawk et al., [loc. cit.]. The mean serum protein content was 6 .79±0 .25 gm. per 100 ml. of serum, with a range of 5.1 to 8.9 Kehar and Murty [loc. cit.] reported an average value of 8.61 gm. per 100 ml. of serum, a value definitely higher than for the Kumaoni bullocks reported here. Inorganic constituents Calcium, Calcium was estimated by the method of Clark and Collip [1925]. The average calcium content of Kumaoni bullocks is 10.5±0.10 within the limits of .9.4 and 11.4 mg. per 100 ml. of serum and is in agreement with the calcium content of Hariana bullocks reported by Kehar and Murty [loc, cit.] and Mullick and Pal [loc. cit.]. The value of 11.1 mg. per 100 ml. of serum observed in Dhanni bullocks by Mullick and Pal [loc. cit.] is higher than the one recorded here for the Kumaoni bullocks. Inorganic phosphorus. This constituent was estimated by the method of Fiske and Subbarow [1925] as described by Hawk et al [loc. cit.]. The mean inorganic
254 THE BLOOD OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS, III [ Vol. XXII, Part IV phosphorus content is 6.8±0.20 within the limits of 4.8 and 8.3 mg. per 100 ml. of blood sera. The figure reported for Hariana bullocks by Kehar and Murty [loc. cit.] is significantly lower. Magnesium. Magnesium was estimated by the method of Fiske and Subbarow [loc. cit.] as described by Hawk et al, [loc.cit.]. The mean magnesium content of" the blood serum of Kumaoni bullocks is 2.35+0.11 with a range of 1.71 to 3.19 mg. per 100 ml. Mullick and Pal [loc. cit.] observed a similar value for the magnesium content of Hariana bullocks, but Kehar and Murty [loc.cit.] recorded a higher value, 2.78 for this breed. The Kumaoni bullocks exhibited a lower magnesium content than the Dhanni bullocks. [Mullick and Pal, loc. cit.] Sodium. The method of Weinbach [1935] was used in estimating the sodium content of serum. A very wide range of 253 to 489 mg. per 100 ml. was noticed with an average amount of 369±15.24. Potassium. The serum potassium was determined by the method of Breh and Gaebler [1930]. The maximum and minimum values were 16.5 and 11.5 mg. with an average of 14.0±0.28 mg. per 100 ml. of blood serum. Chlorides. The serum chlorides were estimated by the method of Whitehorn [1920-21]. The average chloride content was 385±4.42 within the range of 344 to 412 mg. per 100 ml. of serum. From the foregoing data, it is observed that the blood composition of Kumaoni bullocks, which showed lower haematological values as compared to those of pure bred cattle, compare favourably with the blood picture of buffaloes reported by Kehar and Murty [1951]. In view of the breed differences, in the haemoglobin concentration and the red cell count, observed by Manresa and Reyes [1934] and Mullick and Pal [1943], the low values recorded, for these constituents, in the present study, seems to be characteristic of the breed. The mean corpuscular volume and the mean corpuscular haemoglobin of goat blood [Murty and Kehar 1951] are lower than that of Kumaoni bullocks. The serum calcium and magnesium contents of Kumaoni bullocks are almost the same as observed in buffalo [Kehar and Murty, loc. cit.], goat [Murty and Kehar, loc. cit.] and pure bred cattle [Kehar and Murty, loc. cit., Mullick and Pal, loc. cit.]. The serum calcium content is higher and the chlorides lower in equine blood [Kehar et al, 1940] as compared to that of Kumaoni bullocks. It is observed that the Kumaoni bullocks recorded higher amounts of serum inorganic phosphorus and blood sugar but lower serum proteins, than the pure bred cattle, but they compare favourably with buffalo [Kehar and Murty, loc. cit.] and goat [Murty and Kehar, loc. cit.]. The sodium and chloride contents of goat serum [Kehar and Murty, loc. cit.] are lower and the potassium content similar to Kumaoni bullocks. The above findings indicate that not only the blood constituents of different species of domestic animals differ, but variations are also found in different breeds of the same species. SUMMARY Previous investigations carried out in this laboratory had indicated that there may be a possibility of variations in the amounts of the constituents of the blood in
December, 1952] V. N. MURTY AND N. D. KEHAR 256 different breeds of cattle. Since Kumaoni bullocks are extensively used for meta- bolic and physiological experiments, attempts were made to establish the physio- logical standards for the blood constituents of this breed of cattle. These observa- tions included the study of the morphological, organic and inorganic constituents of their blood. The average values with standard error are given below : Haemoglobin: 7.40±0.18 gms. per 100 ml. of blood; Red blood cell count 6.50±0.24 millions and white cell count 8.40±0.33 thousands per cubic millimeter of blood; cell volumeTHE BUFFALO258 THE BUFFALODecember, 1952 ] E. S. E. HAFEZ 259 in the milk-yield [Sinha and Minett, 1947]. The calf can be delivered without much difficulty. The buffalo calf may then be hand reared (pail suckling) with good attention. Buffalo meat is thought to be coarse, but this is due to the fact that old animals are usually slaughtered, and the meat of an animal, four to six weeks old and properly fed, in no way differs from veal. With regard to the relative nutritive value of buffalo beef as compared with ox-beef and veal, it is stated that the former is dis- tinctly superior in several respects. Buffalo beef differs markedly in structure from ox-beef, the muscle fibres being thicker and the nuclei more abundant. In trans- verse sections, the fibres are polygonal instead of irregularly shaped, the component fibrallae are larger and there is a greater amount of sarcoplasm. Differences also occur in regard to the distribution of the subcutaneous fat, connective tissue and elastic tissue. The buffalo bull cannot stand cold or heat, yet he well adapts himself to hard work. In India, the buffalo is generally more susceptible than cattle to Foot-and- Mouth disease and Anthrax and the incidence of Anthrax is almost the same when compared to cattle. Although some of the breeds of domestic buffalo have been introduced in a large number of places, their introduction in some sub-tropical countries is still limited. In the British colonies (tropical Africa) and in most parts of China there are large areas of swampy land which cannot be drained and which supply abundant grass on which the buffalo would no doubt be rendered productive. In the United States, the swamps and marshes of Florida, Louisiana and Mississippi should be especially suitable for buffalo production. Selection must be made to ensure high milk yields from the dairy herds. More angular form, better development of the udder and milk veins may be attained by careful selection. The selection of the breeding animals may be based on the progeny testing of each individual buffalo-bull. Cross-breeding amongst the different breeds and races of the Indian buffalo might give desirable results, and artificial insemination could be applied on a, larger scale. Further careful studies should be made before an attempt to spread the areas of buffalo raising. (b) Reproduction.260 THE BUFFALODecember, 1952 ] E. S. E: HAFEZ 261 TABLE II Literature on the reproduction of the domestic buffalo (Indian buffalo and allied races) Race Cycle length (Days) Duration of Oestrus (Hrs.) Gestation period (Days) Age at 1st con- cep- tion (month) Interval between calving and post- partum heat (Days) Interval between calving (Days) Authority Range Mean Range Mean Range Mean Range Mean Bulgarian 12262 THE BUFFALODecember, 1952] E. S. E. HAFEZ 263 based on selection, progeny testing and crossbreeding although critical data on its productive and reproductive capacities is still lacking. REFERENCES Asdell, S. A. (1946). Patterns of Mammalian Reproduction. Comstock, New York. 358 Badr-Eldin, A. (1952). Personal communication (Cairo) Dave, C. N. (1938). Agric. Live-stk. India, 1, 8, 407 Dave, C. N. (1940). Poona Agric. Coll. Mag., 1, 32, 97 Federated Malay States (1936). Ann. Rep. Vet. Dept. 18 Flower, W. H. and Lydekker, R. (1891). Mammals Living and Extinct, London, Adam and Charles, 360 Haagner (1920). South African Mammals, Witherby, London. 225 Hafez, E. S. E. (1952, a). Proc. IInd Int. Congr. Physiol. and Pathol. Anim. Reprod. Artif. Insem. Copenhagen Hafez, E. S. E. (1952, b). Unpublished data (Cairo) Kaleff, B. (1938). Z. Zucht., 24B, 391 Kaleff, B. (1942). Z. Tierz. u. Zuchtungsb., 51, 131 Kangaratnan, N. (1935). Malay Agric. J., 23, 421 Kothavala, Z. R. (1935). Agric. Live-stk. India. 5, 47 Levine, C. O. (1920). J. Hered., 11, 51 Lydekker, R. (1913). Catalogue of the Ungulates in the British Museum. (Natural History 1913), British Museum, London 1, 40 Mahmoud, I. N. (1949). *Studies on Some important Features of buffalo semen Mahmoud, I. N. (1952). Personal communication (Cairo) Makino, S. (1944). Cytologia (Tokyo)., 13, 247 Manresa, M. and Diapo, D. (1938). Philippine Agric, 26, 870 Markus, J. (1943). Mezogazdas. Kutates, 16, 109 (Anim. Breed. Abst., 14, 208) Marsb, T. D. and Dawson, V. (1948). Malay Agric. J., 30, 133 Maymone, B. (1945). Ann. Inst. sperm. Zootec. Roma., 3, 5 (Anim. Breed. Abs. 10, 217) Ocompo, A. R. (1939). Philippine Agric., 28, 286 Polding, J. B. and Lall, H. K. (1945). Indian J. Vet. Sci., 15, 178 Ragab, M. T. and Asker, A. A. (1951). Indian J. dairy Sci., 4, 159 Shortridge, G. C. (1934). The Mammals of South West Africa, 2, Heinemann, London, 439 Sinha, K. C. and Minett, F. C. (1947). J. Anim. Sci., 6, 258 Villeges, V. (1928). Philippine Agric., 17, 747 Villeges, V. (1930). Philippine Agric., 19, 3 Yamane, J. and Ono Y. (1936). Mem, Fac. Sci. Agric. Tailhoku, 19, 87 (Anim. Breed. Abs. 7, 303) *Fouad I University Thesis for Ph.D. degree, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo, Egypt
CAUSES OF VARIATION IN BIRTH WEIGHT OF EGYP- TIAN CATTLE AND BUFFALOES A. A. ASKER AND M. T. RAGAB, Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agri- culture, Fouad First University, Cairo, Egypt. (Received for publication on 18 March, 1952) THE weight of an animal at any stage of life is a phenotypic expression of its genetype. The wider the difference between the two expressions, the less impor- tant is the phenotype as an aid to selection. The part played by environment in the determination of birth weight seems to be of special importance. Birth weight is the first measure of the prospective value of the animal's weight and it is more economical to cull the surplus males in the herd as early as possible. In consider- ing the birth weight of animals in breeding plans, a full account of the importance of the different factors causing variation should be known. This investigation aims at the study of how birth weight in Egyptian cattle, Pure-bred Shorthorn, Shorthorn grades and buffaloes is affected by genetical and non-genetical factors. The effect of sex, sequence of calving, month of calving and the sire of the calf were studied. Also the repeatability and heritability of birth weight were determined. MATERIAL AND METHODS OF ANALYSIS Birth weights of calves from cattle and buffaloes were available on 133 males and 153 females in the case of buffaloes and 140 males and 130 females in the case of cows, besides 133 calves of pure and graded Shorthorn of both sexes. All those calves were born as singles. The calves were born from 1930 to 1950 on the farm of the Faculty of Agriculture, Giza, Egypt. They were dropped mainly during Autumn, Winter and Spring; and few cases happened to be born in Summer. The buffalo calves were sired by seven bulls, while the cattle calves had six sires. Each bull had seven or more calves. Calves were usually weighed within 24 hours of their birth and their weights were recorded in kilogrammes. The analysis of variance for sex and sequence of calving was worked out using the method suggested by Snedecor and Cox [1935]. In estimating the heritability of birth weight, the parental half-sibs method suggested by Lush [1948] was used, RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Effect of sex and sequence of calving266 BIRTH WEIGHT OF EGYPTIAN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part IV buffaloes in the same order. The results show that females are lighter than male calves at birth in both cows and buffaloes. The difference between the two sexes is highly significant in both cases. This is in accordance with the findings of Knapp et al [1941] and Tyler et al [1947]. The average birth weight of buffalo calves was 38.50 and 36.41 kilos for males and females respectively. In the case of Egyptian cattle the averages were 25.77 and 23.93 kilos in the same order. Buffaloes in both sexes exceeded cattle in birth weight by 12.73 and 12.83 kilos in the case of males and females. Such differences are expected since we are deal- ing with different species of animals. TABLE I Numbers and means of birth weight in kilos according to sex of the calf and calving, sequence of dam for Egyptian cattle. Sequence Number Males Per cent Mean Number Females Per cent Moan 1st 28 20.00 23.75 26 20.00 21.73 2nd 41 29.29 25.95 30 23.08 23.40 3rd 25 17.86 26.60 25 19.23 24.00 4th 19 13.57 26.37 12 9.23 25.58 5th & 6th 16 11.43 26.81 19 14.61 25.37 7th & over 11 7.86 25.81 18 13.85 25.33 Total and Average 140 100.00 25.77 130 100.00 23.93 TABLE II Numbers and means of birth weight in kilos according to sex of the calf and calving, sequence of dam for Egyptian buffaloes Sequence Number Males Per cent Mean Number Females Per cent Moan 1st 24 18.05 36.13 39 25.49 33.67 2nd 25 18.80 36.40 24 15.69 34.96 3rd 30 22.55 39.23 26 16.99 36.96 4th 17 12.78 41.82 26 16.99 37.16 5th 10 7.52 39.20 20 13.07 38.15 6th & over 21 20.30 39.37 18 11.77 40.39 Total and Average 133 100.00 38.50 153 100.00 36.41
December, 1952] A. A. ASKER AND M. T. RAGAB 267 When dams get older, the average birth weight of their calves tends to in- crease. It is more pronounced in the early parturitions, i.e., 1st, 2nd and 3rd ones in both cases, than it is in the later ones (Tables I and II). This may be due to the increase in the dams' weights as they advance in age and approach maturity. Moreover, the analysis of variance set out in Tables III and IV, showed that the mean square for sequence of calving is highly significant. The interaction between sex and sequence is not significant in either cows or buffaloes. This result does not fully agree with other investigations carried out in this respect. Knapp et al [1941] stated that the first calves were lighter than their subsequents in birth weight, but beyond that parturition no consistent trend was evident. On the other hand Tyler et al [1947] reported that calving sequence has no influence on birth weight of calves after the second calving. Probably, the different methods used for raising dairy calves as well as the feeding and management of dairy heifers are responsible for the discrepancies between the results obtained in this subject. TABLE III Analysis of variance of birth weight for sex and calving, sequence in Egyptian cattle Source of variation Sum of squares D. F. Mean squares Significance Between sexes 275.46 1 275.46 H.S. Between Calv. Seq. 393.72 5 78.74 H.S. Sex. Sequence 45.68 5 9.13 N.S. Within individuals 3,473.00 358 13.46 268 BIRTH WEIGHT OF EGYPTIAN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part IV TABLE V Analysis of variance of birth weight for sires (Egyptian cattle) Source of variation Sum of squares D. F. Mean squaros Between sires 312.65 6 52.11** Within December, 1952] A. A. ASKER AND M. T. RAGAB 269 different correlations between relatives. Knapp and Nordskog [1946] and Dawson et al [1947] used sire-offspring regression and parental half-sibs methods for estima- ting the heritability of birth weight in beef cattle. Their estimates ranged between 11 and 42 per cent. This analysis shows that the heritability of birth weight of Egyptian cattle and buffaloes are higher than most of the previously mentioned results. Such results are expected since cattle and buffaloes in Egypt are mixed populations and consequently the genetic variability of birth weight should be higher than those of the established European breeds of cattle. According to such high estimates of heritability for birth weight in both Egyp- tian cattle and buffaloes, it could be concluded that phenotypic selection could be used for improving birth weights of animals. Since the genetic relation between the birth weight and other subsequent weights was not investigated in this study, it seems difficult to depend only on such measure for increasing the weights of animals. However, Kadi [1952] working on two breeds of Egyptian sheep, found that the genetic correlation between the birth weight and weaning weight on the one hand, and birth weight and marketing weight on the other hand, were all near unity. If the case in buffaloes and cattle is proved to be the same, selection based on birth weight will not lead to any loss in the number of genes controlling mature weights. TABLE VII Correlation coefficients for birth weights of Egyptian, cattle and buffaloes for various combinations of calving sequences Comparisons made Cattle Buffaloes Number r. Number r. I and II 30 270 BIRTH WEIGHT OF EGYPTIAN CATTLE [Vol., XXII, Part IV Repeatability of birth weightDecember, 1952] A. A. ASKER AND M. T. RAGAB 271 The herds of the Faculty were under a stable system of feeding for the whole period of study. Animals received their rations according to weight and to produc- tion. During Winter they were fed only on clover if it could suffice their needs, otherwise they were given a supplementary ration of concentrates. This system has been followed all through the long time of investigation without much change. Therefore, one could not expect that month of calving to be a source of variation in birth weight of calves under such stable system of feeding and manage- ment. However, the present results agree with the results obtained by Tyler et al [1947] and Knapp et al [1941]. Effect of grading272 BIRTH WEIGHT OF EGYPTIAN CATTLE [Vol. XXII, Part IV SUMMARY A study was carried out on the influence of the sex of the calf, calving sequence, month of calving and sire of the calf on birth weight of Egyptian cattle and buffaloes. The heritability as well as the repeatability of birth weight in both species were estimated. The effect of grading Egyptian cattle with pure-bred Shorthorn on birth weight of calves was determined. The study covered a period of twenty years (1930-1950) and included 286, 270 and 133 calves of both sexes from buffaloes, native cattle and pure-bred Shorthorn and grades respectively. The average birth weight of male calves was 38.50 kilos in the case of buffaloes, while the mean birth weight of females was 36.41 kilos. In the case of Egyptian cattle, the mean birth weights were 25.77 and 23.93 kilos for males and females res- pectively. The differences between sexes in cattle and buffaloes were significant. Sequence of calving was responsible for bringing about significant differences between birth weights of calves in cattle and buffaloes. Month of calving appeared to have no effect on birth weight of calves. The heritability estimate for birth weight in buffaloes was 0.561 compared to 0.417 for cattle. The repeatability of birth weight was .548 and 0.048 for buffaloes and cattle respectively. Grading Egyptian cattle with purebred Shorthorns caused an increase in the birth weight of calves. The difference between grades was not significant, also grade Shorthorns were 6.6 kilos heavier in their birth weight than Egyptian calves. REFERENCES Dawson, W. M. Phillips, R. W. and Black W. H. (1947). Birth weight as a Criterion of Selec- tion in Beef Cattle. J. Anim. Sci. 6, 247-257 Eckles, C. H. (1919). A Study of Birth Weights of Calves. Mo. Agr. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 35 Fitch, J. B., McGilliard, P. C. and Drumm, G. H., (1924). A Study of Birth Weight and gestation of Dairy Animals. J. dairy Sci. 7, 222-223 Gregory, K. E., Cecil, T. Blunn and Marvel, L. Baker, (1950). A Study of some of the Factors Influencing the Birth Weights of Beef Calves. J. anim. Sci. 9, 338-347 Kadi, M. R. (1952). The Influence of some Environmental and Hereditary Factors on Weights of Ossimi and Rahmani Sheep M.Sc. Thesis, Faculty of Agriculture, Fouad 1st. Univer- sity, Giza, Egypt Knapp, B. Jr., Lambert, W. V. and Black, W. H., (1941). Factors Influencing Length of Gesta- tion Period and Birth Weight in Cattle. J. agric. Res., 61, 277-286 Knapp, B. Jr. and Nordskog, A. W., (1946). Heritability of Growth and Efficiency in Beef Cattle. J. anim. Sci. 5, 62-70 Lush, J. L., (1948). Heritability of Quantitative Characters in Farm Animals. Proc. Eighth Cong. Genet. Stockholm, 356-375. Rhoad, A. O., Ralph, W. Phillips and Dawson W. M., (1945). Evolution of Species Crosses of Cattle by Polyallel Crossing, J. Hered., 36, 367-374 Snedecer, G. W. and Cox, G. M., (1935). Dis-proportionate Subclass Numbers in Tables of Multiple Classification. Iowa, Agri., Exp. Res. Bull. 180 Tyler, W. J., Chapman; A. B. and Dickerson, G. E., (1947). Sources of Variation in the Birth weight of Holstein-Friesian Calves. J. dairy. Sci., 30, 483-498
REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO THE INCIDENCE OF SURRA BY B. C. BASU. P. BALARAMA MENON, AND C. M. SEN GUPTA, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for Publication on 14 April 1952) (With Plates XX-XXI) THE flies belonging to the genus Tabanus, commonly known as horse-flies or gnats, are widely prevalent in India, having been recorded from tropical, sub» tropical, and temperate regions. The adults are strong fliers and occur abundantly in the neighbourhood of water both on the plains and hills. All the common species are blood suckers and attack warm blooded animals including man. Of the diseases' transmitted by these flies, surra is the most important, affecting horses, mules, camels, cattle, etc. These flies lay their eggs generally on leaves over-hanging water. After hatching the larvae fall into the water and develop. When mature, they crawl to dry soil, pupate and after a few days emerge as adult flies. The available meagre, scattered data on the distribution of Tabanus in India comprise the catalogue by Senior-White [1927] and the records based on the speci- mens received from field workers for identification at this Institute. In order to provide an up-to-date ready reference to the distribution of species of Tabanus in India, their occurrence, compiled from various sources has been recorded in this paper. The study on the distribution of these flies has been extended as far as pos- sible to Pakistan and other surrounding countries as a knowledge of their occurrence in the neighbouring countries will be useful in devising control measures. For this purpose the division of the country into five regions on the basis of topography, climate, rainfall and vegetation, etc., as recommended by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the orientation of agricultural research, has been adopted. Their incidence has also been discussed according to four natural physical regions of the country, viz., montane, submontane, pastural, and coastal. Region 1274 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV This region contains also the submontane zone, i.e., the foot hills, with a very heavy rainfall, up to 220 inches, mostly distributed between the months of June and September. The land has a slope and the soil is generally porous. It is traversed by numerous rivers, streams and seepages of varying sizes particularly during the rains. The local rainfall has very little effect on them for unless the sub-soil water on the hills is high the streams do not have water for more than a day even if there has been heavy downpour locally. The places described above are ideal for the breeding of Tabanus flies as is evident from the fact that nineteen species have been recorded from this region. They are as follows:December, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON, AND C. M. SEN GUPTA 275 TABLE I Showing the incidence of different species of Tabanus in various regions of India and the surrounding countries Different regions of India and surrounding countries I II III IV V Ceylon Burma Perso- Baluchi Afghanistan Nicobat Islands 1 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 9 10 10 11 11 11 11 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 17 17 17 18 18 20 17 21 21 22 22 22 19 23 24 24 24 25 25 26 26 27 28 28 28 7A
276 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV TABLE IDecember, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON, AND C. M. SEN GUPTA 277 TABLE I278 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV 9. T. flaviventris Bigot 10. T. fuscomaculatus Ricardo 11. T. hybridus Wiedemann 12. T. joidus Bigot 13. T. khasiensis Senior-White 14. T. leucocnematus Bigot 15. T. macer Bigot 16. T. manipurensis Bicords 17. T. melanognathus Bigot 18. T. monotaeniatus Bigot 19. T. nemocallosus Ricardo 20. T. nephodes Bigot 21. T. obconicus Walker 22. T. obtatus Walker 23. T. rubicundus Macquart 24. T. rubidus Wiedemann 25. T. rufiventris Fabricius 26. T. sexcinctus Ricardo 27. T. speciosus Ricardo 28. T. striatus Fabricius 29. T. subhirtus Ricardo 30. T. tenens Walker 31. T. tuberculatus Ricardo 32. T. virgo Wiedemann The following nine species (1) T. albofasciatus (2) T. auriflamma (3) T. conicus (4) T. hybridus (5) T. joidus (6) T. manipurensis (7) T. melanognathus (8) T. nephodes (9) T. tropicus are specific to this region while others have crossed the regional boundary, vide Table I. Region 3December, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON, AND C. M. SEN GUPTA 279 area has an average rainfall of twenty-five to fifty inches and is largely millet growing. It is a roughly triangular undulating land of moderate elevation interespersed with tracts of somewhat higher forest-covered hills and plateaus. In parts, the land is very fertile and there are many areas of forest specially to the north and the west. The central plateau as a whole slopes to the east and almost all the rivers flow from west to east. Of these, the most important are the Mahandai draining the north-west, the Godavari and Krishna draining the central portion of the Deccan and the Pennar and Cauvery in the south. In the north, however, the rivers Tapti and Narbadda flow in the opposite direction and, passing on either side of the Satpura range, enter the gulf of Cambay. Most of these rivers form deltas at their mouth, which provide ideal breeding places for the tabanid flies. From these rivers a few irrigation projects have been developed in the south raising the subsoil water level which along with numerous ponds, borrow pits, and a moderately heavy rainfall provide innumerable breeding places for these flies. In this region twenty-one species of Tabanus are found, namely:280 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV the wet coastal area of the peninsula. Most of this part is covered with thick tropical forests though there are many areas near the coast which have been cleared for cul- tivation. The majority of the more important rivers flow from west to east forming deltas on the east coast, and afford suitable breeding sites for tabanid flies. The area has a heavy rainfall, receiving both the south-west and the north-east monsoons during which period innumerable small rivulets spring up and the land becomes water logged and provides ideal breeding places for Tabanus. Ten species of Tabanus occur in the region, namely:EXPLANATION OF PLATE XX KEY TO NUMBERS 1 Tabanus abseondong 2 T. adjacens 3 T. albocfstatus 4 T. albofasciatus 5 T. angustilimbatns 6 T. atrohirtus 7 T. auriflamma 8 T. auristriatus 9 T. bicinetus 10 T. birmanicus 11 T. brunnipennis 12 T. ceylonious 13 T. conicus 14 T. consangvineus 15 T. demellonis 16 T. discrepans 17 T. diateniatus 18 T. diversifrons 19 T. eggeri 20 T. exoelsus 21 T. explicatus 22 T. flavicinctus 23 T. flavissimus 24 T. flaviventris 25 T. fulvimediu 26 T. fuscicauda 27 T. fuscicrura 28 T. fuscomaoulatus 29 T. glaber 30 T. hirtipalris 31 T. hirtistriatus 32 T. hirtus 33 T. hybridus 34 T. indianus 35 T. indiscriminatus 36 T. joidus 37 T. jucundvs 38 T. kakhyenenais 39 T. khasiensis 40 T. leleani 41 T. leucocnematus 42 T. leucohirtus 43 T. leucopogen 44 T. macer 45 T. manipurensis 46 T. melanognathus 47 T. monotaeniatus 48 T. nemocallosus 4.9 T. nephodes 50 T. nieibarensis 51 T. nigropictus 52 T. obconicus 53 T. optatus 54 T. orientis 55 T. oxyceratus 56 T. provincialis 57 T. pulchellus 58 T. puteus 59 T. rubicundus 60 T. rubidus 61 T. rvfiventris 62 T. sexcinctus 63 T. speciosus 64 T. striatus 65 T. subcallosus 66 T. subesneraseeus 67 T. subhirtus 68 T. sufis 69 T. tenebrosus 70 T. tenens 71 T. trinominatas 72 T. tropicus 73 T. tubereulatus 74 T. virgo 75 T. wyvilled
Indian J. Vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, Part IV] Plate XX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Map Showing Distribution Of Tabanus Species Throughout The Different Regions of India and Adjacent Territories
December, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON AND C. M. S. GUPTA 281 TABLE II Showing the distribution of Tabanus flies in the different physical divisions of India, viz. montane, sub-montane, pastural and coastal Different divisions of India Montane Sub-montane Pastural Coastal 4 282 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV TABLE IIDecember, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON AND C. M. S. GUPTA 283 So far, fourteen species of Tabanus have been recorded from Ceylon. (1) T. angustilimbatus Senior-White (2) T. atrohirtus Ricardo (3) T. ceylonicus Schiner (4) T. discrepans Ricardo (5) T. flavissimus Ricardo (6) T. flaviventris Bigot (7) T. fuscicauda Bigot (8) T. fuscicrura Bigot (9) T. indiscriminatus Ricardo (10) T. jucundus Walker (11) T. puteus Ricardo (12) T. rubidus Wiedemann (13) T. speciosus Ricardo (14) T. tenens Walker Of the above, the following nine species are exclusive to this region:284 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV Of these, the following four species are exclusive to the region:- (1) T. abscondens (2) T. hirtistriatus (3) T. kakhyenensis (4) T. subcinerascens Perso-Baluchi-Afghanistan.Indian J. Vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, Part IV] Plate XXI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Map showing number of cases (all species) reported during three years 1940-42. After Basu, B. C. [1945].
December, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON AND C. M. S. GUPTA 285 TABLE III Surra cases (January 1940 to December 1942) Province or State Bovines Equines Camel cle. Total Assam 4 205 1 210 Bengal 0 7 0 7 Bihar 22 43 0 65 Orissa 21 58 0 79 Madras 265 92 0 357 Central Provinces 55 74 3 132 Bombay 50 371 0 421 Sind 37 404 67 508 Punjab 491 4,537 4,343 9,371 United Provinces 10 160 480 650 N. W. Frontier Province 0 33 0 33 Ajmer .. .. .. .. Hyderabad 28 39 0 67 Kashmir ? ? ? 67 Travancore 0 0 0 0 Rampur .. .. .. .. Patiala .. .. .. .... Jaipur .. .. .. .. Bikaner .. .. .. .. Udaipur .. .. .. .. Jind .. .. .. .. Mysore 0 0 0 0 Baroda 21 13 0 34 Gwalior 0 26 19 45 Alwar 0 7 0 7 1,004 6,069 4,913 12,058 N.B.286 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV In this paper efforts have been made to rearrange the incidence of surra on regional basis as has been done in case of tabanid flies. It is seen that in Region 1 the incidence is varied. In Kashmir the incidence is reported to be moderately low, it is very high in portions of East Punjab and Himachal Pradesh and moderately high in certain portions of Uttar Pradesh and low in portions of Bihar, Bengal and Assam. No record of surra was available from Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan. In Region 2 the range of variation of incidence varies from moderately heavy to very low. No record was available from Vindhya Pradesh. In Region 3 heaviest in- cidence was recorded in the portion of Punjab and moderately heavy infestation in Sind and part of Uttar Pradesh. The comparatively less infested areas of Kashmir, North West Frontier Province and Madhya Pradesh are also included in this region. No information was available from Greater Rajasthan, a camel raising area, and Baluchistan. In Region 4 the incidence of surra in Bombay and Madras has been reported to be moderately high and Mysore has been reported to be free from it. No report of surra was available from Saurashtra, Kutch, and Madhya Bharat. Incidence of surra in Region 5 has been recorded very low. However, with a view to establish more clearly the direct relationship between the disease and the transmitting vector, more detailed information will have to be collected to rearrange the distribution map of surra on regional basis. SUMMARY To provide a ready, uptodate reference to the distribution of Tabanus flics in India, their incidence has been plotted in a map of India. For this purpose, the country has been divided into the following five regions as recommended by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research in connection with the orientation of different agricultural research organisations in India depending mostly on rainfall, soil, type of crop, etc. Temperate Himalayan Region.December, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON AND C. M. S. GUPTA 287 Out of the seventy-five species of Tabanus recorded from India and the surround- ing countries, the following seven has been reported to be capable of transmitting surra: Tabanus ditaeniatus Mac., Tabanus macer Bigot, Tabanus nemocallosus Ricard., Tabanus rubidus Wied., Tabanus striatus Fabr., Tabanus tropicus Panzer and Tabanus virgo Wied. The incidence of surra has been recorded to be the heaviest in the Punjab followed by Sind and Uttar Pradesh in its intensity. Comparatively lower incidence of infection has been observed in Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Bombay and Madras and the least infection has been noticed in Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Hyderabad, Kashmir and North West Frontier Province. Mysore has been reported to be free from the disease. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The writers express their grateful thanks to Dr. S. Datta, Director, I.V.R.I. for necessary facilities for this work. REFERENCES BASU, B. C. (1945). Distribution and seasonal incidence of surra in India. Indian J. Vet. Sci. XV (IV), 277288 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV APPENDIX Species of Tabanus recorded from India and surrounding territories Species Place recorded from 1. T. abscondens Walker Burma, N. Chin Hills, Dawnat Range (Tenasserim), China 2. T. adjacens Ricardo Perso-Baluchistan Frontier 3. T. albocostatus Bigot India 4. T. albofasciatus Ricardo Shillong 5. T. angustilimbatus Senior-White Marble Valley (Ceylon) 6. T. atrohirtus Ricardo Ceylon, Sumatra (Mount) 7. T. auriflamma Walker Sylhet, Sibsagar (Assam), Naga Hills. Cachar 8. T. auristriatus Ricardo Gersoppa (N. Kanara), Coonoor 9. T. bicinctus Ricardo N. Kanara, Mohand (U. P.), Coonoor, Pollibett (S. Coorg), Sampaji Ghat (Coorg), F.M.S., Formosa 10. T. birmanicus Bigot Burma, Lushai Hills, Nongpoh (Khasia), F.M.S., Formosa 11. T. brunnipennis Ricardo Basi (N. Kanara), Gorakhpur (U. P.), Pusa, S. Malabar, Mbhnyin.(U. Bur- ma), Bistupur (Bankura Dist.), Puri, Dinapur (Coorg), Khurda, Santikoppa (N. Coorg), Polibetta (S. Coorg), Ranchi, Samastipur (Bihar), Kasara- gode (S. Kanara), Siam 12. T. ceylonicus Schiner Ceylon, Trincomali (Ceylon), Malay Penin., Java, Sumatra 13. T. conicus Bigot India, Calcutta, Java, Formosa, F.M.S., 14. T. consanguineus Macquart Malabar Coast 15. T. demellonis Senior-White Combarjua (Port. India) 16. T. discrepans Ricardo Ceylon 17. T. ditaeniatus Macquart N. India, Jhelum Dist., Perso-Baluchis- tan Frontier, Pusa, Bengal, Madras Coast, Ambala, Balighai (Orissa), Port. India, Mohand (U. P.), Tuticorin, Pathankot (Crosse),D. Gazipur(Crosse), Dera Ismail Khan, Mianwali (Punjab), Seistan, Tank (N. W. F.), Coimbatore (S. India), Japan, China, Hongkong, Africa (throughout), Mau- ritius, Reunion
December, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON AND C. M. S. GUPTA 289 18. T. diversifrons Ricardo Shillong, Khasia Lower Ranges, Buxar, Duars, Sylhet, Darjeeling Dist., Cal- cutta 19. T. eggeri Schiner Pers. Seistan, South Europe, Asia Minor, Egypt, Palestine 20. T. excelsus Ricardo Mashobra, Mohand (U. P.), Dehra Dun, Kangra Dist 21. T. explicatus Walker Sikkim, Khasia Hills; Coonoor 22. T. flavicinctus Ricardo Khasia Hills, Nilgiris, N. Kanara, Mohand (U. P.) 23. T. flavissimus Ricardo Java, Pundaluoya (Ceylon) 24. T. flaviventris Bigot Sibsagar (Assam), Ceylon, Calcutta, Ten- asserim, Bihar 25. T. fulvimedius Walker Nepal, N. Chin Hills, India, Formosa 26. T. fuscicauda Bigot Ceylon, Pundaluoya (Ceylon), Shewgu (Burma), Perademiya (Ceylon), Anda- man Islands 27. T. fuscicrura Bigot Ceylon 28. T. fuscomaculatus Ricardo Myitkina Dist. (U. Burma), Sikkim, Masuri, Kumaon, Manipur 29. T. glabaer Bigot Helmand River (Afghanistan), Kashgar, Mesopotamia, Persian Seistan 30. T, hirtipalpis Ricardo Bichiakoh (Nepal) 31. T. hirtistriatus Ricardo Dawnat Range (Tenasserim), F.M.S. 32. T. hirtus Walker India, Phagu (Simla D.), Nainital D., United Provinces, Mukteswar (Ku- maon) 33. T. hybridus Wiedemann Burma, Sylhet, F.M.S., Borneo, S. China 34. T. indianus Ricardo Kadra (N. Kanara), Goa (Port. India), Santikoppa (Coorg), Polibetta (Coorg), Makut (Coorg,) Mercara (Coorg) Poona, Foochow (China), Formosa, Hong- kong 35. T. indiscriminatus Ricardo Ceylon 36. T. joidus Bigot Sibsagar (Assam) 37. T. jucundus Walker Pundaluoya (Ceylon), Kohat, N.W.F. Masuri, Igatpuri (W. Ghats), Mohand (U. P.), Hongkong 38. T. kakhyenensis Senior-White Mohnyin, N. Toungoo, Phynmana (all U. Burma) 9
290 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS OF TABANUS FLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV 39. T. Khasiensis Ricardo Khasia Hills, Meerut, Sinabang (Siam), Penang 40. T. leleani Austin Kangra Valley, Seistan, Quetta, Attock Near Srinagar (Kashmir), Algeria to Mesopotamia 41. T. leucocnematus Bigot India, Lushai Hills, Khasia Hills Coo- noor, Katha (U. Burma), Darjeeling. 42. T. leucohirtus Ricardo Kanara (Bombay) 43. T. leucopogon Bigot Sikkim 44. T. macer Bigot India, Jhelum Dist., Pusa, Goa (Port India), Mohand (U. P.), Trichinopoly Pathankot, Murree, Kathgodam, Dojaion Rawalpindi, Chamba State (Punjab), Nagpur, Dharwar, Coimba- tore Taliparamba (N. Malabar), In train between Rameswaram and Madras 45. T. manipurensis Bicords Manipur 46. T. melanognathus Bigot Purneah (N. Bengal), Laos (Siam) 47. T. monotaeniatus Bigot India, N. Khasia Hills, Nongpoh (Khasia), Sibsagar (Assam), Yunnan Mohnyin (U. Burma) 48. T. nemocallosus Ricardo Pusa, Jhelum District 49. T. nephodes Bigot Naga Hills, Sibsagar (Assam) 50. T. nicobarensis Schiner Nicobar Islands 51. T. nigropictus Macquart India 52. T. obconicus Walker Central India, Bombay, Belgatchia (Bengal) 53. T. optatus Walker Belgatchia (Bengal), Bongaon (Bhagal- pur Dist.), F.M.S., Sumatra, Borneo 54. T. orientis Walker Nepal, United Provinces, Nainital, Than- diani (Himalayas), W. Bhutan, Masuri, Dongagalli (Murree Yunnan), Muktesar, Mohand, Sikhim Jhelum Dist., Kangra Dist., Dalhousi 55. T. oxyceratus Bigot India, Cheena Forest (Himalayas), N. Chin Hills, Masuri 56. T. provincialis Ricardo Arian Kava (Travancore), Kurseong 57. T. pulchellus Loew Seistan, Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, N. Africa, Cyprus, Perso-Afghan Fron- tier 58. T. puteus Ricardo Trincomali Dist., Colombo, Habarane, N.C.P. (all Ceylon)
December, 1952] B. C. BASU, P. BALARAMA MENON AND C. M. S. GUPTA 291 59. T. rubicundus Macquart India, Chargola Valley (Sylhet), Sylhet, Khasia Hills, Petsut, Katha (U. Burma), Sibsagar (Assam), Java 60. T. rubidus Wiedemann Bengal, Moulmein, Bombay, Pusa, Sib- sagar, Khasia Hills, Partabghar (U.P.), Nepal, East India, Trinco. Dist. (Ceylon), Ambala, Calcutta, Muktesar, Matheran (W. Ghats), Goa (Port India), Jhelum Dist., Masuri, Dharam- sala (Crosse), Kangra (Crosse), D. Ghazipore (Crosse), Hopin (U. Burma), Chapra (Bihar), Buxar (Bihar), Co- imbatore, Rawalpindi, Taru near Peshwar, Giridhi, Khumbala, Khurda, Khasi Hills, Bareilly, Midnapur, Kash- mir, Nongpoh (Assam) Manbhum, Delhi, Cuttack, Dera Ismail Khan, Dumraon (Bihar), Kasargode (S. Kanara), Asia, Java, Sumatra, F.M.S. Siam, Hongkong, Cochin China, Annam 61. T. rufiventris Fabricius E. India, Assam, Karwar (N. Kanara) Pusa, Lr. Khasia Hill, Lushai Hills, Sumatra, F.M.S., Hongkong, Formosa 62. T. sexcinctus Ricardo Lushai Hills, Masuri, Formosa. 63. T. speciosus Ricardo Travancore, Trinco. Dist. (Ceylon) Madras, Hazaribagh (Bihar), An- gul, Bombay, Cuddapah (Madras Pres.), Chapra, Khurda, Santikoppa (N. Coorg), Coimbatore, Dum-raon, Buxar, Bhagalpur 64. T. striatus Fabricius Kohat, Jhelum D., E. India, Pusa, Punjab, Bombay, Hissar (Punjab), Belgatchia (Bengal), Midnapur, Angul, Monghyr, Rawalpindi, Lahore, Bhagalpur, Suri, Cuttack, Dal- tonganj (Bihar), Darjeeling, Burd- wan, purulia, Ludhiana (Punjab), Kathgodam, Coimbatore 65. T. subcallosus Ricardo Masuri, Dalhousi, Muktesar, Dogaon, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Dera Dun (U. P.), Pokokku (Burma), Dunera Hills (Gurdaspur D)., Kangra (Punjab), Amparad (near Mukteswar)
292 REGIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS OF TABANUS PLIES IN INDIA [Vol. XXII, Part IV 66, T. subcinerascens Ricardo N. Chin Hills 67. T. subhirtus Ricardo Bengal, Bombay, Java 68. T. sufis Jaennicke Punjab, N. Africa, E. Africa 69. T. tenbrosus Walker Kanara 70. T. tenens Walker E. India, Ceylon-general, Bassein (Bom- bay), Madras, Pusa, Bengal-general, Burmah, Gonda D. (U. P.), E. Coast, Sylhet, Manipur, Mohmand Pass (N. W. F. P.) S. India-general, Goa (Port. India), Dehra Dun, Kasargoda (S. Kanara), Coimbatore, Berhampur, Java, Sumatra, F.M.S., Phillippines, China 71. T. trinominatus Senior-White India 72. T. tropicus aucct. Ind. nec Panzer (1794) Kathgodam,Muk- teswar (both Himalaya), Padda Sultan (Helmand), Java 73. T. tuberculatus Ricardo Companiganj (Sylhet), Belgatchia (Ben- gal), Pusa, Villupuram (S. Arcot), Stehands (Kistna) 74. T. virgo Wiedomann India, Madras, Mysore, Calcutta, Pusa, Mohand (U. P.), Jhelum Dist., Vizianagram (S. W.), D. Ghazipore (Crosse), Kangra (Crosse), Kotla (Crosse), Chapra (Bihar), Chicacole Road (Madras Pres.), Suri (Bihar), Sohawa (Punjab), Hazaribagh, Rawal- pindi, Khurda, Cuttack, Bareilly, Purulia (Bihar), Angul, Bowrah (Champaran) 75. T. wyvillei Ricardo Narkunda, Kasauli (both W. Himalayas)
BIKANER WOOL, A LEADING CARPET WOOL, AND ITS IMPROVEMENT* GURBAX SINGH MAHAL, ALEXANDER JOHNSTON AND ROBERT H. BURNS,WOOL DEPARTMENT, UNIVERSITY OF WYOMING, LARAMIE, WYOMING (Received for publication 1 February, 1952) AS a result of the increasing strain to keep up with the world economy and to raise the standards of living, serious efforts have been made to utilize the internal resources in most Asiatic countries. The improvement in agricultural economy has thus become of vital importnace; this includes the livestock industry, which forms the backbone of agricultural countries like Inida and China. Closely associated with the larger class of livestock is sheep, the importance of which has been recognized since the earliest of times as a source of food and clothing. The need for improving sheep and wool in India has attracted special atten- tion in recent years and every effort is being made for the development of the industry. The average production of wool per sheep is reported as 1.9 lbs. a year [3], which is probably lower than that for any other sheep-raising country; the entire yearly production of 54.33 million lbs. [5] from a quality standpoint is classed as a coarse carpet wool, suitable only for the production of carpets and rough blankets. In spite of producing surplus wool, with an export figure of about 41.14 million lbs. [5] every year, the country has to import 19.24 million lbs. of apparel wools in order to meet its needs for the manufacture of clothing. The total export goes into the international trade as carpet wool. Besides the need for increasing the quantity of wool per sheep, it seems that improvement of quality, both for the production of apparel wool to meet the domestic consumption and for the development of ideal carpet wool for export, would be a befitting plan for any pro- gressive program, with due regard to environmental and feeding conditions. From a preliminary survey by the Marketing Department of India [3], it appears that although the foundation stock is inferior, potentialities for improve- ment in certain breeds are not entirely lacking. One of the promising breeds of sheep, of country-wide importance, is the Bikaner, native to the northwestern parts of India in the Rajasthan Union. It derives its name from its homeland, the Bikaner State. The breed is reported to produce one of the finest carpet wools in the world [16], and the average fleece weight is reported to be as high as 6.5 lbs. [23]. Due to the superior quality of the sheep and its wool, the breed has found favour in many other states of the country294 BIKANER WOOL AND ITS IMPROVEMENT [ Vol. XXII, Part IV spite of varied climates, which in many cases are too humid, with high rainfalls, as compared with its,arid home-region, the breed is reported flourishing in Assam [15], Orissa [27], and Madras [6]. The breed already yields an enormous influence in Rajputana, Punjab, and United Provinces, and, with the growing interest to introduce the breed in southern and central India, Bikaner sheep and wool have become important in all regions of India. With a view to explore the possibilities and the potentialities for improvement of this sheep and wool, 8 representative commercial samples were analyzed in the Wool Department, University of Wyo- ming, Laramie, Wyoming. POSITION OF BIKANER WOOL Bikaner wool is unique for its length, color, quality, and loftiness as a product best suited for carpets. It always commands the highest prices in the local markets as compared with other wools, which usually are double in amount by weight [4]. Because of its superior quality, the wool is mixed by the traders with inferior wools from adjoining areas and exported to foreign countries under the trade name of Vicanere wool [4]. In recent years, wool from certain localities has been so highly appreciated for its fineness and quality that certain authorities have been inclined to believe that the wool is more suitable for clothing purposes than for carpet manufacture. A part of the wool produced is utilized by farmers in hand spinning and weav- ing for making articles of native dress and blankets, while a certain percentage goes into the manufacture of carpets and rugs. A major portion is exported from the home-region to markets in other parts of India for use in the mills and for foreign trade. The 3 types of woolDecember, 1952] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURNS 295 Before analysis the representative samples were scoured in order to remove extraneous matter. The method of scouring suggested by Johnston [22] was employed. Before analysis a final rinse in carbon tetrachloride was given. All burrs or other vegetable matter were carefully picked out from each sample by hand; the sample was then blended, by repeated splitting of the staples, for the study of different characteristics. Techniques used for Analysis The various tests and determinations made in the analysis of the samples included: medullation test; stretched fiber length measurements: fiber thick- ness; contour ratio; and surface scale structure for fiber types. Bikaner wool is of mixed type and contains different types of fibers296 BIKANER WOOL AND ITS IMPROVEMENT [Vol. XXII, Part IV Stretched fiber length measurements were made of the fiber types which were separated out in the count analysis. Burns' improved technique [13] was used for the measurements. One hundred fibers of each type were measured, except when their total number in the sample was smaller. Thickness measurements of each sample as a unit and of the fiber types after separation were made separately. Duplicate composite samples were used in the former case, while the fiber types that were used for the stretched fiber length measurements were utilized in the latter case. The longitudinal short-section method was used in the thickness measurements [1]. The minimum number of readings to come within a prescribed limit of error was first worked out by the formula employed by Roberts [28], and all measurements were made accordingly. Only 100 readings were recorded to measure the fiber types. The contour ratio, which expresses the ellipticity of the fiber cross section, was measured in terms of the ratio of the major to the minor axis [31]. Barker [8] has proved that in two wools of the same fineness, the more circular wool spins better. Hardy's technique [19] was used in making the cross sections. The cross- sectional fiber images were projected and photographed on sensitized bromide paper. The major and minor axes of each fiber cross section were measured with the bi-diameter scale and recorded. The contour ratio was worked out from these readings. The study of scale structure was made by obtaining surface impressions with the aid of a thermoplastic film according to the technique developed by Hardy and Plitt [20]. Until recent years, an efficient method for the study of scale struc- ture had been a difficult problem, but the above method gives satisfactory results. The impressions on the film were mounted on a glass slide and projected at a magni- fication of 500 diameters. Photographs of projected images were then obtained on sensitized paper, showing representative fibers for the different measurements. The attributes studied were the scale outline, the number of scales per unit length, the average visible scale height, the number of scales along the margin per 100µ length, and the relationship of scale height to fiber diameter. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Medullation Test The results of modullation test both by fiber type analysis and cross-sectional technique are presented in Table I. The fiber-count analysis reveals that the average fiber type content in the 8 samples is 58.6 per cent true wool, 29.8 per cent heterotype, 11.4 per cent hair, and 0.1 per cent kemp. The largest variation is in the true wool fibersDecember, 1952] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURNS 297 variation is from 23.8 per cent to 98.9 per cent in the former case, and from 1.1 per cent to 76.2 per cent in the latter. TABLE I Results of Medullation Test Sample number Percentage of liber types by count Percentage of total libers by cross298 BIKANER WOOL AND ITS IMPROVEMENT [Vol. XXII, Part IV average length of 800 fibers in all samples was 10.38 cm., with a coefficient of vari- ability of 31.0 per cent. TABLE II Stretched Fiber Length Measurements of Fiber Types Sample number True wool Heterotype Hair Mean (cm.) Coefficient of Variability (%) Mean (cm.) Coefficient of variability (%) Mean (cm.) Coefficient of variability (%) 1 10.24 12.2 18.17 14.7 December, 1952] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURNS 299 The range of average thickness for the true wool fibers in the 8 samples is from 16.45µ to 31.00µ, with a coefficient of variability range of from 3.8 per cent to 35.9 per cent. The average thickness of 800 fibers in all samples was 24.16µ with a coefficient of variability of 29.9 per cent. TABLE III Thickness Measurerments of Entire Samples and of the Fiber Types Sample number Entire sample True wool Hetorotype Hair Mean (µ) Coefficient of variability (%) Mean (µ) Coefficient of variability (%) Mean (µ) Coefficient of variability (%) Mean (µ) Coefficient of variability (%) 1 26.77 49.2 16.45 18.6 33.80 29-9 300 BIKANER WOOL AND ITS IMPROVEMENT [Vol. XXII, Part IV The amount of medullation and the thickness measurements of different samples apparently show a direct relation to one another. The thickness increases with increase of medullation in the sample. But, even with such increases, hair fibers with a thickness of 30µ and wool fibers with a thickness of 50µ are also en- countered, which evidently shows that thickness alone does not control medulla- tion in wool; some other factor, probably genetic, is partly, if not entirely. responsible. Contour-Ratio Measurements The contour-ratio measurements in the 8 samples are shown in Table IV. The average contour ratio in the 8 samples is 1.284, with a range of from 1.170 to 1.382. According to trade opinion, the spinning properties of wool can be divid- ed into 3 groups [31]December, 1952] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURUS 301 The average number of scales on true wool fibers per in. length is 1,900, with a range of from 1,700 to 2,300; and on heterotypical and hair fibers is 2,788, with a range of from 1,800 to 3,400. When calculated on the basis of 100µ width and the same length, the average number is 10,797, with a range of from 9,000 to 13,571, in the former case; and 5,332, with a range of from 3,214 to 7,750, in the latter. The average scale height is 16.7µ on the true wool fibers and 26.4µ on heterotypical and hair fibers. Although the number of scales per unit length on the heterotypical and hair fibers seems larger than that on the true wool fibers, it is half as much when com- pared on the equal basis of the thickness of the fiber. The number of scales along the margin per 100µ length of fiber was also worked out in the fiber types. The average for the true wool fibers was 6.4, with a range of from 5½ to 8; that for the heterotype and hair fibers was 5, with a range of from 4 to 7. A relationship of scale height to fiber thickness, designated as the "Scale Index" by Hausman [21], was also calculated for fiber types in individual samples. TABLE V Results of the surface scale structure of fiber types Sample number No. of scales per in. length No. of scales per in. length and 100µ width Average scale height (µ) True wool Hair or heterotype True wool Hair or heterotype True wool Hair or hetorotype 1 2,300 2,400* 11,250 6,000* 17.2 36.6* 2 2,000 3,400t 12,500 4,473302 BIKANER WOOL AND ITS IMPROVEMENT [Vol. XXII, Part IV The shape of the scales on the true wool fibers was of annular or coronal form (single scale along the width of the fiber), as described by Blyth [10], and resembled the segments of a young bamboo cane. In the case of heterotypical and hair fibers, the shape of the scales was polygonal or flattened. Various forms of pentagonal and hexagonal shapes were seen. It was apparent that with a smaller thickness the shape of the scales was more or less of a columnar type, but it inclined to become rectangular and flattened with increase in the thickness of the fiber. SUMMARY Eight samples illustrating average and extreme types of Bikaner wool were selected from 28 samples received from the Government Livestock Farm at Hissar, India. These 8 samples were analyzed for fiber types, dividing them into true wool, hair, heterotype, and kemp fibers. Both the benzol test and microscopic cross- sectional images were used in the classification. Fiber thickness, stretched fiber length, and contour ratio were determined for the 8 samples along with the surface scale measurements for the different fiber types. CONCLUSIONS The following conclusions are evident from the results obtained from this study: 1. The results of the count analysis of fiber types and their dimensional characteristics in the 8 samples as a whole show that the wool is very near to the carpet wool standards as worked out by Burns, Johnston, and Chen [14] and the Southwestern Sheep Breeding Laboratory at Fort Wingate, New Mexico, from their work on Navajo Sheep [2]. However, it appears that the variation in the length and fineness of fiber types is slightly largerDecember, 1952] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURUS 303 4. The analysis of medullation in the individual samples indicates that there are great possibilities for improving the wool for apparel fabrics, the variation in the fiber thickness being rather large to require particular attention. Even the finest samples, with average thicknesses of 26.55µ and 26.77µ, show variations of 34.2 per cent and 49.2 per cent. For any program of improvement, therefore, the greatest emphasis should be to attain the uniformity of fibers. The uniformity in the case of true wool fibers is fairly satisfactory. 5. The stretched fiber length of different types of fibers in the individual samples do not show any marked elongation of the outer coat compared to the inner coat as seen in most of the poor carpet wools. This characteristic is highly desirable for the spinning value of carpet wools. 6. There appears to be a relationship between the amount of medullation and the thickness of the entire sample, the diameter increasing with increased medulla- tion in the sample. However, hair fibers with a diameter of 30µ and wool fibers with a diameter of 50µ show that the diameter alone does not control medullation in wool, and some other factor, probably genetic, is partly, if not entirely, responsible. 7. The average contour ratio of the 8 samples is 1.284, designating a fair spinn- ability according to the trade opinion. One of the samples showed a very good spinnability, with a contour of 1.179, and one showed a medium spinnability. This again reflects possibilities for improvement. Higher contour ratio seems to be related to higher amount of medullation in the individual samples. 8. The average number of scales on true wool fibers with an average thickness of 17.2µ is 1,900 along one surface, which is very close to that for the fine wool Merino. When compared on the equal basis of unit length and 100µ width, the number of scales on the true wool fibers was double that found on the heterotypical or hair fibers. The outline of the scales is uniform, regular, and annular on the true wool fiber, but is irregular, with pentagonal, hexagonal and rectangular forms, on the hair and heterotypical fibers. 9. For a mass improvement of Bikaner sheep it seems necessary that only tested rams be used for breeding which show a desirable amount of medullation in the fleece and possess maximum uniformity in fiber thickness. REFERENCES 1. American Society for Testing Materials, Standards on Textile Materials, D419304 BIKANER WOOL AND ITS IMPROVEMENT [Vol. XXII, Part IV 8. Barker, S. G., "Wool Quality," London, His Majesty's Stationery Office, 1931 9. Blyth, J. S. S., Micrological Analysis of Two Fleeces from Black Face Sheep, Ann. Applied Biol. 10, 301-11 (1923) 10. Blyth, J. S. S., Studies on the Fleece Fibers of British Breeds of Sheep (in English), Z. Tier- zucht. und Zuchtungsbiol. 7, 3 (1926) 11. Bryant, D. M., A Note on the Inheritance of Kemp in Black Face Sheep, J. Text. Inst. 7, T585-7 (1933) 12. Bulgaru, I., A Morphological Study of the Wool of the White Turcana Sheep (in French), Ann. Inst. Natl. Zootech. Rouman 4, 277-93 (1935) (Abstract in Anim. Breed. Absts. 4, 188 (1935) 13. Burns, R. H., Monthly Wool Growth of Rambouillet Ewes, J. Text. Inst. 22, T100-1 (1940) 14. Burns, R. H., Johnston, A., and Chen, W. C., The Improvement of Chinese and Other Carpet, Wools, J. Text. Inst. 31, T37-48 (1940) 15. Chakrabarti, S., Assam, Upper Shillong Farm, Indian Farming 3, 290-1 (1942) 16. Chen, W. C., "Analysis and Comparison of Chinese and Other Carpet Wools," M.S. Thesis, University of Wyoming, 1939; of. reference [14] 17. Darling, F. F., Studies on the Biology of the Fleece of the Scottish Mountain Black Face Breed of Sheep (in English), Z. Zucht. und Zuchtungsbiol. B24, 3, 329 (1932) 18. Elphick, B. L., The Detection and Estimation of Medullated Fibers in the N. Z. Romney Fleeces, J. Text. Inst. 23, T367-85 (1932) 19. Hardy, J. I., "A Practical Method for Making Thin Cross Sections of Fibers," U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Circ. No. 378, 1935 20. Hardy, J. I., and Plitt, M., "An Improved Method for Revealing the Surface Structure of Fur Fibers," Wild Life Circ. No. 7, U. S. Department of Interior, 1940 21. Hausman, L. A., Recent Studies of Hair Structure Relationship, Sci. Monthly 30, 258-77 (1930). 22. Johnston, A., A Quick Method of Scouring Small Samples of Wool, Pastoral Rev. 44, No. 5, 6 (1934) 23. Kaura, R. L., Some Common Breeds of Indian Sheep, Parts I and II, Indian Farming 2, No. 4, 175 (1941); 3, No. 3, 122 (1942) 24. Lochner, J. S., "A Biological and Statistical Study of the Development of the Fleece of the Scottish Mountain Blackface Breed of Sheep from Birth to Maturity," Ph.D. Thesis, Edinburgh University, 1931 25. Munz, H., "Observations on Some Wool Samples from North Eastern Asia," Commonwealth of Australia, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Pamphlet No. 69, 1937 26. Nanda, P. N., Singh, G., and Mogre, S. B., A Rapid Field Method of Estimating Medullation in Wool and A Plan for Improvement of Village Flocks, Indian Farming 7, 585 (1945) 27. Patnaik, U., Establishment of Sheep Breeding Units in Orissa, Indian Farming 5, 65-6 (1944) 28. Roberts, J. A. F., Fleece Analysis for Biological and Agricultural Purposes, J. Text. Inst. 21, T127-64, A405 (1930) 29. Roberts, J. A. F., "Kemp in the Fleeces of Welsh Mountain Sheep," Ext. from Pub. No. 59 of Brit. Assoc. of Woollen and Worsted Industries, 1926 30. Townend, S., and McMahon, P. R., Significance of Hairiness to the Wool Textile Industry, Ext. from New Zealand J. Sci. Technol. 26, No. 1, 1-20 (1944) 31. Von Bergen, W., and Mauersberger, H. R., "American Wool Handbook," 2nd Ed., New York, Textile Book Publishers, 1948 32. Waters, R., "First Annual Report of Fleece Testing Section," Massey Agr. College, New Zealand, Bull. No. 4, 1935 33. Wilson, J. F., A Macroscopical Analysis of the Fleeces of Four Romney Rams, Hilgardia 3, No. 19, 584-99 (1929) (Manuscript received November 16, 1950)
TYPES AND DIMENSIONS OF FIBER SCALES FROM THE WOOL TYPES OF DOMESTIC SHEEP AND WILD LIFE* By GURBAX SINGH MAHAL, ALEXANDER JOHNSTON, and ROBERT H. BURNS Wool Department, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming (Received for publication on 1 February, 1952) THE study of the surface structure of wool and hair fibers is an important aid in the identification of fiber types. Besides affording a knowledge of fiber types, such a study would help determine the " healthy " state of fibers with respect to the number of scales per unit length and their shape and dimensions. The visible scale height seems to be an important characteristic for differentiation between wool and related hair fibers such as mohair and camel's hair. A special study of the epidermal structure is sometimes necessary in blends of wool and related fibers which can only be distinguished by the difference in the scale formation. Apart from ascertaining the number of scales per unit length of the fiber and their shape in relation to the felting properties of wool, some workers have tried to relate these characteristics to the different species or breeds of sheep. A study of the surface scales306 TYPES OF DOMESTIC SHEEP AND WILD LIFE [Vol. XXII, Part IV and are either convexly curved or their free edges trace out a wave-shaped line around the fiber shaft. The reticulate or hair type of scale structure has the appearance of a rather taunt net stretched across the surface of the fiber. The scales, although slightly curved, appear rather straight and smooth-sided in comparison with those of the wool type. More than two scales meet at a point, and they are often irregular in size and shape. Hausman [8], from his study of mammalian hair fibers, formulated his well- known classification dividing the scale structure into coronal and imbricate forms. The coronal scales completely encircle the corticle cylinder of the hair shaft, their free ectal edges sculptured in various forms. The imbricate scales do not indivi- dually encircle the corticle cylinder, but are arranged like the scales of a fish, with their free distal edges etched into different shapes. The two groups of scales are further classified according to their apparent structure. The coronal scales may be simple, serrate, and dentate ; imbricate scales may be ovate, acuminate, elongate, crenate, and flattened. Although the author did not include wool in his studies, the crenate and flattened types are often encountered on wool fibers. REVIEW OF LITERATURE Although scale structure has not been studied extensively in the field of wool technology, various workers have been interested in the examination of scale struc- ture. Their methods may be classified under three main headingsDecember, 1952 ] G.S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURNS 307 Hausman [6], while classifying the scale forms [8] from his drawings of the hairs of 166 fur-bearing animals [7], was able to find an interesting and surprising relationship in the scales of infrahominid mammals308 TYPES OF DOMESTIC SHEEP AND WILD LIFE [Vol. XXII, Part IV Skinkle stated further that no cases had arisen in his experience which did not fall into one of the above classes, but it is possible that some wools may have values of S slightly above 18µ but values of S3/D of 140 or less. Mirzoeva [17] made microscopic investigations' of the form and development of the scales of the wool of purebred Merino, Turkmenian fat-rumped, lomud, and Erek sheep, and concluded that the number of scales for a given length of wool (256µ) and the form and area (in µ2) are specific to the individual breeds studied and must be regarded as genetically controlled. He stated further that, contrary to the findings of D. Udolskii (whose methods were used in his study), no definite influence of breed on the number of rows of scales on a hair could be ascertained. Mathews [15] stated that the number of scales necessary to cover the circum- ference of the fiber varies considerably, depending upon the diameter of the fiber. The average height of the scales is approximately 28µ and the average width approxi- mately 36µ. In the finest wools each one of the scales is large enough to encircle the shaft of the fiber, but with increased fiber diameter the number of scales necessary to cover the circumference increases proportionately. Mathews further asserted that the visible scale height in fine wools is from 8µ to 10µ and in coarse wools it may increase to 18µ. The number of scales along the edge of the fiber per 100µ length averages 10 or 12, but may range from 6 to 14. The origin of the samples used in the present study are given in detail in Appendix Table I and may be summarized as follows : Fleece type No. of samples by origin U. S. England Asia Australia Total Wild life 4 0 0 0 4 Fine-wool breeds 2 0 0 1 3 Medium-wool breeds 10 2 0 0 12 Long-wool breeds 4 2 0 0 6 Crossbred breeds 3 0 0 0 3 Mixed-wool breeds 1 4 28* 0 33 TOTAL 24 8 28 1 61 * India Indian J. Vet. Sci., vol. XXII, Part IV] PLATE XXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Common pattern of scales revealed by surface structure of wool fibers. Coronal, or wool type of scales, and imbricate forms are represented. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Common pattern of scales revealed by surface structure of hair fibers. Polygonal (penta and hexagonal) and reticulate (flattened) forms are represented.
December, 1952 ] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURNS 309 PREPARATION OF THE SAMPLES AND METHOD OF STUDY Samples from which representative fibers were taken for the study of surface scale structure were first scoured by the emulsion method, using soap and soda, and then rinsed in water. After drying at room temperature, they were given a bath in carbon tetrachloride. Hardy and Plitt's [5] thermoplastic film technique was followed for determin- ing the surface scale structure on the different types of wool. Impressions were obtained of representative fibers, and photomicrographs were prepared with the help of a projector with a magnification of 500 × . The following measurable characters were studied : 1. Form and outline of the scales. 2. Number of scales per 1-in. length of the fiber along one surface. 3. Number of scales per 1-in. length and 100µ width of the fiber, calculated to facilitate a better comparison of different wools on a standard basis. 4. Average scale height in different types of wool. 5. Number of scales per 100µ length along the margin of the fiber. 6. Diameter of the fiber (on the photomicrograph). 7. Relation of scale height to fiber diameter, S/D, which Hausman [8] desig- nated as the scale index in his study of fur fibers. The types of scale outline were classified according to that described by Blyth [1] and Hausman [8]. The number of scales per unit length of the fiber were counted (from the photo- micrograph) along one surface of the fiber. The number of scales represented the number of complete scales plus half the number of fractional scales. The measurements of scale height and diameter were made with a millimeter scale on the magnified image. The average scale height was calculated from 10 scales taken at random. The number of scales per 100µ length along the margin of the fiber, measured with the help of a millimeter scale, represented the number of scale heights in 50 mm. length along the margin. The observations are recorded in Appendix Tables I310 TYPES OF DOMESTIC SHEEP AND WILD LIFE [Vol. XXII, Part IV Results for the Wool Type of Sheep, including the undercoat of Wild Life and the Wool Fibers of mixed Wools Sheep or wild life type No. of scales Average scale height (µ) No. of scales along margin per 100µ length Diameter of the fiber (µ) Scale index (scale height/ diameter) Per 1-in. length Per 1-in. length and 100µ width Fine woolsIndian J. Vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, Part IV] Plate XXIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Scale type and surface structure of hemp fibres from Asiatic wools. Left to right : 2 from India and 1 from China. All of fattened type. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Scale type and surface structure of hemp fibres from 3 Asiatic (Turkey) wools. All of flattened type. The fiber an the left was cracked in preparation.
Indian J. Vet. Sci., Vol. XXII, Part IV] Plate XXIV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Scale type and surface structure of kemp fibres from European wools. Left : Herdwick. Right : Swaledale. Typical polygonal type resembling a honeycomb is shown. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. Scale type and surface structure of kemp fibres from European wools. Left : Scotch Blackface. Right : Welsh Mountain. Typical polygonal type resembling a honeycomb is shown.
December, 1952] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURUS 311 Results for Types of Fibers, including the Outer Coat of Mixed-Wool Sheep and Wild Life, such as Kemp Fibers (Hair and Kemp are from Mixed Wools) Sheep type No. of scales Average scale height (µ) No. of scales along margin per 100µ length Diameter of the fiber (µ) Scaleindex (scale hight/ diameter) Per 1-in. length Per 1-in. length and 100µ width Wool312 TYPES OF DOMESTIC SHEEP AND WILD LIFE [ Vol. XXII, Part IV 2. There is a wide range in the number of scales per 1-in. length of the fiberDecember, 1952 ] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURUS 313 and 100µ width of the fiber was the largest on the undercoat fibers of the deer, numbering 26,000. 8. It is interesting to note that the scale structure of kemp fibers in the four mixed-type wools originating in England (Scotch Blackface, Herdwick, Welsh Mountain, and Swaledale) all showed a similar shape and form314 TYPES OF DOMESTIC SHEEP AND WILD LIFE [Vol. XXII, Part IV 12. Litterschied, F. M., and Abeler, C., Uber den Bau und die Erkennung von Tierhaaren, mit besonderer Berucksichtigung der Handelsfelle undpelze (in German), Zool. Jahrb. Abt. für systematik Geogr. und Biol. der Tiere 50, 377-450 (1925) 13. Lockte, T., " Atlas der menscblichen und tierischen Haare," (German Atlas), Leipzig, P. Schops, 1938 14. Manby, J., Photomicrographs of Wool Fibers, New Method, J. Text. Inst. 21, T231-6 (1930) 15. Mathews, J. M., " Mathews Textile Fibers," 5th Ed., New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1947, pp. 516-7 16. McMurtrie, W., Report Upon an Examination of Wools and Other Animal Fibers, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Washington, D. C., 1886 17. Mirzoeva, E. L., The Variability of Scales on Sheep Wool (in Russian), Trud. turkmensk.-sel. hoz. Inst. 3, 41-51 (1940) English abstract in Anim. Breed. Absts. 10, No. 3, 166 (1942) 18. Reumuth, H., and Schwerdiner, H., Microscopical Study of Scale Structure of Animal Fibers, Z. ges. Textil-Ind. (Khepzigs) 39, 612 (1936) 19. Saxinger, G., Eine neue Methode zur untersuchungdes Haarepithels (oberhäutchens), Z, Tierzucht, und Züchtungsbiol. 5, 379-88 (1925) 20. Skinkle, J. H., The Determination of Wool and Mohair by Scale Size and Diameter, Bull. Lowell Text. Inst., Series 40, No. 2 (1936-37) 21. Von Bergen, W., and Mauersberger, H. R., " American Wool Handbook," 2nd Ed., New York, Textile Book Publishers, 1948 22. Wildman, A. B., The Microscopy of Textile Fibers Aids to Their Identification, J. Text. Inst. 38, T468 (1947)
December, 1952 ] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURUS 315 APPENDIX TABLE I Scale Characteristics and Outline on Wool Fibers Country of origin Type of wool Type of fiber Scale outline No. of scales per in. length No. of scales per in. length and 100µ width Average scale height (µ) No. of scales along margin per 100µ length Thickness of the fiber (µ) Scale index (scale height/ fiber thickness) Wild life316 TYPES OF DOMESTIC SHEEP AND WILD LIFE [Vol. XXII, Part IV TABLE IDecember, 1952] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURUS 317 TABLE I318 TYPES OF DOMESTIC SHEEP, AND WILD LIFE [ Vol. XXII, Part IV TABLE II Scale Outline and Characteristics on Hair Fibers (Mixed-Wool) Breeds Country of origin Type of wool Type of fiber Scale outline No. of scales per in. length No. of scales per in. length and 100µ width Average scale height (µ) No. of scales along margin per 100µ length Thickness of the fiber (µ) Scaleindex (scale height/ fiber thickness) India Bikaner 1 Heterotype Reticulate 2,400 6,000 36.6 5.5 40.0 0.915 India Bikaner 2 Hair Imbricate, flattened 3,400 4,473 17.0 7 76.0 0.224 India Bikaner 3 Heterotype Reticulate, polyhedral 2,200 6,111 36.4 4 36.0 1.011 India Bikaner 4 Heterotype Imbricate, crenate 1,800 3,214 22.0 6 56.0 0.393 India Bikaner 5 Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,200 5,250 25.6 4 80.0 0.320 India Bikaner 6 Heterotype Reticulate, crenate 2,000 5,000 24.4 4.5 40.0 0.610 India Gujerat Hair Imbricate, flattered 3,200 7,272 13.2 7 44.0 0.300 India Deccan Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,600 5,750 24.5 6 80.0 0.306 India Bellari Hair Imbricate, crenate 3,400 7,083 13.3 8 48.0 0.277 India Nilgiri Hair Reticulare, polyhedral 2,600 7,647 12.1 6 34.0 0.356 India Tibet Hair Imbricate, flattened 3,700 8,809 11.5 9 42.0 0.274 China Sinning Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 3,500 3,723 39.5 3 94.0 0.420 China Eastern Kansu Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 3,800 5,428 34.1 4 70.0 0.487 China Sinho Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 3,600 5,806 26.0 4.5 62.0 0.419 China Kokonor Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,800 3,750 21.8 5 128.0 0.170 China Kansu Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 2,400 4,000 23.0 4.5 60.0 0.383 China Ninghsia Heterotype Imbricate, crenate 1,800 4.500 25.8 4 40.0 0.645 China Sineyuan Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,000 4,762 26.4 4 84.0 0.314 China Yung Chang Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,000 5,000 21.2 5 50.0 0.424 Turkey Akkaraman Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,200 6,562 17.4 6 64.0 0.272 Turkey Kizil Karaman Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,200 8,400 14.3 5.5 50.0 0.286 Turkey Kivircik Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,600 7,666 14.0 7.5 60.0 0.233 Turkey Daglic Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 5,200 8,125 21.8 5 64.0 0.341 England Blackface Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 5,400 6,750 25.3 5 80.0 0.316 England Herdwick Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 2,600 5,000 22.8 5 52.0 0.438 England Welsh Mountain Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 5,400 6,750 20.1 5 80.0 0.251 England Swaledale Hair Imbricate, flattened 3,200 4,571 12.2 8 70.0 0.174 U. S. Navajo Hair Imbricate, crenate 3,200 7,619 15.1 6 42.0 0.860 Austria Zackel Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,100 4,881 34.3 3.5 84.0 0.408 Russia Voloshian Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,400 6,666 35.5 2.75 66.0 0.538 Russia Donskoi Hair Reticulate, polyhedral 4,800 10,285 20.1 5 46.0 0.437
December, 1952 ] G. S. MAHAL, A. JOHNSTON AND R. H. BURUS 319 TABLE III Scale Outline and Characteristics on Outer Coat Fibers of Wild Life and Kemp Fibers of Mixed-Wool Types Country of origin Type of wool Type of fiber Scale outline No. of scales per in. length No.of scales per in. length and 100µ width Average scale height (µ) No. of scales along margin per 100µ length Thickness of the fiber (µ) Scale index (scale height/ fiber thickness) U. S. Big Horn Outer coat Reticulate, polyhedral 6,000 2,143 27.0 5 280.0 0.096 U. S. Deer Outer coat Reticulate, polyhedral 11,600 3,086 25.3 4 376.0 0.067 U. S. Elk Outer coat Reticulate, polyhedral 7,600 1,969 22.3 5 386.0 0.058 U. S. Antelope Outer coat Reticulate, flattened 14,000 2,661 19.3 5.5 526.0 0.037 India Gujerat Kemp Imbricate, flattened 3,500 2,916 11.7 9 120.0 0.097 India Daccan Kemp Imbricate, flattened 5,200 3,059 14.5 9 170.0 0.085 India Bellari Kemp Imbricate, flattened 4,000 5,405 10.8 10 74.0 0.146 China Sinning Kemp Imbricate, flattened 4,200 2,333 15.9 6 180.0 0.088 Turkey Akkaraman Kemp Imbricate, flattened 6,200 3,100 12.8 6 200.0 0.064 Turkey Kizil Karaman Kemp Imbricate, flattened 4,400 4,888 13.5 8 90.0 0.150 Turkey Kivircik Kemp Imbricate, flattened 6,000 3,529 15.0 7 170.0 0.088 Turkey Daglic Kemp Imbricate, flattened 6,500 6,500 10.7 9 100.0 0.107 England Blackface Kemp Reticulate, honeycomb 7,200 2,727 31.1 4 264.0 0.118 England Herdwick Kemp Reticulate, honeycomb 6,000 2,678 33.9 4 224.0 0.151 England Welsh Mountain Kemp Reticulate, honeycomb 5,600 2,500 28.8 5 224.0 0.129 England Swaledale Kemp Reticulate, honeycomb 5,800 4,328 27.7 5 134.0 0.207
ABSTRACT Two New Varieties of Australorps. GERICK, A. M. (1950). World's Poultry Science Journal, 6, 128-132 THE two new varieties described are : (1) White, (2) Buf. Australorps, popular as remarkable egg producers, are black in colour. They were developed in Australia by selective breeding from Black Orpington fowls (Meat type) of England. In 1931, two of the Black Australorp hens at the Agricultural College, Cape Province, showed colour changes in the. feathers, and following the first annual moult in 1932, became pure white in colour (Mutation). In the following are given the results of experimental matings and close inbreed ing :322 ABSTRACT [ Vol. XXII, Part IV at frequent intervals, amounted to 19 per cent but the losses were reduced to 7 per cert after the use of (soiled) built-up floor litter. Coccidia-infested birds were present in all the pens irrespective of management of the floor litter. By old built- up floor litter is meant the litter that was used for previous broods of chicks, indoors. It requires two or three broods of chicks before the litter may be considered as sufficiently old and suitable to bring down the mortality percentage in chicks. The continuous use of the floor litter for about a year, is required, before the full beneficial effect upon the livability of chicks can be realised. In three of the four experiments conducted, the mortality of the chicks from all causes was less on old litter. When the chicks received an incomplete ration, i.e., an all plant diet deficient in riboflavin and the unidentified animal protein factor necessary for the normal growth of chickens raised indoors, the effects of the different kinds of floor litter upon the amount of mortality were pronounced. The authors draw the attention of research workers to the urgent need for fundamental research relating to the chemical and biological processes that take place in the old built-up litter.December, 1952 ] ABSTRACT 323 and stresses the need of preventing mass infestation in young lambs under all condi- tions. In another experiment, it was observed that an increase of maize ration by 300 gm. a day caused a marked superiority in worm infested sheep as regards their body weight, appetite for roughage, haemoglobin level, fleece weight and wool fibre thickness. The immediate cause of death in cases of acute verminosis was pulmonary oedema. Phenothiazine was not only found to be superior to either tetrachlorethylene emulsion or copper tartarate and copper arsenate mixture as a vermifuge but also appeared to be a promotor of bileflow.324 ABSTRACT [ Vol. XXII, Part IV Comparative tests on eggs and fowls to determine the point of inactivation of the virus in the vaccine, during incubation showed that the egg test was less reliable, the failure of the egg test was probably the result of interference in the allantoic sac between inactivated virus and the propagation of the residual active virus. The greater accuracy of the fowl test depended, no doubt, to some extent on the larger inoculum used.December, 1952 ] ABSTRACT 325 SECTION OF PARASITOLOGY A Comparison of the Efficacy of Sulphamezathine (Sulphadimethyl Pyrimidine) and Sulphaquinoxaline in the Control of Experimentally induced Caecal coccidiosis in Chicks. KENDALL, S. B. (1950). Vet. Res. 62, 381-382 SULPHAMEZATHINE and Sulphaquinoxaline were compared at concentra- tions ranging from 0.025 (in water) to 0.25 per cent (in the food), the period of administration being usually from 48th to 120th hour after infection. Both drugs proved ineffective when administered from 72 to 96 hours after infection at a con- centration of 0.025 per cent in water. Both Sulphamezathine and Sulphaquinoxaline gave significant protection against acute coccidiosis, at a concentration of 0.1 to 0.25 per cent in the food. Sulphaquinoxaline at a concentration of 0.05 per cent in drinking water proved markedly more effective than Sulphamezathine in limiting mortality from experimentally induced caecal coccidiosis in young chicks.326 ABSTRACT [ Vol. XXII, Part IV on dams was carried out and to compensate for the possible effect due to variation in total number of classified dams and the proportion of dams in the 2 groups, weigh- ing of data was carried out. The weight finally selected was nk/n+k, where n and k are number of susceptible and resistant dams respectively. The average inter-herd regression of daughters on dams using the method was 0.259 for the 15 Canterbury herds and 0.161 for the 12 Manawatu herds. The overall average for the 2 groups was 0.191. The calculated estimate of heritability of individual differences in susceptibility to mastitis comes to 0.38 with a range of 0.06December, 1952 ] ABSTRACT 327 With this possibility in mind statistical study has been made of published data on a total of 27 feeds including dry roughages, silages and concentrates, involving 1912 trials by 386 authors. The data include proximate composition and the digestion coefficients for organic matter, crude protein, crude fibre, nitrogen-free- extract and ether extract and the contents of the total digestible nutrients in each of the three feed classes. To make the comparisons fair covariance adjustment for proximate composition was conducted. In case of dry roughages significant differences between species of animals exist for the digestibility or organic matter, crude fibre and nitrogen-free-extract and the contents of the total digestible nutrients. In case of silages and concentrates, the differences for the two species were significant only for ether extract. Thus the average differences for dry roughages are in favour of cattle on all nutrients and for silages, although significant only for ether extract, indicate that cattle tend to digest silage better than sheep. The average differences in case of concentrates, however, favour sheep on all the nutrients. Significant species-by-feed interactions were also observed for digestibility of proteins from roughages and that of ether extract from concentrates. In view of the non-interchangeability of the digestibility data for cattle and sheep and the much larger consumption of feed by cattle, it is suggested that more digestibility work be done on cattle rather than on sheep so that greater accuracy may be attained in the application of the data.328 ABSTRACT [ Vol. XXII, Part IV hay. Cotton-seed husks in concentrates were excreted at a considerably faster rate than hay. Influence of mangolds on the rate of passage of hay through the reticulorumen was not the same with each cow. The difference appeared to be related to the total in take of dry matter. Indirect evidence suggested that the rate of passage of man- golds from the reticulorumen was more rapid than that of hay. Passage of foods through the omasum, the abomasum and the intestines tended to be rapid when the diet included a high proportion of water. A decreased rate of passage of food through the reticulorumen was accompanied by a raised digestion of crude fibre and a lowered apparent faecal digestibility coeffi- ceint for crude protein and ether extractable substances.December, 1952 ] ABSTRACT 329 milk, stored milk, milk whey, cow serum and effects of injections of calf serum, cow serum and colostrum whey have been tabulated and discussed. Feeding large quan- tities of Bact. coli. had no ill effects. Agglutinins against Brucella abortus rose higher after injections of immune serum than after feeding, but the titre in both cases dropped by the 3rd week. Bactericidal properties of blood were similar for animals ranging in age from one day to one month and before or after feeding colostrum. The resistance or immunity enjoyed by the calf, either as a result of ingestion of colostrum or acquired in otherways, is discussed. It is suggested that immunity, in so far as Bact. coli infection is concerned, is independent of immune bodies to the organism and this immunity is comparable to that of a disease resistant animal. (T.P.B.). A Comparision of the Effects of Aureomycin, Penicillin and Streptomycin upon Spermatozoan Livability and Control of Bacteria in Bovine Semen. MYERS, R. M. AND ALMQUIST, J. O. (1951). J. Anim. Sci., 10(2), 322-330 THE paper deal with the effect of aureomycin upon spermatozoan motility and the control of bacterial growth in diluted bovine semen. The results are com- pared with those obtained with penicillin and streptomycin used singly and in combination. Data on stability of aureomycin in stored semen samples is also presented. The tests were carried out on 24 ejaculates. In all seven concentrations of the drug namely 12.5, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500 and 1,000 µg. per ml. of diluted semen were tried, in addition to the control, and the samples containing 1,000 units each of streptomycin and penicillin used singly and in combination. 12.5 and 25 µg. concentrations were found to be not toxic to the spermatozoan while the higher concentrations certainly were. With 50 µg. concentration the toxic effect was manifest in the later half of 14 days storage period. Levels above 50 µg. though spermicidal, materially retarded bacterial growth during the storage period studied. Penicillin and streptomycin used singly or in combination showed lesser sper- micidal properties than aureomycin hydrochloride ; the latter however, was equally efficacious in controlling bacterial growth. A concentration of 50 µg. per ml. of aureomycin hydrochloride is recommended for routine use at artificial insemination centres where semen is not normally retained for more than 4 days from the time of collection. During storage in diluted semen, aureomycin was found to be relatively stabler at 4-5°C. than at room temperatures. (S.S.P.) Spermatozoan Motility as a Measure of Semen Quality. JOHN F. LASLEY (1951). J. Anim. Sci., 10(1), 211-18 THE paper discusses data for 78 ejaculates from seven registered Hereford bulls. Motility was judged on basis of percentage of motile and progressively motile spermatozoa. Techniques are described for making these determinations. 15
330 ABSTRACT [Vol. XXII, Part IV Four distinct groups of spermatozoa are mentioned in both fresh and four days stored semen. Storage increased the dead, live but non-motile, and weakly motile sperm groups, but diminished the progressively motile sperm group, from 51.6 per cent in average fresh semen to 14.2 per cent in semen stored with egg-yolk. As progressively motile sperm cells were alone believed to take part in fertilization, caution in evaluation and use of semen is advised. Correlations between different groups and the relationship between sperm motility and conception rate are discussed. Percent motile spermatozoa as determined by haemacytometer count was found to be a good index of motility. (S.V.C.). The use of Lapinised Rinderpest virus vaccine to replace the annual inoculation of cattle previously protected with inactivated formolised spleen vaccine.BROTHERSTON, J. G. AND PURCHASE, H. S. (1952). B. Vet. J. 108, 3, 96-100 THE success of lapinised rinderpest virus vaccine having been acclaimed in China, Hong Kong and East Africa, etc., in protecting highly susceptible cattle, a field experiment was conducted by the authors at a farm in Kenya having all high-grade susceptible cattle. The state of immunity in cattle inoculated 14½ months back with formaline inactivated rinderpest tissue virus was tested by giving 14 cattle a challenge dose of virulent live virus when only 3 animals out of 14 survived. A batch of 13 cattle immunized with formaline inactivated spleen vaccine 13 months and 19 days before was then given an immunizing dose of lapinised vaccine and challenged with live virus 25 days after immunization when only one out of 13 cattle showed thermal reaction. Lastly 120 susceptible weaners, aged 8-12 months, were given lapinised virus vaccine and challenged 25 days later with virulent live virus when all cattle remained normalREVIEW DAIRYING IN INDIA, 1951. BY JAMES N. WARNER Published by MacMillan & Co. Ltd., Calcutta. Pp. 380. Price Rs. 15 THIS book, published under the auspices of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, is the second of a series of manuals relating to animal husbandry subjects. It is divided into 15 chapters. The first 3 chapters deal with dairy farming, management of dairy cattle and physiology of milk secretion. The fourth chapter presents information on the composition of milk, factors affecting the same and the nutritive qualities of milk and milk products. The next 2 chapters deal mostly with the general methods of chemical and bacteriological analysis of milk and milk products. Chapter VII is confined to dairy engineering problems connected with the management and maintenance of a dairy herd and the operations of a dairy or creamery. The next chapter covers the principles underlying such common operations as pasteurisation, separation, homogenisation, and cleaning and sterilisa- tion of dairy equipments. Chapters IX and X present comprehensive information on the methods of manufacture, properties and uses of indigenous dairy products. Chapter XI deals with the principles of production of casein, cheese, ice cream, evaporated and dried milks. The next 3 chapters deal with milk production records, dairy book keeping, marketing of milk and cooperative dairying. The last chapter presents some information on goats and other animals as milk producers. A few statements deserve some modification : Page 24, ' The calf should be per- manently marked soon after birth. This may be done by branding.' Branding is not usually done soon after birth. Page 66, ' Of the amino acid present in casein and albumin, at least three are essential.' Ten amino acids are now known to be essential. Page 69, ' The quantity of vitamin D found in milk depends.......... particularly on the amount of green feed '. It is vitamin A which is markedly influenced by the green feed. Page 90, ' In forewarming milk it is heated to as high a temperature as 230°F and held for 5 to 10 minutes.' At such a high temperature the holding period is usually much less. Page 192, ' Trisodium phospate is a valuable cleaning material. Its corrosive action may be largely overcome by adding to it 5 per cent potassium bichromate'. Dichromate is usually used to prevent corrosion by brine and not in cleansing materials. This book attempts to cover all aspects of dairying in India and as such, a few pages might have been allotted for a description of some important breeds of cattle and systems of breeding (page 3). More information would be useful on the nutritive value of milk (page 71), its supplementary effect, etc. Some attention could have been paid on the computation of simple dairy rations (p. 26), on the method of deter- mination of Reichert value and detection of adulteration in ghee, and on the calcula- tion of total solids in milk by Richmond's formula. Due to the delay in the publication of this book, the information presented by the author in some places have to a certain extent become out of date, but this defect will no doubt be remedied when a new edition is published. 331
332 REVIEW [Vol. XXII, Part IV The material is presented logically and in an easily understandable form. The general get-up of the book is good except for a few misprints. The book is well indexed and should prove of value to all who are interested in dairying, especially students, teachers, field workers and those engaged in dairy business. (K.C.S.) LITERATURE REVIEW ON FATS AND OILS, 1950 (Published by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi 1952, Pp. 28. THIS pamphlet deals with a review of the literature on oils and fats for the year 1950. It is divided into 2 sections. Section 1 deals with hydrogenated fats under different heads, viz., production and trade, chemistry and technology of hy- drogenation, nutritive value, applications, identification and analysis. Section 2 pertains to edible oils and fats and the main subheads are production and trade composition and structure, synthesis, technology and processing ; deterioration and spoilage ; nutrition and metabolism ; and lastly methods of analysis. This pamphlet is presumably intended for research workers and others interested in the field and as such its usefulness is narrowed down because of the late publication. The printing and the get up of the pamphlet is good except for a few misprints. (K.C.S.). GENERAL ZOOLOGY BY TRACY I. STORER (Published by Mc Graw-Hill, University of California at Davis in the Zoological Sciences, Second Edition, 1951. Pp. V-832, with many figures THIS well known text book has been so revised and presented in this second edition that the significant developments in Zoology have been incorporated in a form which can be easily understood by students in Colleges and Universities. Till recently Zoology was studied mainly as a descriptive Science with the basic knowledge of comparative anatomy mostly devoid of consideration of functions and mechanistic conceptions of the process of life and all the text books dealt with the subject matter accordingly, but with this change from morphology to Physiology as the basic theme text books have to be written with the same modern trend of thought ; and General Zoology by Tracy I. Storer is a good example of this change in Text-book writing. The book shows in its present revised form a considerable care and contains much useful information on almost all topics of Zoology. It is unique in this respect and is up to date. The whole account is well written and illustrated with the most suitable diagrams. Most of the illustrations are original, clear and add greatly to the usefulness of the book. Part I on General Animal Biology deals comprehensively with the various sub- jects, notably Organs and Organ systems, Heredity and Genetics, Animal Ecology, Distribution of animals, Organic Evolution, History of Zoology, Classification and International Rules of Nomenclature. The chapter on Heredity and Genetics explains in the most lucid manner the particulars of the subject in the light of most recent advancements. Addition of such subjects as hormones, genetics of human
December, 1952.] REVIEW 333 blood groups, populations, human evolution and the relation of genetics to natural selection have been made. Part II dealing with the morphology and systematics of the various divisions of animal kingdom gives all that is required for a general study. Details needed for a special study of different groups for which special text books are necessary have been rightly avoided. The synopsis of classification, however, does extend down to orders and even to the principal families in some orders. At the end of each chapter a good list or references is given. Chapter on Mankind i.e., Man's place in nature should, however, have been more comprehensive and should have dealt with the evolution of man from the point of view of the recent discoveries of ancient proto-human finds. (H.R.M.). MGIPCVol XXIII, Part I March, 1953 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20s. Rs. 3 or 5s. PUBLISHED By THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA, 1953. ICAR. 6. XXII. 1. 830.
CONTENTS Vol. XXIII, Part I (March, 1953) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles Page THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN QUALITY AND ON SOME PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF GOATS I. EFFECT ON REACTION TIME AND SEMEN CHARACTERISTICS (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) D. P. Mukherjee, A. Roy, and P. Bhattacharya 1 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN QUALITY AND ON SOME PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF GOATS II. EFFECT ON SPERM NUTRIENT AND ITS UTILISATION (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) A. Roy, D. P. Muhherjee, S. N. Luktuke, and P. Bhattacharya 9 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN QUALITY AND ON SOME PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF GOATS. III.EFFECT ON PULSE RATE, RATE OF RESPIRATION, BODY TEMPE- RATURE AND BODY WEIGHT (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) D. P. Muhherjee, S. S. Jawa, and P. Bhattacharya 15 VOLE VACCINATIONCONTENTS Vol. XXIII, Part II (June, 1953) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles PAGE. INDIAN WOOLVol XXIII, Part II June, 1953 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20s. Rs. 3 or 5s. PUBLISHED By THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA, 1953. ICAR. 6. XXIII. II. 875.
Vol XXIII, Part III September, 1953 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20s. Rs. 3 or 5s. PUBLISHED By THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA, 1953. ICAR. 6. XXIII. 3. 875.
CONTENTS Vol. XXIII, Part III (September, 1953) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles Page STUDIES ON THE EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS ON THE MILK YIELD AND ITS COMPOSITION AND MINERAL ME- TABOLISM IN SAHIWAL COWS. M . L . Mathur and S. V. Desai 143 REPLACEMENT OF PLANT PROTEINS BY ANIMAL PROTEINS IN THE RA- TIONS OF BREEDING BULLS AND ITS EFFECT ON SEMEN PRODUCTION S. S. Prabhu, S. Guha and P. Bhattacharya 175 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF SOME INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF INDIA (WITH TWO TEXT FIGURES) Narindar Nath and N. B. Das 185 EFFECTS OF SHADING AND SPRINKLING ON CATTLE AND BUFFALOES IN EGYPT M. T. Ragab, M. A. Ghany and A. A. Asker 205 Abstracts 217 Review 219
CONTENTS Vol. XXIII, Part IV (December, 1953) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal Original articles Page STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK AND FEEDS OF SAHIWAL COWS FROM PRECALVING PERIOD TO THE END OF LACTATION (WITH 13 TEXT-FIGURES) M. L. Mathur and S. V. Desai 221 ASSIMILATION OF PHYTIN PHOSPHORUS BY DAIRY COWS M. L. Mathur 243 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK. IV. EFFECT OF SOME FACTORS ON THE FREEZING POINT OF MILK (WITH TWO TEXT-FIGURES) C. S. Dharmarajan, R. Venkates- wara Rao and Noshir N. Dastur 249 THE STUDY OF NORMAL BLOOD OF SHEEP A. F. Hathoot 269 COMPARISON OF FOUR EJACULATES COLLECTED IN RAPID SUCCESSION FROM THE INDIAN WATER BUFFALO (B. BUBALIS) S. S. Prabhu and U. D. Sharma 273 FERTILITY OF BULL SEMEN PRESERVED FOR LONG PERIODS S. S. Prabhu, K. D. Bhaya and P. Bhattacharya 279 ACCURACY OF A SIMPLE METHOD FOR ESTIMATING THE PERCENTAGE OF ABNORMAL SPERMATOZOA IN SEMEN SAMPLES S. S. Prabhu and U. D. Sharma 283 PADDY-CUM-FISH CULTURE. PILOT STUDIES CONDUCTED AT HESSERAGH- ATTA AND VISWESWARAYA CANAL FARMS IN MYSORE STATE (WITH THREE TEXT-FIGURES) H. D. R. Iyengar 289 Abstracts 299 Reviews 302
Vol XXIII, Part IV December, 1953 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20s. Rs. 3 or 5s. PUBLISHED By THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA, 1954 ICAR. 6. XXIII. 4. 875.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN QUALITY AND ON SOME PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF GOATS I. EFFECT ON REACTION TIME AND SEMEN CHARACTERISTICS By D. P. MUKHERJEE, A. ROY and P. BHATTACHARYA,Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 1 April 1952) (With Text-figures) ALTHOUGH spermatozoa are produced throughout the year in farm animals, the rate of spermatogenesis and the quality of semen are greatly influenced by climatic changes. Experiments on different species of animals have shown that the climatic conditions prevailing in certain seasons are conducive to the production of good quality semen, but that the quality deteriorates very much during other seasons of the year. In India, high air temperature associated with high relative humidity and rainfall has an adverse effect on the quality of both semen and blood [Mukherjee and Bhattacharya, 1947 a and b ; Shukla and Bhattacharya, 1947 a and b]. Attempts have been made in the United States of America to improve the semen quality in rams during an unfavourable season by administration of thyro- xine or thyroactive materials. Berliner and Warbritton [1937] observed that the administration of thyroxine to rams during the summer improved the quality of semen. This observation has been supported by Bogart and Mayer [1946], Warwick et al. [1948] found that rams which tolerated the dosage of thyroactive protein administered to them produced in the summer semen which was either equal to or slightly better in quality than that produced by the control group. But the treatment of rams with thyroactive protein during spring had a deleterious effect on semen quality. Eaton et al. [1948] reported that thyroprotein (1 and 2 gm.) given to rams daily from May to September did not improve their semen quality. In view of the conflicting results obtained by the above mentioned workers and especially because in India there is a very long period of high environmental temperature, the present investigation was undertaken to study the effect of the administration of thyroactive protein on semen quality and ' reaction time ' of goats during the summer, the most unfavourable period for semen production. MATERIAL AND METHODS Experimental animals comprised 14 male goats between 1 to 2½ years of age. Before the commencement of the experiment they were trained to mount on anoes- trous female and ejaculate semen in the artificial vagina. After the animals were properly trained, they were divided into two groups of seven each as evenly as
2 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (I) [Vol. XXIII, Part I, possible on the basis of semen qualities produced during the ' pre-treatment period ' of three weeks. Throughout the experimental period, the animals were kept under uniform dietary and managerial regime. The concentrate supplied consisted of the following ingredients. Rape cake 1000 parts by weight Wheat bran 200 March, 1953] D. P. MUKHERJEE, A. ROY AND P. BHATTACHARYA 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Weekly average 'reaction time' and semen quality of two groups.
4 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (I) [Vol. XXIII, Part I, TABLE I Average of reaction time and semen qualities of control and experimental groups of goats Pretreatment period Treatment period Control group Experimental group Difference between the two means t. value Control group Experimen- tal group Difference between the two means t. value Reaction time (in seconds) 31.3±3.31 24.26±1.60 7.04 1.786 32.6±2.33 28.77±1.06 3.9 1.429 Volume of semen in ml. 0.54±0.04 0.43±0.05 0.10 1.617 0.63±0.03 0.50±0.03 0.13 2.915** Initial motility of spermatoza 4.35±0.11 4.16±0.06 0.19 1.083 4.21±0.04 4.29±0.07 0.08 0.992 Sperm concentration in millions per ml. of semen 5368±247.88 5025.00±296.20 343 0.948 4322±186.94 4987±142.23 665 2.707* Total number of spermatozoa in millions 2778±242.0 2159±222.0 619 1.855 2761±219.99 2287±128.6 474 1.769 Percentage of abnormal sperma- tozoa 3.35±0.40 5.26±0.56 1.91 2.852** 6.66±0.30 9.62±1.01 2.96 3.262 ** Significant at one per cent.
March, 1953]. D. P. MUKHERJEE, A. ROY AND P. BHATTACHARYA 5 that the sperm concentration of the control group gradually decreased during the experimental period. Administration of thyroprotein to the animals of the exper- mental group not only prevented this decrease but also raised the sperm concen- tration. ' Reaction time ' and the rest of the semen characteristics did not appear to have been greatly affected by thyroprotein feeding. Table I shows the average ' reaction time, ' and, the averages of the semen characteristics of the two groups, together with the results of statistical analysis of data regarding these characteris- tics during the entire experimental period. The statistical analysis was done according to the method described by Goulden [1939]. During the pretreatment period, the two, groups were almost identical in all the characteristics under study, except in the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. The difference in the average percentage of abnormal spermatozoa between the two groups was found to be highly significant, the average in the experimental group being higher than in the control group. During the treatment period, highly signi- ficant differences in volume of semen, sperm concentration and percentage of abnor- mal spermatozoa were found in the two groups. The differences in average ' reaction time ' and other characteristics of semen as found between the two groups were due to chance variation. The experimental group showed a highly significant decrease in semen volume as against the control group, but it showed a highly significant increase in the sperm concentration. As in the pretreatment period, the difference in the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa remained highly significant ; the percentage in the experimental group was higher than in the control group. It seems, therefore, that the dosage of thyroprotein administered to the animals had an adverse effect on semen volume. It undoubtedly increased the sperm concerntration per ml. of semen, but failed to reduce the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. DISCUSSION As the various methods used for evaluating the quality of semen are all sub- jective and as no one method gives a correct appraisal, it is desirable that each semen sample be subjected to several methods of analyses. Various physical tests, therefore, were made in this experiment while studying the effect of thyroprotein feeding on semen quality of goats during an unfavourable part of the year. The results show that feeding of 1 gm. of thyroprotein daily increased the sperm con- centration per unit volume of semen. This result, on the whole, agrees with that of Bogart and Mayer [1946] in rams. It appears that of the many probable factors one, which perhaps accounts for low sperm concentration in goats during the un- favourable seasons [Shukla and Bhattacharya, 1947 b], is subnormal secretion of thyroid hormone. It is common experience of workers in artificial insemination of farm animals that high initial motility is generally found to be associated with high sperm con- centration. The reason for the absence of significant difference in average initial motility between the experimental and control groups might be due to the fact that initial motility rating as appraised in this experiment was not determined by a very precise method for evaluating semen quality. The method could at best
6 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN. (I) [Vol. XXIII, Part I, be used to distinguish a very good sample from a very bad one. Grading of samples with small differences is almost impossible by this method. The dosage of thyroprotein administered to the animals was found to have a deleterious effect on semen volume. The total volume of semen of the experi- mental group was found to be much lower than that of the control group. A conse- quential effect of such reduction in volume was that the total number of sperma- tozoa failed to show any significant difference between the two groups, in spite of the higher sperm concentration of the experimental group. According to Bogart and Mayer [1946] ' the results of a concentration count are indicative of the sperma- togenic activity of the male, but do not give a true evaluation unless the semen volume is also considered and a calculation of the total spermatozoa per ejaculate is made. To gain any degree of insight into the effect of high temperature and thyroxine upon spermatogenesis the data on total spermatozoa per ejaculate and the semen volume must be considered.' Judged on the basis of these factors, the present investigation shows that thyroprotein feeding has little effect on spermato- genesis. Bogart and Mayer [1946] found that thyroactive protein fed at the daily dosage level of 1 gm. per ram failed to maintain or raise semen volume during periods of high temperature. But the decrease in volume due to high environmental temperature was less in the treated group than in the control group. This obser- vation is contrary to what has been found in the present experiment. The reason for the decrease in semen volume might be due to the high dosage of thyroprotein administered to the animals. The percentage of abnormal spermatozoa was found to be uninfluenced by thyroprotein feeding. This result is not in agreement with those of some previous workers. Bogart and Mayer [1946] found that by feeding 1 gm. of thyroprotein per day per ram for a period of 30 days during the summer, the percentage of abnor- mal spermatozoa decreased considerably. Berliner and Warbritton [1937] reported that two intact and one thyroidectomised Hampshire rams with high abnormality counts returned to normality after the administration of two doses (2 mg.) of thy- roxine in August. In contrast to these results Eaton et al., [1948] observed that feeding of thyroprotein to rams for 15 weeks, increased the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. In the present experiment, some of the animals of the experimental group after four weeks of thyroprotein feeding produced semen containing 30 to 40 per cent beaded spermatozoa. These were included as abnormal spermatozoa although such spermatozoa have been identified by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1949] as immature forms. The increase in the percentage of beaded spermatozoa in some of the animals and their inclusion as abnormal sperm in the computation of results might have masked the beneficial effect of thyroprotein feeding on other true abnormalities. But in a study from the point of view of semen utility, the beaded spermatozoa cannot be excluded from the computation of results because they, like the other abnormalities, reduce the fertilising capacity of semen. ' Recation time ' is an indications of sex vigour. Reineke [1946] found de- finite improvement in sex drive and vigour by oral administration of thyroprotein to 14 bulls which were sluggish, lethargic and showed lessened libido before treatment. Turner et al. [1943] found that a Toggenburg buck, which showed a definite lack of interest in oestrous does, displayed sexual interest after the feeding of one gram of
March, 1953] D. P. MUKHERJEE, A. ROY AND P. BHATTACHARYA 7 thyroprotein per day. It seems that the lack of sexual urge or libido in males born with hypothyroid condition may be remedied by the administration of thyroprotein. But the hypothyroid condition created in males by external factors, such as high air temperature, high relative humidity and high rainfall, does not reduce the sexual behaviour of the animal. Therefore, the feeding of thyroprotein seems to have little effect on the sexual activity as measured by the ' reaction time '. SUMMARY Observations made on seven goats treated with thyroprotein and seven control animals for a period of 14 weeks during May to August revealed the following. (1) Thyroprotein feeding had no significant effect on the ' reaction time ', initial motility, total number of spermatozoa per ejaculate and percentage of abnor- mal spermatozoa. (2) Sperm concentration increased due to thyroprotein feeding. (3) A highly significant decrease in semen volume was obtained due to the administration of the drug. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are grateful to Dr. S. Datta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for his kind interest in this work. REFERENCES Berliner, V. and Warbritton, V. (1937). The Pituitary and Thyroid in Relation to Sperm Pro- duction in Rams. Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod. 30 Ann. Meet. 137 Bogart, R. and Mayer, D. T. (1946). Environmental Temperature and Thyroid Gland Involve- ment in Lowered Fertility in Rams. Mo. Agr : Expt. Sta. Res. Bull. 402 Erb., R. E., Andrews, F. N. and Hilton, J. H. (1942). Seasonal Variation in Semen Quality of Dairy Bull. J. Dairy Sci. 25, 815 Eaton, O. N., Schott, R. G., Simmons, V. L. and Franks, A. H. (1948). The Effect of Feeding Thyroprotein on Semen Characteristics of Rams. J. Anim. Sci. 7, 449 Goulden, C. H. (1939). Methods of Statistical Analysis. Pub. Chapman and Hall, Ltd. Mukherjee, D. P. and Bhattacharya, P. (1947 a). Seasonal Variation in Semen Quality and Haemoglobin and Coll Volume Contents of Blood in Bulls (In press). (Abst.) Proc. Indian Sci. Congr. 3, 215 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN QUALITY AND ON SOME PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF GOATS II. EFFECT ON SPERM NUTRIENT AND ITS UTILISATION BY A. ROY, D. P. MUKHERJEE, S. N. LUKTUKE AND P. BHATTACHARYA, Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 1 April 1952) With one Text-Figure APART from actual fertility tests, no one method can forecast the fertilizing capa- city of semen. The available methods for the grading of semen are all subjected and unless several such methods are applied simultaneously the conclusions may be of 'dubious value. In Part I of this series, data on the influence of thyroprotein on semen quality as determined by microscopical methods were presented. The data obtained by biochemical methods might further elucidate the efficacy of the administration of thyroprotein in improving the quality of semen. With the iden- tification and isolation of fructose as the only glycolysable sugar present in semen [Mann, 1948], an entirely new method10 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (II) [Vol. XXIII, Part I, TABLE I Summary of statistical analysis of average IFC, rate of fructolysis and MBRT of semen of goats Control group Experimantal group Difference between the two means tMarch, 1953] A. ROY, D. P. MUKHERJEE, S. N. LUKTUKE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 11 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Per lines marked * have been dealt in part 1 of the present series
12 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (II) [Vol. XXIII, Part I, In Table II, the IFC, the rate of fructolysis and MBRT have been arranged as they were found to stand in relation to various levels of sperm concentration. The groupings of the various ranges of sperm concentration as shown in this table were arbitrary. It will be evident from the table that with the increase in the sperm concentration per unit volume, (i) the IFC per 100 ml. decreased, (ii) the rate of fructolysis showed a concomitant rise, and (iii) the time required to reduce methy- lene blue became less. Correlation co-efficients between sperm concentration and the three semen characteristics, as worked out by the method described by Goulden [1939] are given below: Correlation between sperm concentration per unit volume of semen and (i) IFC per 100 ml. of semen March, 1953] A. ROY, D. P. MUKHERJEE, S. N. LUKTUKE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 13 difference in the IFC and rate of fructolysis were only significant at five per cent and two per cent levels, respectively. Differences between samples with ++++ and +++++ initial motility were highly significant in all the four characteristics. DISCUSSION Since they discovered that fructose is the only glycolysable sugar present in semen, Mann and his collaborators have investigated the possibility of its utilisation from various aspects. In one of their communications [Mann, 1948] it was reported that the 'fructolysis index' of a good semen sample obtained from healthy bulls with good fertility records was between 1.4 and 2.0 mg./10 sperm/ hour. Further, the semen samples obtained from animals with poor fertility records were character- ised by a low content of fructose. Besides these, the rate of fructolysis now appears to be the most satisfactory method for assessing not only sperm activity but density as well [Rothschild, 1949]. In an endeavour to put the relation of sperm concen- tration to the degree of fructolysis on a quantitative basis, we found in the present investigation that the ranges of sperm concentration and fructolysis were significantly correlated and that the IFC and sperm concentration were also similarly related. This higher correlation coefficient, therefore, indicated that for the estimation of sperm concentration a high accuracy existed in the measurement of IFC and fruc- tolysis. This was found to be so, not only in goats but also in rams and buffaloes [Roy, et al. 1950]. Semen samples with higher sperm concentration and higher initial motility have been found to reduce methylene blue much faster than those with lower sperm concentration and lower initial motility. This finding agrees with those reported by Van Demark, et. al. [1945] in bull semen. Warwick et al. [1948] found that semen, obtained from rams receiving 0.5 g. of thyroprotein, had high initial motility and reduced methylene blue faster than samples obtained from either the control group receiving 1.5 gm. of thyroprotein. The results obtained in this experiment show that the average MBRT of the experimental group did not differ significantly from that of the control group. This is due possibly to the fact that MBRT, like initial motility of the spermatozoa, is not a precise method of appraising of semen quality and can only be used for differentiating semen samples of widely varying qualities. When the variation is small, the evaluation of quality even within reasonable limits by the use of this method, in our experience, is a difficult task indeed. SUMMARY Thyroprotein feeding had no significant effect on methylene blue reduction time of semen. Initial fructose content decreased and the rate of fructolysis of semen increased significantly due to thyroprotein feeding. Highly significant negative correlation coefficients were found between sperm concentration and initial fructose and methylene blue reduction time. There was highly significant positive correlation coefficient between sperm concentration and rate of fructolysis of semen. 3
14 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (II) [Vol. XIII, Part I, ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are grateful to Dr S. Datta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for his kind interest in the work. REFERENCES Goulden, C. H. (1939). Methods of Statistical Analysis. Pub. Chapman and Hall, Ltd. Mann, T. (1948). J. agric. Sci. 38, 323 Mukherjee, D. P., Roy, A and Bhattacharya, P. (1952). J. vet. Sci. (In press) Rothschild, Lord (1949). Nature 163, 358 Roy, A., Luktuke, S. N., Bhattacharya, S., and Bhattacharya, P. (1950). Indian. J. dairy Sci. 3, 161 Van Demark, N. B., Mercier, E. and Salisbury, G. W. (1945). J. dairy Sci. 28, 121 Warwick, E. J., Childs, C. E., Flower, A. E. and Ham, W. E., (1948). J. anim. Sci. 7, 198.
THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN QUALITY AND ON SOME PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF GOATS III. EFFECT ON PULSE RATE, RATE OF RESPIRATION, BODY TEM- PERATURE AND BODY WEIGHTS BY D. P. MUKHERJEE, S. S. JAWA AND P. BHATTACHARYA, Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 1 April 1952) (With two text-figures) IN Parts I and II of the present series the results of feeding thyroprotein to goats on their semen characteristics and 'reaction time' have been reported. It was found that by feeding one gram of thyroprotein per day per animal during May to August, sperm concentration per unit volume of semen increased with concomitant decrease in seminal fructose and increase in the rate of fructolysis. There was also an appreciable decrease in the volume of semen. The other characteristics of semen remained unaffected. That the improvement brought about in semen quality was rather apparent than real was also discussed in Part I. The results of investigations on the effect of season and/or feeding thyroprotein to animals on their semen quality are likely to be influenced by the various clima- tological factors obtaining during the period of observations. It is, necessary therefore, to correlate the results obtained in such investigations with the relevant detailed climatological data. This may provide a satisfactory general explanation for the various contradictions found in the literature on the influence of seasons or thyroprotein feeding on semen quality. In the present paper, therefore, besides the effect of feeding thyroprotein, on pulse rate, rate of respiration, body temperature and body weight of the goats, detailed information regarding the more important climatological factors prevailing during the course of the experiment and their effect on goats have also been reported. MATERIAL AND METHODS Pulse rate, rate of respiration and body temperature of each animal were re- corded daily and their weekly body weight record was maintained during the entire experimental period, i.e. from May to August. These observations were made in the morning before the animals were let out for grazing. Daily readings of maximum, minimum, dry and wet bulb thermometers were noted in a well ventilated shed. The readings were taken once a day at about 7 a.m. from the records the average weekly air temperature and relative humidity have been calculated. Body tempera- ture was taken by means of a clinical thermometer inserted in the rectum. Pulse rate was determined by feeling the femoral artery with the tips of the fingers. Rate of respiration was determined by the use of a stethoscope applied on the chest wall of the animal. 15 4
16 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (III) [Vol. XXIII, Part I, RESULTS The results of the statistical analysis of pulse rate, respiration rate, body tem- perature and body weight of the animals during the pretreatment and treatment periods are presented in Table I. TABLE I Summary of statistical analysis of average pulse rate, rate of respiration, body tempera- ture and body weight of the animals during the pretreatment and treatment period. Pretreatment period Treatment period Control group Experi- mental group Differ- ence between the means tMarch, 1953] D. P. MUKHERJEE, S. S. JAWA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 17 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Weekly variations in body weight, body temperature, rate of respiration and pulse rate of goats 4 A
18 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (III) [Vol. XXIII, Part I. with the increase in relative humidity. From the 11th to 16th week there was a conspicuous increase in rainfall and as a result the humidity increased and the air temperature decreased. The net effect of these atmospheric changes on the animals was a decrease in their pulse rate and respiration rate. The air temperature, relative humidity and rainfall prevailing during the treat- ment period showed fluctuations as indicated in Table II. TABLE II Summary of air temperature, relative humidity, rainfall, body temperature, respiration rate, pulse rate and body weight for the treatment period Treatment period Range Mean with its standard deviation Air temperature (°F.) 77.6March, 1953] D. P. MUKHERJEE, S. S. JAWA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 19 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Weekly variations in average rainfall, humidity and air temperature
20 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (III) [Vol. XXIII, Part I, Table III Partial correlation co-efficients between atmospheric factors and the physiological conditions of the goats during the treatment period Atmospheric temperature Relative humidity Rainfall Control Experi- mental Control Experi- mental Control Experi- mental Pulse rate +0.510 +0.341 March, 1953] D. P. MUKHERJEE, S. S. JAWA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 21 pulse rate as was due to one per cent change in humidity and one inch change in the rainfall, respectively. Similarly, the examination of the regression coefficients in the equation for the experimental group shows that one degree change in the atmos- pheric temperature caused four times and five times as much change in the pulse rate as was due to one per cent change in humidity and one inch change in the rainfall, respectively. From the two equations it is apparent that of the atmospheric temperature, humidity and rainfall, it was the air temperature which was com- paratively the important cause for fluctuations in pulse rate of both the groups. The effect of atmospheric temperature on the rate of respiration, when the humidity and rainfall were held constant, showed that with the increase in the atmospheric temperature, the rate of respiration of the experimental group increased highly significantly, but this was not so in the control group. An increase in relative humidity, when temperature and rainfall were held constant decreased the rate of respiration in both the groups. From the sizes of the correlation coefficients it is apparent that the control group reacted more sensitively to changes in humidity than did the experimental group. Effect of rainfall, when humidity and air tem- perature were held constant, was found to be insignificant in both the groups. The value of R in the control groups is 0.836, and 0.931 for the experimental group. These values of R suggest that under the combined atmospheric changes in temperature, humidity and rainfall, the rate of respiration of the thyroprotein treated animals tended to react in a more sensitive manner than in the control group. The multiple regression equations for the estimated rates of respiration of the two groups are as follows. Control Group Y=35.1222 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (III) [Vol. XXIII, Part I, factors were held constant. The values of R for control and experimental groups are 0.206 and 0.361, respectively. These values are non-significant. DISCUSSION The increase in pulse rate, rate of respiration and body temperature of the experimental group indicated that by feeding thyroprotein to the animals their basal metabolism increased. The conspicuous decrease in the body weight of the treated animals clearly indicates that the administration of thyroprotein at the rate of one gram daily (this is the dose recommended by the manufacturer) continuously over a long period proved excessive. The effect of an over-dose was shown by majority of the animals after 8 or 9 weeks of thyroprotein feeding by their lethargic movements and dull coat colour. To study the reactions of the two groups to the variable atmospheric conditions under which the experiment was conducted, the data on pulse rate, rate of respiration and body temperature of the animals and atmospheric factors were statistically analysed. From the partial correlation coefficients in the control group, it is apparent that humidity played a significant part in the fluctuations of the pulse and respiration rates. Increase in humidity decreased the pulse and respiration rates and vice versa, when air temperature and rainfall were held constant. Sheath and Miller [1946] found that in dairy animals, changes in air temperature or relative humidity had little effect on the pulse rate. They further observed that relative humidity played a minor role and air temperature a major role in the variation of respiration rate. Sheath and Miller recorded an average relative humidity of 56.8 per cent during their study, whereas in this experiment the average humidity was observed to be 72.8 per cent (Table II). It may be possible that a low relative humidity of 56.8 per cent has little effect on the rate of respiration and pulse rate. During the variations in air temperature, humidity and rainfall, it was found, as already stated, that fluctuations in air temperature played a major role in the variation of pulse rate. Under similarly variable atmospheric conditions the varia- tions in the rate of respiration were mainly due to changes in humidity. Importance of the variations in pulse and respiration rates may be explained as follows: Homeothermic animals, like goats, maintain their normal body temperature with the help of thermo-regulative devices. One of the major physical mechanisms in such animals for dissipating their extra body temperature is by the acceleration of their respiratory mechanisms. In this experiment it was found that when the humidity increased the air tempe- rature decreased (partial correlation coefficient being March, 1953] D. P. MUKHERJEE, S. S. JAWA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 23 In the experimental group, it has been found that during the combined variations in air temperature, relative humidity and rainfall, it was the air temperature which was comparatively the most important cause of variations in both pulse and respira- tion rates. The partial correlation coefficients between pulse rate and atmospheric factors in this group suggest that not a single atmospheric factor played any signi- ficant role on pulse rate when the other two factors were held constant. Rate of respiration on the other hand was influenced by air temperature and humidity. An increase in air temperature increased the rate of respiration (partial correlation coefficient being +0.727) and increase in relative humidity decreased the rate of respiration (partial correlation coefficient being 24 THE EFFECT OF FEEDING THYROPROTEIN ON SEMEN (III) [Vol. XXII, Part I, inch change in the rainfall, respectively. Likewise, in the treated group one degree change in air temperature caused four and five times as much change as was due to one per cent change in humidity or one inch change in rainfall, respectively. Multiple regression equations for respiration rates indicate that in the control group relative humidity played a major role in the fluctuation of respiration rate whereas, in the treated group it was the air temperature which played the major role. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are grateful to Dr S. Datta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for his kind interest in this work. Thanks are also due to Mr. S. Sen, for his help and advice given regarding some of the statistical analysis of the date. REFERENCES Goulden, C. H. (1939). Methods of Statistical Analysis. Chapman & Hall, Ltd. S1, 78 Snedecor, G. W. (1946). Statistical Methods. Collegiate Press, Ames, Lowa, 360 Sheath, D. M. and Miller, G. D. (1946) The Relative Importance of High Temperature and High Humidity as factors Influencing Respiration Rate, Body Temperature, and Pulse Rate of Dairy Cows J. Dairy Sci. 29, 465
Reprinted from the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry 1953, Vol. XXII, Part I (March), Pages 2526 VOLE VACCINATION [Vol. XXIII, Part I, The vole bacillus possesses certain characters, which distinguish it from the human, bovine or avian types of tubercle bacilli. One of the important distinguishing features is its shape. The majority of the bacilli are bent into various forms, which have been likened by Griffith [1942] to a shepherd's crook, a sickel, a spiral or the letter S. It is not uncommon to see the bacillus even forming a complete circle. There are, however, characteristics of the vole bacillus, which make it impossible to classify this organism otherwise than as a type of tubercle bacillus. The vole bacillus has, therefore, been recognised as a third mammalian type of tubercle bacillus and is named as the 'murine type'. It occurs naturally, mostly in wild voles (Microtus agrestis) and also in bank vole (Clethrionomys glareolus), the wood mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus) and shrew (Sorex araneus). Wells [1937] found it in. wild tuberculous voles in aforested parts surrounding Lake Vyrnwy Estate in Wales. Such naturally infected voles were found in other places in England as well. Vole bacillus was found to be incapable of producing progressive disease in laboratory animals, except when administered in very large doses. This observation suggested the possibility that a passing infection with this organism might confer some protection against subsequent infection with human or bovine tubercle bacilli. Wells and Brooke [1940] studied the resistance produced in guinea-pigs on vaccination with vole bacilli to subsequent infection with virulent tuberculous organisms. The guinea-pigs were killed after eleven weeks of the test dose. On, post-mortem examination it was observed that the animals which had received an immunising dose of vole bacilli showed notably less tuberculous infection than the controls or those which had been injected with B.C.G. Similar experiments were also carried out on guinea-pigs by Griffith and Dalling [1940]. Ten animals were given subcutaneously 10 mg. of a culture of vole bacilli divided in nine doses, eight of 1 mg. each and the last of 2 mg. The interval between consecutive injections was one week. Four weeks after the last dose the immunised animals and the five controls were each injected subcutaneously with 0.001 mg. of virulent bovine-tubercle bacilli. All the controls died of severe generalised tuberculosis in an average of 87 days, whereas the vaccinated animals died in an average of 152 days also of severe genera- ralized tuberculosis. They found in another experiment that controls died in an average of 152 days, also of severe generalized tuberculosis. They found in another experiment that controls died in an average of 71 days and the vaccinated animals which were killed 94 to 95 days after infection, showed lesions of the disease of a moderate degree. They concluded that all the animals vaccinated with vole bacilli were more resistant to tuberculosis than the controls. Living tubercle bacilli were, however, present in the lesions of the vaccinated animals, which suggests that these bacilli would have caused progressive fatal disease when the immunising effect of the vole acid-fast bacilli had faded. Similar experiments were repeated on calves. The results of their preliminary experiment on calves [Griffith and Dalling, 1940] are given below: Nine calves were given varying doses (total quantity of the culture received by different calves ranged from 1.1 mg. to 125 mg.) of vole bacilli, by the intravenous or subcutaneous routes or by the combination of both and two animals were kept as controls. These animals were killed 208 to 223 days after infection with a dose of virulent bovine tubercle bacilli, which was sufficient to produce progressive
March, 1953] J. M. LALL AND N. C. SEN 27 tuberculosis in normal animals. All the calves developed sensitiveness to tuberculin after vaccination. The vaccinated animals showed trivial tuberculous lesions in glands of the alimentary tract, while marked lesions were found in the glands of the controls. The authors concluded that the results obtained with vole vaccine were unexpectedly good, better than those which followed the use of B.C.G. as a vaccine. With a view to determine that the vole bacillus was safe for human beings, Sahai [1942] tested the strain on monkeys, which is the only readily available species of animals closely related to man. One monkey was given intravenously 1.0 mgm. of a young culture and another 10.0 mgm. subcutaneously. Both the monkeys remained well during the entire period of observation (146 days and 126 days res- pectively), though the monkey inoculated subcutaneously developed a local lesion at the site of inoculation which burst, but the resulting ulcer healed spontaneously and the animal did not show any disturbance in the general health. The one inocu- lated subcutaneously was killed after 126 days and the other after 146 days for a thorough post-mortem examination. No lesions were met with in any of the internal organs and cultures made therefrom remained sterile. The monkeys were tested repeatedly with human tuberculin both intradermally and subcutaneously. In the former case 0.1 ml. of tubarculin diluted 1:10 and 1:50 was inoculated into the skin on the flexor aspect of the forearm, while for the subcu- taneous test 1.5 to 2.0 ml. of diluted tuberculin (1:10) was injected under the skin in the upper arm. In no case any characteristic reaction was observed. It is well known that cattle and guinea-pigs infected with the vole strain of acid-fast organisms show strong and distinct allergy, to mammalian tuberculin, so perhaps the negative results in these monkeys may be due to the general unsatis- factory nature of the tuberculin test in this species of animal. Sahai [1943 and 1944] again demonstrated the almost complete innocuousness of this organism (strain LV 285) for monkeys. He administered doses as large as 10 mgm. intravenously, subcutaneously, intraperitoneally or by combination of the different routes to ten monkeys, but none showed any ill-effect excepting the develop- ment of local abscesses after subcutaneous inoculation which healed spontaneously. One monkey was given only a single dose of the culture, others received two to four. Two of the monkeys died of dysentery before they could be tested for immunity. The rest, along with three controls, were injected subcutaneously in the left axilla, some two months after the administration of the last dose of vole bacilli with 0.00001 mgm. of a bovine culture. One of these vaccinated monkeys, again died of dysentery after being given the test dose. Of the remaining seven monkeys, one died of severe tuberculosis 193 days after the test dose; the rest were destroyed after 242 to 247 days and they all showed on post-mortem examination generalized tuberculosis of a more or less severe type and in all cases live tubercle bacilli were isolated from the lesions by guinea-pig inoculation. The extent of the disease in the vaccinated animals as a whole differed but slightly from that seen in the control monkeys. So perhaps vaccination with the vole bacillus by any route or combination of routes did not produce any appreciable resistance in monkeys. 6A
28 VOLE VACCNATION [Vol. XXIII, Part I, There are two facts about the above experiment to which attention might be drawn in trying to explain the discrepant results obtained by Sahai and those obtained by other workers in guinea-pigs. The first of these relates to the virulence of the strain used in these experiments. This strain, LV 285, had been isolated from a vole many years back in England and, as far as the writer [Sahai] is aware, has been maintained continuously in artificial culture on an egg medium; at any rate it has been so maintained since its receipt in this laboratory nearly two years ago. The vole bacillus, according to A.E. Griffith, is moderately pathogenic for rabbits and guinea-pigs when inoculated in large doses intraperitoneally or intravenously, but tests with the strain used in this experiment have shown that it has now become almost completely avirulent for these animals after maintenance in artificial culture for so many years. Whether this has anything to do with reducing its immunizing properties one is not yet in a position to say. Young and Paterson [1949] have shown that the degree of resistance set up in cattle by vole vaccination was correlated with the virulence of the vaccinating strain of vole bacillus for its natural host. The other fact relates to the dose of bovine tubercle bacilli used for testing the immunity. This dose was decided upon after a good deal of consideration but it would be open to one to argue whether it was not too large and that any immunity that might have been developed in the vaccinated animals was perhaps swamped or obscured by the severe disease that resulted. In this connection it may be pointed out that 1.0 mgm. of a moist bovine culture has been estimated to contain nearly 1,000 million bacilli of which at least 10 per cent are viable. On this basis the number of viable bacilli administered to each animal was about 1,000. The writer [Sahai] does not consider that this was too large a dose, but the criticism would appear to be quite legitimate and the point is one which can be decided only by repeating the experiment using a smaller infecting dose. However, the opinion can perhaps be ventured that if such a small dose does reveal any differences in resistance between the vaccinated and the control animals that resistance would probably be of very low grade and not likely to be of much practical use. In conclusion, it may be stated that while the experience with the vaccination of monkeys has not been very encouraging, it seems wise to withhold any final conclu- sions as to the value of this method of vaccination until the results of the more important experiment on cattle are available [Sahai]. In order to investigate the possibility of the excretion of bacilli in the milk of cows vaccinated with the vole bacillus, two virgin heifers and two lactating cows were administered large and multiple doses (50-100 mg.) of the vole bacillus (LV 285) intravenously and subcutaneously. Repeated cultural examination of the udder secretion of the virgin heifers and of the milk of lactating cows did not reveal the presence of the organism. One of the cows was given the culture directly into its quarter but still no clinical evidence of infection could be seen. The cows were kept under observation for a period of 10 to 15 months, and were then destroyed. On post-mortem examination, none showed any changes, gross or microscopic, sugges- tive of infection nor the organism, could be recovered from the udder or the suprama- mmary glands. Sahai [1943] studied the pathogenicity of a strain (LV 285) of vole bacillus for the porcupine, which was given 4 mgm. of the culture in the grain. The porcupine
March, 1953] J. M. LALL AND N. C. SEN 29 maintained perfect health and was destroyed 94 days later. On post-mortem examination a hard tumour like mass about the size of a walnut with a central cavity containing a thin creamy yellow pus was seen at the site of inoculation. The asso- ciated inguinal group of glands appeared to be slightly enlarged and cystic. No lesions were observed in any of the internal organs. Smear from the pus showed large numbers of degenerating bacilli, which were long, slender, twisted or curved. These, when grown on suitable media yielded a fair number of colonies showing that some of the bacilli were still viable. However, there was nothing to indicate that a progressive disease had been set up. Irwin and O'Connell [1943] made experiments in guinea-pigs, which had been infected with virulent human tubercle bacilli at varying periods after vaccination with vole bacillus. They observed that all the controls showed severe tuberculosis six weeks after they had been infected, whereas the vaccinated animals showed less severe tuberculous lesions. The severity of lesions decreased in the vaccinated animals as the interval between vaccination and artificial infection increased. Corper and Cohn [1943] made a comparative study of the immunising effects of the vole bacillus, B.C.G. and avirulent human tubercle bacilli in guinea-pigs. A similar infecting dose was used in each case. To assess the degree of infection all the animals were killed sixty days after they had been vaccinated. They con- cluded from these experiments that the vole bacillus sets up immunity against infection with human tubercle bacilli which is comparable to that produced by avirulent human tubercle bacilli or B.C.G. Sahai [1943 to 1944] carried out an experiment to test the value of the vole vaccine in preventing tuberculosis in calves. Sixty-three, four to five months old calves, of Hariana breed, negative to double-intradermal tuberculin test, were divided into groups of 39 principals and 24 controls. The principals were adminis- tered varying doses of the vole bacillus (strain LV 285) suspended in saline and were mixed with controls. Five months later all animals were administered by mouth 8.0 mgm. of mixture of three virulent strains of bovine tubercle bacilli in 2 ml. of saline. The strains used for the immunity test were of standard virulence for rabbits. After three months the controls were tuberculin tested and all but two proved positive. Almost exactly ten months from the starting of the experiment all the remaining calves were again tuberculin tested and a number killed. On post-mortem examination it was observed that the incidence and extent of infection in the controls was so. meagre that little could be learnt of the value of the vaccine. However, it seemed that the principal had developed, a faint immunity. Wahlgren and his co-workers [1944] made a comparative study in guinea-pigs using vole bacilli and B.C.G. as vaccines. They found that ten of the twelve controls infected with virulent human tubercle bacilli died of generalised tuberculosis at varying periods (67 to 140 days). Four out of fourteen animals vaccinated with B.C.G. three months before infection died of tuberculosis at periods varying from 122 to 150 days. All the ten animals which had received vole bacilli three months before infection were alive after 153 days and all the surviving animals which were killed showed lesions of tuberculosis in the regional lymph glands and in various internal organs; these changes were less extensive than those of the controls. They also noted that guinea-pigs vaccinated two, twelve and twenty-four days before
30 VOLE VACCINATION [Vol. XXIII, Part, I, infection, had the same survival time as the controls, whereas animals vaccinated thirty-three and forty-three days before infection survived significantly longer than the controls. While repeating, the experiments of Wells and Brooke, Birkhaug [1946] allowed vaccinated and control animals to survive as long as the virulent tuberculous in- fection would permit. He gave the immunising dose of vole bacilli and B.C.G. intracutaneously as against the subcutaneous route used by Wells and Brooke. He observed that the animals vaccinated with vole bacilli and with B.C.G. showed a pronounced increase in the survival time as compared with the controls, but there was no marked difference between the two groups of vaccinated animals. All vaccinated animals as well as the controls died of generalised tuberculosis. Paterson, Crombie and Coles [1949] vaccinated one group of 50 guinea-pigs with vole bacilli killed by ultra-violet light, a second group of 50 with B.C.G. and a third group of the same size were held as controls. The guinea-pigs of all the groups were given a challenge dose of 0.25 mgm. of human tubercle bacilli by the subcutaneous route 28 days after the last injection of vaccine. The control group survived: for an average of 33 days, the vole vaccine group for 64 days, and the B.C.G. group for 73 days. The difference in survival times was particularly impressive at the 58th day, when all the controls had succumbed while; only 49 per cent of the B.C.G. group and 59 per cent of the vole group had died. It seemed that the degree of protection afforded by the killed vaccine was comparable to that obtained with B.C.G. The results have been encouraging and warrant further work since the advantages of a vaccine made from dead organisms only are obvious. Young and Paterson [1949] carried out a series of experiments to study the efficacy of vaccination with the vole acid-fast bacillus against tuberculosis in cattle by employing a single dose of vaccine intravenously as well as two-spaced doses; the efficacy of multiple puncture skin vaccination was also determined. They further compared the types of tuberculous lesions found in vaccinated and un- vaccinated cattle, and studied the superimposition of infection with vole bacilli on cattle already infected with bovine tuberculosis. They also recorded the clinical effects of inoculation of vole bacillus into cattle and carried out bacteriological and histological examination of the tissues of such calves. According to them there was little hope for the bestowal on an animal of a life-time immunity against tuberculosis by vole vaccination, but surely the vole bacillus was entitled to be ranked alongside B.C.G. as a prophylactic agent. A single intravenous inoculation of 5 mgm. of vole bacillus could raise the resistance of cattle to infection with the bovine bacilli to a high degree, this resistance being evidenced by a complete absence or by a marked diminution in the severity of lesions following exposure to artificial or natural infection. The resistance took time to develop, reached its maximum between 6 to 18 months after vaccination and then slowly waned. The resistance induced by a single inoculation was, how- ever, of insufficient duration in many animals to warrant the practice of single vac- cination being used in the field except in special circumstances. They also observed that revaccination could intensify resistance provided it was delayed until the end of the fourth week. Further work is being carried out by Young and Paterson to study
March, 1953] J. M. LALL AND N. C. SEN 31 if revaccination in addition to intensifying the initial resistance, could also lengthen its duration. These workers were of the opinion that the degree of resistance set up in cattle was correlated with the virulence of the vaccinating strain of vole bacillus for its natural host. This fact would necessitate that any strain used for vaccine purposes will have to be maintained at a high level of virulence by repeated passage through its native host. They have encountered one strain of vole bacillus (G. 564), which could set up a fatal infection in calves. A severe transient lameness following inoculation affected a proportion of the animals and the joint lesions which were found in such cases resembled those generally seen in joints in serum sickness, allergy and anaphylaxis. Utmost care is therefore necessary in the selec- tion of a strain of the vole bacillus for vaccine purposes. However, nothing was noted by them, which would contra-indicate the use of strain LV 285. The histopathological studies carried out by Young and Paterson revealed that changes pathogonomic of tuberculous infection, which followed the intravenous inoculation of vole bacilli, were mainly confined to the lungs and thoracic glands. They reached their maximum about 28th day and had undergone resolution by the 84th day. Young and Paterson have also studied the changes which occur in the cells of the reticulo-endothelial system following vaccination, and these studies are very helpful in deciding the optimal time and dosage for re-vaccination. This rich and virgin problem provides a very important and useful field for further investigation. Lall [1952]* inoculated intravenously two tuberculin and johnin negative kids with 10 mg. of 15 days old culture of vole bacilli (strain LV285) and another two subcutaneously with 3.0 mgm. of the same culture suspended in 3 ml. of olive oil along with 150 mgm. of sterile powdered stone. The kids were about a month old at the time of receiving the culture. All the kids were subjected to D.I.D. tuberculin and johnin tests after 11 weeks of the vaccination. None of these gave any reaction to johnin but with tuberculin the reactions were moderate in the kids injected intravenously, while the ones in- jected subcutaneously showed typically good reactions. (On account of repeated sub-culture the strain LV 285 used in the above experiment had become of sub- standard virulence). DISCUSSION It is abundantly clear that the vole bacillus does produce a resistance to sub- sequent infection with virulent tubercle bacilli in animals and that vaccination with this organism will find a useful place in any scheme directed towards the control or eradication of this scourage from the livestock of a heavily infected country. Now, the question is not whether this vaccine can be used but as to how it can be employed to the best advantage. However, it will not be a sound policy to adopt a new vaccine, unless it possesses some distinct advantages over B.C.G. which is already being used and so before advocating the use of vole vaccination, it seems rational to compare its merits as an antigen with B.C.G., which is now universally applauded, has been in use over a score of years and has stood the test of times and with which *Unpublished work.
32 VOLE VACCINATION [Vol. XXIII, Part I, a number of laboratory as well as field trials in animals under carefully controlled conditions have been carried out. As for other methods of vaccination, e.g. Behring's method of double inoculation with live-vaccine, Klimmer's vaccine, known by the. trade name of antiphymatol, Heyman's method, these can perhaps be straight- away ruled out in any comparison with vole vaccination, as these, after a few trials here and there, were abandoned, or at any rate did not become popular, either be- cause the resistance produced was not significant or because they were not safe from the public health point of view. Comparison between vole vaccination and B.C.G. can be well made from five aspects, viz. safety, local reaction, tuberculin test conversion rate, degree of induced resistance and stability of virulence. Safety. It has been established beyond doubt that B.C.G. is quite safe. As regards, vole bacillus too, the published reports indicate that it does not cause progressive disease in animals unless given in very large doses. Griffith and Dalling, [1940] used doses of 10 mgm intravenously and 80 mgm. intramuscularly in cattle without producing progressive disease. They also found that the vole bacillus was not virulent for guinea-pigs. Sahai [1943] proved the almost complete in- nocuousness of this organism for monkeys, and also established that the bacilli were not excreted through the milk of vaccinated cows. Wallgren [1945] showed that vole bacilli are avirulent to guinea-pigs and human beings. Wells' experience with the vole bacillus injected into 121 human beings, in some instances in a dosage higher than that needful or desirable for immunising purposes, suggests that it does not produce anything other than localised disease. However, the experience of Young and Paterson [1949] with one strain of vole bacillus, G 564, which could set up a fatal infection in calves, makes us feel very seriously that great care is necessary in the selection of a strain for vaccine purposes. Of course, nothing has been observed so far by any worker, which would contra-indicate the use of strain LV 285. Young and Paterson [1949] found that the induced resistance had a co-relation with the degree of virulence of the vole strain. That being so, it opens a field for investigation as to whether a vaccine consisting of ultraviolet killed strain G 564 will form a good antigen. Some work in this connection has already been carried out by Paterson, Crombie and Coles [1949] and the results reported are encouraging. Local reaction. The local reactions obtained with the vole bacillus seem to be entirely comparable to those with B.C.G. enlargement and ulceration of the lymph glands seen after subcutaneous or intradermal injection of B.C.G. [Kereszturi, Rosenberg and Park, 1937; Wallgren, 1923] have not been observed by Wells [1946] after injection of the vole bacillus in human beings. Tuberculin test conversion rate OR Allergy to tuberculin. It seems that tuber- culin allergy following vaccination with the vole bacillus is greater and occurs earlier than that following B.C.G. vaccination [Griffith and Dalling, 1940; Wallgren, 1945]. In order to appreciate the above, it will be perhaps necessary to describe briefly the relationship between allergy and immunity, which of recent years is a subject under active discussion. Two opposing views are being put forward, each based on circumstantial evidence. The theory that allergy is an essential part of the mecha- nism of acquired resistance is disputed by Rich, according to whom no part is
March, 1953] J. M. LALL, AND N. C. SENA 33 played by the allergic reaction at the site of infection in fixing the invading organisms. Rich's view is supported by Rirkhaug. Raffel studied the problem from another angle showed that the chloroform-soluble protein-wax component of the tubercle bacillus was able to produce allergy to tuberculin in guinea-pigs and although on the infection of virulent bacilli in these guinea-pigs a modified Koch's phenomenon could be observed (induration and erythema, but no necrosis), there was no evidence of acquired resistance. Wilson and Miles have summarized the whole work on the subject, and to them the experimental and the field evidence suggest that immunity to tuberculosis is composite, and that allergy is one of the factors which often, though not always contributes to its establishment. The fixation of the organisms that occurs at the site of infection in the allergic subject prevents rapid lymphatic dis- semination and enables the sensitized moni-nuclear cells to ingest and destroy the invading tubercle bacilli more quickly than in the non-allergic subject. Degree of induced resistance. The experimental evidence available so far in guinea-pigs regarding the degree of induced resistance by the vole bacilli and B.C.G., points to the conclusion 'that in the early stages of virulent infection in guinea-pigs, vaccination with the vole bacillus leads to a greater retardation of the disease than does B.C.G. In the later stages, the degree of resistance is approximately equal. In cattle according to Griffith and Dalling [1940], the vole bacillus may confer more resistance than B.C.G. Stability of virulence. In the early days of B.C.G. vaccination several claims were put forward that the B.C.G. strain was not a 'virus fixe' and that its virulence could be increased in vivo and vitro. The controversy centred in those days on the possibility of a dangerous increase in the virulence of B.C.G. to such an extent that progressive disease would follow its injection into animals or man. However, since 1930, this question of virulence of the strain has been little discussed and at present there seems no evidence to prove that organisms of the B.C.G. strain may regain their virulence in the both and the conclusion that can be safely drawn is that, whatever, may have occurred in the twenties, since about 1930 it has been impossible to demonstrate any virulent character of this strain. But one interesting point worth noting is that almost all the reports of a return of virulence were made prior to 1930 and since that time there has been a spectacular silence on this subject, rather concern has now swung in the opposite direction. A fact that emerges from these results is that in the face of the experimental evidence available, it seems difficult to support Calmette's contention that the biological properties of B.C.G. were fixed. Of course, much of the work done to support the presence of certain virulent elements in the B.C.G. culture had in it errors of observation or of inter- pretation. Judging from the history of the evolution of the B.C.G. strain, the enormous literature that once supported the view that it was capable of regaining its virulence under certain conditions, the spectacular silence since 1930 over the virulence question and now the reports of its attenuation, make one feel that the strain se- parated from its natural habitat for 44 years, is perhaps undergoing slow progressive attenuation. If so, will not this continued loss of virulence result, also, in lowering down its protective properties so much so that it may no longer remain an efficient 7
34 VOLE VACCINATION [Vol. XXIII, Part I, antigen? Wallgren considers that it is not inconceivable that the B.C.G. may be- come so avirulent as to have no effect. However, the staunch advocates of B.C.G. vaccination fail to appreciate this view and consider this strain to be a 'virus fixe'. But this will have to be agreed by them that much of our knowledge on this strain during recent year is based on circumstantial evidence gained by the vaccination of millions of human beings and none of the many reports published after 1930March, 1953] J. M. LALL AND N. C. SEN 35 could be replaced with fresh vaccinated stock within a period of say four years, the oldest animals being eliminated as fast as young vaccinated animals become available to replace them. Once the turn-over of the milking stock was complete, it would not be necessary to carry out vaccination any further, rather in their turn during the following four years, the vaccinated animals would be replaced with non-vaccinated ones. In this manner non-reacting, tuberculosis-free herds might be established with a minimum interference with farm management and to our mind this only seems to be a practical and realistic procedure for our country, where slaughter of cattle for beef purposes will not be a desired course on sentimental grounds. How far does the vole bacillus satisfy the requirements for a vaccine likely to succeed when employed for the above Plan? Young and Paterson [1949] have shown it clearly that a single dose of 5 mgm. given intraveneously was capable of inducing in some animals a very marked degree of resistance for periods up to three years and possibly longer, but such a degree of resistance was not seen in every case. So it seems very necessary to look for some way of intensifying the initial resistance either by increasing the dose or attempting revaccination. The former course does not appear to be a practical proposition as the dose used by Young and Paterson seems to be the maximum tolerated by the animals with safety. Regarding repeated vaccinations, the limitations of such procedure should also be borne in-mind, as this would entail periodic dislocation of the routine of farm management. However, if sufficiently strong resistance could be produced and a practicable plan of eradicating tuberculosis could be demonstrated to the livestock owners, they will not hesitate in handling it even if there be some economic loss to them and perhaps it will not be very difficult to enlist voluntary support for meeting the loss from the philanthro- phists of our country, who hold cow with such a great reverence. Young and Paterson [1949] observed that revaccination after intervals of time varying from four weeks to six months after primary vaccination did increase resist- ance to infection but nothing was so far known if the resistance could be prolonged, and if so what would be the optimal revaccinating dose and the optimal period between vaccinations. Some other important connected problems (as suggested by Young and Paterson), awaiting detailed investigations and which would lead to a closer understanding of the principles underlying immunization against tuberculosis are: (i) histological studies of the affects of revaccination on the cells of the reticulo- endothelial system to find out that revaccination can lower or in- tensify resistance according to whether the revaccination is carried out during the period, when the cells of the reticulo-endothelial system are in an irritable state or delayed until the activity of the cells has subsided. (ii) the study of the functional activity of the endocrine glands. And, yet another very interesting and very useful field of study will be to see if smaller doses of the vaccine would prove effective if given in combination with a vaccine consisting of ultra-violet killed virulent bovine bacilli or comparatively virulent vole baccilli or suitable extracts of these bacilli. Perhaps they may bring about a state of resistance in which the cellular and humoral factors are more evenly 8
36 VOLE VACCINATION [Vol. XXIII, Part I, balanced, a state of resistance where there are lesser chances of exhaustion following overstimulation. Till such time, as detailed studies on the above problems have been carried out, it would be wise to reserve our definite decisions regarding the value of vaccination with the vole bacillus in the control of tuberculosis, may be in animals or in human beings. Researches on these problems should find a very important place in the programmes of scientists engaged in the formidable task of control of bovine tuber- culosis. As the things are we have to bear in mind the limitations of vaccination even on heavily infected farms and so under no consideration should vaccination be used to the exclusion of time-honoured anti-tuberculosis measures, such as enforcement of hygienic precautions against the spread of the disease. Vaccination may be taken only as a helpful adjunct and an additional weapon in the already existing armament to fight the scourage of tuberculosis. With our present knowledge, it seems that mass vaccination neither with the B.C.G. nor with vole bacillus will ever be attempted to any advantage, for eradication of cattle tuberculosis, as vaccination renders animals allergic and a very useful method of detecting during life the presence of tuberculous infection, loses its effec- tiveness to a very great extent. The writers are not aware of any successful experi- ment carried out to eradicate bovine tuberculosis from any country by the use of vaccines. In Portugal in 1928, vaccination was tried as a part of an official scheme, but was abandoned in 1931 [Lucas, 1938]. The British Committee on Cattle Diseases [Report, 1934] concluded that even if vaccination was effective, the regula- tions necessary to govern its use would be as onerous and those necessary for an eradication scheme. It will be well to stress here the need for a wider interest in the study of pathology and pathogenesis of bovine tuberculosis, and not simply to transfer concepts gained by the study of human tuberculosis, otherwise we are likely to go very far from the truth, as tuberculosis in bovines differs in some very fundamental ways from that in human beings. For example 'it is known that the primary focus in cattle may remain latent for many years or at the most progress very slightly [Bang, 1899, 372; 1908b, 488; M'Fadyeen, 1899c] but the complete healing which occurs in man is apparently rare in the bovine [Bull, 1937; Stamp, 1944] and the lesions remain 'open'. This view is supported by much epidemiological evidence which shows that if any animal reacting to the tuberculin test, even with very slight lung lesions, is left in a herd, spread will be more or less rapid. The problem of bovine tuberculosis is therefore, a very important one not only from the animal health and agricultural economics point of view but equally so from the public health, and requires being attacked from all the angles in the interest of national welfare. Unfortunately no statistics have yet been collected to show the huge monetary loss that our country suffers annually at the hands of this scourge, but this much can be said with confidence that the loss runs into millions of rupees and as the years go by and animals are brought more and more under domestication and are concentrated in organised dairy farms, the losses are bound to increase each year, unless concentrated efforts are made to control this course. At present our knowledge of bovine tuberculosis in general and especially under Indian conditions is very meagre and there are very
March, 1953] J. M. LALL AND N. C. SEN 37 many debatable points, which require undoubtedly serious studies to gain the further pathological, epidemiological and immunological background which is so very essen- tial to formulate efficient measures for the" control and eradication of the scourge. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Thanks are due to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, for financing the scheme to carry out investigations on bovine tuberculosis. Our thanks are also due to Shri M. R. Dhanda, Head of the Division of Pathology and Bacteriology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for his suggestions in writing this review article. REFRENCES Bang, B. (1899). La lutte contre la tuberculose animals par la prophylaxia (Nordisk medicinsk Arkiv-1899). Reprinted in Selected Works, 366-410 38 VOLE VACCINATION [Vol. XXIII, Part I, Spahlinger, H. (1932). Lancet, 1, 309 Stamp, J. T. (1944). A review of the pathogenesis and pathology of bovine tuberculosis with special reference to practical problems. Vet. Rec. 56, 443-446 Topley, W. W. C. and Wilson, G. S. (1948). Principles of Bacteriology and immunity (third edition), London, 1289-1357 Trudeau, E. L. (1894). A report on the ultimate results obtained in experimental eye tuberculosis by tuberculin treatment and anti-tuberculous inoculation, Trans. Assoc. Phys. 9, 168 Wahlgren, F., Olin, G., and Widstrom, G. (1944). Nordisk Med., 22, 943 Wallgren, A. (1928). J. Amer. Med. Ass., 91, 1876, 1934 Ibid., 103, 1341; (1945) Nordisk Med. 27, 1715 Wells, A. Q. (1937). Lancet, Lond. 1, 1221 Wells, A. Q. (1946). M.R.C. Special Report Series No. 259; London Wells, A. Q. and Brooke, W. S. (1940). British J. Exp. Path, 21, 104 Young, J. A. and Paterson, J. S. (1949). Studies on the vaccination of cattle as a measure against infection with tuberculosis with the living vole acid-fast bacillus J. Hyg. Camb. 47, 39-78
CUTANEOUS ERUPTIONS OF RINDERPEST IN GOATS By RADHEY MOHAN, L.V.P., P.V.S. II, Assistant Disease Investigation Officer (Sheep and Goats), Government Livestock Farm, Hissar and MANGAT RAI BAHL, L.V.P., Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Ferozepur (Received for publication on 25 April 1952) (With Plate I) CUTANEOUS eruptions in cattle due to rinderpest have been reported by several workers from different countries. The following references have been cited by Mohan [1948]. Curasson [1921, 1932] mentioned that the cutaneous form of rinderpest was known since the eighteenth century and that the relationship between the exanthema and the infection had been recognised as early as 1712 by Ramazzini, who accord- ing to Gerlach [1873], went to the extent of designating rinderpest as Pocken- seuche, i.e. 'Pock disease'. These eruptions were repeatedly noticed in Holland, Germany, Hungary and England during the great wars of the nineteenth century and were described by Gerlach [LOC. cit.], Peuch [1892], Nocard and Leclainche [1903] and other workers. Gartner [1920] recorded these cutaneous eruptions as a constant feature of rinderpest in East Africa. Hutyra and Marek [1916] describ- ed similar eruptions from Roumania and steppes of Russia. Curasson [LOC. cit.] and his colleagues found the eruptions a more or less constant feature in Sudan and other parts of West Africa. Croveri [1921] in Italian Somaliland, Carlier [1920] in Belgian Congo, Pecaud [1924] in Chad, and Malfrey [1927] have all reported the occurrence of cutaneous eruptions in rinderpest. MacGregor [1944] was the first worker in India who in collaboration with Menon, made some preliminary observa- tions and tests on this condition. Mohan [1948] published an account of the work done by him during 1943-45. The above workers recorded the occurrence of cutaneous eruptions in cattle but no reference appears to be available in so far as goats are concerned. This note describes an outbreak of rinderpest in goats in which some of the animals showed cutaneous eruptions. Symptoms The outbreak was reported from Basti Bhattian, Ferozepur. There were 115 goats in all in the Basti, out of which 13 were affected. Out of the 13 goats affected, eight with white or grey and short hair showed well marked cutaneous lesions. The eruptions were mainly seen on the udder especially the base of the teats, ears, scrotum, perineum, inside of the thighs, neck and back. In some cases only one or two parts mentioned above showed the eruptions, in others the lesions were seen on three or more parts but in no case there was generalisation of the eruptions over the whole body. None of the affected animals showed any lesion on the por- tions below the hocks and knees. Diarrhoea was seen in two out of the eight goats showing cutaneous lesions whereas it was observed in three out of the remaining 39 9
40 CUTANEOUS ERUPTIONS OF RINDERPEST IN GOATS [Vol. XXIII, Part I, five goats which did not show cutaneous eruptions. The cutaneous eruptions in the beginning were quite small, discrete and presented a congested appearance. In goats which had thick hair or deep coloured skin, such lesions generally escaped notice unless the animals were closely examined. Under and inside of the external ears were the sites where lesions appeared first. The skin of these regions is thin and fine. These initial eruptions developed into pustules and discharged thick sero-purulent fluid which caused matting of the hair. Later, scabs were formed which remained sticking for about a week or even more and fell off after 7 to 10 days leaving hairless islets of skin. Out of the 13 goats affected with rinderpest, seven diedIndian J. Vet. Sci., Vol. XXIII, Part I. PLATE 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Showing cutaneous eruptions of rinderpest on the outer surface of the car of Kid No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Showing cutaneous eruptions of rinderpest on the inner surface of the car of Kid No. 3.
March, 1953] R. MOHAN AND M. R. BAHL 41 TABLE I Observations on transmission experiment conducted with material from an outbreak of suspected cutaneous rinderpest from Ferozepur Serial number Description of the animals Nature of the material used Date of inocula- tion 15 August 1951 Temperatue on REMARKS 1st day °F. 2nd day °F. 3rd day °F. 4th day °F. 5th day °F. 6th day °F. 7th day °F. 8th day °F. 9th day °F. 10th day °F. 1 Male Betal Kid No. 3. Spleen preserved in 50 per cent N. S. Glycerine. 101.6 101.6 102.4 104.6 104.8 103.4 103.4 103.0 Cutaneous lesions visible 102.8 104.4 103.1 A.R.P. Serum given on 21st August 1951 2 Male Betal Kid No. 8. Do. 100.2 100.0 102.8 104.2 103.8 104.2 103.6 103.0 Cutneous lesions visible 103.0 103.6 103.0 3 Male Betal Kid No. 6. Scabs from cutaneous lesions 100.2 100.6 102.2 103.8 105.4 .. .. .. .. .. .. Destroyed on 19th August 1951 4 Male Betal Kid No. 579. Do. 101.8 103.2 103.6 104.0 104.0 105.0 104.0 103.2 Cutaneous lesions visible 103.2 101.4 Died on 24th August 1951 TABLE II Immunity test on kids which developed cutaneous lesions on inoculation with material from the affected goats in the Ferozepur outbreak Serial number Description of the animals Temparature before inoculation with goat blood virus Date of inocula- tion Temperature on Remarks 1st day °F. 2nd day °F. 3rd day °F. 4th day °F. 5th day °F. 6th day °F. 7th day °F. 8th day °F. 9th day °F. 10th day °F. 2-10-51 3-10-51 1 Male Kid No. 3 from Chhaoni 101.4 101.4 3-10-51 102.0 101.0 101.4 101.6 102.3 102.4 102.2 102.2 102.3 102.0 2 Male Kid No. 8 from Chhaoni Controls 101.6 101.4 3-10-51 101.8 100.9 102.0 102.2 102.5 102.5 102.6 102.3 102.0 102.2 1 Male Kid No. 582 from Goat Section 101.2 101.5 3-10-51 101.2 101.2 105.4 106.3 106.4 105.3 104.8 Died A.R.P. Serum given sub- cutaneously 2 Male Kid No. 583 from Goat Section 101.3 101.5 3-10-51 102.0 101.4 106.2 106.2 106.1 105.2 104.6 105.4 103.3 103.0 on the 5th day after inoculation of blood virus
42 CUTANEOUS ERUPTIONS OF RINDERPEST IN GOATS [Vol. XXIII, Part I, SUMMARY An outbreak of cutaneous rinderpest in goats is recorded for the first time. Animals with cutaneous lesions showed the disease in a milder form as com- pared with those which suffered from the systemic form of the disease. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors feel grateful to Major A. C. Aggarwala, B.Sc. (Hons.), M.R.C.V.S., A.I.R.O., Director, Veterinary Services and Warden of Fisheries, Punjab,for constant encouragement and useful suggestions and to Shri M. R. Dhanda, L.V.P., M.S. (Mich.), Dip. Bact. (London) Officer in charge, Pathology and Bacteriology Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for laboratory examinations of the material. REFERENCES Hutyra, F., Marek, J. and Manninger, R. (1938). Special Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic Animals, 4th Ed., I, 272 MacGregor, A. D. (1944). Indian J. vet. Sci. 14, 56 Mohan, R. N. (1944). Ani. Rep. Vet. Investigation Officer, Bengal, for 1943-44, 1944-45 Mohan, R. N. (1948). Indian J. vet. Sci. 18, 27
EFFECT OF GROWTH STAGE ON THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF SOME INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF INDIA By NARINDAR NATH AND N. B. DAS, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi (Received for publication on 18 June 1952) (With one text-figure) IMPROVEMENT of livestock is closely connected with the improvement in the supply of feeds and fodder. One important requirement for bringing about the desired improvement in the fodder supply is a thorough knowledge of the chemical composition and nutritive value of different feeding stuffs available in the country and thereby grading them according to their nutrient contents. Grasses cultivat- ed or naturally grown constitute a major portion of the animal ration and the lack of knowledge about the nutritive value of different species of grasses found in the country makes the judicious selection and cultivation of good varieties rather difficult. Moreover, some of the grasses which are ordinarily taken to be good from nutritive point of view may be deficient in some nutrients at certain stages of growth or at a certain period of the year, since the chemical constituents of plants are known to vary considerably with the stage of growth, methods of harvesting, soil, season and climate. Such changes in the chemical composition and con- sequently in the nutritive value of plants are correspondingly reflected on the pro- ductivity of the cattle to whom they are fed. Therefore, in order to assess the suit- ability of a particular species of a grass, the knowledge of its chemical composition under different systems of cutting is important. If such data about various feed- ing stuffs are available, it may also help to put the nutrition of animals on a scientific basis by supplementing the rations of animals by those nutrients which are actually required and when they are required. Several investigations dealing with the chemical composition of plants have been reported from India and abroad. Ray and Sen [1933] observed that with the growth of the plant and increase in rainfall the percentage of lime and phosphoric acid increased. Ramiah [1933] noted a striking parallelism between the variations of phosphoric acid and nitrogen and opposite variation in lime. Iyer [1935] found that with advance of maturity, nitrogen and potash fluctuated considerably while lime and magnesia showed negligible variations. Iyer and Kayasth [1931] found that the soil exerts a pronounced effect in determining the chemical composition. Narayana Iyer [1939] reported that uncultivated grasses are poorer than the British natural pastures. Mathur and Ray [1943] found that crude protein and phosphoric acid decreased while lime increased with maturity. Lander [1942] concluded that longer intervals between two cuttings increased the yield of green herbage and dry matter but decreased the contents of protein, phosphoric acid and potash of grasses. These findings of Lander were later confirmed by Dharmani and Singh [1946] with 43 10
44 INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF INDIA [Vol. XXIII, Part I, berseem. Talapatra and Dev Goswami [1949] noted a decrease with age in the mineral and protein content of aquatic grasses of Assam. Srivastava, Mukerjee and Shrikhande [1950] recorded decrease in digestible protein, ether extract and other nutrients with growth and found that cuts improved the nutrient status. Das Gupta [1942] also studied the composition of berseem as affected by maturity. In the present investigation three important grasses, namely, Amphilophis odorata, Iseilema laxum and Amphilophis glabra have been analysed for their chemi- cal constituents at four different stages of growth, young, preflowering, flowering and ripe stages. EXPERIMENTAL Sampling. The various species of grasses studied include some of the grasses brought from different parts of the country and established in sub-plots of 1/300 acre for eaoh of the grasses in the Division of Agronomy, Indian Agricultural Re- search Institute, New Delhi, in the year 1943. The nursery has been maintained since then under irrigation and ammonium sulphate is applied at the rate of two maunds per acre. The grasses were cut at four stages of growth irrespective of the chronological dates. For young stage, all the three grasses were cut in May when they had reached sufficient height and were fit for grazing purpose. Samples for the preflowering and flowering stages of growth were taken on the same date, the reason being that preflowering period is a long one extending from the young stage to the time when the plants flower. So in order that the samples of different grasses represent the same preflowering stage of growth, the sampling was done when more than half the plants had flowered. Those plants which had not flowered were taken as preflowering ones while those with flowers were collected for the flowering stages. Samples for the ripe stage were collected when the plants begin to drop seedlings. Samples were collected by hand cutting nearly all the surface growth leaving only one inch to two inches of the herbage. The dust was removed by shaking the plants and the samples were immediately taken to the laboratory, chopped to small pieces and a representative part of each sample was dried in an air oven for moisture content. The dried material was ground and kept in stoppered bottles for analysis. Analysis. The methods, adopted for the determination of various chemical constituents, were mostly those recommended by the Association of Official Agri- cultural Chemists [1940]. Potassium and sodium were estimated by a method given in the Agricultural Analysis by Wright [1938] by converting and separating them as mixed sulphates. Potassium is further determined in the mixed sulphates by Piper's method and sodium was estimated by difference. Amphilophis glabra is a densely tufted perennial grass, one of the common fodder grasses of the Deccan [Blatter and McCann, 1935]. The data refers to a strain of the grass from Delhi. It flowers in August to September.
March, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DASS 45 TABLE I The chemical composition of Amphilophis glabra (Stapf) at four different stages of growth (Percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Stage of growth Young Pre-flowering Flowering Ripe Date of sampling 2-5-1949 31-8-1949 31-8-1949 25-11-1949 Crude protein 5.11 5.08 4.68 3.70 True protein 4.04 4.41 3.90 3.54 Ether extract 2.96 2.92 2.84 2.51 Crude fibre 30.74 32.75 33.16 35.84 Nitrogen-free-extract 51.02 47.07 44.10 47.14 Crude ash 10.17 12.18 15.22 12.81 Silica and insoluble residue 6.03 8.91 11.58 9.90 Silica-free-ash 4.14 3.27 3.64 2.91 Lime (CaO) 0.83 0.85 0.94 1.00 Phosphoric acid (P2O5) 0.48 0.42 0.30 0.29 Potash (K2O) 1.33 0.82 0.98 0.73 Soda (Na2O) 0.28 0.26 0.31 0.16 Magnesia (MgO) 0.46 0.54 0.55 0.42 Chlorine (Cl) 0.45 0.38 0.29 0.25 Original moisture 54.20 66.20 62.50 37.20 TABLE II The chemical composition of Iseilema laxum (Hack) at four stages of growth (Percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Stage of growth Young Pre-flowering Flowering Ripe Date of sampling 2-5-1945 31-8-1949 31-8-1949 25-11-1949 Crude protein 5.67 4.98 5.44 3.05 True protein 5.20 4.69 5.07 2.83 Ether extract 2.74 3.15 3.31 2.69 Crude fibre 28.03 32.98 34.04 36.58 Nitrogen-free-extract 51.78 49.60 48.22 48.10 Crude ash 11.78 9.29 8.99 9.58 Silica and insoluble residue 6.70 5.28 5.51 6.79 Silica-free-ash 5.08 4.01 3.48 2.79 Lime (CaO) 1.30 1.01 0.84 0.84 Phosphoric acid (P2O5) 0.63 0.49 0.59 0.23 Potash (K2O) 1.45 1.08 1.00 0.74 Soda (Na2 O) 0.30 0.39 0.35 0.14 Magnesia (MgO) 0.71 0.60 0.47 0.43 Chlorine 0.45 0.44 0.36 0.27 Original moisture 40.00 68.80 64.00 44.60 10A
46 INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF INDIA [Vol. XXIII, Part I, Iseilema laxum is considered to be one of the bast fodder grasses in India and is known by different names such as 'mdshi', 'ushel', 'tamburt' and. 'mushyal', etc. 'This is widely spread common grass growing in somewhat moist situation, [Ranga Achariyar, 1921]. According to Duthie [1888] the grass is abundant in Bundelkhand and is largely made use of as a fodder. It is a perennial grass grow- ing in tufts. The present data refers to a strain from Nagpur and it flowers in August to September. TABLE III The chemical composition of Amphilophis odorata (A. cannus) at four stages of growth (Percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Stage of growth Young Pre-flowering Flowering Ripe Date of sampling 2-5-1949 17-10-1949 17-10-1949 25-11-1949 Crude protein 4.35 3.58 3.49 2.26 True protein 3.72 3.31 3.40 2.20 Ether extract 2.82 3.01 2.88 2.59 Crude fibre 33.84 31.61 32.57 35.45 Nitrogen-free-extract 49.2 52.24 49.59 49.46 Crude ash 9.07 10.56 11.47 10.28 Silica and insoluble residue 5.41 7.54 8.04 7.44 Silica-free ash 3.66 3.02 3.43 2.44 Lime (CaO) 0.82 0.72 0.78 0.81 Phosphoric acid (P2O5) 0.52 0.34 0.40 0.35 Potash (K2O) 1.15 0.85 0.86 0.78 Soda (Na2O) 0.26 0.22 0.16 0.11 Magnesia (MgO) 0.40 0.45 0.48 0.37 Chlorine 0.50 0.44 0.34 0.46 Original moisture 50.60 57.50 52.50 46.20 This grass Amphilophis odorata was brought from Bareilly and is known by such names as 'bhos', 'usadhana' and 'vaidia-gavat'. According to Lisoba [1896] this grass contains an essential oil. It flowers in the month of October. As seen from Table I, the grass shows a decrease of various nutrients with age. DISCUSSION General, The general behaviour of the variations of different chemical con- stituents with age of the grasses studied shows a marked similarity. The important
March, 1953] n. nath and n. b. dass 47 SHOWING THE PROTEIN, CRUDE FIBRE, PHOSPHORIC ACID AND LIME OF GRASSES AT FOUR STAGES OF THEIR GROWTH [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] STAGE OF GROWTH Y48 INDIGENOUS GRASSES OP INDIA [Vol. XXIII, Part I, constituents like protein, soluble ash, phosphoric acid and to some extent ether extract decreased with the maturity of the plants. The maximum fall took place in the ripe stage. Crude fibre, on the other hand, increased steadily from young to ripe stage. Both these facts point out the decrease in the nutritive quality of the grass with age. (Fig. 1.) Protein. Both crude protein and true protein contents of the grasses studied decreased with the maturity of the plants. A comparison of the two types of protein shows (Tables I, II and III) that changes in the two were closely correlated with each other. The distinction between crude protein and true protein is based on the fact that all the nitrogen in plants is not in the form of protein, but is partly present as, non-proteinous compounds which are water soluble. Any protein, which dissolves in water, is also precipitated by boiling and addition of copper hydrate reagent. Hart and Bentley [1915] have shown that the non-proteinous nitrogen in grasses and hays is largely composed of free amino acids. Further the recognition of the fact that the value of feed for its protein nutrition is determined by its amino acid content has caused the distinction between crude and true protein to lose its significance. But opinion still differs as to the nutritive value of non- proteinous nitrogen. In Britain 50 per cent value is generally given to non-pro- teinous nitrogen when calculating rations. It is seen from Tables I, II and III that difference between crude protein and true protein decreased with the approach of maturity of the plants, the difference in the ripe stage being very small. In other words, in old matured plants the quantity of non-protein nitrogenous compounds decreases. Amphilophis odorata gives the least protein content in every stage of growth as compared to other grasses. One noteworthy point is that the protein content of Iseilema laxum slightly increases in the flowering stage and this value is not much different from that reported in the young stage. This fact may be of some practical interest in that this grass may be kept for late harvesting. In case of Amphilophis glabra, the protein content does not change much upto the pre- flowering stage, but it decreases appreciably in the flowering stage. Ether extract. Ether extract, in addition to fats, also includes various phos- phatides, sterols, plant pigments, some essential oils and carotene which are. removed with the fats during extraction of a material with ether. Fats, however, constitute the major portion and are sources of energy. Ether extract content did not show regular variations in all the three species, though there was a fall in the percentage of ether extract in the ripe stage for all the grasses. Highest percentage of ether extract was obtained in different stage of growth in each case. Amphilophis glabra gave the highest content of ether extract in the young stage. The corresponding values for Amphilophis odorata and Iseilema laxum reached in the preflowering and flowering stages respectively. Crude fibre and nitrogen-free-extract. High crude fibre content is generally associated with low digestibility and palatability of the feeds. It is seen from the Tables I, II and III that the percentage of crude fibre increased progressively from young to ripe. The highest percentage of crude fibre was obtained in the ripe stage. Nitrogen-free-extract, on the other hand, did not show regular variations, though tending to decrease with maturity.
Marbh, 1953] N. nath and n. b. dass 49 Crude ash, silica, insoluble residue and soluble ash. Crude ash as such does not give any idea about the mineral content as it includes both the essential ele- ments as well as inert silicous matter, but it forms a basis for determination of vari- ous minerals. Silica and, insoluble residue is mainly responsible for the changes in crude ash. The more valuable part, namely soluble ash is actually found to decrease with the growth of the plants, being least in the ripe stage. Lime and phosphoric acid. The variations in lime content with plant develop- ment were different in different species. Percentage of lime increased progres- sively from young to ripe stage in Amphilophis glabra. In case of Iseilema laxum there was a steady decrease upto the flowering stage but no further fall in the ripe stage of growth. Lime content of Amphilophis odorata decreased slightly in the preflowering stage, otherwise it tended to remain more or less constant throughout the plant development. Phosphoric acid displayed variations similar to that in protein content and decreased with the advance in maturity of the plants. In addition to the actual amounts of lime and phosphoric acid in plants, their ratio is equally important for their proper assimilation by the animal. It has been reported by various workers that this ratio should be between 1 to 1.5 parts of lime for each part of phosphoric acid. Table IV shows that if the plants are allowed to grow to maturity, the ratio deviates more from the standard and under these conditions these grasses become ill-balanced with respect to lime and phosphoric acid, being relatively low in the latter. Table IV Lime/phosphoric acid ratio at four stages of growth Stages of growth Young Pre-flowering Flowering Ripe Amphilophis glabra 1.73 2.02 3.13 3.45 Iseilema laxum 2.06 2.06 1.42 3.48 Amphilophis odorata 1.58 2.12 1.95 2.31 It is further seen that in case of Iseilema laxum the most suitable lime/phos- phoric acid ratio is in the flowering stage when the protein content too has not decreased appreciably as compared to that in the young stage. This fact is of practical significance as it points out that Iseilema laxum can be kept for late harvest- ing without much decrease in the nutrient status, to suit the convenience of the farmers who are busy sowing and in other operations during early part of the year and in the rainy season. Amphilophis odorata and Amphilophis glabra on the other hand contain lime and phosphoric acid approaching the standard in the young stage. Potash and soda. Potash and soda contents were high in early stages of growth and fell to a minimum value in the ripe stage in all the species. Magnesia. Magnesia content like lime displayed no regular variations. The changes with plant development were different in each species. The percentage of magnesium decreased with maturity in Iseilema laxum. In case of Amphilophis
50 INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF INDIA [Vol. XXIII, Part I, odorata and Amphilophis glabra, the magnesia content increased in the flowering stage and then fell in the ripe stage. Chlorine. The percentage of chlorine decreased successively from young to ripe stage of growth. There was, however, a slight rise in the ripe stage in case of Amphilophis odorata. Summary Stage of growth was found to exert a pronounced effect on the chemical com- position of Amphihphis odorata, Iseilema laxum and Amphilophis glabra. Protein, soluble ash and phosphoric acid contents of the grasses decreased with the advance in the maturity of the plants. Variations in the percentage of lime, magnesia and ether extract were different in all the species of grasses, though ether extract decreased appreciably in the ripe stage in the three grasses. Crude fibre increased with age while nitrogen-free-extract varied irregularly, though tending to decrease with age. Soda, potash and chlorine contents of the grasses studied were high in early stages of growth and fell to minimum in ripe stage. Allowing the grasses to grow to maturity disturbs the lime/phosphoric acid ratio, being relatively low in phosphoric acid. Out of the three grasses studied, Iseilema laxum tends to retain its high nutrient content to a later stage, namely flowering stage and thus seems to be best suited for late harvesting. Out of these three grasses studied, Iseilema laxum possesses the highest average contents of protein, ether extract and minerals. In the case of Amphilophis glabra and Amphilpphis odorata, lime/phosphoric acid ratio approaches the standard in the young stage when the protein content is also highest and thus they were suitable as fodder in the young stage. Iseilema laxum has the optimum CaO/P2O5 ratio in the flowering stage; Acknowledgment Thanks are due to Mr. P. M. Dhabadgao, M.Sc., Assistant Agrostologist, Division of Agronomy for his help in collecting samples of grasses and supplying informa- tion about the places from which these grasses were brought. REFERENCES Association of Official Agricultural Chemists (1940). Official and tentative methods of Analysis, Washington, D. C. Blatter, E. and McCann, C. (1935). I. C. A. R. Scientific Monograph No. 5 Das Gupta, N. C. (1942). Indian J. vet. Sci. 12, 30 Dhannani, L. C. and Singh, A. (1946). Indian J. agric. Sci. 16, 284 Duthie, J. F. (1888). The fodder grasses of Northern India Hart, E. B. and Bentley, W. H. (1915). J. biol. Chem. 22, 477
March, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DASS 51 REFERENCES-contd. Iyer, A. V. (1935). Indïan J. vet. Sci. 5, 129 Iyer, A. R. P. and Kayasth, R. N. (1931). Agric. Livestock, India. 1, 526 Lander, P. E. (1941). Indian J. Agri. Sci. 12, 409 Lander, P. E. (1942). I.C.A.R. Misc. Bull. 16 Lisoba, J. C. (1896). List of Bombay grasses and their uses Mathur, N. L. and Ray, S. C. (1943). Indian J. vet. Sci. 13, 274 Narayana Iyer, K. R. (1939). Proc. Meeting Ani. Husb. Wing. Bd. Agri. Ani. Husb., India. 3, 302 Piper, C. S. (1944). Soil and Plant Analysis, Adelaide Ray, A. C. and Sen, K. C. (1933). Agric. Livestock, India. 3, 437 Ramiah, P V. (1933). Indian J. vet. Sci. 3, 65 Ranga Achariyar, K. (1921). A Hand-Book of South Indian Grasses Srivastava, B. P., Mukherjee, S. K. and Shrikhande, J. G. (1950). Indian J. vet. Sci. 20, 169 Talapatra, S. K. and Dev Goswami, M. N. (1949). Indian J. vet. Sci. 19, 19 Wright, C. H. (1938). Agricultural Analysis, London
SELECTION FOR BUTTERFAT PER CENT IN SOME DAIRY HERDS By. K., A. Alim, Ph.D., Department of Animal Production, Faculty of Agriculture, Farouk I University, Alexandria (Received for Publication on 7 July 1952) RENDEL and Robertson [1950] discussed the possibilities of estimating the genetic improvement which had in fact taken place in a herd of dairy cows without, confusing improvement in management with genetic gain. They concluded that the best way was to make a direct estimate from the selection practiced and the heritability of the character. The application of Rendel's and Robertson's [1950] method and the, estima- tion of genetic gain in milk yield due to selection in some Ayrshire herds in Scotland, was, however, carried out by Mahadevan [1950]. Afterwards, Rendel, Robertson and Alim [1951] adopted the same method and calculated the amount of genetic gain for milk yield in England. The genetic gain due to selection for butterfat per cent will be discussed in this paper. Collection of the data. Eleven herds of pedigree dairy cattle, situated in England, were used in this study. These herds belonged to six breeds: Ayrshire, Guernsey. Jersey, Red Poll, Shorthorn, and Kerry. The production records in these, herds, except, the Kerry, were maintained on the English. Milk Marketing, Boards System. In this study all the lactations that were diseased, or lactations less than 200 days, were excluded. Effect of culling. The average differences in butterfat test between non-culls and all cows in each lactation for the different herds studied were calculated. In Table I, the over-all differences between all the cows and the remainders in each lactation for all the herds was obtained as a weighted average. Table I Phenotypic selection differential for butterfat per cent Differences Lactation Number of cows Number of culled per cent between non-culls and all cows 1 830 32.7 54 SELECTION FOR BUTTERFAT PER CENT IN DAIRY HERDS [Vol. XXIII, Part I, have been complicated however, by the fact that culling for sterility, abortion, etc. tends to alter the general picture. The, values for the later lactations were based on small numbers to be given much weight. In the absence of progeny testing in dairy cattle, the method of Rendel and Robertson [1950], was used to estimate the genetic rate of improvement. In this method, the process of selection is divided into two parts: (a) the selection of cows whose daughters will be incorporated into the herd, and (b) the selection of cows whose sons will be used in the herd or sold to another herd. The effect of the inten- sity of selection in sires on future cows, is considerably more than when the selec- tion is made for heifers. This is due to the fact that, while the male progeny could be bred from the top five per cent of the herd [Lush, 1945], the female offsprings could not be derived from less than 75 per cent of the total breeding stock in order to provide sufficient replacement. The phenotypic selection differential of the dams of cows was computed by finding the mean of all first lactations in the population and subtracting it from the production record of the dams. But as the basis of selection may be more than one lactation, the improvement is calculated on one or the average records on which the merit of the dam was judged. Due weight was given to the number of daughters left by each dam, and the genetic superiority becomes: March, 1953] K.A.ALIM 55 TABLE II Heritability of butterfat per cent Number of records averaged Heritability butterfat per cent 1 0.65 2 0.79 3 0.85 4 0.88 They have been calculated on the assumption that repeatability and heritability of butterfat per cent of a single record 0.65. Only the first four lactations were used as heritability based on four lactations is as high as heritability based on more than four. The results obtained from the study of butterfat test in 11 herds are set out in Table III. TABLE III Selection for butterfat per cent of dams of heifers Total Genetic Herd Breed generation superiority Annual Number of length on 1-4 improvement daughters in years lactations 1 Ayrshire 19.41 56 SELECTION FOR BUTTERFAT PER CENT IN DAIRY HERDS [Vol. XXIII, Part I, The variation in the generation lengths between different herds and breeds are expected since they are influenced by, (1) age at first calving, (2) intervals between calving, (3) age of animals used for. breeding purposes and (4) variation in number of the population. The estimates obtained for the total generation lengths of both the Ayrshires and the Shorthorns were used for Guernseys and Red Polls respec- tively. The values reported for the Shorthorn are in fair agreement with those reported by Rendel and Robertson [1950]. They found that the total generation lengths for the Shorthorn was 19.10 years. For the Ayrshire, Mahadevan [1950], obtained a value of 19.50 years. The present results compare favourably with the results here. Selection in the breeding of bulls. The annual genetic superiority in butterfat test of the dams of bulls retained in the herds in which they were bred, and the corresponding figures for the dams of bulls sold to other pedigree dairy herds are presented in Table IV. Table IV Selection for butterfat per cent of dams of bulls Herd Genetic superiority Annual improvement Number of daughters based on 1-4 lactations 1 Kept 6 +0.0380 +0.0019 242 Sold 70 +0.0580 +0.0029 1838 2 Sold 1 March, 1953] K. A. ALIM 57 sold to other pedigree dairy herds [NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted STUDIES ON THE QUALITY OF GHEE AVAILABLE IN THE WHOLESALE AND RETAIL MARKETS OF CALCUTTA By MRITYUNJOY PROSAD GUHA AND MANISHI PROSAD GUHA, Chemical Laboratory, Presidency College, Calcutta, and SIWNARAIN RAMNARAIN, Agmark Ghee Grading Laboratory, Howrah (Received for publication on 16 June 1952) OF late the question of adulteration of ghee is drawing so much attention of the people of this country that a committee has been set up by the Govern- ment of India under the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (Food), which is busy in actively considering the different aspects of the problem of adulteration of ghee. The present authors are connected with the ghee trade for a long time and would like to place on record their own experiences regarding the quality of ghee available in the wholesale and retail markets of Calcutta. Ghee means clarified butterfat prepared exclusively from pure milk fat of the cow or buffalo, or both. The legal definition, therefore, does not permit the ad- mixture of fat available from any other source. It may be noted that it is in the mixed form that ghee is usually brought to the market and that practically the whole of the inter-provincial trade is in mixed ghee. Calcutta is not a ghee producing centre, but it is one of the biggest consuming centres in India. There is at present only one AGMARK grading laboratory and consequently the majority of trade is in ungraded ghee. At present the purity of ghee is ascertained by three main tests, viz. (a) B. R. reading, (b) R. M. value and (c) Villevecchia (or Boudouin) test for sesame oil present in hydrogenated oil. The supplementary tests, e.g. Kirschner value, Polenske value, Saponification value and Phytosteryl acetate test, etc., are applied only TABLE I(A) Specifications for Agmark ghee Grade Moisture per cent B. R. reading at 40°C. P. C. of F. F. A. R. M. value Polenske value Remarks Special grade (red label) Not more than 0.5 40.5-42.f) Not more than 1.5 Not less than 28 1.0-2.0 Should be free from hydro- genated oil as indi- cated by Villevecchia and P. A. tests. General grade 60 STUDIES ON THE QUALITY OF ghee [Vol. XXIII, Part I, in case the genuineness of a sample is in doubt. The Imperial (now Indian) Council of Agricultural Research have laid down the specifications mentioned in Table I(A), and these are scrupulously followed under the AGMARK scheme. It has been found that the chemical and physical constants of ghee vary greatly and depend upon the breed, feed and environment of cattle, and also upon the method of preparation and storage. Many analysts have noticed that samples of genuine ghee are often met with which do not give figures within the limits and it is necessary to exercise judgement before reporting any sample of ghee as adulterated on the basis of the three main tests only. Consequently, in the Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa and Bengal separate B. R. and R. M. value standards have been prescribed for local ghee only. As a result of representations from different regions of India, the Central Agricultural Marketing Department also was con- vinced that the B. R. and R. M. values of ghee actually depended upon the breed feed, etc., of cattle and agreed to allow special regional standards for Kathiawar M. P. and Ajmer-Merwara, Table I (C). TABLE I(B) Bengal Government specifications of ghee Ghee B. R. reading at 40°C R. M. value Remarks Cow and buffalo mixed 40.5-42.5 Not less than 28 Should be free from hydrogena- ted oil as indicated by Villeve- chia and P. A. tests. Cow March, 1953] M. P. GUHA AND MANISHI PROSAD GUHA 61 of raw ghee collected from sealed tins available in the wholesale markets and com- pared the results with those obtained in pre-war days. For the present investigation the authors have followed the standard methods of analysis laid down by the Imperial (now Indian) Council of Agricultural Research. TABLE II Quantity of ghee annually marketed in India in comparison to the quantity annually graded under the Agmark Grading Scheme Province or State Quantity of ghee produced in 1940 (in thousand md.) Position of grading in 1938 Position of grading in 1944 Number of packers Quantity graded (in thousand md.) Number of packers Quantity graded (in thousand md.) Assam 45 .. .. .. .. Bengal (undivided) 569 2 3.1 1 negligible Bihar 759 .. .. 4 15.6 Bombay 511 1 0.5 1 16.5 M. P. 467 .. .. 6 4.2 Madras 1367 .. .. .. .. Orissa 95 .. .. .. .. Punjab (undivided) 2206 2 1.8 5 7.9 U.P. 1938 5 17.5 33 82.3 Baroda 228 .. .. 1 130.4 Gujerat 76 .. .. .. .. Gwalior 581 .. .. 2 negligible Mysore 154 .. .. .. .. Nizam's Dominions 375 .. .. .. .. 14A
62 STUDIES ON THE QUALITY OF ghee [Vol. XXIII, Part I, TABLE III (A) Uttar Pradesh ghee (1938-39) Serial number Source Number of tins (18 sr. each) B.R. reading P.C. of F.F.A. R.M. value Remarks 1 Khurja 110 41.4 0.73 32.0 S 2 March, 1953] M. P. GUHA AND MANISHI PROSAD GUHA 63 TABLE III (B) Uttar Pradesh ghee (1950) Serial number Source Number of tins (18 sr. each) B.R. reading P.C. of F.F.A. R.M. value Villevecchia test Remarks 1 Etah 109 40.9 1.18 33.22 S 2 64 STUDIES ON THE QUALITY OF ghee [Vol. XXIII, Part I, TABLE IV (A) Guntur ghee (1937-38) Serial number Number of tins B.R. reading P.C. of F.F.A. R.M. value Remarks 1 42.8 2.45 25.9 GS 2 42.8 1.3 24.47 GS 3 42.6 1.4 26.5 GS 4 42.4 4.5 27.0 GS 5 42.5 2.7 26.6 GS 6 42.7 1.2 24.53 GS 7 42.6 1.6 26.18 GS 8 42.3 2.35 27.39 GS 9 42.9 1.7 25.79 GS 10 42.85 1.14 26.01 GS 11 534 43.0 25.13 GS 12 899 43.2 25.52 GS 13 415 43.3 24.25 GS 14 843 43.2 25.68 GS 15 440 43.2 26.40 GS 16 443 43.4 24.86 GS 17 437 43.5 24.68 GS 18 769 43.2 26.62 GS 19 443 43.4 24.64 GS 20 442 43.4 24.36 GS 21 600 43.1 24.36 GS 22 974 43.2 23.32 X 23 974 43.65 25.41 X 24 500 43.5 26.07 GS 25 500 43.9 21.5 X 26 439 43.4 26.56 GS 27 148 43.7 23.87 X 28 148 43.85 24.58 X 29 281 43.4 25.63 GS 30 281 .43.3 25.96 GS 31 239 43.25 25.64 GS 32 60 43.1 26.62 GS 33 441 43.0 26.12 GS 34 927 43.1 25.02 GS 35 437 43.1 25.96 GS 36 436 43.0 25.46 GS G S = India Government specification B R= 40.5 to 43.5 R.M. value = Not less than 24
March, 1953] M. P. GUHA AND MANISHI PROSAD GUHA 65 TABLE IV (B) Guntur ghee (1943) Serial number Weight B.R. reading P.C. of F.F.A. R.M. value Remarks Tons lb. 1 9 1382 43.5 2.56 21.08 X 2 8 1110 43.7 3.43 23.81 X 3 6 1529 43.4 4.2 23.2 X 4 5 320 42.8 2.65 25.7 G S 5 5 1076 42.7 2.3 25.4 G S 6 8 440 42.8 3.27 24.2 G S 7 9 1912 42.6 2.48 24.7 G S 8 7 1153 41.8 2.54 22.2 X 9 5 56 42.9 2.3 23.9 X 10 6 1545 42.8 1.8 22.4 X 11 6 1246 42.1 4.1 23.7 X 12 9 2002 41.8 3.4 27.7 G S 13 7 441 41.4 2.6 24.1 G S 14 6 1173 42.8 1.97 24.4 G S 15 9 1918 42.7 2.08 25.3 G S 16 9 1919 43.0 2.48 24.9 G S 17 9 2004 42.7 2.08 25.3 G S 18 10 1044 42.2 3.89 26.07 X 19 4 1812 43.4 2.4 23.3 X 20 4 1466 42.8 2.65 23.3 X 21 9 1576 42.6 3.55 24.86 X 22 8 349 43.2 4.31 24.2 X 23 8 346 42.5 3.95 26.29 X 24 8 405 43.0 3.6 23.65 X 25 4 1767 42.8 2.26 22.8 X 26 9 1288 42.8 2.5 22.2 X 27 11 1277 42.5 2.6 25.7 G S 28 4 2097 41.8 2.48 25.4 G S 29 5 634 43.3 5.9 26.3 X 30 4 1807 43.2 2.8 23.4 X G S = B R. = 40.5 to 43.5 R.M. = Not less than 24 P.C. of F.F.A. = Not more than 3.5
66 STUDIES ON THE QUALITY OF ghee [Vol. XXIII, Part I, TABLE, IV (C) Guntur ghee (1949-50) Serial number Number of tins B.R. reading R.M. value Remarks 1 512 41.8 28.5 G 2 238 41.2 28.7 G 3 419 41.0 28.9 G 4 278 42.1 25.1 B 5 537 41.3 27.9 B 6 511 42.2 24.6 B 7 252 41.5 29.1 G 8 391 42.0 26.0 B 9 253 41.8 29.0 G 10 563 42.5 27.4 B 11 100 42.7 27.1 X 12 692 42.0 28.1 G 13 982 41.9 291 G 14 481 42.1 26.6 B 15 248 42.0 28.2 G 16 234 42.0 27.0 B 17 512 42.0 25.7 B 18 859 41.9 27.0 B 19 525 41.6 29.1 G 20 481 42.5 28.0 G 21 480 42.1 28.4 G 22 450 41.6 29.7 G 23 575 41.9 29.1 G 24 710 41.8 29.4 G 25 745 41.8 29.5 G 26 175 42.1 28.9 G 27 565 41.7 28.5 G 28 500 41.6 28.2 G 29 182 41.6 28.3 G 30 154 42.0 29.3 G
March, 1953] M. P. GUHA AND MANISHI PROSAD GUHA 67 TABLE V (A) Ghee of unknown source (1937-38) Serial number Number of tins B.R. reading P.C. of F.F.A. R.M. value Remarks 1 65 41.4 4.06 27.2 B 2 05 41.3 3.68 31.6 B 3 50 40.9 0.93 29.1 S 4 57 40.7 2.50 29.04 G 5 50 41.4 0.87 29.4 S 6 50 40.7 2.30 29.1 G 7 50 40.7 0.87 34.4 S 8 50 41.3 0.80 31.9 S 9 50 41.5 2.08 28.98 G 10 50 40.3 0.80 35.6 S 11 50 40.8 0.69 33.05 S 12 50 40.8 0.99 31.0 S 13 40 40.5 1.50 32.01 S 14 18 40.8 1.30 30.6 S 15 29 40.9 3.89 28.7 B 16 70 40.9 0.78 34.27 S 17 42.4 0.42 30.3 S 18 41.9 0.79 32.39 S 19 41.8 0.61 31.95 S 20 40.5 0.96 30.52 S 21 40.0 0.78 34.04 S 22 41.3 0.72 33.93 S 23 42.4 0.42 29.81 S 24 42.5 0.82 28.54 S 25 42.3 0.69 30.25 S 26 41.75 1.06 31.79 S 27 41.7 0.69 32.83 S 28 41.4 0.60 33.44 S 29 42.5 0.55 30.41 S 30 42.2 0.57 30.02 S 15
68 STUDIES ON THE QUALITY OF ghee [Vol. XXIII, Part I, TABLE V (B) Ghee of unknown source (1949-50) Serial Number B.R. P. C. of R. M. value Villevecchia Remarks number of tins reading F. F. A. test 1 350 42.7 .. 28.0 Positive X 2 411 42.2 .. 27.2 B 3 443 42.6 .. 28.3 Positive X 4 348 41.7 .. 30.0 G 5 451 41.3 .. 26.0 B 6 500 41.3 .. 27.8 B 7 61 42.7 .. 24.5 Positive X 8 10 42.1 .. 24.0 B 9 600 41.9 .. 29.8 G 10 300 40.9 .. 31.1 G 11 300 41.8 .. 26.7 B 12 448 43.3 .. 22.4 Positive X 13 111 42.5 .. 24.4 B 14 506 42.7 .. 26.4 Positive X 15 400 42.4 .. 26.9 B 16 70 41.5 .. 28.5 G 17 900 41.8 .. 27.0 B 18 612 42.2 .. 27.3 B 19 175 42.1 .. 28.9 G 20 154 42.0 .. 29.3 G 21 300 42.0 2.34 28.16 G 22 538 43.0 2.48 27.39 Positive X 23 419 43.0 1.89 23.1 March, 1953] M. P. GUHA AND MANISHI PROSAD GUHA 69 TABLE VI Results of analysis of the samples of ghee collected at random from the retail markets of Calcutta (1950) Serial No. Name of the market Price in Rs./Sr. B. R. Reading P. C. of F. F. A. R.M. value Villevecchia test Remarks 1 Baghbazar 5 8 0 51.0 0.3 .. Positive Hydrogenated oil 2 Baghbazar 9 0 0 49.3 1.3 .. 70 STUDIES ON THE QUALITY OF Ghee [Vol. XXIII, Part I, U. P. ghee is valued as the best ghee available in the market, due to low acid, low B. R. and high R. M. values, and fetches the maximum price. The quality has, however, deteriorated after the war but even now 66.6 per cent are of 'special grade, and 20 per cent of 'general grade'. Of late, the Calcutta market is being supplied largely by Guntur ghee which, however, is inferior to Uttar Pradesh ghee in quality, due to high acid, high B. R. and low R. M. values, and is available at a lower price. The quality has now much improved and 66.6 per cent are now found to conform to the AGMARK 'general grade'. 'Special grade' ghee is, however, very rare in this area. The quality of ghee of unknown source, has deteriorated much. Instead of 80 per cent 'special grade' ghee previously obtained the amount now available is only 10 per cent. As much as 30 per cent of the samples did not conform to the AGMARK of Government specifications and were rejected on grounds of quality and purity. The high acid values of a number of samples might be due to long storage in the humid conditions of Bengal but the provincial authorities do not take into consideration this value for rejecting a sample of ghee. Quality of ghee collected from the retail markets In order to ascertain the position of buffalo ghee in the retail markets of Calcutta the present authors actually purchased small quantities of ghee during the months July-August, 1950, from a number of retail shops selected at random from the principal markets within the jurisdiction of the corporation of Calcutta and published a preliminary report in the Science and Culture [Guha, 1950]. The samples were collected from tins which are usually kept exposed till completely sold out in the retail market. The results detailed in Table VI and summarised in Table VII show that the quality of ghee available in the retail market is far worse than that, in the wholesale market. Out of 25 samples analysed only five were found to conform to the AGMARK speci- fications and the rest were either simply hydrogenated oil, or ghee adulterated with hydrogenated oil, or highly rancid ghee unfit for consumption. It is noticed that in a large number of cases simply coloured hydrogenated oil is being sold as buffalo ghee under the very nose of the Public Health Authorities. In one particular case the authors noticed that a stuff selling at a price as high as rupees nine per seer contained only hydrogenated oil and nothing else. All these products were, however, found to be adulterated by the simple Villevecchia test not to speak of the other complicated methods prescribed for the detection of adulteration. The question is why such a thing happens when there are people to detect such crimes and when persons found guilty of such crimes are punishable by law. It might be due to the fact that it is easier to keep vigilant eyes on the few wholesale dealers than on the very large number of retail dealers. Moreover, persons found guilty of such crimes are in most cases simply fined, which the unscrupulous merchant may afford to pay. The punishment, in the opinion of the authors, is not deterrent enough to prevent repeatition of such crimes. The chemical methods for the detection of adulteration and the different provi- sions of the law are all essential to prevent the practice of adulteration, it is true, but something more should be done for the common man who cannot be expected to analyse each and every sample of ghee before purchasing it from the retail market.
March, 1953] M. P. GUHA AND MANISHI PROSAD GUHA 71 It is, therefore, suggested that all hydrogenated oils should be compulsorily made to contain a colouring matter so that when the coloured vegetable product is mixed with ghee will be detected even by a layman by visual observation only. This measure will no doubt greatly minimise the scope of adulteration of ghee with hydrogenated oil by the petty retail dealers. In Bengal, no particular attention is paid either to moisture content or acid value of a sample of ghee. Consequently, it is found that in a number of cases the acid value, an important factor for judging the age and quality of ghee, is found to be very high. Bad odour, generally inherent with acidity and rancidity was, however, not very remarkable in any of these samples. The odour was in all pro- bability carefully masked by blending with fresh ghee or by adding a small quantity of the essence of ghee, available in the market. Samples having acid values as high as 11.6 and 5.56 are thus easily sold to the common man, and in Bengal there is at present no provision in the law to check this undesirable practice. Considering these facts the authors recommend the following measures to be adopted for minimising the scope of adulteration of ghee :72 STUDIES ON THE QUALITY OF Ghee [Vol. XXIII, Part I, The measures so adopted should be given wider publicity so that the public may appreciate them and may guard themselves against being deceived. SUMMARY Results of analysis of a number samples of ghee collected at random from the wholesale markets of Calcutta before and after the war, have been discussed. The samples so examined have been classified as (a) Uttar Pradesh ghee, (b) Guntur ghee and (c) ghee from unknown source. So far as quality is concerned, Uttar Pradesh ghee is valued as the best available in market, and fetches the maximum price. The quality has, however, deteriorated after the war. Results of analysis of a number of samples collected at random from the retail shops of Calcutta have also been discussed. Out of 25 samples so examined only five have been found to conform to AGMARK specifications and the rest were rejected due to adulteration, rancidity, etc. The quality of such ghee is far worse than that of ghee in the wholesale market. The authors have recommended a few important measures to be adopted for minimising the scope of adulteration. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author's best thanks are due to Dr R. Chatterjee, Professor of Chemistry, Presidency College, Calcutta, for his kind interest in this investigation. The authors are also indebted to Sri B. B. Rakshit, Director, Sree Ghee Laboratories, Calcutta, Sri G. N. Ghose, Chemist, Raghubar Dayal Jain & Sons, AGMARK Ghee Grading Laboratory, Etah, and Sri Pandit, Chemist, Ghee Merchants Association, Calcutta, for their kind co-operation during the entire course of this work*. REFERENCES Doctor, N. S. and Banerjee, B. N. (1939). J. Univ. Bombay, 8, 247 Guha, M. P. and Guha, M. P. (1950). Sci. Cult., 16, 191 Report on the Marketing of ghee and other Milk Products in India Standard Methods for the Analysis of ghee (1946). Misc. Bull., No. 64 * It is reported that the committee appointed by the Government of India has already recommended that vanaspati should be made to contain sesame oil and also carotene oil concen- trate so that the product may have an orange colour.
ABSTRACTS The diseases of small animals communicable to man. CUMMINGS SUMNER, K. (1952). B. Vet. J. 108, 7, 246-256 THE W.H.O's report [1951] on Zoonoses lists 80 diseases naturally transmitted from vertebrate animals to man ; of these (excluding helminth diseases) about 13 are capable of transmission by dogs and about five by cats. The author has detailed and discussed the role of small domestic animals in the transmission of diseases to man and brought forth facts of interest and import from a public health point in Britain. Leptospira canicola infects dog and man and with 40 to 50 per cent of urban dogs having been found to be carrying infection and the transmission being possible through unbroken skin, a real danger has been pointed out. Tuberculosis, mostly occurring in lungform in the dog, presents its risks. Texoplasmosis, which has recently been suggested to be more prevalent in man than hitherto suspected, is another malady to be looked into, specially when it is difficult to diagnose it clinically and the methods of transmission as also the portals of entry into the body are still not definite. Rabies, Hydatid disease, Leptospiral jaundice, Salmonella food poisoning and Ringworm have also been described and the risk of infection to man notified. Inspite of the above, the number of occasions, as reviewed from the Medical and Veterinary literature, in which transmission to man did occur, is thus relatively small. [B.N.G.] Epizootic Cerebro-spinal Nematodiasis or Setariasis, focal encephalomyelomalacia in animals in the Orient caused by immature Setaria digitata : a disease which may occur in animals in other parts of the world. INNES, J.R.M. CHUSABURO SHOHO, AND PERUMAL PILLAI, C. (1952). B. Vet. J. 103,3, 71-88 THE authors have traced the choronological developments in the investigation of a new nervous disease identified by the Japanese workers74 ABSTRACTS [ Vol. XXIII, Part I, of Setaria digitata. These immature worms do not appear in the blood stream when transferred into 'an unnatural host' but invade the nervous system which has been proved to be a seat of predilection for worms attacking an unnatural host. Experi- mental evidence proves the lesions to be due to traumatic damage to the nerve tissue caused by the wandering worm. The meticulous study of the pathological material that led towards the dis- covery of the malady by the Japanese research workers is a great pointer for others to follow. A reference is made to not yet fully investigated paralytic conditions in different parts of the globe in which the existing data suggest a possible, nematudal cause (e.g. Equine parapalagia (kumri) and goat paralysis in India and Wobblers in horses in the U.S.A.). Skin tests using setaria antigen and complement fixation tests have been suggested for diagnosis. [H.K.L.] The intradermal inoculation of lapinised rinderpest vaccine, SCOTT, G. R. (1952). Vet. Rec. 64 .(10), 137-39 THE author used Kabete passaged nakamura III strain of lapinised rinderpest virus. Subcutaneous inoculation of two c.c. 10-4 dilution or 0.0002 gm. of freeze dried tissue (blood, spleen and mesenteric lymph gland) virus titrated in cattle was regarded as one m.i.d. Twenty m.i.ds, i.e. 0.004 gm. in two c.c. are used as one sub- cutaneous vaccinating dose in routine field immunization in Kenya. For immunity test vaccinated cattle are challenged between 9 to 14 days with Kabete ' O ' bovine spleen virulent virus. Most of the animals use were high grade and fully susceptible European cattle. Under laboratory conditions, the minimal intradermal immunizing dose that protected cattle regularly was 0.00001 gm. in 0.2 c.c. saline but in field trials, 40 times intradermal m.i.d., (i.e. 0.0004 gm.) in 0.2 c.c. was inoculated. Thus, in field vaccination by intradermal route, there is tenfold saving of the vaccine over the subcutaneous route while at the same time the number of immunizing doses is doubled. Therefore, there is twentyfold reduction in the amount of virus by intradermal route of immunization. During shortage of supply of vaccine the intradermal route should be resorted to. Each of 1022 animals were successfully immunized intradermally without any thermal reaction with 0.2 c.c. of 1/500 dilution, i.e. 0.0004 gm. of lapinized vaccine. Eighteen vaccinates were picked out at random and challenged at intervals between 24 and 85 days after vaccination and only one proved susceptible. Due to peculiar pattern of cattle crushes in Kenya, the area over ribs was found to be a more convenient site than the ventral aspect of the root of the tail during field immunization. Suggestion for use of McLintock automatic syringe in preference to ordinary dental syringe in field trials of intradermal inoculation is made. [P.C.G.]
March, 1953] ABSTRACTS 75 The toxicity of antrycide dimetho sulphate. GARNER, J. R. (1950). Vet. Rec. 62, 314-315 THE author has assessed the toxicity of antrycide dimethosulphate after Dr Davey's statement that 12 mg./kgm. body weight is the safe maximum dose for cattle. Toxic symptoms in cattle, that were infected with Trypanosoma congo- lense, ensued two hours following the administration of the drug at 5 mg./kgm body weight. A dose of 10 mg./kgm. body weight to healthy cattle induced significant rise in their blood sugar. Same rate of dosage in guinnea pigs produced same toxic symptoms and caused them to appear almost dead but recovery was eventful. A dose of 100 mg./kgm. body weight in rabbits, guinnea pigs, rats and calf caused death in 7, 8, 30 and 20 minutes respectively. A single dose/of 7.5 mg./kgm. body weight to cattle infected with T. vivax caused the latter to persist in the blood for several days after treatment while a second dose of 7.5 mg./kgm. induced toxic reaction and even proved lethal to some of the animals. [D.D.N.] Copper pine of Calves. JAMIESON, S. AND RUTH ALLCROFT (1950). British J. Nutri. 4, l, 16-31 THE authors have described a condition occurring chiefly in the young stock of the Aberdeen76 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIII, Part I, factor present or absent in the pastures which seriously interferes with the metabo- lism of copper in the calves, particularly of certain beef breeds at a critical time in their development from 2 to 6 months of age. [K.S.] Effect of dried cow manure on growing pullets. ROSENBERG, M. M. AND PALAFOX L. A. (1951). World Poult. Sci. J. 7 (4), 272-279 WITH sixty-seven week old New Hampshire pullets randomised into one control and three experimental groups, this experiment was carried out to study growth rate, feed consumption from 7 to 25 weeks of age, age of maturity, daily egg production and physical characteristics of eggs as judged by number, weight, incidence of double-Tolks, body check or cracked eggs, meat and blood spots. The control ration (Gr. I) was a grower ration which was replaced to the extent of 5 (Gr.II), 10 (Gr. III) and 15 (Gr. IV) per cent by oven dried (not above 158°F.) cow manure from lactating cow, maintaining the same protein level of approxi- mately 16.5 per cent with additional herring meal. The results indicate that the growth rates in Gr. II and III were as good as in the control group I. Group III showed slower rate of growth all through the experiment but the difference was not found statistically significant. This difference would probably have been significant with larger number of birds. Less total feed consumption was noted in Gr. II, III and IV but on the basis of the feed per pound gain, they consumed more. The age of maturity and the rate of production of eggs in Gr. II and III was similar to controls Gr. I, whereas sexual maturity was delayed and egg production during the first five weeks after onset of production was definitely less in Gr. IV than in control Gr. I. Concentrations above 10 per cent of cow manure seemed to retard sex maturity and diminish the intensity of ovulation. A conclusion, similar to Turner's that the Androgenic hormone in rations containing 5 and 10 per cent of oven-dried cow manure was sublethal to suppress the gonadotrophic effect of the anterior pituitory and hence to retard the growth rate or delay the age of sexual maturity and later, egg-production to 25 weeks of age, was drawn. A definite inverse relationship between concentration of cow-manure and fre- quency of double-yolked eggs existed. A statistically significant difference was. also observed on the incidence of broken eggs but could not be interpreted in absence of data on blood-calcium. The experiment indicates that the oven-dried cow manure can be fed to poultry with good advantage when included up to 10 per cent in the grower ration. [A. K. P.] The effect of the dietary plane upon the reactions of two breeds of sheep during short exposures to hot environments. RIEK, R. F., MARGARET, H., HARDY, D. H., LEE, K. AND CARTER, H.B. (1950). Austr. J. agric. Res. 1, 217 FIVE Camden Park Merino and six Corriedale ewes were taken for this investi- gation. Each breed was divided into three groups based on low, medium and high dietary planes respectively. The animals were exposed for seven hours a
March, 1953] ABSTRACTS 77 day for one to three days in a week, to selected atmospheres of known temperatures and humidity. The temperature of the test atmospheres ranged from 30 to 45°C. and the vapour pressure from 15 to 40 mm. Hg. Observations were made on the rectal temperature, pulse rate, respiratory rate, respiratory volume, evaporative water loss, food and water intake, body growth and general behaviour. It was found that Camden Park Merino adapted fairly well to hot conditions, particularly to hot, dry atmosphere. A high plane diet reduced the heat tolerance of these animals and some of the heavy ewes actually lost weight during the period under experimentation. Low diet on the other hand impaired heat regulating mechanism and thus reduced animal's adaptability. Ewes on a medium-plane diet fared best. [S.N.L.] Water consumption of Hereford and Brahman cattle and the effect of cooled drinking water in a hot climate. ITTNER, N. R., KELLY, C. F. and GUILBERT, H. R. (1951). J. Anim. Sci. 10 :3, 742-751 WITH a view to increase the productive efficiency of livestock in hot climates, cooling of the outside of animals by shade and water sprinkling has been tried. This paper describes the effect of cooling the inside of animals by giving refrigerated drinking water. Eight Herefords for cooled and uncooled water, and four Brahmans for uncooled water were used in the study. Mean air temperature for the test period of June 14 to September 5, 1950 was 85.4°F. Mean of maximum temperatures was 100.5° F., mean of minimum 70.2°F., highest 118°F., and the lowest 54°F. Temperature fell below 70° F. on 29 days. Average for relative humidity at noon was 38.4 per cent and 46.7 per cent for the day. Humidity was highest (72.2 per cent) in early July and lowest (29.6 per cent) in early August. Refrigerated water was supplied at 65°F. Uncooled water ranged between 72° and 97° F. but averaged 88.2°F., for the day. Morning average of 83°F. at six hours rose quickly to 90°. by 11, then gradually to the average maximum of 94.5° at 17 hours, and then cooled back to 83° at six. Results showed significant benefit from the use of cooled water. Water was* mostly consumed between 7 and 11 hours, and 16 and 20 hours. Feeding times were 7.30 and 17 hours. Cooled water was consumed less than uncooled. Here- fords on uncooled water took per head per hour, 0.3 gallons during night when water was coolest, 1.1 gallons between 7 to 11 hours, 0.4 gallons between 11 to 14 hours when heat was greatest, and 1.7 gallons from 16 to 20 hours. Brahmans behaved similarly but drank less water per head and per 100 lb. body weight. Effect of cooled and uncooled water intake was noticed on feed consumed per 100 lb. body weight and on gains made. Herefords on cooled water consumed more food daily and were more efficient than those on uncooled water, but Brahmans on uncooled water were the most efficient. Hay feed consumption per 100 lb. gain in body weight was 1618, 2092, and 1255 lb. respectively. When the day's tempera- ture ranged from 106 to 116°F., their respiration was 124, 137 and 77 and 14 to 16 hours, and 87, 96 and 51 at 9 to 11 hours. Brahmans respired much shallower than Herefords and showed little discomfort from heat. [S.V.C.]
78 ABSTRACTS [ Vol. XXIII, Part 1, The viability and potency of freeze-dried lapinised rinderpest vaccine. SCOTT, G. R., and BROTHERSTON, J. G. (1952). J. Comp. Path. 62, 108-115 FREEZE dried lapinised rinderpest, vaccine, stored under vacuum at 37° C and at room temperature (18°C. to 25°C.) out of direct sunlight, remained in- fective to rabbits for at least 168 hours and 120 days respectively; when reconsti- tuted in normal saline in 1 : 20 dilution and maintained at 37°C., the dried vaccine evoked typical reactions in rabbits up to seven hours, but became completely inac- tive after 15 hours, when maintained at room temperature out of direct sunlight, it was viable till 42 hours and was completely inactive after 48 hours. Freeze-dried vaccine, stored under vaccum at 36.8°C. to 37.8°C. for 48 hours conferred immunity to grade cattle ; but storage at room temperature out of direct sunlight preserved the immunising potency till 40 days. Reconstituted vaccine stored at 37°C. to 38°C. lost its protective value in one hour ; when, however, it was stored at room temperature (20°C. to 22°C.) out of direct sunlight the corres- ponding period was six hours. Great care has been advocated in the despatch and use of freeze-dried lapinised rinderpest vaccine. The upper safety limit for use of reconstituted vaccine has been suggested as 30 minutes. [T.P.B.] The pH change in bull Semen and fertility. ANDERSON, J. (1952). J. agric. Sci. 42 (1+2), 172-174 IN this experiment the author incubated 0.5 ml. of neat, or diluted bull semen samples for one hour at 37°C. Before and after incubation the pH of the samples was determined by means of a Beckmann pH meter. The remaining portions of the samples were used for inseminations. It has been observed that in general, samples showing high pH changes due to incubation were associated with good conception rates and vice versa. There was, however, exception to this general correlation and it is believed that pH changes give an indirect measure of sperm metabolism. The study of sperm metabolism alone, however, does not solve the problems of fertilizations. [D.P.M.] The toxicity of D.D.T. and B.H.C. for domestic animals. JOLLY, D. W. (1952). Vet. Rec. 64, 76-81 THE author reviews the toxicity hazards of D.D.T. and B. H.C. for domestic animals with special reference to the symptoms, prognosis and treatment of poisoning by these insecticides. For fuller information the reader should consult the original article. D.D.T., after its absorbtion into the animal body permeates all tissues, con- centrating in the fact where it is stored as chemically unchanged D.D.T. Prolonged administration of D.D.T. results in the building-up of the insecticide to produce a toxic reaction. Chronic poisoning by D. D. T. causes liver damage.
March, 1953] ABSTRACTS 79 Cats are most susceptible of all the domestic animals to D. D. T. poisoning. The symptoms usually appear four to five hours after the application of the insecti- cide and is characterised by nervous tremors persisting for several days and hyper- ' sensitivity. A reasonable treatment recommended is to narcotize or anaesthetise the animal and to inject glucose saline or calcium borogluconate solution. A non- oily purgative may assist in the removal of the insecticide from the intestines. In dogs the toxic symptoms are manifested in about four to six hours after the administration of D. D. T. The symptoms and method of treatment are the same as mentioned for the cat. Prognosis must be guarded in this species of animal if ventricular fibrillation is noted. Cattle sheep and goat are comparatively more resistant to D. D. T. poisoning while the pig is most resistant to its toxic effects. In poultry the toxic symptoms of chronic D. D. T. poisoning are anorexia and emaciation, culminating in tremors, in coordination, collapse and death. Ad- ministration of calcium is reported to be of some use in such cases of poisoning. Toxicity of B.H.C. is generally considered to be less acute than that of D.D.T. The advantage with B. H. C. is that it is insecticidal at concentrations well below those likely to produce a toxic reaction. Cats are susceptible to B. H. C. poison- ing also. The toxic symptoms appear about five hours after the use of B. H. C. and last for only an hour. The suggested treatment is to narcotize or completely anaesthetise the animal. The use of glucose saline or calcium boro-gluconate in cases of B. H. C. poisoning has not been thoroughly investigated though this line of treatment can be assumed to be therapeutically sound. A non-oily purgative would also assist the removal of B. H. C. from the intestines. In dogs the toxic symptoms are manifested by vomition, polyuria, nervous spasms and mild convul- tions which appear from five to twelve hours after the administration of B. H. C. Treatment is same as that recommended for the cat. In cattle, sheep and goats the toxic symptoms are characterised by dullness, anorexia, hyper-sensitivity and convulsions. Treatment would be symptomatic. There is no available detailed information on the toxic hazards of B. H. C. to horses or pigs. B. H. C. is considered to be a safe insecticide for poultry. [K. S.] The effect of environmental temperature and relative humidity on the acclimation of cattle to the tropics. GAZTAMBIDE ARRILLAGA, C., HENNING W. L. and MILLER, R. C. (1952). J. Anim. Sci. 11, 50-60 THE climatic factors such as air temperature, humidity, air movement, solar radiation, and barometric pressure, acting singly or in combination, are res- ponsible for the thermal stress in animals, by affecting one or more of the physiological systems. The authors investigated the behaviour and adaptability of five dairy breeds 80 ABSTRACTS [ Vol. XXIII, Part I, The most important factor influencing the physiological well-being of cattle, appeared to be the environmental temperature, relative humidity being of secondary importance. The lower body reactions and higher. haemoglobin concentration of the Native and Brahman cattle, as compared to the Hereford cattle, indicate that they acclimate better than the Hereford to the tropical climate of Puterico. Thus the differences in the body reactions and physiological well-being between cattle of the different breeds, indicate breed differences which are important from the point of acclimatization and milk production. In view of the above observa- tions the selection of cattle with high heat tolerance to climatic stress is of great significance for the development of cattle industry in the tropics. [V.N.M.] BOOK RECEIVED The British Journal of Animals Behaviour. MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES INDIAN WOOL II. ASSESSMENT OF WOOL QUALITY* By B. M. Patel, G. K. WAGLE and M. R. PADHYE, Department of Chemical Technology, University of Bombay and B. K. VAIDYA, Assistant Director, The Ahmedabad Textile Research Association, Ahmedabad (Received for publication on 12 September 1952) (With three text-figures) THE quality of wool is closely related to the principal physical attributes of its fibres. The main characteristics that have a decisive influence on the quality of wool re the length, shape, fineness, coefficient of variation crimps, strength, resilience colour and lusture of the fibres. Vaidya and Bhatt in their paper on Indian Wool have stressed the importance and relation of these physical attributes to the assessment of wool which is generally done by its spinning quality. But it is clearly stated therein that there are two factors of primary importance in assessing Indian wools, namely the coefficient of variation as a measure of heterogeneity and medullation or hairy portion in wool. As far as Indian wool is concerned, however, a systematic quantitative study of these attributes has not been made before. No definite standards, therefore, exist to judge the quality of the various types of Indian wool, which is known in the world market as being of a very coarse variety producing yarns of 36's and lower counts (corresponding to fibre diameters above 40 microns) as compared with the Australian Merino wools which easily yield yarns of 80's, 70's and 64's (corresponding to fibre diameters 19-22 microns). The Indian wool is, therefore, mostly used for heavy woollen goods and carpet industry. A factor of considerable importance which has been responsible for lowering the economic value of Indian wool, is its highly heterogeneous nature as regards fineness distribution of fibres, for it is not unusual to find in a single wool sample ready for market high proportions of fibres, varying in thickness from 20 microns to 100 microns. (In a semi-quantitative estimate of the tolerance of C. V. for clothing material Barker sets a limit of 25 per cent C. B.) This is the result of the almost total absence of the proper grading of fleece, which, if carried out at all, is done in a very primitive fashion. Further, if the grading is carried out according to the fineness of wool on different parts of sheep-skin, as is the practice in other wool growing countries, the task of the Indian graders would be difficult on account of the fact that the majority of Indian sheep grow wool in which wide variations occur in the diameter of the fibres even on a small part of the body of the sheep. With coarseness the heterogeneity or disuniformity in fibre fineness also increases, parti- cularly in the non-domesticated types of sheep breeds. Another serious defect with the coarse wool is the generally increasing amount of medullation with increase in diameter: The coarser fibres having diameter above 40 microns are generally * Part I of the Series by Vaidya and Bhatt, Current Science, July 1947. 81 3 AR/53.
82 INDIAN WOOL II. ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, medullated, i.e. more like hair than wool. Ordinarily, a medullated fibre may be distinguished from a wool fibre by its dead white appearance and non-resilient nature. A non-medullated fibre on the other hand is semi-transparent or translucent and possesses a certain amount of elasticity. When viewed under microscope non- medullated (wool) fibres will appear to have the outer covering of scales while medullated (hair) fibres will present an appearance of a hollow portion with dark channels running along the length of the fibres, either continuously, broken or interrupted and this is known as medulla. These two defects of most of the Indian wools, namely their complete heterogeneous nature as regards fineness and their high contamination with hair, greatly enhance the difficulties of the task of wool grading. The comparison of the characteristics of Indian wool with foreign wools show that these are particularly drawbacks in Indian wool. METHODS OF ASSESSING THE FIBRE CHARACTERISTICS The samples were scoured in 04 per cent neutral soap and then alcohol extracted thrice, before actual examination of their fibre characteristics. Measurement of length The crimpy and elastic nature of wool makes the length measurement uncertain unless carried out under specified conditions. The methods of measurement of length may be divided into two main groups, direct and indirect. The simplest direct method as given by Burns consists in lightly stretching a fibre on a steel scale over black velvet box between a thumb and a forceps. This method was followed in the present work and is described by Vaidya and Bhatt. The other direct method of Kronacher is by threading fibres through a needle eye and using a glass scale, is a simple modification of this. Amongst the indirect methods the gravimetric method is quite important. It consists in weighing a fixed number of fibres and also certain length of the fibre on a micro-balance. B. A. S. T. M. method consists in using Suter stapler in combination with good balance. But these methods have two principles drawbacks. Firstly the amount of moisture in wool varies with temperature and humidity which have hence to be strictly maintained constant and secondly these give no idea of the statistical constants of this attribute. Measurement of diameter Fibre fineness is the principal characteristic which determines the quality of wool. In the laboratory of the Wool Research Association three methods have been adopted for fibre examination : 1. Gravimetric methods. 2. Photomicrographs of cross-sections. 3. Projection at high and low magnification. Gravimetric method. It is well known that provided the density or specific gravity of the material is known then the product of the length, area of cross- section and density of a rod of given material is equal to its weight.
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, M. R. PADHYE AND b. K. VAIDYA 83 W=L. A. D., where W is weight, L is length, A is area of cross-section and d is density. For the determination of the weight of a wool fibre two methods are available: 1. Weighing the fibres individually on a micro-balance. 2. Weighing a known number of fibres together which are of equal length and calculating the mean weight per fibre from the result. This weighing can be done on a precision Chemical balance or special micro-balance. Cross-section method. The cross-section of the fibres were taken by Hardy's microtome and the diameter of the fibres were measured under a measuring micrometer, correct to a micron. Microprojection method. Wool samples for the diameter measurements were made up in the form of master samples, which were prepared from several sub-samples, of each type according to the statistical requirements. Thus, depending on the limits of the percentage error derived and the average fineness of the fibre the master samples were required to have 500 to 1000 fibres. The probable error in the mean was fixed ±2.5 per cent, which is the one generally employed in the limits of measurements. The prepared sample was then cut up in very small lengths of about 0.384 INDIAN WOOL II. ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Frequency distribution curve
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 85 Mean M=Arbitrary origin ± mv/n × Group value where m=class frequency v=the class value and n=number of fibres Standard deviation [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Coefficient of variations C. V. = 86 INDIAN WOOL II. ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, types of fibres in the sample. But though it may be convenient method of assess- ment form the manufacturing point of view, it is not a correct measure of degree of medullation since a single fibre may be partly medullated and partly unmedullated. The extensive examination for, the period of about nine years in this laboratory show that the proportion of such partially medullated fibres is very large and hence to get more realistic idea the method adopted in the laboratory has particular advantage over other methods. This method of assessment of medullation has a special ad- vantage from the point of view of breeding experiments over the method of assessing the percentage of medullated fibres in a sample. It is felt that the method followed by Mahal, Johnson and Burns of separating the fibre types is also not convenient since it does not give a quantitative idea of medullation. So far the methods available for the medullation assessment has been based on the observation of Elphik. When wool fibres are immersed in a liquid like benzene the refractive index of which is the same as that of wool, all the wool fibres become invisible while hair stand out, dead white in appearance due to their hollow struc-. ture and they can be easily picked out on account of their clear visibility. Although an idea of the total degree of medullation in a sample may be obtained in this way, its quantitative determination is rendered impossible on account of the presence of a large number of partially medullated fibres which may have developed medullation along the major portion of their lengths or may be medullated irregularly at intervals. MacMahon [1937], however, claims to have the Elphick benzene method quan- titative by employing a photoelectric cell to show the degree of medullation by the amount of light reflected from the opaque white medullated fibres immersed in benzene. The degree of medullation is thus given by the amount of galvanometer deflection produced when a known weight of the wool sample in a blackened glass tray is illuminated under a constant source of light. Hair reflects considerably more light than pure wool when in benzene. An integration of the amount of light reflected or the apparent whiteness of the sample would, therefore, give an index of the degree of medullation. Based on this principle MacMahon used a photoelectric instrument (medullometer) for the purpose. Though this method is quick for assessing medu- llation, it has not been quite a success; as a number of factors have to be considered which requires careful control such as the fluctuation in light intensity, the fatigue shown by the photo-cell, the proper arrangement of the fibres and the refractive index of benzene employed. It was, therefore, found necessary for this reason, that a more direct, simpler and at the same time more reliable method should be evolved which could be adopted for use in the routine work of medullation assessment. When the image of the wool fibre is projected on the screen for the measurement of diameter, medullation appears along the length of the fibre as dark channels, continuous or broken as previously noted. Therefore, while measuring the diameter of the fibre, if the total length of the individual fibres and of medullated portion in each of them is also measured, the percentage amount of medullation in the total number of fibres measured could be easily calculated. The results obtained by these two methods, viz. microprojection and medullo- meter methods are shown in Table I.
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 87 TABLE I Medullation figures obtained by two different methods Microprojection Medullometer 25.4 25.1 30.2 32.3 17.2 15.3 39.2 40.8 27.1 27.7 32.1 32.1 25.9 24.1 19.7 21.3 26.6 28.4 35.5 37.7 It is observed that there is a fairly good agreement between the medullation figures obtained by these two methods. The exact relationship which seems to exist between the fineness of the fibres and their medullation formed a subject of a close study in the present work. It may be remarked that among the well developed breeds of sheep, even in coarse fibres (40-50µ), there is hardly any medullation, but in most of the Asiatic breeds, this defect is far too common. During the course of work it was noticed that fine wool with fibre diameter below 30 microns was rarely medullated, whereas with increasing coarseness medu- llation greatly increased. The diagram for diameter frequency (Fig. 1) wherein the medullated and non medullated fibres are plotted in a distinguishable manner, showed that generally below 30 microns the fibres were non-medullated, while between 30 to 40 microns the medullated fibres were few in numbers. Beyond this limit almost all the fibres exhibited medullation. In order to bring out any quantitative relationship which may, therefore, exist between the total fibre diameter and the diameter of the medullated part, a large number of measurements were carried out. The results are recorded in Fig. 2, wherein the internal diameter of the medu- llated portion is measured against the total diameter. The linear trend of the points is clearly indicated in the diagram, and a mean line extrapolated to zero medullation cuts the diameter axis at 26 microns. It is thus obvious that medullation below this fineness does not generally occur. The same relation was found to hold good when similar observations on the cross-sections of the medullated fibres were plotted (Fig. 3). Table II is made up from these observations which may be expected in a fibre of given diameter.
88 INDIAN WOOL II.ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Total diameter in microns of the fibres
June, 1953] B. M. PATEl, G. K. WAGLE, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 89 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Total diameter in microns of the fibres (cross-section) 3AR/53 2
90 INDIAN WOOL II, ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, TABLE II Observations on the cross sections of medullated fibres Total diameter of the fibre Diameter of medullated portion Difference in diameters 40 18 22 45 21 24 50 27 23 55 30 25 60 39 21 65 41 24 70 45 25 80 58 22 100 80 20 The third column in Table II indicates an interesting fact that the difference between the total diameter and its medullated portion is constant and is independent of the total diameter of the fibre. The microprojection method described above, however, consumes a good deal of time and has to be necessarily carried out in the dark room together with the fineness assessment. It was therefore of interest to see if other quicker methods either physical or chemical were available which would assess medullation, preferably in bulk. Amongst the physical methods which were likely to be of use, the tensile strength and the resilience measurements of the samples were considered suitable for a preliminary study. Relation between the tensile strength of the fibre and its degree of medullation is not very definite on account of the generally heterogeneous nature of the fibre, but a general decrease of strength in medullated fibre has been observed. Resilient measurement in bulk seems to be more promising as it relates the resilience characteristics of wool with its quality. Colour of wool also plays an important part in assessment of its quality. Wool from the more domesticated breeds of sheep is always nearly white. Quite a large portion of Indian wool especially from South and East is found to be coloured as grey, brown or black. This is another factor which lowers the value of Indian wool. Even in white wool there are various grades as white, dirty white, creamy white, pale yellow or yellow. It is difficult to judge the colour of a single fibre and this is usually done by visual examination of the samples in bulk. The Indian Standards Institution has set up certain standard specifications for such a classification for commercial use. Amongst the chemical methods available sulphur content of wool which is known to vary between 2.3 to 4.1 per cent is regarded by some workers as dependent on the quality of the fibres. A great deal of uncertainty is, however, attached to the sulphur
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 91 content of wool which would necessarily vary with genetical and environmental factors connected with the individual cases. Estimation carried out on various types of samples, where such factors were known to a certain extent, emphasize the caution which is necessary in attempting any correlation or wool quality with its sulphur content. Physico-chemical methods for the estimation of medullation were however considered best for testing bulk medullation of a sample ; for here it was possible that due to the larger differences in the surface area of fine, coarse and medullated fibres, the rate of absorption should accordingly show variations. If this rate was then measured under specified conditions, by an application of the laws of absorption a relation may be obtained between the amount of the substance absorbed from the solution and the surface area presented by the fibres in the sample. Calculations of surface area in medullated fibres present some difficulty, due to the partially hollow nature of the medulla, but these could be done by making one or two minor assumptions. There is evidence to show that the behaviour of certain chemicals (acids, alkalies, bromine and permanganate) absorbed by the two types of fibres namely, the fine transparent solid wool and the coarse opaque and hollow hair fibres, from equeous solution, is different. Adsorption experiments carried out with wool samples varying in quality show that from the knowledge of an average fineness of a sample and its corresponding absorption value (which "follows Fick's Law of 92 INDIAN WOOL II. ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was being done under the Indian Council of Agricultural Research,. Wool Analysis Scheme, to whom our thanks are due for their permission to publish this series of papers. Our thanks are also due to numerous technical assistants who worked in the scheme during the coarse of these years for varying periods and who actively co-operated in the collection of such data. We are also thankful to Dr K. Venkataraman, Director, Department of Chemical Technology, for his enthusiastic helpful encouragement during the course of this work. REFERENCES Barker (1937). Univ. Res. Inst. Bull 9 Barker, S. G. Wool Quality Burns (1931). J. Text. Inst. 22, T 98-109 Elphik (1932). J. Text. Inst. 23, T-36 Hardy (1935). J. Text. Res. 5, 184 Kronacher (1930). Technik der Haar and Wollemfer sudring, Berlin-Vien Urban and Schwar- fembeg MaeMahon (1924). J. Text. Inst. 15, T-252 Mahal, Johnson and Burns (1951). J. Text. Res. 21, 94 Vaidya and Bhat (1947). Current Sci. 16, 206-212
INDIAN WOOL III. QUALITY OF WOOL PRODUCED BY SHEEP BREEDS, OF INDIA B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T. K. DESAI AND M. R. PADHYE, Department of Chemical Technology, University of Bombay and B. K. VAIDYA, Assistant Director, The Ahmadabad Textile Industries" Research Association, Ahmeda- bad, (Received for publication on 12 September 1952) INDIA produces annually nearly fifty five million pounds of wool. Of this about half is exported, mostly for the manufacture of carpets. However like cotton, Indian wool in common with other Asiatic wools, is of a considerable coarser type as Compared to the much finer qualities produced in other countries notably Australia. Indian wool consumed in this country and abroad is useful only for coarse quality goods such as blankets, carpets, cheaper qualities of felts and as a lining material for clothings made from finer wools. Indian woollen mills producing yarns and cloth for the worsted and clothing types of material, mostly use foreign wools or blends of foreign and Indian wool of selected varieties from Kashmir and Tibet. It is likely to be presumed from what has been said about Indian wool, that this country is incapable of growing fine wool or that there is no scope in this country for developing goods breeds of sheep with fine homogeneous and non-hairy type of wool. India does produce a fine quality of wool, such as the undercoat of fine-wooled Pashmina goat of the Kashmir frontier, but the production of this wool is however, extremely limited and the question of increasing the population of this animal on its own habitat and in other parts of the country still needs a systematic investigation. The general survey of the literature unfortunately shows, that there has never been an extensive attempt to study the quality of wool produced by the indigenous sheep of this country. The present attempt under the patronage of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research perhaps represents a pioneer effort on such a big scale. Before making any attempts towards producing better quality of wool it is absolutely necessary to have a general survey of what we have at present. The data presented helps to do it to a great extent to isolate and locate the local breeds producing good wool and indicates the potentialities for further development. It is not always possible to get data according to breed, since such a separation of sheep according to breeds has not been done so far. In such a case the data on the regional basis is presented which it is felt is the nearest approach to the understanding of the quality of wool being produced in the country. Such a data has amply shown that there do exist sheep producing wool comparable with the Merino quality 56'8 and 58'8. These breeds of sheep are found in the Kashmir State (Karnah and Gurez) in the Punjab (Hissar dale), in the Niligiri (Ootacamund), in Gujerat (Patanwadi), 93 3 AR/53 3
94 INDIAN WOOL III. QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, in Rajasthan (Shekhavati) and in certain parts of Saurashtra, Kutch and North Deccan. However, it only by a chance that a few good individuals in each of these breeds survive, for no attempt has ever been made on a large scale to increase the number of good breeds. The few individuals of the better types are always in danger of being contaminated on account of the primitive conditions of indiscriminate breeding, ignorance of the breeders and the migration of the flocks to the more fertile parts of the country during seasons of pasture scarcity often involving long journeys. These factors allow sufficient scope for the mixing of pure breeds of good wool with inferior types. Sheep breeding farms established by the Government and some States do help to identify, isolate, conserve and breed the good types of sheep, but they alone could not be expected to undertake large scale breeding operation, which should be done under the present conditions with the co-operation of the private enterprises. The Government of India has for sometime been directing its attention through the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, to the problem of improve- ment of Indian wool. Several experimental sheep breeding farms have been established for this purpose where, sheep selected from local breeds are maintained under controlled conditions and breeding experiments are carried out with animals showing relatively good type of .wool. Work on cross-breeding with established breeds of stud rams, Indian as well as foreign, is also undertaken at the farms while in some cases observations on wool quality are also made with changes in feeding and under various genetic conditions. In all cases, however, laboratory tests on the physical characteristics of the fibres such as length, diameter, crimp, hairy portion (medullation), density, tensile strength are necessary in order to arrive at a satisfactory conclusion regarding the progress of wool improvement experiments of the farms. Such tests also give all information about the quality of wool produced in the country. Under the auspices of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, the Bombay University Wool Research Scheme is going on at the Department of Chemical Techno- logy, Matunga, since August 1940. Under this Scheme wool samples from local sheep of various parts of the country and also of various experimental sheep farms are being examined for the principal fibre characteristics and their qualities reported upon. The progress of farm experiments is judged accordingly by the officer-in- charge at the respective station. The present paper deals with the existing breeds of Kashmir State, Madras State, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Bombay State. The discussion on the breeds of Rajasthan is purposely omitted as sufficient data is- available in the printed report; Report of Jaipur Wool Analysis Scheme, sanctioned by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research from 1 September, 1949 to 31 August, 1950, by Mr. N. C. Narayan, and Mahals paper [1951] on Bikaner wool. (J. Text. Res. 21, 94). All the data in the present paper is tabulated in identical forms. Column 1 gives the sources from which the samples were received and columns 2 and 3 give the particulars of the samples as nature, breed, etc. and the total number of samples of the particulars, in column 2. Columns 4, 5, 6 and 7 give the analysis of the data.
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T. K. DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 95 about length, diameter, coefficient of variation in diameter and percentage medulla- tion respectively, calculated according to the methods given in Part II of the present series. The range in each attribute is divided into three or more ranges to correspond approximately to the fine, medium and coarse variety. Column 4 gives number of samples lying within the ranges of length of above 100 mm., between 76-100 mm. and 75 mm. or less ; 5 column 5 gives those lying within 25 or less microns, 26-40 microns and above 40 microns in diameter ; column 6 gives those lying within 10-25 per cent C. V., 26-40 per cent C. V. and above 45 per cent C. V. and column 7 gives those with 0 per cent, 1-10 per cent, 11-35 per cent and above 35 per cent medullation. KASHMIR BREEDS Indigenous breeds Wool samples received from the Government Sheep Breeding Farm at Banihal in Kashmir indicated that there are four principal breeds of animals found in this part of the country. These are recognised as the Karnah, Gurez, Bhadarwah and the Bakarwal breeds. Forty-seven samples (16 Gurez, 16 Karnah, 14 Bhadarwah and 1 Bakarwal) were analysed for their fibre characteristics. It is observed from Table I that the majority of the samples in all the four breeds of sheep, viz. Gurez, Karnah, Bhadarwah and Bakarwal, lie within the range of 76-100 mm. with respect to length, 26-40 microns with respect to diameter, 26-45 per cent with respect to C. V. and 1-35 per cent with respect to medullation. The detailed analysis shows that of the Kashmir breeds, Karnah wool is the best of the four types, while Gurez and Bhadarwah occupy the intermediate posi- tion between Karnah and Bakarwal. Cross-breeds A very important batch of samples were received from Kashmir farm in three lots consisting of 195, 105 and 116 samples representing the cross-breeding experi- ments with Merino rams. These include samples from the various stages of cross- breeding as ½, 3/4, 96 INDIAN WOOL III. QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, TABLE I Analysis of wool samples (Kashmir breeds) Source of samples Breed or other details Number of samples Length in mm. Diameter in microns C. V. per cent Medullation per cent Above 100 100 June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T. K. DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 97 TABLE II Analysis of wool samples (cross breeds from Kashmir) Length in mm. Diameter in 1 C. V. per cent Medullation per cent Number microns Colour Source of samples Breed or other of details samples 26 Above 100 75 25 Above 10 Above 0 1-10 11-35 Above or or 26-40 to to 100 40 45 45 35 98 INDIAN WOOL III. QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, fart II, TABLE III Analysis of wool samples (cross breeds from Kashmir) Source of samples Breed or other details Number of samples Length in mm. Diameter in microns C. V. per cent Medullation per cent Colour Above 100 - 100 June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T. K. DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K.VADYA 99 TABLE IV Analysis of wool samples (cross breeds from Kashmir) Source of samples Breed or other details No. of samples Length in mm. Diameter in microns C. V. per cent Medullation per cent Colour Above 100 100 100 INDIAN WOOL III. QUALITY [Vol: XXIII, Part II, bred animals wherein 46 out of 55 samples, have diameter below 25 microns and 23 and 32 samples fall within the first two ranges of C. V. Medullation also successively decreases. In local, medullation is uniformly spread over the range 0 to 3 per cent whereas in ½ bred, 93 out of 119 samples, are non-medullated and in 3/4 bred, 54 out of 55 are non-medullated. It clearly shows that the cross-breeding definitely improves wool quality as far as all the three important characteristics are concerned. The fibre lengths cannot be considered since the shearing intervals are not constant. The reproducibility of the data in the successive lots gives confirmation about the accuracy of the analysis. As far as June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T. K. DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 101 medullation. The F1 generation Merico ewes are comparable with the ½ bloods except that there is a slight deterioration in the fibre homogeneity. Wool from the castrated ram of this generation is finer than that of non-castrated animal but it slightly loses in quality in points of homogeneity and medullation. MADRAS PROVINCE Nilgiri breeds (Oolacamund) Recently an interesting breed of sheep known as Nilgiri breed has been located near the area about Ooty. It is interesting because the wool is perhaps of the finest quality amongst that produced in South India, and the breed is one of the very few fine quality wool producing indigenous breeds of sheep. The only other breed to which it can be compared are the few breeds from Kashmir and few from Bikaner. The origin of this breed of sheep is obscure but it is believed that the origin must be perhaps the two famous British breeds which were imported by British planters in Nilgiri and which are found in the hilly regions of England, viz. South- down developed in the chalky hills of Sussex and Chaviots, the native of Chaviot on the border between England and Scotland. The Nilgiri breed is also found mainly over 6,000 feet. It must be noted that this breed has been neglected for some time past and hence some deterioration may have set in the wool quality. It is therefore believed that this enterprise of the Madras Government is quite promising. Ooty Two hundred and seventy three samples in two lots of 54 and 219 were received from Ooty for fibre analysis. The first lot of Nilgiri breed consisted of six rams and 48 ewes while the second lot consisted of 20 rams, five ram lambs, 189 ewes and five ewe lambs. The variation in their fibre characteristics with the number of samples falling in each group of length, diameter, C. V. and medullation are given in Table V. It is observed that out of 273 samples, about 95 samples have fibre fineness below 25 microns, about 177 samples between 26-40 microns and only one sample above 40 microns. As far as C. V. is concerned about 96 are homogeneous and 190 samples are moderately homogeneous and only 13 samples are heterogeneous. About 106 samples are completely free from medullation, while 76 samples have medullation between .1 and 10 per cent and 95 samples lie between 11 and 35 per cent. Only five samples have above 35 per cent medullation. It is observed on the whole that this particular breed of sheep produces medium fine, moderately homogeneous and slightly medullated wool. Most of the samples fall within the range 1/2 blood to 3/8 blood according to American Standards or 60's to 56's accord- ing to the British Standards. Bellary breeds Five hundred and twenty two samples were received from various farms for fibre analysis. Table VI gives the variation in their fibre characteristics with the number of samples falling in each group of length, diameter, C. V. and medu- llation. 3 AR/53. 4
102 Indian wool iii. quality [Vol. XXIII, Part II, Table V Analysis of wool samples (Ooty) Source of samples Breed or other details Number or samples Length in mm. Diameter in microns C. V. per cent Medullation per cent Colour Above 100 100 June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T. K. DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 103 TABLE VI Analysis of wool samples (Bellary breeds) Source of samples Breed or other details Number of samples Length in mm. Diameter in microns C. V. per cent Medullation per cent Colour Above 100 100 104 INDIAN WOOL III. QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part.II, It is observed from the table that out of 522 samples of wool examined, about- 96 per cent have diameter above 40 microns while only 4 per cent have diameter below 40 microns. This shows that the fibres are of very coarse and inferior nature. All the samples are highly medullated and very heterogeneous. Due to its high degree of coarseness, heterogeneity and medullation, the samples can be used only for carpet or heavy woollens. The samples are from animals collected in the farms from the breeds existing in that area. The individual breeds are not indicated and hence are grouped as Bellary samples. The detailed analysis as well as the abridged table shows that there is no major variation in the fibre characteristics in various animals and hence the results stated here can be taken as representative of wool produced in the party of the country it covers. Coimbatore The analysis figures of 22 samples (Polayakothai nine, Sulur seven, Kane- polian five and unnamed one) are shown in Table VII. It is seen from the table that few samples of Coimbatore have medium quality wool comparable to Bikaner type, while the rest of the samples represented coarse, heterogeneous and medullated wool like the samples of Bellary breed. UTTAR PRADESH Meerut One hundred and twenty-two samples were received from the Deputy Director of Animal Husbandry, Meerut, in three lots: The first lot consisted of 58 samples collected from local sheep from various villages near about Meerut as shown in Table IX. The other two lots were 41 samples from local sheep and 23 samples consisting of seven local breed and nine purchased rams and seven of their first progenies. The analysis of the samples is shown in Table X. The details of the 58 samples show that of the 58 samples, 38 have diameters above 40µ and 21 between 26-40µ. The samples are appreciably medullated since practically, all the samples fall in the third and fourth range of medullation. The analysis of the second lot of 41 samples consisting of 22 local ewes selected from different villages other than those in the first lot and 19 first progenies from goat rams shows that the ewes have a better quality wool than those in the first lot and the first progenies show a further improvement in fibre characteristics. Gwaldam Forty-one samples were received from farm in Gwaldam (Dist. Almora) in two lots. The analyses of the samples is given in Table IX. The first two lots, consisted of 27 and 14 samples from local Garhwal and Rampur sheep. The analysis shows that the wool is of medium quality with about 50 per cent of the samples having diameter between 26-40 microns and other 50 per cent above 40 microns. The samples are moderately medullated with 35 per cent and 55 per cent of samples lying between the second and third range of medullation. The samples hence are of medium quality wool.
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G .K. WAGLE, T. K. DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 105 TABLE VII Analysis of wool samples (Coimbatore) Source of samples Breed or other details Number of samples Length in mm. Diameter in microns C. V. per cent Medullation per cent Colour Above 100 100 106 INDIAN WOOL III. QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II TABLE VIII Analysis of wool samples (Bihar) Source of samples Breed or other details Number of samples Length in mm. Diameter in June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T.-K. DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND B. K. VAIDYA 107 TABLE IX Analysis of wool samples (Meerut) Source of samples Breeds or other details Number of samples Length in mm. Diameter In microns C.V. per cent Medullation per cent Colour Above 100 100 108 INDIAN WOOL III.QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, TABLE IXJune, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T. K. DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND 109 B. K. VAIDYA TABLE X Wool, analysis of samples (Meerut) Source of samples Breed or other details Number of samples Length in mm. Diameter in microns C.V. per cent Medullation per cent Colour Above 100 100 110 INDIAN WOOL III QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, The samples received from Fatehpur are of inferior quality than Meerut and Almora samples. All are above 40 microns, below 45 per cent C. V. while majority of the samples have more than 35 per cent medullation. Similarly samples received from Gorakhpur and Mirzapur Sadar are of very coarse and heterogeneous types as their diameter is above 40 microns and C. V. is above 45 per cent and medulla- tion is above 35 per cent. Samples received from Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, are better than the previous ones as the diameter of three out of nine is below 40 microns, C. V. below 45 per cent and six out of nine have below 35 per cent medullation. Two samples received from Benaras from young rams are of good quality as they are below 40 microns, less than 45 per cent C. V. and their medullation is below 10 per cent. BIHAR Patna These samples were received from Patna Cattle Farm for fibre analysis. It is evident from the figures in Table VIII that the samples are coarse, heterogeneous and highly medullated. Gaya Ninety-seven samples were received from Gaya Sheep Breeding Farm for fibre analysis. The results of the analysis are given in Table VIII. It is evident from the figures that this breed produced wool coarse, heterogen- eous and highly medullated inferior type. About 86 per cent of the total number of samples have their diameter above 40 microns and 60 per cent have C. V. above 45 per cent and about 90 per cent of samples have medullation above 35 per cent. Monghyr Samples from Monghyr were analysed for their fibre characteristics. Table VIII gives the analytical data. It will be observed that the castrated feeding males are better than the rest particularly in medullation. This feeding test does not appear to be affected by the females. It is also seen that the castrated males did not show any marked difference in the improvement of wool quality compared to the non-castrated males. On an examination of the fibre characteristic values of each group, the detailed ana- lysis shows that castration combined with special feeding of the animals (with gram and maize) lead to the marked diminution in the amount of medullation. There is also an increased rate of growth and a small gain in fibre fineness. The conclusions however, are very tentative since the number of samples for each ex- perimental condition is very small and secondly the fibre characteristic of the same animals before and after the experiment does not seem to have been done. As far as the quality of wool produced by sheep in this area is concerned it is seen that about 86 per cent of the total number of samples are coarse (diameter above 40 microns) and highly medullated (above 35 per cent), while 60 per cent of the samples are quite heterogeneous (C. V. above 45 per cent).
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE, T. K.DESAI, M. R. PADHYE AND 111 B. K. VAIDYA TABLE XI Analysis of wool samples (Bombay State) Source of samples Breed or other details No. of samples Length in mm. Diameter in microns C. V. per cent Medullation per cent Colour Above 100 100 112 INDIAN WOOL III QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, MADHYA PRADESH Nagpur samples Several samples of black and white wool were received for fibre analysis from Madhya Pradesh. The analysis results are given in Table X. The results showed that both black and white samples are very rough with uneven distribution in diameter and are highly medullated. Practically all the samples have diameter over 40 microns and C. V. between 26 to 40 per cent. The amount of medullation cannot be determined by the microprojection method for the black samples but from the general feel of the samples it is almost certain that they are also highly medullated. BOMBAY STATE Samples received from Poona, Bijapur, Surat, Ahmedabad, Patna and Cutch and their fibre characteristics are shown in Table XI. Thirty samples (10 ewes and 10 rams at Mahad and 10 ewes at Javala) of Deccani wool obtained from experimental stations at Mahad and Javala, where pure flocks of this breed are maintained, showed the general fibre characteristics expected of good animals in this breed of sheep. The set containing wool samples collected from the sheep in the Bombay State in the districts of Ahmedabad, Surat, Bijapur and Dharwar had wool which compared well with Bikaneri type in all respects. Dharwar and Bijapur wools with fibre fineness as good as the Ahmedabad type and having a low amount of medullation like the latter, were however far more heterogeneous as compared to Ahmedabad wool. Specimens of coloured wool from Dharwar and Bijapur were also examined. Their dark colour however put them into a lower quality. Samples received from Cutch, compared in general well with the good type of Joria commmercial wool. The eight samples belonging to the Patanwadi (Gujarat) breed as shown, pro- duce good quality wool comparable to that of Kashmir type of wool. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was being done under the Wool Research Scheme, subsidized by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, to whom our thanks are due for their permission to publish this series of papers. Our thanks are also due to numerous Technical Assistants who worked in the scheme during the course of these years for varying periods and who actively coopertated in the collection of such data. We are also thankful to Dr K. Venkataraman, Director of the Department of Chemical Technology, for his enthusiastic and helpful encouragement during the course of this work. REFERENCES Gulati (1949). Indian Fmg. 90 Mahal, Johnson and Burns (1951). J. Text. Res. 21,94
INDIAN WOOL IV. QUALITY OF COMMERCIAL WOOL OF IMPORTANT MARKETING CENTRES By B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE AND M. R. PADHYE, Department of Chemical Technology, University of Bombay (Received for publication on 12 September 1952) IT is generally recognized that the most important problem in the marketing of Indian wool abroad is to organize the exports with respect to the quality of wool. Such a regulated trade is likely to have far reaching effect since it gives a clear indication to the purchaser of the goods being purchased and also gives the margin of price it is likely to fetch to the seller. It will also stabilize the quality of wool in each lot so that the usual blame thrown on Indian goods, viz. the lack of uniformity and standardization, will be avoided. Thus, the standardization of the grades of wool for export is an essential pre-requisite for efficient marketing of this commodity and for maintaining the reputation of the country in international market. Recently therefore, the Indian Standards Institution, Government of India, has prepared standards for grading Raw Wool for export. The rules are published by the Indian Standards Institution as Wool Grading and Marketing Rules, 1950. According to standards, raw wool is divided into seven grades accord- ing to colour and each grade is further divided into three qualities according to percentage yield and length. The seven grades are the white, pale white, dirty white, pale yellow, yellow, deep yellow and coloured. The first quality in each grade has yield of 88± 2 per cent and length three inches. The second quality in each grade has 82± 2 per cent and length 2.25 inches, and the third quality has yield 75± 3 per cent and the length same as in second. The various grades are specified according to colour of the raw wool with the tolerances of fibres and other colours. The standrads are thus based on three attributes which are important for carpet wool, viz. colour, yield and length ; the other attributes as diameter, homo- geneity (measured in C. V.) in length of diameter and medullation are not considered, since these are not thought to be of primary importance for the type of wool India produces, though they are not necessary for fabric fine wool. The analysis of the commercial samples presented here is done only for colour yield and length. The present paper deals with the analysis of 802 samples of wool. These were selected by the Wool Expert with the Government of India. The total number consisted of samples from both April (Chaitra) and October (Shrawan) shearing, 113 3AR/53 6
114 INDIAN WOOL IV. COMMERCIAL QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, 480 being of the first season and 322 of the second. The number of samples of each shearing collected from each of the six principal trade centres of North India is shown in Table I. The samples were collected from about 101 merchants at the places mentioned. The number of samples supplied by each varied from 2 to 32. The merchants' visual estimates of the colour, group and yield value were also given. TABLE I Samples of shearing collected from principal trade centres Trade centres April shearing October shearing Fazilka 30 78 Panipat 50 56 Bikaner 92 84 Pali 48 52 Beawar 88 52 Rajkot 172 Nil Total 480 322 Analysis The analytical data of the samples is given in Table II. The total number of samples is divided into 119 groups and sub-groups and the average fibre characteristics of each group is shown together with the merchants' estimates. TABLE II Analytical data of the samples Group No. Shearing period Number of samples Breed and colour mentioned Colour observed Average length in mm. Average yield per cent Merchants yield per cent Samples collected at Fazilka 1 April 5 Bikaneri white Dirty white 126 79 82 2 5 Bikaneri pale yellow Yellow 127 80 80 3 5 Bikaneri medium white Dirty white 130 81 80 4 3 Bikaneri pale yellow Yellow 121 74 80 5 2 Medium white White 122 85 80 6 10 Bikaneri yellow medium Yellow 142 76 75 76 October 6 Bikaneri white Dirty white 153 69 80 8 Bikaneri creamy white Pale yellow 151 70 80
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE AND M. R. PADHYE 115 TABLE II116 INDIAN WOOL IV. COMMERCIAL QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, TABLE IIJune, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE AND M. R. PADHYE 117 TABLE II118 INDIAN WOOL IV. COMMERCIAL QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, TABLE IIJune, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE AND M. R. PADHYE 119 TABLE III120 INDIAN WOOL IV. COMMERCIAL QUALITY [Vol. XXIII, Part II, In the first part of Table III, the Bikaneri, Beawar and Bagri, the three breeds represented by the markets of Bikaneri wools are given. The table shows that as far as length and yield are concerned the white and yellow samples are practically similar and the coloured samples are definitely shorter than both. This is found to hold true even in case of fibre fineness and the amount of medullation. Thus it would be clear that except for colour, one being white and other yellow, the wools are practically alike and their market value may entirely be determined by colour. The coloured samples other than white and yellow are inferior to these in length and other characteristic apart from being coloured. The second part gives similar specification for Marwar samples. It shows the white Marwar samples are superior to yellow or coloured, in length and yield ; then comes yellow and lastly the coloured. The work done previously in this laboratory shows that coloured samples are inferior to yellow Marwar in fineness and uniformity. The white samples were unfortunately not then available. The classification of Joria samples follows that of the Bikaneri type. Here also the white and yellow samples are similar in character in length and yield and even diameter and medullation when the data of the analysis of previous years is taken into account. The coloured samples are inferior to both in length, yield and even diameter. There is however nothing to choose between the white and yellow samples, except colour. As compared to Bikaneri yellow and white, the Joria yellow and white are little shorter and have slightly higher yield value. It is unfortunate that the commercial samples from Kashmir market were not received. The com- parative study extended to those samples would give the relative value of the three important wool markets of India, viz. Bikaner, Joria and Kashmir. With a view to give a better confirmation of the above conclusions Table IV is drawn which gives the comparative study of the ranges of the various wool qualities in each type. It should be noted that this has nothing whatsoever to do with the standards formulated by the Indian Standards Institution, according to which all samples of Bikaner, Beawar, Joria and Marwar and even Kashmir will fall in I quality in each grade. The table shows that the white Bikaner wool is all grouped in the central range and there is greater probability of finding the yellow Bikaner wool in the higher grade. This compares well with our previous observation that if there is at all anything to choose it is in favour of yellow. It also shows that the number of yellow samples are considerably greater in the October clip than in the April clip. In Joria samples the white and yellow again are exactly similar and they mostly come in first and central groups. The coloured samples are exclusively in the range of the central group. The Marwar samples white and yellow mostly fall in the central range and the coloured are in the third range. This compares well with the previous data wherein Bikaner and Joria were classified as falling next to Kashmir and North Gujarat (Patanwadi) and the Marwar wool falling in lower grade when diameter and medullation are considered.
June, 1953] B. M. PATEL, G. K. WAGLE AND M. R PADHYE 121 TABLE IV Comparative study of various wool qualities in each type Average length range Shearing season Number of samples White Yellow Coloured Bikaneri, Beawar, Bagri, etc. 126 mm. and above April 28 40 Nil October 44 36 24 125 mm.MAIZE CAKE AS A CATTLE FEED By PANDIT LAL CHAND DHARMANI, B.SC. (Agri.), D.Sc., F.I.C.S., P.A.S. (I), Agricultural Chemist, Punjab, Ludhiana and G. V. KARIRA, B.Ag. (Bombay), Agricultural Department, Sind (Received for publication on 22 November 1952) OWING to difficulties in importing foreign manufactured starch due to recent World War, Indian concerns thought of manufacturing starch from maize (Zea mays). Such industry has, therefore, been started recently in the Punjab and at some other places in India. The question of disposing of its by-products such as maize bran, maize cake, etc. engaged the attention of the manufacturer. Surjit Mills, Phagwara, manufactured molassed feed by adding about 20 per cent molasses to maize bran. This sample was sent to the Agricultural Chemist, Lyallpur, for opinion. The Bhar t Starch and Chemicals Limited, Abdullahpur, also sent a sample of maize cake for opinion regarding its use as cattle feed. On analysing, the maize cake was found to be very rich in protein and fat. The value of maize cake or corn meal as a cattle feed is well recognised in western countries but no definite data based on controlled feeding trials regarding its feeding value as manufactured in the State are available ; it was, therefore, decided to conduct digestibility trials with this concentrate. EXPERIMENTS The digestibility trials were carried out at Lyallpur on six Sahiwal breed heifers, particulars of which are shown in Table I. TABLE I Particulars of animals Number Approximate age on 29-11-45 Body weight at the start of the experiment (29-11-45) Body weight at the end of experiment (2-2-46) Years Months In lb. In lb. 1 2 9 604 611 2 2 8 695 699 3 2 6 621 642 4 2 7 635 649 5 2 2 542 558 6 1 8 431 447 123 3 AR/53 8
124 MAIZE CAKE AS CATTLE FEED [Vol. XXIII, Part II, The technique followed during the experiments was the same as already published by Lander and Dharmani [1929]. Maize cake was fed once a day after being soaked in water for a couple of hours, with wheat bhusa alone and wheat bhusa and berseem as basal rations. The nutritive value of wheat bhusa alone was first determined and it turned out to be a non-maintenance ration. Graduated amounts of maize cake were there- fore added to wheat bhusa in order to bring it up to a maintenance level, heifers No. II and III were given 1.25 lb. and the other four, one pound each per day ; the digestibility of different constituents of maize cake were determined. It was planned to superimpose the quantities of maize cake on this maintenance ration (wheat bhusa and maize cake) but the animals refused to eat the extra quantity. With a view to create palatability for the maize cake an experiment was under- taken by feeding maize cake along with 10 lb. green berseem and wheat bhusa ad lib as basal ration. The animals began to eat more of maize cake, as they liked the same due to the presence of green berseem in the ration. Two heifers No. II and III ate 2 lb. of maize cake and the rest 1.5 lb. each, per day. RESULTS Table II shows the chemical composition of maize cake. The chemical composition of cotton seed cake, toria and sarson cakes are also given for the sake of comparison as maize cake is to compete with these cakes in the Punjab. Digestibility data and the comparative nutritive values of the cakes are shown in Table III. Daily nitrogen balance during different experimental periods is given in Table IV. TABLE II Chemical composition of feeds Name of the feed Moisture per cent Dry per cent Ash per cent Fat per cent Fibre per cent Protein per cent Nitrogen free extract per cent Maize cake 7.25 92.75 2.52 19.80 7.75 19.55 43.13 Cotton seed cake (undecorticated) 7.48 92.52 6.01 8.47 22.31 21.13 34.60 Sarson cake 8.74 91.26 9.12 10.10 9.17 32.94 29.93 Toria cake 5.31 94.69 7.14 11.83 10.61 32.00 33.11
June, 1953] L. C. DHARMANI AND G. V. KARIRA 125 TABLE III Digestibility data of different cakes Name of the feed Digestibility co-efficients Digestible nutrients per 100 lb. of the feed Dry matter Ash Fat Protein Nitrogen free extract Dry matter Ash Fat Protein Total carbo- hydrates Total digestible nutri- ents Albumi noid ratio 1 : Maize cake (fed with wheat bhusa as basal ration) 64.20 .. 87.05 64.05 55.05 (total carbo- hydrates) 59.70 .. 17.17 12.52 27.70 78.93 5.49 Maize cake (fed with wheat bhusa and berseem as basal ration) 67.18 35.49 98.36 69.80 51.91 (total carbo- hydrates) 61.89 0.84 19.54 13.53 27.94 85.48 5.17 Cotton seed cake 72.81 68.73 98.01 85.03 59.36 67.36 4.13 8.30 17.97 36.96 73.60 3.1 Sarson cake 70.12 .. 93.08 85.00 73.50 64.00 .. 9.40 28.00 26.00 74.15 1.7 Toria cake 70.39 .. 90.84 84.37 60.74 66.65 .. 10.75 27.00 24.15 75.14 1.8 3 AR/53
126 MAIZE CAKE AS A CATTLE FEED [Vol. XXIII, Part II TABLE IV Daily nitrogen balance in grammes Period Heifer number Intake in feed Total intake Outgo Total outgo Balance Dung Urine Wheat bhusa Berseem Maize cak 14-12-45 to 23-12-45 I 14.98 June, 1953] L. C. DHARMANI AND G. V. KARIRA 127 DISCUSSION Maize cake is richer in fat and soluble carbohydrates but poorer in protein as compared to other cakes as seen from Table II. It will be seen from Table III that fat in maize cake is slightly more digestible than other cakes, (toria and sarson cakes) while digestibility of protein is less. Diges- tibility of dry matter in maize cake is lower. It will be noticed that the palatability and the digestibility of maize cake due to the addition of green berseem has considerably improved. The digestibility of its fat and protein have increased by 11 and 6 per cent respectively, whilst the digestibility of dry matter and soluble carbohydrates remained almost unaltered. The figures for total digestible nutrients and digestible protein show that the nutrients in the form of maize cake when fed with basal ration of berseem and wheat bhusa have been utilised better by the animals than when maize cake was fed with wheat bhusa alone as basal ration. Maynard mentions in his book on Animal Nutrition [1937] on page 82 paras 74, 75 as follows. 'It is a common belief that the Herbivora have a low tolerance for fat but the experimental evidence in its support is scanty. Certainly the suckling is able to handle a relatively large amount of fat, since milk contains from 25 to 40 per cent of this nutrient on a dry matter basis. The studies have not been extended to other oils except to show that cotton seed oil certainly does not have any such effect.' Lander and Dharmani [1935] also observed that no ill effects were noticed on the health of animals when fed with cotton seeds, having about 20 per cent fat. Similar are our findings in the case of maize cake, which is rich in fat contain- ing about 19.8 per cent. No untoward effects whatsoever were noticed on the general health of animals under experiments. The effect of storage on the com- position and keeping quality of maize cake is under investigation. SUMMARY Digestible coefficients of maize cake have been determined. It contains higher total digestible nutrients and lower digestible protein as compared to toria, sarson and cotton seed cakes. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Thanks are due to N. Akbar Ali, S. Kartar Singh Lohara and S. Atam Singh Kochhar of the Chemical Section, Punjab Agricultural College, Lyallpur for their assistance in this work. One of us [G.V.K.] is highly indebted to the Sind Depart- ment of Agriculture for sending him on deputation to Lyallpur Nutrition Centre. REFERENCES Lander, P. E. and Dharmani L. C. (1929). Mem. Dep. Agric., India, 10, 6 Lander P. E. and Dharmani L. C. (1937). Indian J. vet. Sci. VII. Leenard A. Maynard (1937). Animal Nutrition, 82 Lander P. E. and Dharmani L. C. (1935). Indian J. vet. Sci. V, 343-34
SEASONAL VARIATION IN CONCEPTION RATES IN ARTIFICIALLY BRED COWS By S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA, Division of Animal Genetics, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 5 January 1953) THE occurrence of a seasonal trend in the quality and quantity of semen produced by bulls has been observed by many workers. Erb, Andrews and Hilton [1942] found highly significant differences between months in respect of all the factors studied. They observed that the quality of the semen produced during the spring was significantly superior to that produced during the summer months. Results similar in a large measure to those of Erb, Andrews and Hilton [1942] were also obtained by Phillips, et al. [1943] and by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1947]. In addition, the former workers noted that the decrease in semen quality during summer was reflected in decreased breeding efficiency. The highest percentage of fertile matings (69.6 per cent) occurred during April and the lowest (40.8 per cent) in August. Anderson [1945] drew the conclusion that 'there is a seasonal similarity between semen quality and fertility'. While this is true in free mating populations, it is unlikely to hold good in artificially bred populations where each sample of semen injected is previously tested for quality and only semen of approved quality is generally used. Besides, as also pointed out by Lasley and Bogart [1943], since both the cow and the bull are involved in fertility, the seasonal variation of it, cannot be dependent entirely on the variation in the production of spermatozoa. Salisbury [1944], in his studies on feeding wheat germ oil as a supplement to the normal rations of bulls used for artificial insemination, found that there was no significant difference in fertility of the bulls from month to month. It is interesting to find out whether any seasonal variation in conception rates does occur in any unselected population of cows bred artificially, as it has a special bearing on the successful application of artificial insemination on a large field scale in India. Accord- ingly, the relevant data, from the records of the artificial insemination centres run under a scheme of research financed by the Government of India were collected and analysed. The results obtained are presented in this paper. DATA AND RESULTS For the purpose of this study calving data from 2,596 inseminations performed at the Calcutta Artificial Insemination Centre and 5,854 inseminations performed at the Patna Artificial Insemination Centre during the years 1946 to 1948 were used. In addition, the data collected during 1947 and 1948 (April to December only) at the Bangalore Artificial Insemination Centre, comprising 1,284 inseminations, was also utilised. The total number of bulls involved was twenty. Since no purposeful selection was made of the cows inseminated they were taken as representing random samples of the cow populations in the areas concerned. Details of service rates 129 3 AR/53 10
130 SEASONAL VARIATION IN CONCEPTION RATES [Vol. XXIII, Part II, observed at the centres are given in Table I. The Calcutta and the Patna data were analysed together, while the Bangalore data was treated separately (for reasons see below). In this study, the actual figures used for analysis were number of services per conception obtained by dividing the total number of cows inseminated by the total number of cows conceiving. This was done for the sake of convenience as these figures were readily available. The central purpose of the study was not vitiated by the adoption of such a procedure. It will thus be seen that the conception rates referred to in Tables II, III and IV are actually the service rates. The analysis was carried out by the technique of analysis of variance. The summaries of the results are presented in Tables II, III and IV. TABLE I Details of service-rates observed at the three artificial insemination centres Season Months Name of centre Calcutta Patna Bangalore 1946 1947 1948 1946 1947 1948 1947 1948 Spring February 1.71 1.90 1.47 1.42 1.29 1.29 .. 2.00 March 1.56 1.90 1.32 1.28 1.21 1.38 3.00 1.80 April 1.59 2.04 1.62 1.21 1.25 1.43 2.30 1.58 Summer May 1.79 1.94 1.53 1.25 1.19 1.44 1.76 1.93 June 1.50 1.76 1.44 1.25 1.24 1.38 2.04 1.61 July 2.35 1.71 1.54 1.10 1.34 1.39 1.83 1.74 Autumn August 1.60 1.86 1.63 1.44 1.24 1.40 2.00 1.47 September 1.50 1.73 1.52 1.28 1.27 1.42 1.91 1.87 October 1.44 1.41 1.47 1.25 1.38 1.49 2.71 1.85 Winter November 1.61 1.56 1.98 1.28 1.30 1.68 2.56 1.85 December 1.33 1.47 1.62 1.28 1.44 1.54 1.93 1.78 January 1.29 1.98 1.17 1.28 1.37 1.42. .. 1.63 TABLE II The analysis of variance of conception rates obtained at the Patna and Calcutta artificial insemination centres Source of variation D.F. S.S. M.S. Years 2 0.1002 0.0501 Months 11 0.2293 0.0208 Year x months 22 0.6669 0.0303 Centres 1 1.6020 1.6020** InteractionJune, 1953 ] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA 131 It will be seen from Table II that the conception rates varied significantly from one artificial insemination centre to the other. In addition, as the interaction ' centres x years' has come out to be highly significant, it also shows that the variation from year to year for a given artificial insemination centre was different from the other artificial insemination centre. On the other hand, there was no significant difference between months. The results of re-analysis of the data on a season-wise basis (the seasons being considered according to the convention followed in this laboratory, namely August-October as autumn, November to January as winter, February to April as spring and May to July as summer) are shown in Table III. TABLE III The analysis of variance of the seasonal conception rates obtained at the Patna and Calcutta artificial insemination centres Source of variation D.F. S.S. M.S. Years 2 0.0351 0.0175 Seasons 3 0.0077 0.0025 Interaction132 SEASONAL VARIATION IN CONCEPTION RATES [Vol. XXIII, Part II, In view of the missing observations, a separate month-wise analysis of the Bangalore data was carried out, omitting the missing months in 1947 and months corresponding to these in 1948. The results are presented in Table IV. TABLE IV The analysis of variance of the average conception rates obtained in different months at the Bangalore artificial insemination centre Source of variation D.F. S.S. M.S. Months 8 0.4005 0.0500 Years 1 0.8277 0.8277* Months X years (error) 8 0.7968 0.0996 TOTAL 17 2.0250 *F.-ratio significant at 5 per cent level Table III also shows no significant difference in the month to month conception rates, though a significant difference,is found between years. CONCLUSION It appears from our results that no seasonal variation in conception rates occurs in animals artificially inseminated. The year to year and centre to centre significant differences are in all probability due to the acquisition of increased skill by the operators coupled with the inherent initial difference of the individual operators and the speed at which they are able to acquire the desired level of efficiency. SUMMARY The conception rates of 2,596 and 5,854 cows inseminated at Calcutta and Patna, respectively, during 1946 to 1948 and of 1,284 cows inseminated at Bangalore during 1947 and 1948 (only April to December figures in both years, have been considered since January to March figures were missing for the year 1947) have been analysed with a view to detect the existence of seasonal trend, if any. The results failed to bring out any seasonal trend, which has been interpreted as due to the use of semen samples of only approved quality for insemination. It was observed in case of the Patna and Calcutta artificial insemination centres that the conception rates differed significantly. There was a year to year significant difference also, which again was different for the two artificial insemination centres. A year to year significant variation in conception rate was also observed in the case of Bangalore Artificial Insemination Centre. These results were interpreted as possibly due to the acquisition of increased operative skill by the artificial insemination personnel
June, 1953] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA 133 coupled with their inherent initial difference in skill and the subsequent speed with which they were able to attain the desired level of efficiency. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are indebted to Dr S. Datta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, for his interest in this work. REFERENCES Anderson, J. (1945). Semen of farm animals and its use for artificial insemination. Imp. Bur. Ani Breed. Genet. Edinburgh Erb, R.E., Anderws, F.N. and Hilton, J.H. (1942). J. Dairy Sci. 25, 815 Lasley, J.F., and Bogart, R. (1943). Uni. Mo. Res. Bull. 376 Mukherjee, D.P and Bhattacharya, P. (1952). Indian J. vet. Sci. 22(2), 73-91 Phillips, R.W., Kannp, B. (Jr.), Heemstra, L.C. and Eation, O.N. (1943). Amer. J. Vet. Res. 4, 115 Salisbury, G.W. (1944). J. Dairy Sci. 27, 551-561
ABSTRACTS Experiments on Salmonellosis of fowls. ZAKI MORCOS (1952). Brit. Vet. J. 108, 376-381, 31 THE paper deals with the method of diagnosing Salmonella pullorum and Salo- monella gallinarum infection by thinly plating a clot devoid of serum from the blood of infected birds on MacConkey's medium. No colonies develop on plating with whole blood on account of the bactericidal effect of the serum. The characteristics of S. gallinarum and S. pullorum as regards reaction on sugars, pathogenicity and resistence have been studied and found to resemble each other except in their reaction on maltose which, according to the author is not sufficient basis for differentiation of the two. The above method of culture is suggested to be of use in diagnosis of other bacteraemic diseases and considered more reliable as it avoids variation in titre, agglutination, strains of antigens and suspicious reactions. Terramycin in three successive doses of 250 mg. was effective as a curative and the author prefers it to slaughtering of the infected and carrier birds. [B.N.G.] The cattle trypanesomiasis, a cryptice focus of parasites in association with a secondary stage of disease. FIENNES, R. N. T. W. (1952). Brit. Vet. J. 108, 298-306 THE paper deals with the study of the cardiac lesions produced due to infection of T. congolonse and T. vivax in six Guernseys and 21 Zebus. The condition in the heart has been referred to as ' a secondary stage of trypanosomiasis '. The heart was found to be the main seat of infection, even in cases where there was no general invasion of the blood ; while in the other organs such as adrenals, hameo- lymph glands, kidneys, livers, lungs, lymphatic glands and spleens, the trypano- somes were found only sporadically. The infected heart muscles showed necrosis, disintegration of muscle fibres, round cell infiltration, extreme capillary dilation, separation of fibres and atrophy. Normal crypanosomes were also observed in capillaries of cardiac muscle, though mostly degenerated trypanosomes were found. These were not considered to be the development forms or latent bodies. This fact, however, is not given as proof for non-existence of latent bodies in vertebrates, on account of all organs not having been examined. It is suggested that such severe lesions in the heart cause death in certain cases due to direct failure of heart action. No functional heart tests were done which might have revealed more about the effect of such lesions on cardiovascular system. [H.K.L.] 135 3 AR/53 12
136 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIII, Part II, The disinfection prior to incubation of hen eggs contaminated with Salmonella pullorum. LANCASTER, J. E., GORDON, RF. AND TUCKER, J. (1952). Brit. Vet. J. 108, 418-431 THE paper details experiments for finding out suitable disinfectants to destroy Salmonella organisms on egg shells. Eggs were inoculated by dropping over them an 18 hour culture of Salmonella pullorum containing about ten million organisms. Treatment with disinfectant followed and organisms, if any, were recovered on Selenite ' F ' medium incubated for 18 hours at 37°C and later identified. Egg dipping for 15 minutes in solutions of 0.2 per cent sodium salt of para- toluesulphono-chloramide (Chloramine T), 1.8 per cent of 10 per cent sodium hypochlorite (Deosan), 0.5 per cent cetylthrimethyl ammonium bromide (Cetavlon) and 1.5 per cent chlorometa xylenol (Dettol) heated to 25°C was found effective in killing Salmonella pullorum while dips with lower temperature than that of the egg were ineffective. Addition of a detergent in the former two enhanced their action. 0.4 per cent solution of para-toluesulphonochloramide plus detergent retained its ability to kill Salmonella pullorum to a maximum of 46 immersions. Salmonella thompson and Solmonella typhimurium were found more resistant to the action of the disinfectants tested. Dipping eggs in solutions of double the strength of various disinfectants required to kill Salmonella organisms did not show any adverse effect on hatchability. These disinfectants, however, did not improve the keeping quality of eggs by controlling egg-rots. [B.N.G.] Influence of crude fibre in the ration on efficiency of feed utilization by dairy cows. NORDFELDT, S., IWANAGA, I., MORITA, K., HENKE, L.A., ANNIE AND TOM, K. S., (1950). J. Dairy Sci. 33, 473-485 IN order to find out if different levels of crude fibre in the feed of dairy cows have any influence on the milk yield and also its optimum level for maximum yield a feeding experiment was carried out on dairy cows of Holstein-Friesian breed. Except for fibre, other nutritive factors (digestible protein and T. D. N.) were kept alike in the different rations. A sufficient supply of vitamin and minerals were also provided. Four different rations were tried, viz. A with 60 lb. mature Napier grass (Pennisetum purpureum), B with 40 lb. Napier grass, C with 20 lb. Napier grass and D with no Napier grass. The protein and T. D. N. needed to balance the rations were made up of pine apple bran, soyabean oil meal, fish meal and molasses. The crude fibre contents, in the different rations on dry matter basis were : A, 22.7 per cent; B, 19.6 per cent; C, 16.1 per cent and D, 12.0 per cent. It was found that the amount of crude fibre in the rations tested had a definite influence upon the milk yield and the effect of its level was highly significant, statistically. The milk yield definitely decreased as soon as the crude fibre content in the feed increased over 16 per cent, calculated on the dry matter basis, regardless of the fact that equal amounts of T. D. N. and digestible protein were fed.
June, 1953] ABSTRACTS 137 The average daily yield of 4 per cent F. C. M. per cow for 12 weeks was 20.6 lb. on ration A, 21.7 lb. on ration B, 23.4 lb. on ration C and 23.8 lb. on ration D. Pulse rates per minute for cows with no roughage were 62 and increased to 69 with roughage. Thus, for high milk production, the crude fibre level in the feed should not exceed 16 per cent of the dry matter of the ration. This holds true for feeds such as mature Napier grass and pine apple bran as major constituents of the rations. Variations may occur according to the types of roughage used. [B.N.M.] Digestibility of rations for ruminants as affected by proportions of nutrients SWIFT, R.W.,THACKER,E. J., BLACK, A., BRATZLER, J.W. and JAMES, W. H. (1947). J. Anim. Sci. 6, 4 THE effect of supplements of a mixed ration for sheep was studied, using five sheep in each treatment. Supplements were fed in two different quantities, representing crude fibre, ether extract, protein, carbohydrate and urea respectively. By the addition of crude fibre the total amounts of protein and ether extract digested were reduced while the addition of carbohydrate reduced the digestible crude fibre and digestible protein. The addition of casein increased the digestibility of protein, ether extract and energy and decreased the digestibility of the crude fibre and nitrogen-free extract. Urea significantly increased the digestibility of protein, while corn oil, in small amounts, increased the digestibility of each feed constituent. When a larger amount of corn oil was given, the effect was just the reverse. [K. C.] Surface active agents as growth stimulators in chick rations. ELY, C. M., AND SCHOTTS (1952). World's Poult. Sci. J. 8, 2, 133-144 RESULTS of experiments on 108 experimental groups, which included 3,500 chicks, showed positive growth responses in which surfactants were fed. Of the surfactants reported, lauryl ethylene oxide condensate, sodium ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid, quaternary ammonium compounds, sodium alkyl aryl sulfanate and certain specially formulated products gave the best growth stimulating effect in market weight comparisons. A very high degree of correlation was noted bet- ween the growth response on the surfactants and antibiotics. This observation added weight to the hypothesis that the two products react similarly on chicks. A total of 21 tests showed that vitamin B12 supplements were more effective as the lone supplement to all vegetable basal diets than either surfactants or anti- biotics. It is of interest to note that chicks fed on all vegetable basal diets supple- mented with vitamin B12 showed remarkable growth increases during the early weeks, whereas with surfactant or antibiotics, growth improvement over the control lots was shown only after the sixth or seventh week. Two theories have been proposed concerning the mode of action of surfactants in stimulating growth. These are (1) selective inhibition of non-coli-aerogenes bacteria in the intestine of the chick and (2) more rapid assimilation of nutritional factors from the intestine due to the wetting properties of surfactants. [S.B.] 12A
138 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIII, Part II, Long term storage of bull semen frozen at very low temperatures (-79 C.) POLGE, C. AND ROWSON, L.E.A. (1952). Proc. II Int. Congr. Physiol. Path. Anim. Reprod. A.I. 90-98 DATA are presented from recent experiments conducted by the authors in Eng- land on the preservation of bull semen in solid carbon dioxide at 79°C. Survi- val of bull spermatozoa at low temperatures depended on the addition of glycerol to the diluent so as to get a 10 per cent concentration in the diluted semen. It was observed that dilution is best carried out at 5°C. Before freezing, the semen samples are allowed to remain for 12 to. 20 hours at 5°C and subsequent cooling is done upto a temperature of -15°C at a rate not exceeding 20 per minute and thereafter at a quicker rate. Eighty per cent of spermatozoa thus frozen resumed motility when thawed at 40°C. Thirty-eight cows inseminated with frozen semen gave a concep- tion rate of 79 per cent as against 76 per cent obtained from unfrozen samples. Pregnancies have been obtained with frozen semen 'banked' for 20 weeks. The possible use of the new method of semen preservation in artificial insemination work has been discussed. [S.S.P.] A simplified method of culturing ascarid eggs. RIEDEL BERNARD B. (1951). Trans. Amer. micro. Soc. 70, 57-58 RIEDEL described a simple method of culturing ascarid eggs. The mature females of Ascaridia galli were transferred to large, glass vessels containing water, to a depth of at least one inch, and 3-5 c.c. of a two per cent solution of formalin. All cultures were incubated at room temperature, 20°C or higher. Whenever ova were required for infections, some of the ascarids were ground in a mortar and the eggs filtered through several thickness of cheese cloth and concentrated with a centrifuge. When cultures became contaminated with fungi, either the latter were floated off the surface with a rapid stream of tap water or the ascarids were transferred to clear, moist chambers. Some of the embryonated ova prepared by this method had been kept for one year, and the degree of infectivity was found to be satis- factory for experimental purposes. [K.N.M.] The significance of fæcal egg counts in the diagnosis of parasitic gastro-enterites of cattle. ROBERTS, F. H. S., O' SULLIVAN, P.J. AND RIEK, R.F. (1951). Aust., Vet. J. 27, 16-18 THE authors have discussed the value and significance of fæcal egg counts. The egg counts may be influenced by a number of factors, e.g. the regularity or otherwise of oviposition, the regularity the fæcal material enters and is discharged from the rectum, etc. which cause variation in egg counts. Despite such variations, however, the authors had found that fæcal egg counts, provided their limitations were realised, might give a very valuable assistance in studies concerned with the helminth population in the host. They had given the counts considered indicative of pathogenic infestation for a few common nematodes as follows. Hæmonchus contortus. In calves 6 to 12 months old in which H. contortus was the dominant species, a count of 1,000 e.p.g.* or more was frequently accom- panied by serious symptoms of hæmonchosis. *Eggs per gram of fæces
June, 1953] ABSTRACTS 139 Trichostrongylus axei. No noticeable symptoms of infestation were seen in several calves 8 to 9 months old with a count of 750 e.p.g. to 900 e.p.g. but one calf having a count of 2,500 e.p.g. T. axei and other having a count of 1,000 e.p.g. T. axei and 1,000 e.p.g. H. contortus, died as a result of parasitism. Ostertagia ostertagi. Egg counts above 150 e.p.g. had not been observed in any animal. Counts of this order appeared to be of little significance. Cooperia sp. Egg counts for Cooperia punctata and C. pectinata upto 5,000 e.p.g. were not usually associated with visible evidence of any systemic disturbance. Counts of 10,000 e.p.g. to 37,000 e.p.g. however, were accompanied by a profuse diarrh140 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIII, Part II, The above vaccines were used in 235 birds by two prong wing-web stick method and some of the birds thus vaccinated were later challenged with either Newcastle or fowl pox virulent virus. It was observed that there was 100 per cent protection against needle challenge of Newcastle virus and 80 to 90 per cent protection against fowl pox virus following vaccination with combined Newcastle and fowl pox vaccine. [N.S.D.] Intracaudal vaccinations with Brucella obortus strain 19. GREGORY, T. S. (1952). Aust. Vet. J. 28, 265-269 EXPERIMENTS were performed with a view to assess the value of an intracaudal method of Brucella abortus strain 19 vaccination in comparison with the standard subcutaneous method. The cattle in these experiments had been vaccinated when seven to ten months old and were kept in an uncontaminated en- vironment for a period of 15 months with the control group. During this period all the animals, on repeated serological testing, were found to be free from Brucella abortus infection. The vaccinated and control animals which were hand-mated with the brucellosis-free bulls, were introduced into a contaminating environment, specially produced by artificially infected cattle, after a pregnancy period of 6 to 14 weeks. In the first trial, during the first pregnancy in the second year after vaccination, 24.4 per cent of the cattle injected intracaudally with 1 c.c. of the vaccine, 37.8 per cent of those injected by the standard method with the 5 c.c. dose and 87.8 per cent in the control group, either aborted or picked up infection till the time of parturition. The vaccinated animals which had proved to be immune during the first pregnancy, were again exposed during a second pregnancy, in the third year after vaccination. In this trial, the percentage of animals, that either aborted or got injected in the intracaudal, subcutaneous and control groups, was 18.2, 9.1 and 93.1 respectively. The author, while briefly reviewing the experiments, performed by workers in the United Kingdom and New Zealand, in support of intracaudal method, recom- mends a more extensive use of this method of vaccination on the basis of the practical advantages associated with reduction in dose of vaccine without resultant reduction of immunity. [M.M.S.] The spermatozoa of sterile bulls. HANCOCK, J. L. (1952). Proc. II Int. Congr. Physis. Path. Anim. Reprod. A. I. 36-40 STERILITY in some bulls was traced to a defect in spermatozoa which took the form of eccentrically placed thickening of acrosome. The defect was genetic in nature and the mode of transmission suggested it to be due to a recessive gene. Since this morphological deformity was subject to change while preparing stained semen smears for microscopic examination, experiments designed to study the effects of post mortem changes produced by various treatments on the morphology of the defect carrying spermatozoa were carried out and the results are reported in this paper.
June, 1953] ABSTRACTS 141 Of the various techniques tested, only the Giemsa and Indian Ink staining methods gave accurate estimates of proportion of abnormal spermatozoa in semen samples. Smears of killed spermatozoa stained with nigrosin and eosin or with Heidenhain's iron haematoxylin showed little evidence of the abnormality. It was also indistinct in dead spermatozoa examined with the phase-contrast microscope. [S.S.P.] The roll of carotene in the periodicity of reproduction in livestock. CSUKAS, Z. (1949). Rep. XIV Int. Vet. Congr. Lond. 3, 114-118 THE paper traces the progress of the knowledge of essential elements, the vita- mins, for maintaining the normality in reproduction in livestock. Depletion of vitamin A is shown to harm the reproductive system more quickly than other parts of the body. Various ills of the reproductive system in the female and male, re- sulting from insufficient intake of vitamin A are described and discussed. Expression of the ill-effects varies, but young and pregnant animals are found to suffer more seriously and have a higher mortality than adults and barren females. Irregularities in the pasturing season have been found to be very significantly reflected in the breeding performance of the animals in that region. Drought caused absence of green feed and carotene in pasture and fodder supplies. Unless this was supplemented in the ration, cows bred very late, and bulls did not react and refused to mount cows in heat. In normal years, summer which followed the dry winter, had lower percentage of fertile matings than in the winter which was preceded by a rainy summer. [S.V.C.] Feed supplement containing aureomycin and vitamin B12 for dairy calves. MACKAY, A. M., RIDDLE, W. H. AND FITZSIMMONS, R. (1952). J. Anim. Sci. 11, 341-345 THE experiment was conducted to study the influence of antibiotic feed supple- ment containing aureomycin and vitamin B12 on (1) growth and feed utilisation efficiency and (2) incidence of scours in dairy calves. Out of 15 heifer calves, every third calf was used as control. Vitamin B12 and antibiotic feed supplement containing not less than 1.8 mgm. of vitamin B12 activity per pound and not less than 1.8 gm. of aureomycin hydrochloride per pound was added to the milk of the experimental group. This was given as a finely ground powder at the rate of nine grams per 100 lb. body weight. Weekly adjustments were made for gain in weight. The feeding trial was continued for 12 weeks. The average gain for the supplemented calves was found on statistical analysis to be significantly greater than the average gain of the control calves. No significant difference in utilisation of feed nutrients was observed between the two groups. There was no evidence of scours in any of the calves during the period of the trial. [D.N.M.]
REVIEW INTRODUCTION TO VETERINARY THERAPEUTICS BY GEORGE F. BODDIE [Published by Oliver and Boyd Ltd., Price 15s.] THE distinguished author is Professor of Medicine at the Royal. (Dick) Veterinary College, Edinburgh and has to be congratulated for attempting a concise and comprehensive review of the Fundamentals of Veterinary Applied Pharmacology. There is no doubt that such a book is required very badly, although there will be some disagreement, regarding the way the work is presented. The book mostly deals with brief illustrated definitions of the various groups of drugs, system by system, with a dosage table at the end of each chapter. The preliminary chapters which deal with the ' Elements of Materia Medica' are bound to be controversial as this has not been presented in the Orthodox and Official acceptable form. In the chapter on Chemotherapeutics specially and in other places also greater use has been made of the various proprietory names which may be confusing to the students. This, however, does not detract the value of the publication as a useful addition and will be welcome both by the students and the veterinary profession. The printing and the general get up of the book is very satisfactory. [R.R.G.] 142 MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES STUDIES ON THE EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS ON THE MILK YIELD AND ITS COMPOSITION AND MINERAL METABOLISM IN SAHIWAL COWS* By M. L. MATHUR and S. V. DESAI, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi (Received for publication on 12 April 1951)** THE importance of minerals in the feeding of farm animals specially milch cattle has been stressed by many workers in Europe, U. S. A. and South Africa and a good deal of work on mineral metabolism has been done. In India, Sen [1933] pointed out the desirability of assessing the mineral requirements of Indian cows. But so far no planned work was taken up. In our previous paper [1945], we have pointed out how we came to be seized of the problem. In order to study the mineral requirements of milking cows under the standard dairy feed a balance experiment was planned. Four high milking Sahiwal cows of about the same age and the same stage of lactation were selected for experiment. TABLE I Cows and their particulars Cow Date of birth Date of calving Number of calf Average milk yield during the experiment in lb. Average liveweight during the experiment in lb. Lenjurki (929) 4-9-41 21-3-46 3rd calver 32 959 Larajbani (932) 19-9-41 25-3-46 2nd 144 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, The grain mixture consisted of the following: Barley 30 per cent Cow peas 25 per cent Wheat bran 20 per cent Groundnut cake 15 per cent Linseed cake 10 per cent 100 per cent Common salt (NaCl) 1.5 per cent of the grain mixture Chalk (CaCO3) 1.6 per cent of the grain mixture These were obtained in one lot and samples were taken for analysis. The fodders selected for the experiment were unmanured green berseem, manured green berseem*, green lucerne, jowar silage and lucerne hay. The fodders were given ad lib. according to chart on the Latin square basis as shown in Table II. TABLE II Scheme of feeding fodders Names of cows Period I Period II Period III Period IV A B C D Lenjurki (732) Unmanured berseem Manured * beraeem Lucerne Jowar silage plus lucerne hay B C D A Larajbani (932) Manured* berseem Lucerne Jowar silage plus lucerne hay Unmanured berseem C D A B Haskila (955) Lucerne Jowar silage plus lucerne hay Unmanured berseem Manured berseem* D A B C Yulamati (966) Jowar silage lucerne hay Unmanured berseem Manured* berseem Lucerne * Manured with four maunds of ammonium phosphate per acre
September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 145 In addition to these fodders, small amounts of bhusa (wheat straw), varying from 2 to 4 pounds per animal was also given to these animals. It may be mentioned that these experimental animals, along with the rest of the herd, were being fed this concentrate mixture and these fodders for the last five or six months. At the time of the experiment, these four animals were selected for the metabolic trial and the fodders were fed singly according to Table II. Thus the animals adopting them- selves to a new feed was not a factor in these results. During each period one fodder was given except in case of jowar silage which was supplemented with one to four pounds of lucerne hay ; thus, jowar silage remained the principal fodder. Each experimental day began at 8 a.m. and ended at 8 a.m. on next day. The rations were fed four times a day. Each day's grain mixture was thoroughly mixed and weighed amounts were put before the cows just before milking. It was observed that the cows consumed all the grain mixture without any waste except occasionally when some cow left a little quantity, which was removed immediately and reweighed. The fodders required for the day were out in the fields and brought to the dairy buildings, when samples for analysis were taken. Weighed amounts of fodders were placed before the cows. These were generally consumed, but small amounts of residues when left were accounted for. The appetite of the cows were keen and at no time of the experiment impaired and they did not suffer from constipation. Water was given at definite times in buckets and the amounts taken were recorded. The cows were milked four times a day at 3 a.m., 8 a.m., 3 p.m. and 8 p.m. Samples of milk were taken from all the four milkings and kept in the cold room. A composite sample of the days milk was prepared by taking 5 c.c. per pound. The faeces were caught in scoup shovels and collected in covered galvanised buckets kept nearby by the attendents on duty. Each morning the faeces were weighed, thorough- ly mixed and samples taken in wide mouth glass stoppered bottles for analysis. The urine was collected by means of the urine cup arrangement, designed by Lander [1926], which was held against the hind quarters of the animals. The urine was collected in galvanised buckets coated with thymol. In the morning it was measured, thoroughly mixed and samples taken in bottles for analysis. Out of the twelve days of each period, the first six days were non-experimental and the second six days experimental or collection period. During the non-experi- mental period, the cows were given experimental fodder and grain mixture so that they adapted themselves to the new fodder and eliminated the carryover effect of the previous fodder from the alimentary canal. During the collection period an accurate account of the amounts of feed given, the quantities of milk secreted and of the faeces and urine voided each day was kept, and samples taken for analysis. The investigation involved the determination of 96 balances of the intake in food and outgo in milk, faeces and urine of each of the following elements : Calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, phosphorus and chlorine. METHODS OF ANALYSIS The samples of fodders and dung were dried in the air oven at 100° C. powdered and kept in sample bottles to be analysed later. The samples of milk were eva- porated, dried, ashed and dissolved in HCl, then made up to a known volume of
146 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, 250 c.c. and kept in sealed stoppered bottles in cold room. Five hundred c.c. of urine were evaporated to dryness and ashed. The ash was dissolved in. dilute HCl filtered and made up to a known volume (250 c.c.) and kept in sealed stoppered bottles in cold room. Chlorine in milk and urine samples was determined daily and other elements after the collection period was over. Five to ten grams of the oven dried material was weighed in a platinum dish and ashed on a low flamed rose top or in muffle furnace at 500°C. The ash was moistened with water with the help of a pipette and transferred to a beaker with a fine jet of water. Any particles of ash still sticking to the dish were rubbed with a rubber policeman and taken in the beaker. Forty c.c. of dilute HCl (1+1) was then added and the beaker kept on the water bath to digest and then evaporated to dryness. It was kept on water bath for ½ hour to dehydrate silica. The dehydra- tion was completed by placing it in an air oven at 105°C. It was cooled and again treated with 10 c.c. HCl (1+1) and the process repeated. The beaker was then removed. 50 c.c. diluted HCl added and heated on water bath. The contents were then filtered and collected in 250 c.c.volumetric flask and made up to 250 c.c. Determination of calcium Fifty to hundred c.c. of aliquot was taken in a 150 c.c. beaker, a few grams ammonium chloride and 10 to 15 c.c. of 10 per cent solution of sodium citrate were added to prevent precipitation of iron and aluminium and stirred; two drops of methyl red were added followed by 10 c.c. of saturated solution of ammonium oxalate. The contents of the beaker were heated to boiling and dilute ammonia was added drop by drop with a pipette, until the indicator showed orange colour and calcium oxalate precipitated. The beaker was covered and kept overnight. It was. filtered, washed and the filtrate kept for magnesium. The rest of the procedure was as described by Desai and Mathur [1945]. Determination of magnesium The filtrate and washings after removing the calcium were evaporated to about 100 c.c. in a 250 c.c. beaker, 10 c.c. of 10 per cent ammonium phosphate solution was then added and the contents heated to boiling. The beaker was re- moved the flame and NH4OH (1: 4) was added with constant stirring with a glass rod, until the precipitation was apparently complete. At this stage there was danger of hydroxides being precipitated if ammonia was strong; in that case the precipitate was dissolved in HCl and the process repeated. With little care and practice only magnesium ammonium phosphate was reprecipitated. It was then allowed to cool and then 10 c.c. or ten per cent of the volume in beaker, of strong ammonia was added, the contents vigorously stirred and allowed to stand in cool place overnight. The precipitate was filtered and washed free from chlorides with cold dilute NH4OH (1 :10). It was then allowed to remain over night or washed with two or three washings of water and alcohol to remove free ammonia. The filter paper was taken in the same beaker, 20 to 25 c.c. water added and a known volume of decinormal HCl to dissolve the precipitate. The excess was back titrated with decinormal caustic soda using methyl orange as indicator.
September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 147 Determination of sodium and potassium For the estimation of sodium by uranyl-zinc acetate or uranyl-rnagnesium acetate, the phosphate was removed as ferric phosphate by adding FeCl3 to the HCl extract, evaporating to dryness and igniting. The sodium and potassium salts were taken in water, while ferric phosphate remained on the filter paper. The removal of phosphate as Mg NH4PO4 by magnesium acetate was found to be lengthy and tedious. Fifty to hundred c.c. aliquot, depending upon the quantities of sodium and potassium, was taken in a flat bottomed silica dish and 1 to 2 c.c. of 10 per cent. Fe Cl3 solution, depending upon the phosphate contents, added. It was evaporated to dryness on a water bath and ignited very gently on a rose top burner for about five minutes, cooled, extracted with water and filtered in a 50 c.c. flask. From this solution aliquots for sodium and potassium were taken. Determination of sodium (Kahanes method modified) An aliquot of 10 to 20 c.c. from the above solution was taken in a 100 c.c. beaker or basin, evaporated to about five c.c. Two to three drops of acetic acid were added and then 15 to 20 c.c. of uranyl magnesium acetate reagent added and stirred until precipitation occurred. It was kept for about half an hour but not more and then filtered on a weighed gooch crucible with a fritted disc. The precipitate was washed twice with two c.c. portion of the reagent then five times with 96 per cent alcohol saturated with the triple salt Na (UO2)3 Mg (C2H3O2)9-8H2°) finally with ether. It was dried in an oven at 105°C for about 30 minutes, cooled in a desiccator and weighed. Determination of potassium An aliquot of 10 to 20 c.c. was taken in a 100 c.c. beaker and evaporated to about five c.c. When cold 1.5 c.c. glacial acetic acid and 10 c.c. saturated solution of NaCl were added in order. The contents of beaker were stirred and five c.c. of 35 per cent sodium nitrate was added and stirred again. When the solution was complete 5 c.c. of 20 per cent cobalt nitrate solution was added with a dropping pipette with an enlarged aperture (the addition was done rapidly taking not more than 2 to 3 minutes) and with constant stirring, since the desired composition of the precipitate formed depends on the rapid addition of the reagent. The contents of the beaker were stirred for 40 to 60 seconds, covered and allowed to stand over night. The precipitate was filtered on a tarred filter paper and washed with 35 per cent alcohol. It was either dried in on air oven at 105°C and weighed or dissolved in excess of standard potassium permanganate and back titrated with oxalic acid. Determination of phosphorus Pemberton [1882]. Determination of chlorine Husband and Godden [1927].
148 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, RESULTS Tables III and IV give in grams the average daily intake of minerals and the average daily outgo in milk, faeces and urine, the average daily balance and the total and the percentage assimilation by the cows during the four periods. TABLE III Intake, outgo and percentage assimilation of berseem fodder Item (average per day) Unmanured berseem Manured berseem Lenjurki Larajbani Haskila Yulamati Lenjurki Larajbani Haskila Yulamati CaO in grams Intake 150.00 207.94 249.11 208.93 234.44 157.88 224.56 235.88 Milk 27.92 25.89 29.60 23.96 28.95 28.17 27.97 23.82 Faeces and urine 105.80 176.34 210.31 179.51 184.08 116.81 186.20 197.57 Total outgo 133.78 202.23 239.91 203.47 213.04 144.98 214.17 221.39 3alance +16.22 +5.71 +9.20 +5.46 +21.40 +12.90 +10.39 +14.49 Assimilation total 44.14 31.60 38.80 29.42 50.36 41.07 38.36 30.31 Per cent of intake 29.43 15.20 15.58 14.08 21.48 26.01 17.08 15.39 MgO in grams Intake 55.50 72.07 88.37 71.26 73.09 59.54 82.86 75.14 Milk 4.07 4.49 4.81 3.82 4.74 4.22 5.00 3.78 Faeces and urine 50.55 65.18 79.83 60.96 65.01 50.15 70.86 63.61 Total out go 54.62 69.67 84.64 64.78 69.75 60.37 75.86 67.39 Balance +0.88 +2.40 +3.73 +6.48 +3.34 September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI; 149 TABLE III150 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE IVSeptember, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 151 The average mineral balance and their standard error under the various feeds in the four cows in grains per period, are given in Table V. TABLE V Average mineral balance and their standard error under various feeds Mineral A B C D Unmanured berseem Manured berseem Green lucerne Jowar silage and hay Cow No. 1 Lenjurki CaO +16.22* ±2.79 +21.39* ±4.27 +16.83* ±3.72 +8.0* ±1.77 MgO +0.88 ±2.33 +3.35 ±3.61 +7.45¶ ±2.13 +6.05¶ ±1.99 Na20 +10.64* ±1.00 +14.60* ±0.96 152 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE VSeptember, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 153 The statistical analysis of the data showed that the fodders and the experimental period did not introduce any significant change in milk yields, but the cows differed significantly. TABLE VII Live-weight in pounds, average per day Cows Period I Period II Period III Period IV Total A B C D Lenjurki 990 1001 984 928 3903 B C D A Larajbani 1004 991 987 974 3956 C D A B Haskila 807 831 839 829 3306 D A B C Yulamati 748 757 752 751 3008 Total 3549 3580 3562 3482 14173 The statistical analysis of the data showed that the fodders and periods did not introduce any significant change in the live.weights of the cows; but the cows differed significantly. Comparative assimilation of the minerals The percentage of the minerals calcium, phosphorus, etc., used or utilized or assimilated by the cows, is taken as the algebric sum of the mineral balance and the mineral in the milk. In other words it is the total intake of the minerals minus the outgo of the minerals in the faeces and urine.
154 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, Assimilation of calcium The total average daily intake of CaO and the part present in the fodders only in the different cows during the various periods is consolidated in Table VIII. TABLE VIII Daily intake in CaO and the part present in fodders only Cows Total intake of CaO (gm. per day) CaO in fodders only (gm. per day) A Un- manured berseem B Manured berseem C Lucerne D Silage plus hay A Un- manured berseem B Manured berseem C Lucerne D Silage plus hay 43.35 Lenjurki 150.00 234.44 233.10 152.34 99.27 175.88 180.97 +50.00 35.41 Larajbani 207.94 157.88 201.45 141.95 148.00 107.60 135.18 +53.52 36.26 Haskila 249.11 224.56 182.08 181.39 177.40 154.22 118.58 +74.25 29.39 Yulamati 208.93 235.88 202.25 120.55 145.82 176.24 139.90 +32.45 Mean 204.00 213.19 204.72 149.06 142.64 153.48 143.60 88.76 III I II IV III I II IV It would appear that the manured berseem supplied the highest amount of lime (CaO) and the total intake was also the largest during that period. Unmanured berseem and lucerne were equal and come next. The lowest intake was during the silage and hay period. Table IX gives the average assimilation of CaO per day and the percentage assimilation of the intake. TABLE IX Average assimilation of CaO per day Cows Average assimilation of CaO (gm per day) Assimilation percentage of the intake Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jo.war silage and hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Lenjurki 44.14 50.34 45.59 34.24 29.42 21.47 19.55 22.47 Larajbani 31.60 41.07 35.62 27.86 15.20 26.01 17.68 19.62 Haskila 38.80 38.36 43.26 34.77 15.65 17.07 23.75 19.17 Yulamati 29.42 30.31 28.17 27.78 14.08 15.39 13.92 93.04 Average 35.99 41.52 38.10 31.10 18.59 19.98 18.72 21.08
September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 155 Table IX shows that the manured berseem period provided the highest assimila- tion. Lucerne, unmanured berseem and jowar silage respectively were the next in order whereas the percentage assimilation was the highest in silage period. This is explained by the fact that intake of CaO during this period was much less. The total assimilation was influenced by total intake to some extent. The increased amount of intake helped in the retention and maintaining increased balances to a certain limit after which it was excreted through the gut. The views expressed by Haffman, et al. [1930], that actual intake of minerals has much greater signi- ficance than the Ca : P ratio has been corroborated by the results of the present experiments. TABLE X Average balance of CaO (gm. per day) during various periods Cows Period I Period II Period III Period IV Total A B C D Lenjurki +16.22 +21.39 +16.83 +8.00 +62.44 B C D A Larajbani +12.90 +9.26 +3.37 +5.74 +31.37 C D A B Haskila +10.66 +6.20 +9.20 +10.39 +36.45 D A B C Yulamati +4.24 +5.54 +12.60 +2.70 +25.08 Total +44.02 +42.39 +42.00 +26.83 +155.24 The analysis of variance showed that there were significant differences between the cows in, their mineral balances, as also between the four experimental periods and between the treatments (fodders).
156 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, The mineral balances of calcium under four fodders with a supplement of chalk are given in Table XI TABLE XI Mineral balances of calcium under four fodders Treatments Average CaO balance A. Unmanured berseem +9.18 B. Manured berseem +14.32 C. Green lucerne +9.86 D. Jowar, silage and hay +5.45 C. D. at five per centSeptember, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 157 There was no significant difference between the first three periods ; but all the first three periods differ significantly from the fourth. Thus the cows could not maintain high balances during the fourth period. If the total intakes of CaO in the cow Lenjurki (Table VIII) during unmanured berseem period and jowar silage period are compared, they are very nearly equal, i.e. 150.0 and 152.34 gm. respectively. But the assimilation during the respective periods were 44.14 and 34.24 gm., i.e. 9.9 gm. more during the unmanured berseem period. Similarly in the cow Larajbani the intakes during manured berseem period and silage period, were equal, but the assimilation was 13.21 gm. more during the manured berseem period. In the cow Haskila also with equal intakes (182.08 and 181.39 gm.) during lucerne and silage periods, the assimilation was 8.49 gm. more during the feeding of lucerne. It appeared therefore that the assimilation of calcium was better from the legumes fodders than from non-legume fodders. It was found that all the four cows, maintained positive balances during the four periods even when the milk production was at its peak. This may be parti- cularly due to the chalk supplement in the feed. The highest intake of CaO, which maintained positive balances of 9.2 gm. was 249.11 gm. during the unmanured berseem period. But a low intake of 120.5 gm. per day during the jowar silage period also maintained a positive balance. By increasing the intake to twice its quantity, the positive balance improved by five grams only. Hart, et al. [1927], were able to main- tain calcium equilibrium in case of cows giving 40 to 60 pounds milk per day with an intake of 200 grams CaO present in a ration consisting of grain mixture, chalk and green grasses. In the present experiments in case of a cow giving 38 lb. milk per day positive balance of 10.67 gm. CaO per day was maintained with an average daily intake of 182 gm. CaO present in a ration of grain mixture chalk and green lucerne. In case of another cow giving 30 lb. milk per day, an intake of 120 gm. of CaO present in a ration consisting of grain mixture, chalk, lucerne hay and jowar silage maintained a balance of four grams. Forbes, et al. [1916, 1917, 1918, 1922], however, obtained negative balances in high milking cows even when a good ration was supplemented with calcium salts or bonemeal. In the present experi- ments calcium was retained by cows giving upto 40 lb. milk per day on a diet consisting of grain mixture, one per cent chalk and one of the four fodders. Ber- seem contained a high percentage of calcium and the mineral supplement of chalk further improved the retention of calcium; chalk supplement proved to be very useful during the feeding of jowar silage, which was poor in calcium contents. It was observed that after a certain limit, large excess of calcium in the feed was eli- minated in the faeces and very little in the urine. Thus it is not the amount of calcium ingested in the food that counted, but the amount assimilated or absorbed by the system. The assimilation was 15 to 30 per cent of the total intake, during the various periods in the present experiments. Miller, et al. [1924, 1925], found that the utilisation of calcium was the highest at the height of lactation and was about 23 per cent. The indications from the present experiments appeared to warrant the conclusion, that even in case of high milk yield- ing cows, it was possible to maintain positive balances by ingesting high amounts of calcium in the ration by way of calcium salts and the calcium present in green forage containing vitamins. Green fodders as berseem and lucerne afforded better assimila- tion than hay or silage. Though equilibrium was maintained during the feeding of
158 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, jowar silage and lucerne hay, but retention was much improved when unmanured and manured berseem was fed. There was no significant effect on the calcium contents of the milk by change of different fodders rich and poor in calcium. Assimilation of magnesium The total average daily intake of MgO and the part present in the fodders only in the different cows during the various periods was as shown in Table XIV. TABLE XIV Daily intake of MgO and the part present in fodders only Cows Total intake of MgO (gm. per day) MgO in fodders (gm. per day) A Un- manured berseem B Manured berseem C Lucerne D Jowar silage and hay A Un- manured berseem B Manured berseem C Lucerne D Jowar silage and hay Lenjurki 55.50 73.09 75.17 76.71 20.30 29.83 30.12 32.98 Larajbani 72.07 59.54 70.56 73.62 28.13 21.73 24.39 33.55 Haskila 88.37 82.86 67.94 89.91 35.34 30.01 21.11 37.02 Yulamati 71.26 75.14 77.90 67.75 25.31 29.96 31.40 23.46 Mean 71.80 72.66 72.89 77.00 27.27 27.88 26.75 31.75 The concentrates contained the major amount of magnesium in the diet and the rest was present in the fodders. The amounts of magnesium ingested by way of fodders were approximately the same. Table XV gives the average assimilation of MgO per day and the percentage of the intake. TABLE XV Average assimilation of MgO per day Cows Total assimilation of MgO (gm. per day) Percentage assimilation of the intake of MgO A Un- manured berseem B Manured berseem C Lucerne D Jowar silage and hay A Un- manured berseem B Manured berseem C Lucerne D Jowar silage and hay Lenjurki 4.95 8.08 12.0 10.63 8.98 11.05 15.96 13.86 Larajbani 6.29 3.40 7.95 7.65 8.72 5.71 11.27 10.39 Haskila 8.54 12.0 8.09 13.26 9.66 14.48 11.91 14.75 Yulamati 10.30 11.53 9.22 8.10 14.44 15.34 11.84 11.96 Mean 7.52 8.73 9.31 9.91 10.45 11.64 12.74 12.74 At the level of intake of 71.8 gm. MgO in the feed (Table XIV) five grams in- crease in the MgO contents of the intake has improved the assimilation by two grams.
September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 159 TABLE XVI (a) Average balance of MgO in grams per day Cows Period I Period II Period III Period IV Total Lenjurki A + 0.88 B + 3.34 C + 7.46 D + 6.05 + 17.73 Larajbani B 160 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE XVII Daily intake of P2O5 and the part present in fodders only Cows Total intake of P2O5 (gm. per day) P2O5 in fodders (gm. per day) A Un- manured berseem B Manured berseem C Lucerne D Jowar silage and hay A Un- manured berseem B Manured berseem C Lucerne D Jowar silage and hay Lenjurki 81.10 111.99 106.97 118.47 16.14 28.48 23.06 34.17 Larajbani 106.24 91.36 110.43 110.13 21.89 20.51 26.19 33.27 Haskila 121.99 129.82 107.02 139.75 18.39 26.40 17.08 26.60 Yulamati 104.06 118.91 116.18 112.20 17.19 29.66 25.43 25.29 Mean 103.35 113.02 110.15 120.14 16.47 26.47 22.94 29.88 Table XVIII gives the average assimilation of P2O5 and the assimilation per cent of the intake. TABLE XVIII Average assimilation of P2O5 Cows Total assimilation of P2O5 (gm. per day) Percentage assimilation of the intake of P2O5 Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage plus hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage plus hay Lenjurki 6.83 31.36 8.58 27.84 8.42 28.00 8.02 23.49 Larajbani 15.60 16.43 29.75 23.87 14.69 17.98 26.94 21.67 Haskila 26.99 23.40 24.38 21.61 22.05 18.02 22.78 15.48 Yulamati 22.77 43.71 21.66 22.20 21.88 36.76 18.64 19.78 Mean 18.05 28.72 21.09 23.88 16.76 25.19 19.09 20.10 It would be seen that the total assimilation and the percentage assimilation was found to be the highest during the manured berseem period.
September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 161 TABLE XIX Average balance of P2O5 in different cows during different periods Cows Average balance of P2O5 (gm. per day) Period I Period II Period III Period IV Total Lenjurki A 162 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, The change of fodders as has been done in the present experiment has not shown any marked effect on the composition of the milk. Most of the ingested phosphorus was excreted in the faeces and only about one per cent in the urine. Viswanath Iyer [1935] in the course of feeding experiments on bullocks found that maturity of fodders lessened the mineral assimilation. This has been corro- borated in the present experiments also. The legumes when in the prime stage of growth allowed the maximum assimilation, which decreased with ripening of fodders. CAO : P2O5 RATIO The CaO : P2O5 ratio in the feed during the various periods has been arranged according to four fodders in Table XX. The ratio seems to have some bearing on the assimilation of calcium and phosphorus as discussed below: TABLE XX CaO : P2O5 ratio in the feed during various periods COWS CaO : P2O5 in the feed CaO: P2O5 in fodders Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Lenjurki 1.86 : 1 2.09 : 1 2.18 : 1 1.29 : 1 6.05 : 1 647 : 1 7.84 : 1 2.73 : 1 Larajbani 1.96 : 1 1.73 : 1 1.82 : 1 1.29 : 1 6.76 : 1 5.24 : 1 5.16: 1 2.68 : 1 Haskila 2.04 : 1 1.73 : 1 1.70 : 1 1.29 : 1 9.65 : 1 5.84 : 1 6.94: 1 4.15 : 1 Yulamati 2.00 : 1 1.99 : 1 1.74 : 1 1.07 : 1 8.48: 1 5.94: 1 5.50 : 1 2.44 : 1 Mean 1.96 : 1 1.88 : 1 1.86 : 1 1.23 : 1 7.73 : 1 5.80 : 1 6.36 : 1 3.0 : 1.0 Hart, et al. [1928] in all the metabolic trials with the dairy cows, had most successful experience in maintaining equilibrium or positive calcium balances, when the animals received green grasses fortified with calcium salts, like calcium carbonate or bone meal. On these rations, the CaO intake was about 200 gm. and P2O5 intake 180 gm. of cows giving 40 to 50 lb. milk per day. When marl was supplemented to green grasses Ca : P ratio was 1 : 0.57 ; when bone meal was supplemented to green grasses the ratio was 1: 0.86. It appears likely that an unbalancing of Ca : P ratio in the feeds of the dairy cows might lead to poor assimilation of calcium and phosphorus. Turner, Harding and Hartman [1927] found that calcium balances and assimilation were decided by better in high phosphorus period. The phosphorus assimilation was larger also in the high phosphorus period and the percentage assimilation, even with the double
September, 1953] M.L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 163 phosphorus intake, remained constant. Cows could assimilate calcium and phos- phorus when the Ca: P ratio in the feed was as high as 2.5, but a more favourable ration was from 1 to 1.5. Henderson [1925], found in case of pigs that when the CaO: P2O5 ratio was 1:1 there was adequate assimilation and retention of Ca and P; but when the ratio was 1 : 2.5, the balances were very much lower showing poor assimilation. In the present experiments the assimilation of phosphorus was rather poor due to the comparatively low phosphorus contents of the feed. Improved assimilation had taken place, when manured berseem was fed, thus enriching the phosphate contents of the fodder. The results indicate that with a higher Ca : P ratio, the calcium assimilation was more and the phosphorus assimilation poor. The calcium balances were all positive and with a high CaO : P2O5 ratio in the feed, the assimi- lation of calcium was more. Large amounts of CaO ingested in the feed, helped in maintaining positive calcium balances, whereas during the low phosphorus period when the ratio of CaO : P2O5 naturally became high, negative phosphorus balances occurred. Meigs, et al. [1926], suggested similar conclusions based on their experi- ments of feeding hays cured in different ways. The results of the experimental data of the previous workers as corroborated by the results of the present experiments appear to warrant the conclusions that in high milking cows the following factors tend to reduce the losses of calcium and phosphorus. (1) Maintaining high intake of calcium and phosphorus in the feed. (2) Maintaining suitable ratio of calcium to phosphorus in the feed. (3) Feeding green fodders specially legumes as compared to dry fodders ; hay, or silage or other than legumes. Assimilation of sodium In Table XXI, the total intake of sodium (Na2O) during the various fodders periods and the amount present in the fodders are given. In Table XXII the average daily assimilation and the percentage assimilation out of the total intake of Na2O are given. TABLE XXI Total intake of sodium and the amount present in fodders Cows Total intake of Na2O (gm. per day) Na2O in fodders (gm. per day) Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Lenjurki 103.56 113.93 57.33 56.40 64.33 64.03 4.06 3.82 Larajbani 94.68 90.37 56.37 50.19 47.96 43.74 5.36 5.62 Haskila 108.52 124.07 57.79 69.00 62.29 46.52 4.46 8.36 Yulamati 108.32 107.88 56.89 55.59 53.16 56.47 2.65 4.45 Mean 103.77 109.04 57.09 57.79 56.44 52.69 4.13 5.56
164 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE XXII Average daily assimilation and percentage assimilation of sodium Cows Total assimilation of Na2O (gms/day) Assimilation per cent of the intake Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Lenjurki 17.11 22.11 September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 165 The analysis of the average balances of sodium showed that the fodders were highly significant. The balances of sodium oxide during the various fodders supple- mented with salt are given in Table XXIV. TABLE XXIV Average balances of sodium in different treatments (fodders) Treatments Average balances Uumanured berseem +6.74 Manured berseem + 10.28 Green lucerne 166 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, The total average assimilation of K2O and the percentage assimilation is given in Table XXVI. TABLE XXVI Average assimilation and percentage assimilation of K2O Cows Total assimilation of K2O (gm. per day) Percentage assimilation of the intake of K2O Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Lenjurki 35.61 6.39 37.42 46.05 18.12 3.40 14.58 13.39 Larajbani 30.48 25.89 29.71 33.64 15.38 14.49 12.93 11.98 Haskila 33.92 37.09 37.39 32.69 13.37 18.59 17.70 10.05 Yulamati 26.53 27.68 31.26 28.70 12.23 14.32 14.41 12.94 Mean 31.63 24.26 33.94 35.27 14.77 12.70 14.90 12.09 The highest assimilation of 35.27 gm. was during the jowar silage period while during the lucerne period it was 33.94 gm., during unmanured berseem period 31.63 gm. and during manured berseem period 24.26 gm. After an optimum intake of potassium in the feed, further increase does not improve assimilation or increase the positive balance is quite clearly shown in Tables XXV to XXVIII. With an intake of 216.3 gm. the assimilation was 31.6 gm. When it was increased to 282.9 gm. by feeding hay the assimilation was 35.3 gm., i.e. with an increase of 66.6 gm. K2O in feed, the assimilation improved by 3.7 gm. Similarly the balance in the intake of 216.3 gm. was +9.9 and with 282.9 it was 10.8 thereby improving the balance by 0.9 gm. only. Thus it appears that about 200 gm. K2O in the feed of high milking cow is sufficient to maintain positive balance. TABLE XXVII Average balance of K2O (grams per day) during the various periods Cows Period I Period II Period III Period IV Total Lenjurki A + 15.35 B September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S.V. DESAI 167 TABLE XXVIII Balance of K2O in different fodders Treatments Balance of K2O Unmanured berseem 9.90 Manured berseem 0.72 Lucerne 10.16 Jowar silage 10.77 The analysis of variance of average balance of K2O showed that fodders, cows and periods were not significant at five per cent level and the error was high. SODIUM : POTASSIUM RATIO The importance of sodium : potassium ratio in influencing the assimilation of these elements, specially sodium, has received some recognition for some time past. Few workers have mentioned the effect of high or low Na : K ratio on the assimilation of these minerals in the course of their metabolic experiments. Bunge [1873] showed that an excessive ingestion of potassium salts cause an elimination of sodium and chlorine. The farm animals generally take large quantities of green forage which contains little of sodium and more of potassium. Thus the intake of potassium is high and that of sodium less, resulting in an unbalanced Na : K ratio in the diet. This is of importance in practical feeding of farm animals, because a depletion of sodium and chlorine tend to react unfavourably on the animals. Hart, et al. [1911], have however shown that Bunge's theory was not complete. They found in the case of different groups of animals, fed on rations of different cereals but all having free excess of salts, that the amount of sodium chloride consumed bore no relation to the potassium contents of the ration, either when used alone or when supple- mented with potassium salts. Table gives the Na2O : K2O ratio during the various periods and in the fodders in the course of the present investigations. TABLE XXIX Na2O : K2O ratio in the fodders during various periods Cows Ratio Na2O : K2O In the feed Ratio Na2O : K2O in the fodders only Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and lucerne hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and lucerne hay Lenjurki 1 : 1.89 1 : 1.65 1 : 4.47 1 : 5.56 1 : 1.75 1 : 1.55 1 : 36.57 1 : 54.75 Larajbani 1 : 2.09 1 : 1.97 1 : 4.07 1 : 5.59 1 : 2.13 1 : 2.19 1 : 21.83 1 : 34.33 Haskila 1 : 2.34 1 : 1.60 1 : 3.70 1 : 4.71 1 : 2.26 1 : 1.94 1 : 26.38 1 : 26.10 Yulamati 1 : 2.00 1 : 1.78 1 : 3.81 1 : 3.98 1 : 2.23 1 : 1.83 1 : 44.45 1 : 30.97 Mean 1 : 2.08 1 : 1.75 1 : 4.01 1 : 4.98 1 : 2.09 1 : 1.88 1 : 32.31 1 : 36.54 5 AR/53.
168 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, The sodium: potassium ratio in the diet in manured berseem period was 1.75, in unmanured berseem period 2.08, in lucerne period 4.01 and in jowar silage period 4.98. From the figures given for average balances of Na2O in different fodder periods, it would appear that positive balances were maintained during the manured and unmanured berseem periods and negative balances during the lucerne and silage periods. The sodium : potassium ratio during former periods is much less, i.e. almost half of that during the latter periods. When the potassium was four to five times in the diet, almost all the sodium found its way in faeces and urine. The ratio of 1.75 in the diet during manured berseem period appeared to favour the maximum assimilation. In the two cows, where the ratio was lower than 1.75, the assimilation was much better. In Lenjurki, during the manured berseem period, the ratio was 1.65 and the total assimilation was 22.11 gm., i.e. 19.4 per cent of the intake. In the cow Haskila during the same period, when the ratio was 1.60 the total assimilation was 20.67 gm., i.e. 16.65 per cent of the intake. In the cows Larajbani and Yulamati, during the same manured berseem period, the ratios were higher 1.97 and 1.78 and the assimilation was lower, i.e. 14.04 and 10.58 gm, respectively. This indicated that excess of potassium in the diet influenced the elimination of sodium, thereby corroborating the observations made by Bunge. The necessity to supplement the lucerne and jowar silage fodders with enough sodium chloride in the diet to correct the ratio was quite apparent. Assimilation of chlorine The average intake of total chlorine during the feeding of various fodders and part of the intake of chlorine present in the various fodders fed to different cows are given in Table XXX. TABLE XXX Total intake of chlorine and the part present in the fodders Cows Total intake of chlorine (gm.per day) Chlorine intake in fodders (gm.per day) Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and hay Lanjurki 100.17 118.87 114.01 116.72 41.61 49.47 33.55 42.93 Larajbani 125.39 94.05 99.83 106.31 51.00 32.75 23.61 34.91 Haskila 167.05 124.33 97.27 128.28 77.51 35.89 21.97 43.61 Yulamati 124.18 124.70 103.89 98.65 49.85 49.94 26.08 28.47 Average 129.19 115.48 103.75 112.49 54.99 42.01 26.31 37.48
September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 169 The average total assimilation and. the percentage assimilation have been shown in Table XXXI. TABLE XXXI Total assimilation and assimilation percentage of chlorine Cows Tota1 Assimilation of chlorine (gm. per day) Assimilation percentage of the intake (gm. per day) Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and lucerne hay Un- manured berseem Manured berseem Lucerne Jowar silage and lucerne hay Lenjurki 1314 11.39 12.56 16.64 13.11 9.57 11.02 14.26 Larajbani 17.62 13.79 17.48 16.32 14.05 14.79 17.51 15.65 Haskila 18.41 15.74 17.14 18.35 11.02 12.65 17.62 14.30 Yulamati 20.78 15.11 16.51 21.41 16.58 12.11 15.89 21.70 Average 17.48 14.00 15.92 18.18 13.67 12.28 15.51 16.47 The greatest assimilation of 18.18 gm. occurred, when the total intake was 112.49 gm. chlorine. When the ingested amount was 103.75 gm. the assimilation was 15.92 gm. This showed that assimilation increased with the intake but it was not true after a limit. Thus with an intake of 129.19 gm. the assimilation was only 17.48 gm., i.e. with an increase of 25.44 gm. in the intake, the assimilation increased by 1.56 gm. only. The average total balances during the various periods are given in Table XXXII. TABLE XXXII Average balance of chlorine (grams per day) during the various periods Cows Period I Period II Period III Period IV Total Lenjurki A +2.40 B 170 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, The statistical analysis of average balances of chlorine showed that the fodder and cows were significant even at one per cent level, but the periods were not significantly different at five per cent. The average mineral balances of chlorine in various fodders have been given in Table XXXIII. TABLE XXXIII Average balances of chlorine in different fodders Fodders Average balances 1. Unmanured berseem +5.97 2. Manured berseem +1.84 3. Green lucerne +2.65 4. Jowar silage and hay +6.87 C.D. at five per cent 2.70 Unmanured berseem and jowar silage do not differ significantly in maintaining high positive balance. Similarly manured berseem and green lucerne do not significantly differ in maintaining positive balances. But unmanured berseem and jowar silage are significantly better than manured berseem and green lucerne. When the intake of chlorine was 103.75 gm. the positive balance was 2.65 gm., when the intake was 129.19 gm. the positive balance improved by 3.0 gm. only. SUMMARY 1. A balance experiment to study the effect of four fodders, i.e. unmanured berseem, manured berseem, green lucerne and jowar silage plus lucerne hay with supplements of chalk and salt, on the milk yield, its composition and mineral reten- tion in four high milk yielding sahiwal cows was conducted. 2. The four fodders and the mineral supplements did not bring about any significant change in the live weights and milk yields of the cows during the seven weeks of the experiment. 3. The mineral composition of the milk was not influenced by the feeding of fodders which were rich in some and poor in other elements. 4. The cows differed amongst themselves in their capacities to assimilate the minerals from the rations. 5. The fodders were significantly different amongst themselves in affording mineral assimilation. 6. The legume fodders like berseem and lucerne are three times richer in calcium contents than the non-legume fodder like jowar silage. The sodium contents of manured and unmanured berseem are about ten times higher than that of green lucerne, lucerne hay and jowar silage, while the chlorine contents are only twice as high.
September, 1953] M.A. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 171 7. Berseem manured with ammonium phosphate was richer in phosphate contents than the unmanured berseem. 8. Positive calcium, magnesium, potassium and chlorine balance were maintained by all cows during almost all periods. Negative sodium and phosphorus balances occurred in some cows. 9. Berseem, lucerne, jowar silage plus lucerne hay, supplemented with one per cent chalk (calcium carbonate) maintained positive calcium balances in all cows. 10. Manured berseem maintained the highest positive calcium balances and proved to be the best for assimilation or retention of calcium. This was followed by unmanured berseem and lucerne which were not significantly different between themselves. Legumes as manured berseem, unmanured berseem and lucerne were significantly better for the assimilation of calcium than jowar silage, which proved to be poor for calcium assimilation. 11. One hundred and twenty grams of CaO per day in the feed, maintained positive calcium balances in case of cow giving about 30 lb. milk daily, while 180 gm. CaO per day maintained positive calcium balances in case of cow giving about 40 lb. milk daily. (On an average about 100 to 200 gm. CaO per day in the food of cows is necessary when they are giving 30 to 40 lb. milk.) 12. Unmanured berseem, lucerne and jowar silage could not maintain phos- phorus equilibrium and all the four cows lost phosphorus from the body during their feeding. Manured berseem however maintained positive balances in two cows and negative balances in the other two cows. 13. One hundred to 120 gm. P2O5 per day in the feed of the cows could not maintain positive balances in cows giving about 30 to 40 lb. milk per day. 14. The assimilation of phosphorus by the cows was better from the phosphate manured berseem than the unmanured berseem. 15. The assimilation of calcium and phosphorus (per cent of the intake) was higher during the period when the CaO : P2O5 ratio was 1.23 : 1, than when the ratio was higher 1.86 : 1 or still higher. The only exception was during the period of manured berseem feeding when there was better assimilation of phosphorus only. 16. Two-third of the total amount of magnesium in the rations was generally provided in the grain mixture. About 80 gm. MgO in the feed was enough to maintain positive balance of about five grams MgO in cows giving 30 to 40 lb. milk per day. 17. Manured or unmanured berseem feeding supplemented with one per cent salt (sodium chloride) maintained positive sodium balances, while lucerne and jowar silage feeding even when supplemented with one per cent sodium chloride did not maintain equilibrium and sodium was lost from the body. 18. One hundred and four, and 109 gm. Na2O in the feed could maintain positive balances of 7 and 10 gm. per day, while on 57 to 58 gm. Na2O in the ration was not sufficient to maintain the equilibrium and 6 to 12 gm. sodium Na2O was lost from the body.
172 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT FODDERS IN SAHIWAL COWS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, 19. One hundred and ninety grams of K2O in the rations could maintain positive balance of 0.72 gm. and 283 gm. K2O in the feed could maintain a positive balance of 10.77 gm. with average milk yield of 32 lb. daily. Potassium was always present in large quantities in the ration of the cows and hence positive balances were always maintained. 20. The assimilation of sodium was the highest during the manured berseem period when the Na2O : K2O ratio in the feed was 1 : 1.75 ; the assimilation de- creased with the increase in the ratio to 1 : 2. With further increase in the ratio to 1 : 5 there was very little assimilation or negative assimilation and sodium was lost from the system. Thus a high intake of potassium which increased the sodium : potassium ratio, helped in the elimination of almost all the sodium present in the feed. 21. Positive chlorine balances were always maintained during the experiments. 112 to 130 gm. chlorine in the feed was enough to maintain positive balances of 2 to 7 gm. per day. 22. The assimilation of mineral nutrients was better from the green fodder than from hay or silage. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are grateful to Mr C. H. Parr then Imperial Agriculturist for giving facilities to conduct the experiment in his Division and for taking keen interest in the work. REFERENCES Bunge (1873). Z. Biol. 9, 104 Desai, S. V. and Mathur, M. L. (1945). Indian J. vet. Sci. 15, 199 Forbes, E. B. et al. (1916). Ohio Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 295 Forbes, E. B. et al. (1917). Ohio Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 308 Forbes, E. B. et al. (1918). Ohio Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 330 Forbes, E. B. et al. (1922). Ohio Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 369 Forbes, E. B. et al. (1922). J. Biol. Chem. 52, 281 Haffman, C. F. et al. (1930). J. Dairy Sci. 13, 432 Hart, E. B. et al. (1911). Wisconsin Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 17 Hart, E. B. et al. (1921). Wisconsin Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 362 Hart, E. B. et al. (1926.27). J. Biol. Chem. 71, 263, 271 Hart, E. B. et al. (1927). J. Biol. Chem. 72, 59 Hart, E. B. et al. (1929). J. Biol. Chem. 84, 359, 367 Henderson, J. M. (1925). Biochem. J. 19, 52
September, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 173 Husband, A. D. and Godden, W. (1927). Biochem. J. 21, 259 Lander, P. E. (1926). Agric. J. India 21, 347 Meigs, E. B. et al. (1926). J. agric. Res. 33, 383 Miller, H. G. et al. (1924). Amer. J. Physiol. 68, 169 Miller, H. G. et al. (1925). Amer. J. Physiol. 72, 647 Pemberton, H. (1882). J. Franklin Institute 113, 184 Sen, K. C. (1933). Indian J. vet. Sci. 3, 287 Turner, W. A., Harding, T. S. and Hartman, A. M. (1927). J. agric. Res. 35, 625 Viswanatha Iyer, A. (1935). Indian. J. vet. Sci. 5, 129
REPLACEMENT OF PLANT PROTEINS BY ANIMAL PROTEINS IN THE RATIONS OF BREEDING BULLS AND ITS EFFECT ON SEMEN PRODUCTION By S. S. PRABHU, S. GUHA and P. BHATTACHARYA, Animal Genetics Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 8 April 1953) LITTLE information is available on the effect of specific nutritional factors upon semen production. Jones, Haag and Dougherty [1942] showed that rations satisfactory for normal growth up to three years of age are adequate for normal reproductive function. Branton, Bratton and Salisbury [1942] fed bulls used for artificial insemination with 100, 120 and 140 per cent levels of T. D. N. of Morrison dry cow requirement and observed that neither the quantity and quality of semen produced nor the fertility of the bulls was related to the digestible nutrient intake within the limits studied. They also observed that concentrate mixtures containing 12 per cent, 16 per cent and 20 per cent total protein did not significantly affect the fertility of bulls. On the basis of their findings, they have suggested a feeding schedule for bulls in active service. Reid, Ward and Salisbury [1948], who tried simple and complex concentrate mixtures on young breeding bulls, observed that good quality semen of similar character resulted from the ingestion of both diets, when given at the average rate of 1.18 lb. digestible nutrients per 100 lb. body weight daily. Bulls given complex mixture yielded slightly larger ejaculates, containing more spermatozoa per ejaculate and fewer abnormal spermatozoa than those fed on simple mixture. The decrease in pH following incubation of ejaculated semen was greater in latter group than in the former. Regardless of the diet fed the concentration of spermatozoa in semen, the initial motility, the degree of livabili- ty, the size of spermatozoa, the quantity of total reducing substances, reducing sub- stances in oxidised state, potential reducing capacity, ascorbic acid and the initial pH. of the semen were similar. A number of Russian workers also have stressed the value of proper feeding in increasing sperm production [Snironov-Ugrjumov, 1937 ; Pankhevic, 1930 ; Ovsjannikov, 1939]. According to their findings, the animal pro- teins contained in blood-meal and skim milk caused significant improvement in semen production when fed to breeding bulls. Branton, Bratton and Salisbury [1949], who tried one animal protein (skim milk powder) and two vegetable proteins (corn gluten feed and soyabean oil meal) in an experiment conducted on 18 bulls em- ploying a double cross over design and a 120 days period, could get no confirmation of these results. They found that the three protein supplements were approximately equal in value. In India, the necessity for meeting the overall deficit in concentrates, rendered acute by the partition of the country, through use of suitable substitutes has become urgent. An attempt has been made by the authors to study the possibility of 175 5 AR/53
176 REPLACEMENT OF PLANT PROTEINS IN THE RATIONS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, replacing part of the vegetable proteins by animal protein, like blood-meal (skim milk powder was out of question, as it is needed urgently to meet the shortage for human consumption) without impairing the reproductive efficiency of artificial insemination bulls. EXPERIMENTAL Eight Kumaon-Hill bulls ranging in weight from 276 to 528 lb. were divided at random into two lots of four each. Animals in the first group were fed ration consisting of a concentrate mixture made up as follows : Crushed oats 150 parts by weight Crushed maize 150 September, 1953] S.S PRABHU, S. GUHA AND P. BHATTACHARAY 177 The quantity of bhusa fed to bulls 1, 2 and 8 was subsequently raised to four pounds, as it was observed that three pounds allowance was insufficient. The experiment was started on 29 June, 1949 and concluded on 9 November, 1949. Due to the non-availability of wheat bran, it had to be excluded from the mixture from 31 July, 1949. The rations were weighed as per schedule drawn up and fed individually to the animals. The blood-meal was added prior to feeding. Blood-meal was increased slowly and brought up to the desired level to enable the animals to get used to it. Within 4 to 8 days all were readily taking blood-meal mixed in the concentrates. Semen was collected at weekly intervals from all the bulls, and on each day of collection two ejaculates were taken and completely analysed with regard to colour and consistency, volume, initial motility, sperm density, percentage of abnor- mal sperm and initial pH. In addition, reaction time for each ejaculate and records of daily body weight of the animals were maintained. RESULTS In Table II are brought out the averages of the various semen characteristics, observed in the two ejaculates of the control and blood-meal fed animals. In addition the averages of the reaction time, body weights, rates of gain and rates of change in rates of gain of the different bulls are also given in the same table. The figures given in columns 13, 14 and 15 of the table are respectively the values of co-efficients A, B and C obtained by fitting orthogonal polynomials as described by Fisher [1943] to the daily live-weight data. The co-efficients give respectively (i) average weight, (ii) average gain in weight and (iii) average rate of change in gain of weight. For analysing the data on semen characteristics and reaction time, two different, methods were adopted. In the first method, the figures under each criterion for the different bulls in the two groups were separately averaged out and the averages so obtained used in conducting a straight-forward analysis of variance. The variance due to treatment differences were tested using the 'between bulls within feeds' variance as the error. The results are given in Table III. In none of the criteria were the treatment differences found to be significant. This method at best provides a rough and ready way of testing overall group differences. Besides, the use of averages smooths out random variation between collections giving more stable figures for carrying out the analysis. The analysis, however, does not take into account the possible effect of the time factor on semen production and reaction time. In the present experiment, a certain amount of seasonal effect on the results might reasonably be expected as the experiment had lasted for over four months178 REPLACEMENT OF PLANT PROTEINS IN THE RATIONS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE II Details of averages of various semen characteristics, reaction time and live-weight of bulls in the two treatment groups Treatment Bull number Ejaculate number Volume in c.c. Initial motility Sperm density (millions per c.c.) Per cent abnormal sperms Total sperm in ejaculate (millions) Initial pH Reaction time (seconds) Initial weight (lb.) Final weight (lb.) Average weight (lb.) Average rate of gain in weight (lb.) Average rate of change in rate of gain (lb.) Control 1 I 1.51(15) 3.53(15) 557.27(15) 3.60(15) 841(15) 6.00(15) 65.50(14) 444 444 443.35(141) September, 1953] S. S. PRABHU,S. GUHA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 179 TABLE III Analysis of variance Source of variation D.F. Volume Initial motility Sperm density Per cent abnormal sperm Initial pH Total sperm in ejaculate M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. Between feeds 1 0.1870 . . 0.0462 . . 47305.16 . . 7.03 . . 0.0016 50176 . . Between bulls within feeds 6 0.7803 0.3186 125481.09 15.72 0.0241 799089 . . Between ejaculates 1 0.0095 . . 0.0841 . . 634.16 . . 1.12 2.00 0.0256 19.69 28900 . . Feeds × ejaculates 1 0.0077 . . 0.1089 . . 30290.79 . . 1.57 2.80 0.0009 . . 756 . . Residual 6 0.0420 0.1803 40365.12 0.56 0.0013 142996
180 REPLACEMENT OF PLANT PROTEINS IN THE RATIONS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, In the treatment of the data pertaining to attributes of semen quality and reaction time, the adjustment made was for the intial quality of the semen for each attribute. In case of reaction time, adjustment was made for the initial reaction time. The initial semen quality was obtained by averaging each of the attributes falling within the summer month. The total number of observations used for striking the averages were four in all the first three weeks of experimentation. In the like manner, four observations per attribute falling within the last three weeks of the experiment were utilised for getting the averages of the final figures which were adjusted with the inital figures in the analysis of co-variance. Thus, not only more stable observations within the two seasons, viz. summer and autumn, were obtained, but, due to the use of like number of observations in the two averages, the averages also were brought on to a comparable basis. The results are summarised in Table IV(a) and (b). From a study of Tables II, III and IV (a) and (b) the following facts emerge : Volume. The average semen volume was higher in the second than in the first ejaculate in both groups. Between ejaculate difference was not statistically significant. The overall group average for the blood-meal fed group was 1.59 c.c. while it was 1.80 c.c. for the control group. The difference in the adjusted overall group means failed to reach the level of significance. Initial motility. The average motility rating was slightly in favour of the second ejaculate in case of bulls in the blood-meal group ; while it was markedly in favour of the second ejaculate in the control group. As before, between ejaculate differences as well as the adjusted lot mean difference, were not significant. The actual mean motility rating for blood-meal group was 3.39 while it was 3.50 for the control. Sperm density. The mean sperm density was found to be higher for the first than for the second ejaculate in both groups. The mean was 983.05 millions per c.c. for the blood-meal group and 874.30 millions per c.c. for the control group. Both between ejaculates and adjusted group mean differences were statistically not signi- ficant. Per cent abnormal sperms. The mean for the first ejaculate was higher than for the second ejaculate in the blood-meal group and the other way about in the control. The actual group means were 6.89 per cent and 5.57 per cent respectively for the blood-meal and control groups. Both between ejaculates and adjusted group mean differences due to treatments failed to reach the level of significance. Total number of sperms in ejaculate. The total was obtained by multiplying volume by the corresponding sperm density. The mean for the second ejaculate was observed to be higher than for the first in both groups, the group means being 1,465 and 1,577 millions respectively for the blood-meal and control groups. Both between ejaculates and between groups (after adjustment) differences failed to reach the level of significance. Initial pH. In both groups, the initial pH on an average was higher in the second than in the first ejaculate. The difference again was not statistically significant, though between ejaculate difference was highly significant. The average overall pHs for the blood-meal and control groups were 6.13 and 6.11 respectively. After adjusting for initial observation, it was found that the difference between the two groups failed to reach the level of significance for both the ejaculates.
September, 1953] S. S. PRABHU, S. GUHA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 181 TABLE IV (a) The test of significance of adjusted lot means of the various semen characteristics and reaction time in control and blood-meal fed groups (by co-variance) Eja- culate No. Variation due to D.F. Volume Initial motility perm density Per cent abnormal sperms Total sperm in ejaculate Initial pH M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. Between treatments 1 0.1806 . . 0.1057 . . 8639 . . 46.20 2.45 23165 . . 0 . . I Within treatments 5 0.9695 0.2070 161233 18.79 1452103 0.1946 Between treatments 1 0.7099 . . 0.0346 . . .69444 . . 15-67 1.22 191990 1.32 0.1034 . . II Within treatments 5 0.9233 0.5630 102307 13.96 144906 0.1621 (b) The analysis of residual variance after adjustment of the initial weight (by co-variance) Variation due to D.F. Final weight Average weight Average rate of gain in weight Average rate of change in rate of gain M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. Between treatments 1 0.05 . . 35.50 . . 0.00057903 . . 0.0000023355 . . Within treatments 5 95.57 87.91 0.00096856 0.0000045705
182 REPLACEMENT OF PLANT PROTEINS IN THE RATIONS [Vol. XXIII, Part III, Reaction time. Bulls in the blood-meal group took longer time on an average to give the first ejaculate than the second, while opposite was the case with bulls in the control group. The between ejaculates difference, however, was not statistically significant. The overall group average for the blood-meal fed lot was 80.78 seconds as opposed to 91.5 second for the controls. The difference between groups, after adjusting for initial observation, was not statistically significant for both ejaculates. Body weight. With the exception of the two heavier bulls, namely bulls No. 2 and 8, the other bulls either maintained their initial weight or slightly increased in weight during the course of the experiment. Bull No. 2 lost about 44 lb. and bull No. 8 about 28 lb. This in all probability, was due to their receiving slightly lesser amount of starch-equivalent than their actual requirement. F. ratios for final weight, average weight, average rate of gain and average rate of change in gain were not statistically significant, showing no material difference between the liveweight position of the control and blood-meal fed groups. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [unpublished] who studied the seasonal variation in semen quality and reaction time of Kumauni Hill bulls observed the following characteristics in these animals during the months of autumn : (i) Reaction time=73.42 seconds (ii) Initial pH=6.25 (iii) Volume=2.28 c.c. (iv) Initial motility=3.48 (v) Sperm density=534.85 millions per c.c. (vi) Per cent abnormal sperm=5.57 per cent and (vii) Total number of sperm in ejaculate=1,284.24 million The chief concern of the person in charge of field artificial insemination centres is to keep close watch on the following attributes of semen quality and reaction time: (i) Volume (ii) Motility and (iii) Sperm concentration. According to the observations of the above mentioned authors, significant difference in 'Reaction-time' was found only between bulls. The differences in years and seasons were not significant. Same was true of volume of semen. Sperm concentration was found to vary not only from bull to bull but also between seasons, while motility varied significantly from bull to bull, year to year and between one season and another. The reaction time observed in the control of our experiment with which the observations of Mukherjee and Bhattacharya loc. cit. could be com- pared, showed longer time. The volume of semen was found to be slightly lower. These differences could be attributed largely to the individuality of the bulls. The sperm concentration, however, was decidedly superior to that got by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya, while the motility rating was approximately of the same order. In
September, 1953] S. S. PRABHU, S. GUHA, AND P. BHATTACHARYA 185 view of this, it could be stated that the quality of the semen produced by the bulls in the control groups of our experiment was in no way inferior to the semen produced by the normal individuals belonging to this breed. This fact taken along with our finding showed that the blood-meal fed bulls produced semen of about the same quality as that expected from a representative sample of bulls of the breed given normal rations. Our findings were that the crude vegetable protein in the rations of artificial insemination bulls could be replaced by animal products like blood-meal, to the extent done in our study, i.e. by 30 per cent, without detriment to normal semen production and reaction time. These results are not in agreement with the Russian findings and bear out the conclusions drawn by Branton, Bratton and Salisbury [1949] who used skim-milk powder instead of blood-meal as a source of animal protein supplement in the concentrate mixture. As our study was carried out for a limited period of four months, no conclusion on long term aspect of feeding blood-meal could naturally be drawn on the basis of the data presented. It has however, clearly demonstrated that, as a short-term measure of feeding bulls, rations with. 30 per cent of the crude protein replaced by blood-meal could be instituted without materially affecting semen production and reaction time. This should prove of value in a stop-gap arrangement of feeding artificial insemination bulls during times of scarcity of good quality concentrates, besides helping release of valuable concen- trates like maize and linseed cake for effective use in normal times. SUMMARY 1. Data are presented on the effect of replacing 30 per cent of crude proteins in normal rations of Kumauni Hill bulls by blood-meal, for a period of four months, on semen production and reaction time. 2. Analysis of the data showed no significant difference in the various semen characteristics and reaction times of bulls fed on normal and blood-meal replaced rations. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to Dr N. D. Kehar, Officer-in-charge of Animal Nutrition Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, for help in drawing up the schedule of rations followed in the present study. Their thanks are due to Dr S. N. Ray and Shri V. N. Amble for kindly going through the manuscript and making valuable suggestions. They are grateful to Shri A. R. Roy, Animal Husbandry Statistician of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for advice in the statistical treatment of the data. Their grateful thanks are due to Professor G. W. Salisbury of the University of Illinois, U.S.A., for having kindly scrutinised the manuscript and for suggesting certain improvements. Finally, their thanks are due to Dr S. Datta, Director of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar for providing all facilities and for sustained interest in the progress of this work. REFERENCES Branton, C., Bratton, R. W. and Salisbury, G. W. (1942). Total digestible nutrient and protein levels for dairy bulls used in artificial insemination. J. Dairy Sci. 30,12, 1003184 REPLACEMENT OF PLANT PROTEINS IN THE RATIONS [Vol. XXIII, Part III Branton, C., Bratton, R. W. and Salisbury, G. W. (1949). Semen production and fertility of dairy bulls fed rations containing proteins of plant and animal origin. J. Dairy Sci. 32, 4, 292EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF SOME INDIGENOUS GRASSES OF INDIA By NARINDAR NATH and N. B DAS, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi (Received for publication on 5 January 1953) (With two text-figures) THE desirability of studying the chemical composition of various species of grasses found in the country under different systems of cutting was emphasised in a previous publication in which the effect of growth stage on the chemical composition of some grasses was studied [Narindar Nath and Das, 1952]. In this investigation the effect of monthly cuts on the chemical composition of some species of grasses is reported. The object is to bring about condition similar to intermittent grazing where plants are allowed alternately a large period of unchecked growth followed by intensive grazing for a short period. In other words the investigation aims at studying how the chemical composition of grasses varies with season when under grazing with a month's closure. It is, of course, true that conditions are not exactly identical with actual grazing which is not so uniform. In grazing the animals sort out certain plants and even certain parts of the plants and eat them first pre- ferably leaving the stemy portion while some of the plants are trampled over during grazing. Moreover, the manuring effect of the excreta of animals in actual grazing is also absent in this investigation. But, nevertheless, this investigation will be of interest and practical value in that it will give us the nature of variation of chemical composition with season under grazing condition. A monthly system of cutting has been chosen keeping in view the findings of some earlier workers who showed that longer intervals between two cuttings increase the yield of dry matter and green herbage but decrease the contents of P2O5,K2O, protein, etc. [Lander, 1942 ; Dharmani and Singh, 1946 ; Woodman, et al., 1930.] Of course, it will also be interesting and helpful to investigate the effect of more severe and more lenient system of cutting on the chemical composition of these grasses which will form the basis of another investigation. EXPERIMENTAL Material Ten species of indigenous grasses, viz. Dichanthium annulatum, Amphilo- phis odorata, Iseilema laxum, Themeda trimula, Amphilophis glabra, Pennisetum orientale, Panicum repens, Chrysopogon montanus, Sehima nervosum and Heteropogon contortus were selected for this study. These grasses were brought from different parts of the country and established in the nursery of Agronomy Division, I.A.R.I., New Delhi. A brief description of three of these grasses was given earlier [Narindar Nath and Das, 1952], that of the other seven grasses is given below: 185 5 AR/53
186 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III, Dichanthium annulalum (Stapf). It is one of the most recognised fodder grasses and is known as zingoo, kail, apang, palwan and gergha in different parts of the country. It is a perennial densely tufted grass occurring on a variety of soils and favours medium to low rainfall regions [Bor, 1940 ; Burns, 1916]. Duthie [1888] puts it as a first class fodder grass. It flowers all the cold weather. The present data refer to a selected strain from Karnal. Themeda trimula (Hack). It is a perennial grass known as barki, bungrat, gundi and gangdad. It is considered to be a good fodder grass [Blatter and McCann, 1935 ; Jacob, 1945]. The sample of the grass was collected from Bijapur (Deccan) and it flowers very late. Pennisetum orientale (Rich). It is a perennial grass and is very leafy [Bor, 1940]. It flowers in the rains and early cold weather. It shows a very early spring growth and stands cutting well. This collection is from Simla and is locally known as bimalsia. Panicum repens (L). It is a perennial glaucus grass. It flourishes in moist situations and is an excellent binder of the soil. When once established, it is very difficult to get rid of it on account of its rhizomes. It is considered to be one of the most nutritious fodder grasses. It yields a considerable quantity of grain also. The sample was collected from Conoor and is locally known as silkhoo. Chrysopogon montanus (Trin). This is an extremely variable perennial grass growing in tufts of many culms and leafy at the base. Burns [1916] considers this grass as an excellent fodder before flowering though the leaf appears somewhat coarse. Bor [1940] says that this grass is not suitable for silage, as it contains too much water. According to Lisoba [1896] it is reckoned as a good fodder in Mount Abu and the grain is used by the natives. The present data are collected on a robust strain of the grass collected from Nagpur, locally known as dhawlu. Other common names of the grass are goria, chickua and dongri-gawat. Sehima nervosum (Stapf). A perennial grass growing in compact tufts. It tolerates a wide variety of soils but avoids those very wet and heavy. Usually found in the open, but can stand moderate shade. This grass can stand drought well and flowers at the beginning of cold weather [Bor, 1940]. This is one of the good fodder grasses and is much liked by cattle. According to Jacob [1945], Swhima nervosum thrives under partial shade and is considered the best forest fodder grass and is the main-stay of the Amritmahal breed of cattle of Mysore. The variety is from Nagpur locally known as sheda. Heteropogon contortus (Roem et schult). This is the wellknown 'spear-grass' also known as sukla and kusal. It is densely tufted perennial grass found chiefly in dry areas. The grass forms an excellent hay and is eaten by cattle before the inflorescence forms. When the fruit is mature the cattle avoid it, the awned fruit cause severe sores in the gums and mouths of cattle. " In Mount Abu the people consider it best fodder grass they have. In other districts it is said to be eaten only by buffaloes when they are hungry and cannot get other kinds of grasses "September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS 187 Sampling of grasses The samples of different species of grasses were collected by hand cutting nearly all the surface growth of the plants, leaving only about one inch of the herbage. All these grasses have been grown in sub-plots each comprising an area of 1/300 of an acre. A fixed number of plants of each grass were cut repeatedly after every 30 days beginning from May 2, 1949. The rest of the plants were left undisturbed throughout the period of investigation. The weights of green material obtained for each cutting for each grass were recorded in the field. The samples were immediately taken to the laboratory, chopped to small pieces and a representative part of each sample was dried in oven for moisture content. The dried material was ground and kept in stoppered bottles for further analysis. Analysis Analysis was carried out by the methods recommended by the ' Association of the Official Agricultural Chemists' [1940]. Meteorological observations Table I gives the meteorological observations recorded during the period of investigation at the Farm Observatory, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. For the sake of comparison rainfall during the corresponding period in 1948 has also been included. TABLE I Meteorological observations Months Mean daily relative humidity (mean of at 7 A.M. and 2 P.M.) Monthly rainfall in inches 1948 1949 January 62.30 } 5.40 0.07 February 59.35 0.64 March 49.30 0.24 April 28.45 0.00 May 33.65 0.48 June 32.80 0.12 July 76.00 7.10 14.72 August 70.85 9.05 4.75 September 72.00 4.12 3.66 October 49.15 0.51 0.01 November 39.05 0.00 0.00 December 188 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III, RESULTS AND DISCUSSION General Tables I-XIII give the dates of sampling and results of analysis. A general idea about the chemical nature and nutrient contents of different species of grasses studied under monthly system of cutting, can be had from the average composition of all these grasses during the experimental period of May to the end of October 1949. The average composition is as follows: Crude protein 7.82 per cent; true protein 7.07 per cent; ether extract 3.36 per cent; crude fibre 28.53 per cent; nitrogen-free-extract 46.03 per cent; crude- ash 14.26 per cent; silica-free-ash 4.72 per cent; silica and insoluble residue 9.54 per cent; lime (CaO) 0.93 per cent; phosphoric acid (P2O5) 0.68 per cent. A comparison of different species can be made by comparing their average contents of various constituents during this experimental period. Average contents of crude fibre, crude protein, lime and phosphoric acid of all these grasses are plotted in Fig. I. Out of all these grasses Themeda trimula gives the highest average crude protein content. Seasonal variation of chemical composition The general trend of variations in. various chemical constituents is shown by the monthly averages of different constituents of all the grasses. The variations in the more important constituents namely, phosphoric acid, lime, crude protein, crude fibre and original moisture as also in lime/phosphoric acid ratio and yield of green matter for each cutting are indicated in Fig. II. It shows that the variations in moisture, crude protein and phosphoric acid were similar, while lime, crude fibre varied inversely with each of the above mentioned constituents. The data further show that crude ash, ether extract also tended to follow crude protein quite consis- tantly, while nitrogen-free-extract was correlated with crude fibre. A further comparison of the average data with those for individual species shows that there was a good deal of similarity in the changes occurring in the chemical composition of each of the ten species during the whole of the investigation. This similiarity was by no means without exceptions and differences did occur in certain constituents. Yield of green matter Table II shows the yield of green matter obtained for each cutting for different species of grasses. It is seen that the maximum yield in most of the grasses was obtained in the first cutting, which represented accumulated spring growth. After this the yield continuously decreased wth each successive cut upto the beginning of July, i.e., the third cut. With the incidence of heavy rainfall during July which resulted in favourable soil humidity and favourable temperature condition, the plants showed vigorous growth. The result was that the yield of green matter of samples increased considerably and in some cases was even higher than that in first cutting. Thus in case of Themeda trimula, samples collected during this period on 31 July recorded 14.5 lb. of green matter against 10 lb. in the first cutting. With the approach of dry weather yield again successively fell till the end of the investi- gation when the amounts of green matter obtained became very small. This
September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS 189 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. The average crude fibre, protein, lime, phosphoric acid content of different grasses cut monthly
190 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Monthly average for all grasses
September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS 191 TABLE II Yield of green matter in pounds for each cutting Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Total 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 5 2 1 1 1.0 0.75 0.41 11.16 Amphilophis odorata 9 6 3 7 2.0 1.25 0.28 28.53 Iseilema laxum 0.5 1 0.5 4 0.5 0.5 0.14 7.14 Themeda trimula 10 4 2 14.5 5.5 2.0 0.14 38.14 Amphilophis glabra 2 2 0.5 4 0.5 0.5 0.18 9.68 Pennisetum orientale 10 6 2.0 4 2 1.0 0.24 25.74 Panicum repens 10 1 0.5 5 4 2.5 0.25 23.25 Chrysopogan montanus 1.5 2 1 2 2 1.5 0.24 10.24 Sehima nervosum 4 5 2 6 3 1 0.36 21.46 Heteropogon contortus 3 4 1 5 2 1.25 0.11 16.36 Monthly average 5.5 3.3 1.35 5.25 2.3 1.23 0.25 N.B.192 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III, decreased out-turn at the end of the investigation was due to both climatic condition as well as the effect of systematic continuous cutting on the plant development. It has been reported by different workers that continuous cutting results in making the plant physiologically less active. Another marked feature is that Dichanthium annulatum did not record any rise in the yield of green matter after the rains, this was perhaps due to the weeds which affected this grass during the investigation. TABLE IV Variations in true protein content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 3.97 6.75 6.06 9.12 8.00 7.16 6.69 6.82 Amphilophis odorala 3.72 5.32 4.77 7.07 7.14 6.47 6.87 5.91 Iseilema laxum 5.20 7.92 6.02 7.85 7.71 7.57 6.31 6.94 Themeda trimula 3.91 10.80 7.51 9.34 9.31 9.00 7.61 8.21 Amphilophis glabra 4.04 6.42 5.88 7.44 7.54 6.86 6.51 6.38 Pennisetum orientale 5.49 6.05 5.20 10.32 7.31 6.73 8.48 7.08 Panicum repens 6.25 7.24 6.51 9.20 9.23 7.95 7.36 7.68 Chrysopogan montanus 6.63 5.82 7.39 9.62 8.33 7.83 7.99 7.67 Sehima nervosum 7.23 6.88 6.46 9.42 7.89 7.95 7.82 7.68 Heteropogon contortus 6.03 640 5.34 7.74 6.72 6.68 5.94 6.36 Monthly average 5.25 6.93 6.11 8.71 7.92 7.40 7.16 7.07 Protein Tables III and IV represent the changes occurring in crude protein and true protein contents of various grasses. It is seen that the changes are closely corre- lated to each other. The difference between crude protein and true protein in continuously cut grasses averages about 10 per cent of the crude protein. It was pointed out in a previous publication that this difference between crude protein and true protein becomes small when the plants approach maturity. The data further reveal that the dry matter of grasses was throughout rich in crude protein and percentage seldom fell below that recorded in the first cutting, while much higher values were obtained for samples collected after the onset of rains. This must be attributed to the influence of systematic cutting on the grasses, as the successive samples consisted of new growth. It is also seen that the cutting affected the protein content of different grasses to different extents. Thus first cutting resulted in raising the protein contents of successive cutting of Dichanthium annulatum to more than 1½ times, while in case of Themeda trimula this increase was more than 2½ times. Heteropogon contortus and Sehima nervosum on the other hand did not show appreciable change in their protein content in the second cutting.
September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS 193 Rainfall exerted a good deal of influence on the protein content of grasses. The highest value for protein content in most of the grasses were recorded in the samples collected at the end of July, which month also had the heaviest rainfall. The leading grass in terms of crude protein contents is Themeda trimula with an average value of 9.03 per cent. The last average value is in the case of Amphilophis odorata with an average of 6.44 per cent. TABLE V Variations in ether extract content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 2.55 3.36 3.17 3.50 3.36 2.88 2.32 3.02 Amphilophis odorata 2.82 3.69 3.84. 3.78 3.89 3.76 2.64 3.49 Iseilema luxum 2.74 3.91 4.27 3.74 4.13 4.18 2.25 3.60 Themeda trimula 1.75 4.21 3.71 3.69 4.06 3.61 3.67 3.53 Amphilophis glabra 2.96 3.86 3.48 3.58 4.02 3.20 2.84 3.42 Pennisetum orientale 3.33 3.04 2.99 3.63 3.42 2.82 2.74 3.18 Panicum repens 2.48 3.29 3.32 3.56 3.74 3.51 2.12 3.16 Chrysopogan montanus 3.49 4.43 4.54 4.36 4.15 4.03 3.19 4.03 Sehima nervosun 2.53 3.53 3.73 3.65 3.61 3.18 2.64 3.27 Heteropogon contortus 3.37 3.27 3.27 3.58 3.30 2.80 2.01 3.09 Monthly average 2.81 3.66 3.63 3.71 3.77 3.40 2.64 3.38 Ether extract It is seen from Table V that ether extract content of various grasses increases with the protein content in the second cutting except in case of Heteropogon contortus. But after that it is subject to less variations which were not so regular in different grasses. The monthly averages of ether extract content of all the grasses were practically same for the samples collected during June, July, August and September. There was a small decrease in the samples collected on 28 September, but a significant decline in ether extract contents of all the grasses collected on 28 October. This fall in, the ether extract contents of all grasses is of practical significance since this took place with the onset of dry winter season. 5AR/53
194 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE VI Variations in crude fibre content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 36.00 26.39 27.99 24.49 26.05 28.26 28.24 28.17 Amphilophis odorata 33.84 31.50 30.70 30.40 29.78 30.28 29.30 30.88 Iseilema laxum 28.03 27.00 24.98 27.87 29.06 28.57 28.91 27.77 Themeda trimula 34.18 30.21 29.95 30.49 29.69 31.64 29.85 30.86 Amphilophis glabra 30.74 29.05 27.21 25.70 26.47 27.35 28.00 27.79 Pennisetum orientale 26.75 27.27 27.79 25.85 29.74 28.74 28.89 27.86 Panicum repens 27.73 26.00 27.10 25.88 27.53 29.75 28.09 27.44 Chrysopogan montanus 26.94 26.41 27.64 25.72 28.41 26.46 27.53 27.02 Sehima nervosum 30.64 30.00 28.96 27.56 29.16 29.54 28.63 29.21 Heteropogon contortus 26.24 26.68 27.08 30.17 29.17 30.53 27.95 28.26 Monthly average 30.12 28.05 27.94 27.39 28.51 29.11 28.58 28.53 Crude fibre Crude fibre content (Table VI) was somewhat variant throughout the course of investigation, though it had a tendency to vary inversely with crude protein. Thus in most of the grasses the lowest value was obtained in the fourth cutting when the crude protein content was maximum. The percentage of crude fibre in some of the samples collected on 28 September decreased with the crude protein content. Again in Heteropogon contortus it is seen that the samples collected after onset of rains contained higher percentage of crude fibre and crude protein as compared to those collected before the rainy season. No definite conclusions can be drawn regarding the nutritive value of the grass from these changes in crude fibre content. It is generally said that high crude fibre content of feeds is associated with low digesti- bility ; while this may be true with regard to mature plants, the changes in crude fibre content of young immature plants have to be cautiously interpreted, particu- larly in the light of investigations of some other workers. Woodman, Blunt and Stewart [1926] have shown that in case of young herbage the crude fibre is as diges- tible as the soluble carbohydrates. Christensen and Happer [1933] obtained even higher co-efficients of digestion for crude fibre than for nitrogen-free-extract in April and October cuttings of hay. The following statement by Warth [1924] may also be noted. ' In some cases chemically insoluble crude fibre is digested with greater facility than is readily soluble nitrogen-free-extract. This tendency is more marked in the case of tropical stock and tropical grown fodder.' It is thus evident that rise in the fibre content in certain cuttings does not necessarily mean that the produce is less digestible.
September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS 195 The Meda trimula and Amphilophis odorata have equal crude fibre content of 28.86 and 28.88 per cent, respectively, being higher than that of any other grass. But the former has the highest average protein content while the latter has the least average value. TABLE VII Variations in nitrogen-free-extract content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 48.58 47.63 49.00 41.63 48.95 48.33 49.49 47.66 Amphilophis odorata 49.92 46.98 48.16 44.68 47.16 47.85 45.90 47.24 Iscilema laxum 51.78 47.28 48.55 43.44 46.48 47.39 47.18 47.44 Themeda trimula 51.38 42.30 47.81 43.91 45.47 44.55 46.54 45.99 Amphilophis glabra 51.02 45.22 48.95 39.89 46.63 48.35 46.72 46.68 Pennisetum orientale 50.78 42.34 48.05 39.58 46.20 44.68 41.60 44.74 Panicum repens 52.81 47.78 50.49 43.31 40.82 46.78 49.00 48.14 Chrysopogan montanus 47.25 47.75 44.01 45.00 45.32 49.19 45.16 46.24 Sehima nervosum 49.93 39.27 38.89 37.27 37.80 38.47 37.47 38.44 Heteropogon contortus 51.57 51.56 50.21 44.35 46.34 44.45 45.49 47.74 Monthly average 49.50 45.81 47.41 42.30 45.72 46.00 45.48 46.03 Nitrogen-free-extract Table VII shows the changes occurring in nitrogen-free-extract during the period of investigation and it is seen that there is good similarity of variation in different species. Comparing the data with protein content, it is seen that nitrogen-free- extract varied inversely with protein. First cutting gave maximum content of nitrogen-free-extract. While protein content was minimum and it was exactly the reverse in the fourth cutting. The variations in nitrogen-free-exract and crude fibre are almost similar. Crude-ash, silica and insoluble residue, and silicia-free-ash Out of these three constituents silica-free-ash is the more valuable portion of the crude ash as it provides more accurate estimate of mineral contents of the plants, but other two constituents from the basis of determining the mineral constituents. Both crude ash, silica and insoluble residue varied in manner similar to crude protein. Silica and insoluble residue were mainly responsible for the changes in the crude ash content of the grasses. The variation in silica-free-ash tended to follow variations in crude ash and crude protein, but not so regularly. Thus silica-free-ash averaged highest in the samples collected on 1 June, while average crude protein and crude ash reached their peak values in the fourth cutting. Pennisetum orientale gave the highest average silica-free-ash content of 6.79 per cent while in Heteropogon contortus it averaged least and was 4.09 per cent of the dry matter.
196 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE VIII Variations in crude-ash content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 8.59 15.48 13.54 20.64 13.13 12.08 12.81 13.75 Amphilophis odorata 9.07 11.88 12.09 13.41 11.64 10.79 14.79 11.95 Iseilema laxum 11.78 13.21 15.76 16.43 12.38 11.22 15.24 13.72 Themeda trimula 8.08 10.98 10.12 11.89 10.80 10.47 12.91 10.75 Amphilophis glabra 10.17 14.91 14.34 22.19 14.93 13.08 15.58 15.03 Pennisetum orientale 13.07 18.62 15.26 18.94 12.84 16.02 17.85 16.09 Panicum repens 10.33 14.46 11.93 16.50 12.14 10.95 12.99 12.76 Chrysopogan montanus 15.18 13.07 15.88 14.26 12.78 11.30 15.57 14.01 Sehima nervosum 19.08 19.16 20.13 20.84 20.60 19.75 23.12 20.53 Heteropogon contortus 12.72 12.14 13.28 13.37 14.07 15.07 17.79 14.06 Monthly average 11.81 14.39 14.33 16.85 13.53 13.07 15.87 14.27 TABLE IX Variations in silica and insoluble residue content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 4.52 10.68 10.06 15.45 9.10 7.75 9.21 9.54 Amphilophis odorata 5.41 7.30 7.74 8.39 7.75 7.02 10.59 7.74 Iseilema laxum 6.70 8.00 11.60 11.25 7.87 6.69 10.80 8.99 Themeda trimula 4.49 5.17 5.22 6.59 5.98 6.21 7.60 5.89 Amphilophis glabra 6.03 9.76 10.66 16.51 10.34 8.64 11.39 10.47 Pennisetum orientale 6.15 8.95 8.69 9.66 8.63 10.21 12.80 9.30 Panicum repens 5.73 8.76 7.27 10.98 6.83 7.33 8.41 7.90 Chrysopogan montanus 9.73 8.02 11.89 9.40 8.13 7.55 10.40 9.30 Sehima nervosum 13.95 13.85 17.81 16.54 16.24 16.35 18.89 16.23 Heteropogon contortus 7.65 8.33 10.66 9.13 9.41 11.53 13.48 10.03 Monthly average 7.04 8.88 10.16 11.39 9.03 9.93 11.36 9.54
September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS TABLE X Variations in silica-free-ash content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 4.07 4.80 3.48 5.19 4.03 4.33 3.60 4.21 Amphilophis odorata 3.66 4.58 4.35 5.02 3.89 3.77 4.20 4.21 Iseolema laxum 5.08 5.21 4.16 5.18 4.51 4.53 4.44 4.73 Themeda trimula 3.59 5.81 4.90 5.30 4.82 4.26 5.31 4.86 Amphilophis glabra 4.14 5.15 3.69 5.68 4.59 4.44 4.19 4.55 Pennisetum orientate 6.92 9.67 6.57 9.28 4.21 5.81 5.05 6.79 Panicum repens 4.60 5.70 4.66 5.52 5.31 3.62 4.58 4.85 Chrysopogan montanus 5.45 5.05 3.99 4.86 4.65 3.75 5.17 4.70 Sehima nervosum 5.13 5.31 3.32 4.30 4.36 3.40 4.23 4.29 Heteropogon contortus 5.07 3.81 2.62 4.24 4.66 3.54 4.31 4.09 Monthly average 4.77 5.51 4.17 5.40 4.50 4.15 4.51 4.72 Table XI Variations in lime (CaO) content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-0-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 0.96 0.88 0.95 0.92 0.93 1.02 1.08 0.96 Amphilophis odorata 0.92 0.68 0.82 0.79 0.86 0.99 1.20 0.88 Iseilema laxum 1.30 0.99 1.11 0.73 0.89 0.97 1.07 1.01 Themeda trimula 0.86 0.80 1.08 0.66 0.72 1.15 0.89 0.88 Amphilophis glabra 0.83 0.86 0.97 0.82 0.94 1.01 1.15 0.94 Pennisetum orientale 0.81 0.82 0.92 0.72 0.68 0.88 0.95 0.83 Panicum repens 0.67 0.79 0.71 0.37 0.85 0.59 0.70 0.67 Chrysopogan montanus 1.63 1.24 1.32 1.06 1.09 1.05 1.35 1.25 Sehima nervosum 1.17 0.86 0.86 0.94 1.28 1.00 1.33 1.06 Heteropogon contortus 0.72 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.85 0.93 l.06 0.79 Monthly average 0.98 0.86 0.94 0.77 0.91 0.96 1.08 0.93
198 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE XII Variations in phosphoric acid (P2 O 5) content (percentage expressed on dry matter basis) Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 0.56 0.75 0.72 0.82 0.78 0.85 0.70 0.74 Amphilophis odorata 0.52 0.51 0.46 0.66 0.60 0.65 0.55 0.56 Iseilema laxum 0.63 0.76 0.73 0.77 0.78 0.87 0.74 0.75 Themeda trimula 0.49 0.75 0.68 0.73 0.70 0.75 0.60 0.67 Amphilophis glabra 0.48 0.68 0.61 0.88 0.66 0.68 0.60 0.66 Pennisetum orientate 0.69 0.93 0.79 1.24 0.74 0.73 0.74 0.84 Panicum repens 0.45 0.87 0.82 0.99 0.63 0.69 0.63 0.73 Chrysopogan montanus 0.56 0.76 0.47 0.77 0.64 0.61 0.60 0.63 Sehima nervosum 0.52 0.64 0.50 0.79 0.57 0.57 0.55 0.59 Heteropogon contorlus 0.64 0.58 0.51 0.81 0.65 0.74 0.76 0.67 Monthly average 0.55 0.72 0.63 0.85 0.68 0.71 0.65 0.68 Lime and phosphoric acid The changes in the lime and phosphoric acid contents are represented in the Tables XI and XII respectively. It is seen that the two constituents displayed variations opposite to each other throughout the investigation. Phosphoric acid contents of the grasses increased after the first cutting while lime content slightly decreased. The opposite variations in the two constituents became marked in the most humid part of the season. The samples collected on 31 July after the heaviest monthly rainfall recorded maximum phosphoric acid content and minimum lime content. After this percentage of lime increased with each successive cutting while that of phosphoric acid decreased. It is noteworthy that though the percentage of phosphoric acid decreased at the end of the investigation the value was still higher than that in the first cutting. This maintenance of high percentage of phosphoric acid is the result of systematic continuous cutting on the grasses and is thus of practical significance. It has been reported that phosphoric acid content of Indian grasses is low, but in this investigation it has been found that phosphoric acid remained fairly high throughout and even in certain cases exceeded the lime content. This tendency of phosphoric acid to exceed lime content was marked in Panicum repens and Pennisetum orientale, though similar tendencies were noted in Iseilema laxum, Themeda trimula, Amphilophis glabra and Heteropogon contortus in samples collected on 31 July. It is also found that the dry matter of individual grasses showed wide variations in their percentage of lime and phosphoric acid, though the variation trends were almost similar in all the grasses. Again comparing these data of phosphoric acid
September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS 199 and lime with the crude protein it is found that there was a parallelism between variations in crude protein and phosphoric acid contents while lime. varied inversely with both of them. Similar variations between crude protein and phosphoric acid and lime were reported by Ramiah [1933] in his investigation on spear grass. Wood- man and his associates [1926] also noticed a rough parallelism between crude protein and phosphoric acid and opposite variations in lime content of the herbage kept short by mowing. Ray and Sen [1933] found that both phosphoric acid and lime increased with the incidence of rain. The different grasses can be best evaluated as to their mineral content by comparing the analytical data with the requirements of the cattle. Black, Tash, Jones and Kleberg [1943] report that phosphorus content of 0.13 per cent (P205= 0.30 per cent) and calcium content of 0.23 per cent (CaO=0.32 per cent) of the dry matter of the vegetation consumed are generally accepted as the minimum quantities of these elements required by range cattle. The data show that none of the grasses studied fell short of these requirements at any period of investigation, on the other hand considerably higher values were obtained in most of the cases. Morrison [1945] on the basis of the recommendations of Huffman and his associates states that the ration of 1200 lb. cow producing about 30 lb. of milk per day should con- tain 0.23 per cent phosphorus (P2O5=0.53 per cent). It is found that under monthly system of cutting the average phosphoric acid content in each species of grass is higher than this value, though in certain cuttings it fell below the value of 0.53 per cent P205 in the sample collected before the onset of rains. Among those grasses which fell below this value during any cutting is Amphilophis odorata in all the three cuttings taken before the rains. TABLE XIII Variations in lime/phosphoric acid ratio Names of grasses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 31-7-49 5th 30-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Dichanthium annulatum 1.71 1.17 1.32 1.12 1.19 1.20 1.54 1.32 Amphilophis odorata 1.58 1.33 1.78 1.20 1.43 1.52 2.18 1.57 Iseilcma lacum 2.06 1.30 1.44 0.95 1.14 1.11 1.44 1.35 Themeda trimula 1.76 1.07 1.59 0.90 1.04 1.58 1.48 1.34 Amphilophis glabra 1.73 1.26 1.59 0.93 1.42 1.49 1.49 1.42 Pennisetum orientale 1.17 0.88 1.16 0.58 0.92 1.21 1.30 1.03 Panicum repens 1.49 0.91 0.87 0.37 1.35 0.86 1.11 0.99 Chrysopogan montanus 2.91 1.63 2.81 1.38 1.70 1.72 2.25 2.06 Sehima nervosum 2.25 1.34 1.72 1.19 2.25 1.75 2.42 1.85 Heteropogon contortus 1.13 1.12 1.27 0.80 1.31 1.26 1.39 1.18 Monthly average 1.78 1.20 1.56 0.94 1.38 1.37 1.66 1.41
200 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III, Lime/Phosphoric acid ratio Another factor responsible for the proper assimilation of the two constituents is the ratio in which these minerals occur in the rations of animals. As stated before these constituents in a well-balanced ration should be present in an approximate ratio of 1 to 1.5 parts of lime for each part of phosphoric acid. It is seen that monthly cutting keeps the lime/phosphoric acid ratio (Table XIII) quite near to the standard ; but in certain cases wider or narrower ratio was also obtained. The wider ratio (excess of CaO over P2O5) was obtained in some samples collected during dry months, i.e. in the beginning of May and end of October ; while narrower values (excess of P2O5 over CaO) was obtained in some samples collected at the end of July, which month also had the heaviest rainfall. It is, therefore, recommended that rations composed solely of these grasses individually may with advantage be supplemented with phosphoric acid concentrates during very dry periods. While lime concentrates may be added during very humid period to get a balanced ration as regards these minerals. But it will not be advisable to add P205 concentrates to rations composed of Pennisetum orientale and Panicum repens at any part of the seasons. Similarly lime concentrates should not be added to the rations composed of Chrysopogon mon tanus or Sehima nervosum, but on the other hand these grasses may with advantage be supplemented with P205 concentrates throughout except during very humid part of season, when these grasses become balanced with respect to these minerals. The CaO/P2O5 ratio tended to deviate less from the standard in case of Dichan thium annulatum, Heteropogon contortus, Amphilophis glabra and Themeda trimula and therefore these grasses may be taken best as regards mineral nutrition under monthly system of cutting. TABLE XIV Variations in percentage of original moisture Names of gra sses Number and date of cutting Average 1st 2-5-49 2nd 1-6-49 3rd 1-7-49 4th 13-7-49 5th 39-8-49 6th 28-9-49 7th 28-10-49 Diehanthium annulatum 45.6 60.4 58.9 75.8 67.8 67.8 56.4 61.8 Amphilophis odarata 50.6 63.5 62.8 77.0 71.2 70.7 63.6 65.6 Iseilema laxum 40.0 63.2 54.9 78.3 74.1 72.3 55.1 62.6 Themeda trimula 47.2 70.5 51.0 83.4 78.3 77.5 67.3 67.9 Amphilophis glabra 54.2 66.4 63.7 78.4 69.2 68.9 58.9 65.7 Pennisetum orientale 66.9 73.1 69.8 84.2 71.6 73.8 66.6 72.4 Panicum repens 62.8 65.1 61.5 77.6 75.4 75.1 64.3 68.8 Chrysopogan montanus 56.2 60.6 59.2 75.6 72.4 74.6 67.6 66.6 Sehima nervosum 55.7 61.2 58.4 77.5 68.5 68.6 64.5 64.5 Heteropogon contortus 50.5 59.5 54.3 78.9 71.3 76.0 56.6 63.9 Monthly average 53.0 64.4 59.5 78.7 72.0 72.5 61.8 66.0
September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS 201 Original moisture The changes in the moisture content are represented in Table XIV. These variations are similar to crude protein and phosphoric acid while opposite to each of crude fibre and nitrogen-free-extract. It appears, therefore, that moisture con- tent is a good indication of the nutrient contents of grasses under monthly system of cutting. Yield per acre To compare the relative out-turn of nutrients by various grasses during the period of investigation total yields of green matter, dry matter, crude protein, lime and phosphoric acid have been calculated and given in Table XV. TABLE XV The yields of green matter, dry matter, crude protein, lime and phosphoric acid in pounds per acre Names of grasses Green matter Dry matter Crude protein Lime Phosphoric acid Dichanthium annulatum 16740 7364 328 70 48 Amphilophis odorata 42795 15609 876 114 85 Iseilema laxum 10710 3138 245 29 24 Themeda trimula 57210 17905 1320 147 106 Amphilophis glabra 15424 5431 376 47 34 Pennisetum orientale 24402 6220 459 50 51 Panicum repens 20253 6252 499 41 38 Chrysopogon montanus 15360 5228 435 63 33 Sehima nervosum 38628 13194 1126 135 79 Heteropogon contortus 24540 8308 562 59 53 The highest yields of green matter, dry matter, crude protein, lime and phos- phoric acid are given by Themeda trimula. Amphilophis odorata ranks second as regards yield of green and dry matter and phosphoric acid, while Sehima nervosum is second best in case of yield of lime and crude protein per acre. The lowest values of yields of various constituents per acre are recorded in case of Iseilema laxum. Correlation co-efficients It has been pointed out during the course of discussion that there is a close parallelism between variations in crude protein and phosphoric acid, while lime varied generally in a manner opposite to both of them. To ascertain whether these correlated variations have any statistical significance, the data were subjected to 5AR/53
202 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III statistical examination. Table XVI gives correlation co-efficients between crude protein and each of phosphoric acid and lime contents of different grasses. TABLE XVI Correlation co-efficients Names of grasses Crude protein and phosphoric acid Crude protein and lime Corr. coeff. r.* Significance Corr. coeff. r. Significance Dichanthium annulatum +0.9160 Highly significant September, 1953] N. NATH AND N. B. DAS 203 correlation co-efficients in case of Iseilema laxum to positive ones in case of Amphi- lophis odorata and Amphilophis glabra. Most of the grasses have negative though . not significant correlation co-efficients between crude protein and lime. This leads to the conclusion that the positive correlation co-efficients between crude protein and phosphoric acid indicate some sort of association between the two constituents in continuously cut grasses. SUMMARY Investigations were undertaken to study the effect of monthly cuts on the chemical composition of ten Indian grasses. (1) Monthly cuts were found to maintain the protein, phosphoric acid, lime and ether extract contents of different grasses fairly high during the period of investiga- tion. The percentage of crude protein and phosphoric acid seldom fell below that recorded for the first cutting. While considerably higher values were obtained in the samples collected after the onset of rains. Lime phosphoric acid ratio deviated less from the standard in most of the cases under monthly system of cutting. (2) There was a close parallelism between the variations in crude protein and phosphoric acid throughout the investigation, while lime generally varied inversely to both of them. (3) Ether extract increased with crude protein after first cutting but afterwards was subjected to less variations which were not regular in all the species. There was sharp decline in ether extract content of all grasses at the end of the investigation. (4) Crude fibre and nitrogen-free-extract tended to display variations opposite to crude protein, but crude fibre was somewhat variant throughout. (5) Crude ash, silica and insoluble residue, and silica-free-ash varied in a way similar to crude protein and phosphoric acid but variations in silica-free-ash were not so regular. (6) Changes in original moisture were related to crude protein and phosphoric acid. (7) Yields of green matter, dry matter, crude protein, lime and phosphoric acid per acre for different grasses have been calculated. Maximum output of different constituents was obtained in case of Themeda trimula, while it was least in Iseilema laxum. (8) Statistical examination of the results gave positive and in most cases signi- ficant correlation co-efficients between crude protein and phosphoric acid contents of different grasses indicating some sort of association between the two. Correla- tion co-efficients in case of crude protein and lime varied from highly significant negative correlation co-efficients to positive ones, but in most of the grasses, the correlation co-efficients were negative though not significant. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT Thanks are due to Mr P. M. Dabadghao, Assistant Agrostologist, Division of Agronomy, for his help in the collection of samples of grasses and in supplying information about their habits of growth and the places from which these grasses
204 EFFECT OF MONTHLY CUTS ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION [Vol. XXIII, Part III were brought. We are also thankful to Dr P. Saxena, Statistician, for statistical examination of the results. REFERENCES Association of Official Agricultural Chemists (1940). Official and Tentative Methods of Analysis, Washington D. C. Black, W. H., Tash, L. H., Jones, J. M. and Kleberg, R. J., Jr. (1943). U. S. Dept. Agri. Tech. Bull. 856 Blatter, E. and McCann, C. (1935). I. C. A. R. Sci. Monogr. 5 Bor, N. L. (1940). Indian For. Rec. Bot. 2, 1 Burns, W. (1916). Bombay Dept. Agri. Bull. 78 Christensen, F. W. and Happer, T. H. (1933). Wis. Agric. Expt. Sta. Bull. 260 Dharmani, L. C. and Atam Singh (1946). Indian J. Agric. Sci. 16, 284 Duthie, J. F. (1883). The fodder grasses of Northern India Jacob, K. C. (1945). Indian Fmg. 6, 3 Lander, P. E. (1942). I. C. A. R. Misc. Bull. 16 Lisoba, J. C. (1896). List of Bombay Grasses and their Uses Morrison, F. B. (1945). Feeds and Feedings Narindar Nath and Das, N. B. (1952). Indian J. vet. Sci. (In Press) Ramiah, P. V. (1933). Indian J. vet. Sci. 3, 65 Ranga Achariyar, K. (1921). A Hand book of South Indian Grasses Ray, A. C. and Sen, K. C. (1933). Agric. Live Stk. India, 3, 437 Warth, F. J. (1924). Agric. J. India, 19, 600 Woodman, H. E., Blunt, D. L., Stewart, J. (1926). J. agric. Sci. 16, 205 Woodman, H. E., Bee, J. W., Griffith, G. (1930). J. agric. Sci. 20, 53
EFFECT OF SHADING AND SPRINKLING ON CATTLE AND BUFFALOES IN EGYPT By M. T. RAGAB, M. A. GHANY, and A. A. ASKER, Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Fouad I University, Cairo, Egypt (Received for publication on 13 February, 1952) THE summer season in Egypt was found to be the most critical season of the, year as far as the comfort of cattle and buffaloes is concerned [Badreldin, et al. 1951]. When animals were exposed to sun during summer, the buffaloes showed more discomfort than cattle [Asker, et al., 1952]. In many other countries, cooling treatments have been tried to keep the animals in comfort during the hot season of the year with more or less success. Minett [1947], Sinha and Minett [1947], showed that, hosing, sprinkling or wallowing in water, caused an appreciable reduction in body temperature of both cattle and buffaloes. Seath and Miller [1947-1948] found that either shade alone, or water sprinkling followed by shade reduced the body temperature and respiration rate of dairy cattle. They also observed that combining the two procedures was more effective in bringing the animals back to their normal conditions. In this study, it was interesting to investigate the effect of shading and sprinkling on body temperature, respiration and pulse rates during the hot days of the summer season. The experiment was carried out on buffaloes, Egyptian cattle, pure Jerseys, pure and graded Shorthorn cows. MATERIAL AND EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE Five groups of mature females were used in this study. The first group was composed of eight buffaloes, the second of nine Egyptian cows, the third of two pure Jerseys, the fourth of three pure Shorthorns, and the fifth of eight graded Shorthorns. Animals after being exposed to sun for two hours, between 10-12 A.M., for six hot days [Asker, et al., 1952], were subjected to different cooling treatments. They were either put dry under shade, indoor or outdoor, or were sprinkled before shading. The shading indoor took place by installing the animals in a covered milking stable, while shading outdoor took place under big shady trees. Sprinkling was made by a specially constructed shower which enabled the water to cover the animals from all possible sides. Body temperature, respiration rate and pulse rate were hourly measured, in the usual ways, during the time of exposure and cooling. Also the average air temperature and relative humidity were recorded during the period of study (Table I). 205 5 AR/53
206 EFFECT OF SHADING AND SPRINKLING [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE I Average air temperature and relative humidity during experimental days Treatment Before exposure After one hour After two hours Air temp. °C. Relative humidity per cent Air temp. °C. Relative humidity per cent Air temp. °C. Relative humidity per cent Shading outdoor 32.9 52 33.0 47 33.0 47 Shading indoor 33.3 51 32.0 38 32.0 38 Sprinkling 3 min. then shading indoor 32.3 53 33.5 40 .. .. Sprinkling 3 min. then shading outdoor 33.3 51 34.0 45 34.0 45 Sprinkling 5 min. then shading outdoor 32.3 53 33.8 35 .. .. RESULTS 1. Shading outdoor In this treatment, buffaloes, Egyptian cattle and pure Shorthorns were only used. After one hour of shading, body temperature, respiration and pulse rates decreased in variable rates and differently, according to the groups of animals used. Body temperature decreased more remarkably in the case of buffaloes and Shorthorns than Egyptian cattle. The rate of decrease was 1.3 per cent and 0.26 per cent for the two former groups of animals and the latter one respectively. As far as respiration rate was concerned, the percentage of decrease was far much greater than in the case of body temperature. The decrease was 52.3 per cent, 47.8 per cent and 24.5 per cent for buffaloes, pure Shorthorns and Egyptian cattle respectively. The decrease in pulse rate was different in its magnitude than either body temperature or respiration rate ; it was greater in the case of pure Shorthorns being 8.2 per cent compared to 3.7 per cent for buffaloes and 4.5 per cent for Egyptian cattle. At the end of the second hour in shade, body temperature decreased in both buffaloes and native cattle, while practically no further decrease was noticed in the case of Shorthorns. The decrease was 1.8 per cent and 0.52 per cent for buffaloes and Egyptian cattle from the initial body temperature after exposure to sun. The respiration rate after two hours of shading continued to decrease in all groups of animals The decrease was more noticeable in the case of buffaloes and pure Shorthorns. The pulse rate also continued to decrease after shading for two hours in all groups of animals. The Egyptian cattle was noticed to show the less rate of decrease either after one or two hours of shading.
September, 1953] M.T. RAGAB, M.A. GHANY, AND A. A. ASKER 207 TABLE II Shading outdoors for two hours Animals Items before exposure to sun Items after exposure to sun Change after one hour in shade Change after two hours in shade B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. Buffaloes 37.6 17.8 24.1 38.8 33.3 27.2 208 EFFECT OF SHADING AND SPRINKLING [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE III Shading indoors for two hours Animals Items before exposure to sun Items after exposure to sun Change after one hour in shade Change after two hours in shade B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. Buffaloes 37.6 15.0 24.8 38.7 37.4 27.4 September, 1953] M.T. RAGAB, M.A. GHANY, AND A. A. ASKER 209 2. Shading indoors There was a decrease in body temperature of the animals after staying in the shade for one hour (Table III). The rate of decrease in body temperature was in the following order : First, the pure Shorthorn, then buffaloes, pure Jerseys, Shorthorn grades, followed lastly by native cattle. The decrease in respiration rate was highest in buffaloes being 50.8 per cent followed by pure Shorthorns, Shorthorn grades (both 38.3 per cent), then the pure Jerseys (33.8 per cent) and then the native cattle (31.6 per cent). The change in pulse rate did not follow the same trend previously noticed for body temperature or respiration rate. After two hours of shading the animals, body temperature and respiration rate continued to decrease in all groups except the native cattle, which did not show any change, while the pure Shorthorns were slightly affected. The pulse rate, decreased in all groups of animals except the pure Jerseys and Shorthorn grades. The rate of decrease in body temperature after one hour of shading indoor was in general less than that of shading outdoor. This may be due to the effect of air movement outdoor which will undoubtedly have a decreasing effect on body temperatue. 3. Sprinkling for three minutes followed by shading indoor for one hour The effect of this treatment on animals was much pronounced in body tempera- ture, respiration rate and pulse rate than shading only for one hour (Table IV). This is due to the combined effect of sprinkling and shading. The effect of sprinkling is mainly due to the heat loss which happens as a result to the vaporization of water from the surface of the animal's body. 4. Sprinkling for three minutes followed by shading outdoor for two hours It is noticed from Table V that this treatment caused a decrease in each of the three items after one hour and two hours. The rate of decrease in body temperature after one hour was just the same as that of the previous treatment (No. 3) in the case of Shorthorn grades only. The decrease in body temperature of buffaloes and native cattle was 1.8 per cent and 0.52 per cent for both groups of animals respec- tively. The rate of decrease in body temperature in the case of pure Jerseys and pure Shorthorns was not much different than what was noticed for other groups of animals. After two hours of shading indoor, no much change was noticed in the body temperature of both Egyptian cattle and Shorthorn grades. In all other groups of animals body temperature kept on decreasing with the buffaloes having the highest rate of decrease. The respiration rate did not change considerably after two hours of shading in all groups of animals. It seems that the change in this item takes place after putting the animals in the shade, but did not appreciably change since that time. The pulse rate did not follow a clear cut trend in all groups of animals. It is worth noting that, when sprinkling was practised before shading, pulse rate showed a slight increase in some groups of animals. Perhaps the vaporization from the cooled skin may play a part in increasing the pulse rate.
210 EFFECT OF SHADING AND SPRINKLING [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE IV Sprinkling for three minutes then shading indoors for one hour Animals Items before exposure to sun Items after exposure to sun After sprinkling and shading B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. Buffaloes 37.5 16.2 21.5 38.9 39.5 26.0 September, 1953] M.T. RAGAB, M.A. GHANY, AND A. A. ASKER 211 TABLE V Sprinkling for three minutes then shading outdoors for two hours Animals Items before exposure to sun Items after exposure to sun Change after one hour in shade Change after two hours in shade B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. Buffaloes 37.7 19.3 25.2 39.1 40.0 20.6 212 EFFECT OF SHADING AND SPRINKLING [Vol. XXIII, Part III, TABLE VI Sprinkling for five minutes then shading outdoors for one hour Animals Items before exposure to sun Items after exposure to sun After sprinkling and shading B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. B. T. R. R. P. R. Buffaloes 37.7 16.2 22.0 39.0 35.3 25.0 September, 1953] M.T. RAGAB, M.A. GHANY, AND A. A. ASKER 213 5. Sprinkling for five minutes followed by shading outdoor for one hour As it is shown in Table VI, this procedure caused a decline in both body tem- perature and respiration rate in all groups of animals except native cattle. The difference between the effect of this treatment and that of sprinkling for three minutes then shading outdoor for one hour was not appreciable. Increasing the time of sprinkling from 3 to 5 minutes does not seem to be responsible for making the animals feel more comfortable. The pulse rate as in all other treatments was not consistent in its magnitude. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS The use of shade whether outdoor or indoor, preceded by a sprinkling, was investigated as a means of combatting the unfavourable effects of hot atmospheric conditions on buffaloes, Egyptian cattle, pure and graded Shorthorns and pure Jerseys. The idea of trying those different procedures was to know the best system of management which will be more elaborate in keeping those animals comfortable under Egyptian summer conditions. The methods of sprinkling adopted in this investigation did not cause a remarkable decline in body temperature, respiration rate and pulse rate of animals to justify its use. This may be due to the limited air movement at such time of the year. Moreover, sprinkling was practised for a rather short time (3 and 5 minutes), com- pared to longer periods of time previously recorded by Seath and Miller [1947, 1948a and 1948b]. Sprinkling, hosing or any other water wetting device, would not appreciably affect the animals' temperature and respiration rate unless they are either practised on the animals for a sufficiently long time or followed by an artificial moving current of air. Thus the animals could keep their normal body temperature through the dissipation of excess heat by conduction and vapori- zation. Sprinkling, in general, is not the kind of treatment which is advised to the Egyptian farmer, since it needs special devices not available in the country at the present time, and if sought, they will be costly and beyond his means. When sprinkling was followed by shading, the combined effect resulted in bringing the animals to their normal conditions more rapidly after one hour of shading. Shading was proved to be the most favourable cooling treatment discussed in this study. When it was practised outdoor, its effect was noticed quickly and in a more pronounced way than in the case of indoors. The abundance of shade outdoor where there are trees, makes this system of cooling the most appropriate and highly recommended to the farmer in this country. At any rate, if animal production is to be practised more intensively in the Egyptian agriculture, it becomes necessary to think of building airy and shady types of housing for animals. In comparing the different groups of animals used in this experiment, the Egyptian cattle was found to be very stable in its reactions to the different treat- ments. This, added to its ability to withstand exposure to sun [Asker, et al., 1952], denotes to its profound suitability for the environmental conditions in this country. The buffaloes and pure Shorthorns were the most sensitive to the effect of exposure to sun ; here they also proved to be the most sensitive in their reactions to shade and sprinkling, since their temperature and respiration rate decreased more rapidly. 5AR/53
214 EFFECT OF SHADING AND SPRINKLING [Vol. XXIII, Part III, The quick response of buffaloes and pure Shorthorns to shade is difficult to explain. As far as farm work is concerned, the Egyptian cattle should be the only depend- able animals in this respect especially in summer time, since work means, in other words, exposure to sun. SUMMARY The effect of shading outdoor, shading indoor, either preceded by sprinkling for 3 and 5 minutes or not, were investigated as means of keeping down the body temperature, and respiration rate of buffaloes, Egyptian cattle, pure Jerseys and pure and graded Shorthorns during the summer season. The results obtained could be summarized in the following : 1. Body temperature, after shading for one hour outdoor, was reduced by 1.3 per cent, 0.25 per cent and 1.3 per cent for buffaloes, native cattle and pure Shorthorns respectively. After two hours of shading, the decrease in body tem- perature amounted to 1.8 per cent for the buffaloes and 0.52 per cent in Egyptian cattle. The Shorthorns did not show any further sign of decline in this respect. Respiration rate followed the same trend in general but the rate of decline was different in its percentage. The pulse rate was not similar for any of the two readings previously discussed. 2. The animals after shading indoor for one hour ranked in their rate of de- crease in body temperature as follows : Pure Shorthorns, buffaloes, pure Jerseys, Shorthorn grades and native cattle. As far as their respiration rate is concerned, the rate of decrease was highest in buffaloes being 50.8 per cent, followed by pure Shorthorns and Shorthorn grades (both 38.3 per cent) then the pure Jerseys (33.8 per cent) and comes last the native cattle being 31.6 per cent. After two hours both body temperature and respiration continued to decrease in all animals except native cattle. 3. Sprinkling for three minutes followed by shading indoors for one hour was more effective in keeping down body temperature and respiration rate than shading only. 4. Sprinkling for three minutes followed by shading outdoors for two hours caused a decrease in body temperature, respiration and pulse rates after one hour in all animals in general. Their reaction after two hours was different. 5. Sprinkling for five minutes followed by shading outdoor for one hour caused a decline in body temperature and respiration rate in all animals. The difference in time between this treatment and that of three minutes did not seem to have a more appreciable effect on body temperature and respiration rate. 6. In all treatments, the pulse rate was affected, but it had no special trend as it was noticed for both body temperature and respiration rate. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors wish to express their thanks to Prof. A. L. Badreldin of the Animal Breeding Department for his interest in this work. His criticisms are also very much appreciated.
September, 1953] M.T. RAGAB, M.A. GHANY, AND A. A. ASKER 215 REFERENCES Asker, A. A., Ghany, M. A. and Ragab, M. T. (1952). Indian J. Dairy Sci. 5, 171-182 Badreldin, A. L., Oloufa, M. M., Asker, A. A. and Ghany, M. A. (1951). Fouad I Univ., Fac. Agri. Bull. 4 Minett, F. C. (1947). J. Anim. Sci. 6, 35-49 Seath, D. M. and Miller, G. D. (1947). J. Dairy Sci. 30, 255-261 Seath, D. M. and Miller, G. D. (1948a). J. Anim. Sci. 7, 251-256 Seath, D. M. and Miller, G. D. (1948b). J. Dairy Sci. 31, 361-366 Sinha, K. C. and Minett, F. C. (1947). J. Anim. Sci. 6 258-264
ABSTRACTS Interim report on research on foot and mouth disease at the Research Institute, Pirbright Surrey (1952). Brit. Vet. J. 108, 359-367 INTERIM report of work done on foot and mouth disease at Pirbright for the last 12 years had brought a number of interesting facts to light. It has been found that pigs are more susceptible than cattle and that there is species specificity ; pig's strain will spread more quickly in pigs than in cattle and vice versa. Different strains of virus within each type, differ in severity of the disease they cause and the ease with which they spread. Three new types from outbreaks in S. Africa have been identified. Virus has been found to consist of two components, the larger gives a positive complement fixation test and is infective, and the smaller is positive to complement fixation test, but non-infective. Complement fixation test has been further developed to determine the strain of virus and this can be done within a few hours of the receipt of material from a suspected outbreak. This test is also used for differential diagnosis, against diseases like vesicular stomatitis. Vaccine has been prepared by cultivating virus in the tongue of animals slaugh- tered for food. These vaccines have been found as useful as the ones prepared in live cattle which are much more expensive. It has been found possible to infect unweaned mice, and this suggests another source of cultivating virus for vaccine production. Immunity lasts for four months only. It has been shown that all body tissues of infected carcasses are capable of transmitting infection. Quick frozen meat and its wrappings were found to be more dangerous than meat frozen by ordinary methods or chilled. [H. K. L.] The treatment of Johne's disease in cattle. FORD, E. T. H. (1952). Brit. Vet. J. 108, 411-418 SIX cases of Johne's disease in cattle were treated, three with T. B. I and three with streptomycin. No cures were obtained, but in one case Mycobacterium johnei failed to grow from intestines and mesenteric glands at post mortem. (Author's own summary.) [H. K. L.] The sheep dog218 ABSTRACT Vol. XXIII, Part III, unbalanced. During the lambing season, when hill farmer has to walk about 25 miles a day, sheep dog may have to do as much as 90 to 100 miles a day. Most of these sheep dogs belong to the Border Collic type weighing about 30 to 50 lb. and measuring about 18 to 22 inches at shoulder height. The common daily ration of sheep dog consisted of a mixture of ½ lb. maize meal, ½ lb. oat meal and ½ pint of milk, in addition to table scrap, occasionally rabbit or horse flesh and sheep placentia during the lambing season. Analytical study of this diet found it to be deficient in calcium, nicotinic acid and possibly in riboflarin and vitamin D. All these defi- ciencies, if made up, would naturally lead to general improvement of the sheep dog's health. In author's opinion, the high standard of health generally attributed to the sheep dog, was more apparent than real. The active working life of a hill collie while intense, was of relatively short duration and the arduous and exacting work performed was a reflection of his inherent devotion to duty rather than of a high level of robust health. [H. K. L.] Observations on the behaviour of rinderpest virus in indigenous African sheep, PLOWRIGHT W. (1952). Brit. Vet. J. 103, 12 KABETE strain of rinderpest virus and a field strain of virus, produced incon- sistent temperature reaction in indigenous fat-tailed hairy sheep and temporary viraemia. The quantity of virus as evident from blood inoculation of infected sheep to cattle reached its maximum at the 5th to 6th day ; it persisted at least until the 9th day and had disappeared by the 13th day. There was no contact infection of sheep to sheep, except in one case or from cattle to infected sheep. (These observations on susceptibly of sheep to rinderpest made are similar to those in this country during the past few years, of which, how- ever, no reference has been made by the author at all.) [H. K. L.]
REVIEW HOME DOCTORING OF ANIMALS BY HAROLD LEENEY (Revised by C. G. Saunders) (Published by ' Farm and Stock-Breeder ', London, 1952) THIS is the fifth edition of a popular book, largely rewritten and brought up-to- date by Saunders. It is intended to serve as a guide to the home treatment of diseases, injuries and ailments of domestic animals and poultry. It also includes information on the difficulties and diseases connected with parturition, nursing and feeding of sick animals, trammelling, and performance of operations within the scope of the layman. There are chapters on poisons and their antidotes, recent drugs, antiseptics and formulae for making up a wide variety of safe and approved medicines and methods of administering drugs. The book is meant primarily for the use of educated stock-owning public in western countries, where the horse is the chief farm animal. It is written in simple, lucid language easily understandable by the layman, and is provided with sufficient instructive illustrations. Admirably providing for the requirements of stock-owners in western countries, the book deals mostly with diseases occurring in their animals ; and to this extent its usefulness to the Indian livestock owner is limited, who will find only a meagre or no mention about several important common diseases of animals in his country, nor will the measures for the control of the scheduled diseases in those countries be applicable in India. (H. D. S.) 219 MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK AND FEEDS OF SAHIWAL COWS FROM PRECALVING PERIOD TO THE END OF LACTATION By M. L. Mathur and S. V. Desai, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi (Received for publication on 6 April 1951*) (With 13 text-figures) IN our previous publication [1945], we had pointed out the trend of calcium and phosphorus contents of pre-milk and milk after lactation in Sahiwal cows. The present paper is the result of the continuation of the studies in thirteen cows from precalving period to the end of lactation. The composition of milk in high, medium and low milking cows, with respect to any possible effect of the various feeds on it, was studied throughout the pre-lactation, lactation and gestation period. The object was to study if there were and if so to what extent, variation in the percentage, ratio and total outgo of calcium and phosphorus in relation to the yield of milk, age and stage of lactation. Four high milking, four medium milking and five low milking cows, whose par- ticulars are given in Table I, were selected for the experiment. TABLE I Particulars of the cows Group Names of the cows Number of lactation Lactation milk yield in lb High milkers I Firookee 3 9,060 Cholina 4 7,555 Tashkam 2 7,620 Rajkhati 5 7,560 Medium milkers II Nalchamina 2 4,135 Nachreng 1 6,141 Firchrama 3 7,118 Chansuri 9 6,610 Low milkers III Nachrengee 1 4,656 Naroochi 1 4,359 Lefinchni 1 4,649 Nalkram 1 4,410 Hanchalma 1 3,532 * Revised in July 1953. 221 7 AR/53
222 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, Some of these cows were from the same sire. Nalchamina, Nachrengee, Nal- kram, Naroochi and Nachreng were from one sire. Chansuri and Cholina were from another sire. Cows were taken for the experiment as their calving time approached. Ex- perimental period began few days before calving, when the pre-milk was being taken out. During the lactation period, the cows were milked four times a day and fed four times a day at the time of milking. The various fodders and their quantities consumed by the cows throughout the experimental period are set forth in Table II. TABLE II Various fodders given to the cows Number Period Fodder Lb. per day I 1 December 1943 to 12 February 1944 Bhusa 2 Cow peas hay 4 Green jowar 16 Green berseem 25 Green oats 3 II 13 to 20 February 1944 Bhusa 4 Green berseem 29 Green oats 11 III 21 to 29 February 1944 Bhusa 5 Green berseem 29 Green oats 11 Jowar silage 11 IV 1 to 31 March 1944 Green berseem 28 Green oats 11 Jowar silage 20 Green lucerne 5 V 1 to 10 April 1944 Bhusa 4 Green berseem 22 Green oats 3 Jowar silage 22 Green cowpeas 4
December, 1953 ] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 223 TABLE II224 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE IIDecember, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 225 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Cholina 4th Lactation (7544 lb.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ferookee 3rd Lactation (9060 lb.)
226 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Rajkhati 5th Lactation (7560 lb.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Tashkam 2nd Lactation (7620 lb.)
December, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 227 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Nachreng 1st Lactation (6139 lb.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Nalchamina 2nd Lactation (4135 lb.)
228 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chansuri 9th Lactation (6587 lb.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Firchrama 3rd Lactation (7118 lb.)
December, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 229 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Naroochi 1st Lactation (4359 lb.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Nachrenge 1st Lactation (4645 lb.)
230 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Nalkram 1st Lactation (4410 lb.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lefinchni 1st Lactation (4649 lb.)
December, 1953] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 231 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Hanchalma 1st Lactation (3532 lb.)
232 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, Graphs for each cow, showing curves for CaO and P2O5 per cent in milk, calcium phosphorus ratio, total calcium oxide and phosphorus pentoxide in the milk and the daily milk yield during the precalving period and throughout the lactation are shown in Fig. 1 to 13. DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS Calcium percentage of milk The percentage of Calcium was very low about 0.02 to 0.11 per cent on the first day of taking out pre-milk and tended to increase as the time of calving approached and continued to increase for a week or two after calving. As the milk yield increased with the approach of flush period the percentage of calcium fell. It remained at low level for some time and then the tendency was to increase and remain more or less constant for a fairly long period of lactation. It then again increased with the start of gestation period and shrinkage in the milk yield. Phosphorus percentage of milk The percentage of phosphorus was fairly high about 0.1 to 0.3 per cent in the pre-milk on the first day of pre-milking and continued to increase, reaching the maximum (0.30 to 0.37 per cent) a day or two before calving (in few cases after also) and then decreased. The tendency to decrease continued for about two weeks. It remained at low level for some time and then tended to increase and remain more or less constant and the tendency was to run parallel to calcium curve. Calcium : Phosphorus ratio in milk The CaO : P2O5 ratio was high (1.20 to 4.0) and fluctuating in the pre-milk. After calving, there was sharp fall in the ratio. It remained low during the flush period and then increased slightly and remained more or less constant throughout the lactation period. Calcium and phosphorus in the milk The curves for total calcium and phosphorus in milk run more or less parallel. Since the CaO and P2O5 contents of the milk depend more on the yield of milk than on the CaO and P2O5 per cent, they are similar and run parallel to the curves of milk yield. While the trend of the curves of CaO and P2O5 per cent is to go up, the curves for total CaO and P2O5 in milk is slanting upward. Milk yield The curves for the milk yields have been shown for each cow. After calving, there is a sharp rise in the curves. The milk yield remains at that level for 8 to 18 weeks and then the shrinkage is visible by the slanting down of the curves. Table III shows the average milk yield, CaO and P2O5 per cent, total calcium oxide and phosphorus pentoxide in milk in the (i) pre calving period (ii) before flush period (iii) during flush period and (iv) after flush in case of high, medium and low milking cows.
December, 1953 ] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 233 TABLE III Average milk yield, its composition and the total CaO and P2O5 in milk in the various stages of lactation Stage of lactation Average milk yield in lb. CaO per cent Total CaO in milk in gm. P2O5 per cent Total P2O5 milk in gm. Ratio CaO : P2O5 Group I. High milkers 1. Pre-calving 3.4 0.118 2.23 0.280 4.28 1 : 2.45 2. Before flush 25.4 0.173 20.12 0.288 32.80 1 : 1.69 3. During flush 34.6 0.169 26.41 0.209 32.67 1 : 1.24 4. After flush 22.1 0.171 17.01 0.217 21.61 1 : 1.27 Group II. Medium milkers 1. Pre-calving 2.9 0.124 2.07 0.242 3.59 1 : 2.05 2. Before flush 25.3 0.171 19.72 0.273 31.24 1 : 1.61 3. During flush 32.0 0.170 24.53 0.218 31.37 1 : 1.28 4. After flush 17.2 0.173 13.32 0.225 17.45 1 : 1.30 Group III. Low milkers 1. Pre-calving 3.4 0.123 2.26 0.269 4.38 1 : 2.37 2. Before flush 20.7 0.174 16.38 0.273 25.24 1 : 1.58 3. During flush 22.0 0.171 17.13 0.215 21.51 1 : 1.26 4. After flush 12.4 0.181 10.13 0.227 12.73 1 : 1.25 It appears that calcium and phosphorus contents in the milk in different groups of cows are about the same. Calcium is low 0.12 per cent in the pre-milk and gradually increased to 0.17 per cent afterwards. Phosphorus was high 0.28 per cent in the pre-milk and came down to 0.22 per cent afterwards. The average CaO : P2O5 ratio in the milk was as high as 1 : 2.4 in the pre-milk and reached a lower value of 1 : 1.3 in normal milk. The calcium and phosphorus contents of the milk during the flush period were lower than that before flush and after flush period. Two cows Tashkam and Rajkhati were under study in different lactations. Their average daily milk yield, composition of milk and CaO : P2O5 ratio during the sa me period in the two different lactations have been compared in Tables IV and V.
234 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE IV Comparative data of the cow Tashkam in 14 to 17 week of the first and second lactations Total lactation yield in lb. Average yield of milk per day in lb. Average CaO per cent in milk Average P2O5 per cent in milk Ratio CaO : P2O5 Number of lactation 8,621 31 0.144 0.189 1 : 1.32 1 7,620 30 0.149 0.192 1 : 1.29 2 TABLE V Comparative data of the cow Rajkhati in 9 to 12 week of fourth and fifth lactation Total lactation yield in lb. Average yield of milk per day in lb. Average CaO per cent in milk Average P2O5 in milk Ratio CaO : P2O5 Number of lactation 9,061 37 0.159 0.174 1 : 1.09 4 7,560 33 0.174 0.186 1 : 1.07 5 In Tashkam the average daily milk yield, CaO and P2O5 percentages and the CaO : P2O5 ratio were practically the same in the first and second lactations. In Rajkhati the average daily milk yield was four pounds less in the fifth lactation and the calcium and phosphorus contents of the milk were slightly higher. This cow gave 1,500 pounds less milk in the fifth lactation than the previous one. The ratio of calcium and phosphorus was the same. The total calcium and phosphorus in milk under the various feeds (feed 100) have been given in Tables VI and VII. These indicate that when more than 20 gm. CaO and 21 gm. P2O5 was given out in the milk out of 100 gm. supplied in the feed during the various fodder periods, negative calcium and phosphorus balances occur- red in the cows. The fodders berseem, lucerne, oats, cowpeas, jowar, maize, bajra, Rhodes grass, were of good quality. Hay prepared from berseem, lucerne and cow- peas and silage prepared from jowar were also fed along with the fresh green fodders. But these were not found to be sufficient to meet the mineral requirements of the cows and the need for mineral supplement was all along felt. The different fodders did not seem to alter the composition of milk (calcium and phosphorus percentages).
December, 1953 ] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 235 TABLE VI Sum mean CaO in grams present in the milk during the various fodder periods (feed 100 gm. CaO) Period of fodder First group Second group Third group Firokee Cholina Tashkam Rajkhati Nalcha- mina Nachreng Firchr- ama Chansuri Nachre- ngee Naroochi Lifinchni Nalkram Han- chalma 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 16.05 11.52 14.77 11.95 1.63 2 29.25 15.17 20.67 16.31 20.96 3 37.30 0.24 23.39 19.80 22.87 22.22 0.16 4 34.23 16.40 18.33 15.12 18.C9 16.06 17.14 20 .8 8 17.88 5 27.55 30.28 24.40 12.51 12.13 13.77 19.29 19.28 6 50.16 55.31 26.84 45.84 27.29 28.74 33.88 27.00 35.25 36.55 7 51.35 45.42 44.34 1.23 0.03 48.40 47.40 29.79 25.18 30.45 22.45 37.56 8 27.65 26.14 31.35 14.34 4.93 45.49 50.48 26.92 12.89 20.42 16.49 31.41 9 25.65 23.49 29.71 22.51 33.27 30.03 23.82 26.95 18.61 11.48 16.61 14.72 15.55 10 22.58 21.20 19.57 32.56 17.01 23.36 21.93 24.35 15.60 10.72 14.48 11.73 7.49 11 16.83 19.12 27.65 7.86 25.32 10.80 17.94 14.89 6.12 6.34 12 14.32 19.43 30.24 24.75 9.95 4.19 4.65 4.90 13 7.61 12.79 20.82 15.74 7.74 11.49 14 12.13 20.59 11.80 6.31 15 and 16 10.61 4.87 NOTE.236 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE VII Sum mean P2O5 in gm. present in the milk during the various fodder periods (feed 100 gm. P2O5) Period of fodder First group Second group Third group Firokee Cholina Tashkam Kajkhati Nalch- mina Nachreng Firchr- ama Chausuri Nachren- gee Naroochi Lifinchni Nalkuam Han- chalma 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 24.87 88.67 25.51 21.42 5.30 2 33.98 30.43 24.63 29.63 35.89 3 33.84 0.56 33.27 24.26 27.95 28.66 0.40 4 30.78 18.90 23.62 18.23 24.91 19.26 17.60 24.54 26.14 23.69 5 25.57 29.39 26.33 28.23 19.87 14.64 17.64 21.25 19.97 6 31.81 32.96 27.10 28.65 30.86 22.90 18.49 19.96 22.89 22.75 7 36.65 34.58 34.30 2.30 0.09 32.52 33.25 22.54 20.66 26.08 19.32 28.19 8 35.05 29.80 31.43 25.78 0.11 29.90 29.75 21.48 17.30 24.72 18.33 29.81 9 28.27 28.38 29.93 24 . 14 33.17 38.08 27.05 26.78 21.48 13.40 18.37 16.04 19.56 10 36.01 24.46 22.44 30.42 20.51 28.82 25.58 26.20 22.93 17.95 21.95 16.90 20.57 11 26.68 25.23 28.68 20.82 34.44 17.51 24.56 10.57 24.48 12 22.96 23.49 30.35 28.71 20.64 21.35 11.89 18.04 13 22.80 22.10 30.37 25.95 26.32 18.71 14 18.79 26.60 17.77 15 and 66 23.01 14.39 NOTE.December, 1953 ] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 237 From our experience of the balance experiments [1953] conducted with cows yielding between 30 to 40 pounds milk per day, it was found that equilibrium was maintained, as long as, out of every 100 gm. CaO in the feed, 20 gm. were utilised in milk or retained in body and 80 gm. were voided in faeces and urine. It may therefore be concluded that for every 20 gm. CaO given out in the milk, 100 gm. CaO should be present in the feed. If more than 20 gm. are passed out in the milk when the feed contains only 100 gm. CaO equilibrium is disturbed and negative balance occurs, since 80 gm. or 80 per cent of the intake are invariably voided in the faeces and urine. Similarly in the case of phosphorus also out of 100 gm. P2O5 in the feed, 79 gm. are voided in faeces and urine and 21 gm. are utilised in the milk production. Thus for every 21 gm. P2O5 given out in the milk, at least 100 gm. are necessary in the feed. If more than 21 per cent of the intake of P2O5 in the feed, are present in the milk negative balance occurs. The data of the three groups of cows, high milkers, medium milkers and low milkers, has been examined in the light of the above conclusions from pre-calving period to the end of lactation ; and set forth in Tables VIII, IX, X and XI. In the Table VIII, CaO and P2O5 balances of each cow has been shown datewise dividing the whole lactation into three periods. In Table IX the number of days of positive and negative balances of CaO and P2O5 in the three periods have been shown. In Table X are shown the number of days, each cow was in positive and negative calcium and phosphorus balances. Average balances of CaO and P2O5 of the three groups of cow have been shown in Table XI. TABLE VIII A. Calcium oxide balance Names of cows +Balance 238 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, B. P2O5 balance Names of cows +Balance December, 1953 ] M. L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 239 TABLE X The total number of days of + and 240 STUDIES ON CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS IN MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, In the medium and low milkers, the number of days in positive balances are more and in the negative balances much less. Table XI would show that the high milkers were in positive calcium balance, for 97 days and in positive phosphorus balance for 59 days only. For the rest of the days calcium and phosphorus was lost from the body. The cows in this group were second, third, fourth and fifth calvers. The average figures of positive and negative balance of the medium and low milkers are given. The groups of high and medium milking cows remained in negative calcium and phosphorus balances for a fairly long time during the lactation period and the losses from the body were not negligible. Even in the low milking group, the cows, doing about 4,500 lb. in the whole lactation, lost calcium and phosphorus during the flush period for seven to nine weeks, when the daily milk yield was about 25 lb. or more per day, on a good feed, but not supplemented by mineral salts. The lossses of calcium and phosphorus were apparent when its amounts in the feed were less than 75 and 80 gm. respectively. Since only a limited fraction of the minerals was available to the animals, an adequate intake was necessary in the feed. The necessity of feeding mineral supplement is therefore felt for a small period in low milkers, greater period in medium milkers and almost throughout the lacta- tion period in the case of high milkers. The cow secretes about 4 gm. CaO and 5 gm. P2O5 in 5 lb. of milk. Therefore with an intake of 75 gm. CaO and 80 gm. P2O5 after the daily milk yield exceeds 20 lb., it becomes necessary to supply the cow with 20 gm. CaO and 25 gm. P2O5 in the feed with every increase of 5 lb. in the milk yield. In our experiments [1953] we found that CaO : P2O5 ratio varying from 1.0 to 2.0 maintained positive calcium balance but not phosphorus balance. The phosphorus assimilation was larger in high phosphorus period when the CaO : P2O5 ratio was about 1.0 to 1.25. Keeping these into consideration, the mineral mixture should be such as to provide an optimum CaO : P2O5 ratio in the feed. A mineral mixture of the following composition is considered very suitable. Sterilized bone-meal 50 lb. Finely ground chalk 15 lb. Di-calcium phosphate 10 lb. Sulphur 3 lb. Common salt (NaCl) 20 lb. Oxide of iron 2 lb. Potassium iodide 4 oz. Finely ground anhydrous copper sulphate 0.5 oz. Finely ground cobalt chloride 0.1 oz. Manganese sulphate 4 oz. In case the phosphorus in the fodders is not sufficient, di-calcium phosphate may be replaced by sodium phosphate and chalk by bone-meal. Extra sodium chloride, according to the needs of the animals whether growing or milch cattle, is also provided as salt licks or half to one ounce mixed in the concentrate feed. The quantity of sulphur is adjusted according to the sulphur contents of the ration and common salt substituted in its place.
December, 1953 ] M.L. MATHUR AND S. V. DESAI 241 This mixture may be fed at the rate of one ounce per day in case of growing animals and two ounces per day or one to two per cent of the dairy mixture in case of lactating animals. SUMMARY 1. The calcium and phosphorus composition of the milk in high, medium and low milking cows from the pre-calving period to the end of lactation, with reference to any possible effect of the various feeds on it has been studied. 2. The curves for CaO and P2O5 percentage for thirteen cows from pre-calving period to the end of lactation have been shown on photographs. These indicated that the composition of the milk was determined by the age, breed, individuality and state of health and the time in the period of lactation of the cow. The mineral contents of the ration did not directly effect the composition of the milk in a definite way though it may effect the retention of the minerals by the cows. Similarly fresh green fodder as compared to silage or hay prepared out of them, may effect the assimilation of the minerals from them, but not the composition of milk. 3. The calcium and phosphorus contents of the milk were lower during the flush period than in other period of lactation after calving. 4. Negative calcium and phosphorus balances in high milking cows were indicated after two weeks of calving and were maintained for twenty to thirty weeks of lacata- tion. The storage of calcium and phosphorus was possible as soon as the milk production decreased to less than fifteen pounds per day. 5. The group of cows of low milking capacities giving about 4,500 pounds for the whole lactation also lost calcium and phosphorus during the flush period when the daily milk yield was about 25 pounds. 6. Seventy-five grams of CaO and 80 gm. P2O5 were the minimum amounts necessary in the feed of average milking cows giving about 20 pounds milk per day to avoid losses of these minerals. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are grateful to Mr. C. H. Parr, then Imperial Agriculturist and Mr. N. P. Fernendez, Cattle Superintendent, for giving facilities to conduct the experiments in his Division and for taking keen interest in the work. REFERENCES Desai, S. V. and Mathur, M. L. (1945). Indian J. vet. Sci. 3, 199 Mathur, M. L. and Desai, S. V. (1953). Indian J. vet. Sci. 23, 143-172
ASSIMILATION OF PHYTIN PHOSPHORUS BY DAIRY COWS By M. L. MATHUR, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi (Received for publication on 14 January, 1951) It has long been known that a large part of organic phosphorus of cereals and cakes which are the principal constituents of concentrate mixtures usually fed to cows, occurs in the form of phytic acid (inositolhexaphosphoric acid) or phytin which is calcium magnesium salt of phytic acid. Starkenstein [1910] and Plimmer [1913] were the earliest workers, who provided evidence, that phytin when fed to animals, was not directly absorbed from the alimentary canal, but was simply hydrolysed by bacterial action. Rather [1918] found that almost all phytin phosphorus fed to pigs was hydrolysed and excreted in the form of orthophosphoric acid. Bruce and Callow [1934] found that phytin phosphorus which was about 50 per cent in the diet of rats was not available to them. McCance and Widdowson [1935] found that 20 to 60 per cent of the phytin fed to human beings was excreted unchanged in the faeces. They suggested that the rest may also have been unabsorbed and present in other forms in the faeces. Young, Gregory and Vere Jones [1935] found that part of phytic acid phosphorus was hydrolysed in the stomach of rabbits and excreted as inorganic phosphorus. Low and Steenbook [1936] also found that phytic acid was partially available to rats on a low calcium ration but the addition of calcium carbonate makes it almost completely unavailable. Kreigher and Steenbook [1940] also confirmed that increase of Ca/P ratio from 1:1 to 2:1 decreased the availability of phytic acid phosphorus. It seemed desirable, therefore, to study the metabolism of phytin phosphorus in milch cows. Generally about 80 per cent of the P2O5 in the rations of dairy cows, is present in the concentrated feed ; and more than 50 per cent of this is phytin phosphorus. It would therefore be of great advantage to know (a) how far this amount of phosphorus present in the concentrated feed met the requirements of the animal, (b) whether it was necessary to add more phosphorus in the form of mineral salts in the diet or improve the fodder by manuring it and (c) the influence of calcium carbonate on the assimilation of phytin phosphorus. EXPERIMENTAL Four high milking Sahiwal cows of about the same age and at the same stage of lactation were selected. All the cows received the same concentrated feed in different quantities according to its requirements and fodders ad lib. according to the latin square as shown in Table 1. Small amounts of wheat straw (2 to 4 lb.) were also given to avoid loose faeces by the animals. Out of the 12 days of each period, the first six days were non-experimental and remaining six days experimental, when accurate account of feed consumed and 7 AR/53 243 5
244 ASSIMILATION OF PHYTIN PHOSPHORUS [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, faeces voided was kept. Each experimental day began at 8 a.m. and ended at 8 a.m. on the next day. The animals were fed four times in 24 hours at the time of milking. Each morning, the faeces were weighed, thoroughly mixed and samples taken for analysis. TABLE I Feeding scheme of fodders Name of the cow Period I 28-3-46 to 8-4-46 Period II 9-4-46 to 20-4-46 Period III 21-4-46 to 2-5-46 Period IV 3-5-46 to 14-5-46 Lenjurki A B C D Larajbani B C D A Haskila C D A B Yulamati D A B C A=Unmanured berseem B=Manured berseemDecember, 1953 ] M. L. MATHUR 245 materials and food stuffs and found that its accuracy was not affected by the presence of non-phytic substances in plant extracts. This method involved the titration of phytic acid in 0.6 per cent HCl, ammonium thiocyanate being used as internal indicator. Heubner and Stadler recommended that the end point was reached when a flesh pink colour persisting for five minutes was obtained. The disadvantage of this method was that the end point was not sharp owing to the presence of colloidal precipitation of ferric phytate, which was formed during the titration. To avoid that difficulty various modifications had been suggested by Knowles and Watkin [1932], Andrews and Bailey [1933], Harris and Mosher [1934] and Young (1936). In the present metabolic experiments the feeding stuffs and the faeces had to be analysed. The feeding stuffs could be analysed by the modified method of Andrews and Bailey [1933]. Since the faeces gave coloured extracts with HCl, this procedure could not be applied. Knowles and Watkin [1932] used ether to remove colouring materials ; but in the present experiments ether was not found to remove the colour- ing materials completely. Experiments with adsorbents such as kaolin, alumina, Fuller's earth, norite charcoal and activated charcoal, prepared from paddy husk in this laboratory, showed that phytic acid was partially adsorbed on these substances, though the colouring matter was removed. The method suggested by Young [1936] was used with slight modification. Determination of phytic acid in faeces FeCl3 in N/HCl : A solution containing 1.5 mg. per c.c. N/2 HCl solution 5 N and N/2 NaOH solutions. Eight grams of oven-dried faeces were extracted with 200 c.c. of two per cent HCl solution in a glass stoppered bottle for three hours. The extract was filtered on a Buchner funnel, through double layer of hardened filter paper. 25 c.c. aliquot (containing not more than 4 mg. phytic acid) was taken in a 50 c.c. graduated centrifuge tube, neutralized with 5 N. NaOH, made just acidic to litmus with HCl. After taking the reading in the tube, one fifth of its volume of FeCl3HCl solution was added. The tube and its contents were heated in a rack, in boiling water bath, for 15 minutes, with level of water above that of the contents of the tube, then cooled in a bath of cold water for 15 minutes and centrifuged for 10 minutes at about 3,000 rounds per minute. The supernatent liquid was decanted and the tube allowed to drain. The precipitate was suspended in 10 c.c. of hot water in the centrifuge tube and heated in boiling water bath for two minutes. To the hot suspension, 2 c.c. of N/2 NaOH were added with stirring and heating in the water bath was continued with occasional stirring. The precipitate of ferric hydroxide was filtered on a 7 cm. whatman filter paper (No. 31) and washed with hot water. The filtrate and wash- ings were taken in a graduated cylinder, allowed to cool and made just acidic to litmus. N/2 HCl was then added to bring the resultant acidity to 0.6 per cent and the volume made up. Fifty c.c. aliquot was taken in a beaker followed by 10 c.c. of 0.3 per cent ammonium thiocyanate and standard ferric chloride solution was added from a microburette. When the end point had nearly reached, the titration was stopped and the solution allowed to stand for five minutes or heated on a water bath for 15 minutes, cooled and then filtered. The titration was concluded in the filtrate.
246 ASSIMILATION OF PHYTIN PHOSPHORUS [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, Knowles and Watkin [1932] recommended that sodium salicylate gave sharper end points when used as an indicator, but ammonium thiocyanate was found better. TABLE III The distribution of phosphorus in the grain mixture and its components Feed Phytin phosphorus per cent Total phosphorus per cent Total phos- phorus as P2O5 per cent Bran 0.893 1.281 2.934 Barley 0.116 0.331 0.757 Cowpeas 0.063 0.371 0.849 Linseed cake 0.304 0.741 1.698 Groundnut cake 0.411 0.593 1.359 Grain mixture 0.321 0.611 1.399 It shows that 52.54 per cent of the total phosphorus in the grain mixture was present in the form of phytic phosphorus. While studying the mineral balances, it was observed that negative phosphorus balances occurred in all animals during almost all periods, hence the distribution of phytin was likely to throw some light on the unavailability of such large amount of phosphorus. The average daily amounts of phytic phosphorus present in the concentrate mixture* and that excreted unchanged in the faeces during the various periods are given in Table IV. TABLE IV Phytic phosphorus in concentrate mixture and faeces Name of the cow Phytic phosphorus (in gm. per day) present in concentrate mixture Phytic phosphorus (in gm. per day) excreted un- changed in faeces (per- centage of the intake in brackets) A B C D A B C D Lenjurki 14.5 18.9 18.9 18.9 6.3 (43.0) 7.8 (41.4) 7.6 (39.9) 7.1 (37.5) Larajbani 18.9 16.0 18.9 17.2 8.0 (42.4) 8.2 (51.1) 7.8 (41.1) 7.2 (41.6) Haskila 23.3 23.3 20.4 23.3 11.0 (47.2) 10.0 (43.1) 9.9 (48.7) 10.2 (43.8) Yulamati 19.7 20.4 20.4 19.8 8.3 (40.9) 7.4 (36.3) 7.9 (38.6) 7.1 (34.8) Mean 19.2 19.6 19.6 19.8 8.4 (43.4) 8.4 (43.0) 8.3 (42.0) 7.9 (39.4) *The amount of phytin phosphorus present in the fodders consumed by the cows was between 0.23 to 0.29 gm. per day and hence it has not been taken into consideration.
December, 1953 ] M. L. MATHUR 247 It will be seen from Table IV that 35 to 51 per cent of phytic phosphorus was recovered unchanged and rest was hydrolysed. The grain mixture contained 30 per cent barley, and hence the enzymic cleavage of phytic acid by the enzyme phytase, may have taken place in the intestine of the animals. It is assumed that after hydrolysis or enzymic cleavage of phytic acid, the products are similar to other inorganic forms found in green fodder and absorbed as such. The reason, why such large amounts of phytic acid is withdrawn from metabolism and not available to the cows, can also be explained. The diet of the animals contain- ed large amount of calcium in chalk and it may be assumed that this calcium prevents the splitting of phytic acid by precipitating it as calcium phytate in the small intes- tine. Even if the enzyme is present in the food, the phytic acid which is precipitated as calcium phytate is rendered unavailable to the action of phytase. Thus both calcium and phosphorus are rendered unavailable for absorption in the system. It would thus appear that excess of calcium depresses the absorption of phytic phosphorus and at the same time excess of phytic acid also renders calcium un- available. Considering these it would suggest that a suitable calcium phosphorus ratio in the food should be aimed at. Table V gives the CaO : P2O5 ratio in the food during the experiments. TABLE V The CaO: P2O5 ratio in the diet during the different periods Name of the cow A B 0 D Lenjurki 1.85:1 2.09:1 2.18:1 1.29:1 Larajbani 1.96:1 1.73:1 1.86:1 1.29:1 Haskila 2.04:1 1.73:1 1.70:1 1.29:1 Yulamati 2.00:1 1.99:1 1.74:1 1.07:1 Mean 1.96:1 1.88:1 1.86:1 1.23:1 When the Ca : P ratio in the feed was judged with the percentage of phytin phosphorus metabolised it was found that the mean CaO : P2O5 ratio during the periods A, B, C, D, were 1.96, 1.88, 1.86, 1.23 and the phytin phosphorus metabolise during the corresponding period were 56.6, 57.0, 58.0 and 60.6 per cent. It appeared therefore that with the CaO : P2O5 ratio approaching 1 : 1, more and more phytin phosphorus was metabolised in the system of the cows. TABLE VI Phytin phosphorus calculated as P2O5 in gm. per day in the grain mixture Name of the cow A B C D Lenjurki 33.31 43.33 43.33 43.33 Larajbani 43.33 36.66 43.33 39.21 Haskila 53.33 53.33 46.67 53.33 Yulamati 45.00 46.67 46.67 45.27 7 AR/53 6
248 ASSIMILATION OF PHYTIN PHOSPHORUS [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE VII Phytin phosphorus calculated as P2O5 in gm. assimilated or used per day Name of the cow A B C D Total for cows Lenjurki 19.01 25.37 26.04 27.07 97.49 Larajbani 24.96 17.93 25.53 23.04 91.46 Haskila 28.14 30.37 23.95 29.98 112.44 Yulamati 26.00 29.70 28.65 26.75 111.10 Total for fodder 98.11 103.37 104.17 106.84 Preliminary statistical analyses showed that there was strong variation in the utilization of phytin phosphorus amongst the animals, but the differential effect of fodders in inducing assimilation of phytin was small. SUMMARY 1. The methods of the estimation of phytin have been discussed. 2. Balance experiment of phytin phosphorus in high milking cows has been described. 3. Of the total phosphorus in the grain mixture 52.54 per cent was present in the form of phytin phosphorus. 4. Of the total phytin phosphorus present in the feed of the cows, 35 to 51 per cent was recovered unchanged, while the rest was either metabolised, or hydrolysed. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author is grateful to Dr. S. V. Desai, I/C Division of Chemistry, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, for his valuable suggestions and guidance during the progress of the work. His thanks are also due to Mr. C. H. Parr, Imperial Agri- culturist and Mr. N. P. Fernandez for providing facilities for conducting the experi- ment at the, Dairy Farm. REFERENCES Andrews, J. S. and Bailey, C. H. (1932). Industr. Eng. Chem., 24, 80 Bruce, H. M. and Callow, R. K. (1934). Biochem. J., 28, 517 Harris, R. S. and Mosher, L. M. (1932). Industr. Eng. Chem. Anal Ed. 6, 320 Heubner, W. and Staddler, H. (1914). Biochem. Z. 64, 42 Knowles, F. and Watkins, J. E. (1932). J. Agric. Sci. 22, 755 Kreigher, C. H. and Steenbock, H. (1940). J. Nutrition, 20, 125 Low, J. T. and Steenbock, H. (1936). Biochem. J. 30, 1120 McCance, R. A. and Widdowson, E. M. (1935). Biochem. J. 29, 2694 Plimmor, R. H. A. (1913). Biochem. J. 7, 23 Rather, J. B. (1918). Ark. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 147 Starkenstein (1910). Biochem. Z. 30, 56 Young, L. (1936). Biochem. J. 30, 252 Young, L., Gregory, R. A. and Vere Jones, N. W. (1935). Chem. Industr. 54, 270
FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK IV. EFFECT OF SOME FACTORS ON THE FREEZING POINT OF MILK By C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. VENKATESWARA RAO and NOSHIR N. DASTUR, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 12 May 1953) (With two text-figures) THE freezing point of milk is recognised to be the most reliable test for detect- ing adulteration of milk with water. It is, therefore, desirable to study how the value of freezing point varies due to natural causes, due to the addition of adulterants and due to processing, and to see how these factors influence the inter- pretation of the results. Some of these factors have been examined with milk of western breeds [Elsdon and Walker, 1942 ; Department of Health, Scotland, 1943]. In a previous communication of the present series, Dharmarajan and co-workers [1950] found the average value of the freezing point of cross-bred, Gir, Sahiwal, Red Sindhi and Tharparkar cows' milk collected at Bangalore to vary from 250 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Effect of stage of lactation on the freezing point of milk.
December, 1953] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 251 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Variation in the freezing point of milk season
252 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE I Effect of development of acidity in cow milk on the freezing point Sample number 1 2 3 4 5 6 Time interval (in hours) F. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. P. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. Initial 0.544 0.15 December, 1953 ] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 253 TABLE II Effect of development of acidity in buffalo milk on the freezing point Sample number 1 2 3 4 5 6 Time interval (in hours) F. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. F. P. Aci- dity B. T. Initial 0.553 0.12 254 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE III Changes in the freezing point of cow and buffalo milk due to natural souring Cow milk samples Buffalo milk samples Serial number Increase in F. P. due to developed acidity (°C.) Increase in acidity at positive boiling test stage (per cent lactic acid) Increase in P. P. per 0.01 per cent increase in acidity Increase in F. P. due to developed acidity (°C.) Increase in acidity at positive boiling test stage (per cent lactic acid) Increase in F. P. per 0.01 per cent increase in acidity 1 0.006 0.02 0.0030 0.012 0.04 0.0030 2 0.010 0.06 0.0017 0.012 0.03 0.0040 3 0.013 0.06 0.0022 0.013 0.05 0.0026 4 0.014 0.04 0.0035 0.015 0.15 0.0030 5 0.014 0.02 0.0070 0.016 0.05 0.0032 6 0.019 0.09 0.0021 0.020 0.07 0.0029 7 0.020 0.06 0.0033 0.024 0.06 0.0040 8 0.023 0.08 0.0029 0.025 0.07 0.0036 9 0.023 0.09 0.0026 0.025 0.06 0.0042 10 0.024 0.10 0.0024 0.025 0.05 0.0050 11 0.024 0.04 0.0060 0.025 0.07 0.0036 12 0.025 0.10 0.0025 0.026 0.09 0.0029 13 0.025 0.09 0.0028 0.028 0.08 0.0035 14 0.026 0.08 0.0033 0.029 0.10 0.0029 15 0.026 0.07 0.0037 0.030 0.05 0.0060 16 0.028 0.08 0.0035 0.030 0.05 0.0060 17 0.035 0.10 0.0035 0.031 0.08 0.0039 18 0.035 0.09 0.0039 0.033 0.07 0.0047 19 0.035 0.10 0.0035 0.035 0.10 0.0035 20 0.035 0.10 0.0035 0.035 0.08 0.0044 21 0.035 0.06 0.0058 0.035 0.09 0.0039 22 0.037 0.12 0.0031 0.036 0.13 0.0028 23 0.040 0.09 0.0044 0.045 0.12 0.0038 24 0.046 0.09 0.0051 0.046 0.16 0.0029 Average 0.00365 Average .00378 For study with separated milk, whole milk was separated in a cream separator. The fat in skimmed milk varied from 0.01 to 0.05 per cent. The effect of separa- tion on the freezing point is shown in Table IV. Milk was heated by the following methods to study the effect of heat on the freezing point of milk : (a) Pasteurised by the holding method at 145°F. for 30 minutes and chilled to 50°F. (b) Pasteurised by the H. T. S. T. method at 165°F. for 15 seconds and chilled to 50°F. (c) Milk brought to first boil in a covered alu- minium vessel and cooled to room temperature by immersion in water. (d) Milk boiled as above, allowed to simmer for five minutes and then cooled to room tempera- ture by immersion in water. (e) Milk was heated as under (c) and (d) and the freezing point of milk was determined soon after cooling. In another set of trials milk after boiling and simmering for a minute was cooled to room temperature and
December, 1953 ] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 255 TABLE IV Effect of skimming on the freezing point of milk Sample number F. P. of whole milk 256 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [ Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE VI Effect of storing boiled milk on its freezing point (December, 1953] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 257 TABLE VIII Effect of adulteration of milk with 10 per cent of distilled, municipal and farm-well water on the freezing point depression Serial No. Milk sample of Change in P.P. for 10 per cent addi- tion of distilled water Change in F.P. for 10 per cent addi- tion of municipal water (T.S. 180 p.p.m.) Change in F.P. for 10 per cent addi- tion of farm-well water (T.S. 380 p.p.m.) 1 Cross-bred cow 0.057 0.053 0.056 2 Red Sindhi cow 0.059 0.055 0.057 3 Tharparkar cow 0.059 0.060 0.059 4 Mixed cow 0.052 0.053 0.054 5 Murrah buffalo 0.059 0.056 0.057 6 Mixed buffalo 0.063 0.060 0.061 Average 0.058 0.056 0.057 The changes in the freezing point of milk when starch and cane sugar were added are shown in Table X. Starch (B. D. H.258 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE IX Calculation of added water from the freezing point of milk Sample number Particulars of samples Freezing point (December, 1953] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 259 7 Milk 0.549 18.04 10.44 260 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, of high values obtained during the colostral period could be gauged from the average freezing point depression of milk collected during the first 12 days as shown below: Cow No. 256 0.578ºC. Cow No. 413 0.573ºC. Cow No. 414 0.574ºC. Buffalo No. 136 0.579ºC. Buffalo No. 272 0.573ºC. The values for the colostral milk of cows and buffaloes appear to be the same. The high values for cow's colostrum have been noted amongst other workers by Schuette and Huebner [1933] and Elsdon [1934]. Though the freezing point depression is higher during the colostral period, it was interesting to note that, excepting the values for the first two days when the values were low, the lactose-chloride relationship calculated according to the for- mula of Davies [1939] showed almost the same value as for normal milk (Table XII). This leads to the inference that higher depression during the colostral period was not due to the presence of larger amounts of lactose and chloride but due to some other constituents of milk. TABLE X Effect of addition of starch and cane sugar to milk on the freezing point Particulars Trial I Freezing point (December, 1953] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 261 TABLE XI Freezing point of cow milk, buffalo milk and toned milk Sample number Reconsti- tuted milk powder solution (262 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE XIDecember, 1953] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 263 A study of Fig. 1, wherein the changes in the freezing point have been recorded for complete lactations, showed that the variation in the case of cows may be roughly divided into four stages. During the first 12 days of lactation the values were high, from 12 to 120 days the values were a little below the average for the rest of the lactation, from 120 to 220 days values fluctuated about the average, and the end period when the values were a little higher. However, in the case of the two buffaloes, apart from the colostral period, the other three stages were not so well defined. Aschaffenburg and Veinoglou [1942-44] in a study with Shorthorn cows found no. relationship between the freezing point and the stage of lactation, the age of the cow, or the milk vield. Effect of season on the freezing point of milk The results of examinations of samples from different breeds of cows and Murrah buffaloes over a period of 13 months have been illustrated in Fig. 2. These results do not reveal any significant variation which could be ascribed to season. This may be due to the equitable climate of Bangalore and more or less uniform rations given to the animals throughout the year. A study of the literature of other countries, however, does not reveal any uniformity of results as far as the effect of season is concerned. Thus, Elsdon and Walker [1942] from a study of their results concluded that abnormal weather had no effect on the freezing point depression. Earlier, Buchanan and Lowman [1929] found that during the spring months the freezing point was lower than during other seasons. In recent studies Aschefferburg and Temple [1941], and Aschaffenburg and Veinoglou [1942-44] obtained varying results in studies extending over two years and concluded that the smaller freezing point depression observed during the spring was 'due not to the season as such but a factor connected with it'. The factor presumably was the sudden change over to more palatable feeding stuffs from that given indoors during the winter months. Rees [1949] in studies with bulk market milk in Australia found the freezing point to show a close seasonal trend reaching two peaks during the year, in late spring and autumn. The values were further closely correlated with the S. N. F. content of milk, a conclusion not substantiated by the earlier results of Stubbs and Elsdon [1934]. Effect of souring on the freezing point of milk A study of the results in Tables I and II show that an increase in freezing point depression of milk occurred on souring. A perceptible increase was noted at the end of 4 to 5 hours in the case of cow milk, and 5 to 6 hours in the case of buffalo milk. In cow milk the increase in acidity when the samples gave positive boiling test varied from 0.02 to 0.12 per cent lactic acid, and the corresponding increase in the freezing point depression varied between 0.006º to 0.046ºC., the average increase in freezing point depression per 0.01 per cent increase in acidity being 0.0036ºC. (Table III). In case of buffalo milk the increase in acidity when the milk showed positive boiling test varied from 0.03 to 0.16 per cent lactic acid, and the increase in freezing point depression at the same stage varied from 0.012º to 0.046ºC., the average increase in freezing point depression per 0.01 per cent increase in acidity
264 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, being 0.0038ºC. Thus the increase in acidity can seriously interfere with the inter- pretation of the results of the freezing point test. It is essential to know the acidity of the samples before drawing any conclusion. Various methods of applying corrections to the freezing point of sour milk have been suggested ranging from the strict adherance that only fresh milk should be used for the test [A. O. A. C., 1950]. The sub-committee of the Scientific Advisory Committee, Department of Health for Scotland [1943] after reviewing the available evidence suggested that the best estimate of the original freezing point of the fresh milk was given by a correction equivalent to 0.0034ºC., per 0.01 per cent lactic acid, which should be subtracted from the apparent freezing point depression when the acidity of the milk sample exceeded 0.18 per cent lactic acid. The correction found in the present studies was a little higher than that recommended above, and for practical purposes may be taken as 0.0037ºC. per 0.01 per cent increase in acidity. Examination of a number of results show that when the correction was taken as 0.0034ºC. the freezing point depression found by calculation exceeded the true value by 0.021ºC. on an average, while if the value taken as 0.0037ºC. the average difference was only 0.003ºC. It is, however, well to remember that any correction at best is only an approximation, as the high apparent acidity of milk may not be due to lactic acid but also due to other factors. The safest rule appears to be to work only with fresh samples of milk, or samples which have been stored at a sufficiently low temperature that no appreciable change in the acidity of the milk occurs. As a workable solution it is recommended that a sample of milk should be examined by the freezing point test only when its acidity does not exceed 0.19 per cent lactic acid, and/or when the sample does not give a positive boiling test. Effect of removal of fat on the freezing point of milk The results in Table IV show that for practical purposes the removal of fat does not effect the freezing point. The average difference in the freezing point depression of 12 trials was less than 0.001ºC. This increase presumably may be due to the small increase in concentration of other constituents due to the removal of fat, as the S. N. F. of separated milk is higher than that of whole milk. Effect of processing of milk on the freezing point Pasteurisation of milk by the holding method or the H. T. S. T. method had no effect on the freezing point as shown by the results in Table V. On boiling the freezing point depression increased, and the value increased further when milk was simmered. However, there was no change in the freezing point of boiled milk on storing (Table VI). The increase in freezing point depression during processing was in a large measure due to the loss of moisture by evaporation. Elsdon and Stubbs [1933] have shown also that the freezing point of milk was not altered when it was heated in a closed container in an autoclave for 30 minutes at 110ºC. Effect of diluting milk with water on the freezing point As was to be expected the freezing point depression of milk was lowererd by the addition of water (Table VII). Addition of small quantities of water, from 1 to 5 per cent, brought about relatively less change than when the amount of water
December, 1953] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 265 added was 10 per cent. With 10 per cent water the average decrease in the freez- ing point depression was 0.058ºC. The effect of using water from different sources, that is distilled, farm well and municipal tap, was also studied. Though the total solids in different samples of water varied, these had no appreciable effect on the freezing point depression of the diluted milk as shown in Table VIII. In the past, attempts have been made to calculate the exact amount of water added to milk from its freezing point. The A. O. A. C. [1950] has suggested the following formula: W = (T266 FREEZING POINT OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, water. Addition of one per cent cane sugar sufficed to mask the addtion of over 15 per cent of water. Thus the test should be used judiciously in inter- preting the results, and more as a supplement to other methods rather than as the sole criterion for judging the purity of milk. With reconstituted skimmed milk powder the freezing point depression varied from 0.482º to 0.522ºC. in the case of spray-dried powder, and from 0.455º to 0.480ºC. in the case of roller-dried powder (Table XI). Similar results were obtained by Featro and Moore [1950] who ascribed the decrease in the freezing point depression of dried skim milk solids to the lowered solubility of some of the constituents of milk. Whole milk toned with reconstituted milk powder also behaved similarly, so the test may be used as an additional confirmatory test when the addition of milk powder to milk is suspected. SUMMARY A study of the freezing point of milk of three cows and two buffaloes over complete lactations showed that the freezing point depression was high during the colostral period. The values became normal in about 12 days. In spite of these high values during the colostral period, the lactose-chloride relationship was almost the same from about the third day of lactation, as the average found for the rest of the lactation. In the case of cows after the colostral period the freezing point depression remained below the average for full lactation till about 120th day of lactation, then the values fluctuated uniformly about the average till about the 220th day, and then showed a tendency to increase. In the case of buffaloes these changes were not noticeable. The freezing point of milk was not affected by the change in seasons under the conditions prevailing in Bangalore during this study. Development of acidity in milk increased the value of freezing point depres- sion. At the stage when milk showed positive boiling test, the increase in freezing point depression per 0.01 per cent increase in acidity was 0.0036ºC. in the case of cow milk, and 0.0038ºC. in the case of buffalo milk. It is suggested that for freez- ing point test a sample should be examined only when its acidity does not exceed 0.19 per cent as lactic acid, and/or when the sample does not give a positive boiling test. Removal of fat from milk or pasteurisation of milk had no effect on the freezing point values. On boiling and simmering the freezing point depression increased. Addition of water lowered the freezing point depression. None of the formulae tested gave satisfactory results for calculating the amount of added water when the original freezing point of samples was unknown. While the addition of starch had no effect on the freezing point depression, presence of cane sugar increased the value. Addition of one per cent sugarmasked the presence of over 15 per cent of added water. Reconstituted skimmed milk powder, both roller and spray dried, showed a smaller freezing point depression than milk.
December, 1953] C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. V. RAO AND N. N. DASTUR 267 ACKNOWLEDGMENT The work described was carried out under a special grant given by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the authors are grateful for the help. They also thank Dr K. C. Sen and Dr K. P. Basu for their interest and valuable criticisms. REFERENCES Aschaffenburg, R. and Temple, P. L. (1941). J. Dairy Res., 12, 315 Aschaffenburg, R. and Veinoglou, B. C. (1942-44). J. Dairy Res., 13, 267 Association of Official Agricultural Chemists (1950). Handbook of A. O. A. C., 239 Buchanan, J. H. and Lowman, O. E. (1929). J. Dairy Res., 12, 484 Davies, W. L. (1939). The Chemistry of Milk, Chapman & Hall Ltd., London, 50 Department of Health, Scotland (1943). Report of the Sub-Committee of the Scientific Advisory Committee Dharmarajan, C. S., Venkateswara Rao, R., Menon, M. N. and Dastur, N. N. (1950). Indian J. vet. Sci. 20, 35 Elsdon, G. D. (1934). Analyst, 59, 665 Elsdon, G. D. and Stubbs, J. R. (1933). Analyst, 58, 7 Elsdon, G. D. and Stubbs, J. R. (1936). Analyst, 61, 382 Elsdon, G. D. and Walker, G. H. (1942). Richmond's Dairy Chemistry, Charles Griffin & Co., Ltd., London, 109 Featro, J. G. and Moore, A. V. (1950). J. Milk and Food Tech., 13, 167 THE STUDY OF NORMAL BLOOD OF SHEEP By A. F. HATHOOT, M.V.Sc. (Cairo), Lecturer in Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University (Received for publication on 7 January 1953) THE blood picture of the animal is a good criterion for its condition. It serves too, as an aid in both diagnosis and prognosis. The normal picture which is the standard that will be compared to in other cases has to be known first. This information is lacking in the case of Egyptian sheep; therefore this study was made. REVIEW OF LITERATURE Red blood corpuscles Cohnstein [1884] gave a count of 12.090 millions per cu. mm. of R. B. C. in sheep. Bethe [1892] gave a count of 9.133 millions per cu. mm. in sheep. The average number of red corpuscles given by Wolcmann [1895] was 8.000 millions per cu. mm. in sheep. Storch [1901] found the average for adult sheep to be 10.470 millions, while for lambs he found 11.032 millions per cu. mm. Warthin [1903] recorded 12.5 millions per cu. mm. in sheep. Giltner [1908] found higher amounts in two normal male sheep. The red corpuscles were 9.120 and 11.500 millions per cu. mm. Wetzl [1910] found the red corpuscles in normal sheep to vary from 8.008 to 9.272 millions per cu. mm. Holmann [1945] found that sheep have a count of 11.5270 THE STUDY OF NORMAL BLOOD OF SHEEP [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, MATERIALS AND METHODS Blood samples were drawn from 60 sheep belonging to Breeding Department in the Faculty of Agriculture. They were under good management representing the best in the country. The animals were classified as follows: Group No. 1 included new-born lambs from 1 to 60 days old Group No. 2 included lambs from 2 to 12 months old. Group No. 3 included young sheep from 1 to 2 years old. Group No. 4 included adult sheep from 2 to 5 years old. Blood specimens were collected from the marginal vein of the ear. The first drop was wipped and the second drops were used for the following determinations: 1. Red blood corpuscles (erythrocytes). 2. Hæmoglobin percentage. 3. White blood corpuscles (leucocytes). 4. Differential count of leucocytes. Blood films were stained after the panoptic method by using May-Gruenwald stain followed by Giemsa stain. They were then examined for differential count of leucocytes. In counting cells a Neubauer hæmocytometer was used. The Sahli hæmoglobinometer was chosen for determination of hæmoglobin. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Red blood corpuscles The new-born lambs recorded a maximum count of 12.780 millions and a minimum one of 9.080 millions with an average of 10.930 millions per cu. mm. The count for the adult sheep ranged between 9.210 millions for the maximum and 7.960 millions for the minimum with an average of 8.585 millions per cu. mm. Lambs and young sheep recorded averages of 10.598 millions and 9.735 millions per cu. mm. respectively, while their maximum counts were 9.240 and 9.220 per cu. mm. respectively. In the four groups the counts were high in new-born lambs and low in adult sheep; while lambs and young sheep were medium between the two groups. Table I contains the averages of the differential count in the four groups. TABLE I Averages of the differential count in four groups Group of animals R.B.C. in millions W.B.C. in millions H.B. per cent Neut- rophile Lym- phocytes Eosi- nophiles Baso- philes Mono cytes New-born lambs 10.930 10.000 70.5 64.5 44.0 0.2 0.1 1.2 Lambs 10.598 8.500 72.0 39.0 55.0 2.5 0.5 3.0 Young sheep 9.735 9.200 62.5 43.0 48.5 4.0 0.2 4.3 Adult sheep 8.585 8.000 54.0 41.0 50.0 5.7 0.3 3.0
December, 1953] A. F. HATHOOT 271 Therefore it could be safely concluded that the younger are the sheep the more was the red cells count. Hæmoglobin percentage The percentage of hæmoglobin varied from 72 to 54 in all groups, the averages recorded for the four groups were 70.5 for new-born, 72 for lambs, 62.5 for the young sheep and 54 for adult sheep. Here too, the hæmoglobin percentage tended to be high in young animals and low in adult ones. White blood corpuscles The number of white blood corpuscles per cu. mm. for sheep as a whole varied from 8,000 to 10,000. Averages being 10,000 for new-born lambs, 8,500 for lambs, 9,200 for young sheep and 8,000 for adult sheep. The lowest average recorded was that of the adult sheep. The highest average was recorded by new-born lambs, then it was observed that the averages tended to be lowered in lambs while it increased a little in young sheep. Differential count A. The neutrophile granulocytes The neutrophile cells, according to their percentages occupy a second place to the lymphocytes in all groups except animals of group 1 new-born lambs, where the neutrophile cells recorded a higher percentages than the lymphocytes. The average percentage of neutrophiles were 64.5, 39.0, 43.0 and 41.0 for the four groups respectively. B. The lymphocytes The lymphocytes occupied as a whole the first place in all groups of animals except the new-born lambs. This trend was similar to that of the neutrophiles. Averages of lymphocytes were 44.0, 55.0 48.5, and 50.0. per cent respectively for the four groups. C. The eosinophile granulocytes These cells are not so numerous as the lymphocytes and neutrophiles. The percentage of these cells in the circulating blood in the four groups varied widely. The percentage of eosinophiles increased in a parallel direction with the age. The increase in it was lowest in young animals and highest in adult ones. The average percentages recorded for the animals studied were 0.2, 2.5, 4.0 and 5.7 respectively. D. The basophile granulocytes These cells are very scanty in the blood as they were not demonstrable in the majority of 60 animals examined. Averages were 0.1, 0.5, 0.2 and 0.3 for the four groups. E. The monocytes These cells were not very numerous in the blood. They showed high counts in young sheep, being 4.3 per cent and low counts in new-born lambs being, 1.2 per cent. Close agreement was noticed between our records and that of Burnett [1917] and Holmann [1945] as shown in Table II.
272 THE STUDY OF NORMAL BLOOD OP SHEEP [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE II Comparison of count of cells by two authors Author Neutro- philes Lympho- cytes Eosino- philes Basophile Monocytes Burnett [1917] 37 53 1.7 0.3 8 Holmann [1945] 17 74 5.0 1.0 3 SUMMARY Sixty normal samples of blood were examined for R. B. C., W. B. C., H.B. per cent and differential count. The results are as follows: (1) The number of red blood corpuscles per cubic millimeter of blood varies with the age of animals. The counts being higher in the new-born sheep and low in the adult ones. Lambs and young sheep were inter- mediate. Males recorded high counts than those of females. (2) The hæmoglobin percentage showed the same trace of R.B.C. It was higher in young animals than in the older ones. (3) The white blood corpuscles counts also behave in a similar manner, being higher in new-born lambs and lower in adult sheep. (4) The neutrophiles were found to be higher in percentage than the lympho- cytes in the new-born lambs. (5) The lymphocytes were of high percentage in all cases except in the new- born lambs. (6) The eosinophiles were found to increase in a parallel direction with age, they were lowest in the young and highest in adult ones. (7) The basophiles were the lowest cells in the blood. (8) The monocytes were not very numerous, they were low in the new-born lambs. REFERENCES Burnett, S. H. [1917[. The clinical pathology of the blood of domesticated animals, 44 Bethe, M. [1892]. Sehwalbe-Morpholog. Arbenten, i, S. 207 Cohnstein, J. [1884]. Aroh. f. gesamm. Physiol. 34, S. 233 Giltner, Ward. [1908]. Ann. Vet. Rev. 33, 557 Holmann, H. [1945]. J. Comp. Path. Therap. 55, 146 Storoh, A. [1901]. Inaug. Diss, Born. Warthin, A. S. [1903]. Contr. Med. Res. dedicated to Vughan, Ann. Arber. 216 Wetzl, J. [1910]. Zeitschr. f. Tiermed, 14, I. Wiendick, K. [1906]. Arch. f. wisson. u. prakt. Tierkeilk 32, 113 Woltmann, H. [1895]. J. Exp. Med. 7, 119
COMPARISON OF FOUR EJACULATES COLLECTED IN RAPID SUCCESSION FROM THE INDIAN WATER BUFFALO (B. BUBALIS) By S. S. PRABHU and U. D. SHARMA, Division of Animal Genetics, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 14 March 1953) COMPARATIVELY little information on the factors affecting the semen of the Indian water buffalo, B. bubalis, is available in literature. Kushwaha and Bhattacharya [1951], Kushwaha, Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952], and Malkani and Patel [unpublished] present data on the seasonal variations in the quality of buffalo semen. Kushwaha and co-workers had worked on the semen of buffalo breed commonly found in Uttar Pradesh, while Malkani and Patel had studied the Surati breed of buffaloes. Prabhu and Bhattacharya [1951], compared the first and second ejaculates collected in rapid succession from eight buffalo bulls at weekly intervals. They found that while highly significant difference existed between bulls, out of the 12 criteria of semen quality studied, only percentages of abnormal and dead sperm showed statistically significant difference between ejaculates, while the difference in the total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate approached five per cent level of significance. In the present paper four ejaculates taken in quick succession from 12 buffalo bulls belonging to the breed commonly found in Uttar Pradesh are analysed and compared. METHODS The twelve bulls selected for the study were purchased locally so that their exact ages were not known. They all possessed full mouths and were healthy and vigorous. Preliminary trials showed that they were suitable for artificial service. They were kept on a uniform schedule of rations, which consisted of bhoosa or hay given ad lib and concentrates made up of two parts crushed oats and one part linseed cake given at the rate of 3 lb. per 800 lb. live-weight. In addition, each bull was fed 10 lb. of green grass. The experiment was started on 26 May, 1952 and the last collections were made on 16 July, 1952. To facilitate work, six bulls at a time were studied. Collections from the two groups of six bulls were made at an interval of 24 hours. For the purpose of analysis, however, all collections were treated as if made on the same day. Each ejaculate was studied for the following criteria of semen quality. (i) Volume, (ii) Initial motility, (iii) Sperm concentration, (iv) Total spermatozoa in an ejaculate and (v) Initial pH. In addition, reaction time was also recorded. Altogether, per bull eight collections each consisting of four ejaculates were taken and studied. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In Table I are presented the averages of the various items of semen criteria and reaction time for the four ejaculates averaged over bulls. The data of the analys is of variance [Snedecor, 1947] carried out is presented in Table II. 273 7 AR/53 11
274 COMPARISON OF FOUR EJACULATES OF BUFFALO [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, TABLE I Comparative statement of the various semen criteria and reaction times in the four ejaculates Serial number Description of item studied Order of ejaculates Critical difference I II III IV 1 Volume (c.c.) Average 2.14 2.26 1.18 1.30 0.260 Range (0.2-9.0) (0.3-5.7) (0.1-5.0) (0.1-4.1) 2 Initial motility Average 2.69 2.31 1.89 1.01 0.4033 Range (0December, 1953] S. S. PRABHU AND U. D. SHARMA 275 (i) Volume There was a highly significant difference in the total volumes of semen collected from the different bulls. The minimum was 21.9 c.c. (for eight collections with four ejaculates per collection) given by Bull No. 16 and the maximum was 90.9 c.c. given by Bull No. 24 which works to 0.68 c.c. and 2.81 c.c. per ejaculate respectively. There was also great variation in total volume of semen collected in the different ejaculates. The respective ranges for total volumes collected in 32 ejaculates per bull were: First ejaculate 5.4 c.c. to 33.4 c.c. Second ejaculate 6.0 c.c. to 35.5 c.c. Third ejaculate 2.0 c.c. to 16.7 c.c. Fourth ejaculate 3.8 c.c to 22.6 c.c. In general, larger semen volumes were obtained in the first two than in the subse- quent ejaculates. Here again, individual behaviour of a few bulls was different. Thus Bull No. 37 gave a total semen volume in the fourth ejaculate, which was larger than the other ejaculate totals. Bulls No. 16, 25 and 38 had fourth ejaculate totals larger than their respective first and third ejaculate totals. On an average, the difference among ejaculates was statistically highly significant. The critical difference for testing significance between ejaculate averages worked out to 0.2690 c.c. Application of this test showed that while there was no significant difference between first and second ejaculates, both these ejaculates varied significantly from the remaining two ejaculates. Besides as the interaction 'bulls × ejaculates' came out to be significant, it also showed that the difference in the ejaculates had varied significantly from bull to bull. (ii) Initial motility As in the case of the semen volume, initial motility also showed highly signifi- cant variation from bull to bull. The lowest average initial motility was found in Bull No. 20 with 1.27 and the highest in Bull No. 16 with 3.00. Among ejaculates, differences were highly significant. While there was no statistically significant difference in the average motility of first and second ejaculates, both these ejaculates differed significantly from the remaining two ejaculates. This shows that on an average the third and fourth ejaculates contain semen of poorer motility-rating than in the first two ejaculates. (iii) Sperm concentration Among the bulls, the lowest average sperm concentration namely 328 millions/c.c. was found in Bull No. 20, and the highest namely 1376 millions/c.c. in Bull No. 16. Bull to bull variation was highly significant, so also was the difference among ejaculates. There was no significant difference among the first, third and fourth ejaculates, while all of them differed significantly from the second ejaculate which contained the highest average concentration of sperm. The interaction 'bull X ejaculate' came out to be highly significant, showing that the sperm concentration in the four ejaculates varied significantly from bull to bull. 7 AR/53 12
276 COMPARISON OF FOUR EJACULATES OF BUFFALO [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, (iv) Total sperm in ejaculate The lowest average total sperm in an ejaculate was found in Bull No. 20, and the highest in Bull No. 24. The respective figures were 553 millions and 3045 millions. Bull to bull variation in total sperm in ejaculate was highly signifi- cant. So also was the difference among the ejaculates. The second ejaculate differed significantly from the remaining three ejaculates; while among the remain- ing three ejaculates, the first differed significantly from the third and fourth. These results also show that on an average the first two ejaculates are better than the subsequent two ejaculates. In addition, the difference among ejaculates had varied significantly with bulls, which was shown by the highly significant 'bull x ejaculate' interaction. (v) Initial pH As in previous criteria of semen quality, pH showed highly significant varia- tion in case of both bulls and ejaculates. It was noticed that with the frequency of collection the pH turned from acidity to definite alkalinity. There was no signi- ficant difference in the pH between first and second ejaculates, while both these ejaculates differed significantly from the subsequently drawn two ejaculates. These results also suggest that the first two ejaculates on an average are better than the subsequent two ejaculates. (vi) Reaction time Reaction time showed highly significant difference from bull to bull and from ejaculate to ejaculate. Besides, the difference among ejaculates also varied signi- ficantly from bull to bull. On an average, the first two ejaculates individually differed significantly from the remaining two ejaculates, while the difference between the first and second was not statistically significant. The results presented in this paper confirm the findings of Prabhu and Bhatta- charya [1951], as far as the first two ejaculates taken in rapid succession are con- cerned. Further, in all the five items of semen criteria and reaction time compared, the first two ejaculates appear to be superior to the subsequent two ejaculates. It was observed that the third and fourth ejaculates contained less semen volumes, of lower initial motility rating, of lower sperm concentration, of lower total number of sperm and of higher pH value than the first two ejaculates. Besides, the reaction times in the former cases were higher. It appears therefore that it is undesirable to take more than two ejaculates at a time from the buffalo bulls when a schedule of collections at weekly intervals is followed at the artificial insemination centres. Even so, there could be exceptions as seen by the large bull to bull variation and significant 'bull X ejaculate' interaction. A safer course may be to follow generally the suggestion made in this paper and introduce modification only under special circumstances. SUMMARY 1. Four ejaculates taken in rapid succession at weekly intervals from twelve buffalo bulls of the type commonly found in Uttar Pradesh were analysed in respect of five semen criteria and reaction time.
December, 1953] S. S. PRABHU AND U. D. SHARMA 277 2. On the basis of the results obtained, it is suggested that, it is undesirable to take more than two ejaculates at a time from buffalo bulls, though in special cir- cumstances depending upon the individual behaviour of the bulls a slight departure from this rule may be made. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to Dr P. Bhattacharya, Head of the Division of Animal Genetics, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, for his keen interest and encouragement in their work. They are grateful to Dr S. Dutta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, for providing all facilities. Their thanks are also due to Shri V. N. Amble, Statistician (A.H.) of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for advice on the statistical treatment of the data. REFERENCES Kushwaha, N. S. and Bhattacharya, P. (1951). Seasonal variation in reaction time and semen of buffalo bulls. Proc. 38th Indian Sci. Congr. Bangalore, 3, 248 Kushwaha, N. S., Mukherjee, D. P. and Bhattacharya, P. (1952). Seasonal variation in reaction time and semen of buffalo bulls. (Unpublished) Malkani, Mohina, C. and Patel, M. D. (1952). Seasonal variations in the quality and quantity of semen of buffalo bull. (Unpublished) Prabhu, S. S. and Bhattacharya, P. (1951). Comparison of first and second ejaculates collected in rapid succession from the Indian water buffalo (B. bubalis) Indian J. vet. Sci. 21(4), 257-262 Snedecor, George, W. (1947). Statistical Methods. The Collegiate Press; Inc., Iowa
FERTILITY OF BULL SEMEN PRESERVED FOR LONG PERIODS By S. S. PRABHU, K. D. BHAYA and P. BHATTACHARYA, Animal Genetics Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 31 March 1953) WITH the rapid development of air transport, the time factor involved in long range inseminations has been considerably shortened, making possible the widest use of available semen from high quality pedigree sires on a global scale. As compared to Milovanov's statement [1932] that the distance to which bull semen is to be transported should not exceed two hours' journey and that not more than six hours should lapse between collection and insemination, Lambert and MacKenzie [1940] reported successful impregnation with semen air lifted from Beltsville, Maryland to Piran in the Province of Buenos Aires, with the total time-lapse of seven days between collection and insemination. Cows in England have been successfully inseminated with semen sent by air from Denmark [Edwards, Walton and Siebenga, 1938] and those in Italy from semen air lifted from South and North America [Bonadonna, 1949]. In India, successful inseminations have been per- formed with Hariana semen sent either way between Izatnagar and Calcutta. In addition, over 250 inseminations have been performed at Cochin, Ernakulam and Colombo from air-borne semen from Sindhi bulls stationed at the Animal Genetics Division's field station at Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore. In India, among the various problems associated with long range paternity, the economics of the time factor involved between despatch of semen from the site of collection to the sites of insemination is an important one. This is specially so in cases where the animals to be inseminated are located right in the interior, and are reached only through primitive modes of conveyance over difficult road and terrain. In view of the heavy expenditure inevitable in such cases, one has to see whether it is repaid by a proportionately reasonable level of fertility. To investigate this problem, the present study was undertaken. METHODS AND RESULTS In order to ensure that sufficient number of cows would be available on a given day for insemination, the corpus lutea of cows in groups of 6-10 from the experimental herd at Izatnagar were manually removed. The animals usually came on heat from 3rd to 4th day after the treatment. In this way oestrus cycles of a group of cows were so adjusted as to ensure sufficient number of cows on heat to be ready at about the dates required. Semen samples of good quality from two young bulls were in the meantime processed and kept ready so that when the cows came on heat and/or repeated, semen samples with storage times ranging from 120-241 hours were available for artificial service. In this way, 21 cows were inseminated 279 7 AR/53. 13
280 FERTILITY OF BULL SEMEN [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, using semen from Bull No. 1, and 18 cows from semen of Bull No. 2. The results are shown in Table I. TABLE I Details of semen used and the percentage of conceptions obtained Bull number Number of cows used Number of inseminations Number pregnant Percentage of conception 1 21 36 7 19.44 2 18 20 2 10.00 Total 2 39 56 9 16.07 Details of the actual age of semen used in case of conceiving cows is given in Table II. TABLE II Age of semen used in the successful cases Cow number Age of semen in hours Bull number 1 216 2 2 216 2 3 120 1 4 241 1 6 241 1 6 197 1 7 168 1 8 192 1 9 126 1 DISCUSSION In our study, more than 50 per cent of the successes were obtained with semen stored for 9-10 days. Such samples according to the unpublished data collected by Bhatnagar contain on an average 15-20 per cent motile sperm. Of this, a small proportion differing with semen samples are progressively motile. The actual percentage of total and progressively motile sperm present in the stored semen samples depended on the bulls and varied from ejaculate to ejaculate within a bull. Report of Margolin, Bartlett and Lepard [1943] shows significant correlation between
December, 1953] S. S. PRABHU, K. D. BHAYA AND P. BHATTACHARYA 281 longevity of preserved semen stored at 4ºC. and fertility. In our study, estimations of motile sperm in semen samples were not carried out. But considering the average values, an estimate can be arrived at regarding the probable number of motile sperm present on an average in such samples, and it approximates to the estimate given by Salisbury and Bratton [1948] as to the number of live sperm that should be introduced in the reproductive tract of the cows for ensuring conception. The average over-all fertility for all inseminations works at 16.07 per cent. If the 16 cows, on which 30 inseminations were performed, are omitted (in view of their proving to be shy breeders) the overall fertility rate rises to 34.60 per cent. Further, a certain correction has to be applied for inseminations made at induced heats, which according to foreign workers, produce lower conceptions. Taking into account all relevant factors, it may not be considered unreasonable to estimate that given good quality semen to start with, preservation for 9-10 days at 4ºC. gives a fertility rate lying between 35-40 per cent. No doubt, this fertility rate is 20 to 25 per cent less than what is normally obtained, yet, in our opinion, the results offer a reasonably sound basis for undertaking long range paternity programmes, where the time-lag between collection and insemination is of the order of 9-10 days. It is to be remembered that the findings reported in this paper pertain to currently used methods of preservation. With the new technique of preserving sperm at very low temperatures [Polge and Rowson, 1952] developed in Britain, far reaching changes affecting long range paternity are expected. SUMMARY From a study of 56 inseminations performed with good quality bull semen preserved upto 10 days at 4ºC., it has been estimated that about 35-40 per cent of the cows may be expected to hold, which provide a reasonably sound basis for undertaking long range paternity service, when required. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for providing all facilities for undertaking this work. REFERENCES Bhatnagar, D. S. (1952). Unpublished data Bonadonna, T. (1949). XII Inter. Dairy Congr. 5, 195-198 Edwards, J., Walton, A. and Siebenga, J. (1938). J. Agric. Sci. 28, 503 Lambert, W. U. and Fred McKenzie (1940). Cir. U.S.D.A. 567 Margolin, S., Bartlett, J. W. and Lepard, O. L. (1943). J. Dairy Sci. 26, 983-985 Polge, C. and Rowson, L. E. A. (1952). Proc. II Inter. Congr. Physiol. Path. Ani. Repr, A. I. 90-98 Salisbury, G. W. and Bratton, R. W. (1948). J. Dairy Sci. 31(9), 817-822
ACCURACY OF A SIMPLE METHOD FOR ESTIMATING THE PERCENTAGE OF ABNORMAL SPERMATOZOA IN SEMEN SAMPLES By S. S. PRABHU and U. D. SHARMA, Animal Genetics Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 23 May 1953) FOR the assessment of potential fertility of semen samples used in artificial breeding, microscopic examination of stained spermatozoa is still the routine procedure followed in all advanced artificial insemination laboratories. Details of the various methods in vogue are given by Anderson [1945]. Salisbury, Willet and Seligman [1942], who tested four methods of making semen smears, found that the most satisfactory one consisted of drawing a drop of diluted semen between two microscope slides, drying and clearing in chlorazine and staining in carbol-fuchsin and gentian voilet. Gunn, et al. [1942] have obtained uniformly satisfactory results with a modified method of Cary and Hotchkiss [1935] using Mayer's acid haemalum and eosin. Most of these methods involve considerable labour and time; a certain amount of skill in preparing the smears and later, in staining them is also essential. Besides, due to the processing at the various stages of its preparation, an inevitable increase in certain types of abnormal spermatozoa may occur. Mercier and Salisbury [1947], who studied the effects of the methods of making, clearing and staining smears on the proportion of tailless heads and on the proportion of abnormally formed spermatozoa in fresh and stored semen of fertile bulls, observed that (a) the 'pulling' and 'drop' methods of making smears gave the same result when the smears were of uniform thickness, (b) fixing smears by heat or by albumen did not influence the proportion of tailless heads or true abnormals, (c) clearing of smears with one per cent chlorazine was responsible for producing most of the tailless heads and (d) with semen of fertile bulls, the staining of thin uncleared smears eliminated most of the tailless heads. At artificial insemination field stations elaborate laboratory facilities are not always available. To meet the special needs of the persons entrusted with such work it is necessary to place in their hands a method which, while requiring a minimum of laboratory equipment, may at the same time be expected to give results of about equal precision as of the elaborate tests. Such a method has been experi- mented upon by us; in this paper its results are compared with those got by one of the more elaborate laboratory methods. Incidentally, the comparison also reveals the relative merits of the two methods of processing of sperm284 ESTIMATING ABNORMAL SPERMATOZOA [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, on it, as is done in temporary mounts for rapid examination. To prevent the evaporation of the liquid under the coverslip, it was completely sealed with a thick side coating of vaseline. Thus protected, the slide can be examined at leisure. In the second method smears were prepared as described by Gunn, et al. [1942], i.e. smear was fixed in methyl-alcohol, washed in water, stained with Mayer's acid haemalum, counterstained with acidified saturated alcohol solution of eosin, washed in water and dried. For each ejaculate, two slides per method were made, and at least 300 spermatozoa were examined per slide under high dry power objective. The head, midpiece and tail abnormalities were classified separately. In all 52 first ejaculates and 53 second ejaculates from nine different buffalo bulls were studied. RESULTS An overall distribution of the different types of abnormalities observed in the slides prepared by the two methods is given in Table I. The total number of spermatozoa observed are of the same order, being 67,628 in the first case and 67,745 in the second. In view of this, the actual number of the different types of abnormalities will indicate their relative frequency of incidence, and comparisons between methods were made on the basis of these numbers only. TABLE I Distribution of the various kinds of morphological sperm abnormalities found by the two methods Method Various kinds of sperm abnormalities (i) Head Double Micro Mega Pointed Degenerate Circular Total I (Temporary mount) 1 85 24 39 215 6 370 II (Permanent mount) 1 110 10 43 258 27 449 (ii) Mid-piece Double Broken Beaded Thick Filiform Total I (Temporary mount) 2 3 449 52 7 513 II (Permanent mount) 5 78 424 65 12 584 (iii) Tail Double Beaded Bent Coiled Tailless Rudi- mentary Broken at base Total I (Temporary mount) 1 49 1324 1468 96 288 30 3256 II (Permanent mount) 1 49 1868 1395 239 169 80 3796 Total sperm observed for I (Temporary mount) method = 67,628 Total sperm observed for II (Permanent mount) method = 67,745
December, 1953] S. S. PRABHU AND U. D. SHARMA 285 TABLE II The bull-wise average estimates of morphologically abnormal sperm Bull number 17 4 30 19 21 16 20 31 33 Method I II I II I II I II I IT I II I II I II I II Abnormality per cent I Ejaculate (i) Head 0.41 0.53 0.64 0.78 0.42 0.54 0.62 0.63 0.58 0.70 0.50 0.52 0.90 1.04 0.42 0.62 0.50 0.72 (ii) Mid-piece 0.54 0.58 0.66 0.90 0.80 0.66 0.68 0.71 0.78 1.05 0.82 0.68 1.11 1.12 0.84 0.76 0.87 0.78 (iii) Tail 3.87 5.11 4.40 5.97 4.86 5.41 6.03 5.30 4.76 5.93 1.91 3.91 9.08 8.56 5.42 5.28 4.32 5.63 (iv) Total 4.82 6.28 5.70 7.65 6.08 6.61 7.33 6.64 6.12 7.68 3.23 5.11 11.09 10.72 6.68 6.66 5.69 7.13 II Ejaculate (i) Head 0.68 0.54 0.50 0.70 0.41 0.53 0.39 0.65 0.62 0.75 0.32 0.58 0.77 0.89 0.53 0.72 0.51 0.49 (ii) Mid-piece 0.47 0.79 0.70 0.89 0.72 0.80 0.65 1.08 0.92 0.96 0.77 0.66 0.95 1.07 0.68 0.91 0.67 0.79 (iii) Tail 3.67 4.30 4.25 5.87 4.99 5.83 5.54 5.27 4.57 5.15 1.81 3.30 7.72 8.15 4.21 4.99 4.16 4.95 (iv) Total 4.82 5.63 5.45 7.46 6.12 7.16 6.58 7.00 6.11 0.86 2.90 4.54 9.44 10.11 5.42 6.62 5.34 6.23 7AR/53 15
286 ESTIMATING ABNORMAL SPERMATOZOA [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, The figures presented in Table II are bull-wise averages got with the two methods. These were tested by the technique of analysis of variance [Snedecor, 1940]. Results are discussed below: (i) Head abnormality. The actual percentage varied from 0.3 to 1.0. It formed the smallest portion of the total morphological abnormalities of the sperm observed. On the whole, the abnormality was higher in the second than in the first method. The difference was statistically highly significant. (ii) Mid-piece abnormality. The actual percentage varied from 0.46 to 1.42 and on an average was slightly higher than (i) above. On the whole, the abnormality was higher in the second than in the first method. The difference, after eliminating the variation due to bulls and ejaculates, was found to be not significant. (iii) Tail abnormality. These form the largest portion of the total abnormality observed and varied from 1.91-9.07 per cent. On the whole, the percentage was higher in the second than in the first method. The difference was statistically significant. In addition with different bulls significantly different percentages were obtained. (iv) Total abnormality. The percentage varied from 3.00 to 11.09. The second method gave significantly higher percentage than the first. CONCLUSION The second method gave, on an average, significantly higher estimates of morphologically abnormal sperm than the first method. This was so particularly in case of head and tail abnormalities. As stated earlier, the second method involves a more elaborate processing of sperm than the first. The higher percentage of abnormals thus appears to be due in large measure to the additional manipulations to which the sperm were subjected. This will be seen by the larger number of broken mid-piece, degenerate head, bent and tailless abnormalities shown by the second method (Table I). In view of this, it may reasonably be concluded that the first method gives a better estimate of the percentage of morphologically abnormal sperm actually present than the second. Besides, it is the easier of the two methods to learn and practice, requiring minimum laboratory facilities. As such it can conveniently be adopted by all workers in the field for routine semen examination without sacrificing accuracy. SUMMARY 1. Two methods of making semen smears for estimating the proportion of morphologically abnormal spermatozoa in semen samples were compared. For the first method, temporary mounts made with eosin stained semen samples were used, while for the second, permanent mounts prepared as described by Gunn, et al. [1942] were used. Two slides per method per ejaculate and 52 first and 53 second ejaculates obtained in quick succession were studied. Per slide about 300 spermatozoa were counted.
December, 1953] S. S. PRABHU AND U. D. SHARMA 287 2. Results showed that the first method gave, on an average, a significanty lower proportion of abnormal spermatozoa than the second method. This was attributed to the comparatively fewer manipulations to which the speraatozoa were subjected. It has been shown that the first method, being the easier one of the two, can be used in place of the second one at field artificial insemination centres for routine semen examinations without sacrificing accuracy of estimates. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to Dr P. Bhattacharya, Officer-in-Charge of the Animal Genetics Section, for his keen interest in this work, and to Messrs, A. R. Roy and V. N. Amble of the Statistical Section, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for their help and advice in the statistical treatment of the data. REFERENCES Anderson, J. (1945). Semen of animals and its use for artificial insemination. Imp. Bur. Anim. Breed. Genetics, 96-97 Cary, W. H. and Hotchkiss, R. S. (1935). Cornell Vet. 25:79 Gunn, R. M. C., Sanders, R. N., and Granger, W. (1942). Bull. Coun. Sci. Industr. Res. Austr 148 Mercier, E. and Salisbury, G. W. (1947). J. Anim. Sci. 6:60-66 Salisbury, G. W., Willett, E. T. and Seligman, J. (1942). J. Anim. Sci. 1:199-205 Snedecor, George, W. (1940). Statistical Methods, XIII +422 pp. (The Collegiate Press, Inc. Iowa)
PADDY-CUM-FISH CULTURE PILOT STUDIES CONDUCTED AT HESSERAGHATTA AND VISWESWARAYA CANAL FARMS IN MYSORE STATE By H. D. R. IYENGAR, M.Sc., PH.D. (Washington), Fisheries Officer, Department of Animal Husbandry, Government of Mysore, Bangalore ( Received for publication on 22 April 1953) (With three text-figures) ONE of the several items of fishery development work is the practice of rearing fish in paddy fields. The vast stretches of water 6 in. to 8 in. deep that are maintained in the paddy fields are rich in fish food, hence form excellent nurseries for fish. The idea of paddy-cum-fish culture is new only to India, for it is extensively practised in several other countries of the Indo-Pacific region, Japan, China, Indo- nesia, etc. The credit for popularising such an enterprise should go to the Chinese, who have been pioneers in fresh water fish culture. The Chairman of the Sub- Committee on fish culture of the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, F.A.O. states (F.A.O./IPFC 1951) that fish are reared simultaneously with paddy in over 4,00,000 hectares* of paddy fields in the Indo-Pacific area. Malaya leads in this with 3,00,000 hectares of paddy fields under fish-culture. Indonesia is second with 62,000 hectares, while Japan has 18,200 hectares, Indo-China and Ceylon have 15,000 hectares each under paddy-cum-fish culture. In India several attempts have been made to popularise the practice of paddy- cum-fish culture. The available literature on paddy-cum-fish culture is limited to brief reports and notes. Hora [1949] states that in an acre along with a paddy crop, a fish crop of 100 to 300 lb. could be raised. In China, it has been shown that paddy yield increased by 10 to 15 per cent by practising fish culture in rice fields. The fish to an extent control the spread of the stem borer and also the propagation of mosquito larvae. In Dutch East Indies, fish culture in paddy fields has been characterised as the 'highest form of pisciculture.' Experiments conducted by the Directorate of Fisheries, Bengal during 1945-46 showed an increase in paddy yield of 150 lb. per acre. The F. A. O. Rice Conference at Baguio, in March 1948, recommended the adoption of this practice in all suitable places. Hora [1951] while commenting on the paper by Hofstede and Ardiwinata [1950] on the compilation of data on fish culture in irrigated rice fields in West Java draws the attention of the public on the importance of fish culture in paddy fields. The possibilities of growing fish should on no account be underestimated as the advantages derived are many. Fish production in paddy-fields has been classified into four categories: (a) Catch on irrigated rice fields which represents a wild crop. * One acre = 0.40468 hectare 289 7AR/53 16
290 PADDY-CUM-FISH CULTURE [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, (b) Fish culture as a secondary crop, which represents the raising of fish as an alternate crop. (c) Fish culture between harvest and planting in fields where there is perennial irrigation, thus using the fields continuously. (d) Mixed paddy cultivations and fish culture. In this system, fish is reared as a catch crop during longer or shorter period in the paddy fields while the paddy is actually growing. Also the farmer may use the paddy fields as a nursery for young fish. In Indonesia, there is an extension service which gives practical demonstration on the utility of paddy-cum-fish culture and results of these experiments are given in the paper published by Hofstede and Ardiwinata. According to them, it is quite practicable to have fish culture in paddy fields and they recommend carp as an ideal fish for such an enterprise. As the tillering action of fish produces more stems, the fish control the growth of weeds and the manurial value of fish excreta will result in an increase of paddy yield which is shown to be 6.3 per cent. In Mysore State the first attempt at paddy-cum-fish culture was made in Nagar taluka of Shimoga district in the paddy fields of a private land owner when a few hundred 1 in. size fingerlings of Ophicephalus striatus were released into a paddy plot. Even though the experiment was not completed due to certain difficulties experienced by the landowner on the field, his reactions to this novel venture of paddy-cum-fish culture was expressed in a letter to the Fisheries Officer, wherein the landowner says: "I am glad to report that the small fishes let out in one of my fields of paddy at Nagar a few months ago are thriving well and attained a size of about 3 in. In my opinion the scheme of paddy-cum-fish culture can be made a success in the Malnad parts provided the fishes are let out in the fields immediately after the paddy seedlings are transplanted so that at least a period of four months may be allowed for them to grow. I would suggest fishes of bigger size than those used at Nagar should be used. As far as I could see only two difficulties are met with. When the rains are heavy, it is almost impossible in the Malnad parts to avoid the flooding of fields with the result that the fishes are likely to escape with the flowing water. Secondly crabs which are in abundance in the paddy fields bore opening across the mud bunds surrounding the fields and it is through these opening made by the crabs that the impounded fish find an exit to get out of the fields."These points raised by the cultivator are noteworthy and should be provided with an answer. In Mysore, the Policy Committee for Agriculture at its sixteenth meeting of the Mysore Economic Conference held on 11 April, 1949 recommended to Govern- ment a Scheme for the introduction of paddy-cum-fish culture as a very promising method of short term food production. In the meanwhile the Fisheries Division of the Department of Animal Husbandry conducted two pilot experiments in the selec- ted paddy plots at the Hesserghatta and Visweswaraya Canal farms respectively.
December, 1953] H. D. R. IYENGAR 291 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Paddy-cum-fish culture 7 AR/53 17
292 PADDY-CUM-FISH-CULTURE [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, Results of these two experiments are reported for record, while further research is in progress. EXPERIMENT No. I (Conducted at Hesserghatta Grass Farm, from 19 December, 1949 to 21 April, 1951) An area of 1/4 acre was selected for the experiment on paddy-cum-fish culture. This plot was divided into small plots of 169 sq. yards each. The bund around these plots was raised to 1½ ft. Only one plot of 169 sq. yards in the area was selected for fish culture, the remaining plots were kept as control plots. The water inlet and outlet were properly screened to prevent the escape of fish fingerlings. A depression of 2 sq. ft. and 1½ feet deep was dug up near the water inlet to act as retreats for the fish which were attracted to the water flow at the inlet. The depth of water maintained in the paddy plots was 4 in. to 6 in., thus a total volume of 507 cubic feet water was always maintained in each paddy plot. No special manure was used in the preparation of the paddy field. One thousand and twenty fingerlings of Ophicephalus striatus of an average size of 1.84 in. and an average weight of 0.87 gm. were released into one of the selected plots on 19 December, 1949. The paddy seedlings were 12 in. high and 6 in. apart at the time of fish release. A daily record of the water temperature in the paddy plot was kept. Every month, 100 fish were taken and their average length and weights were recorded (Table I). The experiment lasted 122 days. At the conclusion of the experi- ment, i.e. on 21 April, 1950, only 193 fish were collected. They measured on an average, 3.20 in. in length and weighed 9.85 gm. (Fig. 1). TABLE I Data on the rearing of 1,020 Ophicephalus striatus fingerlings in a paddy plot at Hesserghatta Farm Date Average length of paddy seedling in inches Average length of fish fingerlings in inches Gain in length Per- centage gain Average weight in gm. Gain in weight Per- centage gain Monthly average water temperature in centigrade 19-12-1949 12" 1.84" .. .. 0.87 .. .. .. 19-1-1950 16" 1.94" 0.10 5.43 1.36 0.49 56.3 19.4ºC 20-2-1950 24" 2.24" 0.30 15.46 3.31 0.95 70.0 22.6ºC 25-3-1950 40" 2.70" 0.46 20.53 4.05 1.74 75.0 27.6ºC 21-4-1950 42" 3.20" 0.50 19.52 9.85 5.85 143.2 32.3ºC Water temperature and rate of growth The water temperature in the paddy plot during the month of December was 19.4ºC., this gradually increased to 32.3ºC. at the conclusion of the experiment,
December, 1953] H. D. R. IYENGAR 293 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Pddy-cum-fish culture
294 PADDY-CUM-FISH CULTURE [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Weight of fish in grammes. Scale : Two divisions represent one gramme. Fig. 3. Paddy-cum-fish culture
December, 1953] H. D. R. IYENGAR 295 Figure 2 shows the correlation of water temperature with the average growth in length and weight of the fish. The water in the Hesserghatta plot is not very fertile and may be classified as belonging to the Desmid type [Soong, 1947], being predominant in desmid popula- tion and low in fertility. Hora [1947] records a growth of 8 in. to 10 in. in five months for 1 in. to 2 in. carp fingerlings introduced in paddy fields while Gopinath [1950] reports a growth of 8 in. to 9 in. of Trichopodus trichopterus, an anabantid fish, in the paddy fields of Malaya. Here, in Hesserghatta experimental paddy plot, 1.84 in. fingerlings of Ophicephalus striatus have grown to 3.20 in. in 122 days, while their gain in weight is also not any spectacular (Table I). This record of 1.37 in. of gain in length and 8.98 gm. gain in weight is not very encouraging (Fig. 3). This is due to the low fertility of the soil and water in the paddy plots. Computing the weight of fish produced in 169 sq. yards, it is estimated that 109.4 lb. of fish could be produced along with an acre of paddy. This is in conformity with Hora's [1949] estimates of 100 to 300 lb. of fish production in an acre of paddy. Paddy yield Hora [1947] reports an increase of 10 per cent in paddy yield from paddy-cum- fish culture. At Hesserghatta on harvesting, 90 seers of paddy was collected in the paddy-cum-fish culture lot and 84 seers from the control lot thus recording an increase of 7.2 per cent in paddy yield in the plot where fish was also reared. Fish survival Out of the 1,020 fish fingerlings introduced, only 193 survived recording a survival rate of 18.1 per cent. The loss of 81.9 per cent of the fish, besides natural causes, was also due to predation and escapement. EXPERIMENT No. II (Conducted at Visweswaraya Canal Farm from 23 September, 1951 to 28 November, 1951) An area of 726 sq. yards was selected. This was divided into two plots of 363 sq. yards each. One of the plots was used for fish culture, while the other one was used as a control lot. Bunds were raised to 1½ ft., screens were provided to the water inlet and outlet and a small depression was dug up near the water inlet. The depth of water in the plots was maintained between 6 in. to 9 in. The plot held a total volume of 1,906 cubic feet of water. The water temperature ranged from 23.3ºC. to 24.4ºC. Special manure mixture of 6 2/3 maunds of groundnut cake, two maunds of super- phosphate and four maunds of ammonium sulphate per acre was used in preparing the paddy plots. The paddy plant used, was the special deep water paddy. 1,100 fingerlings of Ophicephalus striatus of an average of 1.95 in. and of an average weight of 1.07 gm. were released into one of the selected paddy plots on
296 PADDY-CUM-FISH CULTURE [Vol. XXIII, Part IV, 23 September 1951. The paddy seedlings were 24 in. high and 6 in. apart at the time of fish release. Daily record of water temperature in the paddy field was kept. The water temperature ranged from 23.3ºC to 24.4ºC. The experiment lasted 66 days. At the conclusion of the experiment on 28-11- 1951, 127 fish were collected. They measured on an average 5.24 in. and weighed 28.3 gm. each. Due to inaccessibility, it was not possible to take monthly record- ings of length and weight of the fish. The water in the plot was fertile and teeming with fish food; this no doubt was due to preliminary manuring of the paddy field. Consequently the fish recorded a good rate of growth showing an increase in length of 3.29 in. and a gain in weight of 27.23 gm. The rate of growth for the same species in this experiment in 66 days as compared to the gain in length of 1.37 in. and a gain in weight of 8.98 gm. in 122 days in Experiment No. I is noteworthy. Manuring of the paddy plots prior to fish release is very beneficial for fish growth. The total production of fish per acre in this experiment as computed was 114.2 lb. At the Visweswaraya Canal Farm, experiment of paddy yield in the fish culture lot was 147 seers while in the control lot, it was 130 seers which showed an increase of 13 per cent in paddy yield. Out of 1,100 fish introduced, there was a survival of only 11.5 per cent. The fingerlings had grown to such a size that they were able to jump out of the paddy- cum-fish culture lot into the adjoining fields during night time. Predation due to the presence of crabs and water snakes was also observed.* SUMMARY 1. Culture of Ophicephalus striatus in paddy field requires better facilities like raising the height of the bund and use of manure in preparing the paddy plots. 2. It is possible to produce 100 lb. of fish in an acre of paddy field and at the same time increase the yield of paddy by 7 per cent to 13 per cent. 3. The paddy fields could be used as nurseries in the culture of murrels. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The experiments were started at the instance of Sir Datar Singh, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Government of India, during his visit to Hessaraghatta grass farm. *The relatively poor results obtained in these experiments can be ascribed to the defective selection of fish for culture. The murrel is a carnivorous fish and often shows cannabilistic tendencies, if live food is not available in its environment. The paddy field, in which they were cultured, at least in the first experiment was, of the desmid-type. It is likely that faunal elements, which from the food of murrel, were not available in adequate quantities in the area and the stronger specimens may have devoured the weaker ones. Further, being an airbreathing fish, the murrel can travel over long distances on wet land and it is not quite suited for culture in paddy fields having low embankments. The high rate of escapement seems to have been the main reason for low production. Instead of the murrel, if any of the carps had been employed for the experiments, a much better yield could have been obtained. A production of 150-300 lb., estimated by me in 1949, is under natural conditions and not under intensive fish culture. The value of the above experiments chiefly lies in the fact that when fish are cultured in paddy fields, there is an appreciable increase in the yield of the paddy. (Dr S. L. Hora)
December, 1953] H. D. R. IYENGAR 297 The author is grateful to Dr P. M. Narainswamy-Naidu, Director of Animal Husbandry Services, Government of Mysore and to Dr S. L. Hora, Director, Zoolo- gical Survey of India, for their continued interest and guidance. REFERENCES Chacko, P. I. and Ganapati, S. V. (1952). Fish culture in paddy fields. Indian Comm. J. Dasen, O. F. Paddy-cum-fish culture. A memorandum on food production, Lebanon Mission Road, Tanjore F. A. O. Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council. (1951). Preliminary report. Indo-Paoific fisheries Council, 3rd meeting February 1951, Madras, India. 75, App. 2 and Table 7 Gopinath, K. (1950). Fresh water fish farming in the Malay archipelago. Zool. Soc. India. 2, 2 Hickling, G. F. (1948). Fish farming in the middle and far east. Nature, London. 161, 748- 751 Hora, S. L. (1943). Fish farmer's calender (Department of Fisheries, Government of Bengal), Amritbazar Patrika, Puja number ABSTRACTS Production of food in fishery ponds suitable for major carps and seasonal variations of the food of carps. R. BHATTACHARYA(1948-50) THE paper relates to the investigations on the production and seasonal varia- tions of food suitable for major carps in the fish ponds of West Bengal. The investigation is directed to find out the effect of some of the ecological factors on the culture of major carps, Catla catla, Labeo rohita and Cirrhina mrigala. The water is more alkaline (pH above 8) in summer, but there is a fall of pH., and in concentrations, of organic matter and chlorides, in the rainy season. The avail- ability of plankton as food of fish is meagre in winter months and high in spring and summer. Microcystis, amongst phytoplankton, and Ceriodaphnia sp. and Cypris sp. amongst Zooplankton, dominate the plankton in summer and early part of rainy season. Catla catla feeds only on plankton throughout its life, whereas Cirrhina mrigala and Labeo rohita are planktonic feeders in the fingerling stage but feed mainly on decomposed vegetable matter afterwards. [B.N.G.] Ecology of Mugil parsia in the salt water bheries. P. S. MUKHOPADHYAY (1948-50) THE present investigation includes the studies on life history, bionomics and ecology of Mugil parsia with special reference to the conditions under which this fish is cultured in salt water bheries in the southern parts of Bengal. Sea- sonal occurrence of phyto and Zooplankton, availability of food for the fish at different stages and in different seasons and conditions of maturity are also discussed. The bheries are rich in plankton, Diatoms and Myxophyceae, constituting the larger portion of phytoplankton, and protozoans and Crustaceans that of Zoo- plankton. Phytoplankton is found in abundance from January to September, with a peak in March, and Zooplankton from July to January with a peak in Novem- ber. The food of the fry of Mugil parsia consists of Diatoms, Myxophyceae, Chloro- phyceae and Crustacea while fingerlings and adults feed on purely vegetable mattter comprising of Diatoms, Myxophyceae and Chlorophyceae. The fish feeds mainly at the bottom or at the edges, whereas its fry feeds at the surface, thus indicating selective feeding. The intensity of feeding is much reduced during September to December, when growth is also retarded. From the examination of gonads and from the appearance of fry and fingerlings, it has been inferred that the breeding season extends from January to June. In view of the availability of the food of this fish in freshwaters of the State, it has been suggested that Mugil parsia can be successfully cultivated in these waters. It has also been indicated that, if stocked in an advanced stage, this fish can be grown along with prawns and crabs and also with carnivorous fishes. [B.N.G.] 299 7 AR/53 18
300 ABSTRACTS [Vol, XXIII, Part IV, Diet protein in relation to disturbed host-parasite balance. CORKILL, N. L. (1950). Ann. trop. Med. Parasit. 44(3), 212-221 THE author has reviewed the literature in detail and has described the distur- bance of host-parasite balance as due to certain factors, protein intake of the host being the chief amongst them. He has shown that in certain infections in which phases of latency exist, failure of host-parasite balance may follow infection with a different pathogen, tissue trauma, physiological stress or protein subnutrition. The breakdown of the body protein is common to all these conditions which pre- sumably includes antibody gamma-globulin. He has suggested that in such circum- stances there is inhibition of resynthesis of gamma-globulin, as antibody, owing to the insufficiencies of dispensable amino-acids in the protein reserve or of indispen- sable amino-acids in the dietary intake, or of both. Lysine appears to be of special interest in this connection, since it is quantitatively the most important indispensable amino-acid in gamma-globulin. He has also suggested that the abnormal low- albumin high-globulin pattern of plasma-protein response in infection, trauma and subnutrition is purposive, in that, since in all these conditions there is increased danger of infection (old or new) overpowering the existing antibody defence, economy in dietary lysine (of which albumin contains about twice as much as globulin) enables a greater amount of globulin antibody to be formed from an intake which is assumed to remain constant. He has not suggested that the reasons for the failure of host- parasite balance are necessarily as simple as the above hypothesis might seem to indicate, nor that the part played by lysine is as important as might apppear. [K.N.M.] Sweet potato root meal versus yellow corn meal in the chick's diet. M. M. ROSENBERG and JAMES SEU (1952). World's Poult. Sci. J. 8 (2), 93-98 THE sweet potato utilised in this study is named Ono Lena, a Puerto Rican type, i.e. a moist, high dextrin tuber. It is recognised for its carbohydrate value and can be raised in the tropics. Previous work on this subject had revealed that the starches in raw sweet potato, among others, caused digestive disturbances when fed to certain animals in large quantity, and that cooking or heating of the tubers in the presence of water, dextrinised the starches and thereby eliminated this problem. In the present study the authors have investigated and procured data on the carbohydrate value of sweet potato root meal, processed or otherwise in the chick's diet. Uncured, uncooked dehydrated sweet potato root meal was prepared by slicing newly unearthed roots and dehydrating the chips at 150ºF. When dry, the chips were ground and screened and stored in four-ply paper bags at room temperature. In the first experiment this meal was substituted on a pound for pound basis for yellow maize meal in a series of rations fed for 21 days to straight-run, day-old New Hampshire chicks housed in battery brooders. In the second experiment a supply of fresh sweet potato roots was cured or cooked or both. Curing was done
December, 1953] ABSTRACTS 301 by storing roots in burlap sacs for 10 days, then sliced, dehydrated, and ground while cooking was by treatment in boiling water until soft. The cooked mass was mashed, dehydrated and ground. The various treated meals were substituted for. yellow corn meal at different concentrations and fed to chicks in the same manner as in the first experiment. The results are as follows: According to the authors the carbohydrates in the uncured sweet potato are not readily digested in the intestine of the chick. Dehydrated sweet potato root meal produced from freshly unearthed tubers gave significantly poorer results than yellow corn meal (maize) when fed to chicks for three weeks at levels ranging from 7.5 to 45.0 per cent of the experimental diets. When cured or cooked, or both, the nutritive value of sweet potato root meal was significantly improved and changes beneficial to the chick were induced, but the authors do not recommend more than 22.5 per cent cured or cooked or cured and cooked root meal in the chick's rations. [S.G.I.]
REVIEWS ANATOMY OF CHORDATES By CHARLES K. WEICHERT(Published by McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, 1951, pp. 921, Price $8) ANATOMY of chordates is not only a good treatise on chordate anatomy but also gives an interesting account of the natural history of these animals. The author has divided the book into three parts, (1) Review of the Phylum Chordata, (2) Organ System of Vertebrates, and (3) Representative animals; followed by a summary giving classification with characteristics and advances. The introduction given in the first chapter rightly emphasises that morphology and physiology go hand in hand and that the former has little meaning unless it is interpreted in terms of function. The author has consequently included func- tional point of view in every chapter of the organ systems. The chapter on the Classification and Natural History of Chordates is profusely illustrated and deals with the subject in such a way that it hardly leaves anything to be desired. Some of the figures of the recent and extinct chordates are rare, and others are of the forms shown in their natural back-ground which are not avail- able in any other single book. The chapters on organ systems are clearly written and well illustrated with an instructive summary given at the end of each. The account of the gills and phylogenetic origin of lungs and swim bladder may be cited as an instance of a subject dealt with in a remarkably good manner. The account of the digestive, excretory and reproductive systems, as well as of the receptor organs is also good. The chapter on Endocine system is a very useful addition as the information on this subject is not ordinarily available in such books. Some of the information contained is recent and valuable. Though no distinct pancreas is present in Cyclostomes, a few small masses of cells buried in the substance of the liver and wall of the intestine represent pancreatic tissue comparable to the island of Langerhans. The symptoms and changes in physiology due to removal of pancreas are also given in detail. The chapter on the skeletal system, though it gives a fairly good account of the appendicular skeleton, lacks some important features. For instance a com- parative account of the skulls of reptiles and mammals from phylogenetic standpoint has not been dealt with. The book is an important and useful contribution. It is of much help to a beginner as well an advanced student. The subject matter is well illustrated and the facts are properly correlated and blended in a harmonious whole. [H.R.M.] 302
Vol. XXIII, Part IV] REVIEWS 303 BANHAM'S THE VETERINARY SURGEONS VADE MECUM By W. ALSTAIR GREIG(Published by Bailliere, Tindall and Co., London, 1952, pp. 240, Price 17s. 6d.) THIS new edition is an enlarged and modified volume of the already well known Banham's Veterinary Posology and Other Information. The contents have been brought up-to-date and complete chapters on nutrition, milk, blood and urine examinations, allergic tests and on poisonous plants have been incorpora- ted. The book is divided into ten chapters dealing with important information. In the first chapter the author has dealt with materia medica and pharmacology including Posology, formulae, classification of drugs, solubilities and incompati- bilities of drugs, abbreviations used in prescription writing, dangerous drugs and poisons legislation, poisons and their antidotes and plants poisonous to live-stock. Most of the work in this chapter is in tabulated form and presents an easy access. The second chapter deals with bacteriology and parasitology. In this chapter the bacteria and the viruses are classified. A concise account of the diseases caused by Mycosis and other living agents, stains and staining methods, animal parasites of domestic animals, examination of faeces, identification of Mange mites and incuba- tion periods has been dealt with precisely. The third and fourth chapters deal with nutrition, food stuffs and milk while in the fifth chapter normal temperature, pulse rate, respiration, oestrum, gestation, puberty and weaning periods are given in a nut-shell form. Post-mortem signs, description of animals, colour and markings of horses and dentition are also dealt with in this chapter. The sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth chapters deal with notifiable diseases, allergic tests, blood, urine, and faecal examination, respectively. In the 10th chapter, tables of constants and conversion formulae are given along with such other useful information. The book has been printed on very good paper and nicely brought up. This hand book will be found valuable and handy aid to all the workers in the field of veterinary science, students and professionals alike. (M.R.M.) A WORLD DICTIONARY OF BREEDS, TYPES AND VARIETIES OF LIVESTOCK By I. L. MASON (Technical Communication No. 8 of the Commonwealth Bureau of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Edinburgh, 1951, pp. 272, Price 30s.) THIS volume is a compilation containing nomenclature, synonyms, physical description of breed characteristics, economic use, origin and location of com- mon farm animals such as cattle, horses, buffaloes, sheep, goats and pigs, as found in countries all over the world. The need for such a reference book at the present times cannot be over exaggerated. It seeks to remove once for all the 7 AR/53 19
304 REVIEWS [December, 1953 existing confusion and inconsistency that are commonly observed in the use of names and synonyms of various breeds and types described by different authors all over the world. Such a compilation will, no doubt, be an extremely valuable guide to those interested in farm animals, students of animal husbandry and research workers in animal genetics. The book would have been more complete if it con- tained illustrations and maps showing breed location for comparative study. This omission, however, has been accepted by the author. The task involved in such a compilation must have been tremendous, requiring data from innumerable references, sifting, collecting and collating information, which appeared during the last 20 years or more. It not only clarifies many mis- conceptions as regards breeds, their origin and use and ensures uniformity in the use of names and synonyms, but also furnishes information such as colour, shape of horn, productivity and purpose for which they are bred. The book consists of two parts and begins with an introduction, details of abbreviations and transla- tion of Russian words. In part I of the volume, the author describes in alphabetical order the names of species, types or varieties, consisting of more than 4000 entries. It commences with an explanatory note which serves as a key or guide to the method of presenta- tion of the nomenclature, location of breeds, economic use, relationship to other breeds, breed characteristics, synonyms, prescribed names, etymology and references. In Part II are given the latest numerical strength, percentage of composition and male and female ratio of some breeds wherever such data are available along with relevant references. In this part, descriptions have been given countrywise of all the animals, viz. horses, asses, cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats and pigs. [S.K.S.] MGIPC