Vol. XXIV, Part I March, 1954 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20s. Rs. 3 or 5s. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA 1954 ICAR. 6. XXIV.1. 875.
CONTENTS Vol. XXIV, Part I (March, 1954) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this Journal. Original articles Page THE NATIONAL RINDERPEST ERADICA- TION PLAN S. Datta 1 STUDIES on THE NATURE, INCIDENCE, DISTRIBUTION AND CONTROL OF NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS AND FASCIOLIASIS OF BIHAR (WITH PLATE I AND ONE TEXT-FIGURE) A. K. Varma 11 INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX- DRIVE ON SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES. I. PHYSIOLOGICAL STATE OF THE 'TEASER' COW S. S. Prabhu and P. Bhattacharya 35 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS. V. FREEZING POINT, LACTOSE, CHLORIDE AND ACIDITY [IN GOAT AND SHEEP MILK C. S. Dharmamjan, R. Venkates- wara Rao and N. N. Dastur 51 Abstracts 63 Review 65
ORIGINAL ARTICLES THE NATIONAL RINDERPEST ERADICATION PLAN By S. DATTA, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 13 October 1953) THE scheme for the eradication of rinderpest from India* was discussed at the last Animal Husbandry Wing Meeting held at Izatnagar in March, 1951. The live vaccine strains suggested for use in the campaign at that time were the 'lapinised' and the 'avianised'. As efficacy of neither of these had by then been tested under Indian conditions, the decision as to the type of vaccine to be employed for mass vaccination was withheld pending further field trials on the different species of animals. In the meantime, it was suggested that intensive control work in the States be continued by employing the existing method of immunisation and a circular letter was issued by the Ministry of Food and Agriculture to the various States, and the work has been intensified considerably in some of the States within their present resources. The present position Since the eradication plan was last discussed, a considerable amount of further work has been carried out on 'lapinised' and the 'lapinised goat-reactor' strains of rinderpest virus and more information has also been obtained on the goat-adapted strain, particularly on the virus content of the spleen tissue which is employed for the preparation of the vaccine and this would enable fixation of the minimum dose adequate to afford protection and working out of the costs of production.** Choice of a vaccine It is obvious that the choice of a vaccine for adoption in a countrywide cam- paign will depend on its safety, efficacy, ease with which it can be handled and trans- ported to the site of operation and the cost of production. It would be well to consider the various products in the field in the light of the above considerations on the basis of the information available to us about each product. The goat-adapted vaccine The original goat-adapted strain of rinderpest virus, which was evolved first by Dr Edwards at Mukteswar, has been extensively used in this country for the control of rinderpest ever since 1931. Other strains, notably the KAG and CAG strains, also evolved on the basis of Edwards' technique have been used in other countries. The Mukteswar strain has, no doubt, stood the test of time and has been ex- perimentally proved to confer a solid and life-long immunity (so far tested up to 14 years at Mukteswar). The majority of cattle met with in the plains in India react only mildly to it and can be very safely immunised with this product and in these, this would naturally be the product of choice. It must be admitted, * Dated 18 February, 1949. ** Datta, S. and Dhanda, M. R. (1951). The latest method evolved for the control of rinderpest and the problem of its control. Indian Vet. J. 27, 418. 8 AR/53
2 THE NATIONAL RINDERPEST ERADICATION PLAN [Vol. XXIV, Part I, however, that the product produces more severe reactions in certain types of cattle such as the hill cattle, the European and the European-graded stock as well as in buffaloes and even in the last named species, which is comparatively more resistant than the others mentioned here, a marked reduction in the milk yield and abortions in a certain proportion of animals in advanced pregnancy is not uncommon. Reports of such severe reactions are received from field workers engaged in this type of work. The natural outcome of this is that field workers are not very happy to undertake inoculations in these classes of animals for fear of being chased out of the villages that they visit in the event of a severe reaction, in rare cases followed by death. Even the smallest mortality or severe reactions in a few animals from amongst those immunised are enough to disturb the owners unless there is provision for compensation. Effect of vaccination in actual outbreaks Some of these severe reactions can be ascribed to vaccination carried out in the actual face of outbreaks, where some of the animals may be harbouring the virus of the disease at the time of vaccination, but not all severe reactions are due to this and that severe reactions do occur even otherwise is substantiated by those having first hand experience of vaccination on organised farms where the natural disease may be non-existent. The numbers of animals of this category which would be unsuitable for vacci- nation with the goat-adapted virus on account of their higher susceptibility to this strain of virus are quite considerable and cannot be ignored. They include certain types of cattle including the hill cattle and the European and European-graded cattle, buffaloes, and sheep and goats. The lapinised vaccine The rabbit-adapted strain has shown great promise as a suitable immunising agent for animals of all species, except perhaps the highly susceptible black cattle met with only in Japan. The vaccine is safe for all species of animals met with in India, producing in only a small proportion of them no more than a slight rise in temperature. Somewhat higher rise in temperature has lately been noticed in goats inoculated with this strain although the reaction is not such as to render the vaccine unsafe. On account of the great potentialities of this strain, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research sanctioned in 1951 money for operating at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute a scheme for under-taking studies on this strain of rinderpest virus to find out by laboratory and field trials if it would be suitable for adoption for mass vaccination campaign. The scheme started operating in July 1951 and the information obtained so far goes very much in favour of this vaccine. The total number of animals of different species vaccinated up-to-date with this product exceeds 20,000.* These include cattle of all breeds as also * Datta, S., Seetharaman, C. and Rajagopalan, V. R. (1951). The use of lapinised rinderpest vaccine (Nakamura III) in IndiaMarch, 1954] S. DATTA 3 European-graded animals and buffaloes in various parts of the country as well as sheep and goats. Their distribution is given in Table I. TABLE I Distribution of vaccinated animals Animals Lapinised virus Vaccine Lapinised reactor vaccine Cattlo 7,386 3,062 Buffaloes 951 502 Sheep 4,705 2,415 Goats 1,285 302 Sambhar (Stag) 2 Total 14,329 6,281 The vaccine has been found to be absolutely safe for animals of all ages, including those in advanced pregnancy without a single mishap. No reduction in milk yield has been noticed on any of the farms where vaccinations have been carried out on a fairly large scale. Immunity tests Immunity tests have been carried out in the laboratory on hill cattle as well as those belonging to the experimental dairy and the herds at Mukteswar and Izat- nagar by challenge with virulent virus and the results are summarised in Table II. TABLE II Results of immunity tests Species Number Interval Result Immunity tests carried out in 1949-50 Goats 6 3 months Immune Goats 3 6 months Immune Sheep 6 6 months Immune Cattle (Dairy) 2 7 months Immune Sheep 6 13 months Immune Immunity tests carried out in 1950-51 Cattle (Lucknow) 6 12 months Immune Cattle (Hissar) 20 91/3 months Immune Sheep (Hissar) 12 9½ months Immune Goats (Hissar) 12 9½ months Immune Immunity tests carried out in 1951-52 Calf 1 12 months Immune Heifers 2 2½ years Immune Cows 2 2½ years Immune Cows 4 2 years 9 months Immune Sheep (Hissar) 7 1 year 10½ months Immune Goats 9 1 year 10½ months Immune Sambhars (Stags) 2 2 months Immune
4 THE NATIONAL RINDERPEST ERADICATION PLAN [Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE IIMarch, 1954] S. DATTA 5 and some of the immunity tests carried out recently on buffaloes at Haringhata and sheep and goats at Hissar have shown that adequate immunity was not pro- bably established or that there has been a breakdown in the immunity when the challenge was done after one year of vaccination. The avianised vaccine At a result of work carried out during the last war by Shope and his co-workers in Grosse ' Isle in America it was shown that rinderpest virus can be adapted to grow on the membranes of the developing chick embryo after which it can be pro- pagated in the yolk sac from where it finally extends to the tissues of the embryo. By this process, serial passages in the yolk sac cause the attenuation of the virus and a stage is reached when it is rendered safe enough to be used as a vaccine. Sufficiently high titres are obtained to render vaccine production much cheaper than by any other method. The chief drawback of the avianised strains is that attenuation continues with further serial passages in the yolk sac so much so that complete attenuation may result, rendering the strain unsuitable for vaccination. The fixation of the virus which has been attained with the goat-adapted and rabbit-adapted strains has not so far been achieved with any of the avianised strains and one has to be vigilant about the passage which would be effective in conferring immunity, earlier passages being too virulent and later passages non-antigenic and unless suitable storage facilities are available, the stage at which the strain is safe as well as anti- genic may be missed. Moreover, the strain has not been tried in India on the various types of cattle required to be protected as well as other species of animals such as buffaloes, sheep and goats and the nature and duration of immunity conferred by it have still to be assessed. Unless this is done, and it will entail work of a considerable magni- tude, involving some considerable time, it will not be wise to adopt this strain in our eradication campaign for which a product conferring a long and lasting immunity is required. A further important consideration is the extremely fragile nature of the egg- adapted strain which will necessitate its handling in the field with the utmost care involving the use of ice at every stage of operation which may not render it of practical utility in any mass vaccination campaign under Indian conditions. The two main advantages of the avianised strain are its cheapness and complete freedom from other viruses and bacteria which in the other two types of vaccine may be acquired from the donor animals if such happen to harbour them in a latent form. The freeze-drying equipment The advantages of freeze-drying live virus vaccines are now established beyond doubt. The dried product, be it goat tissue vaccine, lapinised vaccine or avianised vaccine has much better keeping qualities. Normally, the wet seed material of goat tissue vaccine remains in the refrigerator, viable for about three months whereas the dry powder kept under vacuum will remain potent and maintain its titre for at least one year when stored in the refrigerator and for years if kept at a tem- perature of 6 THE NATIONAL RINDERPEST ERADICATION PLAN [Vol. XXIV, Part I, of freeze-drying which is of the order of about 90 per cent, the dry powder vaccine would be very much more efficacious and at the same time more economical to use. The freeze-drying equipment has already been installed at Izatnagar as well as in a few other places and it will not be long before production of freeze-dried virus vaccines becomes a reality in this country. Depending on the plan of work decided upon production could also be made possible on regional basis, the centre at Izatnagar taking care of supplies to the contiguous areas as well as to such States as may not be in a position to undertake their own manufacture of freeze-dried vaccines, and other stations looking after the areas falling in their own regions. THE SHEEP AND GOAT PROBLEM An important point worthy of consideration by the States themselves is whether, in view of the gigantic nature of the campaign, involving production of vaccine for as many as over 320 million animals of different species, their actual vaccination, branding or tatooing for identification and maintaining all records thereof, all to be accomplished in a relatively short period of 5-10 years, it would not be better to leave sheep and goats out of the programme. It may be pointed out in this connection that independent outbreaks of rinderpest of a severe nature resulting in death of thousands of them have only recently been recorded among sheep and goats in different parts of the country. Although in some of these out- breaks, the disease was not noted to occur simultaneously in cattle and buffaloes the fact remains that such outbreaks would remain serious sources of infection to animals of other species and it may become absolutely impossible to achieve our objective of eradication which the campaign aims at. It would thus appear that any mass vaccination campaign aiming at eradication of the disease must be so planned as to include all species of animals susceptible to the disease, so that at least amongst the domesticated animal populations in the areas no animals may be available that could get the infection and pass on to the progeny of the vaccinated cattle and buffaloes as soon as such young stock come to existence. It would thus appear that it would not be logical to leave out of the programme sheep and goats of which the numbers in this country are quite considerable and are likely to get even larger on account of great demand of meat and wool animals of these species. But in the light of the gigantic nature of the campaign it would appear quite logical to divide the campaign into two phases, the first phase during which all larger animals, viz. cattle and buffaloes may be immunised and the second phase in which all sheep and goats and other species as well as the progeny of cattle and buffaloes, the number of which would have reached quite considerable figures by the time an area is traversed a second time, could be tackled. However, it is for the individual States to decide for themselves whether the phases could not be combined. SUMMARY From what has been stated above it naturally follows that: (a) No single vaccine could be safe or economical to be used on the entire animal population with the varying susceptibilities which it is aimed to protect with a view to the eradication of the disease.
March, 1954] S. DATTA 7 (b) Goat virus is highly antigenic and would be good for the bulk of cattle living in the plains of India. But it would prove too severe for certain other breeds as well as for buffaloes and sheep and goats. (c) The lapinised vaccine, very satisfactory in all other ways, would be much more expensive to produce if all vaccinations are to be carried out with it and it may entail breeding of large numbers of rabbits, free of disease and the proposition would not be economical. It would be possible, however, to produce adequate quantities of lapinised vaccine, sufficient to deal with buffaloes and certain types of cattle more susceptible to the disease and which cannot be vaccinated by the goat-adapted vaccine. (d) Lapinised goat-reactor virus has to be ruled out at the present moment on account of the extremely low titres obtained with it and unless further work shows that the titre can be stepped up to an economic level. (e) Avianised virus, though extremely cheap, has not been tried in this country and until the nature and duration of immunity conferred by its use in the various species and different breeds of animals can be determined, it would not be wise to adopt it for a countrywide campaign. RECOMMENDATIONS The research so far has given definite indications of the great potentialities of both the goat virus and the lapinised vaccine each in their respective sphere as valuable agents for use in field campaign for the eradication of rinderpest. The time is now ripe for giving effect to the eradication plan and how best to do so should now be possible to be worked out by the Central Rinderpest Eradication Committee proposed below. Our recommendations in the light of the above discussion are as follows : 1. To adopt freeze-dried goat-adapted virus vaccine for the immunisation of all plains cattle. The vaccine should be produced at Izatnagar and at other few suitably-equipped regional laboratories giving due regard to its purity, safety, potency and keeping quality. To ensure its potency, proper storage facilities must be provided at each depot where the vaccine may have to be stored. 2. To use lapinised vaccine for all hill, European and European grade cattle, buffaloes, and sheep and goats. 3. The campaign may be divided, if required, into two phases, viz. Phase I.8 THE NATIONAL RINDERPEST ERADICATION PLAN [Vol. XXIV, Part I, field, be extended and reoriented to include work on avianised vaccine in the light of the experience gained and the developments which have taken place including the installation of freeze-drying equipment at several centres in India. In this connection the pro- gramme of the Disease Investigation Officers in the State will have to be suitably modified and the scheme will render assistance in the effective application of control measures as envisaged in the eradication plan without loss of time. 5. It is proposed that at the level of the Central Government there should be a Central Rinderpest Eradication Committee to plan, co-ordinate and progress the countrywide campaign with the Vice-President of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research as Chairman. It should include the Animal Husbandry Commissioner; Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute; FAO Experts; and some State Directors including the Animal Husbandry Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh. The work of the Central Committee shall be managed by a Secretariat staff and a whole-time Veterinary Officer appointed for the purpose at the Centre, who shall act as Secretary of the Committee. The State Committee shall also be constituted on similar lines, in which there would also be the representatives of the Revenue as well as the Police. The country should organise itself into certain regions, say, Northern, Eastern, Southern and Central, and the States in each region should agree on a common plan and decide to obtain their own requirements of freeze-dried vaccines from the regional vaccine producing centres. The Central Institute would still continue to supply products wherever required including those States which will not be covered by the regional centre and also supplement their activities, and with the improved air service, convenient air transport is likely. The staff required for the Central Rinderpest Laboratory at Izatnagar should be provided without delay to form as the co-ordinating link of all the technical acitivities. Without this control co-ordination, progress will not be as rapid as one would expect. 6. The resources of the States should be concentrated on improving the field organization and making it more adequate for intensifying and expanding their campaigns. The available resources could go a longer way, if expenditure could be rationalised and wastages eliminated. In regard to the organization of campaign on regional and State levels and to assist the regional and State authorities, the Central Body shall have sufficient funds to assist the State organization to reach up to such a level as to be most effec- tive for the purpose. All this will involve the appointment of appropriate strength of staff, mobile transport, cold storageMarch, 1954] S. DATTA 9 7. In addition it is suggested that in States having Veterinary Colleges, the third and final year students should during long vacation be taken out with college teachers to assist the field staff in executing eradication plan in the field. This will need the provision of a small amount for travelling and subsistence allowance and mechanical transport. Considering the magnitude of the task in so far as the numbers of animals to be inoculated in a short space of time and the area of the country to be covered, keeping in view the conveniences of the farmer, it is essential that stockmen in sufficiently large numbers be trained in specially designed course of short duration at all the available regional and State centres. In order that the services of the FAO experts now assigned to India for the purpose may be utilised to the best advantage, action as early as possible to imple- ment the above suggestions should be taken. The Directors in the States may submit schemes to their Governments and these may be forwarded to the Planning Commission for obtaining their blessings.
STUDIES ON THE NATURE, INCIDENCE, DISTRIBUTION AND CONTROL OF NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS AND FASCIOLIASIS IN BIHAR* By A. K. VARMA, Ph.D. (Lond.), Department of Parasitology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London (Received for publication on 8 May 1953) (With plate I and one text-figure) DURING the tenure of a State scholarship, so kindly awarded by the Govern- ment of Bihar for advanced studies in Helminthology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, an opportunity was afforded to the author by the same Government at the instance of Prof. J. J. C. Buckley to go to India. The object of this visit was to spend a short period collecting helminthological data and material regarding some important helminthic conditions of man and animals, prevalent in India, with a view to pursuing further research at London. During this period a simultaneous effort was made to investigate the nature, incidence and distribution of some of the important helminthic infections of domesticated animals in Bihar. Such a work has never been undertaken in the past and to carry oat a thorough helminthological survey of a big State like this, some years of hard continuous work would be necessary. Studies were therefore confined to the more important hel- minthic conditions like nasal schistosomiasis and fascioliasis, which are of great economic importance. Bihar is one of the big States of the Indian Union, lying between latitudes 21º58' N12 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, Mr. G. L. Wilkins of the Mollusca section of the British. Museum (Natural History), by comparing with the type specimens and referring to literature on the subject. All the forms, thus collected and identified, are catalogued in Appendix B with a Plate of illustrations. NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS (NASALGRANULOMA) Schistosoma nasale Rao, 1933 Malkani [1932] announced both at a public lecture in Patna (BiharIndian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part I] PLATE 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Limnaea auricularia race rufescens (syn: Limnaea acuminataarch, 1954] A. K. VARMA 13 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1.14 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, probably created doubts in the minds of some of the earlier workers, who considered them as identical with the eggs of S. spindale. In examining the samples of urine and faeces for the presence of eggs the ordinary concentration method was followed, which may be briefly described as follows. The faecal sample was emulsified with normal saline in the proportion of one to eight roughly. The emulsion was then strained through an ordinary tea- strainer to remove the coarse debris and the liquid was allowed to stand for about 20 minutes for the eggs to settle down. Usually four preparations from each such sedimented sample were examined. As regards the samples of urine, they were just allowed to stand and the sediment was then examined. Fresh-water molluscs were collected from different localities and tested for natural infections by (1) the ordinary test-tube method, in which the snails were kept separately in clean test-tubes containing three-fourth clean water to examine at subsequent intervals if they were discharging cercariae, and later by (2) dissecting them out for the developing larval stages, if any. Physical and topographical features of the area were studied and a close observation was made on the ecology and distribution of the molluscan intermediaries of the parasite with a view to correlate them with the incidence and distribution of the disease and also to formulate the most applicable prophylactic measures. This programme of work was followed during a tour extending over a period of about one month, from 24 February to 24 March 1952, in the infected areas, which were marked off from the records of the State Civil Veterinary Department. The itinerary was so planned as to visit each district of the endemic zone in turn. The number of places visited (indicated on the map, Fig. 1) was limited, but this did not interfere with the object of the survey on account of more or less similar conditions prevailing over the entire region. TOPOGRAPHYThe endemic sone of nasal schistosomiasis in Bihar lies between latitudes 25ºN and 25.60'N and longitudes 84ºE and 85.70'E and is marked off from the surrounding areas by the Main Line of the Eastern Railway (formerly called East Indian Railway) on the north and the Grand Chord Line of the same Railway on the south. On the west and the east the boundaries extend respectively to the areas irrigated by the Buxar canals and the low-lying areas watered by the river Poonpoon, Phalgu and Sakri with their tributaries. The physical features of the area seem to be an important factor in the occurrence of the disease, which has a more or less definite zonal distribution, as indicated in the map showing infected areas roughly. Methods of irrigation The entire region is a flat country in the Gangetic plain and is watered by the rivers Sone and Ganges with their tributaries and canals. The land slopes down to the north-east. The Sone has been harnessed by a dam near Dehri from where two Main Canals have been taken out, one on either side of the river. The Western Main Canal serves the district of Shahabad and the Eastern one irrigates parts of Gaya and Patna districts. The Shahabad canal system is more widely spread with all its distributaries in between the two railway lines named above. The areas of Piroo and Bikramganj, which were found to harbour the greatest number of cases
March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 15 of nasal schistosomiasis, actually lie in the centre of this canalised zone and are watered perennially. The subsidiaries of the canals through which water is taken to the fields for irrigation and the side-drains provided for draining off the excess water to low-lying areas are physical features of paramount importance in the ecology of the snail vectors of the parasite. It is noteworthy that not a single snail was ever found in the main streams of the canals where the water generally flows swiftly. The Eastern Canal, with its few branches, irrigates only the western parts of the districts of Gaya and Patna, while the rest of the central and eastern region, particularly of Patna district, is a low tract or depression which is annually flooded with water from the united streams of the Poonpoon, the Phalgu and the Sakri. These rivers flowing through low-lying land cannot empty into the Ganges when the latter itself is in high flood and are consequently held up and spread over the adjacent country. Throughout its long devious course the Poonpoon is extensively used for irrigation in the districts of Gaya and Patna, the usual practice being to raise temporary dams across its channels and to divert the water to subsidiary channels and thence into the adjacent fields. The river is fed by a number of tributaries, namely the Batane, the Adri, the Madar, the Morhar and the Dardha, all joining from the right bank. The predominant feature in the physiography of this part is the presence of innumerable swampy ditches, ponds, pools and low-lying, water-logged areas, filled with more or less clean water from the canals and the over-flooded rivers, providing a suitable abode for the molluscan intermediaries. These places are readily and regularly accessible to the susceptible animals, mostly for the purpose of drinking; while some are taken there by their owners for washing and cleaning. These facts account for the continued infections and re-infections of both the molluscan and the definitive hosts. Rainfall Broadly speaking there are three distinct seasons, each having four months' duration and gradually merging into the other; (1) the rainy season extending from June to September, (2) the winter from October to January and (3) the summer from February to May. The rains are torrential from the south-west monsoon arising from the Bay of Bengal and deviating westward after striking against the Assam Hills of Garo, Khasi and Jayanti and also from the same south-west monsoon coming out from the Arabian sea and deviating towards the east in the Gangetic plains from the Indus valley. The area also gets some more rains from the north- east monsoon during the winter months. Average monthly rainfall, as furnished by the State Agricultural Department is given in Table I. TABLE I Average rainfall in inches District Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June. Jly. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. An- nual Patna 0.51 0.73 0.31 0.28 0.99 4.98 10.61 11.24 7.47 1.77 0.40 0.17 39.40 Shahabad 0.64 0.90 0.37 0.22 0.67 5.19 12.59 13.03 7.87 2.04 0.39 0.28 44.19 Gaya 0.74 0.96 0.47 0.26 0.87 5.46 12.48 13.50 7.58 1.94 0.50 0.20 44.96
16 STUDIFS ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, Temperature The usual day temperature is about 100ºF. in the summer months and 65°F. in the winter months. The summer is dry with scorching heat and the temperature sometimes shoots up during the day to 115°F. or even a little over. During this period most of the pools and water-logged areas dry up, exterminating thereby the snail population or at least reducing it to a great extent. It appears that some of the surviving snails undergo aestivation, as after the rainy season when water returns to these pools, etc. they are again full of snails, probably as an outcome of very rapid multiplication of the aestivating snails or fresh ones brought in with flood water from other sources. TABLE II Mean monthly temperature in Fahrenheit District Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June. Jly. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Patna 62 66 78 88 90 86 85 84 83 80 70 62 Gaya 61 66 77 88 93 90 86 85 85 80 70 60 Soil and cultivation The area has special alluvial soil called locally 'Karail', which is a black, stiff and tenacious soil, sticky when wet and which can retain moisture for a long time, providing suitable aestivating grounds for the snails. It is very fertile, the chief crops being rice, wheat, gram, maize and all sorts of tropical vegetables in different seasons according to their natural requirements. Rice is the predominant crop of the area. It is grown in shallow waters that provide a very suitable ground for the transmission of the helminth under question through its molluscan hosts. Another point, possibly of importance in the epidemiology of the disease, is the close proximity of these unfenced rice-fields and other molluscan habitats to the villages providing opportunities for the constant exposure of animals to infection and re-infection. Livestock population Livestock is of great importance in the agricultural economy of the area and cattle outnumber all other domesticated animals, as the entire agricultural burden lies on the back of bullocks alone. Buffaloes probably come next in order, but it is interesting that only one or two cases of nasal schistosomiasis in these animals are on record; although owing to their aquatic habits they are more exposed to infection. Sheep and goats are also found in almost every village, but very few of them have been reported to carry the disease, possibly due to their remaining more or less confined in the villages away from the sources of infection. The area being densely populated and widely cultivated, there is practically no wild life. INCIDENCE AND DISTRIBUTION To quote Malkani [1933],' Nasalgranulomata has not been reported from other parts of the world and appears to be confined to India, where it is found principally
March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 17 in Burma, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Madras, Mysore and C. P. Even in these provinces the disease shows a curious regional distribution being restricted to low- lying marshy localities, which are either irrigated with canal water throughout the year or suffer from inundation during the rains. Its distribution in this province (Bihar) has been fairly fully worked out from the replies to a questionnaire sent out from this laboratory'. From this statement it transpires that the distribution of the disease in Bihar, as worked out by Malkani, is highly theoretical, based evidently on the cases of Nasalgranuloma treated by the district veterinary staff, posted at different stations throughout the State. Such a report has little statistical value and cannot be relied upon in face of the common practice of moving cattle from place to place, which tends to mislead the veterinarian as to the genuine occurrence of the disease in his locality, and most likely this caused errors in answer- ing to Malkani's questionnaire. Also, owing to the ignorance of the people and the fact that veterinary aid is not easily available, many cases go entirely untreated and unrecognised. Bihar, particularly the districts of Patna, Shahabad and a part of Gaya, is one of the very few States, which has to sustain a heavy economic loss on account of this wasting disease of cattle. The main routes followed in the present survey were : (1) Patna-Fatwah-Hilsa-Islampur (2) Fatwah-Bakhtiarpur-Harnauth-Biharsharif (3) Patna-Maner-Arrah-Piroo-Bikramganj-Jitaura-Jagdishpur (4) Jagdishpur-Behea-Berhampur-Bhojpur-Nawada-Arrah (5) Gaya-Wazirganj-Hansua-Nawada-Warsaliganj In these areas enquiries were made regarding the occurrence of nasal schistosomiasis and a series of samples were examined in nine different locations, where facilities were available for the work. The results have been summarised in Table III. TABLE III Incidence of infection in different localities surveyed District Locality Total number of animals examined Number found infected Percentage of infection C B G C B C C B G Patna Hilsa-cum-Islam- pur 92 20 10 57 0 0 61.9 0 0 Bakhtiarpur-cum- Harnauth 85 15 10 50 0 0 58.8 0 0 Shahabad Piroo 170 20 12 107 0 0 62.8 0 0 Bikramganj 105 20 10 61 0 0 58 0 0 Berhampur 35 6 9 3 0 0 8.5 0 0 Nawada 82 14 8 6 0 0 7.3 0 0 Gaya Hansua-Nawada 32 8 0 2 0 0 6.2 0 0 Grand total 601 103 59 286 0 0 47.5 0 0 C18 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, Routes (1) and (2) pass through the Poonpoon belt, which suffers typically from annual inundation and presents numerous swamps and pools that are most favoured habitats of the molluscan hosts. Areas on route (3) are likewise heavily canalised presenting many water-pockets, as described before. The aquatic molluscs of these areas have been discussed in a subsequent section. Areas on routes (4) and (5) showed very low percentage of infection. This is accounted for by a topographical contrast of these areas, which are at a higher level and rather dry being free from the ravages of the rivers and the canals. Many of the villages in these areas are dependent on well for their water supply in dry season. It was interesting to find that some animals were harbouring the parasite without showing any pronounced clinical manifestation. The typical snoring symptoms of the disease appears to be associated with more or less older infections setting up ulcerated nasal polypi with consequent impediment in the normal respiration. From the foregoing data it may be concluded that cattle are the chief definitive hosts of the parasite and that the infection rate is much higher in the water-logged areas of the Poonpoon belt of Patna district and the heavily canalised zone of Shaha- bad district, where about 60 per cent of the cattle were found infected with the disease in the months of February and March. It was also observed during this investigation that both sexes are equally susceptible; but bullocks, owing to their more frequent contacts with the foci of infection while doing field work, are more exposed to infection. This accounts for TABLE IV Age and sex incidence of nasal schistosomiasis in different areas surveyed Locality Total number of positive cases Age and sex group 1 to 3 3 to 6 6 to 12 1 to 3 Over 3 months months months years years M F M F M F M F M F M F Hilsa-cum-Islampur 38 19 .. .. 2 1 2 3 10 4 24 11 Bakhtiarpur-cum-Harnauth 36 14 .. .. 1 .. 1 1 7 4 27 9 Piroo 82 25 .. .. 2 2 4 3 18 7 58 13 Bikramganj 38 23 .. .. 1 2 2 2 13 9 22 10 Berhampur 3 . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. Nawada 3 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 3 Hansua-Nawada 2 . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. Total 202 84 .. .. 6 5 9 9 49 24 138 46 MMarch, 1954] A. K. VARMA 19 the greater percentage of incidence of the disease in these animals. Further, all ages were found to contract the disease when exposed to infection; but the younger calves, that are kept more confined to the villages near dwelling places, were generally found free. Thus, the age and sex incidence of this bilharzial disease appears to be actually influenced by the increased or reduced opportunities of exposure of susceptible animals to infection and there seems hardly any acquired partial or total immunity on the part of any particular category of susceptible animals. Some data worked out in this connection to substantiate these deductions more positively are given in Table IV. These figures indicate greater incidence of the disease in older animals and in males, both of which are more exposed to contacts with the foci of infection. In order to find out the probable concentrations of the parasite elsewhere in the intestinal and vesical veins, besides the usual nasal veins, about 100 samples of faeces and 20 of urine, collected from positively infected cases in different areas, were examined for the presence of eggs, but the results were all negative, which confirms the findings of previous investigators in this connection. It is quite probable that the parasites, as they grow to maturity, find it physiologically more suitable to migrate to the nasal veins to settle down there to lay their eggs for their final dis- charge to the exterior. This peculiar selective habitat of S. nasale, unlike other schistosomes parasitising intestinal and vesical veins, needs further investigation to throw more light on the bionomics and pathogenicity of the parasite in order to estimate the harm caused to the host. The writer was unable to obtain a single positively infected animal for post- mortem examination. An opportunity was, however, afforded to examine some freshly slaughtered cattle and buffaloes as well as some goats (eight cattle, six buffaloes and 18 goats) in this area at Patna, Biharsharif, Nawada and Arrah, but no schistosome could be recovered from any of these carcases, although a very close search was made for them in the mesenteric veins, liver and also the nasal veins. The owners of these animals reported that none of them was infected with nasal schistosomiasis, which is locally known as 'Nakra' or 'Sunsuna'. Moreover, most of the animals slaughtered in these abattoirs are brought from other places, because they are cheaper and not available in the locality owing to the religious prejudices of the people, who do not usually sell cattle for slaughter purposes. MOLLUSCAN FAUNA No attempt seems to have been made so far to ascertain the potential molluscan intermediary of the parasite in this State. Rao [1933] demonstrated that Limnaea luteola (Lamarck) and Indoplanorbis exustus (Desh.) were the intermediate vectors of S. nasale in Madras. Existence of many most favoured habitats of aquatic snails in the areas surveyed has already been pointed out and it was interesting to find that in areas lying over routes (1), (2) and (3) Limnaea luteola predominated strikingly over other types. Some of the ponds and water-logged areas were found very badly infested with these Limnaea, which, unlike Planorbis, were found to favour clean, shallow, sluggish-moving water, where they were moving freely on the surface of the water in an inverted position. Some Planorbis were also re- covered from more or less stagnating water in some ponds covered with vegetation, 8 AR/53 4
20 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, to which they remained mostly attached below the surface of water. In some of the rice fields they were found in clusters near the inlets of water and the villagers reported that during the inflow of water into different plots these snails move against the current and assemble together. In areas lying over routes (4) and (5) neither Limnaea nor Planorbis were found and the predominating type was Vivipara bengalensis. This accounts for the absence of the disease there; and whatever few cases were found in some localities of this area may be imported ones from the surrounding infected areas. A collection of both the types of snails, supposed to carry the infection, was made from different localities and some specimens, totalling over 100, were tested for natural infection by ordinary test-tube method. They were later dissected out for cercarial stages; but the results in both the cases were negative. Some snails, however, showed natural infection with some leptocercous distome cercariae. Most of the snails in the collection appeared to be young ones, while some older ones, when being tested in tubes, were found to lay eggs. Thus, the investigations to find out the potential molluscan vector of the disease in the area proved inconclusive. But in view of the most wide distribution of Limnaea luteola throughout the infected zone, which corresponds with the intensity of the disease, the writer feels empirically inclined to establish some epidemiological correlation between this snail species and the causal trematode parasite under study and to conclude that this is a potential intermediate vector of the disease in this area. Rao [1933] also found in Madras that the rate of infection was higher in Limnaea luteola than in Indoplanorbis exustus. Experimental infection could not be undertaken in India due to lack of laboratory facilities and unfortunately none of the samples of infective material arrived alive in London to pursue this. Other snails collected from this area were, on identification, found to be Vivipara bengalensis, which on account of their gill-breathing habit, lived in somewhat deeper water at the bottom. They were of various sizes and plenty in number, particularly in areas lying on routes (4) and (5). Some Melania variabilis were also collected from some marshes in the district of Patna, particularly about the Bakhtiarpur- Bihar road in the pools. These were found to favour muddy habitats. Scarcity or uneven distribution of these species suggests that they are not concerned in the transmission of the disease. Routine examination of some of these snails for larval stages of trematodes yielded negative results. CONTROL As this disease is clearly a great menace to the area, it is desirable that the preventive measures against the malady should be taken with a clear appreciation of the factors and conditions under which the disease is contracted and propagated. Unfortunately, although the parasitic nature of the disease has been established, no measures have been taken so far to control it. The strictly limited distribution of the disease in parts of Shahabad, Patna and Gaya districts, as shown in the map of Bihar (Fig. 1), suggests that the bionomics of the snail vectors are the critical influence in the endemicity of the infection, which is favoured by the physical and topographical features of the area, discussed earlier for the animal-snail contact.
March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 21 This knowledge should provide stimulus to the initiation of local control mea- sures, which may be directed towards sealing the avenues of infection, before the disease spreads to other areas having ideal conditions for its dissemination. It is noteworthy that subsequent investigations of the writer in some other districts of the State have revealed the presence of such areas and the constant movements of cattle from one part to the other, so commonly practised, provide ample scope to carry and spread the infection. In the present survey it was actually found that the disease had established itself in some such villages, where it did not exist before, as far as the district of Saharsa in the north-east and Katras Goshala in the district of Manbhum in the south-east of the State. 1. Prevention of contact with infected water This could be of some practical value in minimising the incidence of the disease. It needs extensive surveying of the entire endemic zone to mark off the infected foci with a view to making them inaccessible to animals. 2. Prevention of contact between infected animals and uninfected snail habitats The common practice of letting loose the animals needs attention in this respect and it could be stopped if the ignorant villagers were educated about its harmful effects, which favour the spread of many diseases. 3. Treatment of infected animals It is suggested to employ a special squad of trained personnel to work in the area for mass treatment of clinical cases of the disease. Work should be started intensively in groups of villages only at a time, commencing from higher levels (south-west to north-east) with a view to guarding against the possible spread of infection through the flow of infected snails from higher to lower region along with the streams of flood water. Various antimony preparations are on the market having curative value against the disease, but the cheap tartar emetic is the drug of choice to meet the requirements of the poor peasantry. Whatever drug be selected, the standardisation of its dosage and concentration is a matter of prime importance wherein lies the secret of success. In view of considerations like age, sex, size, breed, intensity of infection and individual idiosyncracy, it rests entirely with the physician to use his discretion in individual cases. 4. Treatment of infected foci From prevention point of view this is as important as the treatment of infected animals and much of the success depends on the scientific planning of any scheme in this direction. Fortunately, the disease has a zonal distribution and has not yet spread itself widely to other similar areas in the State; this in itself provides a great possibility to stamp out the disease. Various authorities have suggested different methods to disinfect the infected foci with suitable disinfectants, or more effectively to root out the very source of infection with appropriate molluscicidal chemicals. (a) Molluscicidal treatment of infected foci with suitably cheapter chemicals may be schemed on the lines of 'Anti-malarial campaign directed towards the
22 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, mosquitoes and their breeding grounds', which is already being worked out in several malarious areas of the country. It needs a special contigent of some trained labour with a supervisory staff to spray or broadcast the molluscicidal chemical in proper strength over the snail-infected water. It must be planned systematically, taking up groups of villages at a time along with the treatment of infected animals as discussed earlier, without omitting any infected foci. Copper sulphate, owing to its cheapness and easy availability, provides a good choice and the necessary molluscicidal concentration should be worked out. Some Japanese workers [Hunter Freytag, Ritchie, Pan, Yokagawa and Potts, 1952] have tried Santobrite (Sodium pentachlorophenate) in Japan as a molluscicidal agent, using 30 lb. of the chemical per acre (current price of the chemical is about $0.25 per lb. according to these authors) in the dilution of approximately 1:200, with encouraging results. The infective foci or the molluscan habitats are no doubt very many in the area but are not very extensive and can be easily controlled. (b) Weeding out the snails by netting or hand-picking and destroying them may not be physically possible. (c) Rearing of ducks and other snail-feeding birds does not appear to be a practical proposition. (d) Some authorities have also suggested that by removing the vegetation from the infected ponds, etc. the snails would automatically be starved and rooted out. (e) Channelling the area and draining off the water-logged places is another devise to control the incidence of the disease. FASCIOLIASIS Fasciola indica Varma, 1953 Like other helminthic infections, particularly those caused by the trematodes, this parasite has also found its habitat chiefly in the low-lying marshy regions of the districts of Darbhanga, Saharsa, Purnea and parts of Monghyr and Bhagalpur lying north of the river Ganges. The entire area constitutes almost a consolidated block, bounded on the north by the territory of Nepal, on the south by the river Ganges, on the west merging into the district of Mazaffarpur and on the east extending as far as the eastern boundary of the State. TOPOGRAPHY This region of fascioliasis lies wholly in the North Gangetic plain, between latitudes 25.25' N & 26.50' N and longitudes 85.75' E & 88.25' E and is mostly watered by the most notorious river Kosi with its many bifurcating and interlacing off-shoots and tributaries, notable amongst them are the Kamla-Tiljuga, the Old Baghmati and the Ghugri. The river Mahanadi with its several tributaries waters the eastern portion of the district of Purnea. The Kosi takes its origin somewhere in the territory of Nepal and all its seven streams (called 'Sapta Kosi') join together before the river enters the plains.
March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 23 It divides again into a number of branches before actually entering the plains of the State of Bihar and as these branches go down and down they give out numerous capricious channels, spreading throughout the area, described above. The river is notorious for changing its course frequently and over-flooding the adjacent areas, which get submerged under water during the flood season to such an extent that it presents the appearance of a broad swiftly flowing sea and it becomes almost impossible to define the main stream of the river. The errancy and fickleness of its course during the annual flood season has changed the whole face of the country from a beautiful landscape into a wilderness of sand and swamp, which has been described vividly by Inglis [1888]* " Diverging here, re-uniting there; forming a wide bend in one place and cutting direct through the sandy soil in another; the whole face of the country is split up into an infinitude of islands and reticulated everywhere by a network of dry channels and shifting sand-banks." The Mahanadi, originating from the Darjeeling Hills, flows through the district of Purnea with its several tributaries, as a wide meandering stream providing in- numerable small water-pockets, which expand and cover large areas in the rains and shrink to small ponds or lakes in the dry season. Nourished by melting glaciers and fattened by the heavy monsoon rain, these rivers come down in spate in the rainy season. After the flood water recedes, the water-logged areas, numerous and sometimes extensive, throughout the entire region, act as most suitable habitats for the molluscan intermediaries of the trematode parasite under study, providing innumerable foci of infection. Such a change in the topographical features of the area is brought about yearly during the flood season by shifting of the river-beds. Thus, many new suitable breeding centres for the snails are being constantly pro- vided. This is a factor of paramount importance in the distribution and endemicity of the disease. Soil In the lowland areas, where the soil has become thick and heavy by continuous addition of fine clay carried by drainage from the highlands of quick disintegrating mountains of Nepal, which consist mostly of shaly naked rocks, there is a tendency towards water-logging, which is so favourable for the spread and propagation of the snails. The lime-content of the soil is generally higher in this area (about 20 per cent calcium oxide), which is so essential for the molluscan shells. The high per- centage of lime makes it less tenacious and greatly improves its texture, so that both its texture and retentiveness of moisture are unique. The land thus suffers from excess of moisture and provide favourable aestivating ground for the snails in times of drought. It has further been found by the agriculturists that a large part of the north Gangetic plain, of which this region forms a part, suffers from phosphate depletion and is in a dangerously exhausted condition as regards available phosphate. It is a well known fact that phosphate-deficiency produces 'deficiency diseases' in animals grazed on natural herbage, which is a common practice in the area. Such a mal- nutrition may as well predispose the animals to helminthic infections or at least * Inglis, J. (1888). Tent life in Tiger-land
24 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, lower their vitality to resist the ill-effects of parasitism. This may be one of the factors responsible for the high incidence of infection in this area, as shown in subsequent pages. Rainfall The area gets torrential rains, chiefly during the months of June, July, August and September, from the south-west monsoon arising from the Bay of Bengal and deviating westward after striking against the Assam hills. There is also a few inches of winter rainfall from the north-east monsoon. TABLE V Average rainfall in inches District Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. An- nual Purnea 0.34 0.66 0.52 1.16 4.71 11.12 15.34 13.36 11.53 3.48 0.31 0.11 62.64 Saharsa 0.41 0.52 0.47 1.05 3.97 9.25 13.39 11.86 9.99 2.87 0.33 0.11 54.05 Darbhanga 0.36 0.60 0.43 0.73 2.77 7.82 12.65 12.01 9.41 2.46 0.29 0.13 49.66 Temperature Accurate temperature data are not available, but the mean monthly temperature has been calculated roughly for the area from the monthly weather reports of India (Table VI). TABLE VI Mean monthly temperature in Fahrenheit Area Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June. July. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. An- nual Purnea, Supaul and Darbhanga 62 65 73 82 85 85 84 84 82 80 70 62 76 Cold weather day temperature is usually about 65ºF, while during the hot weather it rises upto 90ºF. Unlike the area of nasal schistosomiasis, as discussed earlier, there is hardly any day of dry heat in this area, which is usually moist and cool.
March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 25 Population Owing to large areas occupied by rivers and marshes, human habitation is limited; but in certain parts of Darbhanga district and areas bordering on the Ganges the density exceeds a thousand per square mile. Livestock population is, however, tremendous and chiefly consists of cattle, buffaloes and goats, which are all victims of the disease. Wild rodents and ruminants are plentiful including hares and various antelopes, which have been found to act as reservoir-hosts of the parasite in other countries. Their presence in enormous number is critical for control measures. Cultivation During the heavy early rains and subsequent flooding a large acreage of land in the district of Purnea is utilised for the cultivation of jute and autumn rice. Maize and winter rice and grown in the higher and lighter lands towards the west that are liable to early flooding and are thus well supplied with moisture. There are large tracts of pasture lands along the various old and new channels of the Kosi and other rivers, which serve as potential avenues of infection to the grazing animals. METHODS EMPLOYED IN THE SURVEY Owing to vastness of the area on the one hand and extremely limited time at the writer's disposal on the other, it was decided to visit only the areas showing very high incidence of infection in the districts of Saharsa and Purnea. In selecting such areas the writer was chiefly guided by the officers of the State Veterinary Department. The main object of such a brief survey was to study the factors having probable bearing on the endemicity of the disease and to find out, if possible, the chief molluscan intermediary and also the prevalent species of the parasite. The scope and application of various control measures were also explored in the light of available data concerning the infection and its transmission. There is no recorded evidence of any survey work undertaken in the area to estimate the intensity of infection. The State Veterinary Disease Investigation Officer, in a personal communication, reported that '60 to 90 per cent of cattle and buffaloes harbour either Fasciola gigantica or Fasciola hepatica'. In the present work series of faecal samples were examined for the eggs of the parasite in three different endemic locations viz., Supaul, Saharsa and Purnea; and also no opportunity was lost to conduct autopsies to collect and examine adult worms with a view to ascertaining the prevalent species. The faecal specimens were examined by the ordinary sedimentation method, as followed in the nasal schisto- somiasis area. Aquatic molluscs particularly belonging to Limnaeid and Planorbid groups, were searched for and collected in and around each location and some of them were tested for natural infection without any conclusive result. An effort to examine some wild life to throw some light on the 'carrier problem' was not successful owing to extreme shortage of time. INCIDENCE OF INFECTION Supaul area Samples of faeces from 178 animals (68 cattle, 82 buffaloes and 28 goats), col- lected from Supaul proper and some adjacent villages within a range of about three
26 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, miles, were examined and 32 (47 per cent), 65 (79.2 per cent) and 22 (78.5 per cent) respectively were found positive for fasciola infection. Some of the animals, es- pecially buffaloes, had received carbon tetrachloride treatment recently. The higher incidence of infection in buffaloes and goats is interesting. Paramphistome eggs were very often found in association with this infection in buffaloes. Among other helminthic infections met with during the course of these examinations may be mentioned Trichostrongylosis, Oesophagostomiasis, Trichuriasis and Ascariasis (particularly in young calves). Faecal samples from two elephants (commonly found in the locality) were also examined; one of them showed fasciola eggs (pro- bably Fasciola jacksoni). Two adult cattle and ten goats were examined post-mortem for adult worms, but none could be recovered from the former while seven (79 per cent) of the latter yielded about 20 worms, varying from two to seven from each in their different stages of development. No opportunity was available to examine any buffalo post- mortem in this locality. A tour in the surrounding areas to study the physical features of the country and also the molluscan fauna of the locality revealed what has been discussed earlier in respect of the most favoured habitats of the snails. Snails of both Limnaeid and Planorbid groups were found in abundance in water-logged marshy grounds, locally called 'Chaurs', infested with vegetation grazed by animals. A few of these snails, about 100, were tested for natural infection and two Planorbis only were found to discharge some leptocercous distome cercariae, which were preserved for specific study. On examination they were found to be two different cercariae. One lot was xiphidic-cercariae corresponding, but for slight greater dimensions, to 'cellulosa' group of Sewell [1922] and resembling Cercariae indicae LVII. Sewell got these cercariae from Digoniostoma cerameopoma in a tank in the Indian Museum,Calcutta. Thus, Planorbis exustus becomes another host of this cercaria and the change of host might as well account for dimensional variations. The other lot of cercariae had a long tail without fin-folds and collar-spines. These corresponded to 'Agilis' group of Sewell [1922] but differed from his only form of the group, Cercariae indicae XVI, which he had recovered from Amnicola travancorica in the Wynaad (South India). All those apparently non-infected snails were later dissected out for the develop- ing carcarial stages, but only one Limnaea (L. auricularia race rufescens) was found to be infected with leptocercous distome cercariae that did not come out when being tested in tube containing fresh well-water. The cercariae resembled fasciola, but no definite opinion can be given as to their identity, as their morphology could not be studied in detail in the field. Thus, no conclusive evidence could be obtained re- garding the potential molluscan intermediary of the parasite, although Limnaea auricularia race rufescens were found abundantly and widely spread. Saharsa area Forty-eight faecal samples (18 from cattle, 23 from buffaloes and seven from goats) were examined for fasciola ova and 10 (55.5 per cent), 19 (82.6 per cent) and five (71.4 per cent) were respectively found positive. No opportunity was afforded to examine some animals post-mortem. There was no evidence of any anthelmintic
March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 27 treatment of these animals in the recent past. The area being in the same Kosi belt has more or less identical topographical conditions in relation to the molluscan habitats. Some Limnaea and Planorbis snails were collected and examined for cercariae with negative results. Purnea area Faecal samples from 92 animals (34 cattle, 42 buffaloes, 10 goats and six sheep) were examined and 20 (58.8 percent), 30 (71.4 per cent), five (50 per cent) and four (66.6 per cent) were respectively found positive for fasciola infection. There was no evidence of any anthelmintic treatment of these animals. One adult cattle was examined post-mortem, but no fluke was recovered. Autopsy of two buffaloes yielded several hundreds of flukes and paramphistomes from the bile ducts, which were found very badly infested. Due to shortage of time snail-searches could not be undertaken; but the topo- graphical features of the area have similarity with the aforesaid localities, as the Kosi was flowing through this area some years ago and when it worked its way westward it left behind many water-pockets for the snail-hosts of the parasite. TABLE VII Summary of the incidence of fasciola infection Locations Total number of animals* examined Total number found positive for infection Percentage of infection C B G C B G C B G Supaul 68 82 28 32 65 22 47 79 78 Saharsa 18 23 7 10 19 5 55 83 71 Purnea 34 42 10 20 30 5 59 71 50 Grand total 120 147 45 62 114 32 52 77 71 * C=Cattle B=Buffaloes G=Goats DISCUSSION From the foregoing data it is quite conceivable that the incidence of infection varies considerably in different categories of susceptible animals. It was found to be highest in buffaloes and lowest in cattle, the goats coming intermediate. This phenomenon is apparently attributable to the grazing habits of these herbivora, rather than to any selective affinity of the parasite for any particular host. Buffaloes are voracious feeders and on account of their aquatic habit of grazing on grass grow- ing over swamps, are comparatively more exposed to infection. Cattle have a 8 AR/53 5
28 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, more or less selective habit of grazing; they generally avoid swampy pasture and thereby minimise the chances of picking up infection. The goats are more akin to buffaloes and have preference for grass growing over the margin of swamps, pools, etc. All ages and sex, exposed to infection, contract the disease; and upon the inten- sity of infection depend the clinical manifestations, increasing as the host advances in age due to continued re-infection, as it has been found by some workers that the final host appears to be unable to develop any specific resistance to fasciola, which, once acquired, it continues to carry. The longevity of F. hepatica has been worked out to be many years and the same may apply to other species of the genus. Distribution Investigations indicated that the high incidence groups are geographically scattered along the water-pockets in the beds of the notoriously vagrant Kosi and its numerous capricious channels and tributaries. This suggests that the bionomics of the molluscan intermediary will prove to be of great epidemiological significance. Snails collected from the area and later identified here revealed that Limnaea auri- cularia race rufescens have the widest distribution throughout the region. Unlike Limnaea luteola, this snail species was found to favour somewhat deeper water. Experimental evidence obtained by some workers [Bhalerao, 1933 and Srivastava, 1944] in this direction has indicated that this snail is the vector of what they believed to be Fasciola gigantica in India. Srivastava was, however, able to infect experi- mentally some Limnaea luteola as well with the miracidia of this fluke. This snail was also found in the area, although in much lesser number. Indoplanorbis exustus were also quite common there. These have been shown to act as intermediaries for various paramphistomes, which are abundant there, particularly Paramphistomum explanatum. Prevalent species There is no recorded evidence of any attempt made to find out the prevalent species of Fasciola in this locality or elsewhere in Bihar, although the infection seems so widely distributed there. Both the species F. hepatica and F. gigantica have been reported from India [Bhalerao, 1935], the former chiefly from the cold Himalayan regions while the latter are mostly from warmer areas having wider distribution throughout the country. There, however, still exists some controversy over the occurrence of both the species in the area under survey. In the present work an attempt was made to settle the matter. Living adult flukes were collected from buffaloes and goats in Purnea and Supaul respectively. In the live state the body of these worms is greyish in colour and is extremely contractile. They were fixed in 10 per cent hot formalin, some between two glass slides to keep them flat, and were then preserved in 10 per cent formalin. These were later stained and mounted for specific diagnosis. They were found to be quite distinct from either F. hepatica or F. gigantica. This has been described as a new form and named Fasciola indica Varma, 1953. Not a single specimen of true F. hepatica Linne [1746 and 1758] or of F. gigantica Cobbold [1855] was found in this collection and it is quite probable that the new species
March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 29 F. indica was hitherto mistaken to be F. hepatica or F. gigantica. The former might occur in the cold Himalayan region, where Bhalerao records to have found its snail- intermediary, Limnaea truncatula, but the writer is dubious about the occurrence of true F. gigantica in India. Demonstration of some fasciola-like eggs in the faecal sample, examined from an elephant in the area, points to the occurrence of Fasciola jacksoni Cobbold [1869]. CONTROL The knowledge regarding the nature, incidence and distribution of the disease in a circumscribed area of the State should prove of value in formulating control measures. It has been shown that the vagaries of the river Kosi are to a large extent responsible for providing ideal habitats for the molluscan vectors of the parasite. Hence, any attempt to harness this river may go a long way not only in converting the country from a wilderness of sand and swamp to a fruitful landscape but also in driving out the notorious parasites. It is gratifying to note that efforts are being made to dam the river near the point of its emergence from the hills. In carrying out the scheme proper drainage of the area by providing suitable channels without leaving behind water-pockets for the snails, should not escape consideration. Meanwhile, control measures should be directed against reducing the incidence and intensity of infection by resorting to principles which are generally adopted for such conditions. There are large marshy tracts whose molluscicidal treatment is impracticable and hence prevention of the disease must depend upon well advised grazing practice. In this connection it becomes imperative that the optimal condi- tions of life for the snails in question and the factors governing their infection with the miracidia, development of the parthenitae in them and the emergence, encyst- ment and longevity of the cercariae encysted on herbage under natural conditions be studied in details. Mass treatment of susceptible animals with carbon tetrachloride is advisable but it must be well planned on scientfic basis. Some investigators have found it ineffective in acute and sub-clinical infections. The drug may kill all the adult flukes living in the bile ducts at the time, but there will usually be a few young forms migrating, which are not affected and for this reason repeated treatment is essential. This programme of work should be initiated in the higher regions and worked down to the lower levels without missing any infected animal; and the treatment be repeated at least six months later. Random dosing of animals here and there without any planning may be ineffective owing to the chances of re-infection. Con- trol of wild animals, which probably act as reservoirs of the disease, should also receive attention simultaneously. This scheme of treatment together with planning grazing practice will break the chain in the life cycle of the parasite and thereby control the spread of the disease, which may die out completely in course of time. SUMMARY 1. A survey of the endemic areas of nasal schistosomiasis and fascioliasis in the State of Bihar (India) was undertaken to study the factors having a bearing on their occurrence. It revealed an interesting relationship of the diseases to topographical and other factors, which are discussed in the report.
30 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, The incidence and distribution of both the infections were also worked out by examining population samples of diagnostic material in several locations. An account is given of the incidence of these infections in two different localities, with observations on age and sex incidence. Each focus of infection is fairly well circums- cribed. 2. Investigations have proved beyond doubts that cattle are the chief definitive hosts of Schistosoma nasale and while all ages and sex seem to contract the infection equally, if exposed to it, older animals and males are the chief sufferers and carry the disease owing to their more frequent contacts with infected foci. 3. A study of the molluscan fauna of the areas in relation to the incidence of the disease indicates that Limnaea luteola and L. auricularia race rufescens are the intermediaries of schistosomiasis and fascioliasis respectively. All available fresh-water snails in the areas surveyed are specifically determined and recorded with illustrations. 4. The very fragile nature and quick hatchability of S. nasale eggs are indicated. 5. In determining the prevalent species of Fasciola in the area it was found that it was a new species of the genus, Fasciola indica Varma 1953, quite distinguishable from either F. hepatica or F. gigantica. 6. Some control measures of practical value, both preventive and curative, are suggested. In this connection it is also considered necessary that ecological aspects of the molluscan vectors and their relationship with the parasites be studied in detail, as they are likely to prove of great value in eradicating the infections. 7. Cercariae indicae LVII Sewell [1922], are reported from another host, Indo- planorbis exustus, in the district of Saharsa of this State. Also, a new cercaria belonging to 'Agilis' group of Sewell [1922], is reported from Indoplanorbis exustus. REFERENCES Bhalerao, G. D. (1932). On the identity of the schistosome found in cases of bovine nasalgranu- loma and some observations on a few other members of the Sehistosomidae. Indian. J. vet. Sci., II (4), 338-356. (W. L. 9941 h) March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 31 Monthly Weather Reports of India Preston, H. B. (1915). Fauna of British India32 STUDIES ON NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, APPENDIX A Methods employed for despatching living Schistosoma nasale eggs 1. Thick glutinous, blood-tinged nasal discharge, obtained by pressing the nasal polypi with the thumb, was collected in clean sterile petri dishes from infected cattle from different areas. While examining the samples microscopically for confirmation, it was invariably found that some of the eggs had already hatched out and the miracidia could be seen swimming about; others had miracidia ready to hatch within the egg-shell. This is, however, not unusual, as the schistosome eggs take some time (some days in some cases) to pass through the surrounding host-tissues to come to the exterior and so by the time they are finally discharged most of them are ready to hatch. Since quite a number of eggs were still immature, an attempt was made to des- patch them alive to London by air for experimental work. The discharge was transferred to a piece of filter-paper (sometimes ordinary blotting paper was used), damped in normal saline, which was then wrapped up and put in a small glass tube. The tube was plugged with damp clean cotton wool (damped in normal saline) and corked tightly. Three or four such tubes, containing samples from different cases in a locality, were packed in small wooden cases, specially designed for the purpose. 2. Employing the same technique as above, an alternative medium was used to soak the filter-paper or the cotton plug with crystalline penicillin solution in vary- ing concentrations, ranging from 12,500 to 100,000 (12,500, 25,000, 50,000 and 100,000) units. Results. Owing to ready hatchability of these eggs (for the reasons advanced above) even within the transit-period of air-mail, usually 4 or 5 days, the methods were not successful. Some controls were kept under the same condition in local atmospheric temperature, which, when examined at subsequent intervals, revealed no trace of life in the egg-shell after about 48 hours. Most of them had already hatched out within 24 hours. Methods employed for despatching living Fasciola and Paramphistome eggs 1. Living worms (both Fasciola and Paramphistomum) were collected from freshly killed animals and placed in a beaker or petri dish containing normal saline. Each worm was soon after transferred to a clean sterile glass pan (watch glass) containing a few drops of filtered water. The intra-uterine eggs were then dissected out with a sharp pointed sterile scalpel, making a transverse incision on the ventral side of the worm just below the genital opening and the eggs were squeezed out from both ends of the uterus with the blunt edge of the scalpel. This yielded hundreds of eggs which were then transferred to a piece of filter-paper smeared with fine faecal culture (the faecal culture was made by emulsifying some fresh faeces, obtained from the same host or at least the same species of animal from which the worms were collected, with filtered water and straining off the coarse debris and filtering off the liquid). The paper with the eggs was then wrapped up and put in a glass tube which was plugged with damp cotton wool in order to prevent desiccation. These tubes were packed and despatched in the usual small wooden sample boxes.
March, 1954] A. K. VARMA 33 2. Eggs were concentrated from heavily infected faecal samples from endemic areas. For this advantage was taken of the routine examination of population samples carried out during the course of survey of the infected foci. A fair quantity of the desired sample was emulsified with filtered water and strained through an ordinary tea-strainer to get rid of the coarse debris. To the strained emulsion was added some more filtered water, sufficient to make it fairly thin. It was then allowed to stand for about 20 minutes after which the supernatant fluid was decanted. The sediments were washed and sedimented five times with filtered water after which the final sediment containing concentrated eggs was put in a clean glass tube, for despatch by air, throwing off the excess water. Results. Both the methods proved successful, but the latter method delivered a wide variety of helminth eggs along with those of Fasciola and Paramphistomum. Methods used for despatching living snails Two types of cigarette tins, the flat and the cylindrical ones, were used for despatching living snails. The flat kind could take only one layer of snails; the other kind accommodated five or six layers. Living snails (Planorbis and Limnaea) were despatched to London by air-mail, using different methods of packing. Limnaea and Planorbis were packed separately in the cigarette tins from different areas of nasal schistosomiasis fascioliasis and paramphistomiasis. About half a dozen snails were put (not very closely) in between the layers of either damp (i) sterile powdered charcoal or (ii) sterile sand or (iii) cotton wool. The lids were tightly sealed with adhesive tape. Results. None of the packing methods was successful with the Limnaea, all of which arrived dead; whereas two examples of Planorbis, which were packed in damp charcoal powder, survived the journey well and arrived alive. APPENDIX B List of fresh-water snails collected from different localities in Bihar District Locality Species collcted Patna Fatwah, Hilsa, Islampur, Bakhtiarpur, Harnauth and Biharsharif 1. Limnaea luteola (Lamarck) in abundance 2. Indoplanorbis exustus (Desh.) 3. Vivipara bengalensis (Lamarck) 4. Melania variabilis (Benson) 5. Unionid species Shahabad Arrah, Piroo, Bikramganj Jitaura and Ramnagar 1. Limnaea luteola in abundance 2. Indoplanorbis exustus (Scanty) 3. Vivipara bengalensis Bhojpur Tal 1. Limnaea auricularia (Linne) race rufescens (Hubendick) (syn. Limnaea acuminata) in abund- ance Saharsa Supaul and Saharsa 1. Limnaea auricularia race rufescens in abundance 2. Limnaea luteola (scanty) 3. Indoplanorbis exustus
INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX DRIVE ON SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES I. PHYSIOLOGICAL STATE OF THE 'TEASER' COW By S. S. PRABHU and P. BHATTACHARYA, Division of Animal Genetics, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 24 March 1952) THE introduction of artificial insemination as one of the routine practices in animal husbandry has in recent years drawn special attention to the desirability of testing the individual performances of bulls in respect of semen production and general breeding behaviour. Under a system of natural mating, the defects in semen quality would normally remain undetected till a noticeable damage has been produced in the herds. Any such danger is eliminated altogether in the new techni- que of breeding in which only semen previously tested for quality is used. Inciden- tally, this method has led to a further increase in the number of factors taken into account in selecting breed sires for herds in which artificial insemination is practised. Thus in selecting bulls for artificial service, in addition to their pedigree, type, breed characteristics and progeny performance, a certain amount of desired respon- siveness in them for service in the artificial vagina and the ability to give large ejaculates of uniformly high quality when semen is so collected are also taken into consideration. A perusal of the excellent monograph on the work done on semen of farm animals and its use in artificial insemination by Anderson [1945] and of the articles that have appeared from time to time subsequently bearing on like subject, shows that very little controlled work on factors affecting sex-urge of bulls, and the influence of such factors on semen production has so far been done. Rowson [1946] read a paper on the subject before the British Society of Animal Production in which, in addition to his own observations, he cites the work conducted by Milovanov on inhibited bulls in Russia. The Indian water buffalo, B. bubalis, occupies an unique position in the dairy industry of this country. The bulls of this species under artificial service are at times found to be erratic, giving cause for anxiety to artificial insemination techni- cians. A clear understanding of the factors responsible for variations in sex and breeding behaviour should prove valuable in speeding up the economic and more efficient utilisation of these bulls at the artificial insemination centres. Accord- ingly, the present studies were undertaken. Background for the studies Among bulls of both B. indicus and B. bubalis kept under identical and uniform management and husbandry, wide variation is observed in reaction time, volume of semen produced, quality of the ejacula collected, longevity of stored semen samples and the fertilising capacity of sperm [Bhattacharya 35 8 AR/53. 6
36 SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part I, and Prabhu, 1950, 1951, 1952, 1953; Bhatnagar, 1952 (unpublished)]. Bulls with initially high sex-urge and drive were noticed in certain instances to slow down and exhibit signs of inhibition after being in artificial service for a few months. Similar behaviour was observed in adult active bulls transferred from one region to another; for example, such difficulties were found in bulls of Sahiwal and Murrah breeds transferred from Delhi and Rohtak respectively to Calcutta; and Murrah bulls transferred from Rohtak to Izatnagar. Occasionally, such defects have developed in otherwise sound bulls. At times, the fault was traced to carelessness of the operators, and use of unsatisfactorily prepared artificial vaginas for collection, or to change in diet. Rowson [1946] mentions a case where a bull suffering from loss of sex-urge, was restored to normalcy through change in the dress worn by the operator, and Milovanov cites an instance where a bull showing all signs of sex inhibition behaved normally when the tall operator gave place to a short one. However, authentic cases are on record where apparently no direct or indirect causal agent could be detected for a sudden drop in sex-urge by otherwise normal and healthy bulls. At Izatanagar, where artificial insemination is being practised for the past ten years, sex-inhibitions occurring in bulls have been sucessfully treated by one or other of the following methods:March, 1954] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA 37 PHYSIOLOGICAL STATE OF THE 'TEASER' COW Ordinarily bulls will take notice only of cows 'on heat', such cows alone will 'stand' to the bull. According to Sarthou-Montengou [1950], the motivating factor arousing the sex desire in the bull that leads him to the cow 'on heat' is the smell of oestrogenic substances present in the secretions thrown out by the cow ' on heat'. When a cow is trained to stand to the bull and the bull trained to mount a cow which is not in heat, as in artificial insemination collection practice, a condition foreign to both the cow and the bull is introduced; the probable effect of which on the continued sex-drive and semen production of the bull remaining unknown. Results obtained with collections taken on teaser cows 'on heat' appear to suggest that the sex-urge of the bull is heightened by the physiological condition of the teaser cow. For example, in a series of exhaustion tests conducted on ten buffalo bulls there was a prima facie case for drawing such a conclusion. The results are discussed in some detail in Table I as these are the first data of the kind in buffa- loes. TABLE I Results of exhaustion tests conducted on buffalo bulls Serial number No. of bull Total number of ejaculates taken in the five tests Average reaction time in seconds 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 16 8 7 7 7 9 62 70 14 10 11 2 19 8 4 6 6 4 13 29 172 20 25 3 20 7 10 3 6 4 63 152 166 102 84 4 22 6 4 2 5 .. 24 108 52 194 .. 5 23 39 36 5 3 12 71 70 214 147 94 6 24 8 6 4 4 5 56 49 52 132 124 7 25 11 6 11 3 .. 197 45 90 31 .. 8 26 4 3 5 1 1 65 81 51 78 381 9 28 12 23 23 10 9 73 40 92 73 63 10 31 34 24 30 15 15 51 83 83 56 19
38 SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part I, Each test was conducted after an interval of 24 hours, i.e. after resting the bull for a day between tests. In the majority of the tests in all the bulls, the total number of ejaculates taken at rapid succession never exceeded 15. The exceptions are tests 1 and 2 of buffalo bull No. 23, tests 2 and 3 of buffalo bull No. 28 and tests 1, 2 and 3 of buffalo bull No. 31. The first two tests on buffalo bull No. 23 were carried out on 15-11-51 and 17-11-51 respectively when the teaser cow was 'on heat'. The tests on the other two buffalo bulls were conducted from 10-12-51 to 14-12-51, i.e. after an interval of 25 days. In buffaloes, the length of March, 1954] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA 39 was taken to see that the other teaser cow was not on heat during the experiment. The six bulls were divided at random into two lots of three bulls each. Collections were taken on alternate days for a period of two weeks. At each collection two ejaculates were taken and these were analysed separately. Reaction times for the different ejacualtes were recorded separately. Bulls in the first lot were shown the on-heat teaser cow to begin with, while the bulls in the second lot were shown the non-heat teaser cow. The treatments were interchanged at subsequent collec- tions following the 'switch-back' design of experimentation. At the end of two weeks, the bulls were rested for a week and second set of observations were taken for a further period of two weeks, following the same procedure as detailed for the first two weeks. In this way a complete replication of the entire experimental series was provided. Experimental series II. The procedure adopted was identical with that followed in the first experimental series, except that instead of making collections on alternate days, once a week collections were made. The experiment was run for six weeks. There was no replication of the experimental series. Experimental series III. The general procedure followed was the same as for the first two experimental series. Instead of six, twelve bulls were used, and instead of two, four ejaculates in rapid succession were taken per collection. The first two ejaculates were taken with one type of teaser cow, say one 'on heat', while for the subsequent two ejaculates the 'non-heat' teaser cow was used. The treatment was interchanged at subsequent collections. Thus, a bull which had its first two ejaculates taken on 'on heat' teaser cow for a given collection, had 'non-heat' cow for getting the first two ejaculates in a subsequent collection and so on. The collections were taken once a week and the experimental series was run for a period of eight weeks. There was no replication of the experimental series. Details of observations made In each ejaculate, reaction time and the semen characteristic detailed under each experimental series were studied. Experimental series I. (i) Volume (ii) Initial motility (iii) Sperm concentration (iv) Percentage of abnormal sperm (v) Total Sperm in the ejaculate (vi) Initial pH. (vii) Percentage of dead sperm (opal-blue-eosin method) (viii) Percentage of non- motile sperm (ix) Percentage of weakly motile sperm (x) Percentage of progressively motile sperm (xi) Percentage of total motile sperm. Experimental series II. Items (i) to (vii) and (xi) as detailed under the first experimental series. In addition, total number of live-sperm in an ejaculate was studied. Experimental series III. Items (i) to (iii), (v) and (vi) as detailed in the first experimental series. The number of items of semen characteristics studied in the first experimental series were cut out in subsequent experimental series, in the light of the progressive results got from the experiments. Minimum items consistent with the efficient study of the problem under scrutiny were retained in the last experimental series, so that the time thus saved could be profitably utilised in studying a larger number of bulls.
40 SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part I, RESULTS Experimental series I. Overall averages of each of the various items studied in the two experiments under a given treatment are brought out in Table II. An examination of the various figures in the table, shows that with the exception of reaction time, the figures are uniformly low in respect of all items studied as compared to the like figures obtained by Prabhu and Bhattacharya [1951]. This was probably due to the collections being taken with a higher frequency (four times a week instead of the usual twice a week) and spread over a short period (two weeks). This should not interfere with the experiment planned as only differences in semen characteristics and reaction time due to the two treatments are subject matter for study. A look at the last column in the table where the differences between treatments are brought out show that in case of all items studied the differences are small, and considering the large bull to bull and within bull, ejaculate to ejaculate variations, they are probably not statistically significant. To study the significance of the differences statistically analysis of variance technique appropriate to the 'switch-back' design was employed. The analysis was carried out separately for the two experiments and for each of the two ejaculates in each. Since there were six periods, i.e. change-over from one treatment to another, the values of March, 1954] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA 41 TABLE II42 SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE IIIMarch, 1954] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTAOHARYA 43 TABLE III44 SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE IV Average reaction time and semen characteristics observed in the two experimental groups Serial number Item studied Ejaculate With on heat' cow (x) With 'not on heat' cow (y) Difference (x-y) 1 Volume (c.c.) First 3.37 2.98 +0.39 Second 2.44 2.34 +0.10 2 Initial motility First 2.47 2.32 +6.15 Second 3.16 2.85 +0.31 3 Sperm concentration (millions) First 666 622 +44 Second 776 723 +53 4 Percentage of abnormal sperm First 10.44 10.58 March, 1954] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA 45 The data were analysed statistically and the results of the analysis of variance carried out are summarised in Table V. TABLE V The analysis of variance of data collected under experimental series II (proportional quantities) Variation D.F. (i) Volume (ii) Motility (iii) Sperm concentration M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. Treatment 1 1117.52 .. 0.20 .. 28052670 .. Error 3 1216.14 .. 330.27 .. 54298880 .. Variation D.F. (iv) Percentage abnormal sperm (v) Total sperm in ejaculate (vi) Initial pH M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. Treatment 1 533.49 1.13 49452.43 .. 2.29 .. Error 3 468.69 .. 81571.95 .. 2.77 .. Variation D.F. (vii) Percentage dead sperm (viii) Percentage total motile sperm (ix) Reaction time M.S. F. M.S. F. M.S. F. Treatment 1 233620.68 1.49 56389.12 .. 360584 .. Error 3 156042.18 .. 71678.72 .. 429427 .. It will be seen from Table V that in none of the items studied, the bulls in the 'on heat' and ' not on heat' groups differed significantly, Experimental series III. Overall averages of reaction time and semen charact- eristics under a given treatment ('on heat' or 'not on heat') are presented in Table VI.
46 SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE VI Average reaction time and semen characteristics of bulls receiving a given treatment Serial number Item studied Ejaculate With 'on heat' cow (x) With 'not on heat' cow (y) Difference (x-y) 1 Volume (c.c.) First 2.25 2.03 +0.22 Second 2.12 2.39 March, 1954] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA 47 ejaculates were taken as one reading and totals of the other two ejaculates as another reading. This was done since the first two and last two ejaculates were collected under different teaser cows. Further, it was assumed that there was no carry-over effect of the treatment given last on a day prevailing on the first two ejaculates coll- ected during subsequent week, and the sets of readings for the two groups of six bulls each taken on consecutive days was regarded together as pertaining to one day, the difference between consecutive days being taken as negligible. The pertinent question of carry-over effect of the first treatment given on any day during the period of collection of subsequent two ejaculates on the same day, was taken up first, (details discussed elsewhere in this paper) and since there was no evidence of such effect being present, analysis appropriate to a ' switch back ' design with 16 periods was carried out. As will be seen from Table VII no significant difference as detected in any of the items investigated between bulls in ' on heat' and ' not on heat' groups. Study of carry-over or residual effects. Since the two treatments tried are interchanged, at periodic intervals which differed in the three experiments an attempt was made to find out whether there was any carry-over or residual effect of a given treatment on the behaviour of bulls as judged from reaction time and semen production on the subsequent treatment. For this study only the data from the last experiment were used since in this experiment the chances of carry- over effects being present happens to be greatest (The change-over of treatments was made with a few minutes interval). The method used consisted in carrying out a pooled analysis of variance using values of 48 SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE VIIMarch, 1954] S. S. PRABHU AND P. BHATTACHARYA 49 and anoestrus teaser cows at intervals of few minutes, 24-48 hours and seven days, between changes, no effect in either reaction time and quality and quantity of semen .collected which could be attributed as due mainly to the physiological state of the teaser cows, could be detected. Since the only stimulus provided was the olfactory one and collections were taken in all cases in the artificial vagina, the possible effect of natural service cannot be ruled out. Our results show that in case of buffalo bulls there is no harm if occasional additional stimuli in the form of teaser cows on heat are shown to the artificial insemination bulls for short periods to over- come impaired sex-drive. It is interesting to find out whether significant differences are produced, if the treatment is continued for fairly long period before change- over is effected. Experience in training older bulls used to natural service to serve in artificial vagina seems to suggest expectation of positive results. It was observed that as a rule bulls used to natural service took on an average longer time to serve in artificial vagina. Here again species difference was noticed suggesting the exis- tence of differing threshold reaction values for B. indicus and B. bubalis. Records collected over the past ten years show that buffalo bulls as a class can be trained to serve in the artificial vagina earlier than bulls of the B. indicus breeds, especially those of the milk breeds. The exception to this general observation are the bulls transferred from one climatic stress to another, which come in a class by themselves. Finally, the possible role of training on the normal sex behaviour of bulls needs consideration. In this connection reference is invited to the reports of Milovanov [1934] and of McKenzie and Berliner [1937] on the effect of training on the normal mating behaviour of rams. Whether such an effect is present in buffaloes, and if present whether it has influenced the results got by us since only artificial insemina- tion trained bulls were used is difficult to say without further work. SUMMARY 1. Using a ' switch back' design, three sets of experiments were run on the common water buffalo bulls normally found in Uttar Pradesh to investigate the effect of short term stimuli in the form of a teaser cow ' on heat' on the reaction time and semen production. 2. In the first experiment, which was replicated, an interval of about 24-48 hours, in the second experiment an interval of seven days and in the third experiment an interval of 15-20 minutes were given before changing over of ' treatments '. 3. The first two experiments were conducted on six bulls, while for the third experiment 12 bulls were used. Results show that there was no statistically signifi- cant difference in either the reaction time or semen production between the bulls in the two groups, in all the experiments. In addition, no residual effect of one treatment on the next subsequent treatment could be detected. 4. It has been concluded that as far buffalo bulls are concerned a short-term addition to normal service condition, such as providing a teaser cow on heat for making collection from artificial insemination trained bulls, is not attended by any bad effects, either immediate or subsequent, and as such may be safely introduced in suitable cases to provide additional sex-stimuli.
50 SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to Messrs K. D. Baya and U. D. Sharma for assistance in collecting the basic data and to Shri V. N. Amble, Statistician (Animal Husbandry), Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for help in the statistical treatment of the data. They are grateful to Dr S. Datta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute for his keen interest and general encouragement. REFERENCES Anderson, J. (1945). Semen of animals and its use for artificial insemination. Imp. Bur. Anim. Genetics, Edinburgh, pp. viii+151 Bhatnagar, D. S. (1952). Fertility of bull semen stored for long periods. (unpublished) Bhattacharya, P. (1948). Preliminary report on the field application of artificial insemination Abstr. Proc. 35th Indian Sci. Congr. (Patna), III (4), 96 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS V. FREEZING POINT, LACTOSE, CHLORIDE AND ACIDITY IN GOAT AND SHEEP MILK C. S. DHARMARAJAN, R. VENKATESWARA RAO AND NOSHIR N. DASTUR, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on 8 May 1953) COMPARED to our knowledge of the composition of the milk of cow and buffalo the same about Indian goats and sheep is limited. The available literature on the subject has been summarised by Sen and Dastur [1947, 1948]. Srinivasa Rao [1914], examined eight samples of goat milk and found the average lactose content to be 3.49 per cent. Examination of four samples of goat milk by Stewart and Banerjea [1930, 1931] showed that on an average the milk contained 4.40 per cent lactose, 0.15 per cent chloride and gave a freezing point depression of 0.589°C. Bunce [1933] has given data for 30 samples of goat milk. Titratable acidity varied from 0.07 to 0.20 per cent lactic acid (average 0.14 per cent), and freezing point depression from 0.550° to 0.590°C (average 0.578°C). Apart from the work of Bunce [1933] very few samples of milk were examined in other cases. It was therefore thought desirable to examine a larger number of authentic samples of goat and sheep milk for their freezing point. Along with this, lactose, chloride and acidity in some of the goat milk samples were also determined whenever sufficient quantity of milk was available. Other components of milk, like fat, total solids, etc., were studied separately [Basu and co-workers, 1949], hence those results are not included here. EXPERIMENTAL Work has been carried out with two types of samples, namely, samples produced at this Institute and those obtained from other farms outside Bangalore. At the Institute farm bulk goat milk samples were obtained from a herd of five animals of Surti breed, and bulk sheep milk samples from two to three animals of North Gujarat breed. Colostrum and milk from individual animals were also studied in both the species for a part of their lactations. Unless otherwise stated, a com- posite milk sample prepared by mixing one day's evening milk with the next day's morning milk was used for the study. No preservative was added to the samples, but whenever necessary they were kept in a refrigerator to prevent the development of acidity. Results of analysis of milk from individual animals and bulk samples are shown in Tables I and II. 8 AR/53 51 8
52 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE I Freezing point and acidity in Surti goat's colostrum and milk produced at Bangalore Samples from individual animals Bulk samples Sample number Number of days in lactation Freezing point (-°C) Acidity (percent lactic acid) Sample number Freezing point (March, 1954] DEARMARAJAN, VENKATESWARA AND DASTUR 53 TABLE I54 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE IMarch, 1954] DHARMARAJAN, VENKATESWARA AND DASTUR 55 TABLE I56 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE II Freezing point of North Gujarat sheep colostrum and milk produced at Bangalore Samples from individual animals Bulk samples Sample number Number of days in lactation Freezing point (March, 1954] DHARMARAJAN, VENKATESWARA AND DASTUR 57 TABLE III Freezing 'point, lactose and chlorine in goat milk samples collected from out-stations Sample number Locality Breed of goats Number of animals in the herd Samples analysed after (days) Freezing point (58 COMPOSITION or MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE IIIMarch, 1954] DHARMARAJAN, VENKATESWARA AND DASTUR 59 The samples were examined for freezing point, lactose, chlorine and acidity as per methods already outlined by Dharmarajan and co-workers [1950.] DISCUSSION Analysis of 69 normal samples of goat milk from individual animals showed the freezing point depression of the samples to vary from 0.545° to 0.625°O (Table I). Majority of the samples, however, fell within the narrow range of 0.565° to 0.590°C. Data on an additional 72 samples of bulked milk gave almost similar results; the average values for individual and bulk samples produced at Bangalore ranged from 0.578° to 0.584°C. As shown in Table III the analysis of 29 preserved milk samples obtained from out-station centres showed a lower average value, namely, 0.573°C. Taking together all the data for goat milk samples (Table IV), the average value for freezing point depression was 0.579°C; 92.4 per cent of the samples examined fell within the range 0.565° to 0.600°C. The value for the freezing point depression of goat milk was thus distinctly higher than that of cow and buffalo milk [Dharmara- jan, et al., 1950]. Colostrum from two of the goats has been examined and it was found that there was no sharp demarcation in the values for colostral period and for normal milk. For goat No. 2 the average freezing point depression of samples collected during the first two days was 0.581°, the average for subsequent samples was 0.584°C. In the case of goat No. 3, only during the first two milkings were slightly higher values than those obtained on subsequent days were observed. This is in contrast to the results observed with the colostrum of cows and buffaloes [Dharmarajan, et al., 1952] wherein higher values for the freezing point depression were noted. The average acidity of goat milk from Bangalore ranged from 0.12 to 0.15 per cent lactic acid in the case of individual samples and from 0.10 to 0.26 for bulk samples, the average in both the cases being 0.14 per cent. The apparent acidity in goat milk was thus a little higher than that of cow and buffalo milk. Further, samples of goat milk collected during the colostral period had a slightly higher appa- rent acidity than normal milk. Only a few samples have been examined for lactose and chlorine content. The results given in Table III show that the average lactose content of goat milk was 4.45 and average chlorine content, 0.127 per cent. The lactose content of goat milk was much lower than that of cow and buffalo milk. Chlorine content on the other hand was nearly one and a half times as much as in cow milk, and almost double the amount present in buffalo milk [Dharmarajan, et al., 1950 ; Dastur, et al., 1951]. The average lactose-chlorine number [Davies, 1939] on the other hand was very similar to the value obtained with buffalo herd milk at Bangalore. The values for acidity and freezing point depression given in the present studies are in close agreement with these given by Bunce [1933]. Stewart and Banerjea [1930-31] observed higher values for freezing point depression and chlorine. This may be due to the fact that these authors examined only four samples of milk. The results for the analysis of sheep milk samples given in Tables II and IV show that sheep milk had higher average freezing point depression and apparent acidity 8 AR 53 9
60 COMPOSITION OF MILK OF INDIAN ANIMALS [ Vol. XXIV, Part I, TABLE IV Frequency distribution of freezing point of goat and sheep milk Freezing point depression range (°C.) Goat milk samples Sheep milk samples Goat No. 1 Goat No. 2 Goat No. 3 Bulked milk (I. D. B. I.) Bulked milk (other farms) All goat milk sample Sheep No. 2 Bulked milk (I.D.R.I.) All sheep milk sample No. Per cent No. Per cent No. Per cent No. Per cent No. Per cent No. Per cent No. Per cent No. Per cent No. Per cent Below 0.565 1 4.8 .. .. 1 4.8 1 1.4 6 20.7 9 5.3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 0.565 to 0.570 3 14.3 5 18.5 .. .. 7 9.7 5 17.3 20 11.8 .. .. .. .. .. .. 0.571 to 0.575 6 28.5 1 3.7 4 19.0 18 25.0 6 20.7 35 20.6 1 6.2 1 4.8 2 5.4 0.676 to 0.580 4 19.0 6 22.2 5 23.8 20 27.8 2 6.9 37 21.8 6 37.6 3 14.3 9 24.3 0.581 to 0.585 4 19.0 21 7.5 5 23.8 15 20.8 2 6.9 28 16.5 2 12.5 9 32.7 11 29.7 0.586 to 0.590 1 4.8 6 22.2 4 19.0 8 11.1 3 10.3 22 12.9 4 25.0 5 23.8 9 24.3 0.591 to 0.595 1 4.8 5 18.5 1 4.8 .. .. 1 3.4 8 4.7 .. .. 1 4.8 1 2.7 0.596 to 0.600 1 4.8 1 3.7 1 4.8 2 2.8 2 6.9 7 4.1 1 6.2 1 4.8 2 5.4 Over 0.600 .. .. 1 3.7 .. .. 1 1.4 2 6.9 4 2.3 2 12.5 1 4.8 3 8.9 Total 21 100.0 27 100.0 21 100.0 72 100.0 29 100.0 170 100.0 16 100.0 21 100.0 37 100.0 Average 0.578 0.584 0.581 0.579 0.573 0.579 0.588 0.587 0.587
March, 1954] DHARMARAJAN, VENKATESWARA AND DASTUR 61 than goat milk. The average freezing point depression of bulk sheep milk samples was 0.587°C and the acidity was 0.17 per cent. Nearly 78 per cent of the total samples fell in the range of 0.575° to 0.590°C. Study of colostral milk in the case of sheep No. 1 showed that except for the sample obtained at the first milking, which gave a value of 0.700°C for freezing point depression, the samples of colostrum did not differ markedly in their freezing point depression from the samples collected sub- sequently, a result similar to that observed with goat milk samples. SUMMARY The average freezing point and acidity of goat milk samples produced at Banga- lore were ABSTRACTS Perosis in ducklings complicated by a riboflavin deficiency. TURTON, J. D. (1953). Brit. vet. J. 109, 171-174 THE author describes a syndrome of manganese-cum-riboflavin deficiency in a flock of ducklings at 4-5 weeks age. Early cases showed enlargement of one or both hock-joints followed by subcutaneous haemorrhage over the joints. Later, metatarsus became twisted and articular cartilages and gastroenemius tendon got displaced with complete disarticulation in some cases. Several birds showed para- lysis of digits. Post-mortem showed fatty degeneration of the liver in all cases, while petechiae near the coronary groove of the heart were noticed in a few. About 2/3rd of the flock died while survivors showed leg changes to varying extent. The deficiency of riboflavin has been stated to be the likely primary cause of death. Addition of five per cent dried yeast and six ounces of manganese sulphate per ton in ration and putting birds on grass at three weeks have been suggested as preventive measures. (B.N.G.). The effect on the health of lactating cows of treatment with galacto poietic doses of thyroxine or iodinated casein. LEACH, F. B. AND BAILEY, G. L. (1953). J. agric. Sci. 43, 2, 236-251 THIS article reports results of an experiment undertaken by a group of workers brought together by the Agricultural Research Council of the U. K. under the Chairmanship of Prof. H. D. Kay. The main object of the extensive experiments was to study the effect of thyroactive substances on the herd life of cows or on general health and breeding efficiency. The economic life of the animals found from the rate of their removal from commercial herds was used as an indirect measure of health and productivity. On statistical and practical grounds it was decided that there should be 1,000 treated and 1,000 control cows located in moderate-sized herds of 30-50 milking cows record- ed under National or ' Scottish Milk Records'. A panel of 38 farms started the experiment of which 24 were in England five in Wales and nine in Scotland. Half the cows in each herd were given, in addition to their normal food the experimental cubes containing the thyroactive substances after about the 84th day of calving for eight weeks at the rate of 4 lb. of cubes per day. Gradually the dose was dropped to 1 lb. and stopped altogether in the 11th week. The other half of each herd got no such special treatment and served as controls. Each farm was visited before starting the experiment, soon after the start of the experiment and at six monthly intervals thereafter for observations and records. The experiment lasted three years and provided results for second and third successive lactations on the herds. 63 8 AR/53 10
64 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, The experiment, on due statistical analysis of the recorded data, shows that the use of thyroactive material in successive lactations did not have any serious adverse effects on the health of cows. The effect on productivity was less than had been expected, since the increase in milk yield resulting during the period of hor- monal treatment was often largely or completely negativated by a shortening of the lactation period. During the period of treatment there was however, a marked response in daily milk yield but the fat content of the milk was not raised. The incidence of disease was somewhat greater in the treated than in the control group. There were no adverse effects on the reproductive life of treated cows. Thyroxine sodium replaced iodinated casein on 26 farms during the second and third years with no significant differences in the milk yield response. [R.S.]
REVIEW MANUAL OF INFERTILITY AND ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE BY P. G. MILLAR AND N. P. RAS (Published by Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, London, W. C. 2, 1952, pp. XV+339 Price: 25s.) ARTIFICIAL insemination as a biological tool has already found for itself an important place in the animal husbandry practice all over the world, in recent years. Infertility has always been a scourge of the cattle industry, but its menace was not so well realised as the havoc caused by it is not so striking as rinderpest, foot and mouth, tuberculosis and other diseases. With the widespread introduc- tion of artificial insemination in cattle, however, the problem of infertility is acquir- ing increasing significance. Systematic studies on the subject being of recent origin, there are but very few text-books on the problem concerning bovine inferti- lity. The present manual is, therefore, welcome especially because it incorporates topics on both infertility and artificial insemination. The authors are to be con- gratulated for the simple and easy style in which they have presented their experiences in the field, in this volume. The book is divided into four sections. The first section deals with the anatomy and physiology of the male and female genital tract, methods for clinical examina- tion of the genitalia, diagnosis of pregnancy and semen evaluation. Sections 2 and 3 deal with infertility and its manifestations. Genetical, developmental, infec- tive and environmental aspects of infertility problems have been discussed in these chapters. Individual infertility, both male and female and herd infertility have been specially dealt in Section 3. Artificial insemination has a 'definite inherent value' in the treatment and control of infertility besides being an important tool for livestock development. Section 4 has been devoted to the discussion on this subject. The authors have rightly stated on page 158 that no breeder can hope to improve his cattle, in conformation and productivity, if he does not understand the basic genetic principles and make use of them in the right way. But as the science underlying the art of breeding is very little understood by an average cattle breeder and even by many a technical person dealing with infertility problems, the scope of the book could have been enlarged if more pages were devoted to the funda- mental principles of animal genetics. On page 29 the authors mention of having noticed increased rate of twinning in the herd with falling conception rate, in the presence of genital diseases and increased incidence of abortion. How the genital diseases can produce higher incidence of twinning is not easily understood. An elaboration of this statement would, there- fore, have been welcome. Similarly, the statement on the same page that in certain 65
66 REVIEW [Vol. XXIV, Part I, herds, showing high incidence of twinning due to genital infections there was also an increase in the percentage of male calves born and a lower viability of heifer calves, leaves the reader with a hazy mind. For, from the work of Crew, it is known that in diseases there is a preferential mortality for the male from the time of con- ception onwards. This manual with its original and excellent illustrations will undoubtedly serve as a useful practical guide to the cattle breeder and to the students of animal husbandry and veterinary science, in the understanding of the complex problems associated with reproduction in cattle. [P.B.] MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES FIELD APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-II P. BHATTAOHARYA and S. S. PRABHU, Division of Animal genetics, Indian Veteri- nary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Reecived for publication on 31 March 1953) IN earlier reports [Bhattacharya, 1948 ; Bhattacharya and Prabhu, 1952], the first results of an organised attempt by the Government of India to introduce the technique of artificial insemination in the field were analysed and discussed. The data were from the three field stations opened at Calcutta, Montogomery and Patna, and covered a working period of about 13 months from the commencement. In the present article, the data gathered during the subsequent 12 months are dis- cussed. The Montogomery centre had to be closed down in August, 1947, following the partition of the country, with the result that data comprising about 928 inse- minations were lost. About 13 per cent of the Calcutta centre data of the period could not be utilised for want of complete information due to migration and/or change of residence by cattle owners. The study presented here comprises data collected at Calcutta, Patna and the freshly opened centre at Bangalore during the year 1947. Details of bulls At the three centres, there were a total of 26 bulls in use of which two were B. indicus, four B. bubalis and one B. taurus. They belonged to the following breeds : B. indicus X-bred Sahiwal Nagore Tharparkar Gir Red Sindhi B. taurus . Aryshire B. bubalis . Murrah Out of the 26 bulls, the Bangalore centre had the largest number, namely 15. The Patna centre had six while the remaining five belonged to the Calcutta centre. The bulls stationed at Bangalore were unaccustomed to artificial service and had to be freshly trained for the purpose. There was no change in bulls at the Calcutta centre, while at the Patna centre, one of the B. indicus bulls used in the previous years was replaced. No difficulty was experienced in securing semen when desired from these bulls. 67 18 AR/53
68 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE (II) [ Vol. XXIV, Part II, TABLE I Details of collections at the three artificial insemination centres Centre Serial number of bulls Brand No. or name of bulls Breed Total number of collections per Average volume in c. c. of ejaculate per Bull Breed Species Bull Breed Species B. indicus Calcutta 1 Eng. 1 x-bred 33 74 433 3.46±0.28 3.39±l.98 3.98±0.18 2 Eng. 2 x-bred 41 3.32±0.28 3 Multani Sahiwal 22 22 3.39±0.37 3.39±0.39 4 Hiralal Nagore 49 49 3.86±0.24 3.86±0.24 Patna 5 6 7 8 7/2 151/2 158/2 57/2 Tharparkar Tharparkar Tharparkar Tharparkar 29 24 57 55 165 3.41±0.22 3.99±0.16 3.66±0.14 3.22±0.12 3.52±0.09 Bangalore 9 Windfall Gir 12 19 5.33±0.66 5.74±l.00 10 430 Gir 4 4.43±2.18 11 Tanji Gir 3 9.20 12 Unique Bed Sindhi 23 85 3.39±l.16 4.71±0.58 13 281 Red Sindhi 13 7.57±l.30 14 Therab Red Sindhi 11 5.11±l.17 15 Ziman Red Sindhi 6 5.95±l.73 16 Tasman Red Sindhi 18 4.81±l.09 17 Tojo Red Sindhi 8 2.53±l.12 18 Warspite Red Sindhi 3 4.00±l.29 19 484 Red Sindhi 3 4.33±l.54 20 Tulsiraj Tharparkar 11 19 6.36±l.18 5.92±l.32 21 Thiagraj Tharparkar 8 5.30±2.70 B. taurus 22 Bright lad Aryshire 22 22 22 4.55±0.85 4.55±0.85 4.55±0.85 B. bubalis Calcutta 23 .. Murrah 7 96 2.27±0.29 2.85±0.20 2.85±0.20 24 S. P.439 Murrah 37 2.92±0.17 Patna 96 25 S. P. 441 Murrah 43 2.51±0.21 Bangalore 26 Winston Murrah 9 4.69±l.22
June, 1954] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S.S. PRABHU 69 Details of collection (i) Number. Full particulars of the collections made from the different bulls are given in Table I. This contains information on the number of collections made during the year and the average volume of semen collected per ejaculum of bull, breed and species. From the 26 bulls, less than 10 ejaculates were taken from nine, less than 20 ejaculates from five, while the maximum number of ejaculates constituting 78.91 per cent of the total ejaculates came from the remaining 12 bulls. Among the B. indicus, the largest number of collections (57) was made from the Tharparkar bull No. 158/2 stationed at the Patna centre. The previous year's best bull was second with 55 collections. The highest for the B. bubalis was 43, given by S. P. 441 also of Patna. On an average, these collections work out to about one per week for the above three bulls, while for all bulls about one per 2½ weeks. (ii) Average volume. The average semen volume, as observed previously differed from species to species, from breed to breed and within a breed from animal to animal, and within an animal, from ejaculate to ejaculate. The B. indicus bulls gave on an average 3.98±0.18 c.c., B. taurus 4.55±0.85 c.c. and B. bubalis 2.85±0.20 c.c. The difference between B. indicus and B. taurus was not significant, while that between both these species and B. bubalis was statistically significant. Among the B. indicus breeds, the average semen volume per ejaculum of breeds like Gir and Tharparkar (Bangalore) was 50-75 per cent higher than those of breeds like Nagore, Tharparkar (Patna), X-bred and Sahiwal. Red Sindhis gave ejaculates which were slightly larger than those given by the latter breeds. Statistical signi- ficance of the difference between any two given breeds can be readily seen from Table 11. TABLE II Statistical significance of the difference between two breeds Breed X-bred Sahiwal Nagore Thar. (Patna) Gir R. Sindhi Thar. (Bangalore) B. indicus X-bred .. .. .. .. * .. * Sahiwal .. .. * .. * * * Nagore .. * .. * * * * Tharparkar .. .. .. .. * * * (Patna) Gir * * * * .. .. .. Red Sindhi .. * * * .. .. .. Tharparkar * * * * .. .. .. (Bangalore) B. taurus Aryshire .. * .. * .. .. B. bubalis Murrah .. * * * * * * * Statistically significant.
70 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE (II) [ Vol. XXIV, Part II, It will be noticed from Table II, that while there was no significant difference in amount of semen given per ejaculate among Gir, Red Sindhi and Tharparkar (Bangalore), each of these produced significantly larger ejaculates than other B. indicus breeds and Murrah. The ejaculates given by Murrah bulls differed signi- ficantly from all breeds, the only exception being x-bred. One interesting feature observed was the higher volumes of ejaculates got from the bulls of the same breed reared under different climatic stresses. Thus Tharparkar (Bangalore) bulls gave on an average 5.92±1.32 c.c. of semen per ejaculate, as opposed to Tharparkar (Patna) bulls whose ejaculates averaged only 3.52±0.09 c.c. The difference was statistically significant. Same was the case with the Murrah bulls located at the three different artificial insemination centres. A comparison of the average semen volume per ejaculate obtained from like bulls during 1947 and the previous year is shown in Table III. TABLE III Comparison of average semen volumes per ejaculate Bull number Average volume per ejaculate (c.c.) Difference (c.c.) (b-a) 1946 (a) 1947 (b) B. indicus X-bred 1 2.35±0.13 (28)June, 1954 ] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 71 Details of inseminations. Complete details of inseminations performed from different bulls at the three artificial insemination centres are given in Table IV. The response from public to the new technique was greatest at the Patna centre, where a. total of 2034 cows and 437 she-buffaloes were inseminated. Next came Calcutta centre, with a figure of 1008 cows and nine she-buffaloes ; while at Bangalore centre the minimum number of animals was served. The poor response in respect of buffaloes at Calcutta was due to the non-availability of a suitable bull at the centre. The distribution of the services performed at the three artificial insemination centres between the 26 bulls was as follows : Over 600 services 2 bulls 30172 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE (II) [Vol. XXIV, Part II, TABLE IV Details of inseminations at the three artificial insemination centres Centre Serial number of bulls Brand No. or name of bulls Breed Total number of inseminations per Average number of inseminations per ejaculate per Bull Breed Species Bull Breed Species B. indicus Calcutta 1 Eng. 1 x-bred 258 556 3435 7.82 7.51 7.91 2 Eng. 2 x-bred 298 7.41 3 Multani Sahiwal 172 172 7.82 7.82 4 Hiralal Nagora 380 880 7.76 7.76 Patna 5 7/2 Tharparkar 319 2034 11.00 12.33 6 151/2 Tharparkar 354 14.75 7 158/2 Tharparkar 720 12.63 8 57/2 Tharparkar 641 11.65 Bangalore 9 Windfall Gir 24 86 2.00 1.89 10 430 Gir 7 1.75 11 Tanjl Gir 5 1.67 12 Unique Red Sindhi 72 246 8.13 1.73 13 281 Red Sindhi 44 8.38 14 Therab Red Sindhi 33 3.00 15 Zinian Red Sindhi 27 4.50 16 Tasman Bed Sindhi 56 3.11 17 Tojo Bed Sindhi .. 18 Warspite Bed Sindhi 10 8.38 19 484 Bed Sindhi 4 1.83 20 Tulsiraj Tharparkar 11 11 1.00 1.00 21 Thiagraj Tharkarpar .. .. B. taurus 22 Bright lad Aryshire 38 38 55 1.73 1.73 1.73 B. bubatis Calcutta 23 Murrah 9 453 1.28 4.72 Patna 24 S. P.489 Murrah 214 5.78 25 S. P. 441 Murrah 223 453 5.19 4.72 Bangalore 26 Winston Murrah 7 0.78
June, 1954 ] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 73 TABLE V Details of service rules at the three artificial insemination centres Centres Serial number of bulls Brand No. or name of bulls Bred Total number of cows whose calving data were No. of cows holding to service Average service rate per conception per Known Unknown Bull Breed Species B. indicus Calcutta 1 Eng. 1 x-bred 232 26 186 1.71 1.61 1.46 2 Eng. 2 x-bred 256 42 166 1.54 3 Multani Sahiwal 172 .. 88 1.95 1.95 4 Hiralal Nagore 621 59 176 1.91 1.91 patna 5 7/2 Tharparkar 319 .. 249 1.28 1.30 6 151/2 Tharparkar 354 .. 271 1.81 7 15S/2 Tharparkar 720 .. 555 1.30 8 57/2 Tharparkar 641 .. 498 1.80 Bangalore 9 Windfall Gir 24 .. 16 1. 50 1.61 10 430 Gir 7 .. 4 1.75 11 Tanji Gir 5 .. 3 1.67 12 Unique Red Sindhi 72 .. 31 2.32 13 281 Red Sindhi 44 .. 22 2.00 2.71 14 Therab Red Sindhi 33 .. 20 1.65 15 Ziman Red Sindhi 27 .. 12 2.25 16 Tasman Red Sindhi 56 .. 25 2.20 17 Tojo Red Sindhi .. .. .. 18 Warspite Red Sindhi 10 .. 3 3.33 19 484 Red Sindhi 4 .. 1 4.00 20 Tulsiraj Tharparkar 11 .. 7 1.57 1.30 21 Thiagrej Tharkarpar 1 .. 1 1.00 B. taurns 22 Bright Lad Aryshire 33 .. 14 2.71 2.71 2.71 B. bubalis Calcutta 23 .. Murrah 6 3 5 1-20 1.46 Patna 24 S. p.430 Murrah 214 .. 144 1.49 1.46 25 S. P. 441 Murrah 223 .. 157 1.42 Bangalore 26 Winston Murrah 7 .. 3 2.33
74 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE (II) [ Vol. XXIV, Part IT, TABLE VI Service rates of bulls observed at the three centres Bull No. Service rate Difference 1946 1947 B. indicus X-bred 1 1.63 1.71 + 0.08 X-bred 2 1.82 1.54 June, 1954] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 75 From Table VII, it will be noticed that marked centre to centre variation in fertility rates exists, within a centre variation is also observed from month to month. There does not appear to be any clear cut trend in this variation. No attempt is made to test the variation for statistical significance. Semen dosage and fertility. In Table VIII is presented details of semen dosage in terms of neat semen in the dose and fertility. TABLE VIII Semen dosage and fertility Name of centre Fertility per dosage (c.c.) 0.1 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.4 0.5 B. indicus Patna .. 1.37 1.19 1.24 1.31 .. (619) (1132) (410) (185) Calcutta .. .. 1.58 1.74 .. .. (716) (218) Bangalore 1.28 1.73 .. .. 1.50 1.63 (41) (19) (24) (52) B. bubalis Patna .. 1.45 .. 1.48 1.35 .. (194) (135) (89) Figures in brackets denote the number of inseminations considered in each case. Since the amount of diluted semen injected per insemination had remained more or less constant, the fertility figures given in Table VIII also give an indication of fertility obtained with different dilution rates. There is no apparent trend seen in these results. Patna, centre for example, show higher fertility rates when instead of 0.2, 0.25 or 0.3 c.c. of neat semen was introduced with a drop again when higher dose was given. Since in each of the dosage groups semen of the same storage age was not used, the data were re-grouped under each dosage according to the age of the semen, and the results obtained are presented in Table IX. Figures for Bangalore are omitted as the observations under each item were scanty. The B. indicus figures for Patna on analysis showed that there was no difference in fertility between age groups of semen used, but statistically signi- ficant difference was observed between dosage and fertility. Fertility with 0.30 dosage was significantly different from fertilities with other doses. Among the other doses however, the fertility difference was not significant. The B. indicus figures of Calcutta and B. bubalis figures of Patna have not been analysed because of insufficiency of data. 18 AR/53. 2
76 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE (II) [ Vol. XXIV, Part II, TABLE IX Semen dosage and fertility according to age of the semen Name of centre Age in hours Dosage in c.c. Fresh 24 48 B. indieus Patna 0.20 1.32 1.32 1.36 0.25 1.34 1.26 1.30 0.30 1.28 1.20 1.20 0.40 1.87 1.29 1.28 Calcutta 0.25 1.65 1.54 1.70 0.30 .. 1.53 1.75 B. bubalis Patna 0.20 1.41 1.47 1.35 0.30 1.30 2.38 0.40 1.36 1.63 1.33 Age of semen and fertility. In Table X, details of age of semen injected and fertility are presented. TABLE X Age of semen and fertility Age in hours Fresh 18.24 24.1.30 42.1.48 48.1.54 66.1.72 Name of centre B. indieus Patna 1.35 1.27 1.16 1.31 113 1.38 (793) (650) (152) (359) (54) (22) Calcutta 1.61 1.55 .. 1.71 .. 1.76 (240) (385) .. (222) .. (37) Bangalore 1.62 2.00 2.29 2.25 .. 1.73 (110) (30) (16) (27) .. (19) B. bubalis Patna 1.40 1.60 1.35 1.38 .. 1.78 (154) (88) (27) (105) .. (52)
June, 1954 .] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 77 Owing to the incomplete observations, the data did not present itself for straight forward analysis. Analysis already carried out for B. indicus (Patna centre) had shown that there was no difference in fertility with the use of semen samples preserved up to 48 hours. Figures for other species and centres were not analysed. SUMMARY Data gathered during the year 1947 by the Calcutta, Patna, and Bangalore field artificial insemination centres run by the Animal Genetics Division of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute and comprising 3926 inseminations made from 551 ejaculates collected from 21 B. indicus, one B. taurus and four B. bubalis bulls of the centres are analysed and discussed. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors wish to thank Shri D. B. Mukherjee, Ch. Chetram and Shri S. V Chandiramani, the Officers-in-charge of the Calcutta, Patna and Bangalore arti- ficial insemination centres respectively, for their help in introducing the new tech- nique in the field. The basic data utilised in the preparation of this report were collected by them. Thanks are due to Major J. M. Lahiri, Principal, Bengal Veteri- nary College, Shri S. K. Sen, Director of Animal Husbandry, Bihar and Dr. K. C. Sen, Director, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore, for their personal interest and for providing all facilities at the respective artificial insemination centres. To the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, the authors are grateful for help and advice at all stages during the progress of the work. REFERENCES Bhattaoharya, P. (1948). Preliminary report on the field application of artificial insemination. Proc. 35th Indian Sci. Congr. (Patna), III (4) ; 96 (Abstr.) Bhattacharya, P. and S. S. Prabhu (1952). Field application of artificial insemination in Cattle-I Indian J. vet. Sci. XXII, 3,163.178.
THE DEEP80 THE DEEP FREEZING OF SEMEN [ Vol. XXIV, Part II, the ampoules are transferred to their permanent container, which is a heavily in- sulated box containing trays of alcohol at A STUDY OF THE REACTION OF THE VAGINAL SECRETION IN COWS AND HEIFERS By A. C. CHOUDHURI, B, Sc., PH. D. (EDIN), and R. B. PRASAD, G. B. V. C., Bihar Veterinary College, Patna (Received for publication on 24 August 1953) ACCORDING to Hammond, one of the chief characteristics of the cervix is the mucous secretion, the amount and consistency of the mucus varying with the stage of the 82 VAGINAL SECRETION IN COWS AND HEIFERS [ Vol. XXIV, Part II, MATERIAL The mucus collected for this study was from the animals of the Government Cattle Farm, Patna which are of Tharparkar breed. METHOD The main object of this study was to find out the exact reaction of the vaginal mucus in both normal and abnormal animals. In order to do this it was decided to estimate the true reaction of the mucus in terms of pH values. At first an attempt was made to collect mucus from the vaginal wall by inserting the hand through vulva but this method was found to be unsatisfactory as very little mucus would be collected and as such it was abandoned. After various trials the following method was adopted. A vaginal douche nozzle was fitted to a small glass funnel with the help of a short piece of rubber tube. This apparatus was employed to wash the vagina with distilled water. The washing was done by inserting the nozzle in the vagina and pouring about 25 c.c. of distilled water and collecting the washings which used to come out in a clear test tube. The pH value of the vaginal washings from each animal was determined by colorimetric method using universal indicator which has a range of 4.5 to 9.0 (0.25 c.c. of indicator was used in 10 c.c. of the sample tested and in the control). RESULTS Table I shows the pH values of vaginal macus arranged in groups according to the age of the cows. The range of variation in the pH values is between 6.0 and 8.5. Out of 135 readings taken in normal cows the pH values are found to be 6.0 in 20.7 per cent; 6.5 in 41.4 per cent; 7.0 in 28.6 per cent ; 7.5 in 6.1 per cent ; 8.0 in 2.2 per cent and 8.5 in 0.74 per cent of the total readings. TABLE I pH. values of vaginal secretions according to age groups Age of cows Number of animals in each pH group pH 6.0 pH 6.5 pH 7.0 pH 7.5 pH 8.0 pH 8.5 3 years 1 4 1 1 June, 1954 ] A. C. CHOUDHTJRI AND R. B. PRASAD 83 TABLE II pH values of vaginal secretions according to stage of lactation Stage of lactation of cows Number of animals in each pH group Percentage of total readings between pH 7.0 and above pH 6.0 pH 6.5 pH 7.0 pH 7.5 pH 8.0 pH 8.5 1st month 1 1 3 2 84 VAGINAL SECRETION IN COWS AND HEIFERS [ Vol. XXIV, Part II, It would appear from the result that there is a distinct tendency of the pH value of the mucus falling below 7.0 from the fourth month of pregnancy and onward. TABLE IV pH value of vaginal secretion of heifers Serial number Brand Number of heifers Date of birth Date of test A ge at the time of test pH. value Years Months 1 29/4 6-3-44 16-1-45 10 6.0 2 27/4 4-3-44 16-1-45 10 6.5 3 63/2 1-4-42 17-2-44 1 10 6.0 4 71/2 12-4-42 17-2-44 1 9 6.0 5 78/2 23-4-42 12-2-44 1 9 6.5 6 79/2 25-4-42 17-2-44 1 9 6.0 7 76/2 20-4-42 18-2-44 1 9 8.5 8 77/2 22-4-42 18-2-44 1 9 6.0 9 43/3 21-3-43 16-1-45 1 9 6.0 10 53/3 7-4-43 16-1-45 1 9 6.5 11 52/3 5-4-43 16-1-45 1 9 7.0 12 46/3 24-3-43 15-1-45 1 9 7.0 13 35/2 3-3-43 16-1-45 1 10 6.5 14 66/2 3-4-42 17-2-44 1 10 6.0 15 70/2 10-4-42 18-2-44 1 10 6.5 16 73/2 16-4-42 18-2-44 1 10 6.5 17 74/2 17-4-42 18-2-44 1 10 6.5 18 19/3 5-2-43 15-1-45 1 11 6.0 19 28/3 16-2-43 15-1-45 1 11 6.5 20 35/2 20-2-42 15-1-45 2 10 6.0 21 29/2 8-2-42 15-1-45 2 11 6.5 22 25/2 1-2-42 15-1-45 2 11 6.5 23 3/2 1-1-42 15-1-45 3 June, 1954 ] A. C. CHOUDHUEI AND K. B. FRASAD 85 In order to determine the reaction of the vaginal mucus of heifers the mucus from the vagina of 27 heifers varying in age from 10 months to 3 years 6 months was tested, the pR values were found to be 6.0 in 33.3 per cent, 6.5 in 48.1 per cent and 7.0 in 18.5 per cent of the readings. The range was from 6.0 to 7.0. TABLE V pH value of vaginal secretion of cows during cestrum Serial number Brand number of cows Date of birth Date of last calving Date of test pH value 1 321 13-1-37 27-7-42 23-11-43 6.5 2 136 6-11-29 26-6-43 23-11-43 7.0 3 190 14-5-33 20-9-43 27-11-43 7.0 4 203 19-2-34 10-12-41 29-11-43 6.5 5 283 13-10-35 17-9-43 29-11-43 6.5 6 16/0 28-2-40 86 VAGINAL SECRETION IN COWS AND HEIFERS [ Vol. XXIV, Part II, TABLE VIJune, 1954] A. C. CHOUDHURI AND R. B. PRASAD 87 was determined, starting from the day when SOME FACTORS AFFECTING MORTALITY IN OSSIMI AND RAHMANI LAMBS By M. T. RAGAB, A. A. ASKER, and M. R. KADI, Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Cairo, Giza, Egypt (Received for publication on 3 August 1953) THE number of lambs that survive until weaning age determines, to a great extent, the amount of profit which the sheep farmer obtains. This is because loss of lambs through death means a decrease in the number of surplus heads avail- able for sale. Other than diseases, there is a good number of factors that influences the incidence of death in the flock. The study of such factors and their effects will help the breeder to be more competent in minimising his losses. In this investigation, the aim was to study the effect of some of the important factors that influence mortality of lambs until weaning age. The effects of birth weight, breed, type of birth, sex and inbreeding were investigated. MATERIAL AND METHODS The breeding and landing records for sheep kept by the Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University were used in this study. The data covered a period of 13 years, from 1940 to 1952, and comprised 860 Ossimi and 439 Rahmani lambs. Mortality rate was calculated in terms of percentage of the number of lambs surviving at the age of four months (weaning age) to the number of born ones. This stage of life was chosen because it is the one where heavy losses through death are mostly expected. The coefficients of inbreeding of inbred lambs were calculated following the method developed by Wright [1922]. Chi-square method [Snedecor, 1946], was used to test the significance of the differences in mortality rate of the different groups of the lambs studied. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Birth weight Lambs were divided into seven groups according to their birth weights (Table 1), to study the influence of birth weights of lambs on mortality rate. it is noted from this table that as birth weight of lambs decreases, mortality rate increases. TABLE I Effect of birth weight on mortality rate of Ossimi and Rahmani lambs Items compared Birth weights (Kilos) 1.5-2.0 2.1-2.6 2.7-3.2 3.3-3.8 3.9-4.4 4.5-5.0 5.1-5.6 Ossimi Number of births 17 56 125 191 160 34 9 Number of deaths 5 10 15 11 7 1 1 Mortality percentage 29.4 17.9 12 5.8 4.4 2.9 11.1 Rahmani Number of births 10 22 58 99 85 14 .. Number of deaths 2 4 6 6 4 1 .. Mortality percentage 20 18.4 10.3 6.1 4.7 7.1 .. 18AR/53 89 5
90 MORTALITY IN OSSIMI AND RAHMANI LAMBS [ Vol. XXIV, Part II, The average birth weights for Ossimi and Rahmani lambs were 3.65 ± 0.6802 and 3.78 ± 0.4243 kilograms respectively [Asker, et al. 1952]. The mortality rates for Rahmani and Ossimi lambs, that were heavier in their birth weights than the breed's average, were 4.6 per cent and 4.4 per cent respectively. On the other hand, lambs that were lighter than the breed's average, have a mortality rate of 13.3 per cent for the Rahmani and 15.1 per cent for the Ossimi. The differences in mortality rates between lambs of heavier and lighter weights than the breeds' averages were statistically significant. Phillips and Dawson [1940] and Venkatachalam, el al. [1949] came to the same conclusion studying the effect of birth weight of lambs on mortality rate. Therefore, breeders should give more concern to birth weight when selecting animals for breeding purposes. Ragab, et al. [1953] have shown that the heritability of birth weight in the Ossimi sheep was 34 per cent. This estimate does not justify the use of phenotypic selection alone for improving birth weight of lambs. Selection based on the pedigrees of the animals as well as the performances of their ancestors and collaterals would be more appropriate and helpful in this respcet. Effect of breed Out of 860 Ossimi lambs which were born during the period from 1940 to 1952 only 99 lambs died before weaning age (four months). This brings the mortality rate in this breed up to 11.5 per cent. In the case of Rahmani, 439 lambs were born. The number of surviving lambs in this case was 398, and therefore the mortality rate was 9.3 per cent. Although the Rahmani showed a somewhat less mortality rate than the Ossimi, yet the difference was not statistically significant. Some breeds of sheep are known to be more robust than others. Venkatachalam, et al: [1949] studying mortality rate in Costwald, Oxford, Hampshire, Southdown, Shropshire and Rambouillet breeds of sheep ; reported that heavy breeds of sheep showed significantly higher losses than light breeds. In the case of Ossimi and Rahmani sheep, the difference in birth weight between the two breeds is not very great [Asker, et al. 1952]. This may be the reason why no difference in mortality rate was found between the two breeds. Moreover, the mature weight of both Ossimi and Rahmani ewes is more or less the same, thus no significant differences in mortality rate between the two breeds would be expected. It may be worth mentioning here that the mortality rate for those breeds of sheep studied by Venkatachalam, et al. [1949] ranged between 18.0 and 42.2 per cent with an average of 28.6 per cent. These are much higher than those of both Ossimi and Rahmani. It could be suggested here, that higher mortality rate reported by Venkatachalam, et al., were due to the severe prevailing conditions of Michigan State where those foreign breeds were studied. Type of birth The mortality rate of single Ossimi lambs was 9.9 per cent compared to 8.3 per cent for the twins of the same breed. The Rahmani singles had. a mortality rate of 11.5 per cent while it was 11.6 per cent for the twins. There were no signi- ficant differences between mortality rates of single and twin lambs in the two
June, 1954] M. T. RAGAB, A. A. ASKER AND M. R. KADI 91 breeds. It was expected that twins should show higher mortality rate than singles because of their less birth weight and competition during the suckling period. The results arrived at in this investigation do not follow such trend. However, Ven- katachalam, et al. [1949] reported that mortality rate for twin lambs was significantly higher than that of singles, while Phillips and Dawson [1940] found no consistent differences in the ability of single and twin lambs to survive to three months of age. Effect of sex The sex-ratio in the Ossimi flock was 57 per cent males and 43 per cent females. The mortality rate among the 498 male rams was 13.9 per cent, while it was 8.3 per cent for the 361 female lambs born during the period of study. The differences due to sex were statistically highly significant. The higher mortality rate of male lambs may be a balancing factor for the sex-ratio when lambs get older. In the case of the Rahmam breed, 224 females and 217 males were produced, and the sex ratio came to 49.2 per cent males and 50.8 per cent females. The mortality rate in this flock was 10.3 per cent and 8.8 per cent for females and males respectively, and the difference between the two sexes was not significant. Our results on the Ossimi flock agree with Venkatachalam, et al. [1949] while those of the Rahmani are in accordance with those of Phillips and Dawson [1940]. Effect of inbreeding Table II was prepared to illustrate the effect of inbreeding on mortality rate of Ossimi lambs only, since the number of inbred lambs in the Rahmani flock was limited. TABLE II Effect of inbreeding on mortality rate of Ossimi lambs Items compared Coefficient of inbreeding (per cent) 0 1-5-9 6-11-9 12-17-9 18-23-9 24-30 Number of births 463 66 35 53 .. 89 Number of deaths 46 6 4 4 .. 7 Mortality percentage 9.9 9.1 11.4 7.5 .. 7.9 In this table, lambs were classified into six groups according to their coefficients of inbreeding, and it shows that inbreeding has no effect on mortality rate of lambs. The average coefficient of inbreeding for the whole number of inbred lambs in the Ossimi flock was 14.7 per cent. The mortality rate for the inbred lambs and the outbred ones was 9.9 per cent and 8.6 per cent respectively. The difference between the two groups was not statistically significant. Our finding is in close agreement to that reported by Venkatachalam, et al. [1949] studying this problem in six breeds of sheep in the United States.
92 MORTALITY IN OSSIMI AND RAHMANI LAMBS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, However, it should be noted here, that no lethal factor has occurred in this flock although it was closed to outside blood since 1934. Only a recessive case of blindness was observed [Ragab and Asker, 1953] and most blind lambs failed to survive up to weaning age, although their number was very limited. SUMMARY Records kept by the Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Giza, on a flock of Rahmani sheep and another of Ossimi sheep were analysed to study the effect of various factors influencing mortality rate of lambs till four months of age. The records included 860 Ossimi lambs and 439 Rahmani ones and covered a period of 13 years since 1940. The results showed that breed, type of birth and inbreeding had no significant effect on the mortality rate of lambs. Birth weight of lambs was an important factor in mortality rate of Ossimi and Rahmani lambs. Lighter lambs had a signi- ficantly higher mortality rate than heavier ones. In the Ossimi breed, males showed a higher mortality than females, while in the Rahmani breed the differences between the two sexes in mortality rate was not significant. REFERENCES Asker, A. A., Ragab, M. T. and Kadi. M. R. (1952). The Influence of Some Environmental Factors Affecting Weight of Ossimi and Rahmani Sheep. Fac. Agri. Univ. Cairo, Bull. 19 Phillips, R. W. and Dawson, W. M. (1940). Some Factors Affecting Survival. Growth and Selection of Lambs. U. S. D. A., Cir. 538 Ragab, M. T., Asker, A. A. and Kadi, M. R. (1953). Genetic Factors Affecting Weight of Ossimi Lambs Emp. J. Exp. Agri. (In press) Ragab, M. T. and Asker, A. A. (1953). Some Results of Inbreeding on a Flock of Ossimi Sheep. J. Hered. (In press) Snedecor, G. W. (1946) Statistical Methods, 4th Edition, Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa Venkatachalam, G., Nelson, R. H.,Thropp, F., Leucke, R. W. and Gray, M. L. (1949). Causes and Certain Factors Affecting Lamb Mortality. J. Anim. Sci., 8, 392-396 Wright, S. (1922). Coefficients of Inbreeding and Relationship. Amer. Nat., 56, 330-338
COMPONENT ACIDS AND THE PROBABLE GLYCERIDES OF THE MILK FAT OBTAINED FROM COTTON- SEED-FED BUFFALOES By V. V. MHASKAR and B. N. BANERJEE Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore (Received for publication on 21 April 1953) VERY few samples of milk fats obtained after special feeding of buffaloes have been analysed so far. Because of the presence of a number of mixed glycerides in milk fats, it is very difficult to determine their glyceride composition, even though the recent analytical methods enable us to determine accurately the acid composition. The main difficulty in determining the glyceride composition is that the solubility of any particular glyceride in the common organic solvent is considerably influenced by the presence of other glycerides and hence a sharp separa- tion of the different entities is not possible. Many workers have attempted the separation of the glycerides of milk fats using ether, acetone, alcohol or suitable mixtures of these solvents, preferably at low temperatures. Hilditch and Paul [1940] analysed the milk fat of an English cow by separating it into three groups which obviously were less complex in their glyceride composition than the original fat; acetone was used for crystallisation and the separation was carried out at 0° and 20°C. The low temperature crystallisation technique was further applied to milk fats by Jack and Henderson [1945] and by Jack, Henderson and Hinshaw [1946]. Bhattacharya and Hilditch [1931], Achaya and Banerjee [1946] and Ananta- krishnan, et al. [1947], analysed buffalo milk fats and determined the acid composition. Achaya and Hilditch [1950] have worked out in detail the glyceride composition of a buffalo milk fat after carefully separating the fat into a number of fractions at low temperatures. The present work deals with the acid composition of the milk fat of buffaloes heavily fed on cottonseed. The fat was separated into four fractions using acetone and the acid composition of each fraction was determined. The possible types of glycerides are discussed. EXPERIMENTAL Collection of the sample The sample was kindly supplied by the Indian Dairy Research Institute, Banga- lore. All the buffaloes were fed with 75 per cent of cottonseed and 25 per cent of concentrate mixture, consisting of 45 per cent gram, 20 per cent wheat bran, 20 per cent groundnut cake and 15 per cent gram husk. The above mentioned ration was given at the rate of 1 lb. of total mixture for every 3 lb. of milk per day, together with 65 lb. of Guinea grass, 10 lb. of ragi straw, 2 oz. of common salt and ½ oz. of mineral mixture. The sample analysed was obtained from the milk drawn after ten days of feeding. Table I indicates the analytical characteristics of the ghee; the low Reichert and Polenske values and high iodine values of such samples derived after cottonseed feeding are quite characteristic [1946]. 18 AR/53 93 6
94 MILK FAT OBTAINED FROM COTTONSEED-FED BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part II, TABLE I Chemical constants of the ghee sample Analytical characteristics Value Saponification equivalent 265.7 Iodine value (Wijs) 37.9 Thiocyanogen value 31.0 Acid value 0.16 Reichert Meissel value 18.5 Polenske value 0.9 Crystallisation from acetone into fractions Dry acetone was used for the crystallisations. A weighed quantity of the sample was dissolved with gentle warming in the required volume of acetone in a suitable pyrex conical flask. The solution was slowly brought to the required temperature and maintained there for the necessary length of time. It was then filtered through a buchner funnel and washed with cold acetone at the temperature used for crystallisation. The insoluble fraction was used for further analysis after completely removing the solvent from it. The following chart gives the details of crystallisation. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Loss of fatJune, 1954] V. V. MHASKAR AND B. N. BANERJEE 95 aqueous distillate and the ether distilled were titrated against standard alkali and calculated as butyric acid. The non-steam volatile acids were extracted with ether, washed free of mineral acid with distilled water, dried over anhydrous sodium sulphate and the solvent ether removed completely. The mixed acids were then separated into 'solid' and 'liquid' acids by the Twitchell lead salt-alcohol method and each group converted into methyl esters. The methyl ester were fractionated by distillation through an 'E. H. P.' column at low pressures. An ordinary claissen flask provided with a long fractionating column having deep indentations was also found to function efficiently. The component acids of the two groups were built up by calculation from the determined S. E. and I. V. of the individual fractions. The residual esters during fractional distillation of the 'liquid' esters from fractions A, B, C and D were saponified and the soaps freed of unsaponifiable matter by extraction with ether. The acids liberated from these fractions gave S. E. and I. V. nearly equal to that of oleic acid, showing that 2096 MILK FAT OBTAINED FROM COTTONSEED-FED BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part II, TABLE IV Fractionation of methyl esters of 'solid' acids of fraction A through E. H. P. column. at 1-2 mm. Fraction Number. Weight in gm. B.P. °C. S.E. I.V. Saturated Oleic C14 C16 C18 C20 1 1.163 Below 130 252.3 2.9 0.737 0.386 .. .. 0.04 2 2.443 130June, 1954 ] V. V. MHASKAR AND B. N. BANERJEE 97 TABLE V Fractionation of methyl esters of 'liquid' acids of fraction A through E. H. P. Column at 1-2 mm. Fraction Number. Weight in gm. B. P. °C. S.E. I. V. Saturated Unsaturated Oleic linoleic C12 C14 C16 C12 C14 C16 1 0.2794 Below 115 232.1 8.4 0.0850 0.1731 .. 0.0055 0.0158 .. .. 2 0.7974 11598 MILK FAT OBTAINED FROM COTTONSEED-FED BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part II, TABLE VI Fatty acid composition of fraction A Acids Steam volatile 2.12 per cent 'Liquid' 17.64 per cent 'Solid' 80.24 per cent Total 100 per cent Mols. 100 per cent Saturated Butyric 0.711 .. .. 0.711 2.09 Caproic .. .. .. .. Caprylic 1.208 .. .. 1.208 2.18 Capric .. .. .. .. .. Laurie .. 0.275 .. 0.275 0.36 Myristic .. 2.152 4.520 6.C72 7.61 Palmitic .. 1.473 42.720 44.193 44.77 Stearic .. 22.248 22.248 20.32 As Arachidic .. 3.982 3.982 3.31 Unsaturated .. Decenoic .. .. .. .. Dodecenoic .. 0.019 .. 0.019 0.02 Tetradecenoic .. 0.437 .. 0.437 0.50 Hexadecenoic .. 1.854 .. 1.854 1.89 Oleic 0.201 11.270 6.770 18.241 16.79 Linoleic .. 0.169 . . 0.169 0.16 Mean As acids As glycerides (ex- cluding unsaponi- fiable) S.E. 259.3 272.0 I.V. 19.1 18.2
June, 1954] V. V. MHASKAR AND B. N. BANERJEE 99 TABLE VII Fatty acid composition (per cent mol.) of fractions A, B, C and D Acids A B 0 D Butyric 2.09 5.24 9.47 13.51 Caproic .. 1.37 1.65 1.82 Caprylic 2.18 0.37 0.51 0.35 Capric .. 0.12 0.53 0.70 Lauric 0.36 0.61 0.93 0.90 Myristic 7.61 7.09 4.03 3.45 Palmitic 44.77 38.77 24.52 19.13 Stearic 20.32 14.98 12.53 6.33 As Arachidic 3.31 1.25 0.58 0.70 Decenoic .. 0.08 0.04 0.05 Dodecenoic 0.02 0.09 0.22 0.12 Tetradecenoic 0.50 1.08 1.09 1.01 Hexadecenoic 1.89 6.39 1.58 3.81 Oleic 16.79 22.18 40.15 44.20 Linoleic 0.16 0.38 2.17 3.92 Mean S.E. as glycerides 272.0 269.2 262.1 255.1 Mean I.V. as glycerides 18.2 28.9 45.9 55.5 TABLE VIII Increments (per cent mol.) of fatty acids infractions A, B, C and D Fraction A B C D Total Weight in grams 153.6 360.1 311.0 275.6 1100.3 S.E. found 274.1 271.5 263.9 257.2 265.7* I.V. found 18.1 28.15 45.26 54.6 37.9* Per cent weight 14.0 32.7 28.3 25.0 100.0 Per cent in mol. 13.5 32.1 28.5 25.9 100.0 * From Table I.
100 MILK FAT OBTAINED FROM COTTONSEED-FED BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part II, TABLE VIIIJune, 1954] V. V. MHASKAR AND B. N. BANERJEE 101 (3SU2); and 4. Triunsaturated glycerides (U3). Table IX gives the probability calculations for these types of glycerides. TABLE IX Glycerides present in various fractions (increments per cent mols.) calculated from probability equation Glycerides A B C D Total Trisaturated 7.2 10.9 4.7 2.7 25.5 Disaturated-monounsaturated 5.1 14.2 11.6 9.1 40.0 Monosaturated di-unsaturated 1.2 9.6 9.6 10.3 27.2 Triunsaturated 0 0.9 2.6 3.8 7.3 As the number of component acids in a fat increased the glyceride structure becomes more and more complicated. To get a clearer idea of the picture of the types of glycerides in the present sample of ghee, it is necessary to divide the com- ponent acids into four main groups as shown in Table X. TABLE X Grouped fatty acids in various fractions Fatty acids A B C D Total C4 saturated102 MILK FAT OBTAINED FROM COTTONSEED-FED BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part II, Fraction B. In this fraction the percentage of 0 is 9.69 and that of other saturated acids is 22.11; therefore the possibility of the presence of O3 need not be considered. The possible glycerides in this fraction may be PO2, BPS, PO2, BPO, SO2, BSO and BP2. Glycerides like P2S or S2P will not be present in this fraction, as such glycerides will naturally separate in fraction A. The total percentage of the disaturated mono-unsaturated glycerides will be much more than the percentage of mono-saturated di-unsaturated glycerides, as is suggested by the figures in Table IX. Fraction C. The percentage of 0 is 12.89, the remaining saturated acids being 15.5. The component acids will form glycerides which will be more soluble than the glycerides in fractions A and B. The presence of triunsaturated is doubtful as the percentage of 0 is not even equal to that of the remaining acids, while the possibility for the formation of trisaturated glycerides still exists. The percentages of the component acid groups show that B and S will form mostly mono-B-di-ethers and mono-S-di-ethers glycerides. The percentages of the glycerides B2P and B2S will be, therefore, very small. The trisaturated glycerides of this fraction will mostly consist of BPS. This glyceride BPS is also present in fractions A and B and so its presence in fraction C is quite possible, since in a mixture of glycerides the solubility of a particular glyceride varies considerably according to the quality and quantity of the other glycerides present (Mutual solubility effect). This is the reason why some glycerides appear in more than one fraction. The possible glycerides in frac- tion C are BPS, PO2, SO2, BPO and BSO. Fraction D. Triunsaturated glycerides may be present in this fraction as the percentage of O is 13.76 and that of the remaining acids 12.75. Considering the percentages of B, P,S and O and the solubility of the fraction the following glycerides are possible: O3 (in small quantity), B2O, BO2, SO2, BPO and BSO. Finally the acid composition, (in percentage mols.) of the milk fat used during the present work may be compared with the results obtained by Achaya and Hilditch (loc. cit.). The milk fat analysed by Achaya and Hilditch was collected from the animals fed on normal ration. TABLE XI Fatty acid analyses (per cent mol.) of ghees from buffaloes fed on cottonseed and on normal diet Fatty acid Present work (Cottonseed diet) Achaya and Hilditch [1950] (whole fat analysis) (Normal diet) Butyric 8.2 12.6 Caproic 1.4 3.3 Caprylic 0.7 0.8
June, 1954] V. V. MHASKAR AND B. N. BANERJEE 103 TABLE XI104 MILK FAT OBTAINED FROM COTTONSEED-FED BUFFALOES [Vol. XXIV, Part II ACKNOWLEDGMENT Our thanks are due to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the grant of a scheme under which the present results were obtained. REFERENCES Achaya K. T. and Banerjee B. N. (1946), Biochem. J. 40, 664 Achaya K. T. and Hilditch T. P. (1950), Proc. Roy. Soc. Biol. 137, 187 Anantakrishnan C. P., Bhalerao V. R. and Paul T. M. (1947). Arch. Biochem. 12A TAMPER-PROOF MILK DELIVERY CAN AND CAN LOCKING BRACKET By JAMES N. WARNER and O. P. AAGARWALA, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad (Received for publication on 28 May 1953) (With three text-figures) THE market milk industry attempts to control the problem of adulteration of milk. This illegal practice has often made it difficult for consumers to obtain genuine, clean and safe milk. In an attempt to assure that the can used in the distribution of milk is tamper- proof, new designs for the lid and for the faucet of the conventional milk delivery can were first developed in the Indian Dairy Research Institute at Bangalore and then in the Dairy Technology Department of the Allahabad Agricultural Institute. The construction of these devices at the Institute was carried out by the Institute Workshop. The tamper-proof mechanism of the milk delivery can developed at Bangalore (details published in the Indian Journal of Dairy Science, Vol. III, No. 1, pp. 23-30) was complicated, expensive and difficult to clean. Easyness in cleaning is very essential for clean distribution of milk. The tamper-proof milk delivery can dis- cussed here is an improvement on those lines. TAMPER-PROOF LID FOR MILK DELIVERY CAN In one common type of milk delivery can each end of the strap-iron handle on the lid extends about an inch beyond the outside edge of the lid. When the lid is in place on the can these ends overlap with brackets fixed to the outside upper edge of the can neck. Both the ends of the lid handle and of the brackets are bored with small holes through which a wire or string may be passed to tie them together. Usually after they are tied, the wire or string is sealed with a wax or lead seal to assure the removal of the lid being easily detected. Such a method of closing and sealing the can almost always allows a little vertical movement of the lid, perhaps one-fourth of an inch or so. Water may then be worked into the can, between the lid periphery and the can lip, while working the lid up and down as far as the seal permits. Quantities of water can be mixed with the milk in this manner with particular ease if the lid skirt has been bent inwards at the point at which the water is worked into the can, for then this skirt does not at this point fit tightly against the inside of the can neck. In order to correct this fault of the lid described, those portions of the lid handle which extended beyond the edge of the lid at each end were cut off and the brackets removed from the can neck. A second hood-type lid or hood was then constructed. Heavy gauge galvanised iron was used in the experimental 18 AR/53 105 8
106 A TAMPER-PROOF MILK DELIVERY CAN [Vol. XXIV, Part II, models discussed here. This covered the lid, extended down the outside of the can neck on all sides, and reached to the can shoulder. At opposite points on the outside lower edge of this hood, small brackets were fixed with which to tie the hood, at both points, to other brackets fixed on the can shoulder (Fig. 1). This hood, in addition to the regular can lid, makes possible the double closure of the mouth of the can in order to prevent the addition of water around the lid. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Milk delivery can with tamper-proof lid. TAMPER-PROOF FAUCET FOR MILK DELIVERY CAN Many common types of valves or faucets used on milk delivery cans are not designed to prevent the flow of a liquid through them from the outside to the inside of the can, It is possible with such faucets, by use of greater pressure outside than that inside, to force water through them and into the can in which milk may be present. This is a common means of adulterating milk in such cans. A faucet which would allow the movement of a liquid from inside to outside the can, but prevent such movement in the opposite direction, that is from outside
June, 1954] JAMES N. WARNER AND O. P. AGARWALA 107 to inside the can, might be useful in reducing the incidence of adulteration of the can contents during route delivery. However, certain possible designs of such a faucet are so complicated that their construction obviates proper sanitation. An ideal design would include a minimum of different parts which would be inter- changeable between faucets, at least on the different cans owned by a particular dairy. Then too, the constructional characteristics of each part would be such as to permit easy and effective cleaning and sterilization. A faucet with certain of these characteristics is discussed here. Description of the faucet One of the common valves for a milk delivery can was modified by making changes in the plug and by redesigning the milk outlet. This modified faucet (Fig. 2) consists of the following parts: 1. The faucet body, including a feed pipe inlet, a feed pipe flange, a faucet plug housing, a feed pipe threaded outlet, and a milk outlet cone; 2. The faucet plug; 3. The faucet plug locking collar; 4. The ring valve; and 5. The ring valve housing. The faucet plug, plug locking collar, ring valve and ring valve housing are separable from the faucet body. All parts, except the ring valve and the faucet plug locking collar are made of cast brass; the ring valve is made of plastic, the locking collar of rolled or sheet brass. It is recommended that, except for the side walls of the faucet plug and the inside surface of the faucet plug housing, surfaces which must be ground to fit together so well as to prevent leakage of milk when the faucet is assembled, all cast brass parts should be tin-plated on their inside and outside surfaces. Faucet body. The faucet body is fixed to the can and supports the removable parts of the faucet when fully assembled. The overall length of this piece is four and a half inches, of which only two and a half inches extend outside the milk can when properly installed. The feed pipe inlet is a tube about two and a half inches long with an inside diameter of one-half inch; the wall of this tube may be about three-thirty-seconds inch thick. The inner end of this pipe is bevelled, diagonal to its long axis, begin- ning on its top outside, roughly one and a three-fourth inch as from its inner end, and continuing approximately to the opposite or bottom interior surface just at the inner end of the piece. This bevelled opening is cut so that its edges coincide with the interior surfaces of the can side wall and/or bottom when the faucet is fixed in its proper position in the can, thereby facilitating complete drainage of the can. The outer end of this tube is fixed to the faucet plug housing, and opens into the faucet plug space inside this housing. Fixed about this tube, approximately two inches from its inner end, is the feed pipe flange. As the faucet body is fixed to the can, the faucet tube inlet is inserted through a hole in the side wall and/or bottom of the can, and up to this flange. The faucet body is then welded or soldered firmly in place with all rough edges, both inside and outside, smoothed off with a fine file or abrasive. The flange, therefore, strengthens the attachment of the faucet to the can. This flange is about one-eighth inch thick and one and a half inches in outside diameter.
108 A TAMPER-PROOF MILK DELIVERY CAN [Vol. XXIV, Part II, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Tamper-proof valve for milk delivery can
June, 1954] JAMES N. WARNER AND O. P. AGARWALA 109 The faucet plug housing is a frustrum of a cylindrical cone about one and a half inches long. The walls are about one-eighth inch thick; greater thickness is probably unnecessary. The inside diameter of this housing is about one inch at the top and three-fourth inch at the bottom. It is fixed between the feed pipe inlet and the feed pipe threaded outlet, at right angles to their long axis, so that when the faucet body is installed in the can this housing is substantially parallel to the long axis of the can. Opening through either side of this housing, with a diameter equal to the inside diameter of the feed pipe and the threaded outlet, open into these respective parts of the faucet body. This housing should be so con- structed that it extends about one-fourth inch below the bottom outside edge of the inlet and outlet pipes; it may extend nearly one-half inch above their top out- side edges. The feed pipe threaded outlet is a continuation of the feed pipe, extending for about one-fourth inch beyond the faucet plug housing, opposite the feed pipe inlet. It has an outside diameter of fifteen-sixteenth of an inch where it is threaded for attaching the ring valve housing. The thickness of the walls of this piece is about one-eighth inch. The milk outlet cone is an extension of the threaded outlet and is about one- half inch long. Its outside diameter at its inner end, where it is attached to the threaded outlet, is about five-eighth of an inch, that is about one-fourth, inch less than the outside diameter of the threaded outlet. The outside diameter of this outlet cone diminishes to seven-sixteenth of an inch at its outer end. The thick- ness of the walls of this piece at its inner end is similar to that of the other portions of the faucet body, that is, three-thirty-second to one-eighth inch; at its outer end this wall thickness is about one-sixteenth of an inch only. The diameter of the opening at the outer end of this cone outlet is about five-sixteenth inch. Faucet plug. This is a piece of such dimensions that it fits into the faucet plug housing sufficiently tightly and snugly that milk may not leak from between them. It is sufficiently long that it extends above and below its housing about one-fourth inch at each end. The upper end contains a special shaped hole about one-fourth inch deep for inserting a key with which to turn this plug to open or close the faucet; it is desirable to have the hole so shaped that the position of the plug when the faucet is open may be clearly indicated. A groove, three-thirty-seconds inch wide, is cut into this plug about its entire circumference, perpendicular to its long axis, at such a distance from the bottom end of the plug that the top edge of the groove is immediately opposite to the bottom edge of the plug housing when the plug is in position. This groove is about one- eighth inch deep. The plug-locking collar fits into this groove, to prevent the removal of the faucet plug, when the faucet is assembled. Plug locking collar. This is a round U-shaped piece, made of sheet brass, about one-sixteenth of an inch thick. The throat or opening is seven-sixteenth of an inch wide and one-half to three-fourth of an inch deep; the sides of the collar are about three-eighth of an inch wide. The outside edge of the collar, directly opposite the opening, is extended about one-fourth inch wide and one-fourth inch long, it is bored near its outer end with a three-thirty-seconds inch hold and is bent at an
110 A TAMPER-PROOF MILK DELIVERY CAN [Vol. XXIV, Part II, angle of 90° from the plane of the collar body, to form a small bracket for tying this locking collar to the ring valve housing bracket. The thickness of this collar is such that it fits snugly into the groove about the lower end of the faucet plug; the collar is broad enough to extend, when in position, to the outer edge, or preferably slightly beyond, on all sides of the plug housing, except where collar is open; the throat of this collar is just deep enough that the outside surface of the tying bracket comes firmly against the interior surface of a tying bracket on the ring valve housing. Ring valve. This piece is made of Alkathene * a plastic which actually weighs less than water. The valve is round in cross-section and three-fourth inch in dia- meter outside; it may be between one-half and nine-sixteenths of an inch long. Running longitudinally along its outside surface are six rounded grooves, each one- fourth inch wide and about one-sixteenth inch or so deep. These allow milk to flow past this valve when the faucet is assembled and opened. This piece has a hole cut partly but not completely through it from the inside. This opening is cut with a smaller diameter at its interior end than that at its exterior end, so it just fits tightly over the outside of the milk outlet cone. When drawing milk from the can, the force of the flowing milk pushes this valve away from the end of the milk outlet cone. The milk then flows out of the milk outlet cone into the ring valve opening, then backward between the milk outlet cone and the ring valve opening until it can again flow outward through the rounded grooves, on the outer surface of the ring valve, and within the inner wall of the ring valve housing, then out through the ring valve housing. Ring valve housing. This housing is tubular but with the outer opening at right angle to the long axis of the piece; it is about one and three-fourth inches long. The inside diameter is about twenty-seven-thirty-seconds inch for the first one inch from the inner end. It then diminished to five-eighth inch rather quickly but with rounded, not sharp, corners at the point at which the 90° turn begins near the outer end. From this point this diameter further diminishes gradually into through and to the outer end of the turned opening where it is about one-half of an inch. The inner end of this housing is threaded inside for about one-fourth inch to coincide with the threaded outlet of the faucet body. The thickness of the walls of this piece is about one-eight of an inch. When the faucet is assembled the ring valve is free to move in and out within this housing. The shoulders of the inside surface of this housing at the point at which this diameter diminishes just inside of the turn to the opening, are designed to stop the outer movement of the ring valve, yet permit the interior of the housing at this point to be easily and satis- factorily cleaned. On the bottom outside surface of this housing at its inner end is a small bracket about one-fourth inch wide, one-fourth inch long and one-sixteenth to one-eight of an inch thick. It is bored with a three-thirty-seconds inch hole to admit a string or wire with which to tie this housing to the plug locking collar tying bracket. * See acknowledgment.
June, 1954] JAMES N. WARNER AND O. P. AGARWALA 111 Installing and assembling the faucet The faucet is to be installed in the milk can in such a position that when the can is upright and level the milk may drain completely from the can through the faucet. To assure this the faucet should be fixed so the inside bottom surface of the feed pipe is about one-eighth inch below the lowest point in the bottom of the can, and at an angle of just over 90° to the vertical axis of the can. Some cans have concave, some convex, and still others plane bottoms. The characteristics of each particular can will determine the exact position of the faucet. It is advis- able to locate the faucet at a point 90° around the can side from the position of the can handles, if any, although this is not imperative. The faucet plug is inserted in the faucet plug housing and the locking collar fixed in position. The ring valve is then placed either over the milk outlet cone or inside the ring valve housing, then the housing is screwed into position over the threaded outlet pipe. A string or wire is then passed through the holes of the tying bracket on the ring valve housing and the tying bracket on the plug locking collar, which holes should be directly opposite each other with the brackets fitting closely together when the faucet is fully assembled. This string or wire is then tied and sealed with a wax or lead seal. If properly constructed and assembled, there is no way of disassembling the faucet, while on the milk route or elsewhere, without breaking this seal. Dairy operators are warned, however, that this seal must be inspected very carefully on the return of the can from the route to make as certain as possible that it has not been broken and then skilfully replaced. Working of the faucet As the faucet plug is opened, milk, if present in the can, will flow outward through the threaded outlet and into the milk outlet cone. The pressure of this flowing milk forces the ring valve outwards, allowing the milk to pass into the ring valve cone-shaped opening, backward outside the milk outlet cone until it passes the inside edge of the ring valve; the milk then flows outward through the grooves along the outside of the ring valve and into the outer portion of the ring valve housing; it then drains out of the faucet. The physical characteristics of the plastic which is used for the ring valve and the constructional features of this valve and its housing are such that valve is very sensitive to the pressure of a flowing liquid, whether that liquid is flowing in or flowing out of the faucet. As is stated, milk flowing outward through the faucet activates this ring valve so as to allow the milk to pass. On the contrary, if an attempt were made to force water inward through this faucet, as may be done when attempts are made to adulterate the milk in the can by forcing water through the faucet, this ring valve closes, thereby stopping the inward flow of the water. The effective principle of this faucet is the construction and sensitivity of this ring valve. Plastic was chosen because it is relative to milk much lighter than any common metal that might be used for the purpose. A ring valve of hollow con- struction, made of the gauge metal, might prove as sensitive to the movement of milk, or water, as does this plastic valve. Such a ring valve, however, is extremely difficult to construct satisfactorily.
112 A TAMPER-PROOF MILK DELIVERY CAN [Vol. XXIV, Part II, Not all plastics would be acceptable for this purpose even if their density were suitable, for they might disintegrate or warp as they repeatedly are washed and sterilized which is necessary if the faucet parts are to be cleaned regularly and satisfactorily. Some Alkathene ring valves have been in regular use on cans used on the milk delivery routes of the Institute Dairy now for over three years; they have been washed twice daily in hot water containing washing soda, 'Lustros', or both, and have been sterilized after each washing with a warm chlorine solution. These valves are still in very satisfactory condition, having shown no visible chemical or physical changes, except for turning from their original milky white to a slight amber colour. They impart no noticeable flavour in. the milk. These valves were turned out of a one inch Alkathene rod on an ordinary lath. This method of making the valves has not given the smoothness of surface desired for sanitary purposes, nevertheless they have been satisfactory. MILK CAN LOCKING BRACKET FOR DELIVERY CYCLE Milk delivery cans which are not fixed to the delivery cycle serve as a con- venience for certain methods of adulterating their contents. While fixing the cans to the delivery cycle gives no guarantee whatsoever that the milk they contain will remain genuine during delivery, it does make certain practices more difficult. It is often considered advisable for this reason, to fix the delivery cans to the delivery cycle so the cans cannot be removed on the delivery route without that fact being liable to detection on their return to the dairy. A simple mechanism for accom- plishing this is described here (Fig. 3). It can be used effectively along with the tamper-proof faucet discussed before in this article. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG . 3. Milk can locking bracket for delivery cycle
June, 1954] JAMES N. WARNER AND O. P. AGARWALA 113 The mechanism consists of a two supporting pieces and one U-shaped collar. The collar and one of the supporting pieces are made of flat steel about one-eighth of an inch thick and one-half inch wide. The second supporting piece is the same width and length as the first; it is about twice as thick, however, except for about one-half inch or its upper end where its thickness suddenly diminished to about one- eighth of an inch, or to the same thickness as the other piece. This forms a shoulder on which the free end of the U-shaped collar rests when the bracket is closed, tied and sealed; the string or wire which is used for this purpose is protected by this arrangement from being sheared off should some sudden pressure be exerted on the tap outside of the collar. The two supporting pieces may be from two to three and a half inches long; each is welded at its lower end in a vertical position, to the bottom outside piece either front or rear, of the carrier frame; they should be about one and one-fourth inches apart inside and extend above the carrier frame from one to two and a half inches, depending on the height of the top edge of the faucet feed pipe above the bottom edge of chime on the can used. They are located on the carrier frame so that a milk can must be set snugly in the corner of the carrier when the can faucet feed pipe lays between these supporting pieces. This is about four or five inches from the corner of the carrier frame to the near side of the nearest supporting piece; this distance will depend on the diameter of the can among other things. Each of these pieces is bored with a one-eighth inch hole, in the centre and about one-fourth of an inch from its upper end. The inside of the U-shaped collar is about one and a one-fourth inches wide and one and a half inches deep; its ends are bored with one-eighth inch holes to coincide with those in the supporting pieces. One end of the collar is fixed to the upper end of the thinner of the supporting pieces by a rivet through the holes, so that the collar may be rotated but not easily removed. When the can is in position the faucet feed pipe should lay between the two supporting pieces of this bracket, with these pieces extending upward between the feed pipe flange and the faucet plug housing. The collar is then rotated over the top of the feed pipe and its free end tied to the upper end of the second or thicker supporting piece by use of string or wire; the tie should be sealed with a wax or lead seal, such as is used on the tamper-proof lid and on the tamper-proof faucet, before the routeman leaves the dairy. The routeman must allow this seal as is true of other, to remain intact until it is carefully inspected after his return from the route, so the manager or the operator of the dairy is quite certain the seal was not tampered with on the route. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT A grant from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research helped to make this study possible. The basic principle of the ring valve was suggested by the design of a special milk can valve supplied by the Agricultural Engineer to Government, Bombay State, Poona. The Alkathene from which the ring valves were made was supplied free of charge for this study by the Imperial Chemical Industries (India) Ltd. Mr. S. R. Biswas, Dairy Manager, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, gave his assistance throughout this study by using the mechanisms described here on the regular milk routes of the Institute Dairy and by suggesting many of the features of the mechanisms described here; he also made the final copies of the figures included. The contributions from these sources are gratefully acknowledged. 18 AR/53. 9
MILK DELIVERY CYCLE UNITS By JAMES N. WARNER and O. P. AGARWALA, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad (Received for publication on 28 May 1953) (With Plates II116 MILK DELIVERY CYCLE UNITS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, For the three units designed here, standard rickshaw parts were used as far as possible; they are less expensive than special spare parts which must be imported, and are usually available locally, some of them actually made in India. THE TRAILOR UNIT This unit consists of an ordinary bicycle to which is attached a two-wheeled trailor. The trailor includes a carrier rack that is mounted on two wheels; the trailor is attached to the bicycle by means of a handle or tongue. A special mecha- nism which permitted freedom of movement both horizontally and vertically was used in this attachment (Plate IV, Fig. 5). Two models of this unit were made and observed under actual route use. The carrier rack of the first is made from ½ and ¾ inch strap or angle iron, that of the second from 3/4 inch galvanized iron pipe; otherwise the two are similar. The rack is of open and welded construction with a wooden floor. The four sides extend 18 inches above the floor which is 28 inches wide and large enough to hold two five-gallon milk cans 34 inches long side by side at the rear, and a case of up to a dozen bottles of milk at the front. The carrier rack is supported on springs fixed to the axel at either end of which is an ordinary bicycle wheel. The leaf-type springs support either side of the carrier and absorb much of the road shock when the unit is in operation. The handle is fixed to the front of the carrier rack and attached to the bicycle from immediately below the seat and above the rear wheel. Initially this attachment included a ball and socket joint to give the required freedom of motion, but this proved unsatisfactory. A double-hinged or universal joint connection has proved more satisfactory. Both models were used on the regular routes of the Institute dairy for over three years. The strap iron carrier rack broke frequently during operation; fractures being most common in the corners just outside of the welds. The rack made of galvanized iron piping pipe was more durable and therefore more satisfactory, despite being a little heavier. Both models placed such a very heavy load on the bicycle frame at the point of attachment, however, that the fork of that frame, extending from the seat base to the rear wheel frequently broke. This unit was very flexible in operation, giving the cycle rider substantially as much freedom of movement as on an ordinary bicycle without a trailor attached. THE SIDE-CAR UNIT This unit consists of an ordinary bicycle and a carrier rack supported mainly by the rear cycle wheel and an additional wheel to the right of the cycle (Plate IV, Fig. 6). In the way it is constructed and in the manner in which it is supported on its axel by two leaf-type springs, this carrier rack is similar to those of the trailor except that the front of the rack is about eight inches narrower, viz. only 20 inches. This narrower width is continued backwards for about Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXIV PART II] PLATE II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A two-wheeled trailer drawn by an ordinary bicycle. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. A side-car attached to the ordinary bicycle.
PLATE III [Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXIV PART II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. A three-wheeled cycle rickshaw with two wheels and the carrying rack behind the rider. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. A three-wheeled unit with two wheels and the carrying rack in front of the rider.
Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXIV PART II] Plate IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. A special mechanism which permits freedom of movement in the handle attachment to the Bailor unit. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. The side-car unit.
PLATE V [Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXIV PART II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
June, 1954] JAMES N. WARNER AND O. P. AGARWALA 117 of this carrier frame are connected by strap iron braces to both the portions of the bicycle frame which extend backward from the housing for the guiding fork spindle (Plate V, Fig. 7). A spring type attachment for fixing the front of this carrier rack to the bicycle frame, was tried on the assumption that a little flexibility here would permit better distribution of the load. This did not prove satisfactory, however, so a rigid attachment was finally used. When the unit was used on the milk routes the spokes in the rear cycle wheel repeatedly broke, apparently because of the angle of the force of the load and the rider when turning corners or when on uneven ground. Some variations in this angle were tried, but no suitable adjustment was found. Although heavy-duty spokes were used in this wheel for a while, this did not prevent the need of repeated repair of this wheel. Because the rear cycle wheel hub contains the free wheel mechanism, it was not possible to modify the wheel greatly to increase its length otherwise. This side-car unit was eventually discarded in preference to the other units described here; although another design for a side-car unit is now under study. THE CYCLE RICKSHAW UNIT In 1948 and 1949 two cycles were constructed on the principle of common cycle rickshaw. This design contains three wheels of which two are behind, one in front of the rider; above and between them is the carrier rack. This cycle is pro- pelled by the ordinary pedal mechanism with the chain driving a sprocket fixed to the rear axel immediately behind the pedal sprocket, in a manner similar to that of the ordinary cycle rickshaw. The carrier rack is also constructed in a similar manner; it is suspended on the axel by two leaf-type springs, one at other side supporting the side of the carrier rack at the ends of the rear axel immediately inside the wheels. At the front of the carrier rack it is attached to the bicycle frame by a pin and hinge unit. The motive power is transferred through the chain and rear axel sprocket to move one of the rear wheel, the other being fixed over the axel. The reason for this is simply that there has not yet been made available differential mechanism for turning both this rear wheels when the cycle is turning a corner at which time one wheel travels faster than the other. The basic differences between these two rickshaw units were simply that one had a larger carrier to accommodate a larger load; this larger carrier was equipped with special heavy duty leaf-type springs to support the heavier load placed on it. Both units of the rickshaw type are working very satisfactorily indeed. The rickshaw type delivery units now in use in the Institute dairy are serving out purpose very satisfactorily. They handle large loads and effect considerable economy as compared to the imported type of cycle, or the conventional standard bicycle which is not designed for heavy loads. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT A grant from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research helped to make this study possible. Mr. S. R. Biswas, Dairy Manager, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, gave his assistance throughout this study by using these Milk Delivery Cycle Units on regular milk routes of the Institute Dairy and by suggesting many of the features of the mechanisms described here. The contributions from these sources are greatly acknowledged.
SYSTEM OF COSTING MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS By O. P. AGARWALLA, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad (Received for publication on 28 May 1953) COST accounting is defined as the application of general accounting principles to the recording, analysis and the interpretation costs of material, labour and of overhead costs for functions, divisions, departments, operations, units of product, lines, sales, territories and salesmen. The definition of cost accounting can be summarized as 'analysing, recording, standardizing, forecasting, comparing, reporting and recommending'*. It is the business of cost accountant to fill the roles of historian, news agent and prophet. As historian he must be accurate and sedulously impartial. As news agent he must be up-to-date and selective. As prophet he must combine knowledge and experience with foresight and courage. An attempt to evolve a detailed system of costing the handling and processing of milk and milk products in the Allahabad Agricultural Institute Dairy was under- taken, beginning in 1947. This project found a part of the scheme on 'Quality Improvement in Milk and Milk Products and Its Costing' financed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. The scheme continued for four years. The costing aspect of this study was designed as far as possible to record small differences in the procedures followed while processing and handling milk and milk products, beginning with the receipt of the raw products and continuing to the time the finished products were sold. A careful study of the processing procedures and of the time spent by workers and supervisors was made from time to time and records of these observations incorporated into the system of costing to assure as detailed accuracy as possible. The system of costing developed during this study and briefly described here includes 64 accounts having entries in as many as three columns each and involving about 1333 entries. There are 13 or 15 main expense accounts and 15 main income accounts. Eleven products, including ice, are costed. Each product is sold by one or more of the following three methods of sale; either through the sales window at the Dairy or inside the Dairy or by delivery at the customer's door. The expenses are distributed process-wise where required, but ultimately product-wise, according to the use to which the separate raw materials and services are put. There are 31 distribution accounts. The summary accounts total 18, including those showing profit and loss by product, by method of sale as well as the total; as well as the summary of all main income and expense items. The income and expense summary provides a check for the combined or total product method of sale profit and loss summary. The items of expenditure are as follows: Inventory brought forward, raw milk, cream from the cattle yard, cream purchased, equipment depreciations, equipment repairs, miscellaneous expenses, miscellaneous supplies, wages, ice purchased, loss in handling and total expense. * Harold Wilmot (1936). The Cost Accountant's Place in Management, The Cost Accountant, England. 18 AR/53 119 11
120 SYSTEM OF COSTING MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, Items brought forward are those products on hand at the beginning of a calendar month, the accounting period employed. The rate or cost per pound at which these products were valued is arbitrarily set at approximately this retail price at the begin- ning of the first month of the study. Thereafter this rate for a particular month was the calculated cost by the procedure described here as of the end of the preceding month. Raw milk is received from the Institute Cattle Yard. No milk is purchased from outside, hence the single source of this raw material. The cattle yard requires some skim milk for calf feeding, consequently the required quantity of whole milk is separated, the cream being supplied to the Institute Dairy. The rates at which raw milk and cream are transferred to the Dairy are arbitrarily fixed at the beginning of each financial year, that is the 1st of April. This rate, with only occasional exceptions, is used throughout the year. As the financial accounts for a particular accounting year are closed, debit or credit balances in the Dairy and in the milk stock account in Cattle Yard combined are approximately divided between the two by an adjustment on raw milk and cream supplied during the year. This practice does not alter the veracity of other items currently comprising the cost of a product of the Dairy in any month prior to this annual adjustment. It does affect the percentage each may represent of the total. That is, it affects the total by reason of its affect on the items raw milk and cream. It does not affect the cost of other items. Raw milk is utilized in making available for sale each of the products handled, except ice and, occasionally, butter, cooking butter and ghee. The cost of raw milk is distributed in the same proportions as the milk itself. Products in which cream is used are charged at a common rate per pound of cream not per pound of butter fat. Cream purchased from outside the Institute was used only for butter making and for no other purpose. The rate is a free market rate which varies from season to season and is based on the butter outturn. Cream for butter making comes from three, sometimes four, sources. On the one hand, it is purchased; secondly, portions of that received from the Cattle Yard are used; thirdly, raw milk may be separated and portions of cream thus obtained may be used for butter making; fourthly, there are times when excess ice cream is melted, separated and the cream thus obtained is used for butter making. Because purchased cream is to be used exclusively for butter making, it is initially entered and charged in the butter manufacture receipts and distribution account. Other cream is brought to this account through one or more other accounts. Cream from raw milk and which, for example, is used for butter making, is entered initially in the raw milk receipts and distribution account from where it goes to the separation account, then to the cream receipts and distribution account, from here it goes to the butter manufacture receipts and distribution account. Reason for this are firstly, the origin of this cream as raw milk, secondly, the need to separate this milk to produce cream and skim; thirdly, the fact that this cream is of such quality that it. may be used for cream sale, ice cream, cream cheese, or perhaps for educational purposes, generally more economical uses in each case. What is left from other possible uses is added to the cream purchased, then churned. Butter itself might be sold as such or converted into cooking butter or ghee.
June, 1954] O. P. AGARWALA 121 Equipment depreciation is calculated by the conventional method of each year charging a fixed percentage of the initial cost of the machine or utensil to the opera- tions for which it is employed. One-twelfth of this annual figure is charged here each month. This cost is distributed to products according to which ones and. how many of each, are involved in the operation of the machine or the use of the utensil. Repair charges are distributed according to the products handled in or by use of the machine or utensil involved. Miscellaneous expenses cover the cost of such items as postage, stationery, freight and octroi. These items are charged to the process or products in or for which they are used. Miscellaneous supplies include such things as parchment paper, sugar, salt, butter colour, rennet, vanilla, extract, etc. These items are purchased by the Dairy through the Institute Purchasing Officer. For the most part they are purchased at regular retail rates, although trade discounts are obtained at times because of the quantity involved. These items are charged as consumed, that is, to the products in whose handling and/or processing they are consumed. Wages are admittedly the most difficult of the expense items to distribute. The distribution of supervisory wages is made by ascertaining monthly from the Dairy Manager what portion of the supervisor's time he considers they gave to each specific product or operation during the period involved. The portions of the supervisors' time determined are used as that portion of their salaries which are charged in each case. This has been found to be the simplest method of distributing these expense items, consistent with the highest possible degree of accuracy. Plant wages are distributed according to the following method:122 SYSTEM OF COSTING MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, (v) The reason for special treatment of the three items in (iv) is that these products do not receive raw milk, hence the cost of general cleaning and other such miscellaneous operations must be charged to them directly rather than through raw milk. Rest is charged to raw milk. Ice is purchased on contract for the supply for one year. This provides some economy as compared to other possible methods of purchase. If the refrigeration capacity of the Institute Dairy plant were adequate to produce our own ice, there is no doubt that even further economy would be realized, amounting probably to rather a large proportion of the present expense on this item. The cost of ice is distributed as used. Loss in handling constitutes an item of expense. It is handled as such here, except that the value of the quantity of a product lost is not separated from that of the value of the quantity used for sale or other disposal. That is to say, the cost of butter or any other product sold is greater by the cost of that portion of the product which is lost in handling than otherwise be true. This is a legitimate method of handling this item of expense,for there is no separate fund from which its value may be recovered. Furthermore, there is no justification in charging the loss of butter to ice cream in whole or in part. Butter must pay for the loss of butter, as any product must pay for its own losses resulting during the handling and processing of that product. The total expense is merely the sum of each of the expenses listed and discussed above, except loss in handling. The following abstract from the system of costing developed here will give a much clearer understanding of its operation than is possible by narrative explana- tion. As indicated above, butter is used to illustrate these accounts. The account numbers and headings, items numbers and amounts, either in pounds or rupees are taken directly from the costing records. In these abstracts the month of December 1950, is used. The term other expenses included in accounts II, V and VIII refer to those items which are listed in more detail in other accounts, such as numbers XI, XIV, etc., such as equipment depreciation, equipment repairs, miscellaneous expenses, miscel- laneous supplied, ice expense, hot water expense, plant wages, supervision wages, cold storage expenses and possibly others. Abstracts from the accountsJune, 1954 ] O. P. AGARWALA 123 Abstracts from the accounts124 SYSTEM OF COSTING MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, Abstracts from the accountsJune, 1954 ] O. P. AGARWALA 125 Abstracts from the accounts126 SYSTEM OF COSTING MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, Abstracts from the accountsJune, 1954] O. P. AGARWALA 127 Item number Posted to number Item Profit Rs. Loss Rs. LVI. BUTTER Profit and Loss Summary 1121 1086 Delivery sales 148.04 .. ABSTRACTS The survival of spermatozoa in vitro and the measurement of motility. ARTHUR WALTON (1952). Rep. II Int. Congr. Physiol Path. Anim. Rep. I, 204-208 DESPITE many efforts very little progress has been made in prolonging the fertilizing capacity of the spermatozoa out side the body. Significant success has, however, been achieved by the control of external temperature which forms the basis of preservation and transport and the promising new technique of deep freezing; by the use of artificial diluents in which sperms can survive longer while protection being afforded to the cells by the colloids in the diluents; and by the addition of antibiotics in the diluted bulk where the beneficial effects are considered to be due to either their effect on the sperms, control of contaminents in the semen or the control of specific infective organisms in the female tract. In order to make further progress it is imperative to develop objective methods to study the sperm activity. The microscopical observation of motility of sperms is the classical procedure for observing the survival of vitality in sperm suspensions. By careful experiments and statistical analysis valid conclusions can be drawn. In concentrated suspension of spermatozoa electrical impedence, which is closely related to wave motion, fluctuates. This phenomenon depends upon flow, orienta- tion of the spermatozoa and electric anisotropy of the orientated cells. Orientation can be induced by mechanical flow. Therefore, relaxation time which can be measured electrically or by optical methods may be used as a criterion of sperm activity. For dilute suspensions an instrument for measuring sperm motility has been designed in which an electric counter is used based on the principles of record- ing the flashes of light reflected from the sperms passing through a narrow aperture. It is of fundamental importance to measure the frequency distribution of activity in a sperm population when attempting to establish correlation or regression co- efficients between a metabolic test and fertility and when measuring metabolic activity. Measurement is generally made on a heterogeneous population of cells. (K.G.M.) Studies on the relationship of lungworm infestation in cattle and their liver vitamin A reserves. SOLIMAN, K. N. (1953). Brit. vet. J., 109, 4, 148-153 TO compare the vitamin A content of livers of cows infected with D. viviparus, and D. filaria, with that of the normal livers, an investigation of vitamin A content of livers of 31 cows that died or were killed as a result of parasitic infection was made. Carotene estimation was not made, as vitamin A concentration was considered to provide a fairly accurate index. Comparing these results with those obtained by Stewart and McCallum for normal livers vitamin A reserve showed severe depletion in all cases of parasitic bronchitis. Vitamin A content of the bodies of parasite was also determined and found to be 0.1 and 0.9 I.U./gm. in two different lots. Similarly in artificially infected guinea-pigs, vitamin A reserve of the liver 129 18AR/53 13
130 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, was found depleted. It could not be assumed whether parasitic infection occurred as a result of vitamin A deficiency, but the reverse appeared true because of demand on vitamin A due to destruction of epithelial lining by the parasite. Seasonal and regional studies of this nature may help to determine the causes of excessive lung infection in some parts of India. [H.K.L.] The experimental reproduction of so called lumber paralysisREVIEWS HOBDAY'S SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT BY JAMES MCCUN (Published by Messrs. Bailliere, Tindall and Cox Ltd., London, 1953, pp. vii+456, Price 30s.) THE publication is an exhaustive treatise on small animal surgery, got up in a concise form, and the subjects classified and arranged systematically in 25 chapters. The book is amply illustrated by 330 appropriate photographs and drawings section-wise and therefore is as practical as comprehensive and illuminating affording accurate and descriptive instructions of the operations and their indications stage by stage on almost all the surgical conditions of the dog and cat usually encountered by the practitioner to grapple with. The book is, therefore, a valuable asset to the veterinary student, teacher and practitioner alike, as they are sure to find an answer to any point they may want including the latest development in the field of canine and feline surgery. The arrangement of the subjects as already mentioned is methodical and dealt in a systematic way. The first three chapters of this book have been devoted to a preliminary consideration and introduction to surgery with particular reference to the care and management of the patient before and after surgical operations, anti- septic preparation of instruments and things connected with the operation and proce- dures and methods of securing and keeping the patient. All these are mostly design- ed by the author and other renowned men in his field including the editor himself. The subject of Anæsthesia and the various kinds of anæsthetics employed with the author's own experience have received good consideration at the hands of the editor in chapter 4. This is indeed a good feature of the book and is as should be; because, in these days especially when 'human surgery' has advanced so much, the veterinary surgeon should not feel complacent and limit himself to the applica- tion of past achievements. Further, sentiments and humanitarian considerations also play a large part in the operation on all animals132 REVIEWS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, Regarding the more delicate operations particularly those of the thoracic, abdominal, pelvic, the male and female generative organs and about dystokia, the editor has spared no pains to describe every surgical condition and the operation indicated. The editor's own experience and the latest developments in the technique employed for the operation have also been dealt with in an excellent way. Some of the delicate operations, e.g. Splenectomy, Gastrotomy, Enterotomy, Ovarotomy, Hysterotomy,etc., were not very commonly practised in all the veterinary hospitals before the advent of the modern sulfa drugs, penicillin and other antibiotics. Further, owners of dogs and cats were also not so keen about such operations in their pets. But now things have changed and veterinary surgeons in charge of hospitals are called upon to undertake all kinds of operations. Besides their practical value, these operations are of great academic interest also, for it is only on this result and experiences gained by these operations on dogs, human surgery develops. Possibly because of its unimportance in veterinary patients, nothing is mentioned in the book about the heart, surgical conditions of the heart and operations indicated. Very interesting observations are recorded about the different kinds of fractures of the different bones and the editor's experience and the methods of reduction and surgical treatment are indeed very illuminating and will be helpful to the students and practitioners. The editor should be congratulated for the excellent and appro- priate skiagraphs and pictures given in this connection. The subject of Radiology could have been dealt in more detail. But in a book of this size, perhaps it is not possible to give all the details regarding deep X- ray and Radio Therapy and the implications involved. The editor has ended the book with a chapter on nursing of small animals which contains a lot of valuable information to guide the students and the practi- tioner. In short, it is an excellent book on the subject, thoroughly practical, very interesting and instructive to the profession, and those engaged in small animal practice should feel grateful to the author and the present editor for bringing out this excellent publication (K.S.S.) VETERINARY ANAESTHES A BY JOHN G. WRIGHT (Published by Messrs Baillier Tindell & Cox, London, 1952, pp. 267, Price 21s.) THE first edition of this book appeared in 1941 and second in 1947, now an enlarged and modified third edition of this publication, wherein the contents have been brought up-to-date in the light of modern knowledge on the subject, is published. The book is divided into 29 chapters and deals with all the aspects and modes of administration of anæsthesia in domestic animals. The local, regional, spinal and epidural anæsthesia as applied to horse, ox, dog, sheep and pig are dealt with while chapters on producing narcosis in all animals are also included. The antidotal measures in cases of collapse during inhalation anæsthesia are clearly
June, 1954 ] REVIEWS 133 indicated. Included in this edition are the further considerations of the use of barbiturates in the horse, sheep and pig, together with references to new develop- ments in the use of ethyl chloride and trichlor134 REVIEWS [Vol. XXIV, Part II, In the course of the interpretation of the symptoms, the author has discussed them from a differential diagnostic point of view and this method of presenting the subject matter is of great help in arriving at a correct diagnosis. This is indeed a special feature of the book which will appeal to every reader. The book is fairly well illustrated and contains a number of radiographs (majority of these are the author's own) which are very clear and instructive. With all these good points however, it is a great pity that some of the common tropical canine diseases have not been adequately considered or have been ignored. For example, there is no mention of canine piroplasmosis caused by B. gibsoni and also of ankylostomiasis which are common causes of unthriftiness and anæmia in dogs in this country. Spirocercosis of dogs caused by the encystment of Spirocerca sanguinolenta in the June, 1954] REVIEWS 135 The poultry section has an educative value in advocating deep litter system for feeding poultry and running poultry and pigs together, a saving indeed in many respects. The construction of modern hen-yard is another good feature. The second sectionORIGINAL ARTICLES EFFECT OF SEASON OF LAMBING ON BODY WEIGHT AND MEASUREMENTS OF LAMBS IN EGYPT By A. A. ASKER, M. T. RAGAB and A. E. BASTAWISY Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Giza, Egypt (Received for publication on 24 September 1953) LAMBING season in sheep is usually so arranged from both biological and economical standpoints, that the ewes drop their young ones during the most favourable time of the year. The general practice for the sheep farmers in Egypt is to mate their ewes during the months of May and June, so that lambing takes place at the beginning of autumn. This is the beginning of both mild weather and grazing season in this country. In the Northern parts of Egypt, where the heat of the summer is within bearable limits, farmers leave their rams with ewes for the whole year ; thus a two-lamb crop for each year could be obtained. The purpose of this paper is to compare lambs produced during summer with those born in winter, for their body weights and measurements. If summer-lambing proves to have no harmful effect on lambs, the amount of mutton produced in this country can be increased by resorting to summer-lambing. However, any increase in this respect will be appreciable, since there is a shortage of meat in Egypt that necessitates the import of a large amount of mutton every year. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND METHODS OF ANALYSIS This experiment was carried out on both Rahmani and Ossimi sheep, in two flocks belonging to the Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, at Giza (Middle Egypt). The winter-lambing started in October 1951 and ended in March 1952, while the summer-lambing extended from June to August in the year 1952. The number of lambs born during summer was 67 compared to 73 dropped in winter. Ewes that produced the summer crop included some lactating ones also. Lambs were weighed and measured within 24 hours of their birth, then every two weeks till they were weaned at four months of age. Heart girth, body length and height at shoulder were measured to the nearest centimeter, while weights were recorded to the nearest 0.01 kilogram. Observations taken at birth and at weaning age were utilised in this report. Lambs born in winter were fed on Egyptian clover (Trifolium alexandrinum) till the end of May, then on hay and a little of concentrates. Lambs dropped during the summer were fed only on hay and concentrates with a little green corn. The mixture used for feeding lambs during the summer consisted mainly of corn, cotton- seed cakes and rice bran. Each lamb received about one pound of this mixture everyday. (137) 57 AR/54. 1
138 EFFECT OF SEASON OF LAMBING ON BODY WEIGHT [Vol. XXIV, Part III, Means, standard errors and co-efficients of variability for weights and measurements were worked out [Snedecor, 1946]. In preparing Table I, the anti- logs were obtained and used for calculating means, standard errors and co- efficients of variability. RESULTS The means, standard errors and co-efficients of variability for both birth and weaning-weights of lambs are shown in Table I, which indicate that lambs dropped during summer were lighter than those born in winter. Difference between seasons was highly significant at both birth and weaning time. It was interesting to note that co-efficients of variability of the summer lambs were higher than those born in the winter season. Moreover, differences between weights of lambs of various groups different in either sex or type of birth, were significant at birth, while at weaning time there were no significant differences. As far as ages of lambs was concerned, the variability of weights at birth for both summer and winter lambs was higher than that measured at weaning age. In the case of heart girth it was found that lambs born during winter time had a greater heart girth than those born in summer (Table II). The differences between the two crops of lambs in this respect were highly significant. In this case too, the effect of both type of birth and sex of lambs showed itself to be significant at birth and insignificant at weaning time, thus following the same trend as body weight. Analysing the data obtained on body length and height at shoulder (Tables III and IV), it was found that lambs born in winter were superior to those born in summer ; the differences between the two-lamb crops in this respect were highly significant. TABLE I Birth and weaning weights of lambs born in summer and winter (in kilograms) Group Sex Summer Winter No. Mean. S.E. C.V. No. Mean. S.E. C.V. Birth weight Ossimi single Females 9 3.13 0.247 23.64 9 3.65 0.220 18.08 Ossimi single Males 8 2.75 0.304 31.27 6 3.77 0.176 11.41 Ossimi twin Females 4 2.89 0.310 21.45 15 2.65 0.147 21.51 Ossimi twin Males 8 2.98 0.166 15.77 11 3.06 0.226 24.51 Rahmani single Females 12 3.04 0.124 14.14 10 3.66 0.120 10.38 Rahmani single Males 13 3.39 0.294 31.27 6 3.99 0.224 13.90 Rahmani twin Females 9 2.81 0.287 30.60 8 2.84 0.431 43.06 Rahmani twin Males 4 2.98 0.545 36.57 8 3.24 0.184 16.10 Weaning weight Ossimi single Females 3 10.55 3.659 60.00 8 13.31 0.859 18.25 Ossimi single Males 3 12.73 2.428 33.00 6 13.56 0.846 15.24 Ossimi twin Females .. .. .. .. 15 13.02 0.568 16.90 Ossimi twin Males .. .. .. .. 11 13.17 1.729 42.24 Rahmani single Females 10 12.67 1.057 26.33 10 13.43 0.351 8.30 Rahmani single Males 8 12.89 0.678 14.90 6 13.47 0.820 16.90 Rahmani twin Females 5 8.53 0.772 2.03 8 13.14 0.806 17.50 Rahmani twin Males 2 15.19 0.773 7.22 7 13.12 1.030 20.80 S.E.September, 19.54] A. A. ASKER, M. T. RAGAB AND A. E. BASTAWISY 139 This work illustrates that males and single lambs are heavier at birth than twin and female ones, except in the case of Ossimi lambs born in summer, where males are lighter than females. In the case of body measurements, our results are in close agreement with those reported by Ragab, et al. [1953]. On the other hand, Daniel, et al. [1953], found that twins were smaller than singles in all measurements except heart girth and round measurements. However, at weaning age, the effect of type of birth and sex of lamb on body weight and measurements were not statis- tically significant. It should be noted that in spite of the small numbers of lambs in the corres- ponding groups either for summer or winter lambing, yet superiority of winter lamb over those born in summer was significant in both body weight and measurements. However, at weaning age the number of lambs was still smaller because of the high mortality rate among this group. Hamada and Badawy [1953] in Alexandria, have shown that there were no significant differences in birth weight of Rahmani lambs born in summer and those born in winter. Moreover, their analyses indicated that winter-born lambs were superior to those born in summer in growth rate, especially after the 13th week of age. TABLE II Heart girth of lambs at birth and weaning (in centimeters) Group Sex Summer Winter No. Mean S.E. C.V. No. Mean S.E. C.V. At birth Ossimi single Females 7 29.16 0.611 5.56 9 32.17 0.433 4.04 Ossimi single Males 8 28.69 1.000 9.86 6 33.73 0.310 2.25 Ossimi twin Females 4 28.60 0.930 6.50 12 28.59 0.479 5.81 Ossimi twin Males 7 29.64 0.374 3.34 7 29.81 0.785 6.98 Rahmani single Females 12 29.36 0.479 5.65 10 32.28 0.522 5.11 Rahmani single Males 11 30.67 0.822 8.90 5 33.64 0.355 2.35 Rahmani twin Females 7 27.57 0.830 7.98 5 31.06 0.665 4.80 Rahmani twin Males 4 29.05 1.375 9.47 7 30.98 0.656 5.62 At weaning Ossimi single Females 3 45.5 3.751 14.26 8 52.02 0.986 5.36 Ossimi single Males 3 44.7 1.341 5.19 6 54.72 1.322 5.92 Ossimi twin Females 1 44.2 .. .. 15 47.71 0.638 5.18 Ossimi twin Males .. .. .. .. 11 50.07 1.205 7.99 Rahmani single Females 10 44.18 0.883 6.32 10 52.08 0.430 2.61 Rahmani single Males 3 46.07 0.993 6.10 6 54.05 1.147 5.20 Rahmani twin Females 5 40.22 1.008 5.64 8 49.32 0.41 4.83 Rahmani twin Males 2 44.40 0.722 2.39 7 48.21 1.298 7.14 S E.140 EFFECT OF SEASON OF LAMBING ON BODY WEIGHT [Vol. XXIV, Part III, TABLE III Body length of lambs at birth and weaning (in centimeters) Group Sex Summer Winter No. Mean S.E. C.V. No. Mean S.E. C.V. At birth Ossimi single Females 7 27.53 0.611 5.95 9 28.02 0.580 6.21 Ossimi Single Males 8 25.59 1.004 11.10 6 30.73 0.412 3.29 Ossimi twin Females 4 26.92 0.845 6.28 12 25.23 0.393 5.39 Ossimi twin Males 7 27.54 0.177 1.71 7 27.08 0.509 4.99 Rahmani single Females 12 27.37 0.396 5.01 10 29.85 0.272 2.88 Rahmani single Males 11 29.31 0.226 2.56 5 30.81 0.518 3.77 Rahmani twin Females 7 26.63 0.830 8.26 5 28.64 0.656 5.13 Rahmani twin Males 4 28.15 1.430 10.16 7 28.30 0.472 4.42 At weaning Ossimi single Females 3 45.50 3.751 14.26 8 48.25 0.664 3.90 Ossimi single Males 3 44.30 0.665 2.60 6 50.75 0.906 4.37 Ossimi twin Females 1 43.20 .. .. 15 43.99 0.615 5.41 Ossimi twin Males .. .. .. .. 11 45.83 1.027 7.44 Rahmani single Females 10 45.08 0.889 6.23 10 50.36 0.377 2.36 Rahmani single Males 8 46.76 0.813 4.92 6 50.93 0.804 3.87 Rahmani twin Females 5 41.12 0.492 2.64 8 47.59 0.622 3.70 Rahmani twin Males 2 47.50 0.965 2.86 7 46.53 1.362 7.76 S.E.September, 1954] A. A. ASKER, M. T. RAGAB AND A. E. BASTAWISY 141 Ewes that lamb during winter (October-March) are in a better condition before lambing than those that lamb in summer since the former group have plenty of green fodder (clover) to consume, and consequently they produce more milk. Lambs born during winter have two advantages, i.e. their dams can provide them with adequate amount of milk and they have also plenty of clover to consume. Con- sequently they surpass lambs born in summer in weight and growth rate. Wallace [1948] and Verges [1940] have shown that birth weight of lambs and milk yield of ewes are affected mainly by the level of nutrition of the ewe during the last six weeks of pregnancy. They have demonstrated also that vigour, growth and development of lambs depend mainly on the milking ability of ewes as well as on the amount of food available for lambs. Hammond [1944] has stated that no one single factor affects growth rate of lambs more than the milk supply of the ewes, and that the rate of growth of the lamb is considerably affected by the amount of fibre in the food. Bonsma [1939] and Wallace [1948], found a strong correlation between milk yield of ewes and growth rate of lambs especially before weaning when lambs depend mainly on the milk supply of their dams. Although lambs dropped during summer have enough concentrates, yet their ration contained hardly any green fodder. Under such conditions, the utilization of the whole concentrates ration becomes less efficient than when the ration contains enough green material, thus affecting the growth and development of lambs. It is also feasible, that hot weather during summer at Giza (average temperature 26°C.), reduces the amount of milk produced by ewes lambing in summer. Con- sequently the growth rate of their lambs is retarded. Such effect on milk yield in dairy cattle has been reported by Espe [1946], who mentioned that high atmospheric temperature seriously depresses milk secretion. The level of nutrition is an important factor in determining the weight and development of lambs. This was demonstrated by many workers who mainly studied the effect of the year of lambing on lambs' weights. Hazel and Terril [1945], Terril, et al. [1947], Asker, et al. (1953) and Daniel, et al. [1953], agreed to that the year of lambing is an important factor in determining both weight and deve- lopment of lambs. Years differ from one to the other in the amount of food avail- able to the animals as well as the atmospheric temperature. These two factors are in fact the main reasons of year to year variations. It should be noted here, that some of the ewes that lambed in summer were virgin and some others were lactating. No comparable group of ewes was available in the winter-lambing group of ewes. This may be responsible to some extent for the results obtained here. Nevertheless, the number of lactating and virgin ewes was limited, besides that under the system of husbandry used in the two flocks, it was impossible to secure lactating ewes that could lamb during winter time. Therefore, it is not advisable to follow the summer-lambing practice unless the farmer can provide both ewes and lambs with adequate food, including green material. At any rate, the possibility of summer-lambing should be attempted in the more favourable regions of the country, where the weather is milder and green fodder is available during most months of the summer. Moreover, the effect of summer-lambing on the longevity and fertility of ewes should be investigated. 57 AR/54 2
142 EFFECT OF SEASON OF LAMBING ON BODY WEIGHT [Vol. XXIV, Part III SUMMARY An experiment has been carried out on a flock of Rahmani and another of Ossimi sheep, belonging to the Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Giza, Egypt. The aim was to study the effect of summer-lambing in both breeds on body weight and development. Development was studied through body measurements namely, body length, heart girth and height at shoulder. The number of lambs involved in the study was 140 of which 67 were born during the summer and 73 in winter. Observations were taken from birth time till the age of four months. The results obtained proved that summer-lambing is a failure in Giza or where environmental conditions are alike. The summer lambs in all their stages of life were inferior to winter lambs in both weight and measurements. Differen- ces in these two respects, between the two crops of lambs were statistically significant. REFERENCES Asker, A. A., Ragab, M. T. and Kadi, M. R. (1952). The influence of some environmental factors affecting weight of Ossimi and Rahmani sheep. Fac. agri., Fouad I Univ., Egypt, bull. 19 Bonsma, F. N. (1939). Factors influencing the growth and development of lambs, with special reference to crossbreeding of Merino sheep for fat lamb production in South Africa. Publ. Univ. Petroria, Agric. Ser. 1,48 Daniel, W., Cassard, P. W., Gregory, J. F., Wilson, W. C., Rollins and Weir, W. C. (1953). Environ- mental factors affecting body size and conformation in Rambouillet yearling ewes. J. Anim Sci., 2, 140RELATIONSHIP OF CLEAN WOOL YIELD WITH BODY WEIGHT AND BODY SIZE IN BIKANER EWES * By S. JAYARAMAN and GURBAX SINGH MAHAL, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar (Received for publication on 14 August 1953) SHEEP are maintained all over the world for mutton or wool or for both. It is always the aim of the sheep breeder to increase the productivity of his flock. In the selection of ewes for breeding purposes it is essential that the characters of greatest economic importance be given the necessary emphasis. In order to effect improvement in fleece weight, most of the breeders lay special emphasis on the size and body weight as a basis for selection. How far this concept helps the breeder has not so far been well established. A study of the relationship of clean wool yield with the body weight and body size respectively will, therefore, be of great importance and interest to the breeder who has to rely on these factors as a means of improving wool production. With a view to solve this problem a study was accordingly conducted on the Bikaner sheep at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar. The present study is an attempt to work out the relationship between the fleece weight on clean yield basis and the body weight and body size respectively, in Bikaner ewes. REVIEW OF LITERATURE Spencer, el al. [1928] were able to find a fairly positive relation between body weights taken after shearing at the age of one year and unscoured fleece weights. Studies by Joseph [1931] relating to size of grade fine wool ewes on their produc- tion showed progressive increase in weight of average lamb crops and fleece weights with increase in the weights of ewes. Hunt [1935] in his studies on the effect of size and type of ewe on efficiency of production concluded that the data and analysis presented in his work lend support in favour of size of the ewe. Brody and Campbell [1938] from their studies of the relationship between body weight and amount of wool showed that body weight is correlated positively to wool production to a fairly high degree though some of the evidence indicated that this was not entirely linear. Under certain conditions the largest ewes were poorer wool producers than medium size ewes. This was related to the optimum size of the ewe for range conditions where the amount of feed was such as to limit the production of larger animals. Gartner and Sternberg [1938] during their statistical studies made at the Animal Institute, Jena, from flock books and records of performance of the large *This paper is based on the report of the research problem conducted by S. Jayaraman in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Post-Graduate Diploma Course in Sheep Husbandry and Wool Production jointly sponsored by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the Government of Punjab at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar. 57 AR/54 143 3
144 RELATIONSHIP OF CLEAN WOOL YIELD WITH BODY WEIGHT [Vol. XXIV, Part III, mutton Merino flock of the Bendleben estate, noted that body weight at one year was found to be significantly correlated to wool yield. The relationship of body weight in the selection of yearling range ewes and their later production of lambs and wool was shown by Terrill and Stoehr [1942] in a study of 758 Rambouillet, Columbia and Corriedale ewes. Regardless of breed, the larger ewes excelled in the amount of products obtained. Jones, et al. [1944] in their studies on the influence of age, type and fertility in Rambouillet ewes on fineness of fibre, fleece weight, staple length and body weight, reported that the correlation of clean fleece weight and body weight was highly significant. Terrill [1939] found a correlation of 0.59 between yearling fleece weights and lifetime yields. Burns [1942] states that greasy fleece weight does not always tell the true story of wool improvement. Burns [1948] in a study of greasy and clean weights of Wyoming Range fleeces reported wide variations in fleece production among individual sheep within flocks and between different flocks. He further remarks that it supports the view that culling and breeding programmes can accomplish a great deal even in flocks with an already high fleece weight average, to bring all animals to a uniformly high production and to increase the wool income per head, MATERIAL AND METHODS Material used in the study Three hundred and forty one ewes in the flock of Bikaner ewes at the Govern- ment Livestock Farm, Hissar, were used for the study. The group included 136 yearlings (known as ' female lambs '), 55 two-year old ewes, 44 three-year old ewes, 52 four-year old ewes, 14 five-year old ewes, 30 six-year old ewes and 10 seven-year old ewes. Representative fleece samples were obtained from all the selected ewes at the time of October shearing in 1952 and were scoured in the wool analysis laboratory attached to the Farm. Methods employed in the study Wool, as it comes from the body of the sheep, contains varying amounts of grease, dirt, sand, etc. consequent to which the grease fleece weight is not a true guide of the clean wool content of the fleece. Although higher fleece weight is of great importance to the breeder, the actual value is to be given only to the clean wool content which is obtained after scouring and deducting the shrinkage. It is thus obvious that the amount of clean wool in each fleece is to be estimated in considering the productivity of sheep. In the present study, therefore, it was necessary to work out the clean weights of the individual fleeces of all the 341 ewes. The only reliable and accurate method of arriving at the clean yield of a fleece is to scour the entire fleece in a standard scouring solution and weigh the fleece after thorough drying. Facilities for the individual scouring of all the entire fleeces being
September, 1954] S. JAYARAMAN AND G. S. MAHAL 145 not available, resort was made to the next best method of arriving at the clean fleece yields by scouring small representative samples (weighed prior to scouring) collected from each fleece at the time of shearing and weighing each of them after drying. Since the weights of fleeces were already recorded at the time of shearing, the clean weight of each fleece was derived from the yield percentage of the re- presentative sample of the concerned fleece. The adult stock which consisted of ewes of different ages included both the ewes that lambed and those that did not lamb during the lambing season of the year 1952 extending from August to October, in each age group. Accordingly, the entire group was first classified into several age groups. Excepting the yearlings, all the rest of the age groups, viz. the adults were further subdivided into two groups within each age group according to whether they had lambed during the season or not. In order to obtain the body weight of the ewes they were weighed for three consecutive days in the morning, soon after they had been shorn and the weights were recorded in pounds. The average of the three weights thus obtained constituted the actual body weight of each ewe. The ewes that lambed subsequent to the time of shearing were excluded from the study since the body weight of such ewes may not be the true weight. The body measurements of the ewes were taken in terms of the length and chest girth of each ewe. The length of each ewe was measured from the point of the shoulder to the point of the ischium in inches. The girth represented the chest girth measured in inches just behind the point of the elbow. These measurements were obtained on the day following the day on which the concerned sheep were shorn. The product of the length and the girth was taken as an index of the body size of each ewe. At the time of shearing, each fleece was weighed and the grease weight of the individual fleece was recorded in ounces. After recording the grease fleece weight a proportionate and thorough representative sample from each fleece was collected and put in separate paper bags. For collecting the representative sample, each fleece was laid open on the table and proportionate pinches from all the regions of the fleece were obtained to ensure the sample being representative. Each paper bag was marked with the number of the ewe from which the sample had been obtained. This was for purposes of identification. Each sample was approximately two ounces in weight which was roughly about l/16th of each fleece weight. The paper bags were closed properly and were all enclosed in a moisture-proof container in order to eliminate the possibility of changes in moisture content during transit to the wool analysis laboratory until the weighment of the samples had been completed. Any variation in the moisture content of each sample is directly proportional to the weight and may thus affect the weight of the sample. After arrival at the labora- tory, each sample was accurately weighed on the analytical balance and the weight of each sample was recorded in grams. Each sample was then carded by hand, opening out the entire sample thorough- ly with the help of the fingers and picking out the burrs, dirt and such other foreign matter at the same time exercising due care to see that no wool fibre was lost during the process.
146 RELATIONSHIP OF CLEAN WOOL YIELD WITH BODY WEIGHT [Vol. XXIV, Part III, The carded samples were then divided into four batches of about 85 each for the purpose of scouring as the scouring and drying facilities could not permit scour- ing of more than 100 samples at a time. SCOURING OF THE SAMPLES The samples were all scoured by the emulsion process to determine the clean yields. The method of scouring used was as suggested by Johnston [1934] with slight modification suiting the nature of conditions. The percentage of soda was reduced since the Bikaner wool is a carpet type wool and contains far less amount of grease than fine wool for which the method was originally adopted by Johnston [1934]. The scouring equipment consisted of three tubs. The first tub contained the scouring solution while the second contained the rinsing solution and the third mere soft water. The scouring and rinsing solutions kept in the first and the second tub contained the following: TUB NO. 1.September, 1954] S. JAYARAMAN AND G. S. MAHAL 147 Statistical analysis of the entire data was carried out on the lines suggested by Amble [1953]. RESULTS The correlation coefficients of the body weight with clean wool yield and of the body size with clean wool yield were first worked out separately for the yearlings and for each 'lambed' and 'not-lambed' group within each age group for the adult stock. The results are given in Table I. TABLE I Correlation coefficients of body size and body weight with clean wool Age (nearest birthday in years) Number of ewes Correlation coefficient of body weight and clean wool yield Correlation coefficient of body size and clean wool yield Yearlings 1 136 0.5868* 0.2010148 RELATIONSHIP OF CLEAN WOOL YIELD WITH BODY WEIGHT [Vol. XXIV, Part III, Similar results in the corresponding groups with regard to the body size and clean wool yield were observed on testing for homogeneity and so the values of the concerned correlation coefficients of each group were also pooled. The pooled correlation coefficients in the order of the groups is given in Table II. TABLE II Pooled correlation coefficients in adult ewes Sub-group Number of ewes Correlation coefficient of body weight and clean wool yield Correlation coefficient of body size and clean wool yield Not lambed 77 0.252* 0.221 Lambed 128 0.260September, 1954] S. JAYARAMAN AND G. S. MAHAL 149 DISCUSSION OF RESULTS The fact that there exists a significant correlation between body weight and clean wool yield and between body size and clean wool yield among the yearlings as well as adults indicates that heavier and bigger sheep are likely to produce more wool, although the correlation is not very high except in the case of yearlings with respect to the body weight and clean yield. This finding is in conformity with those of Spencer, et al. (loc. cit.), Joseph (loc. cit.), Hunt (loc. cit.), Brody and Camp- bell (loc. cit.), Gartner and Strenberg (loc. cit.), Terrill and Stoehr (loc. cit.) and Jones, et al. (loc. cit). In the group of yearlings, where no culling had been performed as yet, the value of the correlation coefficient of body weight and clean wool yield is significant at one per cent level while that between body size and clean wool yield is significant at five per cent level. In the adults, the correlation coefficient of body weight with clean wool yield as well as that of body size with clean yield are both significant at one per cent level. The order of correlation between body weight and wool yield and body size and wool yield, respectively, is more or less the same for different age groups in the adults ; in other words this correlation does not depend upon age. The order of correlation for lambed and not-lambed classes are also not signi- ficantly different. The body weight and wool yield in the yearlings are correlated to the order of 0.587 which indicates that a proportion of (0.587),2 i.e. about 34.46 per cent of the variation in wool yield of different yearlings can be attributed to the variation in body weight. This correlation is fairly high as compared to that of the adult stock and is probably due to the fact that the yearlings include all lambs of different sizes and weights none of them having been culled while the adult stock includes only the selected animals excluding the under-sized and under-weight ewes which were culled as yearlings before they were transferred to the adult stock. A fairly high correlation between body weight and clean wool yield is a good indication for the selection of high wool producing yearlings as replacement stock based on the body weight alone. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The problem was designed to find out the relationship between clean wool yield of Bikaner ewes and their body weight and body size respectively. Three hundred and forty one ewes were chosen for the problem. The ewes were from all ages commencing from the yearlings to the age of seven years. For the purpose of classification, they were divided into separate age groups and the adults were further subdivided into two groups within each age group according to whether they had lambed during the season or not. The group also included 136 yearlings. Representative samples from the fleeces of the ewes were taken, scoured and the yield worked out for the entire fleeces from the yield percentage of the respective representative samples. The body length from the point of the shoulder to the point of the ischium, and the chest girth just behind the point of the elbow were
150 RELATIONSHIP OFCLEAN WOOL YIELD WITH BODY WEIGHT [Vol. XXIV, Part III, measured in inches for each ewe and the product of the length and chest girth was taken as an index of the size of the ewe. The body weight of each ewe in pounds was also recorded. The correlation coefficients of the body weight with clean wool yield and that of the body size with clean wool yield of each age group was worked out separately. Barring the yearlings, the values of the correlation coefficients of body weight with clean yield for the various groups were all pooled since they were found to be homo- geneous. The values of the correlation coefficients of body size with clean wool yield in the adults were also pooled as they also proved homogeneous on test. In the adults the order of correlation between body weight and clean wool yield was found to be 0.257, significant at one per cent level, while the order of correlation between body size and clean wool yield was observed to be 0.225, signi- ficant at one per cent level. In the yearlings, it was observed that the body weight and the wool yield were correlated to the order of 0.587, significant at one per cent level, which indicates that a proportion of about 34.46 per cent of the variation in clean wool yield of different yearlings can be attributed to the variation in body weight. The body size and clean wool yield in the same group were found to be correlated to the order of 0.201 which was significant at five per cent level. The order of correlation of body weight with clean wool yield in the yearlings being fairly high, denotes that more emphasis may be laid upon the body weight of the yearlings at the time of selection for the replacement stock which is usually done at the age of about 15 to 18 months. This will eventually help the breeder to increase the productivity of the flock with regard to wool yield. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are highly indebted to Shri V. N. Amble, and Shri K. S. Krishnan, of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for their valuable guidance and help rendered in the statistical analysis of the data. REFERENCES Brody, S., and Campbell, J. (1938). Growth and development with special reference to domestic animals. Montana Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 287 Burns, R. H. (1942). Wool Fancies and Facts. Wyo. Wool Grower, XV, 13, 4 Burns, R. H. (1948). Greasy and clean weights of Wyoming range fleeces. Univ. Wyo. Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 285 Gartner, R. and Ungern Sternberg, V. (1938). Korrelation en Zwisch nenden Leistungen des Merino fleishchafes. Original in Z. schafz, 27, 81. Abstract in Anim. Breed. Abstr. 6, 110, 111 Hunt, W. E. (1935). The effect of size and type of ewe on efficiency of production. Maryland Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 380, 153 Johnston, A. (1934). A Quick Method of Scouring Small Samples of Wool. Past. Rev., 44, 5, 6 Jones, J. M., Damerson, W. H., Davis, S. P., Warwick, B. L. and Patterson, R. E. (1944). Influence of age, type and fertility in Rambouillet ewes of fineness of fibre, fleece weight, staple length and body weight. Tex. Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 657 Joseph, W. E. (1931). Relation of size of grade fine wool ewes to their production. Montana Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 242 Spencer, D. A., Hardy, J. I. and Brandon, M. J. (1928). Factors that influence wool production with range Rambouillet sheep. U. S. D. A. Tech. Bull. 85 Terrill, C. E. (1939). Selection of range Rambouillet ewes. 32nd Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod., 333- 340 Terrill, C. E. and Stoehr, J. A. (1942). The importance of body weight in selection of range ewes. J. Anim.. Sci., I, 3, 221-228
METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF WOOL FIBRE FOR DIMENSIONAL ATTRIBUTES By K. N. RAMCHANDRAN and P. R. YERI, Wool Research Laboratory, Poona (Received for publication on 17 June 1953) (With Plates VI to VIII) A VARIETY of textile materials are processed out of wool depending on its quality. Quality of wool is the cumulative effect of fineness or diameter, length, waviness or crimps, hairiness and fibre density or packing of fibres on the body of sheep. These measurable attributes of wool quality have a direct bearing on the value of fleeces and guide the sheep breeders for improvement of their flocks for yielding finer and better fleeces. The wool buyer is also guided by some of these attributes while buying wools, which will suit manufacturers' requirements to process for different types of fabrics. The methods of analysis for each of the characteristics of wool fibres are detailed below. Sampling of wool It is necessary to obtain a reliable estimate of wool quality; analysis of all the fibre populations either on the body of the sheep or for a bulk is not practicable. Hence the usual procedure is to draw samples of fibres which will be representative of the original bulk samples. The methods of sampling are : (i) Sampling from a sheep. From each of the six regions of neck, wither, shoulder, side, back and britch, wool fibres from an area of 3 in. x 3 in are clipped from one side of the sheep (because of the bilateral symmetry) and this constitutes a sample for each region. (ii) Preparation of the sample. The sample is washed free of grease with benzene and then in distilled water. This sample is divided into sixteen zones by process of halving, without disturbing the natural arrangement of fibres. From each zone a sheaf of about 50 fibres is drawn from the basal end, and sixteen sheafs of fibres thus drawn are pooled together to form a final sample from a single region for the assessment of the attribute under study. (iii) Sampling from a commercial bale. Eight pickings each of approximately 2 oz. are drawn at random from the different portions of the bale. These samples are well mixed lockwise and divided into 16 zones by successive halving. The locks from each zone are spread out and superimposed over one another in order to set the basal portion in a straight line. The spread of the lock shall be six inches in length at the base. This arrangement of the locks is placed on a black velvet board against a steel rule and bunches of approximately 50 fibres are drawn at random from each of the zones. The 16 drawings are pooled together to form the final sample for the assessment of the attribute under study. 57 AR/54 151 4
152 METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF WOOL FIBRE [Vol. XXIV, Part III, FIBRE DIAMETER OR FINENESS Fineness is one of the most important attributes of wool fibre and the spinnabili- ty of wool to fine, medium or coarse counts is mainly influenced by its diameter. Preparation of the slide. The sample obtained either from a bale or from the body region of a sheep (as detailed before) is washed free of impurities in benzene and in one per cent solution of sodium oleate at 40°c. It is finally rinsed in distilled water and dried over a hot electric plate at low temperature. The sample is then cut into small pieces of about half millimeter in length over a glass plate with the help of a pointed pair of scissors. The pieces are thoroughly mixed with the fine points of a brush and are arranged on the glass plate into a square of 1 in. X 1 in. with the help of the sharp edge of a razor blade. The square is divided into 16 zones of approximately equal sizes, from each of which, a small quantity of fibres is taken with a mounting needle. These are transferred to a few drops of cedar wood oil on a slide 3 in. X 1½ in. The fibre pieces are stirred with the cedar wood oil to get a uniform distribution. A cover glass 2 in. X 13/8 in. is gently lowered on to the slide by placing the shorter edge of the cover glass in contact with the slide. A gentle tap of the mounting needle on the cover glass will give uniform distribution of the fibre pieces and prevent any air bubble accumulation. Apparatus. The apparatus which is commonly used for diameter measure- ments is the one evolved at the Wool Industries Research Association, United Kingdom, and is called the WIRA Projector. This method has also been approved by the International Wool Standards Organization. The Zeiss Lenameter and the Bauch and Lomb Projectors also make use of the same principle as that used in the WIRA Projector (Plate VI, fig. 1.). A short description of the WIRA Projector is given below : ' It is a simple instrument to handle and the method of fibre measurement is based on the projection of the fibre at 500 magnification on to a screen. The apparatus consists of a lamp house and a stage which supports the slide for examination. The objective and eyepiece magnify the fibres. The circular screen on which the image is projected has a 5 cm. wide transparent ruler graduated in millimeters. The ruler can be diametrically moved across the screen between the guides. A circle of 7 cm. in diameter is drawn in the centre of the screen D. The rotation of the knob E traverses the slide in a direction at right angles. Rotation of F focusses the image sharply on the screen.' Procedure The projector is calibrated before the slide is mounted with a micrometer scale of a size 1 mm., sub-divided to 0.01 mm. This scale is mounted on the stage and the magnification is adjusted so that 0.1 mm. of the micrometer scale gives 50 mm. as measured on the screen. The slide is mounted on the stage, cover glass downwards and moved to one extreme corner. The traverse knob is rotated until a fibre image is brought into the field on the screen and focussed. The screen is rotated until the length of the ruler is perpendicular to the fibre image. The ruler is moved through the guides until a centimeter division coincides with one edge of the image and the diameter
September, 1954] K. N. RAMCHANDRAN AND P. R. YERI 153 of the fibre is then recorded in millimeters. Diameter is the distance measured from one edge of the image of the fibre to the other. In case where both the edges of the image cannot be focussed at the same time, one edge is focussed first and the mark of the ruler is adjusted against this edge. The other edge will be focussed without disturbing the ruler and diameter is recorded. Every fibre in the field of view is measured. The following convention is observed in the measurement of fibre diameter. (a) The measurement is not to be taken at the point where the fibres cross one another. (b) If the length of the image is less than the circle (7 cm. diameter) the measurement shall only be taken when the image will project suffi- ciently beyond the width of the ruler. (c) A damaged fibre is not measured. (d) If the fibre measures to a fraction of a division the fibre will be recorded in the lower group, if less, then half the division and in the higher group, if more than half the division. (e) The movement of the slide on the stage is so adjusted as to divide the slide into eight traverses length at equal distances measuring not less than 25 fibres in each traverse. The fibre pieces from all the positions shall be arranged into frequency distribution. The mean fibre diameter and standard deviation is calculated by using the following formula. An example is worked out in the case of length measurement to show the application of the formula. Mean diameter D=B-m(F1-1) Standard deviation [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] where D=Mean diameter B=Highest group-mean for which a frequency value is recorded K=Number of groups m=Class-interval n=Total number of observations recorded F1=Sum of the first cumulative values divided by 'n' F2=Sum of the second cumulative values for the first (K154 METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF WOOL FIBRE [Vol. XXIV, Part III, where g=group-mean x=Observed frequency b=Any arbitrarily chosen value corresponding to one of the group-means f=gIndian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part III ] PLATE VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Wira Projector [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Hardy's Sectioning Device
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part III ] PLATE VII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Length measurement apparatus [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Torsion balance
September, 1954] K. N. RAMCHANDRAN AND P. R. YERI 155 jector with the embedding medium facing the objective and the diameter measure- ments recorded as outlined above, at the major and minor axis of each fibre. The mean is expressed in microns with a tolerance limit of two microns. LENGTH MEASUREMENT Length of wool fibres contributes towards the spinning property, as the longer fibres allow greater draft during spinning. The wool of the sheep in India contains in general an outer-coat of coarse fibres and fine under-coat. The coat is not homo- geneous and hence the sampling for fibre length measurements should take into consideration the dual coatedness of the fleece. (i) Sampling from a sheep. A sample from an area of 3 in. x 3 in. from each of the six regions of neck, wither, shoulder, side, back and britch is cut. Each sample is spread lockwise without disturbing the natural lock formation and spread on a black velvet board so as to arrange the basal portion against a steel rule. Three bunches of approximately 100 fibres are drawn at random and this constitutes the sample for length measurements. (ii) Sampling from a bale of wool. Eight pickings of approximately 2 oz. each are drawn at random from the different portions of the bale. These samples are thoroughly mixed lockwise and successively halved, so that the final sample is about 2 oz. At each stage, of halving, one part is discarded at random. The locks of these samples are superimposed over one another and spread over a length of six inches on a black velvet board. The arrangement is set against a steel rule and six random drawings of approximately 50 fibres constitute the final sample. Procedure The sample is washed free of grease and dirt in a two per cent solution of neutral soap and rinsed in two changes of distilled water. After drying, each fibre in the sample is straightened by holding two extreme points of the fibre with two pairs of forceps against a steel rule on a black velvet board. The length measurements are recorded in groups of equal intervals of 0.5 cm. length. Length measurement apparatus An instrument (Plate VII, Fig. 1) for the rapid determination of the length has been evolved by the Wool Industries Research Association. It is considered that the instrument will enable quick recording of fibre length in the form of frequency distributions. In a laboratory where a considerable number of samples will have to be tested it is felt that an apparatus of this type will be useful. A detailed description of the instrument is given below : The machine comprises two elements, the measuring unit proper and an auxiliary counter. The counter is not an essential part of the machine but is of great con- venience in use. The method of operation is as follows : A lead screw extends the whole length of the front of the machine. This is clearly shown on the photograph. It normally rotates at a slow speed, being driven by the motor visible at the far end of the machine. Fibres are drawn singly from the samples to be analysed, employing a special pair of forceps supplied with the machine. These may be seen retained in a clip just in front of the motor. The fibre is gripped at its end by the forceps, the points of which are engaged in the
156 METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF WOOL FIBRE [Vol. XXIV, Part III, groove of the lead screw, pressing lightly at the same time against a fixed fence extending the length of the screw. The rotating screw draws the forceps, drawing with them the single fibre, along the length of the screw. The fibre draws through a lightly loaded jaw to be seen at the near end of the machine. This incorporates a sensitive trip arrangement which stops the rotation of the lead screw when the end of the fibre is drawn through the jaw. The forceps are then at a distance along the screw which is the length of the fibre. In the simple form of machine without counter, this distance is read off a scale and noted. This routine is obviated when the counter is employed since this is so arranged that the operation of lifting the forceps out of the screw moves a counting wheel corresponding to that length, one step forward. Thus, examination of the state of the counter following measurement of all the individual fibres of a sample, shows immediately the number of fibres of each length category in the sample. The counter is the arrangement of ratchets and pawls visible in the photograph behind the lead screw. The machine is arranged to measure fibres upto 30 cm. length in steps of ½ cm., and operates from a normal 200/250 v., 50 cycle, A. C. supply, the power consumption being negligible. The mean length and the standard deviation is calculated by the formula : Mean length L=B-m(F1-1) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] where L=Mean length B=Highest group-mean for which a frequency value is recorded K=Number of groups m=Class-interval n=Total number of observations recorded F1=Sum of the first cumulative values divided by 'n' F2=Sum of the second cumulative values for the first (KSeptember, 1954] K. N. RAMCHANDRAN AND P. R. YERI 157 Mean length L =B-m(F1-1) =10.75158 METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF WOOL FIBRE [Vol. XXIV, Part III, Estimation The sample is allowed to condition in an electric oven at 102° F. for one day and is then weighed accurately in the torsion balance (Plate VII, Fig. 2). It is then spread on a velvet board to a length of six inches and three bunches of approximately 200 fibres are drawn at random from the basal end. These are conditioned in the oven and are weighed accurately in the torsion balance. The number of fibres in each of the bunches is counted and the number of fibres in the entire sample is calculated on the basis of weight and number of fibres in a bunch. Since three bunches are drawn, average weight and count are taken of three bunches, on the basis of which the total population of fibres in the entire sample is calculated. It will be of interest to mention that a fine woolled sheep like the Merino has a density of 20,392 fibres but the indigenous Deccani sheep carries only, 2,292 fibres per 4 sq. cm. while the selected Deccani flocks carry 4,238 fibres per 4 sq. cm. HAIRINESS OR MEDULLATION The presence of hairiness is one of the main defects not only in the fleeces of Deccani sheep but also in the majority of the breeds of sheep in India. Hairy fibres can be distinguished from the non-hairy by the absence of the medullary canal when the latter are viewed under the microscope. Hence, an evaluation of this defect of hairiness is necessary for breeding sheep with an all wool coat. Method For quick method of distinguishing wool from hair, all that is required is a black enamelled tray of 10 in. X 8½ in., a glass plate of 8 in. X 6 in. and benzene. The test is carried out by placing a sample of wool which may contain hairy fibres, in the tray. The sample is weighed down by the glass plate and benzene is poured into the tray till the glass plate is immersed completely in benzene. Only hair is visible and wool disappears apparently, as wool and benzene have the same refractive index. This method is suitable as a field test, for rapid selection of non- hairy sheep. The method is rather slow and since no calculable values can be worked out, the medullometer (Plate VIII, Fig. 1) evolved by McMahon is a very useful instrument for the rapid assessment of medullation in wool sample. The principle is that a hairy sample reflects light in benzene unlike the pure wool. The light reflected by the hairy or partially hairy fibres is converted into an electric current. When this current is passed through a mirror galvanometer, it gives reflection on a graduated ruler corresponding to the light reflected by the sample. Details of the apparatus Four milky lamps each of 200 watts are connected in parallel through a volt- meter of multirange 300/8/4 volts switch board type, and a rheostat of three amperes current capacity and 100 ohms, is connected to the mains. Rheostat controls the voltage and the intensity of light. The box which receives the reflected light is fitted vertically at a distance of 5½ in. from the tray. It has two sliding boxes. The lower box carried a cinepher condenser of four inches focal length and 5¼ inches diameter while in the top one is fitted a photronic cell of high sensitivity (Weston
PLATE VIII [ Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Medullometer [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Rapid regain apparatus
September, 1954] K. N. RAMACHANDRAN AND P. R. YERI 159 model No. 495). The photo cell is fitted on a clamp and facilitates adjustment to right focus. The current produced in the photo cell is conducted to a mirror gal- vanometer of sensitivity 2.73 X 109 micro amp. through two resistances of 10,000 and 50,000 ohms connected in series. The former resistance is used to its maximum to protect the photo cell and the latter by its adjustment, enables to get desired deflection on the graduated ruler. A gram of fully hairy fibres is used in practice as a standard to give maximum deflection. The grey standard surface on which the benzene tray is placed will also serve as a standard to give a certain fixed deflection. The resistance of 50,000 ohms is adjusted to give deflection of 25 cm. when the standard sample is exposed to the light. The deflection when the benzene tray and glass plate are exposed is noted as zero reading. Benzene with refractive index 1.490 to 1.495 is used. About half a gram of the sample, taken either from the body of the sheep or the sample obtained from the bale after zoning, is taken for tests, after thorough scouring. It is spread in the tray over a surface of 4 X 5 inches in the centre of the tray and is exposed to the light and the deflection is recorded. The true deflection of the sample is obtained by deducting the zero reading from the total deflection. The deflection in centimeters calculated for one gram of sample is called the 'Photo electric index'. The index is a relative number corresponding to the extent of medullation when the maximum hairy sample is taken as a standard. The medullometer provides only an empirical index of medullation. Hairiness is dependent on the volume of medullation structure and the index of reflection obtained in the medullometer does not take into account this factor. In the diameter observations with the projector, the diameter of the fibre and the medullated part is recorded separately for each fibre. Two hundred readings taken for each slide and the number of medullated fibres along with the medullated part enables the estimation of medullation percentge by applying the following formula:160 METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF WOOL FIBRE [Vol. XXIV, Part III, Sampling. Usually sampling from a sheep is carried out at the time of shearing. About 5 gm. of wool is collected from the different parts of a fleece. In the case of sampling from a bale, approximately eight pickings of four ounces each are pooled together to form the final sample. Procedure. A weighed sample of wool obtained as above, is opened thoroughly either by hand or by mechanical means so that wool is free from all the adherent impurities. The opened wool is scoured in a series of four wash bowls of four litre capacity each and preferably made of copper or stainless steel. Each bowl has an inner perforated bowl which enables loose particles of sand and dirt to fall on the bottom while scouring. Usually there is a clearance of at least 2 in. between the inner and the outer bowl. The first three of the bowls contain scouring solutions with three grams of soda ash and 1 gm. of neutral soap per litre. The temperature of the liquor is maintained at 50°C. The wool is gently agitated for 15 minutes in each bowl and squeezed between the rollers of a wringer before it is passed on to the next bowl. After rinsing the wool in the last bowl which contains pure water, it is thoroughly squeezed and dried in an oven at 65°C. The wool is then weighed accurately, and the process of drying and weighing repeated tillt two consecutive weighings do not differ by more than 0.5 per cent. The percen age of clean wool yield is calculated by the following formula : Percentage of clean wool=W2/W1x100 where W1 = Gross weight of the sample W2 = Weight of the sample after scouring The temperature and the humidity of the room are recorded. DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE CONTENT IN RAW WOOL Wool being hygroscopic, can absorb moisture to a considerable extent. The wool buyer is very careful in that he pays money only for wool and not for water. Hence it is his practice to determine the moisture content in a sample of wool, drawn from a bale. Apparatus. The apparatus (Plate VIII, Fig. 2) for moisture content determina- tion consists of an electric hot air dryer and a blower which impels a stream of hot air through the sample of wool at a temperature ranging from 80 to 100° C. The temperature can be set as desired by a lever arrangement. The dryer is provided with an aluminium container which can be sealed with sealed spring caps. The container is weighed correctly and the humidity and temperature of the room recorded. The wool, which is sampled as described in the method for deter- mination of clean wool yield is kept in the container and reweighed. The di- fference of the two weights gives the weights of the sample. The container is fitted to the dryer and temperature of the hot dryer is adjusted to 105°C. The apparatus is switched on and the hot air is allowed to be blown through the wool for five minutes. The container is removed, sealed with the cap and is weighed accurately. Again the process is repeated by placing the container in the dryer so that any two conse- cutive weighings do not differ by more than 0.5 per cent which confirms that the
September, 1954] K. N. RAMACHANDRAN AND P. R. YERI 161 wool is free from all moisture. The percentage of moisture content and the regain is calculated in accordance to the following formula. Percentage of moisture content= W1-W2/W1 X 100 Percentage regain= W1-W2/W2 X 100 where W1 = Weight of the sample of wool before drying W2 = Weight of the sample of wool after drying DETERMINATION OP SCALES ON WOOL FIBRE Wool, amongst all the other fibres of animal origin, has a marked felting quality. This is attributed to the presence of scales on wool fibre, which facilitates the move- ment of fibres towards their root end during the process of milling. Also the elastic nature of wool fibres contributes towards this. The absence of scale structure on wool fibre would not have produced the unshrinkable fabrics. In the process of preparing non-felted fabrics, it is the destruction of scale structure by chemical treatment of wool with chlorine that results in non-shrinkable finish for wool. Hence an estimation of the number of scales per unit length of the fibre provides an indi- cation of the felting quality of wool. Procedure. The wool fibre is washed free of dirt and grease in distilled water and benzene. It is then placed in between two layers of a thin thermoplastic film and then sandwiched between two cover slips. This assembly is held between a clamp, the jaws of which exert sufficient pressure on the film in contact with the fibres. The whole assembly is left in an electric oven at 90°C. for 15 to 20 minutes. The clamp is taken out, immediately disassembled and the fibre is removed with a soft brush. The film on which the impressions of the fibre are transferred is fast- ened to a microscopic slide by means of strips of transparent adhesive tape. The slide with the impression of the film facing downwards is mounted on the WIRA Projector. The number of scales per 100 microns are counted along the edge of each fibre. Five such fibres for each type are taken for the determination of the scales. CRIMPS IN WOOL Wool buyers are mainly guided by the number of crimps per inch when they buy wool for processing fine counts of yarn. This is mainly due to the fact that the crimps are correlated with the fineness of fibres. It is found that fine fibres have more crimps per inch which are uniform and regular. Indian wools do not display this character conspicuously though the undercoat of fine fibres exhibit waviness. Sampling. About 1 gm. of sample is collected from each of the neck, wither, shoulder, side, back and britch regions of the body of the sheep. The ½ gm. of sample is spread so as to set its basal protion against a steel rule and two locks of 50 fibres are randomly drawn and these when pooled together constitute the final sample.
162 METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF WOOL FIBRE [Vol. XXIV, Part III, This process is repeated for each of the six regions so that crimps are estimated for each of the six regions to obtain the within animal variation. While sampling from a commercial bale, 1 lb. of wool is collected from the different portions. This bulk shall be the result of eight pickings of approximate y two ounces each. At each stage of halving, half is discarded at random till the bulk of wool weighs only 0.5 gram. This sample is spread to six inches in length and the basal portion is set against a steel rule on a black velvet board. Six draw- ings at random of about 50 fibres pooled together, shall constitute final sample. Procedure. The sample is cleaned in benzene and dried between two pads of filter papers. Each fibre is placed on a black velvet board, weighed down by a microscopic slide against a steel rule. The number of crimps are counted from end to end and the unstraightened length of the fibre is recorded. This proce- dure is repeated and the fibres in the entire sample are recorded for crimps, in the case of the sample obtained from the animal or bale. Also the six different samples obtained from the animal are analysed for crimps but the average of crimps are calculated for each of the regions separately. The average number of crimps per unit length is calculated according to the following formula SAURASHTRA WOOLS-THEIR PHYSICAL CHARACTERS AND POSSIBILITIES FOR IMPROVEMENT* By B. B. BUCH and GURUBAX SINGH MAHAL, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar (Received for publication on 19 August 1953) INDIA holds a unique position in the world wool trade for producing a high quality of carpet wools. For this superior carpet quality of the wools, a fairly large proportion of the total production in the country, goes in the international trade which helps in earning a substantial amount of foreign currency every year. During the year 1952, 18 million pounds of wool is reported to have been exported to the U. S. A. alone [Anonymous, 1953] out of the total estimated production of 54.33 million pounds annually [Anonymous, 1948]. Although the total production of wool is in excess of the domestic requirements of the country, India needs to import considerable quantity of fine wools for the manufacture of clothings every year. This is because the indigenous wools are only suited for carpet manufacture. To cut short imports and attain self sufficiency in fine wool, concentrated efforts are necessary for the improvement of sheep types in the country. Before definite breeding programme is finalised towards the production of fine quality wool, it is essential to carry out a proper survey of the existing sheep types to study the potentialities of suitable breeds for such an improvement. Of the various types of wools produced in the country, ' Joria ' wool has been recognised as one of the most popular wools and is reported to being used for the manufacture of tweeds, woollen pattis, flannels, etc. in the United Kingdom and blankets, expensive tweeds, single shade clothings, carpets, etc. in the United States [Anonymous, 1945]. Marketing Department of the Government of India has classified 'Joria' wool as clothing wool [Anonymous, 1945]. The name 'Joria' is given for the reason that the major quantity of the wool, from its origin, used to be exported from the port of the same name. The wool actually is a mixture of wools coming from different parts of Saurashtra State and adjoining areas of Gujrat and Rajasthan. Saurashtra State is the outcome of the amalgamation of several Western India States into one unit after the achievement of Independence. The total popula- tion is estimated at 4,000,000 people. This peninsula is formed by the extension of the Arabian Sea on two sides forming two gulfs164 SAURASHTRA WOOLSSeptember, 1954] B. B. BUCH AND G. S. MAHAL 165 'Joria' wool comes from the carpet type wool which is defined as a mixture of hair, wool and kemp fibres [Anonymous, 1947] and is also designated as mixed wool. The common types of fibres constituting carpet wools are wool, heterotype, hair, coloured fibres and kemp. Since carpet wools are a mixture of different types of fibres which possess variable physical properties, a change in their proportion is likely to alter the character and nature of wool for the manufacture of different types of material. Various workers like Blyth [1923], Roberts [1926], Wilson [1929], Lochner [1931], Elphick [1932], Darling [1932], Bulgaru [1935], Manz [1937], Burns, Johnston and Chen [1940], and Mahal [1949], conducted analysis of mixed wools and their basic procedure was to work out the proportion of different types of fibres although using slightly different names in some instances. The method is now universally adopted for the analysis of mixed wools. Although the analysis of fibre types is a useful guide in evaluating the quality of mixed wools from manufacturing view point, it does not give the actual amount of medullation in a sample due to the varying amounts of medullated and non-medullated portions in the heterotypes. The correct estimation, however, is essential for a critical selection of sheep in any improved breeding programme. Accordingly, the medu- llation test was carried out under two different techniques ; Fibre Count Analysis and Projection Method for Medullation Test. For the analysis by count, duplicate composite samples were separated into different types of fibres by employing Elphick's [1932] benzol test. In case of doubt a microscope was employed for the confirmation of results. The different fibre types in each composite samples were counted and the percentage worked out. In the projection method for medullation test duplicate composite samples were used for each type of wool. Hardy's [1935] thin section device was used for making the sections. These sections were projected, using X 500 magnification, on a white surface of 20 cm. diameter area, and the number of medullated and non- medullated fibres in the different samples were determined. From these figures the percentage of the two fibre types were calculated. Measurements for stretched fibre length were made both of the composite samples as well as the fibre types which were separated out in the count analysis. Burns [1940] improved technique was used for these measurements. One hundred and fifty fibres of each type were measured except when their total number in the sample was smaller. For fibre thickness measurements, the longitudinal short section method [A. S. T. M., 1947] was employed. Thickness measurements of the composite samples as well as of fibre types were made separately. Duplicate composite samples were used in the former case and the fibre types separated in count analysis were used in the latter case. The formula used by Roberts [1920] was employed in deciding the minimum number of fibres to be measured for this purpose. Only 100 readings were recorded to measure the fibre types. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The results of medullation test both by fibre type analysis and projection method are presented in Table I. The analysis by fibre count reveals that the
166 SAURASHTRA WOOLSSeptember, 1954] B. B. BUCH AND G. S.MAHAL 167 to various workers like Bryant [1933], Barker [1931], Elphick [1932], Waters [1935] and Nanda, Singh and Mogre [1945], medullation in wool is probably inherited. Although from the above results there appears a great scope for the elimination of hair fibres from the Saurashtra wools though selective breeding of indigenous sheep, it seems necessary to resort to cross breeding with superior selected animals of Pattanwadi or Bikaneri breeds of sheep for quick and speedy improvement. Town and McMohan [1944] by subjecting large quantities of Romney wool to various stages of manufacture, noticed that hairiness up to the extent of six per cent as determined by the McMohan's medullometer, did not affect the processing pro- perties of the wool and produced no marked difference in the appearance and handle of either woven or knitted fabrics. The hairiness could not be detected in dyed cloths. An extremely low medullation contained in the sample numbers 2 and 5 shows great possibilities of improving the wool for clothing purposes. It also shows that suitable sorts can be picked out from Saurashtra wools for the manufacture of clothing material. Stretched fibre length measurements The results of the stretched fibre length measurements of the entire samples and different fibre types are shown in Table II. The range of variation in the entire samples is from 4.4 to 10.9 cm. with a coefficient of variability range of 16.4 to 30.2 per cent. The range of average length in true wool fibres is from 4.0 to 10.7 cm. with a coefficient of variability range of 10.4 to 18.5 per cent. TABLE II Stretched fibre length measurements Sample No. Climatic region Entire sample Different fibre types True wool Heterotype Hair Mean G. V. Mean C. V. Mean C. V. Mean C. V. cm. per cent cm. per cent cm. per cent cm. per cent 1 A 4.4 17.3 4.1 16.0 4.7 31.8 4.1 41.3 2 A 10.9 19.3 10.7 14.3 11.1 17.5 12.1 24.3 3 A 9.6 18.8 9.4 10.4 11.2 14.3 10.5 17.3 4 A 9.9 19.2 8.0 17.5 10.2 18.5 11.5 16.3 5 A 9.9 19.1 9.1 12.5 10.1 15.5 6.3 56.6 6 B 10.1 16.4 8.9 11.6 11.4 19.0 10.1 26.2 7 B 9.6 16.8 8.6 17.0 10.3 17.3 7.9 15.0 8 C 7.2 20.1 6.6 18.5 7.8 14.1 8.4 9.3 9 C 6.0 30.2 4.0 15.8 5.0 11.8 6.3 21.7
168 SAURASHTRA WOOLSSeptember, 1954] B. B. BUCH AND G. S. MAHAL 169 The range of mean fibre thickness in different entire samples is not wide, if sample numbers 4 and 9 are eliminated. The individual samples show a fairly high degree of variation in fibre uniformity as evident from the percentage of co- efficients of variability in the different samples. The range of mean fibre thickness is from 29.6 to 40.3 microns in the entire samples. The range of mean thickness for true wool fibres in the nine samples is from 22.0 to 26.3 microns with a coefficient of variability range of 11.8 to 20.1 percent. The range of mean thickness for the heterotypical fibres in the nine samples is from 31.1 to 36.2 microns with a coefficient of variability range of 12.2 to 20.5 per cent. The range of mean thickness for hair fibres in the nine samples is from 40.4 to 58.9 microns with a coefficient of variability range of 11.1 to 31.9 per cent. From the above results, it is evident that the entire samples do not show a wide variation in the mean thickness of different samples. The fibre types in the indivi- dual samples show negligible variation in mean thickness except in the case of hair fibres. Barker [1937] in his report on Shantung and Woozie sheep of China remarks that if the variation is higher than 25 per cent in the mixed wools, it is not desirable to utilise them for clothing material. In the present study, it will be seen that the variation is not more than 25 per cent in the fibre types and very slightly higher than 25 per cent in the entire samples which shows great possibilities of improving Sau- rashtra wools for clothing purposes through selective breeding. The very fact that the variation is not great amongst the fibre types is suggestive of the possibilities for speedy improvement. The results of the analysis of five samples of 'Joria' wool conducted by the Uni- versity of Bombay [1952] differ slightly in the case of fibre thickness. The probable cause may be that the samples were collected from one dealer only in Bombay which may not be representative for the whole State. Results of medullation test, however, agree with the results obtained in this study. CONCLUSIONS The following conclusions are evident from the results obtained from this study: 1. From the above-mentioned analysis, it is clear that almost all the samples are very near to the carpet wool standards as worked out by Burns, Johnston and Chen [1940] and the South-Western Sheep Breeding Laboratory at Fort Wingate, New Mexico, from their work on Navajo sheep [Anonymous, 1940] except the variations in length. Some of the samples fall slightly below the required length while three out of the nine samples are considerably short. None of the samples exceed six microns more in thickness than the standards suggested by Burns, et al. [1940]. The 'Joria' wool as such therefore, can be considered as a very good carpet wool but some improvement towards attaining the uniformity in fibre length is desirable. Individual sample number 2 seems to be too good for carpet wool and sample numbers 8 and 9 seem too poor for this purpose. Sample numbers, 1, 5, 6 and 7 are very close to the required standard and sample number 5 of them can be consi- dered just the ideal carpet wool. Sample numbers 3 and 4 are slightly below the mark.
170 SAURASHTRA WOOLSSeptember, 1954] B. B. BUCH AND G. S. MAHAL 171 REFERENCES Anonymous, (1940). Annual Report of the South-western range and Sheep Breeding Laboratory, Fort Wingate, New Mexico, U.S.A. Anonymous, (1942). Hand book on the quality of Indian Wool, Agricultural Marketing Adviser to Govt. of India, Indian Market Ser. 33 Anonymous, (1945). Report on the marketing of wool and hair in India. Central Agri. Market. Dept., Govt. of India, Marketing Ser. 54, 1-141 Anonymous, (1947). The development of China's Wool industry. Separate No. 16, From the Report of the ChinaPOSSIBILITY OF VIBRIO FOETUS INFECTION EXISTING IN CATTLE IN INDIA By R. N. MOHAN,* Assistant Animal Husbandry Commissioner with the Government of India, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi (Received for publication on 14 April 1954) SINCE the discovery of Vibrio foetus some forty years ago by M'Fadyean and Stockman [1913] as a cause of abortion in cattle (and sheep) in Britain, similar findings have been reported from several other countries, notably America, Australia, Denmark, Germany, Sweden, Austria, Hungary and Japan. The literature on the subject has been recently reviewed by Prier [1952] and partly also by Lawson and Mackinnon [1952]; and V. foetus has now assumed a greater importance as a cause of infertility than that of abortion [Sjollema, Stegenga and Terpstra, 1949]. The organism has not so far been discovered in India, but this may be due to the fact that no systematic search has yet been made for it. Polding [1948], however, did not encounter any case of V. foetus infection during his extensive investigation of con- tagious abortion in cattle, sheep and goats in this country. In this preliminary report is recorded some evidence based on agglutination tests suggesting the probable existence of V. foetus infection in cattle and buffaloes in India. Confirmation of this must, of course, await cultural demonstration of the organism, but it is hoped the preliminary observations reported here will serve to direct further investigations towards ascertaining the extent of V. foetus infection in India and its economic importance. TESTS AND RESULTS The observations reported in this paper were made in Uttar Pradesh and are confined to the results of some agglutination tests performed on vaginal mucus of 82 cows and seven buffaloes (including a few sexually mature female calves) of three different herds. The animals tested were mostly those which had failed to conceive after two or more services. Herds 1 and 2 consisted of indigenous Hariana cattle and Murrah buffaloes. Herd 3 consisted mainly of Jersey/Sindhi crosses, a few pure Sindhis, and a few Murrah buffaloes. The antigen used in these tests was kindly prepared by Dr J. Terpstra of the. Rijksseruminrichtung, Rotterdam, and was received through the courtsey of the F.A.O. Films made from the antigen on its arrival revealed Gram-negative vibrios in purity, on examination under the microscope. The vaginal mucus was collected with sterile precautions (on suitable tampons), suspended in about 5 c.c. saline, and tested usually after overnight storage in room (cold weather) or refrigerator. In the case of several animals, the blood serum was simultaneously subjected to agglu- tination test with the V. foetus antigen and, in a few cases, also with the Brucella * Formerly Veterinary Investigation Officer, Uttar Pradesh. 173 57 AR/54. 8
174 POSSIBILITY OF VIBRIO FOETUS INFECTION [Vol. XXIV, Part III, abortus standard antigen obtained from the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. The results obtained were as follows: In herd 1, vaginal mucus of 23 cows and five buffaloes was tested. Only one buffalo gave a positive reaction ; and this reaction was so strongly positive that marked agglutination occurred even in 1: 320 dilution of the original mucus suspension. Moreover, the suspension of vaginal mucus collected on the first occasion remained in the refrigerator for some weeks, and it always gave strongly positive agglutination reactions on tests done at periodical intervals. On one occasion, the blood serum of this animal was also tested and it was found to contain agglutinins to a titre of 1 : 160 for V. foetus and 1 : 40 (P) for Br. abortus. The remaining 27 animals were negative. This herd was badly infected with brucellosis and the rate of fertility was very low, services being frequently repeated. In herd 2, vaginal mucus of 29 cows and six sexually mature female calves was tested, and of these six cows and three female calves were found weakly positive for V. foetus infection. The agglutinations obtained in this herd were, however, neither so marked nor so clear-cut as in the case of the buffalo in herd 1. Two attempts to recover V. foetus on culture from vaginal mucus of female calves (at oestrus), and also from one aborted buffalo foetus, proved fruitless. A moderate degree of Br. abortus infection, accompanied by stray abortions, was present in this herd. In herd 3, vaginal mucus was collected from 14 cows and 10 sexually mature female calves (including two buffalo calves). Simultaneously, blood serum was subjected to agglutination tests for brucellosis as well as V. foetus infection. Majo- rity of the animals tested gave weakly positive reactions (vaginal mucus as well as blood serum) indicating V. foetus infection, but in this case also the agglutinations were not so clear-cut or marked as in the case of the buffalo of herd 1. In view of the agglutination reactions with the Rotterdam antigen being gene- rally ill-defined, the results could not be accepted as quite dependable, and it was considered advisable to test the specimens against antigens prepared with some other strains as well. The most reliable antigen would probably be one prepared with a suitable Indian strain of V. foetus ; but, since no Indian strain was available, specimens of vaginal mucus and blood serum from about 20 animals were forwarded to Dr J. R. Lawson at the Veterinary Laboratory, Weybridge, England. The results of the agglutination tests kindly conducted by Dr Lawson against two different V. foetus antigens showed that only one specimen of vaginal mucus, i.e. from the strongly positive buffalo of herd 1, showed marked agglutination and was consi- dered positive. None of the specimens of blood serum caused agglutination in dilutions above 1 : 40. From the results of tests conducted in India and in England it appears that there was at least one animal which could be regarded as infected with V. foetus. SUMMARY 1. Vaginal mucus of 89 cows and buffaloes, including a few sexually mature female calves, belonging to three different herds which experienced a varying degree of breeding troubles, was tested for V. foetus agglutinins. 2. Positive agglutination reactions were encountered in 20 cows, nine sexually mature calves and one buffalo ; but, except in the case of the buffalo, the agglutina- tions were weak and rather ill-defined.
September, 1954] R. N. MOHAN 175 3. Some 20 specimens of vaginal mucus as well as blood serum forwarded to Weybridge, England, showed marked agglutination only in the case of vaginal mucus of the buffalo on test there. 4. The observations made suggest that V. foetus infection probably exists in India. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The writer is indebted to Sir Thomas Dalling of the FAO, Rome, for kindly arranging for the V. foetus antigen; to Dr J. Terpstra of Rotterdam for kindly preparing the antigen; and to Dr J. R. Lawson of "Weybridge for kindly testing a few specimens forwarded to him. The assistance of Shri C. S. Mathur of the State Livestock Research Station, Mathura, and the help given by the authorities of the herds concerned are also acknowledged. REFERENCES Lawson, J. R. and Mackinnon, D. J. (1952). Vet. Rec., 64, 763 M'Fadyean, J. and Stockman, S. (1913). Cited by Lawson and Mackinnon Polding. J. B. (1948). Indian J. vet. Sci. 18, 115 Prier, J. E. (1952). Vet. Med., 47, 85 Sjollema, P. Stegenga, T. and Terpstra, J. (1949). Proc. 14th int. vet. Congr., London
ABSTRACTS Studies on disinfection of eggs and incubators. 1. The survival of Salmonella pullorum, thompson and typhi-murium on the surface of the hen's egg and on incubator debris. LANCASTER, J. E. and CRABLE, W. E. (1953). Brit. vet. J. 109, 139-148 A STUDY has been made of the behaviour of Salmonella pullorum, Salmonella thompson and Salmonella typhi-murium when placed on the surface of a hen's egg. The results show that the Salmonella disappear rapidly from the shell of the egg under normal egg incubator conditions. At room temperature the organisms survive for approximately 21 days on clean eggs and for a longer period in artificially dirty eggs. Experiments with atmosphere of increased humidity suggest that the rapid death of Salmonella under incubator conditions might be due primarily to a drying effect under the conditions described, penetration of Salmonella pullorum and Salmo- nella thompson into the white of the egg occurred a very small number of times. External contamination of the shell of a naturally clean egg with Salmonella pullo- rum and Salmonella thompson would, therefore, appear to be an unlikely means of introducing infection, when a separate hatching compartment is in use. (Author's own summary178 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIV, Part III, Control of epizootic cerebro-spinal nematodiasis in goats. PILLAI, C. P. AND PERERA, S. J. E. (1953). Ceylon vet. J. I, I, 22-26 THIS condition known as 'Goat paralysis' was encountered in Ceylon in goats imported from India. The goats belonged to Jamnapari, Scindhi and Kamori breeds. The disease was caused by nematode (Setaria) larvae found in the brain and spinal cord. The paper records the successful treatment of nine cases of such paralysis with "1-Diethylcarbamyl-4-Methyl piperazine citrate" (Caracide) dis- covered in the Lederle Laboratories in the U. S. A. Symptoms recorded are motor weakness and posterior incoordination ; in some there is swaying and stumbling, while in others, there is complete loss of motor power in the hind limbs or in all the four legs. Onset is sudden and the condition is non-febrile. Some die while many survive. In cases where onset is insidious the first sign is the unsteadiness of the hind limbs which might not be progressive. 'Caricide' is claimed to possess filaricidal activity in this disease without any toxic effects within the prescribed doses of 40 mg. per kilogram of the body weight. Five cases were treated in the Laboratory and four in the field with the drug given per os and repeated for three consecutive days in the laboratory and two days in the field. Animals which could not stand were placed in slings. Normal feed of Jack leaves and coconut cake was given ad lib. All these cases responded to the treatment. The animals resumed normal gait without any residual effect in about 10-15 days. In one case of long duration the drug had no effect. It is important to take up cases for treatment at the very early onset of nervous symptoms if cure is to be effected satisfactorily. (M.R.M.) Lapinised rinderpest virus and a vaccine : some observations in East Africa I. Laboratory experiments. II. Field trials with lapinised vaccine. BROTHERSTON, J. G. (1951). J. Comp. Path. 61, 4, 263-288 and 289-306 BROTHERSTON has described the successful maintenance of lapinised rinder- pest virus in rabbits at Kabete and its use as an immunising agent against bovine rinderpest in East Africa. For the maintenance of the virus locally bred rabbits of Albino and Rex breed, over 4½ months of age and 1000 gm. in body weight, were used and for other experiments susceptible, 2½ to 5-year old steersSeptember, 1954] ABSTRACTS 179 around the 70th hour, a fall was noticed, when these were destroyed for harvesting the virus. On autopsy the lesions were found to resemble those described by other workers. The virus was found 'fixed' for the local breed of the rabbits and during the 21 passages at Kabeta no change in virulence for rabbits or attenuation of the antigenic properties for cattle was observed. Rabbits under 4½ months of age and pregnant does were not found to be suitable subjects for virus propagation. Freeze- dried virus stored in vacuo in the refrigerator at between minus 20°C. and minus 30°C. was seen to remain viable for 25 months, but when kept at room temperature (Maximum 24°C, Minimum 18°C.) it maintained sufficiently high titre for seven clays. Alternate passage of the virus in cattle and rabbits appeared to alter the character of the virus, which showed a decreased virulence for rabbits with an irregular and somewhat increased virulence for cattle. No evidence was found to indicate that the virus would pass from infected rabbits to susceptible rabbits, or from infected cattle to susceptible cattle. A series of titration experiments in cattle and rabbits with fresh as well as dried virus were carried out; It was observed that 0.0000005 gm. of fresh virus in 0.5 c.c. of saline caused the typical syndrome in rabbits when injected intravenously and that the minimum quantity required to immunise an ox was 0.001 gm. in one c.c. of saline. With the freeze-dried virus the minimum infective dose for a rabbit and the minimum protective dose for an ox were found to be 0.00001 gm. and 0.001 respectively. However, by improving the technique and using more efficient methods of freeze drying, the minimum protective dose of the dried virus for an ox was lowered from 0.001 gm. to 0.0001 gm. In contra-distinction to goat-adapted virus, lapinised virus was found to provoke a very mild reaction, in high and medium grade cattle at Kabete which could not be readily recognised. The development of an immunity in cattle so inoculated could not be determined until challenged with the virulent bovine rinderpest virus. The immunity was found to be sufficient to prevent clinical symptoms of rinderpest after challenge with virulent virus. It was further observed that lapinised virus induced a serviceable protection in cattle, when challenged 84 and 108 hours respectively after inoculation. II. Indigenous Zebu cattle, high and low grade crosses of European breeds with the Zebu cattle, pure bred European cattle and hypersusceptible Ankole cattle were successfully immunised against rinderpest with freeze-dried lapinised virus vaccine. Of these, only the Ankole cattle were found to exhibit a marked clinical reaction. When vaccinated cattle were challenged by the subcutaneous inoculation of virulent rinderpest virus, the duration of immunity was shown to last for between 8 and 15 months and when tested by exposure to cattle infected with rinderpest the immunity lasted for 13 months. The injection of lapinised virus was found to have no adverse effect on pregnant cattle, and did not reduce the yield of cows in milk. Many thousands of cattle had been vaccinated with the lapinised virus but so far comparatively few had been tested for immunity. However, when lapinised virus had been used in Kenya in areas where natural rinderpest was present, it had not even once failed to protect the cattle. On one occasion in a herd of 1886 grade cattle, some of which were infected with rinderpest vaccination curtailed the extension of the disease and considerably reduced the fatalities. (R.N.S.)
180 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIV, Part III, A comparison of the efficacy of sulphamezathine (Sulphadimethylpyrimidine) and sulphaquinoxaline in the control of experimentally induced caeca coccidiosis in chicks. KENDALL, S. B. (1950). Vet. Rec. 62, 381-382 KENDALL carried out experiments to compare the coccidiostatic effect of sulpha- mezathine and sulphaquinoxaline. The chicks used in the experiment were unsexed Rhode Island Reds and Rhode Island Red crosses of seven to ten days of age. Oocysts for infection were obtained from faeces of chicks infected with a stock culture of E. tenella and as well as from the caecal contents and caecal cores of infected chicks, which had shown typical clinical symptoms of caecal coccidiosis. The drugs employed for the treatment were either administered in drinking water or in dry mash. When the drugs were given in drinking water, 16 per cent solution of the drug was prepared in 2.4 per cent solution of sodium hydroxide and diluted shortly before use with requisite volume of tap water. The drugs were compared at concentrations ranging from 0.025 (in water) to 0.25 per cent (in food). The period of administration was from 48 hours to 120 hours after infection. At a concentration of 0.025 per cent in water given from the 72nd to 96th hour both the drugs were ineffective. At concentrations of 0.1 to 0.25 per cent in the feed and administered from the 48th hour both the drugs were markedly coccidiostatic. A concentration of 0.05 per cent of the drug in drinking water was lowest to give protection against experimental coccidiosis. At this concentration the mortality rates in the sulphamezathine and salphaqunioxaline treated groups were from 46 to 59 per cent and 5 to 14 per cent respectively. The use of different groups of chicks and different cultures of E. tenella did not affect the results obtained and thus gave a clear indication of the greater efficacy of sulphaquinoxaline in the treatment of caecal coccidiosis in fowls. (K.S.I.) Terramycin supplement for dairy calves. A. M. MACKAY, W. H. RIDDEL AND R. FITZSIMMONS (1953). J. Anim. Sci. 12, 19.23 THE experiment was conducted to study the effect of feeding terramycin on the growth, efficiency of feed utilization, incidence of scours and general well-being of (1) dairy calves from birth to 12 weeks of age and (2) older ruminating animals. Trial 1. Out of the 18 calves, eight were selected at random as controls and the remaining ten were fed a terramycin supplement containing five grams of terramycin hydrochloride, for a period of 12 weeks. The rate of feeding was such as to supply 30 mg. of terramycin hydrochloride per 100 pounds of body weight. Weekly adjust- ments were made for gain in weight. On this basis the calves in the supplemented group received from 19 to 82 mg. of terramycin hydrochloride daily. The supplement was fed in milk in the beginning and later on with grain. Trial 2. Eight heifer calves, from six to nine weeks of age, were divided into two equal groups on the basis of breed, age and size. Both groups were raised on the regular calf feeding schedule. Group I was maintained as control. A terra- mycin supplement of 24 gm. terramycin hydrochloride per ton of feed was added to the grain of the calves in group II. On this basis the calves in the supplemented group received 37.5 to 60 mg. of terramycin daily. After eight weeks, the groups
September, 1954] ABSTRACTS 181 were reversed, so that group II was control and group I received the supplement. The reversal period continued for eight weeks. The feeding of terramycin supplement to young dairy calves produced a signi- ficant increase in growth, stimulated appetite and improved the general appearance. The feeding of terramycin showed a lesser effect on older calves. After an initial increase in rate of growth for the first two weeks of feeding the growth-rate gradually declined to control level. No conclusion can be drawn as to the effect of terramycin in the control of scours due to its very slight incidence in these trials. (M.L.M.) Feather measurements and egg production. GERICKE, A. M. AND ERASMUS, J. World Poult. Sci. J. 8, 4, 271-276 STUDIES were made on the variations occurring in feather measurements and their relationship with egg production, body weight and length of the shank of the bird. In the measurements of feathers of birds of different breeds and age, great variation was obtained in the length and width of the back feather in front of the preen gland, than those of the first secondary and fourth and tenth primary feathers. In general the variation in width was greater than in the length. With White Leghorn hens positive correlation coefficients were obtained between the length of the feather and the length of the shaft or rachis, but the coefficients were of a low magnitude between the length of the feather and that of the quill. In an inbred flock the variations in measurements of shaft, quill and length of the tenth primary, centre tail and the back feather of the daughters of five sires, were not large. There was a tendency for the hens with long and wide feathers to be the heaviest in the flock and also have shorter shanks. In tests with White Leghorn hens it was observed that the length of the back feather and the width of the first secondary and fourth primary were greater in low producers than in high producers. In another experiment with 75 White Leghorn pullets the following observations were made. Length of the shaft of the tenth primary Width of the back feather Average egg production Under 14.3 cm. Under 3 cm. 167.8 eggs Under 14.3 cm. Over 3 cm. 140.0 eggs Over 14.3 cm. Over 3 cm. 140.4 eggs (H.P.T.) The fertility of cows inseminated at various intervals after calving. SHANNON. F. P., SALISBURY, 6. W. AND VAN DEMARK, N. L. (1952). J. Anim. Sci. 11, 350-355 WITH a view to study the effect of the length of period between calving and rebreeding of dairy cows on their fertility, the authors surveyed the breeding records maintained at the Southern Illinois Co-operative Breeding Association from February 1948 to January 1949.
182 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIV, Part III, Data covering a total of 7071 cows and 13,782 inseminations, which, were com- plete in respect of data of calving and data of insemination with normal gestation periods were collected and subjected to statistical treatment. The results are presented in two original tables. It is concluded that a minimum period of 50 days is desirable between calving and breeding of cows in artificial insemination programme for achieving satisfactory conception rates. [U.D.S.] Physiological factors associated with genetic resistance to fowl typhoid. BELL, A. E. (1949). J. Infect. Dis. 85, 154-169- IN this paper an attempt has been made to correlate differences in body tempera- ture and digestive ability of phagocytes with differences in resistance of fowls to fowl typhoid. Highly significant variations in body temperature were observed between resistant and susceptible strains. A positive correlation of 0.83 was found between body temperature and disease resistance. For three days during the incubation period following inoculation with Salmonella gallinarum, the resistant birds showed significantly higher temperature than the susceptible ones, followed in the later stages of the disease by a much higher temperature in the susceptible chickens. Similar trend in body temperature was noticed within the strain between the sur- vivors and those dying of the disease. By reducing the body temperature artificially, it was found that at lower temperatures resistance was lowered within both the susceptible and the resistant strains. No significant difference was found in the bactericidal power of serum or whole blood between the resistant and the susceptible strains. There was also no significant difference in the phagocytic activity between the resistant and the susceptible strains at a constant temperature of 41°C., but this activity increased in both the strains with each elevation in temperature. Both the strains differed significantly in their bacteriolytic property, poly- morphs in the resistant birds destroyed a higher percentage of ingested bacteria than in the susceptible ones. It has been suggested that this bacteriolytic ability of the polymorphs is a factor of primary importance in genetic resistance to fowl typhoid, and the differences in body temperature play only an auxiliary role. [C.R.] Concept of veterinary public health (1953). Chron, W.H.O. 7, 9, 227-238 THE distinguishing characteristic of veterinary public health is its concern with any linkage with human and animal health problems. Veterinary public health has been defined as comprising all the community efforts influencing and influenced by the veterinary medical arts and sciencesSeptember, 1954] ABSTRACTS 183 1. The provision of expert technical advice and the promotion of activities in the control and eradication of zoonoses. 2. The development and supervision of food hygiene practices, with particular reference to diseases transmissible from animal to man. 3. The co-ordination of work and resources of groups or agencies, private or official, dealing with coinciding interests of human and animal health. 4. The education and training of professional and auxiliary workers in veteri- nary aspect of public health. Zoonoses control. The term Zoonoses has gained wide acceptance as denoting that group of animal diseases transmissible to human beings. Over 80 diseases naturally transmissible between animals and man have been listed. Zoonoses of importance in large areas of the world include bovine tuberculosis, brucellosis, anthrax, rabies, leptospisosis, the arthroped-borne virus encephalitides, hydatidosis, Salmonellosis and Psittacosis. Other zoonoses, such as trichinosis, taeniasis, leish- maniasis, erysipeloid (swine erysipelas), and endemic typhus are troublesome but more localised. Diseases such as vesicular stomatitis, foot and mouth disease, New Castle disease and certain ancylostomiases although widespread in animals, cause only minor illness in man. The prevention and elimination of zoonoses in human beings depend in large part on the control of these diseases in animals. The veterinarian assists in this task by providing expert technical advice on these diseases and by promoting activities for their control and eradication. Food hygiene. Food hygiene, particularly in regard to milk and meat is another major aspect of veterinary public-health. The primary purpose being to prevent transmission of disease to man through these food products, the public health veterinarian, because of his training, is best suited to supervise food hygiene practices affecting such transmission. Supervision in milk hygiene begins with the cow on the farm while meat hygiene begins when animal enters the slaughter house ; such duties terminate when these food products are ready for delivery to consumers. By co-ordination of human and animal health interests, economy can be achieved by avoiding overlapping responsibilities. In carrying out animal disease control programme, financial assistance given in bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis control programme, Q fever and leptospirosis, rabies and hydatidosis, has specially yielded results in the control activities. (M.R.M.)
REVIEWS ISOTOPIC TRACERS IN BIOCHEMISTRY AND PHYSIOLOGY BY JACOB SACKS (Published by McGraw Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1953, pp. 383, Price $ 8.50) THE use of isotopes of elements, either the less abundant naturally occurring stable ones such as heavy hydrogen or nitrogen, or radioactive isotopes obtained from nuclear reactions, represents a contribution of modern physics to biology, which has become an important tool in biochemical and physiological studies. From the pioneer investigations of George Hevesy, the isotopic tracer technique is now being increasingly applied by numerous workers in elucidating the mechanism of a large number of biological reactions, particularly in the field of intermediate metabolism. It is no mean task to select from this vast and rapidly growing subject and to collect the major accomplishments in a handy book form. The author must be congratulated in having been able to do this in an excellent way. With the exception of the first six chapters which deal with the elements of nuclear physics and radioactivity and of the principles of measurement of isotopes, each of the other ten chapters amounts to a review in itself. Available information on the use of isotopic tracer in carbohydrate, protein, fat and mineral metabolism, blood studies, etc. has been collected for the first time in a handy volume so that the book forms a valuable reference book for those who are interested in biochemical and physiological problem. The different methods used in isotope technique as well as the procedures for separating and identifying different products obtained in intermediary metabolism have been described in broad outline and each chapter has been provided with a list of 'General reference' in order to help those who are interested in studying the detailed account of any particular isotope or mechanism. The discussions are in general very informative and excellent. In particular, the reviewer would like to draw the attention of the readers to the part where the limita- tions of the tracer technique are discussed. The author stresses that 'the most rigorous logical analysis is necessary both in the design of the experiment and in the interpretation of the data obtained'. This cautionary remark is all the more welcome as there is a growing tendency by some workers who have not specialised in this new technique and type of investigation, to use in a haphazard way, isotopic tracers in the study of physiological and pathological problems. This is a well considered, definitive and valuable treatise and it is hoped that the author will be able to bring forward new editions as and when required, so that up-to-date information in this rapidly developing science is available to all those who are interested but have not the time to look up the relevant data from the current literature. (S.D.) 185 57 AR/54. 10
186 REVIEWS [Vol. XXIV, Part II I BREEDING BETTER LIVESTOCK BY V. A. RICE, F. N. ANDREWS AND E. J. WARWICK (Published by McGraw Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1953, pp. 465, Price $ 4.75) THIS treatise, which presents in a simple language the science and art of live- stock breeding, is an outcome of the distinguished authors' experiences in teaching for the past thirty years in this line. It deals with all the different aspects of the science and art of breeding including reproduction and inheritance. It also incorporates the recent developments in livestock breeding. The book is divided into four sections. Section 1 gives the background for animal breeding. Section 2 explains in a very simple manner the mechanism of reproduction. Sections 3 and 4 give a clear understanding on the subject of 'heredity' which is very essential for the art of breeding. These two sections deal in detail the methods of section and the various systems of breeding. The chapter on 'Fertility and Sterility' in section 2 has been given very few pages. Some more detailed information with suitable illustrations would certainly have proved of great assistance to the reader in understanding the problems associated with the failure in reproduction. There are about 145 illustrations. The summary and questions given at the end of each chapter will be found very helpful. This book will no doubt serve as a very useful guide to practical livestock breeders and others though interested in the subject might not have had the opportunity for undertaking a comprehensive study in physiology of reproduction and genetics. (P.B.) FARMERS & STOCK-BREEDER YEAR BOOK, 1954 (Published by Farmer & Stock-Breeder Publications Ltd., London, 78th Edition, pp. 396 (Over 130 illustrations), Price $ 10.6) THE new year's 'Farmer & Stock Breeder' brings to its readers, the latest in- formation as a reference guide of the latest developments in the stockbreeding and farming spheres. Apart from the usual features of breeders' tables, photographs of the selected pedigreed livestock and a complete reference section, this year's special articles deal with subjects of great topical interest. The features section contains up-to-date information of great interest on subjects like the deep freezing of semen which will enable the maximum utilisation of the best sires of to-day for posterity. Another article of topical interest deals with the feeding of anti-biotics to non-ruminants, in order that they grow quickly to bring more profits to the breeders. The great potentiality of grasses and silage feeding in the economy of stock raising and fattening has been clearly brought out. Those interested in sheep raising have also been catered for. Being next in importance to tuberculosis, an article on Johne's disease and its control through a vaccine has also been dealt with. The reference section and the poultry section are as usual of great interest and on the whole the book is of inestimable value to anyone connected with farming and livestock, and can be highly recommended. (M.R.M.)
September, 1954] REVIEWS 187 CALL THE VET BY MARTIN NANCY (Published by MacMillan & Co., Ltd., London, 1953, pp. 146, Price £ 6-6s.) The book is divided into 18 chapters and is written in the form of a story of a city youth on a country farm. It is of interest to young school and college boys wishing to take up the veterinary profession. By carefully arranging the chapters the author has introduced the subject in such a manner as to systematically interest the young mind in the various kinds of interesting and useful things a veterinary practitioner comes across in his everyday practice. The book is, however, written from the point of view of conditions in countries in the West. All the same, this would also interest the present educated youngmen and women wishing to take up veterinary as a profession in this country. (M.R.M.)
188 ANNOUNCEMENT [Vol. XXIV, Part III AN ANNOUNCEMENT COLONEL AMIR CHAND TRUST PRIZES FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH LIEUT-COLONEL AMIR CHAND, ex-Principal, Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi, has made a munificient donation of Rs. 50,000 to the Indian Council of Medical Research for the purpose of awarding prizes for the best published research work in the field of medical sciences. The Governing Body of the Council has constituted a Trust called the, 'Colonel Amir Chand Trust' for the administration and management of the Fund. SIX PRIZES, of almost equal value, of which some may be in the form of medals, shall be awarded annually on an All-India basis for the best published research work in any subject pertaining to all fields of medical sciences in general including clinical research. The term 'Clinical Research' will imply research into the mechanism and causation of disease, including its prevention and cure. It covers not simply work in patients in hospitals, but also field studies in epidemio- logy and social medicine and observations in general practice. THREE of the prizes will be known as, 'BASANTI DEVI AMIR CHAND PRIZE' and the other THREE, 'SHAKUNTALA AMIR CHAND PRIZE'. OUT OF THE SIX PRIZES, two shall be awarded to graduates of not more than ten years standing, counting from the date of graduation, provided that the work for which the prizes are to be awarded is of approved merit. THE COMPETITORS for the prizes may be medical or non-medical graduates. THE SELECTION of candidates for the award of the prizes will be made by a Selection Board appointed for the purpose. IN THE JOINT PUBLICATION the prize shall be divided between the joint workers in such proportion as the Selection Board may recommend. IN 1954, it has been decided to make a beginning by the award of Two PRIZES of the approximate VALUE OF Rs. 300 each for the best research papers in medical science published by workers during the academic year 1953. THE AWARD of the prizes will be announced at the annual meetings of the Scientific Advisory Board and the Advisory Committees of the Indian Council of Medical Research to be held in Baroda in November/December, 1954. THE WORKERS are required to submit 15 reprints of their papers published during 1953 and these should be sent to the SECRETARY, INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH, 'P' BLOCK, RAISINA ROAD, NEW DELHI, so as to reach him NOT LATER THAN THE 15TH OCTOBER, 1954. THE PAPERS should be accompanied by a short biographical sketch and two copies of PASSPORT SIZE PHOTOGRAPHS of the worker or workers concerned. MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES EFFECT OF FEEDING ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS ON THE GROWTH OF YOUNG CATTLE* By N. D. KEHAR, Head of the Division of Animal Nutrition, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 29 February 1954) (With five text-figures) CEREAL straws are characterised by low percentage of protein, poor digest- ibility and a high percentage of fibre. As such they represent a fodder of rela- tively low nutritive value. In agriculturally advanced countries cereal straws do not ordinarily constitute more than a portion of the roughage for livestock. In India, however, cereal straws assume special significance inasmuch as they constitute by far the largest proportion of roughage, and most of the farm animals subsist on fodder alone. Any attempt, therefore, to improve the nutritive value of straws would be of great economic value in developing the livestock industry. With the ripening of the plant the cellulose of the cell walls, which is empirical- ly estimated as crude fibre, undergoes a process of lignification rendering it woody and indigestible. Since the beginning of this century, numerous attempts have been made to make a better use of the coarse feeding stuffs by different methods. Taking advantage of the susceptibility of lignin to the action of dilute alkalies, Lehmann [1900] found that by boiling with caustic soda solution under pressure, the digestibility of straw was increased by about 50 per cent. But since commercial utilization of such a method proved expensive, Beckmann [1919] introduced a technique in which no heat treatment was required. Godden [1920] simplified the process by dipping the chopped straw overnight in a 1.5 per cent caustic soda solu- tion, removing the straw so as to drain the alkali and then heating in a current of steam for about an hour. By such treatment, the digestibility of crude fibre and nitrogen-free-extract in oat straw was increased from 60.1 to 87.4 and 39.6 to 62.9 per cent respectively. Further simplification in the process was introduced by Slade, Watson, and Ferguson [1939] who showed that there was a marked rise in the starch-equivalent content of wheat or oat straw by soaking it for 24 hours at ordinary temperature in eight times its weight of 1.25 per cent caustic soda solution. Following the line of work of these overseas workers, Sen, Ray and Talapatra [1942] carried out observations on the treatment of wheat and paddy straws by dilute caustic soda solution. The results of their study have shown that the alkali treatment increases the digestibility coefficient of total carbohydrates from 51 to 72 and from 57 to 76 of wheat and paddy straws respectively. This increased * This investigation was carried out under the auspices of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. 104 AR/54 189
190 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, digestibility enhanced the total digestible nutrients in the straws to the extent of about 45 per cent. The alkali treatment has also been shown to have special signi- ficance in the case of paddy straw as it removes 70 to 80 per cent of the deleterious potassium oxalate in the straw as a result of which assimilation of calcium from a ration containing treated rice straw is materially improved. The feeding of treated straw, moreover, effects greater utilization of protein which allows the require- ment of this nutrient to be met at a lower level of concentrate intake, than what is recommended in the prescribed standard. In view of the findings both in India and abroad it was considered desirable to undertake a developmental project, the object of which was to study by simple feeding experiments, the practicability of using extensively alkali-treated wheat and paddy straws in the ration of cattle. Feeding experiments were thus carried out in gowshalas, pinjrapoles and private farms. It was decided that during the course of experimentation, except introduc- ing the particular straw, untreated and treated, for the control and experimental groups respectively, the routine practice in these places in regard to feeding and management of animals should remain undisturbed. The investigation was con- ducted in several centres representing wheat and paddy zones and the feeding trials were carried out both with young stock and milch animals. In this communica- tion the results obtained on the growth of young animals along with the economics of large-scale feeding of alkali-treated straw are presented. MATERIAL AND METHODS Selection of animals Twelve young calves of six to eight months of age were selected, of which half the number formed the control and the other half the experimental group. The animals of one group were more or less identical with those of the other in regard to age, sex, breed, live-weight and general condition. The animals in the control group were fed untreated straw and other items of food as available in the farm. The same dietetic prescription was followed for the experimental group except that alkali- treated straw was fed in place of the untreated straw. During the course of the experiment records were maintained for a comparative study of food consumption and change in weekly live-weight of animals. Any untoward symptoms exhibited by the animals were also recorded. Selection of centres The choice of the centres depended on the nature of the staple roughage avail- able for the stock of a particular zonal area and on the willing co-operation of the management. The following four centres, two in paddy straw area and the other two in wheat straw area were selected. Paddy straw area 1. Pinjrapole at Sodepur (Bengal) 2. Gowshala at Puri (Orissa)
December, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 191 Wheat straw area 1. Sir Datar Singh's Dairy Farm at Montgomery (Punjab) 2. Govin Brothers' Dairy Farm at Rampur (Uttar Pradesh) The particulars of the selected animals and their ration in the respective centres are given in Tables I, II, III and IV. A perusal of the tables would show that owing to the limited number of available animals the stipulations in the plan in regard to the number and age could not be strictly adhered to. The ration fed to the animals in different centres when scrutinised for their available nutrient content showed that only at Montgomery, the diet conformed with the Morrisons Standard ; in other places the proximate principles available are well below the requirement prescribed for growth. TABLE I Particulars of animals selected at Sodepur centre Animal No. Sex Age (Months) Live weight lb. Ration Remarks Control Group 1 Female 7 184 Untreated rice straw ad lib. (1) Animal No. 4a (Control) died in the 15th week. 2 Female 6 142 Concentrate mixture : (2) Animal No. la (experimental) died in the 2nd week. 3 Female 7 184 1st to 24th week 1.75 lb. 4a Male 8 184 25th to 39th week 2.50 lb. (3) The substituted animals were of the same age and almost of the same body weight as the original animals just prior to their death. 4b Male .. .. Concentrate mixture : 5 Male 6 142 Wheat bran 1 part Mung chnunni ½ part 6 Male 6 132 Linseed cake 1 part Average 6.7 161 Experimental Group la Female 7 184 Alkali-treated straw ad lib. 1b Female .. .. Concentrate mixture same as for the control group. 2 Female 6 132 3 Female 6 174 4 Male 8 214 5 Male 6 142 6 Male 6 102 Average 6.6 158
192 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, TABLE II Particulars of animals selected at Puri centre Animal No. Sex Age (Months) Live weight lb. Ration Remarks Control Group 1 Male 9.5 110 Untreated straw ad lib. 2 Male 17.0 213 Green Elephant grass 1 lb. 3 Male 16.0 224 Concentrate mixture 1.5 lb. 4 Female 18.0 229 Common salt 1.5 oz. 5 Female 19.0 206 Concentrate mixture : 6 Female 9.0 93 Kulthi 2 parts Oil cake 1 part Wheat bran 5 parts Average 14.75 179 Experimental Group 1 Male 9.0 104 Treated straw ad lib. 2 Male 17.0 198 The rest of the ration same as for the con- trol group 3 Male 16.0 227 4 Female 18.0 235 5 Female 19.0 209 6 Female 9.0 99 Average 14.67 179 TABLE III Particulars of animals selected at Montgomery centre Animal No. Sex Age (days) Live weight lb. Ration Remarks Control Group 1 Female 317 184 Concentrate mixture 2 lb. 2 Female 228 170 Green fodder 3 lb. 3 Female 292 162 Grazing 4 Male 289 144 Untreated straw ad lib. 5 Male 237 148 Concentrate mixture : Wheat crushed 37.5 parts Grazing for the two groups of animals was confined mainly to green maize and ber- seem fields. Gram 37.5 parts Gram husk 25.0 parts Average 272 162
December, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 193 TABLE III194 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [Vol. XXIV, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Sketch showing a pair of tanks
December 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 195 Although it was intended to conduct these observations over a period of eight or more months, due to factors beyond our control, the feeding at Montgomery and Rampur had to be discontinued after 27 and 22 weeks respectively. Treatment of straw The alkali treatment of straw essentially consists of soaking chopped (3-6 in. length) straw in eight times its weight of one per cent caustic soda solution for 16-24 hours, and then washing the soaked straw thrice with water to remove the adhering alkali. The treatment is carried out in tanks made of cement concrete. The tanks may preferably be constructed in pairs. One tank is placed at a higher level over the other and in between the two, a sloping ramp of about a foot and a half is pro- vided. The upper tank is provided with two outlets, one opening into the lower tank and the other to the outside drain. The lower tank is provided with one out- let connecting it with the drain outside. The size of the tank varies with the quantity of straw to be treated. Usually to treat two maunds of straw the size of the tanks should be 7 ft. × 3 ft. × 2 ft. The construction of the tanks is shown in Fig. 1. The advantage in the con- struction of paired tanks is that it helps in affecting economy in caustic soda, be- cause the spent liquor of one treatment can be used again in the second treatment. The provision of the ramp has proved useful in draining out the liquor in the soaked straw. After the straw is kept soaked for the requisite time, it is pushed to one side of the tank and the accumulated liquor in the other corner is run out through an outlet in the tank below. The treated straw is then thoroughly washed with fresh water to remove the excess alkali adhering to it. The washing may be done for at least three times. The first wash water is drawn into the second tank contain- ing the mother liquor. The second and third wash water is run out from the other outlet. After the final washing, the wet straw is lifted up on the ramp and con- veniently taken out for drying. To treat the second batch in the lower tank, requisite quantity of fresh water is added into the mother liquor and the first wash water received from the first treatment. Half the quantity of caustic soda required in the first treatment is added to the liquor to bring it to the correct strength. After the second treatment, the liquor is thrown away. In actual operation the tank should be filled to a particular level for the pre- paration of alkali solution. Weighed quantity of soda is added to make the strength 1 per cent. The requisite quantity of straw is then steeped in the alkaline solution. After the addition of total quantity of straw a suitable weight should be placed on the top to keep the straw thoroughly steeped in the liquor. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Average straw consumption In all the centres the animals in both the control and experimental groups were given free access to straw after they had consumed their scheduled allowance of
196 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. The change in live-weight of young animals (Sodepur centre)
December, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 197 concentrates and green fodder. The animals at Sodepur and Puri were stall fed, whereas those at Rampur and Montgomery were let out for grazing. In the latter centres, therefore, the consumption of straw was bound to be relatively low. The average consumption of straw by the two groups at different centres is given in Table V. TABLE V Average straw consumption in pounds per animal per day at different centres Centre Type of straw Untreated group Treated group Sodepur Rice straw 4.3 4.6 Puri Rice straw 6.6 6.6 Montgomery Wheat straw 2.8 2.4 Rampur Wheat straw 2.4 2.6 It is apparent from the data in TABLE V that the consumption of treated and untreated straw was almost the same. The alkali-treated straw was, however, preferred as the experimental group animals always took less time in eating than the control group. Change in live-weight The detailed data regarding the change in live-weight of animals in the two groups at the various centres are given in Tables VI, VII, VIII and IX. The trend of change in weight is graphically presented in Fig. 2, 3, 4 and 5. Statistical analysis of results on growth The analysis of the data consisted of evaluating the rates of growth in weight by fitting linear regression and conducting an analysis of variance on these growth rates. For the growth study there were always two factors to be compared for any centre, the treatment and the control. The test of significance employed was the so-called ' t' test on these growth rates. The results for the different centres are given below : 1. Sodepur. For this centre, although the value of 't' was not strictly significant at 5 per cent level it was almost touching the significance value at that level. 2. Puri. The observed value of ' t' was very highly significant indicating that there was very strong evidence in favour of the superiority of the alkali-treated paddy straw over the untreated paddy straw in accentuating growth of animals. Statistically the average rate of growth 104 AR/54. 2
198 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. The change in live-weight of young animals (Puri centre)
December, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 199 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. The change in live-weight of young animals (Montgomery centre)
200 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [Vol. XXIV, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5. The change in live-weight of young animals (Rampur State)
December, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 201 TABLE VI The change in live-weight of animals at Sodepur centre (in pounds) Weeks Control group Experimental group 1 2 3 4(a) 4(b) 5 6 Avg. 1(a) 1(b) 2 3 4 5 6 Avg. 1 184 142 184 184 .. 142 132 161 184 .. 132 174 214 142 102 158 2 184 142 184 174 .. 142 142 162 184 .. 132 174 224 152 112 163 3 184 152 194 184 .. 152 152 169 .. 194 132 174 224 164 122 168 4 184 152 194 194 .. 152 152 171 .. 194 132 174 234 164 122 170 5 184 152 204 204 .. 164 164 178 .. 204 142 174 246 174 132 178 6 194 152 214 204 .. 164 164 182 .. 214 152 184 256 184 142 188 7 194 152 214 214 .. 174 164 185 .. 224 152 184 266 184 152 193 8 204 152 214 214 .. 174 174 188 .. 228 158 188 270 194 152 198 9 204 164 224 214 .. 184 184 195 .. 234 164 188 276 204 152 203 10 204 164 238 214 .. 184 184 196 .. 234 174 188 288 208 164 209 11 214 164 234 218 .. 194 194 203 .. 238 174 198 296 214 168 214 12 214 164 234 218 .. 194 194 203 .. 246 174 198 296 224 174 219 13 214 174 246 222 .. 204 204 211 .. 246 184 208 306 234 174 225 14 224 180 256 208 .. 214 214 216 .. 256 194 214 316 234 184 233 15 224 180 256 204 .. 214 214 215 .. 256 204 228 322 234 184 238 16 224 184 256 .. .. 224 214 220 .. 256 214 228 322 234 188 240
202 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, TABLE VIDecember, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 203 33 276 234 326 .. 266 306 286 282 .. 380 296 306 460 368 246 343 34 276 246 326 .. 276 316 296 289 .. 388 306 316 470 378 256 352 35 276 256 326 .. 276 316 296 291 .. 388 306 316 470 378 256 352 36 276 256 326 .. 276 321 296 292 .. 393 311 326 475 383 256 357 37 286 261 331 .. 276 321 296 295 .. 398 316 331 480 388 266 361 38 286 261 336 .. 281 321 301 298 .. 398 321 336 485 388 266 336 39 291 266 341 .. 281 326 301 301 .. 408 331 341 495 398 271 374 Statistical analysis of data from204 ALKALI TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, TABLE VII The change in live weight of animals at Puri centre (in pounds) Weeks Control group Experimental group 1 2 3 4 5 6 Average 1 2 3 4 5 6 Average 1 110 213 224 229 206 93 179 104 198 227 235 209 99 179 2 110 214 229 232 208 94 181 107 206 236 240 217 102 185 3 112 215 232 235 211 99 184 110 210 239 243 220 105 188 4 116 215 233 237 214 103 187 110 212 240 245 224 112 191 5 120 220 235 240 217 110 190 112 224 243 247 227 120 196 6 123 229 248 243 225 113 197 117 234 255 256 235 124 204 7 125 232 254 248 227 117 200 121 240 257 259 242 126 208 8 128 237 258 253 230 120 205 125 250 262 265 248 130 214 9 130 240 261 255 232 122 207 128 255 266 269 252 133 217 10 132 243 263 255 234 123 208 131 259 263 273 256 135 220 11 133 245 264 257 236 124 210 132 262 270 275 260 140 220 12 134 247 266 258 238 125 211 133 266 272 278 264 142 226 13 135 249 268 260 240 126 213 135 270 274 282 268 145 229 14 136 252 270 262 241 127 215 138 275 278 285 273 148 233 15 138 253 271 263 243 129 216 140 278 281 289 277 151 236 16 139 254 273 264 245 130 218 143 281 283 292 281 154 239
December, 1954] N. D. KEHAR 205 17 140 256 274 265 247 131 219 146 283 285 295 284 157 241 18 141 255 276 267 248 132 220 149 285 287 298 287 159 244 19 142 257 277 269 249 134 221 151 287 289 300 290 161 246 20 143 258 279 270 250 135 223 153 290 291 302 292 163 249 21 144 259 280 270 251 136 223 154 292 293 304 294 165 250 22 145 260 281 272 252 137 225 156 294 294 306 296 167 252 23 146 261 282 273 253 138 226 158 296 296 308 299 169 254 24 147 262 283 274 253 138 226 160 298 297 310 301 170 256 25 148 263 283 275 254 139 227 162 300 299 312 303 171 258 26 148 264 284 275 255 140 227 163 302 300 313 305 172 259 27 149 265 284 276 257 141 229 165 304 301 315 306 174 261 28 150 266 285 277 258 141 229 167 306 303 317 308 176 263 29 151 267 285 278 259 141 230 169 308 305 319 310 177 265 30 152 268 286 279 260 142 231 170 310 308 320 312 178 266 31 153 269 286 280 261 142 232 172 311 311 321 314 179 268 32 154 270 287 280 261 143 233 173 313 312 323 316 180 270 33 155 271 287 281 262 144 233 175 315 314 325 318 182 272 34 155 271 288 281 263 144 234 176 315 315 325 319 182 272 104 AR/54 3
206 ALKALI TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, Statistical analysis Weekly growth rate of animals in Pair No. Control group bi Experimental group b'i di=b'iDecember, 1954] N. D. KEHAR 207 TABLE VIII The change in live-weight of young animals at Montgomery centre (in pounds) Weeks Control group Experimental group 1 2 3 4 5 Average 1 2 3 4 5 Average 0 184 162 144 148 170 162 186 161 147 181 142 163 1 197 173 150 155 179 171 192 163 149 187 146 167 2 206 185 166 168 194 184 204 174 155 199 154 177 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 211 196 174 173 189 188 198 189 160 210 169 185 5 216 196 181 177 196 193 207 193 166 214 170 190 6 226 204 185 177 206 200 215 207 166 219 179 196 7 235 209 193 181 212 206 222 207 169 230 182 202 8 240 218 190 192 216 211 232 216 178 234 185 209 9 244 223 200 197 222 217 237 224 183 240 192 215 10 255 232 210 206 232 227 246 233 187 251 200 223 11 265 244 218 213 243 237 259 244 197 265 210 235 12 278 249 228 221 244 244 272 254 206 274 222 246 13 285 256 239 221 251 251 276 260 213 285 222 251 14 300 262 248 231 263 261 289 270 222 297 241 264 15 309 269 260 238 268 269 292 281 233 304 246 271
208 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, TABLE VIIIDecember, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 209 TABLE IX The change in live-weight of young animals of Rampur centre (in pounds) Weeks Control group Experimental group 1 2 3 4 5 6 Average 1 2 3 4 5 6 Average 0 158 196 134 115 187 132 154 160 208 132 96 212 152 160 1 160 194 136 121 189 130 155 158 226 134 114 208 146 164 2 156 180 128 112 190 140 151 168 233 143 128 217 155 174 3 158 184 124 108 196 160 155 166 238 151 138 211 166 178 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 164 200 148 113 200 165 165 165 242 169 159 203 176 184 6 163 206 144 113 200 168 166 169 248 160 157 210 168 185 7 168 208 142 100 204 172 166 176 240 162 158 214 178 188 8 164 204 148 108 210 168 167 180 244 160 159 215 175 189 9 164 209 147 110 208 168 168 182 248 144 160 217 179 188 10 166 210 145 112 212 169 169 187 256 146 160 220 180 192 11 166 212 146 114 204 166 168 188 256 144 162 224 189 194 12 166 210 149 115 201 166 168 193 260 146 165 221 192 196 13 164 212 140 118 206 164 167 200 268 144 162 232 200 201 14 166 208 148 118 204 170 169 200 273 156 164 236 207 206 15 166 207 150 118 206 172 170 162 280 155 160 239 216 202
210 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [Vol. XXIV, Part IV, TABLE IXDecember, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 211 for animals in the control group was 0.221 lb. per day and that for the animals in the experimental group was 0.391 lb. per day, i.e., 76.9 per cent more than the control group. This could thus be taken as a measure of the effectiveness of the treated paddy straw over the untreated one. 3. Montgomery. The value of ' t' was found to be significant at 5 per cent level indicating that the feeding of alkali-treated wheat straw accelerates the rate of growth of animals by 18.7 per cent212 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, animals started behaving quite normally. Immediately after the symptoms were noticed one ounce of common salt and a small quantity of green fodder was included in the ration. This dietetic treatment resulted in the complete disappearance of symptoms within a few days and never recurred even when the original schedule of feeding was extended for another 71 days. It may be mentioned here that, in this centre, no provision was available for salt supplement for the young stock and during the course of the feeding trial this item was lacking in the ration. Compared to the control animals, however, those in the experimental group were more sleek, alert and vigorous. Puri. No untoward symptom, as noticed in calves at Sodepur, developed amongst the animals in the experimental group. In the ration at this centre common salt was supplemented throughout, and the animals also received a small quantity of green. Here also the experimental animals were found to be of superior external appearance and showed signs of early maturity as two out of six heifers came in heat towards the end of the experimental period as against none in the control group. Rampur. A few animals in the experimental group were affected with foot-and- mouth disease between the sixth and tenth week of starting the feeding trial. Later, all the animals in both the groups were infected naturally or artirfically with the virus. The effect of foot-and-mouth disease seemed to have reacted equally on both the groups of animals. Due to the non-availability of common salt this item was absent in the ration. Montgomery. No untoward symptoms were noticed among the animals except for mild tympanitis which some animals in both the groups developed at an early stage of grazing in berseem fields. From an examination of the external appearance the calves in the two groups could not be distinguished. Economics of alkali-treated straw feeding Since the only variant in the feeding trials is alkali-treated show for untreated straw, the economic appraisal will obviously hinge round the gain in the form of accelerated growth against the cost of treatment. The cost of treatment may be calculated on the following considerations:December, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 213 (b) Caustic soda 31,200 lb.214 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, TABLE XI Daily cost of feeding and management of animals at Montgomery centre Item Control Item Experimental Straw 2.8 lb. 4.5 pice Straw 2.4 lb. 8.4 pice Green fodder 3.0 lb. 4.8 pice Green fodder 3.0 lb. 4.8 pice Concentrate mixture 2.0 lb. 8.0 pice Concentrate mixture 2.0 lb. 8.0 pice Management 4.0 pice Management 4.0 pice 21.3 pice 25.2 pice For working out the economics, the cost of feeding and management for 100 lb. gain in live-weight of the animals in the control and the experimental groups have been worked out and compared. Results for the Puri and the Montgomery centres are separately presented below. 1. Puri Centre (Rice straw).December, 1954 ] N. D. KEHAR 215 per cent of the deleterious potassium oxalate in the straw as a result of which the assimilation of calcium from a ration containing treated rice straw is materially improved. It was also shown that the feeding of treated straw affects greater uti- lization of protein. In view of the above findings, a developmental scheme was undertaken to study by simple feeding experiments, the practicability of using alkali-treated wheat and paddy straws under field conditions. These feeding experiments were carried out in the paddy straw area at the pinjrapole at Sodepur in Bengal and gowshala at Puri in Orissa. In the wheat straw area the two dairy farms selected were those of Sir Datar Singh at Montgomery (Punjab before partition) and Messrs. Govin Brothers at Rampur (Uttar Pradesh). It was decided that during the course of experimentation, except introducing the particular straw, untreated and treated for the control and experimental groups respectively, the routine practice in these places, in regard to feeding and manage- ment of animals, should remain undisturbed. Feeding trials showed that the palatability of the treated and untreated straw was almost the same with the only difference that the alkali-treated straw was preferred by the animals and they always took less time in eating their quota. Interesting observations were obtained on the change in live-weight of the calves of the experimental group as compared with those of the control group. It was found that of the two rice straw stations the rate of growth of the calves of the alkali-treated group at Puri was significantly higher than that of the control group, the difference between the two rates being as high as 77 per cent. It was also cal- culated that the number of days required to gain 100 lb. weight was 452 and 256 for the control and experimental groups respectively. Thus under conditions of feeding operating at Puri there was saving of 196 days in the time for the gain of 100 lb. in body weight. At Sodepur also the difference was approaching the 5 per cent level of significance. Among the wheat straw stations the results at Montgomery showed that the feeding of alkali-treated straw accelerated the rate of growth by about 19 per cent, the difference between the two rates being significant. The animals of the experi- mental group took 76 days to gain a weight of 100 lb. as against 90 days by the control group. At Rampur the animals suffered from an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. It is likely that due to high variation that existed among the different growth rates on account of this disease, the rate of acceleration as a result of feeding the treated straw was not found to be significant. Economics of the feeding trial on growth rate indicated that with the nutritional level as existed at Puri, the feeding of the alkali-treated straw should be expected to make a saving of 13 per cent in cost for the same gain in weight. At Montgomery, however, where the plane of nutrition was high and corresponded to Morrison stan dard, the cost of feeding and management for the same gain in weight both for the control and alkali-treated group worked out to be of almost the same order. The feeding of the alkali-treated straw was found to be, in general, beneficial to the growth of animals. The extent of its effect was, however, not found to be
216 ALKALI-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV uniform for all the centres as the plane of nutrition was different at different centres. The results indicated that there might be some relation between the plane of nutrition at which the animals are maintained and the rate of increase in their growth conse- quent to the feeding of alkali-treated straw. The rate of increase appeared to be falling with the improvement in the plane of nutrition. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT Grateful thanks are due to Sardar Datar Singh, Govin Brothers, and the Direc- tors, Veterinary Services, U. P., Orissa, and Bengal; and the management of the pinjrapole at Sodepur and gowshala at Puri, for their whole-hearted co-operation in extending every facility in prosecuting this project of research. The assistance given by the Statistician, Indian Council of Agricultural Re- search, New Delhi, in statistical analysis of the data, is gratefully acknowledged. The author also expresses his great appreciation of the assistance rendered by Messrs. Naimat Khan, Asghar Ali, S. L. Mukerjee, P. N. Johri and N. Patnaik in supervising the feeding of the animals at different farms and pinjrapoles. REFERENCES Beckmann, E., et al. (1919). Z. angew. Chem., 32, 81-82 ; G.P. 305641 (1917); Cited by Schorger in the Chemistry of Cellulose and Wood (1926 Edition), 497 Godden, W. (1920). J. Agric. Sci. 10, 437 Lehmann, F., et a . (1900). Landw. Vers. Sta., 53, 302 ; Cited by Schorger in the Chemistry of Cellulose and Wood (1926 Edition), 496 Sen, K. C., Ray, S. C. and Talapatra, S. K. (1942). Indian J. vet. Sci., 12, 263 Slade, R. E., Watson, S. J. and Ferguson, W. S. (1927). Biochem. J., 21, 971
RICKETTSIA OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS (A SHORT REVIEW) By S. L. MANJREKAR, G.B.V.C., ASSOC. I.D.R.I., PH.D. (BACT.), Assistant Disease Investigation Officer (Sheep & Goats), Bombay State, Poona (Received for publication on 7 October 1952) (With Plates IX-X) RICKETTSIA is the generic name given to certain minute, bacteria-like bodies which are found in the alimentary canal of insects and other arthropods. They are frequently associated with different forms of typhus or exanthematous fevers in man. From the very start rickettsiosis has been regarded as an infectious condition involving the blood and producing a purpuric fever. Rickettsia, as infective agent producing spotted fever in man, was first recorded in 1909 (Ricketts) and since then number of workers218 RICKETTSIA OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, confirmed in North Africa by Donatien [1937] and by Shirlaw and Shankarnarayan [1947] in India. The condition is associated with acute pain, lacrimation and photophobia. Strangely enough the condition is restricted to one eye only. Corneal ulceration has been recorded in a few cases. Clinically too the disease is recorded in a few cases and in Africa it was found to be similar in many respects to the eye condition reported in India by Shirlaw and Shankarnarayan. Similar condition of eye infection amongst cattle and sheep is also recorded in northern parts of Queens- land but its aetiology is not yet known. Rickettsia producing systemic diseases Donation and Lestoquard have again sub-divided these into two groups. (a) Rickettsia of reticulo-endothelial system. (b) Rickettsia of monocytes. (a) Rickettsia of reticulo-endothelial system. Under this sub-head the following are described. (i) R. ruminantium, (ii) R. avium. (i) R. ruminantium [Cowdry, 1925]. 'Heartwater' disease of sheep was shown to be due to a Rickettsia but it became very difficult to demonstrate the organisms in the tissues, until Jackson discovered that the scrapings of internal walls of the larger veins often showed these parasites. The incubation period is nine days. There is fever and allied symptoms which usually end fatally. Recovered animals are immune in the sense of carrier immunity, but may act as reservoirs of these organisms. On post-mortem one may find hydropericardium, hydrothorax and ascites with haemorrhages on the endocardium, congestion and oedema of lungs and enlarged spleen. The disease is transmitted by the tick Amblyomma hebraeum in which the infec- tion occurs during larval and the nymphal stages, the disease is transmitted in the subsequent stage but the Rickettsia does not pass through the egg. (ii) R. avium [Carpano, 1936]. This micro-organism was described in pigeons in Egypt, but till now nothing more is known about it. (b) Rickettsia of monocytes. The following Rickettsia have been classed under this sub-head: (i) R. canis (ii) R. ovina (iii) R. bovis (iv) R. belgaumii (i) R. canis [Donatien and Lestoquard, 1935]. During investigations on the infection of Piroplasmacanis and Lishmania of dogs in Algeria, this parasite was encountered and the common dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus was incriminated as the transmitter of the infection. Mudaliar [1944] has recorded R. canis from a dog showing febrile illness.
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part IV ] PLATE IX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] R. ruminantium [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] R. canis [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] R. ovina × 15.10 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] R. bovis [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] R. conjuctivae
PLATE X [Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Unnamed Rickettsia R. belgaumii [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] R. belgaumii
December, 1954 ] S. L. MANJREKAR 219 Before this finding a disease in man caused by R. conori producing Mediterranean fever (Fievre boutonneuse), was found to have been transmitted by this tick, which is also responsible for the transmission of R. canis. The cross immunity tests, however, revealed that R. conori was quite different from R. canis though the vector tick is the same for both. Under experimental conditions, the incubation period (after inoculation) is from six to twelve days, followed by a rise in body temperature, with subsequent fluctuations during the next few days. The animal is dull, refuses food and water and rapidly becomes emaciated. There may be exanthematous patches in various parts of the body. Mortality is very high. Rickettsia can easily be demonstrated by lung or liver puncture smears, the organisms being present in the monocytes. There is an increase in the number of monocytes in the blood stream. Dogs which are carriers of P. canis or Bartonella canis get a relapse when infected with these organisms, which can be seen in the blood stream. A state of premunition follows recovery from the disease. Animals are found to be resistant to subsequent infection. (ii) R. ovina [Donatien and Lestoquard, 1936]. These two investigators had observed a species of Rickettsia causing a systemic disease, taking a heavy toll of life among sheep. They termed it as R. ovina. The parasite is found in the monocytes of the blood stream, in sheep suffering from the disease which is febrile in nature and occurs after inoculation of an emulsion of organs of the tick Rhipicephalus bursa. Some observers thought that it produced only a mild infection with low mortality and differed from R. ruminantium. But from the observations made at a later date in Anatolia, it has been proved beyond doubt that this organism causes serious losses in sheep under natural conditions. The incubation period is about nine days. (iii) R. bovis [Donatien and Lestoquard, 1936]. This organism was discovered accidently, following sub-inoculation from cattle which had originally been infected with Theileria dispar as a result of infestation with the tick Hyalomma aegyptium. The incubation period was about fourteen days. The temperature reaction in infected animals was severe and prolonged. Rickettsia was demonstrated in the monocytes of the circulating blood. It was observed that the parasites persisted in the blood till ten months. The organism was found to be transmissible to sheep with mild reaction. The cross immunity tests with R. ruminantium showed the two organisms to be quite different. Four more species have been added to this classification, viz. R. belgaumii, R. phagocytophilia, R. suis and R. burneti. (iv) R. belgaumii [Manjrekar, 1949-51]. A mild febrile condition among sheep and goats, especially highly pedigreed ones as the Merino sheep or the Angora goats, has been shown to be due to a Rickettsia named as R. belgaumii. Though morphologically it resembles R. ovina and is located in the cytoplasm of the monocytes in the circulating blood of the naturally affected and experimentally infected sheep and goats, it has been found to be antigenically and in its biological
220 RICKETTSIA OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, behaviour quite different from the latter or rather from all the Rickettsiae of domesti- cated animals. In all these respects it is nearer to R. mooseri of man causing Murine typhus to which it has been found to be akin on cross immunity tests. It produces a mild systemic disease amongst sheep and goats characterised by sudden onset and rise in body temperature by about 3° to 4° F. above the normal. Fever is of a remittent or intermittent type with no mortality. The vector is found to be a tick, Haemophysalis bispinosa. R. belgaumii has been successfully transmitted to healthy guineapigs, which show a definite thermal and scrotal reaction after an incubation period of three to nine days. The strain can be easily maintained in white rats for a long time (roughly 300 days). In this respect it differs from other Rickettsiae of domesticated animals, since they are not transmissible to the laboratory animals. That R. belgaumii is a new species has been concluded on the following grounds : (1) All the Rickettsiae isolated from domesticated animals are not transmissible to guineapigsDecember, 1954 ] S. L. MANJREKAR 221 through ticks. He also detected those parasites in the monocytes of circulating blood of naturally affected and experimentally infected animals. All these Rickettsiae are not transmissible to laboratory animals such as guineapigs, etc. (b) Pellisier, Troquereau and Trinquier [1950] have described a condition in cattle which they ascribe to a Rickettsia of the exantheramic typhus group. (c) A member of the same group222 RICKETTSIA OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV Pinkerton H. (1936). Criteria for the accurate classification of the rickettsial diseases (Rickettsioses) and of their etiological agents. (As cited by John C. Snyder, in Viral and Rickettsial Infections of Man, edited by Thomas M. Rivers, Lippincott Publication) Von Prowazek. (1907, 1914). (Cited by Philips Thygeson, and John C. Snyder, in the Viral and Rickett- sial Infections of Man, edited by Thomas M. Rivers, Lippincott Publication) Ray H. N. (1950). Rickettsiosis in Indian sheep. Sci. and Cult. 15, 284-285 Ricketts H. T. (1909). A micro-organism which apparently has a specific relationship to Rocky Moun- tain spotted fever. A preliminary report. J. Amer. med. Ass. 52, 379-380 Ricketts H. T. and Wilder R. M. (1910). The relation of typhus fever (tabardillo) to Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Arch. int. Med., 5, 361-370 Ricketts H. T. and Wilder R. M. (1910a). The transmission of the typhus fever of Mexico (tabardillo) by means of the louse (Pediculus vestamenti). J. Amer. med. Ass., 54, 1304-1307 Ricketts H. T. and Wilder R. M. (1910b). The etiology of the typhus fever (tabardillo) of Mexico City. A further preliminary report. J. Amer med. Ass., 54, 1373-1375 da Rocha Lima H. (1912, 1916, 1919, 1930). (Cited by Max Theiler and John C. Snyder, in the Viral and Rickettsial infection of man, edited by Thomas M. Rivers, Lippincott Publication) Edm. Sergent H. Foley. C. Villatte. (1914). Sur des formes microbiennes abondantes dans le corps des Poux infectes par le typhus exanthematique, et toujours absentes dans les Poux temoins non infectes. C. R. Soc. Biol. t. LXXVII 19, juin, 101 Shirlaw J. F. and Sankarnarayan N. S. (1947). Conjunctivitis of sheep and goats in India. Indian. J. vet. Sci. 17, 69-73
GLYCOGEN AND ITS PROBABLE SIGNIFICANCE IN EIMERIA TENELLA RAILLIET AND LUCET, 1891 By B. S. GILL and H. N. RAY,* Indian Veterinary Research. Institute, Mukteswar, Kumaon, U. P. (Received for publication on 29 July 1954) (With Plate XI) GLYCOGEN and paraglycogen are the most widely distributed carbohydrates in parasites, the latter so far has, however, been reported only from protozoa [von Brand, 1952]. Giovannola [1934] found glycogen occurring in insignificant amount in sporozoites within the oocysts; in schizonts, microgametocytes and young macro- gametocytes of Eimeria falciformis and E. steidae; its concentration rising high in older macrogametes and oocysts. Lillie [1947] demonstrated as pinkish matrix of glycogen in E. steidae occurring in hepatic cells and lying in bile ducts. Edgar, et al., [1944] employing iodine staining technique demonstrated some glycogen lying centrally in sporozoites of E. tenella, also in macrogametes which on growth increasingly accumulated larger quantities of it. Unsporulated oocysts were full of glycogen which was exhausted on sporulation but they failed to demon- strate the polysaccharide from schizonts, merozoites, microgametocytes and micro- gametes. MATERIAL AND METHODS White Leghorn chicks, 1-2 weeks old, reared coccidia-free were employed in these studies. The infective brew of oocysts was raised by feeding a single typical oocyst of E. tenella [Barber's technique, Barber, 1914 ; Chambers, 1923]. Oocysts were sporulated and preserved in 2.5 per cent solution (aqueous), of potassium dichromate. Chicks were heavily infected per os. They were destroyed at four-hour intervals, from 24 hours to eighth day (inclusive) of infection. Their caeca were harvested with minimum loss of time after death (within a couple of minutes), to avoid intracellular degeneration of the polysaccharide. Two to three mm. long pieces of caeca were promptly fixed in alcohol-formalin mixture (9 : 1) for 24 hours and the procedure as detailed by Glick [1949] was adopted to prepare the material and staining the sections with Bauer-Feulgen technique (after Bensley); which depends upon hydrolysing the polysaccharide into aldehyde, the latter group being visualised as reddish-violet on. treatment with leucobasic-fuchsin. At each stage of infection portion of caecum was longitudinally split open, mucosa scraped and this material smeared over clean glass slides, which were immediately dropped in Coplin jar containing alcohol-formalin fixative (10-15 minutes), washed in 95 per cent alcohol and by running through descending grades of alcohol brought down to water. They were, subsequently, treated in the same way as the sections. This * At present Professor of Protozoology, School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta. 223 104 AR/54 7
224 GLYCOGEN IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, technique does not differentiate between glycogen, paraglycogen and mucin which all give similar colour reactions. Negative section controls and preparations sub- jected to saliva treatment were run side by side at each stage of our study. Favourable tissue and smears were also fixed in Carnoy's fluid (alcohol, chloro- form, acetic acid; 6 : 3 : 1). Sections and smears were subsequently stained with the techniques of Hotchkiss [1948], and Jarvi and Levanvo) [1950] to visualise possibly all the polysaccharides of the parasite without specific reference to any one of them. OBSERVATIONS Sporozoites observed 34 hours after infection, trophozoites, fully formed schizonts and merozoites resulting from them, remained unstained both in their nuclei and cytoplasm. Very rarely in some just entered sporozoites, a few red granules were seen round the siderophilous body. The latter structure consistently remained unstained. No change was noticed in the host cell nucleus except the usual hypertrophy. The smallest second generation trophozoites measuring 3.8 µ along their broadest diameter, either round or oval in shape, showed distinct fine red granules concentrated on one side usually quite close to the nucleus while the rest of the cytoplasm remained unstained. A low power examination of the freshly parasitised region showed mucosa studded with brick red dots lying in vacuoles. With further growth, red staining became diffuse in the cytoplasm of trophozoites persisting throughout its transformation into schizonts. As the quantity of glycogen in the parasite was very small now, it could only be discerned definitely either in smear preparations or in sections not counterstained with haematoxylin. But, just before the differentia- tion of merozoites, red staining suddenly became intense and the mature schizont appeared as mass of red staining material. Glycogen in second generation merozoites occurred in a diffuse colloid form. Merozoites of larger type (14×2 µ in size) had red staining concentrated in an area just anterior to the nucleus (Plate XI, Fig. 3). Very rarely, a few red granules were seen at the posterior end also. Sometimes the whole cytoplasm showed a diffuse colouration. The smaller merozoites (5×1.5 µ) invariably showed glycogen at either side of the nucleus (Plate XI, Fig. 2). Fresh preparations of merozoites when treated with Lugol's iodine showed brown staining granules scattered all over the body particularly in a dense brown area anterior to the nucleus, though the latter was not coloured. Soon after entering a cell, second generation morozoites became rounded off and showed a large red globule filling almost half to two-third of the cytoplasm of young gametocytes (Plate XI, Fig. 1). Nuclear space remained unstained and appeared as a vacuole lying on one side, on rare occasions two such red masses could be seen in one gametocyte. In macrogametocytes glycogen appeared as a homogeneous colloidal substance which with further growth diffused out into the cytoplasm. The peripheral globules in macrogametes remained unstained and appeared as empty spaces. Later on, as macrogametocytes reached maturity, a differentiation in the centre of the protoplasmic mass occurred showing a clear nuclear area. Microgametocyte appeared as fluffy or rugged pinkish mass, red
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part IV ] PLATE XI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] (Photomicrographs showing reactions of Eimeria tenella for various polysaccharides. Coloured filters have been used, wherever necessary to give the proper photographic effect. Fig. 2 has been slightly touched to accentuate the reactive zone but nothing has been added. Fig. 3, 11 and 12 are taken from smear preparations and the rest are from sections. Hours within parentheses denote the stage of infection.) Various staining techniques used in the preparations photographed for preparation of this plate are as under:December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL AND H. N. RAY 225 staining material appeared more intense on comma-shaped body of the microgametes (Plate XI, Fig 4). Due to their very small size, detailed microscopic examination could not be made, hence a statement as to the exact location of the glycogenic material inside the microgametes was not possible. Oocysts were full of glycogen. A low power examination at this stage revealed as if the epithelial or sub-epithelial tissue was riddled with red shots. With the methods of Hotchkiss [1948], and Jarvi and Levanto [1950] the same locations were coloured as with the Bauer-Feulgen technique. Thus the results of the two former methods overlapped the latter's, casting a doubt that a carbohydrate other than glycogen might also be present along with the latter, as such a substance would be Bauer-Feulgen negative but would certainly be Hotchkiss positive. Such a carbohydrate could not have beer a mucopolysaccharide, a muco- protein or a glycoprotein as these substances are almost Hotchkiss negative [Hale, 1953]. But there is quite a good array of carbohydrates containing 1: 2 glycol, groups (which are oxidised with the technique of Hotchkiss) other than the just mentioned polysaccharides; therefore, doubt regarding the possible presence of a carbohydrate alongside glycogen cannot be dismissed. Nature of the Bauer-Feulgen Positive material Both glycogen and paraglycogen give same colour upon iodine treatment, and with the Bauer-Feulgen technique. Both yield glucose upon acid hydrolysis. However, paraglycogen occurs as birefringent granules sparingly soluble in water. Further, like mucin paraglycogen also resists the action of saliva [Buetschli, 1885 ; Maupas, 1886]. Solubility in water in microscopical preparations seemed to von Brand [1932], hardly a sufficient criterion for separating these two very much allied substances, i.e. glycogen and paraglycogen, and their differentiation cannot be based on the criterion of their occurrence in non-granular and granular forms res- pectively, in total disregard of saliva digestion. At each stage of the coccidium saliva had digested away the Bauer-Feulgen positive material from them, leaving mucin from goblet cells and lumen of caecal glands unaffected. Relying upon saliva test in differentiating glycogen from para- glycogen, the Bauer-Feulgen positive material though occurring in fine, but non- birefringent, granules concentrated on one side of the second generation trophozoites, and the material occurring in homogeneous form elsewhere in the coccidium has been identified as glycogen. To find out if a carbohydrate other than glycogen was present or not along with the latter, preparations were freed of glycogen with the help of saliva, and then submitted to the reaction of Hotchkiss. The latter failed to reveal any carbohydrate anywhere in the parasite concluding that it was glycogen and glycogen alone present in E. tenella at its various stages. DISCUSSION Giovannola [1934] and Edgar, et al., [1944] were able to demonstrate glycogen in sporozoites of Eimeria falciformis, Eimeria steidae, and Eimeria tenella res- pectively. In the present study, however, the sporozoites of E. tenella failed to
226 GLYCOGEN IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, reveal any appreciable quantity of glycogen. Probably it may be due to the fact that sporozoites in tissue could not be encountered earlier than 37 hours after infec- tion when they had already settled in epithelial cells and the reserve glycogen, if they had any, was exhausted by that time in penetrating the host cell. Rest of observations are in full parallel accord with the findings of Giovannola [1934] in his investigation on E. falciformis and E. steidae. The present study confirms the demonstration of glycogen in macrogametes and unsporulated oocysts of E. tenella. In addition to these findings of Edgar, et al., [1944], the occurrence and topographic location of glycogen has also been observed in detail in second generation schizont and merozoites, microgametocytes and microgametes, the stages at which Edgar, et al., failed to demonstrate this carbohydrate. It is obvious that the reserve of the polysaccharide at each stage was directly proportional to the energy requirements of the coccidium (see below). It is, however, difficult to offer an explanation for the failure of Edger, et al., to find glycogen reserve in the second asexual generation, microgametocytes and microgametes of E. tenella. Source of endogenous glycogen It has been generally accepted that endogenous polysaccharide in parasites is derived from exogenous sources. Morita [1938] found that Entamoeba histolytica specimens taken from a carbohydrate containing medium were very rich in glycogen. Glycogen deposition in rumen ciliates runs parallel with the carbohydrate intake of host [Usuelli, 1930 ; Trier, 1926, Westphal, 1934]. Armer [1934] demonstrated high paraglycogen reserve in Nyctotherus ovalis taken from roaches kept on high carbohydrate diet, as compared to the specimens recovered from starving insects having poor polysaccharide reserves. Data on parasitic metozoa also support the hypothesis of exogenous source of endogenous polysaccharide reserve [von Brand, 1952]. Deposition of glycogen by the coccidium was highest at the gametocytic stage of its life cycle which is reached on fifth and sixth day of infection. Pratt [1940] and Waxler [1949] have shown that at this stage the blood sugar content of heavily infected chick is also the highest as compared with its level during the rest of the course of infection. Muscle glycogen was shown to be mobilised through the pro- cesses of glycogenolysis and glycogenesis taking place in liver. It appears that the blood sugar content has been brought to a very high pitch to meet the excessive demand of macrogametes which are storing large amounts of glycogen as a store of readily available energy for sporulation after syngamy. Ray and Gill [1954] demonstrated alkaline phosphatase in E. tenella. The enzyme is widely distributed in nature and plays an important part in various metabolic processes such as carbohydrate metabolism, bone formation and other similar reactions. Blaschko and Jacobson [1951] stated that phosphatases 'play a general part in phosphorylation process' which is of great importance in energy transfer in cellular metabolism. Alkaiine phosphatase may be associated with the process of dephosphorylation and deposition of glycogen in cells [Wislocki and Dempsey, 1946]. In general, however, it has not been possible to connect the
December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL AND H. N. RAY 227 occurrence of phosphates in parasites with definite metabolic processes, although a connection with utilisation of carbohydrates is in many cases probable [von Brand, 1952]. Significance of endogenous glycogen in the Coccidium Glycogen provides a readily available source of energy to the parasite, this reserve seemingly running proportional to the amount of work expected of it at various endogenous stages. The small amount of glycogen present in sporozoites [Edgar, et al., 1944] should be regarded as a sufficient source of energy to enable them to penetrate epithelial cells. Population of the progeny of the first generation schizogony even in very massive infective doses, remain very thin in the caecal epithelium. Schizonts develope widely separated from each other, and merozoites developing from them do not need travelling long distances to establish themselves in healthy epithelial cells for the latter are easily found round about the parent's abode. In doing so they make matters for the second generation quite different. In the latter cycle, schizonts develop side by side in swarms. The mucosa of the parasitised region of the caecum sloughs and is cast off. On their rupture, numerous merozoites are hunting for fresh cellular abodes. The number of latter is much reduced than that in the previous stages, and thus competition amongst them has grown much tougher. They have to travel more than the first generation merozoites, hence, greater stores of energy are required at this stage which is provided in the form of glycogen. Microgametocytes usually develop amidst crowds of macrogametes. The microgametes find their female partners easily ; therefore, they require comparatively little energy as is evident from the poor store of glycogen in them. Whereas, on the other hand, fertilised macrogamete, i.e. an oocyst, has to provide large amount of energy for metabolic processes concerned with sporulation. During this process almost whole of the glycogen is used up, the sporulated oocyst getting practically devoid of it [Edgar, et al., 1944]. Provision of readily available energy is not the sole purpose of glycogen, for it has been accepted, that it is utilised by some nematodes and acanthocephala for synthesis of chitin of exoskeleton and chitinous egg membrane [von Brand, 1952], through intermediate production of glucosamine, an important constituent of chitin [Faure'-Fremiet, 1913, and Szwejkowska, 1929]. Hence, it is probable that glycogen in E. tenella may be contributing towards the formation of various structures develop- ing within the oocyst, and therefore the presence of a very large reserve of the poly- saccharide in macrogametes and unsporulated oocysts, becomes understandable. SUMMARY Edgar, et al., reported the occurrence of glycogen only from sporozoites and macrogametes of E. tenella. But the present investigation has additionally demon- strated this polysaccharide from the second asexual stages, and male gametocytes and gametes. Sporozoite, however, has not shown any significant quantity of glycogen. Intensity of reaction for glycogen was directly proportional to the physiological activity of the parasite at its various endogenous stages. 104 AR/54. 8
228 GLYCOGEN IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV Evidence has been presented that the parasite metabolizes its glycogen from host's blood sugar, and this probably occurs though the activity of the enzyme- alkaline phosphatase. By employing the technique of Hotchkiss [1948] after saliva digestion, it was deduced that glycogen is the only detectable carbohydrate present in this coccidium. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the award of Research Fellowship (Parasitology) to one of as (B.S.G.) which made this investigation possible; and also to the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for providing the laboratory facilities. REFERENCES Armer, J. M. (1944). J. Parasit., 30 : 131 Barber, M. A. (1914). Philipp. J. Sci; 9 : 307 Blaschko, and Jacobson, W. (1951.) Cytology and Cell Physiology, Published by the Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 358 von Brand, T. (1932). Z. Parasitenk; 4 : 753 ON THE OCCURRENCE OF MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDES IN EIMERIA TENELLA RAILLIET AND LUCET, 1891 By B. S. GILL and H. N. RAY,* Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, Kumaon, U.P. (Received for publication on 29 July 1954) (With Plate XII) WHILE investigations on the occurrence of nucleic acids in E. tenella were being conducted (still unpublished) certain stages of the parasite displayed intense metachromasy with toluidine blue. This led the authors to investigate the occurrence of mucopolysaccharide in this coccidum by histo-chemical methods. PROCEDURE One to two weeks old White Leghorn chicks reared coccidia-free, were heavily infected per os with a pure line brew of E. tenella. Chicks were destroyed at 4-hour intervals from 1-8 days after infection. Small pieces (2-3 mm.) of caeca were fixed in Carnoy's, Serra's, and Helly's fluids. Favourable material from caecal mucosa was smeared on clean microslides and fixed in fluids mentioned above. Techniques of Lison [1935] after Sylven [1947] and Brachet [1953] ; and of Hale [1946] were adopted for demonstrating mucoid sulphate and hyaluronic acid type polysaccharide respectively. Sections and smears prepared from birds killed at the end of fifth day, were submitted to the action of ribonuclease [Kunitz, 1950] and then stained according to Brachet's method (loc. cit.) to differentiate between the metachromasy due to mucoid sulphate and ribonucleic acid. OBSERVATIONS A. Distribution of mucoid sulphate Sporozoites lying free in the lumen and freshly penetrated ones contained a few violet230 MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDES IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, Young second generation schizonts appeared as dark blue masses stuffed in the submucosa with their nuclei stained intense blue. Just prior to segmentation into merozoites they reflected a purplish hue and in the cytoplasm there appeared a large number of violet granules [Plate XII, fig. 4]. Merozoites contained several (2-7) brilliant violet granules mostly concentrated just anterior to the nucleus. (Plate XII, figs. 2 & 3). Rarely one could notice one or two granules posterior to the nucleus also. Microgametocyte appeared as a rough purplish mass. Comma-shaped bodies of microgametes took brilliant violet colour. Karyosome of young gametocytes stained intense blue, and metachromatic granules were seen scattered at the periphery of the organism (Plate XII, fig. 4.). Mature macrogametes presented purplish granular material dispersed in their cyto- plasm which after fertilisation condensed into definite metachromatic granules in the zygote protoplasm. Cytoplasm and nucleus of a majority of oocysts stained light blue, but a small proportion of them took deeper stain at both these sites. Parasitised caeca were greatly infiltrated with mast cells, which were laden with coarse, intensely violet granules, especially so between the early fourth day to the seventh day of infection. Lison's method, though strictly adhered to, did not reveal any superiority over that of Brachet. The latter technique gave as good results, besides being simpler than the former. Mucin present in goblet cells and lumen of caecum provided an excellent control for efficient metachromatic staining. Metachromasy was not affected by ribonuclease treatment (Plate XII, fig. 3) showing thereby that it was truly due to mucoid sulphate and not due to ribonucleic acid. This observation is quite contrary to that of Lewert [1952] who showed that metachromasy in Plasmodium cynomolgi was due to ribonucleic acid which disappeared with ribonuclease treatment. Polysaccharide sulphates were not dissolved by water as the metachromasy in tissues fixed in Zenker's remained unaffected supporting thereby the conclusion deduced by Monne and Harde [1952] in their studies on sea urchin eggs that meta- chromasy was not due to ribonucleic acid. Metachromasy was also not affected by the use of Bouin's fixative (Plate XII, fig. 1). B. Distribution of hyaluronic acid type polysaccharide (HAP) By Hale's method HAP is made visible by a modified prussian blue test. The material is in the first instance treated with colloidal acetic iron in order to bind hyaluronic acid with iron ; the latter being made demonstrable by ferrocyanide test as green or bluish green deposit. A dot-like structure stained bluish-green appeared within the nucleus of a freshly penetrated sporozoite. With the process of development into trophozoite greenish material spread out into cytoplasm of the parasite forming bluish matrix in which were embedded emerald-green granules. In developing schizont, the
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part IV ] PLATE XII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Photomicrograph showing metachromasy Eimeria tenella (Photomicrographs showing metachromasy of Eimeria tenella as revealed by toluidine blue Coloured Filters have been used wherever necessary to produce proper photographic effect. Hours within parentheses denote the stage of infection.) Fig. 1. Second generation merozoites (120 hrs. × 2250). Tissues were fixed in Bouin's fluid (aqueous). Note the presence of metachromasy after this treatment. Fig. 2. Second generation merozoites (120 hrs. × 2250). Tissues were fixed in Bouin's fluid (aqueous). Note intensely metachromatic granules in the Golgi region (antenuclear). Fig. 3. Second generation merozoites (120 hrs. × 2250). Tissues were fixed in Bouin's fluid (aqueous). Sections were treated with ribonuclease prior to staining. Note the persistence of metachromasy after enzyme digestion. Fig. 4. Earliest gametocytes (108 hrs. × 1920). Note metachromatic granules at their periphery. Also note the metachromasy in second generation ripe schizonts (bigger and smaller type on the left and right bottom of the micrograph respectively). Fig. 5. Sporozoite (35 hrs. × 2250). Note metachromatic granules in the cytoplasm.
December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL AND H. N. RAY 231 karyosome and nuclear membrane took blue stain while the siderophilous body and the rest of cytoplasm did not react for this ploysaccharide. Host cell was hyper- trophied and its nucleolus took green stain. The fully formed first generation merozoite showed green karyosome and bluish green nuclear membrane. The acid ploysaccharide was present in karyosomes of the unsegmented second generation schizonts but their cytoplasm, reflected only a bluish-green hue. Fully mature merozoites seen in smear preparations contained quite a few blue granules in the cytoplasm anterior to the nucleus. Cytoplasm of the microgametocyte displayed a rugged mass of bluish-green colour, while their pronuclei, and later the comma-shaped bodies of male gametes, took a deep blue colour. Early macrogamete showed a light reaction in its nucleus and nuclear mem- brane. With maturity a fine bluish-green granular material was found to be sprinkled very sparsely in the cytoplasm. Peripheral globules which by now had become prominent presented a deep blue colour with a clear halo around them. Concurrent with the process of fertilization, the contents of these globules were found to be emptied out to coalesce and form oocystic membranes. In oocysts no significant colour reaction for hyaluronic acid could be appreciated. DISCUSSION Runnstrom [1945] advanced the view that a heparin-like sulphate containing mucopolysaccharide, under certain conditions is able to inhibit enzymes which are responsible for protoplasmic clotting. Runnstrom, Tiselius and Lindvall [1945] claimed that the physiological liquefaction of the protoplasm may be due to a detergent-like substance. Mónne [1946], and Runnstrom [1949] held this detergent- like substance to be responsible for the dissolution of various cytoplasmic structures during mitosis and normal functioning of the cell. It is probable that this anti- coagulating mucoid is associated with lipids, and consequently possesses the proper- ties of polar non-polar, surface active, detergent-like compound [Mónne, 1949]. It may be recalled that bacterial mucolipids are powerful agents able to sti- mulate, injure and destroy cells of host ; and of the cell protoplasm this complex is an obligatory constituent [Mónne, 1949]. It is very likely that mucoids and mucoli- pids are able to prevent clotting by virtue of their hydrotropic properties. This conclusion of Mónne [1949] received a strong support in the work of Lorand [1950] who found that clots produced upon treatment of purified fibrinogen with purified thrombin were readily liquefied by area, a strongly hydrotropic substance, and that they were reconstituted when this hydrotropic substance was removed. It is known that phosphates are able to increase the hydration of proteins with which they are associated [Macheboeuf, 1937]. It is highly probable that mucolipids are far more effective in this respect and mucoids still more so. The lipid may tamper to some extent hydrotropic properties of the mucopolysaccharide with which it is connected. These hydrotropic substances may prevent clotting by increasing the hydration of cytoplasmic particles. Thus, it is not necessary to assume that protoplasmic clotting is produced by a thrombin-like enzyme but quite likely it is due to other
232 MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDES IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, enzymes which are able to decrease the hydrotropic properties of the mucoids or mucolipids. On the other hand, increased hydration and dispersion of particles, leading to liquefaction of cytoplasm must be brought about by enzymes or other substances which are able to increase the hydrotropic properties of mucoids or mucoli- pids. The protoplasm is an organised system of hydrotropic and lipotropic sub- stances, and therefore, the condition of the whole cell must be changed by any agent which is able either to decrease or increase the hydrotropic or lipotropic pro- perties of these substances [Mónne and Hardé, 1952]. Mucopolysaccharides increase the water uptake of the cell, consequently pro- duce swelling of various structures and are responsible for the formation of body cavities [Mónne and Hardé, 1950], and possibly vacuoles. Further, the mucoids may activate some physiological processes by changing the colloidal condition of the protoplasm. They may be playing an important role in energy yielding processes by increasing the accessibility of the enzymes to the substrate molecules, as more watery condition of the latter means greater contact between the two [Mónne and Hardé, 1952]. These important roles which the mucopolysaccharides play in the cell physiology are due to their physico-chemical properties. Mucopolysaccharides have been shown to exist at various stages of Eimeria tenella, the gradient closely following the curve of physiological activity of the en- dogenous cycle. A fair reserve of mucopolysaccharides in the form of mucoid sulphate granules around the nucleus, and hyaluronic acid concentrated in the nucleus, is present in sporozoite. After the parasite has established in the epithelial cell these substances progressively increase in amount which is a step preparatory to the active metabolic activity ahead of the nucleus and cytoplasm respectively. During schizogony stress of the active multiplication is felt by the rapidly multiplying nuclei which at this stage are replete with hyaluronic acid. After the nuclear division has proceeded to its predetermined extent the theatre of activity shifts to the cytoplasm which has to apportion around each nuclear fragment to form merozoites. Hyaluronic acid follows trek of this activity. It spreads out from the nucleus into the cytoplasm in the form of irregular colloidal matrix. Its presence in exaggerated quantity, first in the nuclei and then in the cytoplasm around them, is quite conceivable in that it facilitates nuclear division by creating more fluid condition of the nucleoplasm. When this function has been discharged and nuclei entered a resting stage, hyaluronic acid activity shifts to the cytoplasm to prepare ground for its division. It is quite probable that this acid mucoid accelerates nuclear and later extranuclear physiological activities by facilitating supply of necessary energy required to support these reactions by bringing the enzymes and substrates in intimate contact. With rise in tempo of activity in cytoplasm of schizont mucoid sulphates also increase in amount. Merozoite (first generation) has inherited a small store of hyaluronic acid in its nucleus, and polysaccharide sulphate in the form of a cap at the anterior (more pointed) end. It is highly probable that the mucopolysaccharide present at the tip of anterior pole may help the parasite in anchoring at the epithelial cell surface by sticking it to the latter's wall which may be softened and liquefied through its water-attracting property resulting in the establishment of a port of entry for the
December, 1954] B. S. GILL AND H. N. RAY 233 organism. Quite likely, the parasite may be secreting some lytic enzyme, so far unknown, in order to gain entry into the host cell. Even if it were so, the hydrolytic mucopolysaccharide renders no insignificant service to its possessor for it has secured a foothold for the organism and has created conditions ideal for enzymatic lysis. There is again a great task of brisk physiological activity lying ahead of the nucleus and cytoplasm of the parasite successively. Hyaluronic acid faithfully accompanies the rise and depression in physiological activity. During the nuclear division, it is present in nuclei in large quantities. At the approach of cessation of nuclear division it totally disappears from this site and diffuses out into the cytoplasm. At this time the sulphate-containing mucoid has also considerably increased in concentration in the cytoplasm. Just prior to segmentation into mero- zoites, this polysaccharide had condensed into numerous fine granules. Fully formed merozoites contained hyaluronic acid in the cytoplasm in the form of several granules lying just anterior to their nuclei. On rare occasions a granule was also seen within the nucleus. At this very area there appeared several metachromatic granules. This cytoplasmic region of the merozoite was also rich in lipids since it reacted positively to neutral red (intravitam, Golgi element) and turned black on osmication. It is very likely that the polysaccharides and fats in this area exist in a mucolipid complex. It may be remembered that a com- bination of these substances in bacteria is known to be strongly antigenic. At late second generation schizogony, when mucopolysaccharides are present in abundance, the parasite develops its immunogenic character. Thus it is quite likely that these substances may be forming an important part of antigenic structure of the proto- zoon. Just before merozoite formation, i.e. on the late fourth day of infection, profuse bleeding starts from blood vessels in sub-epithelial tissue where swarms of schizonts have developed. At this stage of infection there is a heavy infiltration of caecal tissue by mast cells which are known to manufacture heparin [Holmgren and Wilan- der, 1937] and histamine [Riley, 1953]. Therefore, it can be safely presumed that the heparin (a powerful anticoagulant) and histamine (the liberation of which in body produces 'shock') [Abel and Kubola, 1919 ; Sherwood, et al., 1941] content of the tissue is very high. This presumption receives substantial support from the high anti-coagulant activity of pathological tissues rich in mast cells [Oliver, et al., 1947, Ehrich, et al., 1949]. Heparin in caecal tissue may aid profuse local haemor- rhage, and be responsible for the uncoagulated state of blood in caecal pouches in E. tenella infection. Release of histamine in caecal tissue may aggravate the patho- logical effect of the disease. But at this time the exudate present in the cæcal pouch and mucosa contains a high concentration of a powerful thromboplastin which when injected in as small a quantity as 0.5 ml. invariably killed healthy chicks weighing over 800 gm. due to intravascular clotting [Bradford, et al., 1948]. This thromboplastic effect present in cæcal contents on 5th to 13th day after infec- tion (due to E. tenella) may either be ascribed to excessive mobilisation of throm- boplastin [Shaffiroff, et al., 1943] or it may be the result of severe hæmorrhage [van den Valden, 1909 ; Grey and Lunt, 1914]. It may also be stated here, that in caecal coccidiosis the loss of blood may be as high as 37 per cent [Pratt, 1938]. Thus, the second generation merozoites have tough and trying time. They are bathed
234 MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDES IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV in a medium which possesses potent coagulating power and is literally flushing and perfusing each cell of cæcal mucosa, the cellular structure of which has been disrupted and dishevelled by schizogony. In order to initiate gametogony they have to swim through this hostile environment long distances in search of fresh cells, which have become scarce as large areas of cæcum have already sloughed away due to extensive parasitisation. Provision of high concentrations of anticoagulating mucopolysaccharides in merozoites seems not to be an extravagant, wasteful and mere fashionable array of this carbonaceous material but it stands to reason, to infer, that it is a well-designed and purposeful effort on the part of the parasite to ensure perpetuation of the race. Of the millions of merozoites produced, a large number is eliminated with cæcal evacuations, a fair proportion dies an 'infant's death either due to an inherent weakness or their inability to stand the hazards of tissue-reaction. Only a small proportion, therefore, of the total population survives to initiate gametogony. Mucopolysaccharides appear to discharge yet another function in sporozoite, and in both first and second generation merozoites. Their hydrotropic property attracts water from the surrounding cytoplasm of host cell. This imbibition of fluids by the parasite through osmosis gives it the turgidity and rounded appearance, as with a spherical shape it can hold maximum volume of fluids. Within the host cell a more fluid zone is created in which the parasite is suspended. During fixation due to the differential shrinkage between the parasite and host cell, this zone appears as a vacuole. In sexual stages there is a sensible distribution of mucoid sulphate. Macro- gametocytes contain a poor amount of mucopolysaccharides in their cytoplasm- nucleus and its membrane. But with the approach of maturity concentration of both the mucopolysaccharides rises in the ground substance of cytoplasm. The peripheral globules are replete with HAP. Microgrametocytes possess relatively greater amount of mucoid sulphate, the highest concentration of this substance is present in comma-shaped bodies of microgametes. High concentration of mucopolysaccharides in male gametes can also be explained in the light of their future physiological activity. They have to swim through a coagulating medium to fertilise macrogametes. Presence of hydrotropic substance in the body of microgamete, will undoubtedly help it in pro- ducing an intimate contact with the egg membrane, and facilitate its passage through the egg cytoplasm to reach the female gamete's nucleus. During fertilisation the nucleus is in a fluid stage to allow free chromosomal interplay and also to maintain a close contact between enzymes and substrate. The process of fertilisation provides a stimulus to the peripheral globules to discharge their acid contents which coalesce to form oocystic wall rich in hyaluronic acid type polysaccharide. The whole physiological activity of the oocyst is de- pressed for the time being, consequently the concentration of mucopolysaccharide has also fallen to a low level as is evident from their staining reactions. The nuclear membrance of the zygote is not discernible. After fertilisation hyaluronic acid in the oocyst wall appears to serve a useful purpose in carrying the oocysts undamaged through the acid medium of proventri- culus into the duodenum. Here, trypsin in the presence of an alkaline medium
December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL AND H. N. RAY 235 exerts a lysing effect on the oocystic wall and the steida body of the sporocyst, thus releasing sporozoites. It is also conceivable that even if oocysts are damaged or cracked in the gizzard, the sporozoite can still remain unaffected in the acid medium of stomach by virtue of the presence of acid polysaccharides in their body. In vitro liberation of sporozoites was obtained with trypsinic digestion of the oocyst wall and it was observed that sporozoites were liberated without the oocyst wall being damaged mechanically. This observation confirms the findings of Smetana [1933]. It is, therefore, difficult to subscribe fully to the views of Goodrich [1944] that physical damage to the oocyst wall is essential for the liberation of sporo- zoites by the enzymatic activity of trypsin. The fact that second generation merozoites contain a fair quantity of mucopoly- saccharides explains the successful establishment of infection by Levine [1949] and Ray (unpublished data) in chicks by feeding them with freshly liberated merozoites. Presence of these acid polysaccharides in their bodies ensures their safe passage through the acidic medium of proventriculus. Some aspects of host-parasite relationship. From the foregoing discussion it becomes clear as to how the defensive powers of both the host and parasite are invoked in caecal coccidiosis. Caecal tissue tolerates the parasite upto the end of the third day when it seems not to 'mind' the latter's presence. This is evident from the absence of any local tissue reaction. But as the second generation schi- zogony is consummating to differentiation of merozoites, mucopolysaccharides have appeared in it in large quantities. Profuse bleeding has started, blood and in- flammatory exudate which is literally perfusing each cell of caecal wall, possesses highly coagulating power. This is a very strict measure host has adopted against the invader. But the latter too has not lagged behind in its protection. Second generation merozoites are 'born' endowed with strongly anticoagulant (hydrotropic) mucopolysaccharides. Thus, the forces of the host and parasite have counterpoised each other. If the host survives, the parasite does not cause any further harm to the former, hastens to leave the host in a couple of days. As gametogony is pro- ceeding host mobilises cellular reserves to clear away the debris and reorganise the damaged tissue. It has been mentioned earlier that mast cells swarm the caecal tissue when the violent struggle between the host and parasite for preservation of its species is going on. Host has stepped up its efforts through increased thrombin content ; the latter being a double-edged weapon can act both ways against the parasite, as well as it can threaten the existence of the host. The host has profitably directed this potential weapon against the invader, as it has protected itself, somehow or other, to prevent against the intravascular clotting of its own blood. As small a quantity as 0.5 ml. of caecal fluid when injected into a healthy adult bird cause its sudden death. The host has protected remarkably either through some humoral readjustment or by providing some local barrier against absorption of inimical caecal exudate. Appearance of mast cells in large numbers in caecal wall at this juncture is significant, as they manufacture a potent anticoagulant-heparin. In case of death of the host, parasite has also not reached any fructuitous stage, and exterminates itself along with the former. No doubt Nature favours survival
236 MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDES IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, of the fittest but not extinction of both the competitors. Other (nonpathogenic) species of Eimeria of poultry, have struck a decent compromise and attained balance with the host, thus ensuring perpetuation of their species. But it seems that E. tenella shall take considerable time to arrive at such a compromise. SUMMARY Mucoid sulphates occur in the cytoplasm, and hyaluronic acid type polysaccha- ride (HAP) is more active in the nucleus (especially the karyosome), and also forms the protective covering of the oocyst. It is believed that by virtue of their hydrotropic property, mucopolysaccharides are of immense value to the organism (E. tenella) and perform the following important functions : 1. They inhibit intra-cytoplasmic clotting and create physiological 'liquefac- tion' of the nucleus during multiplication and gamete formation. 2. They promote contact between enzymes and substrate by maintaining fluid condition of the protoplasm. 3. They help to create a fluid zone round the parasite after its penetration into the host cell. The fluid condition thus produced, promotes osmosis between the host and the parasite. 4. They protect second generation merozoites and subsequent forms against the highly coagulating property, the host tissue has acquired at this stage of infec- tion. 5. HAP in the oocystic wall ensures safe passage of oocysts through acidic medium of proventriculus of birds. 6. In this protozoon, there is highest concentration of mucopolysaccharides at the end of the second generation schizogonyDecember, 1954 ] B. S. GILL AND H. N. RAY 237 Ehrich, W. E. ; Siefter, J., Auburn, H. E. and Begany, A. J. (1949). Proc. Soc. Biol., 70 : 183 Goodrich, H. P. (1944). Parasitology, 36 : 72 Grey, H. and Lunt, L. K. (1914). Amer. J. Physiol., 34: 322 Hale, C. W. (1946). Nature ; 57 : 802 Holmgren, and Wilander, O. (1937). Z. Mekroskop.PHOSPHATASES AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE IN EIMERIA TENELLA RAILLIET AND LUCET, 1891 By B. S. GILL and H. N. RAY*, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, Kumaon, U. P. (Received for publication on 29 July 1954) (With Plate XIII) RAY and Gill [1954] reported their preliminary observations on the distribution of alkaline phosphatase in various endogenous stages of Eimeria tenella. The enzymic studies were extended to acid phosphatase and 5-nucleotidase. These observations and significance of the three phosphatases are reported in this article. Acid phosphatase has been reported from Entamoeba histolytica [Carrera and Changus, 1948 ; Carrera, 1950], but so far it has not been reported from coccidia. 5-Nucleotidase has been described from various mammalian tissues [Reis, 1937a, 1937b ; Gulland and Jackson, 1938 ; Newman, et al., 1950 ; Bragdon and McManus, 1952], but it has not been described from protozoa so far. PROCEDURE White Leghorn chicks, 1-2 weeks old, kept coccidia-free, were infected per os with large doses of a 'pure-line', sporulated brew of E. tenella. They were sacrificed at 4-hourly intervals from the 1st to 8th day of infection. Their caeca were harvested with least loss of time. Small pieces (2-3 mm.) of caeca, and smears of mucosal scrapings were promptly fixed in chilled acetone. Glick's revised technique [1949] was used for demonstrating acid phosphatase. Technique of McManus, et al., [1952240 PHOSPHATASES IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, acids and phosphoric acid and (2) dehydration of metaphosphoric acid [Roche, 1951]. They may be specific for one bond, e.g. phosphomonoesterases, phospho- diesterases, pyrophosphatases, etc., or specific for one or several substrates, e.g. adenosine-triphosphatase, 5-nucleotidase, etc. There are four phosphomonoesterases, i.e. those enzymes which catalyse orthophosphoric monoesters [Folley and Kay, 1936 ; Roche and Curtois, 1943 ; Roche, 1942] : the first two of the series, phosphomonoesterase I and II are commonly known as alkaline and acid phosphatase respectively as they exhibit optimum stability at pH 9.3-9.8 ; and 4.5-5.5 in the order written [Roche, 1951]. They are found in a wide variety of mammalian organs. Alkaline phosphomonoesterase activity is specially intense (1) in intestine (brush border, and Golgi region) where it catalyses phosphorylation and synthesis of neutral fat [Jeker, 1936 ; Dempsey and Wislocki, 1946], (2) in ossifying bone [first shown by Robison, 1923] where it hy- drolyses blood esters glucose and 1-phosphate with the liberation of PO4 ions which precipitate Ca++ to lay down bone Ca3 (Po4) 2 [Roche, 1947], and (3) in kidney [in mitochondria ; Dounce, 1951] where it is perhaps concerned with the reabsorption of glucose from the lumen of tubules [Moog, 1946 ; March and Drabkin, 1947]. 5-Nucleotidase specifically hydrolyses 5-nucleotides (adenosine-5-phosphate and inosine-5-phosphate) but not the 3-nucleotides (adenosine-triphosphate and yeast nucleic acid). The participation of phosphatases in cell metabolism has not been precisely understood. The universality of their distribution suggests that they may have a general role to play in all processes. The metabolic importance of energy yielding phosphate bond is developed through an independent system of phosphorylating enzymes. Phosphatase synthesis of esters seems to have little physiological im- portance. Only the specific phosphatase, e.g. 5-nucleotidae takes part in this metabolism as far as the hydrolysing activity in liberating phosphates are concerned [Roche, 1951]. Definitely, they are known to catalyse transphosphorylation processes. Danielli [1953] attaches considerable importance to this role of alkaline phosphatase. He suggests that 'alkaline phosphatase may act as a phosphokinase in the conservation of phosphate bond energy. If gene products must be dephosph- orylated to release products of gene in an active form a considerable economy of the energy of phosphate bond would be affected if instead of hydrolysing the phosphate bond, the phosphate were transferred to some other molecule : alkaline phosphatase would act as catalyst for such transfers '. Alternately he believes that nucleus may normally be synthesising phosphate bonds, and that the function of alkaline phosphatase is to transfer phosphate groups from precursor substances to the specific molecules which are involved in the activity of the genes. Relation between phosphatases and nucleic acids of Eimeria tenella Perhaps the most significant and interesting fact emerging from the present study is the demonstration of the constant presence of phosphatases in the nucleus of the parasite. Its enzymic activity is particularly very high in the karyosomes through- out the endogenous phase of E. tenella whereas it is of moderate intensity in the nucleoplasm. Karyosome of protozoa is comparable to the nucleolus of a mammalian cell. These observations are of considerable interest, since in view of the work of
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part IV ] PLATE XIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Photomicrograph of second sexual generation of Eimeria tenella. (Photo-micrographs depicting the enzyme reactions of the second asexual generation of Eimeria tenella) Fig. 1, 3 and 6 are from smear preparations of caecal mucosa, and the rest are the micrographs taken from sections. Hours within parentheses denote the stage of infection. Fig. 1. Merozoites (Acid phosphatase, 120 hrs. × 1500). Note positive reaction in their karyosomes, and in the Golgi (antenuclear) region. Fig. 2. Schizont (Acid phosphatase, 100 hrs. × 900). Note the reaction in karyosomes of the parasite and in nucleolus of the host cell. Fig. 3. Merozoites (5.nucleotidase, 120 hrs. × 1200). Note the presence of reaction only in the karyosome. Fig. 4. Schizont (5-nucleotidase, 100 hrs. × 900). Note the reaction in the karyosomes of the parasite, and nucleolus of the host cell. Fig. 5. Schizont (Alkaline phosphatase, 90 hrs. × 900). Note the reaction in karyosomes of the parasite, and also in the nucleolus of the hypertrophied host cell nucleus. Fig. 6. Merozoite (Alkaline phosphatase, 120 hrs. × 1000). Note the reaction in karyosome and the Golgi region. Both the small and bigger type of merozoites are seen.
December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL AND H. N. RAY 241 Caspersson and his colleagues, nucleolus is an important site from which protein (nucleolar) migrates to the nuclear membrane where it induces or participates in the formation of cytoplasmic proteins. Karyosome at all stages of the parasite has been shown to react strongly for ribose-nucleic acid (RNA). The constant association of high activity of phosphatases and similar high concentration of RNA in the karyosome naturally suggests a func- tional correlation between these substances. Clearly it is very significant to find abundant phosphatase in a structure rich in RNA, which is manufacturing protein and passing it (ribonucleoprotein) to the cytoplasm. In the nucleoplasm too the presence of a moderate degree of phosphatase activity and desoxyribose nucleic acid (DNA), whether highly or lowly polymerised, is not without significance. The occurrence of these enzymes and DNA in known sites of genes tempts one to suggest that these substances may be integral parts of genes ; and that the latter may be a specific array of enzyme molecules, whose synthetic activity is partly defined by the nature of enzyme molecules present, and partly by the spatial orien- tation of the enzyme. The existence of such a functional relationship between DNA and alkaline phosphatase has been suggested by Danielli (1953). According to him, there is another possible role which may be assigned to phosphatase in chromosomes. They may be protecting genes from the hazardous action of vigorous phosphorylating agents such as adenosine-tri-phosphate and acetyl phosphate, in actual cells. E. tenella is a very rapidly growing parasite. Schizonts and microgameto- cytes mature within forty-eight hours. Their rate of multiplication is pretty high. First and second generation schizonts give rise to 600-900 and 350-400 merozoites respectively. A microgametocyte produces innumberable, probably millions of microgametes. Thus their demand for basic material, i.e. protein (es- pecially nucleoprotein) must be very high, and that is why their karyosomes register intense activity of phosphatases. The macrogametocyte shows a similar high RNA content and strong activity of phosphatases in karyosome. Its peripheral globules, which have been shown to contain RNA. too react very strongly for alkaline phos- phatase. The macrogametocyte is undergoing maturation and is actively metabolis- ing proteins which are so essentially required during sporulation when oocysts are discharged and voided with faeces. When macrogamete reaches maturity physio- logical depression sets in, which accounts for the relatively less strong reaction of nucleus for phosphatases. In oocyst, scattered activity of alkaline phosphatase is seen in the cytoplasm, which may be concerned with some post-fertilisation changes in the metabolism of the zygote. The significance of strong alkaline phosphatase activity at the micropyle of the oocyst is not understood at present, though this area of the oocyst wall also showed intense basiphilia with toluidine blue and pyronin suggesting high concentration of RNA ( and ribonucleoprotein) at this site. The observations that the gradient of reactions for phosphatases is directly proportional to the reaction for nucleic acid and the tempo of physiological activity of E. tenella when it can reasonably be presumed that the rate of protein synthesis is very high, leads to the conclusion that phosphatases in this protozoon are concerned with its protein metabolism. That such a correlation can exist between alkaline phosphatase, RNA and protein synthesis, has been accepted by Davidson [1940]
242 PHOSPHATASES IN EIMERIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, and Brachet [1947]. Possibly protein synthesis involves the formation of a phos- phoprotein and that the action of phosphatases in nuclei is to split off the phosphate residue from protein, and thus liberating an active product from an inactive precursor [Danielli, 1953]. In support of the conclusions drawn, with regard to the relation of RNA to alkaline phosphatan in protein metabolism of E. tenella, many parallel references to similar studies on mammalian tissues can be cited. But, since this is not within the scope of this article, the reader is referred to the works of Brachet, Danielli, Caspersson and their colleagues. Relation between phosphatases and mucopolysaccharides of E. tenella The cytoplasmic distribution of alkaline and acid phosphatase in the second generation merozoites is of considerable interest. The site of location of these enzymes is an area 2-3 µ long, situated immediately anterior to the nucleus. This area of the organism stains intra-vitam with neutral red. By osmication this very region turns black. Both these techniques visualise ' Golgi ' elements in cells. Sulphated acid polysaccharides (metachromatic), 1, 2 glycol groups (Hotchkiss positive), hyaluronic acid type polysaccharide (Hale positive) alkaline phosphatase and sometimes acid phosphatase too are present all together in the ' Golgi ' region of the merozoite. Their simultaneous occurrence naturally suggests a functional relationship between them. Localisation of alkaline phosphatase activity in the ' Golgi ' region of several metazoon cells has been reported by several workers [Bourne, 1943 ; Wislocki and Dempsey, 1946 ; Emmel, 1945 : 1946 ; 1947 ; Al Hussaini, 1948]. Precise functional relationship between the ' Golgi ' element and alkaline phosphatase has not been understood. Emmel [1946], however, suggests that the ' Golgi' apparatus synthesizes and secretes alkaline phosphatase. The latter may well be concerned with the processes of dephosphorylation and deposition of glycogen [Wislocki and Dempsey, 1946]. In a previous article in the series glycogen has been shown to be present in the parasite in fair amounts. Hyaluronic acid type polysaccharide is invariably present in the karyosome of the parasite and so is the alkaline phosphatase. Further, there is a small pro- portion of merozoites which do not show any reaction in the 'Golgi' region either for this enzyme or for hyaluronic acid type polysaccharide. This finding suggests a still closer metabolic association between alkaline phosphatase and this polysac- charide. The other acid polysaccharide (i.e. the sulphated one) is only confined to, and is always present in the ' Golgi ' region. The peripheral globules of macro- gametes show intense alkaline phosphatase activity. These structures have been shown to contain RNA and hyaluronic acid type polysaccharide (Refer to previous communication in the series). At fertilisation these globules coalesce to form oocystic wall. The latter reacts strongly for hyaluronic acid and RNA and also gives a moderately positive reaction for alkaline phosphatase. This further supports the observation that the phosphatase is somehow concerned with the metabolism of acid polysaccharides and nucleoproteins. Occurrence of alkaline phosphatase and acid polysaccharides at some sites of a cell, is of particular interest since Sylvén [1947] reported that in endochondral ossification, chondroitin sulphate disappears in the cartilage matrix as alkaline phosphatase increases. This observation on E. tenella
December, 1954] B. S. GILL AND H. N. RAY 243 is similar to that of Montagna and others [1952] who also found the two substances, (i.e. the phosphatase and acid polysaccharides) occurring simultaneously in the papillæ of growing hair follicles (the two analogies are, however, drawn from two different places, i.e. from protozoa and metazoa respectively). Alkaline phosphatase activity is depressed in the parasitised regions of caecal tissue. This differential change in the distribution of the enzyme in healthy and parasitised tissue is affected to an appreciable degree only when the parasite is undergoing second generation schizogony. However, no such differential reaction between healthy and parasitised mucosa could be observed for acid phos- phatase. This observation is in contrast to that of Carrera [1950], who observed that there occurred intense acid phosphatase activity in and around amoebic (En- tamoeba histolytica) ulcers in caeca of experimentally infected guinea-pigs. The inner and adventitious coats of blood vessels and coarse granules of ' mast ' cells reacted strongly for alkaline phosphatase. ' Mast ' cells are known to originate from tunica adventitia of small blood vessels [Riley, 1953] and their granules have been shown to be strongly metachromatic as they contain heparin [Holmgren and Wilander, 1937]. Thus it seems quite possible that alkaline phosphatase participates in the elaboration of heparin, and similar other polysaccharide sulphates. Such a suggestion has already been made by Riley and Drennan [1949] in their studies on ' mast ' cells of rats. 5-Nucleotidase being a specific phosphatase liberates phosphate from 5-nucleoti- dase. It is distributed in tissues of man and other animals, especially in the poison gland of snakes. It plays similar, but specific role in nucleoprotein metabolism as the alkaline and acid phosphomonoesterases. Various combinations of snake venom phosphatase dephosphorylate RNA to an extent of 75 per cent. [Gulland and Jackson, 1938], though gut phosphatase is even the more active in this respect, and completely dephosphorylates this substance [Schmidt and Tannhausser, 1943]. This enzyme has occurred throughout in the nuclei of E. tenella along with alkaline and acid phosphatase. Occurrence of alkaline phosphatase and 5-nucleotidase together in the same structure is of interest as they are known not to occur simul- taneously in certain mammalian tissues investigated so far. Presence of 5-nu- cleotidase and the absence of alkaline phosphatase is known in renal glomeruli of obsolescent human beings [McManus, et al., 1952] and in epithelium and secretion of rattle snake venom glands [Bragdon and McManus, 1953]. SUMMARY Distribution of acid phosphatase and 5-nucleotidase has been described from E. tenella. Probable roles played by these two enzymes and alkaline phosphatase (communicated earlier) in protein and polysaccharide metabolism of the parasite have been discussed at length. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for the award of Research Fellowship in Parasitology (1952-54) to one of them (B.S.G.) ; and also to the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar for providing the necessary laboratory facilities. 104 AR/54. 12
244 PHOSPHATASES IN EIMBRIA TENELLA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV REFERENCES Al Hussaini, A. H. (1948). Nature, 161, 274 Bourne, G. H. (1943). Quart. J. Exp. Physiol., 82, 1 Brachet, J. (1947). Growth, 7, 309 Bragdon, D. E. and McManus, J. F. S. (1952). Quart. J. micr. Sci., 93 ; 87 Carrera, G. M. (1950). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med, 73 ; 682 Carrera, G. M. and Changus, G. W. (1948). Ibid, 71 ; 610 Danielli, J. F. (1953). CytochemistrySPECIATION AND VIABILITY OF POULTRY COCCIDIA IN 120 FAECAL SAMPLES PRESERVED IN 2.5 PER CENT POTASSIUM DICHROMATE SOLUTION By B. S. GILL, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaon, U.P. ( Received for publication on 29 July 1954 ) EIGHT valid species of Eimeria parasitising poultry have been reported from various parts of the world. Examinations conducted by Ray [1939-53] on occasional faecal samples sent by Provincial Veterinary Officers have recorded E. tenella, E. maxima, E. acervulina, E. praecox and Wenyonella gallinae from Indian poultry. However, in the absence of any systematic and detailed survey, information truly representative of coccidial population and their relative incidence in India is not available. While working in the Protozoology Section of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (1952-54) an opportunity was offered to the author to undertake such a survey, and also to determine survival periods of various coccidia in the commonly used preservative, i.e., 2.5 per cent aqueous solution of potassium dichromate. Morphology of unsporulated and sporulated oocysts, sporulation time and prepatent periods, were the diagnostic criteria kept in view for the purpose of speciation. MATERIAL AND METHODS Faeces were received from the States of Bombay, PEPSU, Punjab, Ajmer, U. P. and M. P., which were collected both from apparently healthy flocks and from flocks where actual outbreaks of coccidiosis had taken place. Each sample was washed free of the preservative with water, and a part of it was floated with brine to recover oocysts for microscopical examination. Rest of the sample was fed to chicks, (4-14 days old) raised ' coccidia free '. These chicks had been segregated from general brooders into single cages a week prior to infection. Their faeces had remained continuously negative for oocysts during the pre-infective period. This measure was adopted to eliminate all chances of an adventitious infection vitiating the viability test, as infection picked up in a general brooder would have revealed itself during that week. Faeces from infected birds for each 24-hour period were collected from the 4th to the 14th day of infection and suspended in 2.5 per cent potassium dichromate for sporulation at room temperature. OBSERVATIONS Diagnostic survey of the material revealed the presence of Eimeria tenella, E. acervulina, E. mitis, E. maxima, E. praecox, E. hagani and Wenyonella gallinae in it ; order of frequency of their occurrence was : 70, 50, 48.4, 30.8, 29.2, 2.5 and 1.7 245 104 AR/54 13
246 SPECIATION AND VIABILITY OF POULTRY COCCIDIA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, per cent respectively. Further, E. necatrix and E. brunetti were noted to be absent in this survey. It may be emphasised that E. hagani has for the first time been recorded from Indian poultry. Observations on the viability of various coccidia are as follows : 1. Twenty-two samples tested varying in age from 86 days to one year contained E. praecox, E. mitis, E. acervulina, E. maxima and E. tenella, and all the species were found viable. 2. Twenty-eight samples between 1-2 years of age contained all the species noted above, with respective percentage viability of 71, 91, 100, 71 and 86, i.e., 9-14 per cent decline in their viability had occurred except in E. acervulina : all the samples of which were still viable at the end of two years. 3. Twenty-nine samples between 2-3 years of age contained oocysts of E. hagani, E. praecox, E. mitis, E. acervulina, E. maxima and E. tenella. Their per- centage viability was of the order of 0, 54.4, 35.4, 76.5, 33 and 28 respectively. It is apparent that a sharp decline in their viability had occurred. Almost 45, 65, 24, 67, 72 and 100 per cent samples of E. praecox, E. mitis, E. acervulina, E. maxima, E. tenella and E. hagani respectively, were found dead between the second and third year of preservation. 4. Twenty samples tested, between the third and fourth year of preservation, contained all the six species of Eimeria named in para 3, and Wenyonella gallinae. All these coccidia were dead (non-viable to susceptible birds) after three years of preservation. 5. Rest of the 21 samples varying in age between 4 to 13 years contained E. praecox, E. mitis, E. acervulina, E. maxima and E. tenella in varying proportions and all of them were found dead. It was also noted that five samples of E. tenella at the ages of 414, 463, 780 (two samples) and 798 days respectively ; two samples of E. mitis-2 years, 7 and 9 days old respectively ; and one sample of E. maxima-2 years and 62 days of age, recorded abnormally long prepatent periods of 9, 7 and 8 days respectively. However, when thus voided oocysts, after sporulation were further fed to susceptible chicks, prepatent periods returned to the normal cycles of 7, 5 and 6 days for E. tenella, E. mitis and E. maxima respectively. Delayed appearance of oocysts in these experiments indicate delayed schizogony and gametogony. Probably, such a phenomenon precedes complete decay of oocysts. Dickinson [1948] also records a similar observation on E. tenella. His culture was preserved at ±4°C. for 781 days. Prepatent period on first passage was a little more than eight days which, however, on next passage returned to the usual cycle. SUMMARY Examination of 120 faecal samples of poultry has revealed the presence of E. tenella, E. acervulina, E. mitis, E. maxima, E. praecox, E. hagani and Wenyonella gallinae in them. Their order of percentage frequency of occurrence is 70, 50, 48.4, 30.8, 29.2, 2.5 and 1.7 respectively. E. hagani has for the first time been reported from Indian poultry. The effect of age of preservation (in 2.5 per cent potassium dichromate) on poultry coccidia in 120 faecal samples was determined experimentally by feeding
December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL 247 tests. Average survival time of different coccidia in the preservative has been found to be 1-2 years. Viability has been seen to sharply decline during the third year of preservation such that by the end of the third year whole population of different coccidia was rendered non-viable. It was also noticed that with the age of preservation prepatent periods of E. tenella, E. mitis and E. maxima were abnormally lengthened : 24-48 hours above the usual periods. However, on further passage in susceptible poultry their prepatent periods returned to the normal cycles. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The author is indebted to Dr. H. N. Ray for suggesting the problem and helpful criticism, and to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for the award of Research Fellowship in Parasitology (1952-54). REFERENCES Dickinson, E. M. (1946). Poultry Sci., 25 : 319 Ray, H. N. (1939-53). Annual Reports of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute
COMPARATIVE FLOATING EFFICIENCY OF COPPER NITRATE, COMMON SALT AND ZINC SULPHATE SOLU- TIONS AS LEVITATING MEDIA IN A MODIFIED LANE'S (1923-24) D.C.F. TECHNIQUE FOR POULTRY COCCIDIA By B. S. GILL, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaon, U. P. ( Received for publication on 29 July 1954 ) FULL realisation of pathogenicity of intestinal protozoa and helminths to man and animals necessitated the devising of coprologic technique for concentrating cysts or ova in fæces for establishing diagnosis. Literature upto 1924- has been competently reviewed by Lane who also devised his direct centrifugation floatation (D.C.F.) technique in 1923-24, various modifications of which have been used by both medical and veterinary workers [Sheather, 1923 ; Young, 1923-24 ; Andrews and Tsuchiya, 1931 ; Faust, et al., 1938 ; Swartzwelder, 1938 ; Otto, et al., 1941 ; Farr and Luttermoser, 1941 ; Farr and Allen, 1942 ; Ripsom and Herrick, 1945 ; Morehouse and Mayfield, 1945 ; Watson, 1947 ; Garcia and Pesigan, 1948 ; Koutz, 1948]. The literature extant on the subject revealed to the author many a short- coming in the various procedures described so far. For poultry coccidia only common salt [Fish, 1931 ; 1932], sugar and sodium nitrate [Koutz, 1948] solutions have been used as floating media while many other chemical solutions which have given good floats of helminth ova and protozoal cysts from human fæces, have not been tried on poultry coccidia. Further, the comparative floating efficiency of brine and syrup has not been investigated. Methods employed were not so simple as advocated by the respective authors. The suspension to be examined under hæmocytometers for counts [method employed by Beach, 1943 ; Farr, 1944 ; Grumbles, et al., 1948] should be finely strained and much diluted. Besides entailing extra labour and care this method has given varying counts with the same sample [unpublished observations of the author and of D. K. Ray, 1953 in the laboratory of the I. V. R. I.]. Levine's [1939] method required special vials and buckets to receive them in the centrifuge, and unless the suspension was absolutely free from fæcal debris, enough light might not pass through 25 mm. high column of the fluid to reach the objective of microscope. Further, the method would be of no avail when fæces contained much blood as in cæcal coccidiosis. Before investigating various problems related to poultry coccidia, necessity was felt for finding an efficient and simple method for concentrating oocysts. This necessity initiated the present study. The following criteria were kept in mind while assessing the suitability of a levitating medium to be employed. 1. It should give a maximum total count of oocysts in a few centrifugations ; 2. It should concentrate a high percentage of oocysts on first centrifugation ; 249 104 AR/54 14
250 FLOATING EFFICIENCY OF LEVITATING MEDIA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, 3. It should cause no appreciable shrinkage and loss in viability of oocysts when the latter remained in it for a reasonable length of time ; 4. It should give consistent results when used over and over again on the same fæcal sample, i.e. it should be reliable ; 5. It should be cheap and easily available ; 6. It should be highly soluble in water ; and 7. It should give cool and clear visual microscopical field to obviate eye strain as far as possible. MATERIAL Four fæcal samples containing sporulated and four samples containing un- sporulated oocysts were tried, but for any one of the series of experiments the same sample was used throughout. For ' A ' series of trials noted in Table I, fæcal samples preserved in 2.5 per cent aqueous solution of potassium dichromate and for the rest four series fæces freshly voided by artificially infected chicks were employed. In both the cases, there was mixed infection with Eimeria tenella, E. mitis and E. præcox ; but the oocysts were sporulated in the former series of trials and un- sporulated in the latter series. Aqueous solutions of common salt (NaCl), zinc sulphate (ZnSo4) and copper nitrate (CuNO3) were tried in these investigations. Specific gravity in the various solutions was kept constant (1,200) to serve as a common denominator in these comparative quantitative studies. Their solutions were prepared as follows : (a) ZnSO4, 331.4 gm. plus 1 litre of water [Faust, et al., 1939] (b) Common salt, 380 gm. plus 1 litre of water (c) CuNO3, 100 gm. plus 344 ml. of water Specific gravity of each solution was checked with a standard hydrometer and if found different was adjusted accordingly. In the beginning, it was intended to include magnesium sulphate and sugar solutions in this investigation, but having seen their behaviour with the rabbit coccidia [unpublished data] both the solutions were dropped in these trials due to the following reasons : Both the media gave ' statistically significant ' lower floats as compared to the solutions of Cu NO3, Zn SO4 and Na Cl. Sugar floated a lot of fæcal debris along with oocysts, attracted flies in the laboratory, and because of its high refractive index produced a glaringly shiny microscopical field thus making difficult prolonged observations, besides adversely affecting the eyes. Oocysts in it, turned black and soon were out of recognitionDecember, 1954 ] B. S. GILL 251 METHODS To cause complete disintegration and consequent release of oocysts from fæces 1 gm. of the latter was comminuted with 40 ml. tap water with the help of pestle and mortar. The suspension was filtered through a strainer of (40 meshes/linear inch) received in a glass bottle of 150 ml. capacity marked up to the level of 100 ml. Enough water was added to bring the suspension to 100 ml. mark. A few (5-10) glass beads were added to the bottle, and the latter shaken vigorously for 10 minutes to form a homogeneous suspension. The suspension was then strained through a fine mesh (100 meshes/linear inch) and the level again brought upto 100 ml. mark. One ml. of the fæces preserved in potassium dichromate solution (series ' A ', Table I) was washed free of the preservative, thoroughly shaken with glass beads, strained and the volume made up to 100 ml. One ml. of the homogenised suspension was poured into a centrifuge tube, sufficient water added to bring it just up to the brim and centrifuged for two minutes at 1200 r.p.m. Supernant fluid was sucked off without disturbing the sediment. The chemical solution to be tried was added little by little while rotating the tube between hands to affect thorough mixing, till the meniscus of the fluid in it rose just over its brim. A coverslip was placed gently over it without entrapping any air bubble and centrifuged as before. The cover slip was sharply lifted off between the middle finger and thumb, placed on a glass slide and oocysts counted under the low power of a microscope with the help of a veeder counter using Ehrlich's counting eye piece (10 X) to squarely limit the field. A drop or so of the medium was added to the centrifuge tube to bring the fluid upto its original level. Another coverslip placed over it, centrifuged as before and the number of oocysts collected was counted. This process was repeated till two trials successively failed to recover any oocyst. The total number of oocysts recovered in this process is hereinafter referred to as the ' primary recovery '. The supernatant fluid was poured off and the sediment washed once with water. The whole process outlined above was repeated with the second chemical solution and oocysts recovered were counted. The third floating medium was tried on the same sediment and the oocysts collected, if any, were counted. Total number of oocysts counted in these two steps is hereinafter referred to as the ' subsequent recovery '. In order to ascertain the reliability of the three chemical solutions to give consistent floats with the same suspension over and over again, six different fæcal samples were used and with each sample three trials were conducted. The number of oocysts recovered on the first centrifugation only were compared. Data on these observations is embodied in Table II. Data and its statistical significance Tables showing the detailed manner of actual recovery affected by different media and series of trials conducted are not included in this paper to economise space, but they may be had from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. However, data have been summarily given in Table I.
252 FLOATING EFFICIENCY OF LEVITATING MEDIA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV TABLE I Summary of the data relating to the actual recovery affected by media and the series of trials conducted Trial No. Sodium chloride solution Zinc sulphate solution Copper nitrate solution Primary recovery Subsequent recovery Primary recovery Subsequent recovery Primary recovery Subsequent recovery No. of oocysts counted No. of centrifu- gations required No. of oocysts counted No. of centrifu- gations required No. of oocysts counted No. of centrifu- gations required No. of oocysts counted No. of centrifu- gations required No. of oocysts counted No. of centrifu- gations required No. of oocysts counted No. of centrifu- gations required A 1st 593 4 1 1 374 3 1 1 557 3 0 0 4th 111 4 2 1 109 4 0 0 148 3 0 0 6th 232 4 1 1 212 4 0 0 245 3 0 0 7th 581 4 1 1 439 4 2 2 606 3 0 0 B 8th 615 3 2 1 667 4 0 0 691 3 1 1 3rd 559 4 3 1 667 4 5 5 572 4 3 1 2nd 234 3 0 0 209 3 0 0 262 3 0 1 5th 112 4 0 0 140 3 0 0 143 3 0 .. NOTE.December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL 253 TABLE II RELIABILITY TESTS Counts of first floats of three aliquots from the same fæcal sample Sample No. CuNO3 solution Brine ZnSO4 solution 1st aliquot 2nd aliquot 3rd aliquot 1st aliquot 2nd aliquot 3rd aliquot 1st aliquot 2nd aliquot 3rd aliquot A 301 310 284 299 280 290 304 294 279 B 505 535 540 469 478 490 493 476 510 C 391 415 401 410 382 369 371 399 380 D 184 166 210 172 161 189 182 169 176
254 FLOATING EFFICIENCY OF LEVITATING MEDIA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, The analysis of the numbers of oocysts floated with various chemical media has been performed under the assumption that each and every fæcal sample of a particular trial had contained the same number of oocysts. It was noted that the numbers of centrifugations required to float the various numbers of oocysts in different chemical media tried differed, to some extent from one another. It was necessary, therefore, to examine the effect of the variable centrifugations and to estimate the numbers of oocysts on equal numbers of centrifugations. The ad- justed means and the significance of their differences are given in Table III. Other results are incorporated in Tables IV, V and VI. TABLE III Adjusted mean numbers of oocysts in one trial Chemical solutions Means Significance of difference CuNO3 415.0 No significant differences among the adjusted means Brine 370.6 ZnSO4 349.1 TABLE IV Number of centrifugations required to affect the total ' primary recovery ' Chemical solutions Means Significance of difference Brine 3.7 (A) A vs. B=N.S. ZnSO3 3.6 (B) B vs. C=S. CuNO4 3.1 (C) C vs. A=H.S. S= Significant (0.051 P&gt;0.01) H.S.=Highly significant (P&gt;0.01) P.=Probability TABLE V Number of oocysts recovered at the first centrifugations Chemical solutions Means Significance of difference CuNO3 358.9 (i.e. 84 per cent of the T.R.) No significant differences among the means Brine 343.1 (i.e. 92.8 per cent of the T.R.) ZnSO4 (i.e. 90.8 per cent of the T.R.) T.R.=Total recently.
December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL 255 TABLE VI Means ' subsequent ' recovery for one trial Chemical solutions Means Significance of difference CuNO3 0.3 Brine 1.1 ZnSO4 0.7 No significant difference among the means DISCUSSION The technique adopted was a simple modification of the Lane's [1923-24] method. Concentration and flotation of oocysts were carried out in the same tube. Both the steps were speeded by spinning. No extra support in the form of horned centrifuge bucket [Lane, 1923-24] or special clamp [Faust, et al., 1939] to be attached to the latter was needed. No adhesive, as advised by Watson [1947] to glue the coverslip to the mouth of centrifuge was required. Coverslip lifted off sharply removed all the oocysts sticking to its undersurface. Coverslip of any specification served the purpose. No additional apparatus was required. An ' all purpose ' centrifuge, a few centrifuge tubes with perfect rims and grease-free coverslips were all the equipment needed. Eight series of trials were conducted with CuNO3, ZnSO4 and NaCl solutions. Residue left by brine (as primary medium), in set A. (Table I) was levitated in turn with ZnSO4 and CuNO3 solutions respectively, and the order of their employment was reversed in set B. Thus each of the two subsequent media was given equal chances to play upon the sediment left by the primary medium. The same scheme, when other two solutions were used as primary media, was adhered to as is evident from Table I. A careful scrutiny of the data has brought forth the following conclusions : 1. That the CuNO3 solution caused the highest concentration of oocysts in 75 per cent of the total trials, whereas each of the ZnSO4 solution and brine affected the greatest concentration of oocysts in 12.5 per cent of the trials conducted. 2. That apparently, CuNO3 solution floated a higher number of oocysts than either brine or ZnSO4 solution (adjusted means of the number of oocysts floated in one trial being 415, 371 and 349 respectively) but the differences in their floating capacities were not found to be statisti- cally significant. 3. That CuNO3 solution affected the statistically significant speediest recovery of oocysts when used as a primary medium than either ZnSO4 solution or brine. There was, however, no significant difference between the rates of recovering oocysts with the latter two media,
256 FLOATING EFFICIENCY OF LEVITATING MEDIA [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, 4. That CuNO3 solution had floated the highest number of oocysts on the first centrifugations in seven out of the eight trials whereas ZnSO4 solution succeeded only once to float greatest number of oocysts. However, the means for the first centrifugations were not found to be significantly different with the three solutions. 5. That the ratio of the mean number of oocysts recovered on the first centrifugation to the mean ' primary recovery ' for a series of trials was highest for brine (92 per cent) ; next in the order of merit were ZnSO4 (88 per cent) and CuNO3 (87 per cent) solution respectively. But here again these differences were not statistically significant. 6. That there was no statistically significant difference in subsequent recovery of oocysts left by the three solutions used as primary medium and all the subsequent recovery was affected in one centrifugation by the first subsequent medium employed. 7. That all the three chemical solutions possessed fairly consistent floating capacities. This fact was brought out when they were played a number of times on different aliquots of the same material (vide Table II). It can be reasonably presumed that the fæcal suspensions contained a uniform distribution of oocysts in them and that all the three solutions handled approximately the same number of oocysts in each experiment. The number of oocysts recovered by a chemical solution did not mean that all the oocysts present in the sample were exhausted, but it only revealed that the number of oocysts which this medium could maximally recover. A small number of oocysts which the levitating medium failed to float to the top, were left suspended somewhere in the column of the floating medium or stayed at the bottom. There- fore, the number of oocysts that rose to the top truly reflected the floating efficiency of a chemical solution. Besides the significantly speedier recovery, and the numerical superiority (though not a significant one) in the number of oocysts recovered, CuNO3 solution has got other advantages over the other two chemical solutions. Firstly, it does not evaporate for long periods ; secondly, it does not crystallise thus making possible prolonged observations, and lastly, it offers a cool and clear visual microscopical field obviating eye strain. Brine recovered greater mean percentage of oocysts (though not significantly so) at first centrifugations. Nevertheless, it is cheap and readily available. Apparently, it has floated more number of oocysts than ZnSO4 solution though the difference was not statistically significant. This observation differs from those of Faust, et al., [1939] and Swartzwelder [1939] who found that ZnSO4 solution was better than brine to concentrate protozoal cysts in human fæces. Both of these media crystallise very quickly under the coverslip thus the slides have to be examined immediately after having been prepared. All told, all the three chemical solutions are well-suited for recovering coccidial oocysts both sporulated and unsporulated from fæcal suspensions. The slightly higher cost of CuNO3 is offset by a few definite advantages gained by its use. For ordinary routine work brine is quite useful.
December, 1954 ] B. S. GILL 257 SUMMARY Literature extant on the various techniques employed so far, for recovering protozoal cysts from human and animal fæces has been briefly reviewed. Their limitations and especially those of the procedures employed by workers on poultry coccidia, have been pointed out. A simple, easy and yet very efficient modifica- tion of Lane's [1923-24] D.C.F. technique for floating coccidia from fæces of poultry has been described. Further, floating efficiencies of copper nitrate, zinc sulphate and common salt solutions (aqueous) have been compared and their respective merits discussed. Eight series of trials using a different fæcal sample each time were conducted with both sporulated and unsporulated oocysts of coccidia. Data thus obtained when submitted to detailed statistical analysis revealed that all the three media were equally suited for the purpose except that CuNO3 affected a significantly speedier recovery than the other two media besides possessing a few other advantages. This medium provided satisfactory visual facility, floated less amount of debris and was not quickly crystallized thus making prolonged examina- tion possible. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The author wishes to place on record his sincere thanks to Dr H. N. Ray for the valuable guidance and helpful criticism ; to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the award of Research Fellowship ; and to Shri S. Sen of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for helping in statistical analysis of the experimental data. REFERENCES Andrews, J. and Tsuchiya, T. (1931). Poultry Sci., 10, 320 Beach, J. R. (1943). Cornell Vet., 23 ; 308 Farr, M. M. (1944). Poultry Sci., 23 ; 277 THE TECHNIQUE AND EVOLUTION OF THE CORE TESTING METHOD OF SHRINKAGE ESTIMATION IN WOOL IN THE U.S.A. By GURBAX SINGH MAHAL and S. JAYARAMAN, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar (Received for publication on 30 April 1953) (With Plates XIV-XV) ACORRECT estimation of the yield (percentage of true wool content) in a consign- ment of wool is of vital importance in the wool trade both for the buyer as well as the seller. Wool, as is shorn from the body of the sheep, contains varying amounts of extraneous substances such as grease, dried perspiration, sand, vegetable matter, tags, etc. These substances are removed during scouring (washing) before the wool goes into the manufacturing processes. Their removal results in a loss in the original weight of wool which in the technical term is referred to as ' shrinkage '. The ' shrinkage ' depends upon various factors like the breed of sheep, the area in which they graze, the nature of feed, the quality of wool and weather conditions, etc. It has been estimated that shrinkage of wool may range widely from 78 per cent to 32 per cent and this is usually referred to in percentage of the original weight of the grease wool. In the absence of a suitable method for the determination of shrinkage in wool, it has been the general practice to estimate the probable shrinkage by visual appraisal. Though the estimation may come close to the actual shrinkage, in majority of the cases it is over-or under-estimated consequently proving disadvantageous to the parties concerned in the trade. The need for an objective, accurate and expeditious method of making this determination had long been felt. Several procedures for the laboratory testing of samples of wool were already available but the major difficulty for which there was no adequate solution was how to get a sample from a large number of bales of wool that would correctly represent the entire lot. The problem is claimed to have been solved by what is known as the ' Core testing ' method developed in the U. S. A., which though has not been taken up by any other wool producing country, is now recognised, in the country of its origin, as an official method for the estimation of shrinkage in wool. Researches regarding further perfection of the method are still in progress in the U. S. A. but the method is worth giving trial in India which may help to improve the present ill-organised wool markets and increase the confidence of foreign buyers in Indian wools in the international wool trade. The present paper is an effort to give a short review and description of the method as practised in the U. S. A. which may be of interest to the wool trade. 259 104 AR/54 16
260 CORE TESTING METHOD [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, EVOLUTION OF THE CORE TEST METHOD Prior to the advent of the core test method for shrinkage determination in wool, several methods on bulk consignments were tried but there was no satis- factory method which could be a reliable check on the accuracy of visual shrinkage. Dantzer [1922] made a series of tests comparing the shrinkage of small samples against entire lots, and he found that four 500 gm. samples drawn from a lot of wool weighing 48,044 lb. gave a shrinkage of 43.4 per cent as compared to 51.4 per cent for the entire lot, a difference of eight per cent. Jones and Lush [1927] found that the reliability of shrinkage in a sample of wool depends upon the size of the sample and the variation in shrinkage between different fleeces in the same flock. Working with fine wool, using 25 fleeces they found that the shrinkage averaged within two per cent of the true value. Spencer, Hardy and Brandon [1928] made a study of the shrinkage of wool taken from the side area of fleeces as compared with the entire fleeces. The shrink- age of the side samples was 56.8 per cent while that of the entire fleeces was 56.95 per cent. Wilson [1929] compared the accuracy of 3-pound triplicate hand samples of wool and found that they varied about three per cent from each other. Burns [1930] found that duplicate hand samples of wool taken from different groups of 50 fleeces gave a yield variation of less than two per cent. Wilson [1931] cited by Robert Burns (loc. cit.) reported a test of three 6- to 7- pound samples made up by separating handfuls of wool at random in triplicate from each of the 47 fleeces before they were tied. Three subsamples of about 200 grams were taken from each of the larger samples and scoured separately. The subsamples agreed in shrinkage but the larger sample varied by three per cent. Buck and Wood [1936] made a comparison of the shrinkage of side samples of fleeces against entire fleeces and found that the average shrinkage of the entire fleeces was 61.86 per cent as compared with 61.55 per cent for the side samples. Davis, Jones and Warwick [1938 and 1939] were able to work out that small shoulder samples of wool taken from the fleece at shearing time showed an average shrinkage difference of 4.94 per cent compared with the shrinkage of the entire fleeces. Burns [1940] noted that a series of small hand samples of wool obtained from sublots of fleeces gave yields within 2.2 per cent of the yields of the entire lots. The sizes of the three lots tested were 82, 126 and 258 bags. It was thus evident that hand sampling methods for various reasons proved inaccurate and slow. To evolve a satisfactory method of scientific sampling and testing consign- ments of wool, the Bureau of Customs of the United States of America conducted an intensive research programme from 1937 to 1941. The efforts resulted in the development of the ' coring ' method now widely used in the U. S. A. for the estimation of shrinkage of wool in bulk consignments.
December, 1954 ] G. S. MAHAL AND S. JAYARAMAN 261 Wollner and Tanner [1941] were the first scientists to apply the principle of core-sampling to grease wool. They found that by drawing 100 cores from a lot of imported baled wool, the composite sample yield should be within one per cent of the lot yield. Johnston, Buck and LeCompte [1944] in preliminary investigations of core sampling applied to United States domestic wools found that in 58 per cent of the tests made, the yield of the sample was within one per cent of the lot yield. Nordskog, Clark and Van Horn [1945] found that 115 cores were necessary to ensure the yield of the sample being within one per cent of the lot yield. Clark, Hughes and Buck [1946] cored baled United States domestic wools and found that 30 cores gave an accuracy within 1.5 per cent between the sample yield and the lot yield. Cronin [1947] conducted some tests regarding the size of the coring tube and used 1- and 2-inch diameter coring tubes in his trials. Johnston and Davis [1949] reported numerous experiments in coring and pro- mulgated the improved sytem of core sampling for yield determination which en- sured practical reliability. It was concluded that the core sampling method for grease wool shrinkage deter- mination could be applied in the field and was found practical, reliable and econo- mical. The procedure consists in the use of an electrically driven tube of standard pattern which takes a sample representing proportionately the physical characteris- tics of wool from different bags. The extracted samples taken with the tube from different bags form a composite sample which is tested in the laboratory for shrink- age determination. The result thus obtained is considered representative of the entire consignment from which the sample was drawn. The method is considered to be far from the error resulting from visual appraisal. The coring method, to the extent of practical reliability, was perfected in 1945 whereby the shrinkage of United States domestic wools can be ascertained within one per cent of the true shrinkages in a great majority of the proof lots tested. Work with regard to the applicability of this method is still in progress. It has also been found practicable that core sampling of sacked grease wool in clips or graded lots can be carried out in the field wherever the representative bags can be assembled and electric current supply for the drilling machine is available. As a routine measure, in the U. S. A., the core sampling is conducted at various stages as given below : (a) Shearing shed : The wool grower sets aside the representative bags to be cored while shearing is in progress and coring is done after all the wool in the lot has been sacked. (b) Wool warehouse : Representative bags from a clip are set aside as the clip is being assembled in a warehouse and are then cored. (c) Loading railway wagons from truck or warehouse : Core samples can be drawn from the representative bags as the clip is being loaded into the railway wagons. This method is the most economical because it involves a minimum of extra labour.
262 CORE TESTING METHOD [Vol. XXIV, Part IV, EQUIPMENT NEEDED FOR SAMPLING The following tools are necessary to carry out the sampling from a consignment : 1. Drill 2. Extraction cylinder 3. Blade retaining ring 4. Cutting blade 5. Cables, plugs, reamer, honing stone, bale cutting knife and spares. Drill : The drill is a three-quarter inch portable electric drill with a pipe handle and a pistol grip. It has a cone-shaped spindle meant to accommodate an extraction cylinder adapter with tapered hole pressure forced on to spindle. Extraction cylinder : This consists of three separate segments welded together, the barrel, cutting end flange and the drill end flange. Originally two types of tubes were used, one 18 inches long and two inches in diameter and the other 30 inches long and two inches in diameter. According to Johnston and Davis [1949] the two inch diameter tubes, both the 30 inch and 18 inch long cylinders, were not found to cut and retain uniform cores because their diameter was not big enough to allow the passage of heavy shrinking greasy lumps of wool and large tags. They also observed that in areas of low density wool, the tube with two inches diameter did not cut and retain the wool but pushed it aside. It was also found that ' roping ' of the cores within the tubes caused them to become constricted and thus to pull out of the tube and remain within the bag when the tube was with- drawn. The authors also reported that the difficulty could be overcome by com- pressing the wool in the bag by a simple wooden beam press but it consumed con- siderable time. The following dimensions and features have been suggested by the authors to obviate the above-mentioned difficulties. (1) 2Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part IV. ] PLATE XIV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Coring equipment 1. The drill. 2. Extraction Cylinder. 3. Blade retaining ring. 4. Cutting blade. 5. Reamer. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Sampling for core testing Photo courtesy, United States Testing Co., Inc. Hobken, N. J. (U.S.A.)
PLATE XV [ Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXIV, Part IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. A wool analytical laboratory Photo courtesy, United States Testing Co., Inc. Hobokin, N. J. (U.S.A.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Coring locations in a bag for obtaining representative sample.
December, 1954 ] G. S. MAHAL AND S. JAYARAMAN 263 many as 60 corings, although coring dense bales may cut down the life to only 20 corings. Blade retaining ring : This is an ordinary ring with two elbow studways the ends of which are meant to lock cutting blade in the cutting blade chamber. The ring fits in the recess of the extraction cylinder. SAMPLING FROM THE BAGS The process of sampling by the core method involves two separate stages for purposes of description : (1) Lots suitable for sampling and (2) the actual sampling. 1. Lots suitable for sampling : It is preferable that the wools to be core-sampled, be as uniform in grade and condition as possible since the accuracy of the results depends far more upon the uniformity of the wool than upon anything else. According to the official standards in the United States Department of Agriculture [1949] it is not practicable to sample lots of less than ten bags or five bales or appro- ximately 2,000 pounds of wool. Accurate core tests require a minimum of 100 cores and it is difficult to draw this number of cores from one or two bags. It has been shown that it is not necessary to draw a sample from every bag in a lot if there are more than ten bags. Sampling of a restricted number of bags on larger lots will give accurate results and with less expense. Bags or bales for being cored are to be selected from all parts of the lot and. should be thoroughly representative. No bags containing only tags or segregated-off wools should be sampled. On the basis of sufficient experience, the United States Department of Agri- culture [1949] has suggested the standards as seen in Table I (a & b) for the number of bags or bales to be cored and the number of cores to be taken according to the size of the lot : TABLE I(a) Standard for bagged lots Size of lot by bags Bags to be cored Cores per bag Total cores 10264 CORE TESTING METHOD [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, TABLE I(b) Standard for baled lots Total number of bales Bales to be cored Cores per bale Total cores 1December, 1954 ] G. S. MAHAL AND S. JAYARAMAN 265 core is then drawn. To extract cores at these locations the coring tube is held at an angle of from 35 to 40 degrees from the surface of the bag and the tube is always pointed along the location line. The arrows on the diagram point in the directions in which the three location lines are to be drawn, and also indicate the direction in which the coring tube should be thrust in obtaining the cores along the given line. This direction of the thrust of the coring tube is always down the centre line from the mouth, then clockwise, along the side line on the left of the foot of the bag, and then down the side line on the left of the mouth of the bag. The bag is to be cored in the specified directions as the clockwise rotation of the coring tube has a tendency to pull it in towards the main mass of wool, thus counteracting the tendency of the rotating tube to pull towards the outside of the bag. The authors report that when the coring tube is held at the 35 or 40 degree angle, at least two layers of fleeces in each bag can be pierced by each core and wool obtained from them, and thus it is probable that at least three, more often four, and sometimes even five fleeces will be sampled with a single thrust of a 24-inch coring tube. They further observed that for bags shorter or longer than the standard six foot bag used in the illustration the distance between the coring locations may be altered so that the pattern of 10 cores per bag can be applied. The samples that have been thus drawn are placed in a moisture-proof container in order to eliminate the possibility of changes in moisture content during transit. The containers then are carefully closed so that no wool will be lost in transit to the laboratory. TESTING OF SAMPLES IN THE WOOL LABORATORY After the core sample has been received in the laboratory, it is accurately weighed with the help of a sensitive balance. In case the size of the sample being too large, a subsample may be made for testing in the laboratory. The weighed samples then go in for sorting. All tags and gross impurities such as pieces of paper twine, heavy dung locks containing no wool, or heavy patches of paint are removed. The impurities discarded represent a loss in the original weight and are thus to be taken into account. The main sort, i.e. the tag-free wool, is then rendered homogeneous by two or more passages through a wool duster which blends the sample and makes it uniform. Further it also opens out the sample of wool for a better action by the scouring liquor. It has been found that it is not necessary to analyse the entire sample for obtaining accurate results. Enough subsamples of the main sort are taken and to these are added proportionate representations of the tag sort. These subsamples of the blended main sort and the tag sort now are ready for scouring and analysis. Scouring. Scouring of the sample is carried out on similar lines as in the com- mercial mill practice. The wool scouring machinery generally consists of a series of vats or tanks called ' bowls '. The common practice is to use the bowls in sets of four to three scouring bowls and one rinsing bowl. The wool is run through a wool opener, then into an automatic feed that delivers the dusted wool into the first bowl of a four-bowl commercial scouring train. This train is equipped with the usual heavy squeeze rolls. The first three bowls contain scouring fluid of standard strength while the fourth bowl contains soft rinse water. Only good textile neutral soap is used and the water must be soft. The wool is agitated in each bowl. The
266 CORE TESTING METHOD [Vol. XXIV, Part IV, temperature of the various bowls and the concentration of soap and soda ash are always maintained steady during the entire process of scouring. The wool is moved in the scouring liquor steadily and slowly by mechanical rakes or forks. It is passed between squeeze rollers which remove the dust and dirty liquor before going from one bowl to the next and finally coming out of the rinse bowl loose and open with a good deal of water squeezed out. The sand and other heavy dirt are allowed to settle on the bottom as the cleansed fibres move along just under the surface of the scouring liquor. After the sample is thus treated it is ready for drying. In core testing laboratories the devices used for imitating the above action vary in different laboratories but the basic idea is to open out the fibres as much as possible to facilitate a better action of the scouring fluids. Any standard of scouring fluid or the agitation of wool in the scouring bowls used in a wool testing laboratory is followed without change for all wool samples received for testing. Drying and blending. After scouring and rinsing the wool sample, it is generally spun in a centrifuge in order to remove the bulk of the moisture after which the sample is placed in a steam heated dryer to remove the remaining moisture. After thorough drying, the impurities such as small pieces of paper twine, vegetable matter, paint, etc. that still remain in the sample are removed by hand. The weight of the dried sample is recorded on bone dry basis by conditioning it in an oven for six hours at 110°C. Ash test. This test is conducted to determine the amount of sand and dirt remaining in the wool. A duplicate subsample from the scoured wool is heated in a crucible over a burner until all organic fumes have been driven off and the wool has been completely converted to a charred mass. This charred material is then heated in an electric muffle furnace at 600°C until the car- bon has been removed and only a light coloured ash is left. The ash along with the container is conditioned in an oven under standard conditions and the weight recorded. Test for determining vegetable matter. A duplicate subsample from the scoured wool is kept in a glass beaker and is then covered with a hot 10 per cent solution of sodium hydroxide until the beaker is half full. The solution and the wool are stirred until all the wool is dissolved. If all the wool does not dissolve it may be boiled until it is completely dissolved. The vegetable matter being insoluble in alkaline solution will stand out suspended. The vegetable matter so isolated is filtered off with the help of a 40-mesh sieve. A wash with five per cent solution of sodium hypochlorite or ' clorax ' is given to remove the last remnants of wool. It is then washed with water, dried and weighed. The residual vegetable matter is then placed in a weighed beaker and conditioned for six hours under standard conditions after which it is weighed and the weight recorded. Determination of grease and soap left in wool. For this test a subsample is placed in Soxhlet Extractor containing alcohol. Approximately 30 c.c. of 95 per cent alcohol is added to a weighed extraction flask. To the extraction condenser is also added alcohol until it covers the wool sample to a point just below the over- flow strip. The alcohol is evaporated and condensed for one hour from the time the overflow strip empties the condenser for the first time. Care is taken to see that the flask is not allowed to boil dry at any time. After the alcohol has run through for
December, 1954 ] G. S. MAHAL AND S. JAYARAMAN 267 about five to six treatments, the extraction condenser is separated from the flask and the excess alcohol in the flask is evaporated from the residual grease. The extraction flask and grease are weighed after conditioning the extraction flask for six hours under standard conditions. CALCULATION OF RESULTS When all the laboratory processes are completed, the clean weight of pure wool fibre without any impurities is known. However, what is commercially known as ' clean wool ' always contains a certain percentage of extraneous matter. In order to bring the laboratory calculation of shrinkage in line with commercial practice, the clean weight of the wool sample is calculated as containing certain standard allowances for impurities. The standard allowances for non-wool components in commercial scoured wool are 12 per cent moisture, 1.5 per cent ash, and 0.5 per cent extractives. In other words, the standard clean weight of the sample is cal- culated so as to contain an added allowance of 14 per cent non-wool materials. As an example, if the clean weight of pure wool fibre is 43 grams then the clean weight of the sample is calculated as 43 × 100/86 or 50 grams. CONCLUSION The core test method is considered to be an accurate and practical method so far devised for determining shrinkage in wool. Though the procedure and technique of applying this test to carpet wools will essentially be the same, there are some differences as a consequence of the difference in the density, gross weight and dimen- sion of the bales. According to the degree of compression, bales may be divided into low density, medium density and high density. If the stock is 20 lb. or less per cubic foot the bale is said to be low density bale while a medium density bale measures 20 to 30 lb. per cubic foot. If it contains more than 30 lb. per cubic foot it is considered a high density bale. The slight differences arise as a result of the low density bales or bags tending to expand during the insertion of the coring tube which consequently causes locks of wool to be pushed aside by the cylinder rather than being cored and forced into the sampling tube. All these aspects shall have to be considered in deciding the correct method of sampling carpet wools both in designing the size of the tube and the actual method of sampling. According to Lyons (loc. cit.) the bulk of carpet wools exported to the U.S.A. are packed in medium density bales, and these are reported to be the easiest to core whether in the grease or dry scoured condition. The author further reports that it may be effectively cored by penetrating the cylinder slowly and sinking the full length of the cylinder into it. It has been suggested that in the sampling of carpet wools not less than 15 per cent of the bales uniformly distributed through- out the lot are cored. The laboratory technique for subsequent analysis of the wool sample is essentially the same. Although the practical utility of the core testing method has not been fully utilised in the other wool producing countries of the world, it may prove a useful application in solving the wool marketing problems in India. Before the method is taken up, it will have to be determined whether it is applicable to carpet wools with the same efficacy as it has proved in the U. S. A. for fine wools and cross-bred 1 04 AR/54. 17
268 CORE TESTING METHOD [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, wools. Due to a wide range in the quality of carpet wools and the wide range of the density in packing, it is doubtful whether the core sample will be able to represent any consignment. However, this difficulty can be overcome by conducting a preliminary investigation in the method of sampling and a final solution worked out to help to evolve a suitable method for handling carpet wools. There is a lot of talk in the international wool trade about the uncertainty of the quality standards of carpet wools exported from India and in order to create confidence in the foreign buyers it seems that this method may be given a trial before long. REFERENCES Anonymous. (1949). Core Sample Analysis for determining Shrinkage of Grease Wool. U. S. Dept. of Agri. Bull., March, 1949 Anonymous. (1947). Core Testing for Determination of Wool Yield and Shrinkage. U. S. Testing Co., Inc. Bull., of 1947 Anonymous. (1948). Core Testing of Wool. Bull. of the American Conditioning House Inc. 1948 Anonymous. (1945). Progress in Wool Shrinkage Research. U. S. Dept. of Agri., Prod. Market. Adm. Washington, D. C. Buck, Warner M. and Wood, L. A. (1936). Cited by Burns, R. H. (1940) Burns, R. H. (1930). Wool Shrinkage Determination by means of Small Samples. Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. A Prod., 196 to 203 Burns, R. H. (1940). Sampling Clips or Wool for Shrinkage Determination. A report made in 1938 in Wool Shrinkage Project, U. S. Dept. of Agri. P.M.A. Mineographed pub. Cleark, R. T., Hughes, G. C. and Back, W. M. (1946). Core Sampling to Determine Shrinkage of Baled Montana Wools. Montana Agri. Exp. Sta., Cir. 185 Cronin, F. D. (1947). Progress in Core Sampling Domestic Wools. Nat. Wool Grower, 37 : 10 Dantzer, M. Robert. (1922). The Experience of France in Testing Wool for Shrinkage During the War Hearings on the Tariff Act of 1921. Sen. Doc. 108. 67th Congre. Second Session, V. 3630-3634 Davis, S. P., Jones, J. M. and Warwick, B. L. (1938 & 1939). Ann. Rep. Texas Agri. Expt. Sta. Johnston, A. (1950). Core Sampling of Wyoming Wools 1946-1948. Univ. Wyo. Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 295 Johnston, A., Buck, W. M. and LeCompte, G. C. (1944) 1943. Wool Shrinkage Studies in the Depart- ment of Agriculture. Nat. Wool Grower, 34, 4, 17-20 Johnston, A. and Davis, S. P. (1949). Core Sampling of U. S. Domestic Grease Wool for Shrinkage Determination. Univ. Wyo. Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull. 292 Jones, J. M. and Lush, J. L. (1927). Methods of Selecting Wool Samples in Shrinkage Studies. Rec. Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod., 115-117 LeCompte, G. C. (1950). Wool Yield Determined by Laboratory Analysis. Text. Industr. January, 1950 Lyons, Stanley C. (1950). Carpet Mill Develops Mechanics of Coring. Text. Industr., January, 1950 Nordskog, A. W., Clark, R. T. and Van Horn, L. (1945). Sampling Wool Clips for Clean Wool Yield by the Core Boring Method. J. Amer. Soc. 4, 2 : 113-121, May, 1945 Spencer, D. A., Hardy, J. T. and Brandon, J. (1928). Factors that Influence Wool Production with Range Rambouillet Sheep. U. S. Dept. Agri. Tech. Bull. 85 Wilson, J. F. (1929). The Determination of Shrinkage of Scouring Small Samples. Nat. Wool Grower, 21 : 716 Woolner, H. J. and Tanner, L. (1941). Sampling of Imported Wool for the Determination of Clean Content. Industr. Engng. Chem. 13
ABSTRACTS Pregnancy toxaemia in grassland flocks. HOLMES, J. R. (1953). Vet. Rec. 65, 20, 299-303 PREGNANCY toxæmia is one of the most important metabolic diseases of sheep and causes a considerable annual loss to the sheep industry. The incidence in individual flocks is often high and mortality is frequently over 90 per cent in affected animals. This paper comprises a review of some of the observations made on certain clinical aspects of the disease. As a result of this work, it is considered that in the great majority of cases the disease is preventable and prophylactic measures are therefore considered in some detail. Pregnancy toxæmia is usually defined as an acute metabolic disease affecting ewes during the last few weeks of gestation, mostly between 120-130 days of preg- nancy. It is characterized by acetonaemia with fatty infiltration of the liver and often associated with a low blood sugar level. This disease tends to affect ewes carrying twins or triplets. The principal symptoms are those suggestive of a nervous and muscular disturbance. The results of this investigation indicate that the development of pregnancy toxæmia depends upon the relationship between f270 ABSTRACTS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV In part 2, the breeding season of six British breeds of sheep kept at Cambridge from 1948-51 have been discussed. The oestrus percentages were inversely correlat- ed with the day length and were maximum from November to January. The December, 1954 ] ABSTRACTS 271 even after alkaline hydrolysis. The substance could be isolated from the sperma- tozoa band testis of bull, ram, boar, rabbit and man. Chemical and physical tests have indicated the presence of elemental sulphur in it. The methods of extraction in crude form from bull spermatozoa and for the biological assay are described. (P. N. S.) Protein requirement of ewes during breeding and pregnancy.E. W. KLOSTERMAN, D. W. BOLIN, M. L. BUCHANAN, F. M. BOLIN and W. E. DINNUSON. (1953). J. Anim. Sci., 12, 188-200 THE experiments described in this paper are in continuation of the previous work by the authors in which they found that the recommendation of the National Research Council to provide 0.20272 ABSTRACTS [ Vol. XXIV, Part IV, reservoir animals kept in complete isolation from other cattle. Their bedding and hay were sterilized, and the only food which was not sterilized was the silage and the concentrate ration. Since the Onderstepoort silage was shown to contain 4 per cent acid, it was believed that any tubercle bacilli originally present in it would be destroyed. The concentrate ration could carry viable tubercle bacilli, the source of such infection was much more likely to be human than bovine. During the last 30 years not a single case of tuberculosis was found in this group of isolation stables. These animals were destroyed and in every case a post-mortem examina- tion was made. Lesions were present in six out of the seven animals. The seventh had actinomycosis, which was thought to have been responsible for the sensitiza- tion in this animal. In four, the bovine type was identified. In one, the organism was lost and in the sixth case the results were not yet available. It was concluded that a human being with open pulmonary tuberculosis due to the bovine type of organism must have been responsible for the infection. All the available humans were tuberculin tested, medically examined and screened. A number of them proved positive to tuberculin test but no clinical cases were found on medical examination and on screening. Since the personnel was constantly changing, it was not possible to examine all those who were in close contact with these animals during the last two years. In another group of three positive reactors no lesions were found and it was considered that these animals were sensitized due to infection with human type of organisms. The attendant in close contact with these animals was shown to have pulmonary tuberculosis on screening, but upto the time of report the organisms could not be identified in his sputum by direct smear examination, nor by biological test. The experience with the Onderstepoort herd suggested that man may become the source of infection to the bovines with human type of organisms and thereby sensitize the animals, and that pulmonary lesions due to the bovine type of organism may become a dangerous source of infection for bovines. The author concludes that man as a source of infection for bovines can no longer be regarded a rare academic curiosity, but must be faced as an important practical issue, where a serious attempt is being made to eradicate tuberculosis from cattle and to maintain them free from sensitization. Where the bovine as a source of infection has been eliminated and tuberculin tests are not carried out annually, serious disastrous set-backs may occur, when a human being with open lesions due to the bovine type of organism, introduces the infection in a herd. (B.R.S.G.) The use of lapinised virus vaccine to suppress active rinderpest in susceptible grade cattle. BROTHERSTON, J. G. (1951). Vet. Rec., 63, 235-238 IN this article the results of a field trial, with lyophilised, lapinised strain of rinderpest vaccine in the face of severe infection, have been reported. This vaccine was tried in preference to formalised spleen vaccine and Kabete attenuated goat virus vaccine, because the lapinised virus vaccine, though still in
December, 1954] ABSTRACTS 273 experimental stage, evinced favourable laboratory trials and was not likely to cause a severe reaction in grade cattle. Twenty times the minimum immunising dose, which was 0.005 gm. of the batch of K21 of the lapinised virus vaccine, was used. At the time of inoculation a proportion of calves, milking cows, bulls, heifers, and dry and in calf cows, were all showing symptoms of rinderpest. It was observed that the lapinised virus vaccine inoculated, so interfered with the extension of the infection, that, rinderpest was prevented from decimating the herd. There appeared to be no adverse effect on the milk yield. Also, the vaccine proved to have no un- toward effect on pregnant cows as no abortion or stillbirth of calves was noticed. The vaccine established a firm immunity in other herds either infected or with fair chances for contact. It is significant that there was no spread of the disease from the immunised animals to those of the unfenced neighbouring farms. The results of the above-mentioned vaccination were encouraging even when susceptible cattle were vaccinated under conditions when cattle were beginning to die in large numbers on the infected farm. (M.S.J.) New theories on methods of selection and mating in poultry. JAAP, R. G. (1952). World's Poult. Sci. J., 8, 2, 114-27 TO produce chickens superior to their parents, one should take into account the production of eggs for selecting breeders. The number of eggs laid up to 500 days from the date of hatching, gives a better idea of the hen's qualities. In the opinion of the author, to large a body size at the time of maturity may interfere with early sexual maturity ; a desirable characteristic determining total annual egg production. Where facilities do not exist for long-term trapnesting, the number of eggs laid during autumn and winter months only can serve as a means to assess the breeding worth of a hen. The author suggests that allowance be given to differences in the laying performances due to heredity and environment. A hen to qualify as a breeder should have laid 30 to 40 eggs more than the average of the flock to allow for environmental influences. For growth-rate studies in the early stages, it is recommended that males and females should be weighed separately. After determining the average weight for the sex in each of the hatches, the weight of a chicken is recorded not in pounds or ounces but as to how many tenths of a pound or ounce it is over or under the average for its sex, e.g. as +3, or 274 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIV, Part IV, Life history of the coccidian parasite-Eimeria arloingiREVIEWS ANIMAL NUTRITION By L. A. MAYNARD (Published by the McGraw Hill International Corporation, New York, 1952, pp. 494. Price $7) PROF. Maynard's book on animal nutrition is a standard text-book and requires no introduction. The present volume is the third edition of his book, first publish- ed in 1937. The rapid expansion in the field of animal nutrition is well illustrated by the fact that the second edition, published in 1947, became so obsolete in four years' time that a fresh revised edition became necessary. The bringing out of this edition also shows the eagerness of Dr Maynard in keeping his book up-to-date and incidentally explains its popularity. In revising his book for a new edition, Dr Maynard has been faced with two problems. The first has been to study and evaluate the tremendous number of papers on animal nutrition which are being published every year and the other one has been to incorporate the latest findings without markedly increasing the size of the new edition. On perusal of this new edition, it must be admitted that the author has succeeded remarkably in achieving both these objects. In maintaining the size of the book at par with the previous edition, Dr Maynard has eliminated some material which was included in the second edition. One such elimination has been discussion, in a tabular form, of the protein requirement figures for growth of dairy cattle, as found by the factorial method of Blaster and Mitchell. In my opinion, the retention of these figures would have been useful. Indeed it would have been very helpful for the student as well as teachers, if the author had included another table giving the protein requirement for growth of various species, as found out by different methods, as well as for the sake of comparison the corresponding figures as recommended by the N.R.C. Similarly in Chapter III, the portion of biological oxidation and reduction might have been profitably enlarged by a consideration of the cytechrom system. In Chapter IV, some elaboration of the tricarboxylic acid cycle (Krebs cycle) would have been helpful. From the point of view of students in the tropical countries, it would have been very helpful, if some discussion about the effect on extreme climates on animal health and production had been included. Some reference to critical temperature has been made in Chapter X but nothing has been mentioned about the large number of papers on the subject of environment on feed intake and milk production. Dr Maynard cites (In Chapter XII, p. 312) the reference of Mitchell that the endogenous nitrogen in ruminants is 0.03 gm. per kg. body weight. Kehar and Mukherjee have however shown that on a nitrogen-free ration the value is really as low as 0.02 gm. of nitrogen per kg. body weight. These authors [1949] have also shown (Indian J. Vet. Sci. 19, 125) that the metabolic faecal in nitrogen output 275
276 REVIEWS [Vol. XXIV, Part IV, of cattle depends more on the level of faecal dry matter output rather than on dry matter consumption. The book is singularly free from mistakes. The only one discovered by the reviewer is on page 333, where it has been stated that 'the data in Table XXVI are somewhat higher than those arrived at by the factorial method (Table XXV)'. The reverse seems to be true. However, the book can be highly recommended and should find a place on the shelf of every student of animal nutrition. Its usefulness will be more appreciated in the tropical countries if some space is given in the next edition to extensive work now being carried out in India. (N.D.K.) ENTOMOLOGY (Medical and Veterinary) By D. N. ROY and A. W. A. BROWN (Published by Excelsior Press, Calcutta 1954, pp. 423, Price Rs. 30) ENTOMOLOGY is a branch of zoology in which Medical and Veterinary men attach the least importance to details of morphological characters unless these have a direct bearing on the identification of the disease producing agents. They pay special attention to the life-history, bionomics and natural enemies of the insects with a view to discover a weak point in their life-cycle for the adoption of suitable control measures. Entomology has now acquired a separate status which has its back- ground in preventive medicine. As there are very few authoritative books on this subject in this country, the medical entomologists experience considerable difficulty in obtaining the requisite information as it is scattered in several scientific journals. A good book on the subject was long overdue and Dr D. N. Roy's book on ento- mology, published in 1940, filled the lacuna and is being largely used as a text- book by medical and veterinary students and those interested in public health. It is gratifying to see that within a short period of eight years the author has brought out a revised edition, incorporating all that is known till now, in collaboration with Professor Brown, M. B. E., Ph. D., Professor and Head of Department of Zoology, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada. Special emphasis is laid in this book on life-history and bionomics of the disease-producing insects with a view to facilitate their identification with certainty and also for the final adoption of suitable control measures. This book has been written with a special bias for medical entomology and until such time a separate treatise on veterinary entomology is brought out, it will continue to be useful for the veterinary entomologists also.
December, 1954] REVIEWS 277 The book is divided into two parts ; part one deals with entomology of disease- producing agents, while the second part deals with the insecticides of vegetable and chemical origin with special emphasis on the control of the insects that transmit human and animal diseases. The get-up of this book is excellent and the author deserves the gratitude of all of those interested in this subject for having brought together all available informa- tion regarding the life-history, bionomics, behaviour, identification and control of all the arthropods that are chiefly responsible for the causation of diseases in man and animals. (S.R.R.). DISEASES OF LIVESTOCK By T.G. HUNGERFORD (Published by Graham Book Co., Martin Place and Elizabeth Street, Sydney 1953, pp. 660, Price 6s.) THE author has tried to write in simple language the difficult subject of livestock diseases for the use of students of agricultural colleges, graziers, extension workers and other non-veterinarians. The language is non-technical as far as the subject would permit and is precise and lucid. The diseases have been dealt with species- wise and in the beginning of each section there is a key for differential diagnosis, which is most useful for recapitulation, even for a trained observer or a busy practi- tioner, who has no time to go through the whole text, to pin down the cause of a certain malady. This, however, as the author points out, is merely a guide to see the details of the disease from the main text. In view of the importance of sheep industry to Australia, the chapter on sheep diseases has been dealt with rather well and extensively. General information given separately about age of puberty, gestation period and about feeding and management of different types of livestock given in the beginning of different sections is most useful. In a book written in 1953 one would however expect a little more information on many of the current topics like pining in lambs in the U.K., selenium poisoning in the U. S. A., use of B. C. G. vaccine for control of T. B. in livestock, etc.; if for nothing else but for the sake of completion. The geographical incidence of the diseases is not mentioned in detail; reference is made about the occurrence of the diseases in Australia and New Zealand only and occasionally in other countries. Important diseases like rinderpest and foot and mouth which occur in this country and several other countries do not find any mention. It is also mentioned that in haemorrhagic septicimia, according to some theory the cause is a virus. This seems to be out-dated since Pasturella boviseptica is a well-established cause of the disease. Similarly the name of a number of important parasites and the species of snakes found in India are missing. Such shortcomings limit the utility of this well-written book to Australian conditions only. (H.K.L.). 104 AR/54. 19
ANIMAL NUTRITION RESEARCH IN INDIA By K. C. SEN (Issued by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and published by McMillan & Co., Ltd., Calcutta, India, 1953, pp. 370, Price Rs. 15) SIR John Russel [1937], while reviewing the work of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, had commented on the fact that much of the research in agricultural science in India was not as widely known in the international sphere, as it deserved to be, and had recommended the preparation of a series of critical monographs setting forth the results obtained by Indian workers and comparing them with similar work done elsewhere. This monograph is, therefore, one of a series of animal husbandry monographs issued by the I.C.A.R. The review of the work in the monograph is divided into 11 chapters and apart from considering the subject of animal nutrition in a comprehensive manner, the last chapter deals with investigations carried out on many aspects of dairy research. The monograph also includes work carried out by Indian workers in foreign laboratories. The monograph may be considered as one of standard scientific manuals on the subject which could be confidently used as a text reference by scientific workers in the field of animal nutrition. It must, however, be clearly indicated that this is a review of research in animal nutrition rather than a text-book. Workers in India will find this a handy compilation of a good deal of data on the work carried out in India, and also an authoritative review series279 REVIEWS [Vol. XXIV, Part IV, The manual has a reference section and author index, and is well-bound. Dr. Sen, the author, has many years experience of animal nutrition research in India. He was the first Officer-in-charge of the Animal Nutrition Division, which was set up and developed under his guidance at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar. He has, however, while holding his present assignment as Director of the Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore, constantly kept himself interested in this vital subject. As such, the publication is an authoritative one and should meet the needs for a handy, informative and a reliable book on the subject. (M.R.M.). MGIPCVol. XXV, Part I March 1955 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 12 or 20s. Rs. 3 or 5s. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA, INDIA 1955 ICAR. 6. XXV. I. 750.
CONTENTS Vol. XXV, Part I (March 1955) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal. Original articles Page HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP IN RAJASTHAN AND ITS CONTROL (WITH PLATE I AND ONE MAP) Gopal Singh Rathore and N. S. Sankarnarayan 1 OBSERVATIONS ON THE NUCLEIC ACIDS OF EIMERIA TENELLA RAILLIET AND LUCET, 1891 (WITH PLATE II) H. N. Ray and B. S. Gill 17 SEARCH FOR ANTHELMINTICS AMONG INDIGENOUS REMEDIES. I. ACTION OF ACETYL SAPONIN FROM ANAGALLIS ARVENSIS LINN. ON ANNELIDES AND HELMINTHS (WITH PLATES III-IV) Ajit Singh, J. D. Kohli and D. B. Parihar 25 NOTE ON A METHOD OF PROTECTING FOWLS AGAINST SPIROCHAETOSIS S. G. Dixit 31 VALUE OF A FEW PROPRIETARY PREPA- RATIONS IN THE CONTROL OF ECTO- PARASITES OF LIVESTOCK P. Balarama Menon, C. M. Sen Gupta and B. C. Basu 35 PHYSIO-CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION ON PLACENTAL FLUIDS OF BUFFALO E. S. E. Hafez and M. A. M. Kamal 39 FACTORS INFLUENCING THE TITRABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK (WITH ONE TEXT-FIGURE) A. A. Badr 47 DRESSING OUT PERCENTAGE IN SUCKLING BUFFALO VEALS A. L. Badreldin 61 BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF AQUATIC SNAILS (A PRELIMINARY ACCOUNT) WITH PLATE V M. Anantaraman 65 Abstracts 69 Review 74
HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP IN RAJASTHAN AND ITS CONTROL By GOPAL SINGH RATHORE, P. D. MATHUR and N. S. SANKARNARAYAN, Veterinary Department, Rajasthan (Received for publication on 21 July 1954) (With Plate I and one map) AMONG the factors contributing to heavy mortality in sheep in Rajasthan, helminthiasis is the primary one. In England, a highly developed country, the Ministry of Agriculture reported that the sheep industry suffers greater loss from parasitic worms than from any other cause [U. K. Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, 1949]. The same remark applies to Rajasthan where little or no effort has been made to control such outbreaks. During the two years of in- vestigations on sheep mortality in Rajasthan, helminthiasis has been found to be the chief cause. There is a common belief that Rajasthan is an arid and rainless desert, and, since moisture and parasitic life go together, it is supposed that animals there are free from helminthiasis. This belief is based on ignorance of the conditions of livestock in villages. In the first instance, a major part of Rajasthan is not a desert. The real desert is seen only to the west of Jaisalmer, on the borders of Pakistan and in patches in Bikaner, Jodhpur and Jaipur Divisions. The rest, comprising about three-quarters of the whole, has good vegetation and cultivable soil. It is true that Rajasthan has comparatively less rainfall and that the western portion is a drier area. It is the western areas that possess the valuable livestock wealth of Rajasthan. The eastern portion comprising Bharatpur, Kotah and Jhalawar, is a region of tolerably good rainfall closely resembling the climate of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Bharat. In desert or rainy Rajasthan, like other Provinces, there is high incidence of helminthiasis and the following facts support this view : 1. Of the 80 faecal samples of sheep, cattle, horses, camels and dogs, recei- ved in the Veterinary Investigation Officer's laboratory for routine examination, 33 proved positive for helminth ova. 2. Faecal samples of camels in Jaisalmer district, the driest area, showed larvae of the worms causing verminous bronchitis. Later, cases of verminous bronchitis were reported by the field staff. 3. ' Pitto' and 'Gillar' were reported in Ajmer in 1949, in Sawai Madhopur district in 1953, and later in many other places. [Annual Report of Diseases, V.I.O.; 1949, 1953, 1954]. 4. Fascioliasis was recorded in Chitoorgarh district in 1949 [loc.cit.], and again in 1953 [loc.cit.]. 5. Ancylostomiasis was recorded in a number of Alsatian dogs in Jaipur Veterin- ary Hospital [loc.cit., 1953]. 1 11 2 AR/54 1
2 HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP [Vol. XXV, Part I, 6. Guinea worm, Dracunculus medenensis, in man is reported to be widespread and is known as 'Nair' in Udaipur, Jaipur and also in the canal region of Jodhpur. The disease is under investigation. In order to confirm the prevalence of helminthiasis and its distribution, a sur- vey, restricted to sheep and goats, was undertaken. Sheep and goats fall easy prey to helminthiasis and are of great economic importance. Material from them is easily available and handled. The first survey was confined to nematodes. MATERIALS AND METHODS OF SURVEY (a) Faecal samples from about six sheep selected at random, weak and healthy, were examined for egg counts by Bhalerao's method [1935]. At the same time identifications were done wherever possible. The localities selected were as far as possible representative of districts, teshils or regions. Samples were taken when- ever such localities were visited for investigation of outbreaks or other work. As such it may be mentioned here first that faecal samples were examined during diff- erent seasons and that any seasonal variation in the load of helminths may make these figures somewhat inaccurate for comparison between different regions. But the presence of helminthic ova, though possibly not enough at the time of ex- amination to cause a clinical syndrome, is an adequate criterion to signify the danger of helminthiasis as the infestation is capable of causing the clinical disease when a favourable opportunity occurs in the animal body. (b) In city slaughter houses, entire alimentary canals from the pharynx to the anus of sheep and goats were removed and the helminth parasites collected, examin- ed and identified (in some cases) by the Helminthologist, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar. This work was carried out only in the cities of Jaipur, Jodhpur, Udaipur, Kotah and Bharatpur. It is important to remember in this connection that no sheep or goats are imported into Rajasthan, and that animals slaughtered in these cities for human consumption are from Rajasthan only. (c) Whenever post mortem examinations were done for diagnosis or investiga- tion, helminth parasites were collected, identified and preserved. By these methods almost the whole of Rajasthan, from Raisingnagar to Sirohi and Jaisalmer to Sironj was surveyed. Places not included are Barmer, Alwar, Dholpur, Dungarpur and Banswara districts. The result of survey is given in Table I. TABLE I Egg counts and helminths found and collected from different localities Locality Average faecal egg count per gm. Worms collected and identified from P-M material or slaughter house material Remarks JAIPUR Government Sheep Farm 1,200 (100-1,200) H. contortus Confirmed by the I. V. R. I. Experi- mental Centre O. columbianum
March 1955] G. S. RATHORE, P. D. MATHUR AND N. S. SANKARNARAYAN 3 TABLE I4 HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP [Vol. XXV, Part I, TABLE IMAP I] [Indian J. vet. Sci., vol. XXV, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 112 AR/54
Indian J. vet. Sci., vol. XXV, Part I ] [ PLATE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A fine Bap ewe [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bap sheep [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Udaipur sheep [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Marwari sheep [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Malpura sheep [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chokla sheep
March 1955] G. S. RATHORE, P. D. MATHUR AND N. S. SANKARNARAYAN 5 Table I shows that the only place where sheep were free of helminths is Bap, a teshil of Jaisalmer district. This place has no trees but this teshil is a widespread plain of good grass. No cultivation is possible as the plain is practically waterless with a yearly rainfall of about five inches. Tanks or ponds are often 10 to 20 miles apart. Such tanks are the only source of water supply to man and animals. The sheep found there are of good size and are the healthiest so far examined in Rajasthan (Plate I, fig. 1). The shepherds are nomadic but seldom go out of Jaisalmer district. The sheep of Udaipur are the poorest specimens and carry the heaviest load of helminths (up to 4000 ova per gramme of faeces) (Plate I, fig. II). Udaipur is full of lakes, canals and low valleys. Despite this, pastures are scanty as moist places are cultivated and dry areas are rocky. The sheep, therefore, are weak and constantly exposed to worm infestation. Moisture is thus not the only condi- tion favourable to helminthiasis. Kotah, a riverine district, has healthier sheep and goats due to good grazing available, and their condition is far better than others except those of Jaisalmer. Bikaner district in general is dry but the animals are not free from helminthiasis. Raisingnagar in Bikaner is a sandy waste recently irrigated by canal and brought under cultivation. Where land is irrigated it is naturally cultivated with the result that no pasture lands are available, and the condition of sheep in canal area is not as good as in the dry areas of south Bikaner. Ajmer and Jaipur are comparatively dry areas with tolerably good seasonal pastures. The animals are better than those of Udaipur and Pali (Jodhpur) (Plate I, fig. I) but poorer than those of Jaisalmer or Bikaner. Nagour area (Jodhpur), like Bikaner, is quite dry with no grazing and animals there which are very poor carry a heavy load of worms. The results of this limited survey establish beyond doubt the widespread incidence of helminthiasis and the causes of its varying intensity. The map illustrates these points in the different regions of Rajasthan, including Ajmer State. The most favourable condition for the spread of helminthiasis is, therefore, malnutrition due to absence of pastures, and not necessarily water-logging or heavy moisture, though such conditions may aggravate. This finding has been supported by Gordon [1948] who, in his lengthy and comprehensive paper presented at the annual meeting of the Australian Veterinary Association in 1947, describes experi- ments illustrating the effect of the nutritional plane on resistance in sheep to H6 HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP [Vol. XXV, Part I, (c) Accordingly East Rajasthan, Bharatpur, Kotah and Jhalawar are only moderately infested. (d) Central Rajasthan is the most highly infested area, with Udaipur and Pali districts the worst affected. (e) West Rajasthan (excluding Ganganagar district), comprising Jaisalmer and Bikaner, are comparatively free and the sheep there are the best in Rajasthan. (f) Jodhpur Division has a variable incidence according to the availability of grazing. Sirohi district produces good sheep but the free entry of innumerable infested flocks from the districts of Bombay State causes the pastures to be overgrazed and infested. The effect of widespread helminthiasis in Rajasthan needs no better illustra- tion than the loss of condition and heavy mortality in sheep in addition to reduced wool production. Numerous reports from all over the world are available on this subject. Franklin [1946] reported that intestinal parasites influence significantly the utilization of calcium and phosphorus. The results of this work suggest that general unthriftiness and atrophic bone changes in heavily parasitized sheep may be the result of infestation. Of the species of helminths affecting sheep and goats, examinations have proved that Haemonchus contortus and Oesophagostomum columbianum, found in almost all regions, are the most important ones. T. ovis was also commonly found but since they are comparatively harmless they were disregarded. In Central Rajasthan (Jaipur, Udaipur, Jodhpur Divisions and Ajmer State), the animals were found to be heavily infested with H. contortus. It is in these regions that most of the outbreaks and mortality have occurred during 1952-53 and 1953-54. The National Veterinary Medical Association of Great Britain [1949] has reported that H. contortus is a voracious blood sucker causing as much anaemia as that produced by constant bleeding. Death may occur even before loss of condi- tion. The symptoms described in this report are identical with those seen during outbreaks. In this region repeated outbreaks caused heavy mortality during 1952-53. In Kotah area the animals were found affected by O. columbianum only. No outbreak of haemonchosis was reported from Kotah and Bundi areas. The worms of M. expansa and Avitillina were not uncommon. In one instance Bunostomum was identified by the Helminthologist, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar. Phenothiazine as an Anthelmintic Concurrently with the survey and investigation, a field experiment to find out a cheap and efficient anthelmintic for mass treatment was carried out. In selecting such an agent, consideration must be given to (a) cheapness, (b) efficiency, (c) ease of administration, (d) freedom from toxicity and (e) availability. Sighetti and Marsh [1947] in Montana recorded favourable response to phenothia- zine in a flock of heavily infested sheep. They report that rams treated with pheno- thiazine showed an increased live-weight with decreasing egg counts, and produced
March 1955] G. S. RATHORE, P. D. MATHUR AND N. S. SANKARNARAYAN 7 finer wool than the controls. The pasture infestation was also considerably reduced. In the U. K. [Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, 1949] with a much smaller sheep population than Rajasthan and better pastures, the mortality from worm infection was estimated at 452,400 yearly by the National Veterinary Medical Association, London. This loss has been substantially reduced by the widespread use of phenothiazine. Krishna Rao [1953] in Madras carried out an extensive survey and control of haemonchosis by phenothiazine. His findings may be studied for details. The success attained on the comparatively poor sheep of South India suggests that similar control in Rajasthan will be followed by outstanding improvements. Experiments with phenothiazine in Australia [Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1946] proved that small doses showed progressive increase in efficiency against O. columbianum. The largest dose 0.5-1.0 gm. used daily eliminated H. contortus. In a recent demonstration by the University of Liverpool Department of Veteri- nary Medicine a five-month old lamb, showing a faecal count of 46,000/gm. (H. contortus), was treated with 15 gm. of phenothiazine and destroyed after five days. Not a single worm was found in the abomasum on post mortem examination. Franklin, et al., (loc. cit.) state that Trichostrongylus species may be specifically attacked by tetrachloroethylene medication, but that the degree of control exercised on this parasite by small and regular routine dosage with phenothiazine for the more dangerous H. contortus and O. columbianum ensures that it remains pathologi- cally insignificant. The Ministry of Agriculture, England [1949], also recommends the use of phenothiazine for periodical dosing of sheep and lambs as a curative and preventive measure against helminths. Edwards [1948] studied phenothiazine, its chemical structure, mode of action and excretion, and the effects of administra- tion. He recommended it as the most efficient veterinary anthelmintic for nematode infestation. Rogers [1948] studied the action of phenothiazine on helminths and found that the drug appeared to effect a breakdown of the nematode glycogen. Gordon [1949] in his paper read at the 14th International Veterinary Congress discussed the comparative efficiencies of different anthelmintics and concluded that phenothiazine has such a wide range of action that a diagnosis of the type of hel- minth present was not necessary. He had already reported in 1945 that since it is effective irrespective of destination in the digestive tract when swallowed, it can be used against any helminth, even O. columbianum. Copper sulphate has a very limi- ted efficiency only if swallowed into the abomasum. This depends on the closure of the oesophageal groove which is known to be very irregular. Sheep in which this closure fails remain infested and readily re-infest pastures. Even when closure is complete Gordon and his co-workers have shown that at least 40 per cent of nema- todes escape the action of copper sulphate. An additional and most important aspect of helminth control by phenothiazine is the inhibition of ova production by worms in the intestine when exposed to routine dosage. Not only is ovulation greatly depressed but even the ova passed in the droppings are sterile and do not hatch out to re-infest pastures. Copper sulphate (with or without nicotine) has no such action.
8 HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP [Vol. XXV, Part I, Some idea of the astronomical figures involved in H. contortus ova studies may be given by the following summary based on recent work in Australia on the known comparative efficiencies of phenothiazine and copper sulphate/nicotine mixture. Two sheep, each with a worm burden of 20,000 adult H. contortus, are exemplified: Statement showing (a) worms in intestine and (b) living ova (in lakhs) passed daily by them after successive treatment by (i) phenothiazine or (ii) copper sulphate nicotine Treat- ment Before dosing After first dose After second dose After third dose After fourth dose i (a)20,000 (b)780 (a)2,000 (b) nil (a)200 (b) nil (a)20 (b) nil (a) nil (b) nil ii (a)20,000 (b)780 (a)8,000 (b)600 (a)3,200 (b)240 (a)1,380 (b)103.5 (a)532 (b)39.9 From the statement it is clear that phenothiazine should be the drug of choice. For the work reported here ' Phenovis ', a form of water dispersible phenothiazine, was selected. The demonstrations were planned to show to the shepherds how routine dosing of sheep with an efficient anthelmintic pays dividends by increases in live-weight and wool production and reduction in mortality. EXPERIMENTAL METHOD Local flocks of about 100 sheep each selected at (a) Cariawas, Udaipur, mostly Chokla breed, (b) Sirohi, mostly Marwari breed, (c) Nimli/Pali, mostly Marwari breed, (d) Jayarampura (Reengus), Marwari and few Shaikawates, and (e) Malpura (Tonka), Malpura breed, formed the material for experiments. All places are in the central region of Rajasthan which is shown by the survey to be a specially helminthic belt. No attempts were made at a selection of breeds, but it will be seen that the Marwari breed predominated except in Malpura and Udaipur. Each flock, mostly ewes and lambs, was divided into two treated and control groups. Those treated were given phenothiazine periodically according to the schedule shown in Table II. It may be seen from Table II that the numbers of treated and controls varied. This was due to some non-co-operative shepherds unable to understand the purpose of the experiment. The object of the varying dosage schedule was to determine the optimum effective routine within the minimum period. To facilitate correct estimation of the results, records were maintained which are described below in detail. Live-weight A spring balance of maximum capacity of 100 lb., accurate up to two ounces, and tied to a stout pole carrying at its hook two cross tapes stitched to a gunny sheet, was used in the field. Each animal was wrapped in the gunny bag, lifted and the weight recorded. The average weight increase for each group are given in columns 11 and 12 of Table II. Weighings had to be done from 8 to 10 p.m. after the flock returned from grazing, as that was the only time when shepherds were willing to co-operate.
March 1955] G. S. RATHORE, P. D. MATHUR AND N. S. SANKARNARAYAN 9 TABLE II Results of ' Phenovis ' treatment in different localities 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Serial No. Dose in gm. Interval (weeks) Total ed od (months) Number of doses Locality Breed of sheep Age group Number of sheep Average live-weight increase Wool yield T C T C Differ- ence T C Differ- ence lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. 1 5.0 4 2 3 Jayarampura Marwari and few Shaika- wati Adult sheep 7 22 7.7 7.0 0.7 15.7 24.7 1.0 2 5.0 6 3 3 Sirohi Marwari Lambs 13 11 30.2 18.0 12.2 20.4 16.7 3.7 3 5.0 8 4 3 Pali 10 HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP [Vol. XXV, Part I, Wool Production Previous production records were not available and at the start of the demons- tration almost all the flocks were found to have had their summer clipping. They were sheared again at the end of the demonstration approximately six months after the first clip. Wool figures were supplied by the Inspectors and Supervisors of the Sheep and Wool Department, Rajasthan. These figures should be considered only for comparison between treated and control groups. The average wool pro- duction of each group is given in columns 14 and 15 of Table II. Dosage The figures for increased live-weight and wool production in the treated groups are of obvious significance. It is clear also that no advantage is gained by increas- ing the dose or the number of dosings. In Malpura and Sirohi 5 gm. doses gave the highest increase in live-weight and wool. Even after increasing the dosage at Udaipur and Pali the results were poorer than those for Sirohi and Malpura. The best results were seen in Sirohi with an average increase of 15 lb. live-weight and six ounces of extra wool. These sheep were dosed only three times, begining with 10 gm. and followed by 5 gm. at six-weekly intervals. Under the conditions of the demonstration on nomadic sheep constantly exposed to re-infestation it was never considered that phenothiazine dose would totally eliminate the worm burden. As already stated the object of the experiment was to determine the dose and dosage schedule that would reduce this burden to a low level that could be safely borne by local animals, thus enabling them to make the best use of the grazing available and to produce significant increases in live-weight and wool. No advantage was seen by increasing the dosage in Udaipur in comparison with the lower dosage in Sirohi giving better results. Hence it is fair to conclude that in lambs 5 gm., re- peated four to five times at monthly intervals, and in adults 10 gm., followed by 5 gm. at six-weekly intervals for three months, is all that is required to produce satis- factory results. If good results are not obtained other conditions, e.g. fascioliasis, paramphistomiasis, etc., should be suspected. TABLE III Statement of weight gains in ' Treated ' and ' Control ' Locality Breed Age Average live-weight increase Average wool yield Treated Control Difference Treated Control Difference (lb.) (lb.) (lb.) (lb.) (lb.) (lb.) Malpura Malpura Lamb 10.2 8.2 2.0 15.5 11.0 4.5 Malpura Malpura Adult 16.2 1.0 15.2 21.6 18.6 3.0 Udaipur Chokia do. 11.5 3.3 8.2 14.8 13.2 1.6 Pali Marwari do. 14.6 8.7 5.9 25.1 23.5 1.6 Jayarampura do. do. 10.2 7.2 3.0 15.8 14.7 1.1 Sirohi do. Lamb 30.2 18.0 12.2 20.4 16.7 3.7 Sirohi do. Adult 20.1 5.0 15.1 19.5 13.5 6.0
March 1955] G. S. RATHORE, P. D. MATHUR AND N. S. SANKARNARAYAN 11 Table III is a consolidated statement of results shown according to the locali- ties. It is clear that Sirohi animals, in spite of a heavy helminth load, gave far better results than those of Pali and Jayarampura. Even Udaipur animals, with the heaviest infestation responded better to treatment than those of the same breed in Pali and Jayarampura. Phenothiazine, or for that matter any anthelmintic, cannot be expected to supply nutrition. Hence maintenance of condition and increase in weight and wool must also depend on the grazing available. Grazing conditions were not uniform in all the five places. Sirohi and Malpura have good pastures and phenothiazine exerted the most favourable influence on these animals; whereas in Pali, a canal area of cultivated land, the grazing avail- able is insufficient. Similarly in Jayarampura uncultivated land is sandy, carrying no pasture. Udaipur, in spite of its numerous lakes, is barren and rocky and offers very little grazing to sheep. The water-logged areas, on the other hand, offer good breeding ground for parasites. This perhaps is the reason that animals at Udaipur are the poorest in Rajasthan and harbour the heaviest load of helminths. The relatively poor results seen must be ascribed to these factors. Apart from nutrition, certain breed characteristics may also play their part and helminth infestation may exert an inhibitary influence on them. When the animal is freed from parasites, such characteristics may be shown more prominently. The Marwari sheep is a hardy animal and, with good grazing available at Sirohi and when freed of their parasites, the animals gave the best results. Phenothiazine thus satisfies all the required conditions for a good anthelmintic. Consideration has to be given to the cost of treatment and also keeping in mind the poverty prevailing in Rajasthan : 'Cheapness' is not necessarily a lower cost of pur- chase unless the use of the drug is accompanied by expected results. Table IV shows the actual cost of ' Phenovis ' in relation to the return it gave in terms of increased live-weight and wool. TABLE IV Economics of 'Phenovis ' treatment T=Treated C=Control Locality Number of sheep Dose in gm. Number of doses Total quantity in gm. Cost of Treatment at Rs.0-2-6 per 10 gm. Total live- weight gain T : C Total wool yield T : C Rs. A. P. (in pounds) (in ounces) Malpura 16 5 5 400 32.0 72 13 5 4 260 149.5 39 9 5 5 225 171.0 .. Total 38 .. .. 885 13 11 0 352.5 111 Udaipur 11 5 6 330 37.4 29.7 10 10 4 400 88.0 7.0 11 10 5 550 105.6 16.5 10 10 6 600 112.0 18.0 Total 42 .. .. 1880 29 6 0 343.0 71.2 Continued on next page
12 HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP [Vol. XXV, Part I, TABLE IVMarch 1955 ] G. S. RATHORE, P. D. MATHUR AND N. S. SANKARNARAYAN 13 OUTBREAKS OF HELMINTHIASIS AND CONTROL As a further proof of the prevalence of helminthiasis in Rajasthan and the efficacy of phenothiazine in controlling it, the following histories of mortality in sheep are recorded here. These outbreaks occurred mostly in Central Rajasthan, as marked in the map opposite to page 4. They were heavy during 1952-53 as a result of successive years of famine ; the animals loosing vitality and power of adjusting co-existence between host and parasite. Grazing became scanty through failure of the rains; flocks migrated in search of pastures to the adjoining States of U. P. and M. B. and returned infested with helminths to spread the infestation. The outbreaks started just after the earlier monsoon and continued until the beginning of summer when the pasture became absolutely dry. In winter, helminthiasis, helped by dry cold, famine and low vitality, also played havoc among the sheep. The outbreak in the Government Sheep Research Farm, Jaipur, started just after the onset of the monsoon. Dying sheep showed abdominal pain, grinding of teeth and circling before collapse. No pyrexia was shown. Some showed diarrhoea and dysentery, but a few succumbed before that stage. The most conspicuous sign was the pass- ing of soft faeces consistent with that of a calf, sometimes with thick mucus and tinge of blood. Faecal examination showed some dead worms which were con- firmed by the helminthologist, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, as H. con- tortus. Egg counts were upto 1,200 gm. which must be considered heavy. Faeces for 24 hours were collected in hospital from one sheep after anthelmintic and purgative treatment. H. contortus and O. columbianum were identified, the former in larger numbers sufficient to cause acute haemonchosis. All animals on the farm were given 10 gm. of ' Phenovis' which stopped further mortality. These animals are specially looked after and are normally in good condition. They are generally kept in separate paddocks away from infestation. Enquiry revealed that they were taken during summer to graze on a neighbouring pasture where village flocks also graze, thus becoming infested. The second outbreak was at Sirohi and surrounding villages. The former Sirohi State has a good rainfall and plenty of pasture, but, being a border area, many flocks from Gujarat come there for grazing. The areas have thus become enzootic and outbreaks occur yearly. In 1952-53 sheep and goats died from causes then unknown. The history, epidemiology and signs were similar to the helmin- thiasis noted above. Faecal examinations showed ova and larvae, the counts being 2,800 gm. (H. contortus with few T. ovis). Mass treatment with 'Phenovis' fol- lowed by 10 c.c. doses of 5 per cent copper sulphate stopped deaths. The third outbreak was at the sheep and goat asylum, Moklawas, situated in a valley about 12 miles from Jodhpur and having a population of about 2,000 male goats and sheep. This is a charitable institution to which animals, purchased from butchers by the Jain community, are left to die a natural death. The animals graze only in the area attached to the asylum with the result that many of them are under-fed. Additional animals introduce infestation. The area is practically dry, the only source of water being a well. The whole flock was heavily infested with a mortality rate of 8 to 10 daily. The sick showed the same signs at first and in many death supervened from pneumonia. Post mortem examinations showed numerous
14 HAEMONCHOSIS IN SHEEP [Vol. XXV, Part I, H. contortus in the abomasum, duodenum and the small intestines. 'Pimpley gut' and large numbers of O. columbianum were also evident. The mucosa was found congested and haemorrhagic. The other signs were peritoneal oedema and anaemia of tissues. Pneumonic smears failed to reveal specific organisms and the condi- tion was considered to be secondary. One sheep in extremis was saved by a dose of 'Phenovis'. Experimental treatment was given to study the comparative efficiencies of (a) carbon tetrachloride, 1 to 2 c.c. dose on 240 animals, (b) 'Phenovis ', 10 gm. on 900 animals, and (c) one per cent copper sulphate, 50 to 100 c.c. on 50 animals. RESULTS Mortality continued in group (a), but may possibly have been due partly to drug toxicity. In the other two groups mortality was much reduced. The only water supply for the animals is a deep well from which water is lifted and filled in a stone trough round the well. One such trough was measured and the volume of water was determined to which sufficient quantity of copper sulphate was added to make the solution 0.5 per cent. Instruction were left to keep the other two troughs empty, so that for about a week all the animals were made to drink only the weak copper sulphate solution. After a week the trough was emptied. Treatment for a week checked the mortality to an appreciable extent. The following factors were clearly realised at the time of observations : (a) the infestation cannot be cleared effectively by copper sulphate solution for reasons already discussed, and (b) re-infestation from the limited and over-stocked grazing area is inevitable, and can be controlled only by routine phenothiazine dosage which, in these animals of very low economic value, is probably unjustified. At Maroth, a village near Kuchaman Road station, in a similar outbreak, suspected to be of rinderpest, the compounder in charge of the veterinary dispensary used serum but the mortality continued. The symptoms were similar to those described in this article but post mortem examination showed lesions typical of rinderpest, including ulcerations and diphtheritic deposits on the lips, tongue, pharynx and abomasum. To eliminate rinderpest a transmission was done with spleen from a case and the emulsion inoculated into a goat which showed no re- action during the following week. When used for goat tissue vaccine-production after 15 days it reacted typically for rinderpest. Similar outbreaks with identical symptoms were seen at Kokria, Rohilla in Jodhpur district, Dudu in Kishangarh district and Tilaunia in Ajmer State. At Tilaunia also the lesions seen on post mortem examination were similar to those of rinderpest and, in spite of serum inoculation, the mortality continued. A transmis- sion with negative results eliminated rinderpest. All outbreaks were controlled by mass treatment, mostly with ' Phenovis ' only. Besides these investigations, reports were received from many other places. Ketri reported ' circling disease '. Some reported rinderpest while others suspected pleuropneumonia. All histories being suggestive of helminthiasis, particularly haemonchosis, mass treatment with ' Phenovis' and copper sulphate was recom- mended which stopped all mortality. Judging from these outbreaks, and from informations gained from enquiries made, it is obvious that thousands of sheep
March 1955] G. S. RATHORE, P. D. MATHUR AND N. S. SANKARNARAYAN 15 have died, since the lack of communications and the ignorance of villagers lead to outbreaks not being reported. It is thus proved, beyond doubt, that helminthiasis is responsible for a very heavy annual mortality. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We are indebted to Shri Samarth Raj, Director of Agriculture, Rajasthan, for his keen interest in the control work carried out. The staff of the Veterinary, Sheep and Wool Departments actively co-operated in carrying out the investigation and control work. Specially valuable help was given by Shri N. L. Narayan, Sheep and Wool Development Officer. Shri Daulat Singh, District Veterinary Officer, Udaipur, and Dr K. R. Lodha, Veterinary Officer, Sirohi, also extended their help. We acknowledge with thanks the free gift of ' Phenovis ', and the co-operation by Messrs. Imperial Chemical Industries (India) Ltd. REFERENCES Annual Report of Disease (Veterinary) (1949-50). Investigation Officer, Rajasthan and Ajmer Annual Report of Disease (Veterinary) (1952-53). Investigation Officer, Rajasthan and Ajmer Annual Report of Disease (Veterinary) (1953-54). Investigation Officer, Rajasthan and Ajmer Annual Report of Council of Sci. and Industry. Res. Aust. (1946) 20th A. Rep. 18-20, 24-35 Bhalerao, G. D. (1935). I. C. A. R. Sci. Monograph 6, 8 Edwards, T. T. (1948). Jt. Pub. Imp. Agri. Bur. 12, 36 Franklin, M. C., Gordon H. Mcl. Catherine, H. and Macgregor, H. (1946). Coun. Sci. and Ind- ustr. Res. 19, 1 Gordon, H. Mcl. (1948). Aust. vet. J. 24, 17 OBSERVATIONS ON THE NUCLEIC ACIDS OF EIMERIA TENELLA RAILLIET AND LUCET, 1891 By H. N. RAY* and B. S. GILL, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, Kumaon, U. P. (Received for publication on 20 October 1954) (With Plate II) DURING the last decade or two, intracellular protein synthesis has aroused keen interest among cytologists. Efforts to reveal this phenomenon auto- matically brought nucleotides into the picture, which have been extensively in- vestigated. According to Cohen [1946] non-parasitic cells contain three types of nucleotides : (a) ribose nucleic acid (RNA); (b) desoxyribose nucleic acid (DNA); and (c) Ribose -5- phosphate nucleotides existing as various coenzymes such as adenosine-triple-phosphatase and others necessary for a number of reactions in- volved in the metabolism of phospholipids, carbohydrates, proteins; and vital processes like the oxidation-reduction, etc. In fact, according to him, the pro- duction and utilisation of energy and substance in all non-parasitic cells, in a large part, depend on the activities of the last named nucleotides. He concludes : " At the present state of knowledge concerning metabolism, one might say that an orga- nism which has lost the use of its ribose-5-phosphate neucleotides would be unable to survive except as an obligate parasite ". Thus a study of the nucleotides in parasites offer an interesting field for investigation, in order to understand the intricate relationship between the host and parasite. The present investigation, therefore, was undertaken with a view to gather as many facts as possible regard- ing the distribution of nucleic acids at various stages of the life cycle of Eimeria tenella. Cytochemical methods alone were employed throughout the course of this investigation. Only a few references on the subject are available, e.g. some observa- tions on the malaria parasites [Breindel and Jirovec, 1932; Jirovec and Cerney, 1932, Ungo-Mugdon, 1938; Cohen, 1944; Dean, 1945, Lillie, 1947 ; Lewert, 1952 ; Sen Gupta, et al., 1953]; Babesia bigemina and Babesia foliata [Ray, 1938 ; Ray and Raghavachari, 1941 ] a few ciliates [Seshachar, 1950; Seshachar and Das, 1953] and Leucocytozoa [Wingstrand, 1948 ; Borg, 1953 ]. PROCEDURE The same material as used in the studies of various polysaccharides of E. tenella [Gill & Ray, 1954 a, b] swas also employed in this investigation. Briefly the procedure adopted was a follows: pieces of caeca were fixed in Serr al's (45 minutes), Carnoy's (2 hours), Zenker's acetic (overnight) fluids and in 4 per cent neutral formalin (overnight, after pre-treatment with 30 per cent sucrose solution * At present Professor of Protozoology, School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta. 112 AR/54 17 3
18 NUCLEIC ACIDS OF EIMERIA TENELLA [Vol. XXV, Part I, at ±4°C. for 2 hours) as recommended by Kurnick [1950 b]. They were washed wherever necessary (not the alcohol fixed ones which were given only a couple of changes in 95 per cent alcohol) dehydrated, cleared in toluol and embedded for 45 minutes only in tissue mat (Fishcer & Co.). Temperature of the paraffin bath was kept at 52-53°C. to avoid depolymerisation of DNA. Sections were cut 4-6 µ thick. For the demonstration of DNA, Feulgen technique [Cowdry, 1928], and to test the veracity of this reaction method of Oster and Mulinos [1944] was adopted. The latter procedure confirmed the ' truth' of Feulgen reaction. In Feulgen's technique by missing acid hydrolysis, it was shown that the performed aldehydes were absent in the parasite and the host cells as well. Preparations made from the variously fixed tissues gave comparable results except in those that were fixed in formalin after the method of Kurnick. Here, DNA in nuclei of both host cells and parasites appeared as a solid homogeneous mass [ thus confirming the observations of Kurnick (loc. cit.) on the nuclei of chick red blood corpuscles and mouse liver cells ]. Al- cohol fixed tissues were stained with Unna-Pappenheim's stain [ after Brachet, 1953 ] to distinguish between the state of polymerisation of DNA, and also for the location of RNA. Tissues fixed in alcohol were treated with ribonuclease [ Kunitz, 1950] and subsequently stained with Unna-Pappenheim's stain. Comparison of preparations stained in this manner with similarly stained counterparts but not submitted to enzyme digestion provided confirmation of the results obtained by staining with pyronin. After enzyme digestion both the parasite and host cells lost all affinity for pyronin, except where it has been indicated otherwise in the text of this article, proving the reliability of pyronin to stain nucleic acids of low polymerisation. As the specificity of Feulgen's technique has now been universally accepted [ Oster and Mulinos, 1946 ], confirmation of observations thus made after digestion with desoxyribosenuclease was found unnecessary. NOTE.Indian J. vet. Sci., vol. XXV, Part 1] [PLATE II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Photomicrographs depicting reactions for nucleic acids in Eimeria tenella. In the process of photography coloured filters have been used wherever necessary. Hours within parenthesis denote the stage of infection. Fig. 1. First generation schizont (Feulgen, 52 hours × 1820). Note reaction in nuclei. Hypertrophied nucleus of the host cell is seen lying facing the lumen of gland. Fig. 2. Second generation schizont (Feulgen, 80 hours × 1820). Note reaction in nuclei of the parasite and in the hypertrophied nucleus of the host cell. Fig. 3. First generation merozoite (toluidine blue, 72 hours × 3200). Note intense basiphilia in nucleus and at the ends especially the pointed end. Fig. 4. Second generation schizonts (toludine blue, 72 hours × 1820). Note intense basiphilia both in karyosomes and cytoplasm. Fig. 5. Second generation schizonts (methyl-green pyronin, 80 hours × 140). Note the appearance of Pyronin-positive material in schizonts reaching maturity. There was no green staining material in the parasites. Fig. 6. Second generation merozoites (methyl-green pyronin, 120 hours × 1500). Note marked reaction (due to pyronin staining) at the posterior (acute) and. Fig. 7. Second generation schizonts. Vacuoles in the cytoplasm represent karyosomes of the parasite. Reaction (due to pyronin staining) has shifted from nuclei to the cytoplasm. This precedes segmentation. Fig. 8. Microgametes (methyl-green pyronin, 142 hours × 1820). Dark staining of the comma-shaped bodies of gametes is due to methyl-green staining. Fig. 9. Microgametes (Feulgen, 142 hours × 3350). Note reaction in the bodies of microgametes. Fig. 10. Oocysts (Feulgen, 148 hours × 1600). Note positive reaction for DNA in the organisms marked with arrow and absence of any reaction in others. Fig. 11. Oocyst and macrogamete (toluinine blue, 152 hours × 1600). Note intense basiphilia in oocyst at the micropyle (a) and in the peripheral globules of a macrogamete (b). Fig. 12. Just-entered sporozoite (methyl-green pyronin, 39 hours × 3203). Note intense pyronin staining umps on either side of the nucleus. Green-staining was absent.
March 1955] H. N. RAY AND B. S. GILL 19 RNA, whereas the cytoplasm evidenced only slight reaction and that too just prior to segmentation. Merozoites liberated from them showed RNA chiefly in the karyo- some and at their more pointed end (Plate II, Fig. 3). Second generation trophozoites exihibited marked reaction for RNA only in the nuclei but when the schizonts were reaching maturity RNA appeared in abun- dance in the cytoplasm (Plate II, Fig. 4, 5 and 7). Merozoites formed from them showed RNA chiefly concentrated at the posterior end (Plate II, Fig. 6), though slight reaction was apparent throughout the cytoplasm and also in the karyosome. Its 'Goigi' region showed no pronounced reaction for RNA. Karyosome of microgametocytes throughout gave simultaneously strong re- action for RNA in the actively dividing nuclei and in the cytoplasm right from the beginning of their development. In microgametes moderate reaction for RNA was appreciable in the comma-shaped body only. Nuclei of both microgametocytes and microgametes always reacted strongly for DNA (Plate II, Fig. 8, 9). Macrogametocytes gave strong reaction for RNA in the karyosome but with the approach of maturity the reaction here became lighter but stronger in the cyto- plasm. Peripheral globules reacted strongly for RNA (Plate II, Fig. 11b). Oocystic wall gave slight reaction for RNA, but it was pronounced at the micropylar end only (Plate II, Fig. 11a). Karyosome and siderophilous body of sporozoites evidenced a slight reaction for RNA but one or two big lumps of the acid were also found placed round about the nucleus, especially towards the siderophilous body (Plate II, Fig. 12). Nucleus of the parasitised cells was always considerably hypertrophied and contained abundant quantities of a high polymer of DNA; while the enlarged nucleolus was rich in RNA. Examination of toluidine blue stained preparations [Brachet's technique, 1953] indicated the same locations of basiphilia at various endogenous stages of E. tenella as described above. DISCUSSION Irrespective of the organisation of any structure, formation of protein molecules is in general a process of vital importance to all the living matter. Because of the constant association of nucleic acids with self-reproducing units, e.g. viruses, plastids genes, etc. the conclusion that the former is involved in protein synthesis becomes inescapable. Casperssons school of thought believes nucleolus as the chief site of protein synthesis, but Brachet and his associates attach more importance to the microsomes, as a major portion of RNA is bound to these ultracentrifugable cyto- plasmic particles. This hypothesis has been supported by Keller [1949], Hultin [1950], and Sickevitz and Zamecnik [1951]. They show that incorporation of tagged amino acids is more rapid in microsomes than in nucleoli. Works of Sonneborn [1950] London, et al., [1950], Brachet [1950] and Borsok, et al., [1951] tend to strike a via media between these two hypotheses, in that the participation of nucleus in protein synthesis is an indirect rather than a direct one. The nucleus probably controls synthesis or multiplication of microsomes, but these must be the true agents of protein synthesis. The question how exactly the nucleic acids influence
20 NUCLEIC ACIDS OF EIMERIA TENELLA [Vol. XXV, Part I, the protein synthesis, leads us to a realm of speculation. They are said to 'funnel energy into protein synthesising mechanism' [Spiegelman and Kamen, 1946; Muller, 1947]. Some believe that they invoke some sort of templet action (chiefly based on an analogy of Astbury and Bell's X-ray crystallographic experiment [1948]. Danielli's hypothesis that nucleic acids act as 'folding' and 'trapping' agents is quite plausible, but proof of incontrovertible nature has yet to be furnished in its support. The euchromatin (DNA) of E. tenella appeared most active in the nuclei of macrogametocytes, sporozoites and trophozoites, a little less so in the schizonts while the nuclei of merozoites were of the least order in this respect. These differences in the metabolism of DNA is in keeping with the differential demands on the nuclei for repeated division. A microgametocyte gives rise to innumerable microgametes the whole comma- shaped body of which now appears to be full of DNA. The total absence of detec- table DNA in a macrogamete is surprising, for, it can be expected to contribute its quota of hereditary characters which are known to be transmitted only through genes of which the DNA is the single largest constituent. Sporozoites and trophozoites are marked by rapid nuclear division to form schizonts. When a destined number of nuclei is produced protein metabolism of their cytoplasm is geared up which is now showing a high RNA content for it has now to apportion around each nucleus to form merozoites. Though RNA is present only in the form of a stretch across the body of the microgametes yet the concentration of the acid is very high in them as indicated by its brilliant red colour with pyronin. The karyosome and the cytoplasm of microgametocyte give fairly strong reactions for RNA but judging from the dimi- nishing colour reactions with age it can be safely presumed that as the parasite reaches maturity a physiological depression, (at least as far as protein metabolism is concerned) sets in. From the evidence presented it can be deduced that there exists certain correlations between the chemical findings on one hand and tempo of the biological activities on the other in Eimeria tenella. Observations on E. tenella add to the view that most rapidly growing parasites undoubtedly synthesise rather large amounts of nucleic acid. Deane [1945] and Ball, et al., [1948] have established that Plasmodium knowlesi possesses a very high rate of nucleic acid synthesis. Such as acitivity has also been reported from the blood stream form of African pathogenic trypanosomes [Moraczewski and Kelsey 1948]. The work of Painter [1945] Moses [1950] and Seshachar [1950] shows that ciliate cytoplasm has abundant quantities of RNA, which is in keeping with the rapid multiplication of the protozoa. Majority (nearly 90 per cent) of oocysts have failed to show the presence of DNA in them whereas a small proportion definitely contained highly polymerised DNA (Feulgen and methyl- green-positive) both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm (Plate II, Fig. 10). Extra nuclear distribution of DNA is known only in a few instances, such as the Purkinje cells which contain only DNA in their cytoplasm [cited by Seshachar, 1952], whereas in a small minority (approx. 10 per cent) of oocysts of E. tenella it is present along with RNA. Preer [1950] demonstrated microscopic Feulgen positive particles, which are known to be the Kappa factor in the cytoplasm of the killer race of Paramaecium. It is of the
March 1955] H. N. RAY AND B. S. GILL 21 nature of plasmagene which in collaboration with K, killer factor in nucleus, confers upon its possessor the facility of secreting a poisonous substance which kills individuals of sensitive race [Sonneborn, 1939]. Lwoff [1952] also described Feulgen positive particles, the provirus particles, in certain lysogenic bacteria. The present investigations adds another example showing the occurrence of extra nuclear DNA. Oocysts showing DNA in them and those devoid of it are all seen at the same stage of maturity. This rules out the possibility that DNA might be developing in all oocysts at a certain stage. Further, it may be said that the oocysts devoid of DNA which occur in solid majority may be abnormal ones ; but this is contrary to the experience that a majority of oocysts voided in faeces develop normally and are viable. It may also be argued that these oocysts which possess DNA and occur in minority may not be normal ones, but the ordinary cytological and histological methods of staining fail to detect any differences in their structure which could lead one to believe that there occurs a proportion of oocysts which are abnormal. Moreover, there seems to be no plausible reason to believe that the possession of DNA by them will be derogatory to their survivability. It may also be argued that these cytoplasmic DNA particles may be elements of viral nature or may be bacteria which have gained access to the developing macrogametes or oocysts. But, this analogy with bacteria or virus is by no means perfect. It is probably safe to regard that these particles have a peculiarity of their own and their precise role in the organism yet remains to be understood. However, it should be admitted that DNA is rarely found outside chromosomes, and we may, therefore, be dealing with a phenomenon of limited occurrence. Therefore, it is concluded that there are actually two types of oocysts in the experimental infections due to a ' pure' line strain of E. tenella which behave differentially with regard to the distribution of nucleic acids in them. A large number of sporozoites studied, both in the lumen and just entered epethelial cells, show a moderate quantity of low polymer of DNA in their nuclei. The facts that all the sporozoites possess DNA, and a solid majority of oocysts do not contain DNA at all, are not reconcilable with each other. These findings of E. tenella drag the discussion to an already hotly disputed subject of the conver- sion of RNA into DNA22 NUCLEIC ACIDS OF EIMERIA TENELLA [Vol. XXV, Part I, 10 per cent) of oocysts showed DNA both in the nucleus and cytoplasm. An indirect evidence has been presented to suggest de novo formation of DNA in this coccidium during the process of sporulation. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Our thanks are due to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the award of the Research Fellowship in Parasitology to one of us (B. S. G.) which made this investigation possible ; to Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, for providing laboratory facilities ; and to Dr J. Brachet (Brussels) and Dr P. C. Sen Gupta (School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta), for gifts of the enzyme ribonuclease employed in these studies. REFERENCES Astbury, W. T. and Bell, F. O. (1938). Nature, 141 : 747 Ball, E. G., and McKee, R. W., Anfinsen, C. B., Cruz, W. O., and Geiman, O. M. (1948). J. Biol. Chem., 175 : 547 Borg, K. (1953). Comm. from Stockholm from Vet. Med. Inst., Stockholm. *Borsook, H., Deasy, C. L., Haagen-Smith, A. J., Keighley, G ; and Lowy, P. H. (1951). Fed. Proc., 9 : 154 (original not seen) Brachet, J. (1950). Experientia, 6 : 294 March 1955] H. N. RAY AND B. S. GILL 23 Painter, T. S. (1945). Trans. Conn. Acad. Arts Sci. 36 : 443 (original not seen) Preer, J. P. (1950). Genetics, 35 : 344 Ray, H. M. (1938). Indian J. vet. Sci. 8 : 183 SEARCH FOR ANTHELMINTICS AMONG INDIGENOUS REMEDIES I. ACTION OF ACETYL SAPONIN FROM ANAGALLIS ARVENSIS LINN. ON ANNELIDS AND HELMINTHS By AJIT SINGH*, J. D. KOHLI and D. B. PARIHAR**, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow (Received for publication on 17 June 1954) (With Plates III-IV) ANAGALLIS arvensis Linn. (Primulaceae, Hindi26 SEARCH FOR ANTHELMINTICS [Vol. XXV, Part I, thus obtained was in the form of brownish micro-crystalline powder insoluble in water. Solution of acetyl saponin was obtained as follows : The required quantity was dissolved in the minimum quantity of 10 per cent NaOH and the solution neutralised with 10 per cent HCl adjusting the pH. between 7-8. The solution was finally made up with tap water to desired concentration. The vermicidal action of the acetyl saponin from A. arvensis was studied on earthworm, leeches, cestodes and nematodes. Wide and shallow dishes were em- ployed in order to avoid the death of worms by drowning. Experiments were de- signed to observe (i) the minimum time required to cause the death of all the worms and (ii) the behaviour of the worms in the solution. Control experiments with the diluent adjusted to equal pH were put side by side. A modified Trendelenburg apparatus was used to record the spontaneous movements of the worms under different experimental conditions. One end of the worm was attached to a light frontal writing lever by means of a thread and fine steel hook fixed to the prostomium. The posterior end was secured to the bottom of a cylindrical glass container by means of another steel hook fixed in a bent glass tubing, held inside the glass container from the top. The container tube was filled either with tap water at room temperature or with NaCl below 0.3 per cent strength in case of earthworms ; but for tape worms, Ringer's solution at 37°C. maintained by a constant temperature bath was used. Experiments on tape-worms were performed on mature proglottids of Moniezia species from sheep and goat. Only vigorously moving segments from freshly received parasites were found satis- factory. About an inch long piece was taken and tied by thread at both the ends. Comparative studies on exposure under identical conditions to well-known anthelmintics such as Kamala (Rottlera), carbon tetrachloride and extract filic (B. P.) were also done to have an estimate of the potency of the acetyl saponin in terms of known anthelmintic remedies. RESULTS The results of vermicidal activity are given in Table I. TABLE I Vermicidal activity of acetyl saponin at a dilution of 1 : 1000 Test worms Species No. of experi- ments Immediate reaction Delayed reaction Earthworms Pheretima pos- thuma 4 Irritation and increase in movements Depression and death in 3-4 hours Leeches Hirudinaria gra- nulosa 3 Do. Contraction, motionless death in 6-8 hours Roundworms Toxocara mystax 5 Slight increase in movements Motionless but alive after 18-24 hours Tapeworms Moniezia expansa Moniezia benecleni 6 Marked contraction and depression Relaxation and death in 30-40 minutes
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXV, Part I ] [ PLATE III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Plate III. Action of drugs on tapeworms Ringer's solution was replaced by the drug at[PLATE IV [Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXV, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Plate IV. Action of drugs on earthworm Drug solution added atMarch 1955 ] A. SINGH, J. D. KOHLI AND D. B. PARIHAR 27 It was observed that in concentrations of 1:1000 and 1 : 5000, the drug exerted its irritant effect on earthworms and leeches soon after these were placed in the solution. The movements were stimulated and became more marked ; the worms tried to get out of the solution. Thereafter they became progressively sluggish until death supervened. Leeches, which normally have the tendency to hold on to the surface by the help of their anterior and posterior suckers, lost this power in the drug solution and lay contracted. Nematode worms were found to be very much depressed after 12 hours of dipping. After 18-24 hours they were completely motionless but death did not occur. This could be observed by changing over the parasites to hot water above 40°C. which induced convulsive movements of the worms. The reaction of scolices and mature and immature segments from freshly received cestode parasites were observed. Immediately after putting the worm in the solution the movements were very much depressed followed by complete shrinkage and tonicity. With this reaction of thickening and shortening, the proglottids cease to move after which the parasite relaxes and increases in length. In another series of four experiments, 18 earthworms were put in each of the three dilutions of the drug. After every 2, 5, 10, 20, 30 and 45 minutes and 1, 2 and 3 hours, two worms were removed each time and washed with running water, then putting them in fresh tap water in separate dishes. They were kept under observation later for a period of 24 hours. This method could not be applied to tapeworms. The results are given in Table II. TABLE II Minimum time (in minutes) of contact with test solutions to cause fatal injury to earth- worms Dilutions Acetyl saponin Kamala Carbon tetra- chloride Extract filic. (B.P.) 1 : 1000 1028 SEARCH FOR ANTHELMINTICS [Vol. XXV, Part I, tonic contraction and the spasm, which results on addition of the drug, was main- tained for 10 and 18 minutes respectively (Graphs C and D). The worm appeared to die at the end of this period and post mortem relaxation followed since no peristalsis was recorded once the drugs were put in. The tapeworm, however, reacted differently to extract arecanut (1 per cent). In this solution, after a primary reac- tion like the control (Graph B), there was gradual diminution in frequency and ex- cursion of movements of the worm which completely disappeared in 12-15 minutes. The effect of various drugs on earthworm is shown in Plate IV. The earth- worms have much stronger contractions normally than a preparation of tapeworm. The effects of acetyl saponin and extract filic. in the same concentration as tested on the tapeworm were, slight stimulation followed by progressive depression till the movements were totally arrested in 1½ hours by acetyl saponin (Graph A) and in 30-35 minutes by extract filic (Graph C). Extract arecanut (Graph B) had a similar action on earthworm as on the tapeworm, i.e. a gradual diminution in the frequency and excursion of movements right from the beginning of the contact with the solution and causing a complete arrest in about 2½ hours. DISCUSSION Earthworm has been largely employed in the screening of anthelmintics ever since Sollman [1918] reported that the drugs which are non-toxic to the earthworm are not likely to be active, while drugs which are lethal to this worm may possess anthelmintic activity. This principle has been followed and confirmed, among others, by Jenkins and Manchey [1936]. Olkers and Rathje [1941] also reported that where ascaris and annelids are affected by the same drug, there does exist some sort of parallelism between their responses. Other workers have, however, strongly condemned the use of earthworm in anthelmintic studies as 'irrational'. Lamson and Ward [1936] could not find any correlation between the responses of earth- worm and roundworm to the drugs that they tested ; Baldwin and Moyle [1949] also disapproved of the use of earthworm in the screening of anthelmintics because of important physiological differences between annelids and nematodes. The authors, therefore, employed both annelids and cestodes, and nematodes for measuring vermicidal activity in vitro. Kymographic studies seem to indicate that there is a good deal of similarity of response between the earthworm and tapeworm towards extract filic. as well as acetyl saponin although there are minor differences. In these records it is seen that both the Anagallis acetyl saponin and extract filic. cause an immediate tonic contraction of the tapeworm and the worm dies followed by post mortem relaxation. In the case of earthworm, however, there is a stimulation of movements for a short period before the depression starts which ultimately passes into complete arrest and death. The earthworm also takes longer time to die than the tapeworm in these solutions. Most authors have rejected the use of earthworm in anthelmintic studies on the basis of differences in behaviour between this worm and the roundworm. Present studies also show lack of any relationship between the vermicidal activity of this saponin against these two classes of worms. However, the authors find a
March 1955] A. SINGH, J. D. KOHLI AND D. B. PARIHAR 29 large amount of parallelism between the earthworm and tapeworm and the differences that are seen are minor and more apparent than real. In any case these differences are not so acute as recorded by Wenzel and Gibson [1951] between the earthworm and the roundworm. In view of these facts it may be suggested that the use of earthworm may be justified for preliminary screening of at least taenicides if not all anthelmintics. Figures given in Tables I and II indicate that the drug exerts a marked ver- micidal action. Experiments on tapeworms of sheep and goat show that quali- tatively the nature of action of the acetyl saponin is very much similar to that of extract filic. on human tapeworms, e.g., T. solium and T. saginata as observed by Feng, et al., [1948]. Our observations so far seem to indicate that Anagallis arvensis may prove a suitable source of drug for treating tapeworm infections. Further work in this direction is in progress. SUMMARY 1. In vitro studies show that the acetyl saponin from Anagallis arvensis Linn possesses marked taenicidal activity in contrast to lack of effect on roundworms. 2. Kymographic studies indicate similarity of action between the saponin and extract filic. both on earthworm and tapeworm. 3. Some relationship between the effect of saponin on earthworm and tape- worm is indicated and it is suggested that earthworm is a suitable test object for preliminary screening of taenicides. REFERENCES Baldwin and Moyle (1949). Brit. J. Pharmacol, 4, 145 Chopra, R. N. (1933). Indigenous Drugs of India, Art Press Calcutta, 461 Feng, L. C., et al., (1949). Peking. Nat. Hist. Bull., 17, 233 Jenkins and Manchey (1936). J. Amer. Pharm. Ass. (Sci. Ed.), 25 : 196 Kirtikar, K. R. and Basu, B. D. (1935). Indian Medicinal Plants, Second edition, 11, 1474 Lamson and Ward (1936). Science, 84, 293 Olkers and Rathje (1941). Arch. Exp. Path. Pharmak, 198, 317 Sollman, T. (1918). J. Pharmacol., 12, 129 Wenzel and Gibson (1951). J. Pharm. & Pharmacol. 3, 169 112 AR/54 5
NOTE ON A METHOD OF PROTECTING FOWLS AGAINST SPIROCHAETOSIS By S. G. Dixit, Assistant Disease Investigation Officer (Poultry), Bombay State, Poona (Received for publication on 15 May 1954) THE well-known method of immunising birds against spirochaetosis by infecting them with spirochaete positive blood followed by injection with some arsenical preparation appears to be rather risky on farms where the infection has already been rather severe. With a view to finding out a suitable method of protection, an attempt was made to afford protection without the risk of producing the disease. Earlier workers, Gabritschewsky [1938], Marchoax and Salimbeni [1903] and Levadill [1904] attempted to produce serum, serum and virulent blood, and inactivat- ed convalescent serum with partial success. Dschunkowsky [1909] tried curative and protective vaccine from serum of recovered geese and claimed success. Aragao [1911] tried formalised fowl's blood as vaccine while Aoki [1914] tried chloroform-treated blood. Both these achieved some success. Other workers as Morcos [1935] and Knowles [1932] tried emulsified liver and, spleen and serum, respectively. Workers in India, Srinivasan and Sankaranarayan [1943] also tried refrigerated blood, serum simultaneous and immunisation by drug. The last-named is the one referred to at the beginning of this article and is most popularly used as the method of choice. On the lines taken by Aragao [1911], an attempt was made to see if the spiro- chaetes killed in vitro could be used to afford protection to birds for a reasonable period. The present attempt was made with the help of famous antibiotic penicillin to kill the spirochaetes in vitro. EXPERIMENTAL From a naturally affected bird that showed spirochaetes in blood (++) meaning that an evenly spread blood film showed five to ten spirochaetes in one field, citrated blood was collected by puncturing the wing vein. The blood was allowed to lie in the refrigerator for a period of 14 days. After this two weeks refrigeration, the spirochaetes were seen alive, though sluggish, when seen under dark ground illu- mination method. Penicillin was then added to this citrated blood at the rate of 15,000 units per ½ c.c. of blood. Penicillin was allowed to act for 30 minutes at room temperature. In another case, citrated blood collected from a naturally affected bird was allowed to lie in the refrigerator for 21 days instead of 14 days as in the first case. 31 112 AR/54 6
32 NOTE ON A METHOD OF PROTECTING FOWLS [Vol. XXV, Part I, Table I S. No. Material Days of refrige- ration Condition of spirochaetes after refrigeration Antibiotic used and dose Period of treatment with antibiotic 1 Spirochaete positive blood 14 days Living but slug- gish 15,000 units of peni- cillin per ½ c.c. of blood 30 minutes at room temperature 2 Do. 21 days No movement Do. Do. A batch of 12 three-month old birds, which had never suffered from spirochae- tosis and was healthy when subjected to experimentation, as ascertained by repeated blood examination, was injected with spirochaete positive 14 day- refrigerated penicillin-treated blood at the rate of ½ c.c. per bird. Two birds were left as controls in the same pen. A second batch of six two-month old birds, which was healthy and which had never suffered from spirochaetosis was injected with spirochaete positive 21 day-re- frigerated penicillin-treated blood at the rate of ½ c.c. per bird. Two birds of the same age were left as controls. Birds from both these batches were kept under observation for a period of 12 days following inoculation during which period, morning and evening examination of blood smears from all the birds was carried out. None of the birds from any batch showed any spirochaetes in them at any time during the period of observation. Two of the 12 birds from the first batch, however, showed slight illness, but there were no spirochaetes in blood and the birds made uneventful recovery. Table II S. No. Birds immu- nised Age of birds Dose of vaccine (Spirochaete positive refrigera- ted penicillin treated blood) Period of observation after protection Results of observation Remarks 1 12 3 ½ C.C. 10 days No spirochates any time Sickness in two birds 2 6 2 ½ c.c. 10 days Do. No sickness at all These 'protected' birds were then challenged for immunity tests after 25 and 63 days respectively. For this purpose, two birds from each lot were injected with virulent spirochaete positive blood from naturally affected bird that showed (+++) tangle formation in blood smears. Two controls were injected simultaneously every time. The challenge dose used was ½ c.c. of citrated blood, drawn from a naturally affected bird immediately after seeing the smears, and used simultaneously. These birds after being challenged were kept under observation for ten days during which period blood examination was carried out twice a day. The 'protected' birds neither showed any spirochaetes in blood nor had any illness during the period of observation. The controls, however, on both the occasions became ill on the third day, showed typical symptoms of spirochaetosis and showed spirochaetes in blood smears made between 36th and 48th hours of the challenge dose. As the disease
March 1955] S. G. DIXIT 33 progressed they became highly positive and the blood smears appeared +++ (meaning more than 10 spirochaetes in each field). The 'protected' birds remained normal with no illness at all in spite of the challenge dose. Table III S. No. No. of birds chal- lenged No. of birds kept as controls Period after which chal- lenged dose was given Dose of virulent material Period of observa- tion Results in pro- tected birds Result in control birds 1 4 (2 from each batch) 2 25 days ½ c.c. of po- sitive cit- rated blood 10 days No spiro- chaetes any time No ill- ness at all Blood positive ( ) typical symptoms of spirochaetosis 2 Do. 2 63 days Do. Do. Do. Do. It is hoped that further experimentation on these lines will yield useful results so that the problem of protection against spirochaetosis can be solved. Further trials on duration of immunity are being carried out. SUMMARY 1. Spirochaete positive blood was kept in the refrigerator for a period of 14 and 21 days respectively. 2. The blood was then treated with penicillin at the rate of 15,000 units per ½ c.c. 3. This blood was used to protect three-month old birds with ½ c.c. as the dose. 4. A challenge dose of ½ c.c. of virulent spirochaete positive blood after 25 days and 63 days was given to four birds selected at random. 5. The birds remained normal in spite of the challenge dose, while the controls became infected and were saved with Sulfarsenol. ACKNOWLEDGMENT I am thankful to the Disease Investigation Officer, Bombay State, Poona, for the encouragement be has given to me in carrying out this work. REFERENCES Aoki, K. (1914): Zeit. f. Immunitatsf. Orig. 23, 127. Aragao, H. De B. (1911) : Mem. do. Oswaldo Crus. 3, 3. Dschunkowsky, E. and Lush, J. (1909) : Rev. in J. Trop. Wed. Hyg. 12, 292. Gabritschewsky, G. (1938) : Zemrablatt. f. Bakt Orig. 23, 779. Knowles, D., Das Gupta, B. M. and Basu, B. C. (1932) : Indian Med. Res. Memo. No. 22,1 Levaditi, C. (1904): Ann. Inst. Past. 18, 129. Marchoux, E. and Salimbeni, A. (1903) : Ann. Inst. Past. 17, 569 Morcos, Z. (1935) : The Yet. J. 91, 161 Srinivasan and Sankarnarayan (1943) : The Yet. J. 39, 8, 9, 10
VALUE OF A FEW PROPRIETARY PREPARATIONS IN THE CONTROL OF ECT OPARASITES OF LIVESTOCK By P. BALARAMA MENON, C. M. SEN GUPTA and B. C. BASU, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (U.P.) (Received for publication on 24 October 1953) IN a previous communication, Menon, Sen Gupta and Basu [195], a and b] reported the insecticidal properties of 10 proprietary preparations and discussed the justi- fication for testing the efficacies of such preparations. In the present paper, they record the value of nine proprietary preparations as insecticide in the control of ectoparasites of livestock. The products were received by the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, from the manufacturers for testing their insecticidal value. The insecticides are as follows: 1. Kitkari AP/5045 2. Kitkari AP/1035 3. Kitkari BP/505 4. Hexamar 5. Benexide WP 50 6. Lotexane dusting powder 7. Sarcoptan 8. Lethane B 71 9. Rhothane D 3 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS A series of experiments were conducted to test the insecticidal value of each of the above mentioned preparations on different species of arthropods. Generally the insecticides were tried in the dilutions recommended by the manufacturers. Dusts were applied by means of a dust gun or by means of cotton wool with the hand. Suspensions or solutions were sprayed on the animals by means of a hand sprayer or dabbed with cotton wool dipped in the liquid, to the affected parts. Daily observations of the treated animals were made. Control animals of each series were also kept under observation. Kitkari AP/5045 Manufactured by Messrs. Progressive Chemical Corporation Ltd., Bombay, it contains 50 per cent DDT suspension powder. This product in dilution of 3/4 pound to 10 gallons of water or approximately at a strength of 0.375 per cent DDT was tested against ticks and lice on goats and dog tick. It was very effective against goat lice both biting and sucking, Bovicola caprae Gurlt and Linognathus 35 112 AR/54 7
36 CONTROL OF ECTOPARASITES [Vol. XXV, Part I, stenopsis Burm., which were all killed within 24 hours. Against ticks, Hyalomma aegyptium Linn, and Rhipicephalus sanguineus Latr., only partial success was obtained as it did not completely eradicate them. Buffalo calves infested with the lice, Haematopinus tuberculatus Giebel, were cleansed within 48 hours. About four ounces of spray material was sufficient for one small animal. Kitkari AP/1035 Manufactured by the same firm and containing 10 per cent DDT powder, it was tested against poultry lice, (Menopon sp. and Goniocotes sp.). Dusted well into the feathers of the birds, all lice were killed within 24 hours. No reinfestation was noticed for a period of three months. Kitkari BP/505 Marketed by the same firm and containing 5 per cent BHC dust, it proved to be as effective as Kitkari AP/1035 in controlling poultry lice. All dusted birds were free of poultry lice (Menopon sp. and Goniocotes sp.) within 24 hours. No re- infestation took place for three months. Hexamar 5 per cent BHC dust Marketed by Messrs. Bharat Pulverising Mills, Bombay, for use in the control of ticks, lice, fleas, in cattle, sheep, poultry, etc. When dusted into the feathers of poultry, it controlled lice infestation. Lice belonging to the genera Menopon and Goniocotes, were completely eradicated within 24 hours. Groats, cow calves and buffalo calves were completely cleansed of ectoparasite infestation particularly of the lice, Bovicola caprae, Linognathus sp. and Haematopinus tuberculatus. Benexide WP 50 Marketed by Messrs. Agri-Orient Industries Ltd., Bombay, it is a water suspen- sion product of 50 per cent BHC containing 7.5 per cent gamma isomer. The above suspension used in a strength of 0.5 per cent, i.e. one and half ounces of the drug to a gallon of water on cow and buffalo calves heavily infested with the lice, Lino- gnathus vituli and Haematopinus tuberculatus, thoroughly cleansed the animals of lice and eradicated the infection. Goat lice, too, (Linognathus stenopsis and Bovicola caprae), were all killed within 24 hours of its application. Roughly, four ounces of the prepared material was required for a small animal. Lorexane dusting powder Manufactured and marketed by the Imperial Chemical Industries (India) Ltd., and containing 0.1 per cent of the pure gamma isomer of benzine hexachloride, this product was found satisfactory in the control of lice infestation in calves and goats. Considerable reduction in the number of lice, Linognathus sp., was noticed, but not complete eradication. Against the goat lice Bovicola caprae, the results were more encouraging as the animals were free of lice within five days. Sarcoptan Marketed by Messrs. Noury and Van Der Lande Ltd., Holland, this antiscabio- sum, containing hexachlorocyclohexane in miscible oil, when diluted one part to hundred parts of water and applied on dogs infested with demodectic mange, cured
March 1955] P. B. MENON, C. M. S. GUPTA AND B. C. BASU 37 the dogs of the mange (Demodex canis Leydig). A second application after a week was found necessary to bring about complete cure. No reinfestation was noticed for a period of six months. Lethane B 71 This insecticide was supplied by Messrs. Amritlal and Co. Ltd., Bombay, and was said to be highly effective against many insects. It is an organic thiocyanate commercially known as Lethane and contains 13.5 per cent dust of PHYSIO-CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION ON PLACENTAL FLUIDS OF BUFFALO By E. S. E. HAFEZ and M. A. M. KAMAL, Department of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, Fouad I University, Giza, Egypt (Received for publication on 10 March 1954) CERTAINLY one of the most adapted environments of any organism is that of the developing mammal in utero. The protection and nourishment for the young embryo within the uterus are provided by a well-developed placental system, the placental membranes and fluids. In the early stages of the pregnancy, the placental fluids increase rapidly at a greater rate than any other part of the conceptus. These fluids by extension have a stimulating growth action on the uterus. They also form a flexible covering so that the foetus itself is protected from local external pressure either from the uterine walls or through movements of the mother. During late pregnancy the placental fluids hold the embryo in place of the uterus. In certain species, however, such as the rabbit, these fluids are absorbed at a rapid rate, until in the period just before parturition merely a few drops are left [Hammond, 1935]. The absorption of the fluids is not merely a passive one but depends on the vital processes and the life of foetus itself [Huggett and Hammond, 1952]. Most of the available data on the placental fluids in ruminants are summarised by Needham [1931]. Additional data on sheep will be found in the papers of Malan and Curson [1937], Cloette [1939] and on the cow in Hammond's monograph [1927] and in Williams monograph [1951]. All this work deals mainly with the volume changes and physical properties, but no physio-chemical studies have so far been published. It is of interest to state that such physio-chemical studies have been carried out on the uterine milk (uterine secretion which bathes the surface of placen- tal membranes and is absorbed by the foetus) [Amroso, 1952]. The buffalo is a ruminant of the ox-tribe family, sub-family Bovinae. Out of the five species in wild condition, there is only the Asiatic buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) which is now domesticated and is found in many tropical and sub-tropical countries [reviewed by Hafez, 1952]. The following study was an attempt to provide some basic information from which to interpret different phenomena related to placental physiology in the buffalo MATERIAL AND METHODS The material was 23 uteri of pregnant Egyptian buffaloes at different stages of pregnancy. The pregnant animals were sacrificed and the uteri were carefully removed to the laboratory covered with wet towels. The gravid uteri represented five stages of pregnancy (P. I, II, III, IV and V). In each case the uterus was carefully dissected and the chorion was then separated gently from the maternal cotyledons. During all stages of pregnancy, the foetal cotyledons could be freed from the maternal cotyledons with ease. A clean syringe was used to draw all the 39 112 AR/54 8
40 PHYSIO-CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION ON PLACENTAL FLUIDS [Vol. XXV, Part I, allantoic fluid from the foetus. When all the fluid was drawn, the allantio-chorion was cut open to expose the aminon with the foetus. Another clean syringe was then used to draw the amniotic fluid from the amniotic sac. The amniotic sac was then freed from the foetus and the umbilical cord was cut at the attachment to the foetus. The diameter and weight of the foetus was measured to determine the approximate age of pregnancy (Table I). The diameter of the foetus (which was measured from the forehead to the top of the tail) more accurately determined the age of pregnancy than the foetal weight. TABLE I Different phases of pregnancy under investigation as measured from diameter and weight of foetus Phase of pregnancy No. of cases Foetal weight (gm.) Foetal length (cm.) Range Mean Range Mean PI 3 0.1March 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ AND M. A. M. KAMAL 41 III Quantitative analysis (a) Total nitrogen: For this a modified ' Micro-Kjeldahl' (modification of Parnas and Vagnar) apparatus was used. (b) Creatinine nitrogen : The colorimetric method of Folin 'Micro' modifica- tion was carried out [Hawk, et al., 1947]. It is based on comparison against standard creatinine solutions yielding colour reactions by means of Jaffe reaction. The quantity of creatinine was calculated as follows : Reading of standard/Reading of unknown+ mg. of creatinine in standard = mg. of creatinine in volume analysed (c) Amino nitrogen : The technique used here is that given by Pope and Stevens [1939] and adopted by Kamal [1951]. RESULTS The amniotic fluid was clear, colourless and slightly heavier than water. In a few cases, it was more or less opaque and showed reddish or yellowish colour. In no case it contained meconium (i.e. there was no foetal diarrhoea). The allantoic fluid was clear and had the appearance and smell of urine and was slightly heavier than water. The specific gravity of the amniotic fluid fluctuated from 1.0040 to 1.0090 ; there was no trend for any increase or decrease throughout pregnancy. The allan- toic fluid had a specific gravity ranging from 1.0060 to 1.0120, with an apparent increase as pregnancy advanced (Table II). The reducing sugars were either not detected or were present in small amounts in the amniotic fluid. In one case (No. 14) reducing sugars were detected in the amnion in good amounts; this might have been a pathological case. In most of the cases the allantoic fluid contained small quantities of the reducing sugars. The presence of glycogen was doubtful in the amniotic fluid whilst the allantoic fluid had no glycogen at all. Acetone bodies were not detected at all in both the placental fluids. Creatinine was not detected, by the qualitative tests, in the amniotic fluid. The allantoic fluid contained creatinine which increased in amount with advance in gestation. Amino acids of benzene ring (tyrosine, phenylalanine and tryptophane) and glycoproteins were not detected in the amniotic fluid whilst the peptide linkaged amino acids, cystine and cysteine were detected in very slight amounts. During stage P V (mid-pregnancy) there were detectable amounts of amino acids of benzene ring in the amniotic fluid. The allantoic fluid contained larger quantities of tyrosine than of other amino acids of benzene ring or of glycoprotein. There was a trend for the former amino acids to be more abundant during late pregnancy than during early one. (Table II). It is of great interest to note that the amniotic fluid contained no amino-nitrogen. The creatinine-nitrogen content in the amniotic fluid varied from 0.43 to 0.78 mg. per cent, there was no significant trend of increase or decrease throughout pregnancy. During early pregnancy (stage P I) the allantoic fluid contained 58 mg. per cent total-nitrogen, 2.25 mg. per cent amino-nitrogen and 2.25 mg. per cent creatinine- nitrogen. These values increased gradually throughout pregnancy. The total- nitrogen, amino-nitrogen and creatinine-nitrogen content of the allantoic fluid during
42 PHYSIO-CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION ON PLACENTAL FLUIDS [Vol. XXV, Part I mid-pregnancy were 169, 44 . 19 and 15 . 38 mg. per cent, respectively (Table III). The percentage of amino-N. to total-N. in the allantoic fluid varied from 3 . 69 to 26 . 15 (Table IV). The percentage of creatinine-N. in the same fluid ranged from 3 . 88 to 10 . 09, it tended to be constant after early pregnancy. DISCUSSION The gestation period in the Egyptian buffalo is 317 [Ragab and Asker, 1951] compared to about 286 days in cattle [reviewed by Asdell, 1946]. Table I which shows the developmental changes in the diameter and weight of buffalo foetuses, were compared with similar figures given for cattle by Hammond [1927]. It is concluded that the present data concerning the placental fluids (five stages of pregnancy P I, II, III, IV and V) only include the first half of pregnancy. The source of physiological amniotic fluid has not been fully determined. Some believe that it is due to a secretion by the amnion itself while according to some it is at least partly composed of urine. Williams [1951] suggests that it is secreted from the foetal skin. The allantoic fluid appears to be derived chiefly from the foetal kidneys. There is anatomical evidence that the urethra and arachus offer ample outlet for any fluid contents within the urinary bladder [Hafez, 1955]. TABLE II Physio-chemical properties of placental fluids in Egyptian buffaloes Fluid Age of pre- gnancy Specific gravity at (25"C) Reduc- ing sugars Glyco- gen Acetone bodies Creati- nine Amino-acids B X Mi A S Mo Amniotic PI 1.0090 March 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ AND M. A. M. KAMAL 43 TABLE III Micro-determination of total, amino and creatinine-nitrogen in placental fluids in Egyptian buffaloes (Average figures, calculated as mg.(100 ml.)). Stage of preg- nancy Amniotic fluid Allantoic fluid Total N Amino-N Creatinine-N Total N Amino-N Creati- nine-N P I (n.d.) .. 0.43 58 2.25 2.25 P II (n.d.) .. 0.78 85 3.14 5.21 P III (n.d.) .. 0.50 119 10.16 11.11 P IV 45 .. 0.74 132 19.05 13.32 P V 80 .. 0.45 169 44.19 15.38 (*) See Table I (n.d.) not determined due to the small volume of sample TABLE IV Per cent amino and creatinine N to total N in the allantoic fluid of the buffalo Per cent of total N Stage of pregnancy P I P II P III P IV P V Amino-N 3.88 3.69 8.54 14.43 26.15 Creatinine-N 3.88 6.13 9.34 10.09 9.10 It has been believed that the ' liquor amnii' has a certain nutritive value for the foetus. Data represented in Table II show that there are but little amounts of reducing sugars, glycogen and most tested amino acids. It would appear that the amniotic fluid has perhaps no nutritive value at least during the first half of preg- nancy. It seems that the foetus acquires the capacity of swallowing during the second half of pregnancy. The abundance of the amino-acids in the allantoic fluid is of great interest. It is suggested that some of the amino-acids circulating from the mother to the foetus during the first half of pregnancy are not wholly metabolised and someof these amino-acids escape and appear in the allantoic fluid. How far this escape of amino-acids occur during the second half of pregnancy remains to be seen. Table III shows that the ' liquor amnii' contains no amino-nitrogen but slight amounts of creatinine-nitrogen (this is not detected by qualitative colour reactions). The gradual increase of total nitrogen and its fractions in the allantoic fluid shows the increase of protein metabolic activity throughout the first half of pregnancy.
44 PHYSIO-CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION ON PLACENTAL FLUIDS [Vol. XXV, Part 1, It may be suggested here that the creatinine N : total N ratio is perhaps correlated with the growth rate during the pre-natal life. There is always a physiological balance between the rate of secretion and of absorption of placental fluids. The rate of increase in the amniotic and allantoic fluids varies throughout pregnancy and amongst species. In the buffalo, the ratio of amniotic to allantoic volume is 1 : 30 in early pregnancy and 5 :1 during mid- pregnancy [Hafez, 1955]. In the cow, the placental fluids increase rapidly until about the fifth month of pregnancy, after which the amount remains fairly constant [Bergmann, 1921 ; Hammond ; 1927] ; the increase, if any, occurs in the allantoic fluid while the amniotic fluid shows a decrease after this time. Similar is the case in women (Minot, 1892]. In the guinea pig the amniotic fluids increase rapidly up to the 44th day after which there is little or no further increase [Draper, 1920], although Ibsen [1928] finds a drop at the 55-day stage with subsequent increase. In some species such as the rabbit, the placental fluids are absorbed by the foetus. A comparative study of the physio-chemical properties of the placental fluids in different species correlated with their respective curve of absorption of placental fluids throughout pregnancy would be of great interest. The presence of certain substances in the placental fluids or certain concentrations of some substances may indicate evolutionary changes with increase in duration of gestation in these species. Changes in the physio-chemical properties in relation to interruption of pregnancy would be of great academic interest in veterinary obstetrics. Morphological evidence into the functioning of the uterus and placenta has been gained by histochemical studies [Weeth and Herman, 1952]. It is fitting that so vital a link in the preservation of placental mammals as the uterus and its functioning should receive thorough investigation. It is also imperative for a more complete knowledge of the biological mechanisms involved in an adequate intrauterine life that all resources and techniques of the various researches be utilized. Localization of metabolites, hormones, enzymes of pregnancy, estimates of their quantitative variations, and interpretation of their inter-relationships in maintaining the environ- ment of the conceptus will materially aid the understanding of pregnancy. SUMMARY 1. The placental fluids (amniotic and allantoic fluids) were obtained from 23 pregnant uteri of Egyptian buffaloes. They represented five different stages of the first half of pregnancy. Qualitative tests for reduced sugars, glycogen, acetone bodies, creatinine and six amino acid tests were carried out in both fluids. Total, amino and creatinine nitrogen were also determined. 2. The specific gravity of the fluids varied from 1.0040 to 1.0120. A slight increase was observed in the allantoic fluids in PIV and PV uteri. 3. Reduced sugars were more abundant in the allantoic fluid than in amniotic. 4. Glycogen was absent in the allantoic and doubtful in the amniotic. 5. Acetone bodies were not detected in both the fluids. 6. Creatinine was found only in the allantoic ; if increased throughout pregnancy. 7. Deeper colour reactions were obtained for the amino acids in the allantoic than in the amniotic fluid. The allantoic fluid contained larger quantities of tyrosine than of amino acids of benzene ring and glycoproteins.
March 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ AND M. A. M. KAMAL 45 8. Total and creatinine-N were much higher in the allantoic than in the amniotic fluid. No amino-nitrogen was detected in the amniotic fluid. Total amino and creatinine-N of the allantoic fluid increased significantly with advanced pregnancy. 9. The physio-chemical properties of placental fluids are discussed in relation to the origin and function of the fluids, to evolutionary changes (species differences) in duration of pregnancy and to placental physiology. REFERENCES Amroso, E. C. (1952). Placentation (In Marshall's Physiology of Reproduction), Third edition. Edited by Parkes, A. S. Longmans, Green & Co., London & N. Y. Asdell, S. A. (1946). Patterns of Mammalian Reproduction, Comstock, Ithaca, N. Y. Bergmann, R. (1921). Arch. Tierheilk., 47, 292 Cloette, J. H. L. (1939). Onderstepoort J. vet. Sci., 13, 417. Draper, R. L. (1920). Anat. Rec., 28, 369 Hafez, E. S. E. (1952). Indian J. vet. Sci., 22, 257 Hammond, J. (1927). The Physiology of Reproduction in the Cow, University Press, Cambridge Hammond, J. (1953). Trans. Dynamics of Development, Moscow, 10, 93. Huggett, A. St. G. and Hammond, J. (1952). Physiology of Placenta (In Marshall's Physiology of Re- production) Third Edition, Edited by Parkes, A.S. Longmans, Green & Co. London & N. Y. Hawk, Ph. B., Bernard, L. and Summerson, W. H. (1947). Practical Physiological Chemistry, Twelfth edition. Blokiston Co., Philadelphia Ibsen, H. L. (1928). J. exp. Biol., 51, 51. Kamal, M. A. M. (1951). Nitrogen Fractions in Trifolium alexandrinum, under conditions of different phosphotic levels with reference to PH value, Cairo University, Faculty of Agriculture, Ph. D. Thesis Malan, A. P. and Curson, H. H. (1937). Onderstepoort J. vet. Sci., 8, 417 Minot, C. S. (1892). Human Embryology, New York Needham, J. (1931). Chemical Embryology, University Press, Cambridge Ragab, M. T. and Asker, A. A. (1951). Indian J. J. vet. Sci. 21, 519 Pope, C. G. and Stevens, M. F. (1947) Biochem. J., 33, 1070 Weeth, H. J. and Herman, H. A. (1952) Mon. Agric. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. No. 501 Williams, W. L. (1951). Veterinary Obstetrics, Fourth edition, New York.
FACTORS INFLUENCING THE TITRATABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK By A. A. BADR, Ibrahim Pasha University, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo, Egypt (Received for publication on 10 October 1953) (With one text-figure) WHILE there have been numerous methods of expressing the titratable acidity of milk such as those recommended by Richmond and Huisk (1920) 0.1 N. Baryta, Storch [Richmond and Miller, 1920] by using a saturated solution of lime- water and Soxhlet-Henkel [Davies, 1939] by using 0.25 N. NaOH, the most widely used and accurate method is that of expressing the acidity as percentage of lactic acid by using N/9 NaOH for titration. The calculation is then avoided since the equivalent of lactic acid is 90 and every ml. of N/9 alkali used for 10 ml. of milk corresponds to 0.1 per cent. According to Rogers [1928] and Davies [1939] what is measured in the titration of fresh milk is the amount of alkali necessary to shift the protein and other buffer systems from initial state of equilibrium somewhere near pH 6.6 to that pH value at which phenolphthalein shows the colour arbitrarily selected as indicating the hypothetical 'end point'. In several text books the acidity of fresh milk has been reported as ranging from 0.10 to 0.14 per cent. Preliminary studies with cow and buffalo milk in Egypt indicated that such low values are not typical of any large number of cows. This observation led to the organization of a plan for a detailed study of the titratable acidity of fresh milk from individual cows and buffaloes of the dairy herd of the Faculty of Agriculture at Giza. Factors studied as possibly connected with acidity of cow and buffalo milk were, 1. species, 2. individuality of the cow or the buffalo, 3. stage of lactation, 4. variations from month to month, 5. variations from day to day, 6. variations from milking to milking, 7. variations from quarter to quarter of the same udder, and 8. the effect of dilution on the titratable acidity of buffalo milk. The acidity of the milk from each cow or buffalo, was determined weekly over a fourteen-month period. More frequent determinations were made with selected groups of cows and buffaloes for shorter periods of time in conducting certain phases of the investiga- tion. PROCEDURE The technique used by different investigators in determining the titratable acidity of milk has varied widely. This fact undoubtedly is an important factor in the variable results which have appeared in the literature. Sommer and Menos [1931] have shown that the addition of an equal volume of water to a sample of 47 112 AR/54 9
48 TITRATABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXV, Part I, milk lowers its titratable acidity approximately by 0.02 per cent, and the addition of nine volumes of water lowers it by 0.06 per cent. Burgwald and Bachtel [1933] found that an increase in the amount or concentration of indicator lowered the results of acidity determinations. This observation has been verified by Caulfield and Riddell [1936]. They found that when replicate 18 gram samples of whole milk were titrated with varying amounts (3 drops to 2.0 c.c.) of one per cent solution of phenolphthalein indicator, the following results were obtained: three drops of indicator, 0.172 per cent acid ; 0.5 c.c. 0.159 per cent acid ; 1.0 c.c. 0.154 per cent acid; 1.5 c.c. 0.151 per cent acid; and with 2.0 c.c. of indicator, 0.149 per cent acid. It is evident that a carefully standardized procedure for determining the titra- table acidity of whole milk must be employed if comparable results are to be obtained. The following procedure was used in the present investigation: 10 c.c. of milk was taken for the test and put in a flat white porcelain dish and 10 c.c. in a similar dish for comparison of colour. Three drops of one per cent solution of phenolphthalein in alcohol was added to the first dish only, while to the control dish about 1.5 c.c. of N/10 solution hydroxide was added for fresh milk. Tenth-normal sodium hydroxide was carefully added from a standard burette to the first dish, the additions being made drop by drop until a faint pink colour was observed on comparing the two dishes. The results were expressed as lactic acid in all the cases. In the determination of acidity at weekly intervals a representative sample of milk of each cow or buffalo was obtained at the time of evening and morning milk- ings separately. The acidity was determined immediately after milking in these samples. When it was necessary to obtain samples from both the milkings, the same procedure was followed except that the samples collected at the morning milking were held in ice water for a period not exceeding five hours before the acidity determination was made. In studying the influence of lactation on acidity, milk samples were obtained from two groups, the first group of 10 cows and the second of 15 buffaloes for the first seven successive milkings following parturition and at less frequent intervals thereafter. Hydrogen-ion determinations were also made by means of the quin- hydrone electrode against a saturated calomel electrode at 25°C. RESULTS Variations due to species of herd Practically most of the milk sold in raw or manufactured form in Egypt is from the buffalo. It is worthy to note that in Egypt, dairy herds whether of cows or buffaloes, do not constitute pure breeds. The average acidity of the milk for the Egyptian cows and buffaloes varied as follows: For cows at morning milking, 0.192 per cent and at evening milking, 0.201 per cent; for buffaloes at morning milking, 0.177 per cent and at evening milking 0.166 per cent (Table I).
March 1955] A. A. BADR 49 TABLE I Average titratable acidity of milks of various Egyptian mammals Species No. of Samples Average acidity (Per cent) Co- efficient of variation (Per cent) Buffalo M. milkings 1225 0.1767±0.003 15.14 E. milkings 781 0.1656± 0.004 17.74 M. milkings and E. milkings 2006 0.1725±0.003 16.07 Cow M. milkings 517 0.1920±0.005 16.56 E. milkings 489 0.2009±0.006 13.85 M. milkings and E. milkings 1006 0.1959±0.005 15.07 Goat: M. milkings 35 0.1833±0.017 17.21 Sheep (Rahmani): M. milkings 12 0.1967±0.040 22.93 Sheep (Ossimi): M. milkings 12 0.2009±0.039 17.41 Horse: M. milkings 27 0.0424±0.005 42.92 Ass: M. milkings 27 0.0404±0.005 39.11 M. Milkings=Morning milkings E. milkings = Evening milkings A glance at Table I shows the following: (a) In general, the average titratable acidity of cow milk is higher than that of buffalo milk. (b) Average titratable acidity of evening milkings is higher than that of morning milkings in cow milk. In buffalo milk the reverse is true. (c) There are no significant differences in the average acidity between cow milk and the milk of goat and sheep, whereas the average acidity is very low in horse and ass milk. (d) Coefficients of variation of the Egyptian cow and buffalo milkings are very high when compared with those found by Caulfield and Riddel [1936] in the case of the European cow breeds. They found that the co- efficients of variation of acidity ranged only from 4.0 per cent for Holstein breed to 4.7 per cent for Guernsey breed and advocated that these figures show that the data were grouped quite closely around the main values for each of the different breeds. These great variations in the case of Egyptian cows and buffaloes are principally due to differing inheritance as the animals are not of pure breeds. Variations due to individuality of the cow or the buffalo While it has been pointed out that the acidity of fresh milk from individual cows varies widely, little data have been presented to indicate the frequency of such variations. The acidity of milk from individual cows and buffaloes in the 9A
50 TITRATABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXV, Part I, present study (exclusive samples obtained at the very beginning or end of the lacta- tion period) varied from 0.08 to 0.26 per cent. These values are in general agree- ment with those from Henkel [1907] who examined 10,000 or more samples of individual cow milk and found them varying from 0.1237 to 0.2025 per cent. McInerney [1920] reported acidity values ranging from 0.10 to 0.22 based upon the examination of the milk from 42 cows. Sommer and Hart [1921] found the acidity in 86 tests on individual samples from 31 cows ranging from 0.102 to 0.257 per cent. TABLE II Distribution of 2006 and 1006 acidity determinations of freshly drawn milk from individual buffaloes and cows respectively Interval per cent Per cent of determinations falling within the interval indicated Buffalo milk samples taken at Cow milk samples taken at Morning Evening Morning and evening Morning Evening Morning and evening 0.08March 1955] A. A. BADR 51 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Acidity in milk during the lactation period
52 TITRATABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXV, Part I acid respectively for the first milking, 0.33 and 0.38 per cent for second milking, 0.28 and 0.33 per cent for third milking and at the tenth milking the acidity was 0.22 and 0.25 per cent acid respectively (Table III). The pH values were in harmony with the trend in the titratable acidity (Table III). Average acidity of buffalo colostrum is somewhat higher than that of cow colostrum. While the acidity of milk continued to decline for a period of 15 to 20 days following parturition, the change was most apparent in the first three milkings (Table III and IV). On the seventh day the average acidity of cow and buffalo milk was 0.21 and 0.19 per cent respectively, on the fourteenth day it was 0.21 and 0.18 per cent. No significant change in either the titratable acidity or the pH was observed from twenty-first to thirty-fifth days in cow and buffalo milk (Table IV). Coefficients of variation ranging from 6 to 12 per cent for the first ten milkings following parturition reflect the variability in acidity for individual cows and buffaloes. All cows and buffaloes within the two groups, however, showed the same general trend, namely a high initial acidity followed by a progressive decline during the early part of the lactation period (Table III and Table IV). Observations made at weekly intervals on two groups of 15 buffaloes and 10 cows for a complete lactation showed that the acidity of milk has a tendency to decline throughout the entire lactation of the dairy cows and buffaloes (Fig. 1). The most significant drop, however, occurred between the first and second months of lactation. The average acidity of cow and buffalo milk for the first month of the lactation was 0.26 and 0.28 per cent respectively and by the second month it had declined to 0.18 and 0.17 per cent, a difference of 0.08 and 0.11 per cent respectively. From the second to the seventh month of lactation, the average acidity of milk remained quite constant. Following this a small decline was registered from 0.158 and 0.153 per cent for cow and buffalo milk respectively for the seventh month to 0.146 and 0.142 per cent for the tenth month. These data substantiate the findings of Houston [1931] and Caulfield and Riddell [1936] who observed a similar trend in the acidity of milk from groups of Shorthorn, Ayrshire, Holstein, Guernsey and Jersey cows. The stage of lactation has a significant influence on the variability in acidity of milk from an individual buffalo or cow. It was observed that almost all cows and buffaloes whose milk showed an acidity of 0.22 and 0.20 per cent or more had been fresh for 14 days or less at the time the determinations were made (Tables II, III and IV), while extremely low values were usually associated with cows and buffaloes near the end of their lactations. Although there is a general tendency in the acidity of milk to decline as the lactation advances, individual cows and buffaloes will show considerable variation in this respect. Data obtained on a group of 15 buffaloes and 10 cows in advanced stages of lactation showed that the average acidity of milk had declined in buffalo milk from 0.135 per cent, approximately one month before the end of the lactation, to 0.08 per cent on the last day of the lactation; and in cow milk from 0.140 to 0.09 per cent. However, the milk from some of the cows and
March 1955] A. A. BADR 53 TABLE III Acidity and pH values of milk samples following parturition Items Number of milkings after parturition 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Number of cows 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 Average acidity (per cent) 0.42 0.33 0.26 0.27 0.28 0.27 0.26 0.26 0.23 0.22 Coefficient of variation (per cent) 25 19 22 22 17 17 22 19 22 25 Average pH values 6.28 3.36 6.35 3.36 6.36 6.37 6.38 6.39 6.42 6.45 Coefficient of variation (per cent) 12 12 10 10 12 10 10 8 8 7 Number of buffaloes 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 Average acidity (per cent) 0.47 0.38 0.33 0.33 0.31 0.30 0.29 0.28 0.26 0.25 Coefficient of variation (per cent) 11 10 9 8 10 9 8 7 8 6 Average pH values 6.21 6.28 6.29 6.30 6.35 6.37 6.37 6.38 6.39 6.42 Coefficient of variation (per cent) 7 8 9 10 11 8 9 7 8 6
54 TITRATABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXV, Part I, buffaloes in these two groups showed very little change, whereas in other instan- ces, a pronounced decline occurred. If a cow or a buffalo is showing good average production near the end of a normal lactation period, the decline in acidity does not appear to be so pronounced as when milk production is low. Data taken from two groups of cows and two groups of buffaloes during the last month of lactation substantiate this statement. One group of seven cows with an average daily production of 5.2 pounds showed an average acidity of 0.122 per cent whereas, in a second group of five cows producing 9.8 pounds daily, the acidity of milk averaged 0.155 per cent. One group of five buffaloes with an average daily production of 6.3 pounds showed an average acidity of 0.116 per cent. whereas in a second group of 10 buffaloes producing 10.2 pounds daily, the acidity of milk averaged 0.146 per cent. TABLE IV Acidity and pH values of milk samples after calving Items Days after parturition 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 57 Number of cows 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 Average acidity (per cent) 0.22 0.21 0.20 0.20 0.19 0.17 0.18 0.17 Coeficient of variation (per cent) 25 22 18 19 18 15 18 17 Average pH values 6.46 6.47 6.48 6.50 6.52 6.54 6.55 6.58 Coefficient of variation (per cent) 12 15 10 8 8 9 8 6 Number of buffaloes 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 Average acidity (per cent) 0.21 0.20 0.18 0.18 0.17 0.16 0.16 017 Coefficient of variation (per cent) 16 18 16 18 16 14 15 15 Average pH values 6.48 6.50 6.54 6.57 6.58 6.58 6.59 6.61 Coefficient of variation (per cent) 10 11 9 7 6 8 7 5 Variations in acidity from month to month The average acidity of milk from cows and buffaloes showed some variations from one month to the next over a 14-month period. The monthly average acidity of milk varied as follows: Cow milk, 0.141 to 0.26 per cent; buffalo milk, 0.135 to 0.280 per cent. Variations in the average monthly acidity in cow and buffalo milk can be attri- buted primarily to differences in the stage of lactation and to the number and indivi- duality of the cows and buffaloes represented in any one month. Several cows or buffaloes freshening in a particular month will result in an increase in the average acidity for that month. Likewise, if several cows or buffaloes are in advanced
March, 1955] A. A. BADR 55 stage of lactation, the average acidity for the month generally will be lower. No seasonal trend was observed in connection with the monthly average acidity of milk. Variations in acidity from day to day and from milking to milking Variations in the acidity of milk for a group of 10 cows and a group of 15 buffaloes were observed in each group over a 15-day period. Acidity determina- tions were made on samples collected from consecutive milkings for a period of 15 days. Daily averages for the acidity of milk from these two groups of cows and buffaloes did not vary more than 0.018 per cent for cow milk and 0.014 per cent for buffalo milk throughout the 15-day period. It was true also that the differences in the acidity of morning and evening milk were not significant. On the other hand, the acidity of milk from individual cows or buffaloes show some variation. The maximum variation observed between any two consecutive milk- ing in cow and buffalo milk was 0.043 per cent and 0.039 per cent respectively. Variations in acidity from different quarters of the same udder Variations in acidity of milk samples collected singly from each quarter of the same udder and from consecutive milkings for a period of five days were observed in five individual cows and five individual buffaloes. The maximum variation observed between the acidity of any two quarters of the same udder and milking in cows and buffaloes was 0.009 per cent and 0.007 per cent respectively. Effect of dilution on the titratable acidity of buffalo milk In determining the titratable acidity of milk various procedures are used. Some titrate the milk directly ; others dilute the measured sample with definite amounts of water ranging from 1 to 10 volumes ; still others dilute the measured sample with indefinite amounts of water used for rinsing the pipette. If such dilution lowers the result as has been shown by Soldner [1888], Plant [1891], Hanne [1904], Siegfeld [1900], Berberich [1907], Rice and Markley [1924] and Sommer and Menos [1931], then this factor in the acid test should not be ignored as is now very commonly the case. Sommer and Menos [1931] gave more detailed explanation of this dilution effect and stated that the greater part of the dilution effect is attributed to a decrease in the amount of tri-calcium phosphate precipitated during the titration. The results reported by these investigators which have been compiled in Table V show that dilution lowers the titratable acidity in cow milk. The aim of the present work was to throw light on the effect of dilution on buffalo milk. TABLE V Effect of dilution on the titratable acidity as shown by various investigators Investigators Year No. of samples Average acidity of samples Undiluted (per cent) Diluted (per cent) Difference (per cent) (Dilution with one volume of water) Berberich 1907 3 0.1357 0.1174 0.0187 Soldner 1888 1 0.1350 0.1225 0.0125 112 AR/54 10
56 TITRATABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXV, Part I, TABLE VMarch 1955] A. A. BADR 57 TABLE VI Effect of dilution on the titratable acidity of buffalo milk No. of buffalo A58 TITRATABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXV, Part I, In order to demonstrate the effect of dilution, the titratable acidity of a number of fresh milk samples were determined and compared with the acidity found in the same samples after dilution with one volume and nine volumes of distilled water. The milk samples were taken from individual buffaloes in order to obtain rela- tively wide differences in composition and in titratable acidity. In the case of each sample, the following titrations were made with N/10 sodium hydroxide : (1) 10 c.c. milk, (2) 10 c.c. milk plus 10 c.c. distilled water, and (3) 10 c.c. milk plus 90 c.c. distilled water. The cubic centimetres of N/10 sodium hydroxide used were converted into percentage of lactic acid, assuming for convenience that the 10 c.c. pipette delivered 10 grams of milk. The results obtained with 20 different samples of milk and colostrum are given in Table VI. The three titrations in the order given above showed averages of 0.227, 0.209 and 0.143 per cent lactic acid in the case of milk, 0.316, 0.275 and 0.210, res- pectively in the case of colostrum and total averages of 0.267, 0.239 and 0.113, res- pectively. These results represent a decrease in titratable acidity of 0.018 and 0.042 per cent respectively, when buffalo milk and colostrum were diluted with an equal volume of water and a decrease of 0.083 and 0.107 per cent respectively, when diluted with nine volumes of water. Twenty other samples were titrated undiluted and diluted with an equal volume of water with essentially the same results ; the average acidity of the undiluted samples was 0.174 per cent, as compared with an average of 0.151 per cent when the same samples were diluted with an equal volume of water. As an average of the 31 samples, dilution with an equal volume of water decreased the titratable acidity 0.0212 per cent. The results obtained are in good agreement with those given in Table V. The acidity of buffalo milk seemed to be slightly more affected by dilution than that of cow milk (Table VI). SUMMARY The titratable acidity of the freshly drawn milk from all cows and buffaloes in the college dairy herd was determined at weekly intervals over a period of 14 months. More frequent determinations were made with selected groups of cows and buffaloes for shorter periods of time. A total of 2006 and 1006 samples from buffaloes and cows respectively, were examined. Factors studied were : 1. species, 2. individuality of the cow and the buffalo, 3. stage of lactation, 4. variations from month to month, 5. variations from day to day, 6. variations from milking to milking, 7. variations from one quarter to another in the same udder, and 8. the effect of dilution on the titratable acidity of buffalo milk. The following is a summary of the results: 1. Average acidity of buffalo milk and cow milk was 0.1767 per cent and 0.1920 per cent respectively at morning milking and 0.1656 per cent and 0.2009 per cent respectively at evening milking. 2. The acidity of the milk from individual cows and buffaloes studied varied from 0.098 to 0.26 per cent respectively. Approximately 85 per cent of the samples of buffalo milk and cow milk could be grouped within range of 0.07 per cent acid. The limits of the interval, however, must be adjusted for these two species.
March 1955] A. A. BADR 59 3. The acidity of colostrum milk from 10 cows and 15 buffaloes was found to be high averaging 0.42 and 0.47 per cent respectively, for the first milking. With each succeeding milking a decrease occurred so that by the third milking, the acidity of the milk averaged 0.28 and 0.33 per cent respectively, and at the tenth milking the acidity was 0.22 and 0.25 per cent respectively. A gradual decline in acidity occurred during the first 15 to 20 days of the lactation. 4. The acidity of milk from two groups of 15 buffaloes and 10 cows showed a gradual decline throughout the lactation. The most pronounced change occurred at the beginning and end of the lactation period. From the second to the seventh month of the lactation the acidity remained fairly constant. 5. A marked decline in the average acidity of buffalo and cow milk was observ- ed during the last month of the lactation period. The extent of the change, however, varied widely between individual cows and buffaloes. 6. Variations from month to month in the acidity of milk for cows and buffaloes were not large. Differences in the stage of lactation and in the number and individuality of the cows and buffaloes represented in any one month, appear to be responsible for the variations in the monthly average for acidity which were found to occur. 7. Average variation in the acidity of milk from day to day and from milking to milking for two groups of 10 cows and 15 buffaloes respectively, over a 15-day period, were not significant. The milk from individual cows and buffaloes within these two groups did show some variation from one milking to the next. The maximum variation between any two consecutive milkings for cows and buffaloes was 0.043 per cent and 0.039 per cent respectively. 8. The maximum variation observed between the acidity of any two quar- ters of the same udder and milking in the individual cows and buffa- loes examined was 0.009 per cent and 0.007 per cent respectively. 9. Dilution of the measured sample of buffalo milk lowers the titratable acidity : dilution with an equal volume of water caused an average decrease of 0.0212 per cent and dilution with nine volumes of water, caused an average decrease of 0.0830 per cent. REFERENCES Berberich, F. M. (1907). Molkerei-Zeitung (Hildesheim), 1359-1362 Burgwald, L. H. and Bachtel, R. T. (1933). Abstracts of papers. Ann. Meet. Ann. Amer. Dairy Sci. Ass., 53 Caulfield, W. J. and Riddell, W. H. (1936). J. Dairy Sci. 4, 235 Davies, W. L. (1939), The chemistry of milk, 120-128, 304-310 Hanne, R. (1904). Milch-Zeitung, 18, 659, 725 Henkel, T.H. (1907). Milchwirtschaftliches Zentralblatt, 34-369. Cited by Sommer (1935). Wisc. Agric. Expt. Sta. Res. Bull, 127 Houston, J. (1931). J. Dairy Res. 2, 2-179
60 TITRATABLE ACIDITY OF COW AND BUFFALO MILK [Vol. XXV, Part I, McInerney, T. J. (1920). J. Dairy Sci., 3, 227 Plant, N. C. (1891). Archiv. fur Hygiene, 13, 133-172 Rice, Frank E. and Markley, Alton L. (1924). J. Dairy Sci., 7, 469 Richmond and Miller, V. (1920). Dairy Chemistry, London, 179 Rogers, L. A. (1928). Fundamentals of dairy science, 117-135 Siegfeld, M. (1900). Molkerei-Zeitung (Hildesheim), 205-207 Soldner, P. (1888). Laudwirtschaftlichen Versuchs-Stationen, 351-436 Sommer, H. H. and Hart, E. B. (1919). J. Biol. Chem., 1, 137 DRESSING OUT PERCENTAGE IN SUCKLING BUFFALO VEALS By A, L. BADRELDIN, Professor of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Cairo (Received for publication on 17 June 1954) GROWTH rate, development and dressing out percentage are the major factors which control meat production. The efficiency of feed utilization by animals is subjected to anatomical, physiological, genetic and environmental factors. During the early stages of life, the young animals achieve their maximum feed utilization when fed on milk. This is well illustrated when comparing the growth rates of rabbits, doves and chickens ; the rabbits being faster in growth than others. The rate of growth in different species is proportional to the percentage of protein in their milk [Aron, 1913]. The high growth rate of the young is associated with the high percentage of protein and ash in milk [Proscher, 1898 ; Belle, 1930]. Extensive slaughter experiments were carried out to determine dressing out percentage of farm animals as affected by the plane of nutrition and method of breed- ing. In Egyptian farm animals the dressing out percentage is 50 per cent for two- year old calves [Badreldin and Zaki, 1951], 43 per cent for one-year old fat-tailed sheep [Badreldin, 1951], 66 per cent for one-year old Fayoumi chick [Hafez, 1953], 50 per cent for 16-week old Baladi rabbit [Khishin et al., 1951] and 48.7 per cent for mature buffaloes [Domingues, 1951]. Dressing out percentage is also affected by the content of alimentary canal, age, state of fatness, breed and sex [Hammond, 1932]. It is hoped to study the dressing out percentage in suckling buffalo calves which are usually slaughtered when 30 to 40 days old. MATERIALS AND METHODS The experimental work comprised two investigations, described below : 1. The study was carried out at Cairo slaughter house. Twenty-five suckl- ing male calves were collected by the butchers from the vicinity round Cairo. They were all healthy and from 30 to 40 days old. The animals were weighed alive after fasting for twelve hours. Slaughtering was carried out by severing the head, atlas and cranium bones by using a sharp knife. The animals were skinned and the feet were cut off between the cannon and pastern bones. The carcasses were dressed out and weighed with offal (liver, kidney, heart, testes, mesenteric fat and tail). The head, skin, four legs and the empty digestive tract were weighed separately and the proportions of these different organs to live and carcase weight were measured. 61 112 AR/54 12
62 DRESSING OUT PERCENTAGE IN BUFFALO VEALS [Vol. XXV, Part I, 2. Sixteen buffalo male calves were available at the Animal Breeding Re- search Farm, Giza. They were born to healthy mothers from October to December 1952, and were kept under standard condition of manage- ment and nutrition. The calves were isolated from the mothers and were allowed to suckle twice a day. The amount of milk consumed by each calf was calculated from the average daily production of the mother when milked once weekly. RESULTS The live-weight of male suckling buffaloes at slaughter ranged from 109 to 167 lb. with an average of 136 lb. The carcase percentage (including liver, kidney, heart, mesenteric fat and tail) ranged from 60 to 70 per cent with an average of 66 per cent. The average weight of the head, four legs and the skin as expressed to the live-weight were 7.0, 5.0 and 8.0 per cent respectively. The head, four legs and empty digestive tract comprise about 20 per cent of the live-weight and about 30 per cent of the dressed carcase. The average weight of empty digestive tract and lungs including the trachea as expressed to the live-weight of calves was 6.29 per cent and 1.26 per cent respectively (Table I). TABLE I Dressing out percentage to live-weight Items Average weight in lb. Weight to live- weight (per cent) Live-weight 135.2 100.00 Carcase and offals: 88.9 65.75 Head 9.9 7.32 Feet 6.8 5.03 Secondary offals : Lungs 1.7 1.26 Empty digestive tract 8.5 6.29 Total 26.9 19.90 Hide 10.8 7.99 Other waste 8.6 6.40 The birth-weight of the buffalo male calves (second group) ranged from 61 to 124 lb. with an average of 90 lb. The live-weight of these calves at 30 days of age ranged from 117 to 187 lb. with an average of 134 lb. The total amount of buffalo milk consumed per calf during 30 days ranged from 280 to 455 lb. with an average of 336 lb. The amount of whole buffalo milk required for one-pound increase in live-weight was on an average of 6.0 lb. (Table II).
March 1955] A. L. BADRELDIN 63 The live-weight increase in the period of 30 days ranged from 42.75 to 130.5 lb. with an average of 56.5 lb. This increase subsequently yielded an average increase of 36.95 lb. of dressed carcase. Consequently, the average amount of buffalo-milk required for one pound dressed meat was 9.0 lb. TABLE II Weights of major organs expressed to carcase and offal Items Average weight (lb.) Weight to dressed carcase (per cent) Dressed carcase 88.9 100.00 Head 9.9 11.19 Feet 6.8 7.60 Lungs 1.7 1.90 Empty digestive tract 8.5 9.60 Total 26.9 30.30 Hide 10.8 12.10 Other waste 8.6 9.70 DISCUSSION The dressing out percentage of buffalo veal is considerably high as compared with that of any other species in stored condition. This may be due to the fact that in suckling calves, the fourth stomach (abomasum) is only developed and so the contents of the digestive tract and the stomachs are small. Thus the carcase per- centage obtained is much nearer to the empty carcase percentage. Moreover, the proportion of secondary offals (head, feet, lungs and empty digestive tract) which are edible in Egypt amounted to 20 per cent of the live-weight. Meanwhile at this stage of slaughter (30 days old), the animals do not have the chance to be affected by the parasitic diseases and infectious diseases which prevail under the sub-tropical conditions and retard the growth-rate of the calves. It is interesting to note that the hide percentage is not affected by age since Domingues [1951] has found in the case of adult Brazilian buffaloes that hide is 11 per cent while the present estimate is 10 per cent of the live-weight. The meat of buffalo veals is tender and very much liked by the consumers whilst the meat from animals of older age is tough, coarse and less palatable. Moreover, male buffaloes are not kept in the farm in big numbers owing to the fact that they are ferocious, difficult to handle and less tolerant than bullocks to hard work, especially during summer months. It is the general practice that the farmers prefer to get rid of their male calves at an early age so that they can utilize the surplus milk from the buffalo-cows in dairy industries.
64 DRESSING OUT PERCENTAGE IN BUFFALO VEALS [Vol. XXV, Part I The average amount of milk required to raise one dressed pound of meat is 9.0 lb. Although there is no financial return in this process of rearing, yet it is essential to raise male calves for a few weeks in order to be ready for human con- sumption. SUMMARY Twenty-five suckling male buffalo calves, 30 to 40 days old, were slaughtered, dissected and the organs weighed (dressed carcase, head, offal, hide, empty digestive tract, waste and feet). Sixteen male buffalo calves were available at birth. They were fed on measured amounts of whole buffalo-milk for 30 days. The live-weight was recorded at birth and when 30 days old. The average live-weight at slaughter was 135 lb. The average dressing out percentage (carcase+offal) was 66 per cent. The average weight of hide was eight per cent when expressed to live-weight. The average birth-weight was 90 lb. whilst when 30 days old it was 134 lb. The amount of whole buffalo-milk required for 1 lb. increase in live-weight was 6.0 lb. whilst 9.0 lb. of milk were required for 1 lb. of dressed meat. The slaughter of buffalo veals was discussed keeping in view the farm practice and economical returns. REFERENCES Aron (1913). Biochemie des Wachstums des Menschen und der hoheren Tier Jena. Quoted by Ham- mond, 1932 Badreldin, A. L. (1951). Faculty of Agric. Bull., 3 Badreldin, A. L. and Zaki, H. (1947). The effect of castration on Egyptian fattened calves (In Arabic). Government Press Publ. No. 500, pp. 14 Belle (1930). Recherches sur la croissance de quelques mammiferes lyon. Quoted by Hammond, 1932 Domingues, O. (1951). A. B. A., 19, 171 Hafez, E. S. E. (1953). Personal communication Hammond, J. (1932). Growth and the development of mutton qualities in the sheep Khishin, A. F., Badreldin, A. L., Oloufa, M. M. and Kheirel Din, M.A. (1951). Faculty of Agric. Bull., 2 Proscher, (1898) Zeits Phyl. Chem. 24. Quoted by Hammond, 1932
BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF AQUATIC SNAILS (A PRELIMINARY ACCOUNT) By M. ANANTARAMAN, Research Officer (Helminthology), Madras Veterinary College, Madras (Received for publication on 18 June 1953) (With Plate V) OF the various kinds of Indian fresh-water snails, two common ones, Limnaea and Indoplanorbis, are of great importance in the transmission of certain fluke infections of animals and man. They serve to convey to cattle, sheep and goats, the dreadful liver-flukes (Fasciola), blood-flukes (Schistosomes, one of which causes nasal granuloma) and rumen-flukes (amphistomes causing 'Pitto' or 'Gillar'). Most of the development of these worms is undergone in one or both of these snails, and the young ones coming out of the snails either settle on grass and enter the animal through the mouth, or directly penetrate its skin, when it comes to the pond or stream. Once inside the animals these parasites impair their health, often killing them. Prevention of disease is best achieved by eliminating the snails from water sources, and while chemical destruction by the use of copper sulphate and removal by hand are practised all over the world, attempts are constantly being made to devise other methods. In the centre for Helminthological research at Madras, aided by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, a study was made for the last few years' on these snails. Among other experiments, those on biological control produced highly fruitful results, which are summarized here for the benefit of stock-owners and others interested in animal health. The two snails are easily distinguished from each other by the shape of their shells. In Limnaea the shell is spirally twisted, whereas in Indoplanorbis it is coiled like a watch-spring. They exist, often together, in fresh-water which is stagnant or not fast moving, such as irrigation tanks and canals, banks of rivers, ponds and paddy fields, and are intimately associated with vegetation. Some of these weeds are used by them as support and food, and for deposition of egg-clumps. They also prey upon minute animal forms and are attacked by insects, fish and birds. Biological control of snails visualizes a disturbance in this balance between them and other forms of life around them, so that they will be diminished in numbers. This disturbance may be caused, for instance, by removing an article of food from or by introducing a natural enemy into its habitat. Removal of aquatic plants Among many plants with which these snails are associated, Ceratophllum, Pota- mogeton and Pistia (Water-hyacinth) are the most important. The snails may feed and crawl on some of them and fasten their egg-cocoons to them. Removal of weeds, from ponds and tanks of moderate size, will effectively reduce the numbers. This may be done mechanically by appropriate tools or chemically by the addition of toxic substances. Agroxone containing a plant hormone has been tested and found to have a high degree of utility in destroying these weeds towards snail-control. 65 112 AR/54 13
66 BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF AQUATIC SNAILS [Vol. XXV, Part I, Insect enemies Some insects are known to attack snails for food. Of these firefly-larvae or the glowworms are notorious. A species of this insect has been successfully employed in Hawaii Islands to control snails. Larvae of a firefly Lamprophorus tenebrosus, were maintained in the laboratory for nearly five months on these two kinds of snails, and each larva required at least one snail every day. Fish predators Fresh-water fish such as the carp are reported to have been used for mosquito control, since they feed on them and reduce the weeds. The habits of some aquatic fish were studied and the gourami (Osphromenus gourami) was found to be an all- purpose kind. It is gluttonous when feeding and swallows large amounts of vege- tation, young snails, and egg-cocoons, free or adherent to the plants. Duck-keeping The incentives to rearing ducks as an industry by itself are manifold, but an additional one is that they prey on fresh-water snails and facilitate snail-control in a locality. On a number of occasions, the author has watched these ducks dash into the pond or stream and swallow all kinds of snails for hours on end, depleting their population conspicuously by the close of the day. It is, however, obvious that for effective reduction of snails in an area, one will have to employ a number of ducks in proportion to the number of snails or the size of pond, repeat their visits to the site continuously and restrict their food-supply otherwise. Mixed farming of this type with ducks is therefore recommended. Poisonous plants Laboratory experiments with leaves, roots and fruits of various plants have shown that when they were left in water containing snails, the latter were killed after some time. Four such plants, whose fruits contain some snail-destroying substances, are Balanites aegyptiaca, Sapindus emarginatus (soap-berry), Acacia concinna (soap- nut) and Caesalpinia coriaria. These poisonous fruits should be allowed to soak in snail-infested waters in large numbers, whole or in a crushed or powdered form, but it would not be economical to accomplish this through human agency considering the cost of the fruits and the wages for the men. Moreover, since the effect of saponin or other lethal substances from the fruits will not last long, the application of the fruits will have to be repeated many times over. Under these conditions this mode of control is no better than chemical control. A method of biological control could, therefore, be devised by the planting of these trees, by villagers themselves, on the bund of ponds and along the edge of canals or ditches, so that the fruits will be continually falling into the waters and check the snail population. Other incidental advantages of such planting are the protection and shade available to the animals and men in the fields, a good fence round the tanks if planted closely, and the possible use of some of the fruits in other ways.
PLATE V] [Indian J. vet. Sci., VOL. XXV, Part I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A typical tank in which both snails occur among all kinds of vegetation [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. (a) Indoplanorbis (b) Limnaea 112 AR/54.
March 1955] M. ANANTARAMAN 67 The four plants mentioned above are distributed in South India as follows: Balanites sp. . In black cotton soil areas, like Hyderabad, Mysore, Ceded Districts and Coimbatore of Madras. Acacia sp. . . In heavy rainfall areas like Malabar. Sapindus sp. . . On sandy soil along the east coast of Madras. Caesalpinia sp. . . In the plains with normal or meagre rainfall. The Hindi, Tamil and Telugu names of different snails are given below Scientific name Hindi Tamil Telugu Balanites aegyptiaca Hingan Nanjundan Garapandu Sapindus emarginatus Ritha Ponnan-kottai Kunkudu- Kayalu Acacia concinna Shikakai Shikakai Shikakai Caesalpinia coraria Divi-Divi Inki-maram Divi-Divi Large scale planting in the different regions ought to be advocated and encour- aged by the authorities of the Agriculture and Forest Departments perhaps as a phase of the National Tree Planting Campaign (Vana Mahotsava) undertaken in this country annually. It must be remembered in conclusion, that in biological control whether by introduction of predators on snails or planting of harmful trees, initial planning and expenditure alone are necessary, while in mechanical or chemical methods these will have to be repeated. A complete and technical account of the study of the bionomics and control of these snails may be awaited.
ABSTRACTS Calf Paratyphoid. I. A general discussion of the disease in relation to animal and man. HENNING, M. W. (1953) Onderstepoort J. vet. Res., 26 (1), 3-23 THE author, besides recording his own observations, has reviewed the literature on calf paratyphoid and allied Salmonella infections of other animals and man. Having commented on the history of calf scours, its world-wide distribution and the pathogenicity of different Salmonella strains for various species of animals and man, Henning dwells on the relative frequency with which these strains are encoun- tered in bovine infection; out of 507 cultures isolated from outbreaks in calves, 491 were identified as S. dublin, 11 as S. typhimurium, four as S. enteritidis and one as S. bovis-morbificans. Twelve additional strains of S. dublin were isolated from adult cattle. For detecting carriers, the advisability of having recourse to both serological and faecal culture examinations is stressed, as none of these, by itself, was found to be as reliable as a combination of both. Contrary to what is observed in S. typhimurium and S. abortus equi infections, the agglutinogenic response of infected, carrier or immunised animals with S. dublin was found to result, principally, in the production of 'H' agglutinins. The role played by rats in disseminating Salmonella infections in man and animals is brought out, and the practice of using commercial rat viruses for the extermination of rats is deprecated. The possibility of transmission of Salmonella infection from cattle to man, with particular reference to S. dublin infection, through the agency of contaminated milk, is discussed. (G.S.) The therapeutic and prophylactic properties of Antrycide in trypanosomiasis of cattle. R.N.T.W. FIENNES. (1953) Brit. vet. J. 109 7 280-295, 8 charts THIS is a review of work done under colonial development and welfare scheme. (R. 318, 1949 to 1952). Antrycide, a trypanocidal drug, was described by Curd and Davey [1950] to possess the following properties: (1) Among most of the trypanocides, Antrycide was active against more species of trypanosomes. (2) It had a wide therapeutic index. (3) Being an insoluble salt, it protected the mice for a long period. It was demonstrated by Davey that injections of Antrycide chloride were effective in preventing the appearance of T. vivax in the peripheral blood of cattle provided that the challenge was made within three to four months and of T. congo- lense within five to six months. During the course of the experiments certain animals, though revealed negative blood smears, were found to give positive serolo- gical result. This was considered to be the evidence of cryptic infection. In such 69 112 AR/54 14
70 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, cases a large number of trypanosomes, mostly in a state of lysis, was found in the smears of kidney, heart, etc. It is a well-known fact that drugs including Antrycide are ineffective in destroy- ing trypanosomes in vitro in concentrations effective in the living body. The drugs might not act as prophylactics in the sense that they would prevent a temporary lodgement of parasities in the body. Various experiments regarding the drug fastness of the trypanosomes (especially T. vivax and T. congolense) with Antrycide and Dimidium were also studied. Treatment with Antrycide sulphate did not affect the number of cattle showing positive blood smears (Dose. Antrycide, 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg.; Dimidium ; 1 to 2 mg/kg.). When treated subsequently with dimidium bromide, trypanosomes were removed from the circulating blood but deaths were not arrested. The strains of T. congolense, isolated from cattle which had become infected following protection with Antrycide or Dimidium under natural conditions, were resistant to one or both drugs. The protective property of Antrycide was also studied. It was found that Antrycide prosalt (Dose 4 mg/kg.), a mixture of sulphate and chloride, gave uni- formly good results; while no other preparation or mixture of preparations was reliable. In both, the normal as well as protected mice, most of the injected try- panosomes were destroyed but small number survived as a focus of infection. A few parasites were always found in the peritoneal cavity or in tissue smears, especially those of lung, liver and kidney. There was no difference between the control and treated mice. The same experiment was repeated with a higher dose of Antrycide (Dose 12 mg/kg.). Only a small proportion of T. congolense was able to survive. There was absolutely no difference between those which received large doses of Antrycide and those which did not. The anaemic condition in trypanosomiasis was also studied. In acute stages, there was a fall of red cell count and haemoglobin estimation. As the anaemia progressed, the red cell size and haemoglobin percentage decreased. As the crisis approached there was anisocytosis, polychromasia, punctate basophilia and hypo- chromia. In chronic stages, there is a tendency of the red cell count to recover and low haemoglobin percentage. There is microcytic anaemia. In cryptic stage, the picture is just like in chronic stage. The blood picture in normal cattle which was given monthly injections of Antrycide did not show anything abnormal. The text has been illustrated with four excellent charts. (V.V.S.) Evidence of gene-controlled sterility in bulls. H. P. DONALD AND J. L. HANCOCK. (1953), J. agri. Sci. 43, 2, 178-181 ASPERMATOZOAL defect characterised by an abnormal formation of the acrosome was observed in 17 sterile Friesian bulls over a period of six years. The affected spermatozoa are referred to in this paper as 'Knobbed'. The defect was identified by microscopical examination of semen smears stained with Indian ink or Giemsa. Of the 17 bulls, eleven were bred and reared in one herd, three in another and one in each of three more herds. All the bulls, with one exception, were related to three common ancestors. Coefficients of inbreeding varied from 0 to 25. It is concluded that the characteristic defect of the acrosome is due to an autosomal sex-linked recessive gene (kn.). (S.N.L.)
March 1955] ABSTRACTS 71 Results obtained with new dilutors for bull sperm. ACHNELT, E. (1953) Priifung sergebnisse neuer Verdiinnumgs fliissigkeiten fiir das Bullen sperma Disch. tierarztl. Wschr Beil. Fort-pfl. ie. Bes. d. Haust. 52-55 RESULTS are reported of in Vitro trials carried out with certain new dilutors for bull semen developed by German firms. The dilutors were those of E. Merck of Darmstadt, of Behring werke of Marburg72 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXIV, Part I, that the heat treatment had more beneficial effects on the four-day old eggs than the five-hour old eggs. The percentage loss in weight by heat treatment was more in the five-hour old eggs than in the four-day old eggs. This effect was also noticed during storage. It was also noticed that increasing the time of heat treatment decreased the percentage loss in weight during storage, probably due to the coagulation of proteins in the shell and membrances. (T.D.M.) The effect of low manganese rations upon dairy cattle. O. G. BENTLEY AND P. H. PHILLIPS (1951) J. Dairy Sci. XXXIV, 5 ; 396-403 THE authors have found sterility in about 10 per cent of cattle in certain parts of Wisconsin where the manganese content of the forage falls below 20 p.p.m. The effect of low maganese rations upon milk production, growth and reproductive performance has been studied. Two experiments on young Holstein heifers have been conducted and studies have been made through one, two or three lactations. In the first experiment, the manganese levels in the ration were kept at 7-10 p.p.m. and 30 p.p.m.; and in the second, the levels studied were 7-10 p.p.m., 40 p.p.m. and 60 p.p.m. From these experiments it was found that the level of manganese in the ration had no effect on the growth of young Holstein heifer calves, but heifers raised on low manganese rations were slower to exhibit oestrus and were slightly slower to conceive upon breeding. The vitamin A, C or carotene content of blood was not affected by these levels of manganese in the ration. The manganese content of the organs and tissues of the animals were found to be similar in different groups, except in the case of ovary the manganese content of which was less than half in the low manganese group than in the supplemented group. Manganese (7-10 p.p.m. to 60 p.p.m.) was found to have no effect on milk production. The livers of the cattle on low manganese ration had abnormal structural changes. The authors suggest that 20 p.p.m. would seem to be a satisfactory level of manganese and below this level, supplementation is indicated. (K.N.) The incidence of fungi in the lungs of poultry. JORDON, F.T.W. (1954) Brit. vet. J., 110, 25-26 Mycological flora of macroscopically normal lungs of 25 dead birds were investi- gated as their presence in apparently normal birds became suspicious, especially in cases of difficult diagnosis. Normal lungs ground with sterile sand and saline were sown on Sabouraud's medium, basal culture medium and two per cent maltose extract agar ; and incubated at 25°C. For identification, yeasts were stained with 10 per cent Nigrosin. Twenty-two carcasses yielded fungus growth and a total of 37 cultures of nine different species, with up to four species from a single pair of lungs, were obtained. Penicillium was found to be the most common. A. fumigatus next in occurrence while A. glaucus, A. candidus, A. versicolor, mucor, phycomycetis and yeast were found to be less common.
March 1955] ABSTRACTS 73 Greater incidence would have been found and more varieties isolated had larger amounts of lung tissue and larger number of carcasses been examined. (Similar investigation in this country will be worthwhile as a large number of deaths were attributed to fungus in M. P. some years ago. (B.N.G.) MaediREVIEW AVIAN PHYSIOLOGY BY PAUL D. STURKIE (Published by Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, 7 and 8 Henrietta Street, London, W.C.2, 1954, pp. 424, Price 48s.) THE book has been devoted to the specialized physiology of birds, dealing mainly with the chicken, duck and pigeon. As physiology provides a basis of animal husbandry and veterinary medicine, the publication of this book should afford much satisfaction to students and research workers in poultry science and veterinary medicine. The book is fairly comprehensive and brings together our existing knowledge of avian physiology. It draws on a wealth of the best and latest results gained in research especially on hypophysis, gonadal hormones and thyroids. The chapter on electrocardiography has also been lucidly recorded. The knowledge that broodiness in chickens can be terminated by estrogen administration, the fattening of table birds can be achieved by synthetic estrogen, such as diethlstilbestrol or dianisylhexene, old hens can be rejuvenated and increase in egg production can be obtained by administration of thyroactive compounds, are some of the instances of marvels of science which on proper application can be of considerable economic importance to the poultry industry. The book has been excellently produced and well supplied with references to the literature and has an adequate subject index. (S.B.) 74 MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES OBSERVATIONS ON THE RELATIONSHIP OF THYROIDAL ACTIVITY OF CHICKS AND ' CAECAL COCCIDIOSIS ' (EIMERIA TENELLA) By B. S. GILL, M.V.Sc. (HONS.), Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar- Kumaon (U.P.) (Received for publication on 7 February 1955) INCREASING use of thyroprotein and thiouracil in commercial poultry farming led Wheeler et al., [1948] and Todd et al., [1949] to study the effects of thus indu- ced changes in thyroid activity of host chicks, upon the growth rates of Eimeria ten- ella and the parasitised chicks. Wheeler and his associates reported that thiouracil feeding did not materially change the resistance of chicks to this parasite. Hyper- thyroid chicks suffered 12 and 14 per cent less mortality than the unmedicated and hypothyroid lots respectively. However, birds in the latter two groups suffered the same mortality and reduction of the rate of gains in body weights. Todd and others [1949] observed that hyperthyroid chicks were more densely parasitised by Eimeria tenella and produced a larger number of oocysts than did the control (unmedicated) birds. Hypo- and hyperthyroidism are two relative conditions of thyroid activity depending upon breed, strain [Glazner and Jull, 1946], age of the animal and the climatic factors [Reineke and Turner, 1945]. Wheeler et al., [1948] in their experi- ments, had employed fortnight-old chicks of three breeds (unnamed) which were started on medicated feed (0.1 per cent thiouracil and 0.02 per cent thyroprotein respectively) 12 days before infection (60,000 sporulated oocysts of E. tenella to each bird). They judged the effects of the two drugs on growth of the parasite indirectly by comparing gains made in body weights and mortality suffered by chicks of the three groups. Todd et al., [1949] started 46-day-old New Hampshere chicks on mash medicated with thyroprotein (0.04 per cent) 6 days before infection (approximately 250 sporulated oocysts of E. tenella to each bird). Body weight and oocyst counts per gramme of caecal contents 23 days after infection were taken with a view to judging the results of experiments. As these two experiments were conducted under widely differing conditions, their results cannot be safely compared with each other. Separate breeds of chicks of different age groups were employed under dissimilar climatic conditions. Thyroprotein was fed in two different concentrations. Pre-test medication period differed widely in the two experiments. Mortality rate [Wheeler et al., 1948] alone fails to indicate the effect of alterer thyroid status on growth of the parasite directly as altered physiological thyroid status could have modified death rate through changed basal metabolic rate (B. M. R.). At the most it could serve only as an indirect means to gauge the complex host-parasite relationship. It would be interesting to ascertain the effect of changed thyroid status on the parasite itself. Any changes in the physiology of host having repercussions on the growth of the parasite would be manifested in 141 AR/54 75
76 THYROIDAL ACTIVITY AND CAECAL COCCIDIOSIS [Vol. XXV, Part II, the oocyst output. Consequently, count of oocyst output by an infective dose would form a more foolproof method for judging the effect of changed thyroid status upon growth of the parasite. Todd et al., [1949] counted oocysts 23 days after infection, when majority of oocysts has been eliminated. Only the oocysts which were produced by the progeny of slackers (lag-phase) could have been taken into consideration by them. Even this factor is not regular and constant as it is a matter of chance as to how many sporozoites lag behind in development and reach their destination (i.e. oocystic stage) later than others. Pathogenicity of coccidia depends upon the size of infective dose. Only ingestion of a large number of viable and sporulated oocysts will cause mortality which, in case of caecal coccidiosis, takes place on the 5th to the 7th day of infection. Survivors will start voiding oocysts in faeces late on the 7th day, discharge being heaviest for next 2June, 1955] B. S. GILL 77 After keeping for 14 days on medicated mash, each lot was weiged. Birds of medicated groups and one group out of the two unmedicated lots were infected individually with 300 sporulated oocysts raised from a single-and-pure line strain of Eimeria tenella. The second unmedicated lot served as uninfected control. Each lot was weighed on the 7th, 8th and 9th day of infection. They were destroyed on the 9th day. Thyroids were carefully dissected out, weighed and fixed in Zenker's fluid. Caeca were also harvested and oocysts released by tearing entire pouches in Waring blender (worked for two minutes at medium speed). This tissue suspension was further diluted to watery consistency and strained through fine wire gauze (100 mesh per linear inch). Faeces of each lot collected at the end of 7th, 8th and 9th day were weighed, made into watery suspension, and strained to remove coarse particles. Total oocyst count of faecal and caecal tissue suspension was determined by counting the oocyst population of a representative sample of each suspension. (Full details of the method of counting oocysts is the subject matter of separate paper.) Oocyst counts of faeces were made separatly for collection of each day. All the lots were maintained under similar conditions except for medication. Separate attendants were employed for each lot and chances of reinfection were scrupulously avoided. Cages and the rooms in which they were kept were rat and vermin proof. Mortality rate One hundred and fiftynine two-day-old chicks were randomised into three groups of 53 each, lot weight determined, and each group was kept separately in electrically-heated batteries. One lot was started on basal ration plus 0.15 per cent thiouracil, the other on basal ration plus 0.04 per cent ' protamone', and the third group was maintained on unmedicated basal ration. When they were 17 days old, their lot weight was determined, and each bird was infected individually by pipetting 200,000 sporulated oocysts from a common pure-line brew of Eimeria tenella directly into the pharynx. Lot weight was again determined on the fourth and tenth day of infection. On the tenth day, all the birds (i.e. the survivors) were sacrificed and their caeca and thyroids harvested. Thyroids were weighed and a few were fixed for histological examination. Caeca were opened and the amount of haemorrhage in them noted. Caeca were also examined for the presence or otherwise of caecal cores. Birds dead after the third day (mortality occurred only upto seventh day) were examined for etiological diagnosis. Those dead of caecal coccidiosis showed varying degree of haemorrhage, and smears from caecal scrapings and contents were examined for endogenous stages of the parasite under the phase-contrast microscope. Another lot of 22 birds was kept coccidia- free and fed unmedicated mash. This lot served as healthy control for comparing live weights of experimental groups. DATA AND ITS STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE Experimental data (i.e. observations) for the sake of clarity and brevity are summarised in Tables I to V.
78 THYROIDAL ACTIVITY AND CAECAL COCCIDIOSIS [Vol. XXV, Part II, TABLE I Oocyst production and body weights of hypo- and hyperthyroid parasitised (Eimeria tenella) White Leghorn chicks Item Lot I 0 . 15 per cent thiouracil Lot II 0 . 04 per cent protamone Lot III Control 1. Average live weight/bird when 3 days old (i.e. on the day when medication was started) 46.6 gm. 47.5 gm. 46.6 gm 2. Average live weight/bird when 17 days old (i.e. on the day of infection) 89.2 gm. 79.8 gm. 84.2 gm. 3. Average live weight/bird when 23 days old (i.e. on the 6th day of infection) 140.2 gm. 120.0 gm. 134.7 gm. 4. Average live weight/bird when 26 days old (i.e. on the 9th day of infection) 147.5 gm. 126.2 gm. 139.9 gm. 5. Oocyst count/bird at the end of 7th day of infection 289,000 Oocysts 1,600,091 Oocysts 325,666 Oocysts 6. Oocyst count/bird at the end of 8th day of infection 189,000 Oocysts 630,250 Oocysts 189,916 Oocysts 7. Oocyst count/bird for 9th day's faecal collection and caecal tissue suspension taken together 87,369 Oocysts 170,642 Oocysts 66,000 Oocysts 8. Total oocyst output/bird 565,378 Oocysts 3,400,983 Oocysts 581,582 Oocysts 9. Overall live weight per cent increase during the life time of the bird 216.5 163.5 202.2 10. Average live weight per cent increase during the 10-day infection period 63.1 58.1 61.1 11. Average live weight per cent increase during the 14 days prior to infection 91.4 68 80.8 12. Average weight of thyroids/bird/ 100 gm. live weight 81.7 mg. 3.44 mg. 8.3 mg
June, 1955] B. S. GILL 79 TABLE II Mortality rate and body weight of hypo and hyperthyroid parasitised (Eimeria tenella) chicks Item Lot I 0.15 per cent thiouracil Lot II 0.04 per cent protamone Lot III Unmedicated diet Lot IV Healthy control 1. Average live weight/bird on the start of experiment (i.e. at 2 days of age) 44.0 gm. 43.6 gm. 43.8 gm. 43.6 gm. 2. Average live weight/bird on the 15th day of experiment (i.e. on the day of infection) 99.8 gm. 90.3 gm. 93.6 gm. 95.2 gm. 3. Average live weight/bird on the 4th day of infection 129.7 gm. 110.3 gm. 121.4 gm. 120.4 gm. 4. Average live weight/bird on the 8th day of infection 120.5 gm. 112.3 gm. 119.8 gm. 141.3 gm. 5. Number of birds in experiment on the 4th day of infection 55 58 56 22 6. Number of birds dead of caecal coccidiosis 4th to 8th day of infection 42 29 33 not infected 7. Mortality per cent due to caecal coccidiosis 76.4 50 58.9 .. 8. Average per cent increase in the live weight/bird upto the day of infection 127 107.1 113.7 122.4 9. Average per cent shift in live weight/bird during the 5th day to 8th day (both inclu- sive of infection) Decrease 7.1 Increase 1.8 Decrease 1.3 Increase of 17.3 during this period 10. Average per cent increase in live weight during the 10- day infection period 29.7 24.3 28 48.2 11. Average weight of thyroids/ bird/100 gm. live weight 93.6 mg. 4.6 mg. 9.1 mg. 9.3 mg. TABLE III Severity of caecal lesions in birds dead of coccidiosis (Eimeria tenella) and in those sacrificed on the 10th day of infection Item Control (Unmedicated group) Protamone (0.04 per cent) -fed group Thiouracil (0.15 per cent) -fed group Haemorrhage+++ ; and caecal core 40 per cent chicks 52 per cent chicks 41 per cent chicks Haemorrhage+++ ; but no caecal core 50 per cent chicks 43 per cent chicks 47 per cent chicks Haemorrhage++ ; and caecal core -nil- 25 per cent chicks -nil- Haemorrhage++ ; but no caecal core 10 per cent chicks -nil- 12 per cent chicks
80 THYROIDAL ACTIVITY AND CAECAL COCCIDIOSIS [Vol. XXV, Part II, TABLE IV Percentage of deaths due to caecal coccidiosis in chicks and significance of differences Item Percentage of deaths Significance of difference Lot I (0.15 per cent thiouracil) 76.4 Lot I vs. Lot II N.S. Lot II (0.04 per cent protamone) 50.0 Lot I vs. Lot III N.S. Lot III (unmedicated) 58.9 Lot II vs. Lot III N.S. TABLE V Percentage of birds dead of coccidiosis (Eimeria tenella) showing severity of caecal lesions (haemorrhage+++ with and without caecal cores) and significance of differences Item Percentage of birds Significance of difference Lot I (Infected group) 92.3 Lot I vs. Lot II N.S. Lot II (Protamone, 0.04 per cent) 93.1 Lot I vs. Lot III N.S. Lot III (Thiouracil, 0.15 per cent) 82.6 Lot II vs. Lot III N.S. N.S.=not significant S=Significant (0.05&gt;P &gt;0.01) H.S.=highly significant (P &lt;0.01) P=Probability DISCUSSION Thyroid along with pituitary controls the general metabolism of the body. Its activity varies with age and breed of the animal, and climatic and seasonal variation. These factors are also universally accepted to effect the course of the disease. In order to clearly enunciate the effects of seasonal variation, breed and age of the animal upon pathogenesis, prognosis and course of a disease, recent trend of workers in the field of medicine has shifted towards altering physiology of the animal, by manipulating activity of its thyroids, so as to simulate conditions created by these factors and then notice the repercussions of thus induced physiologic changes upon the. disease process. Evidence on this recently opened chapter of preventive medicine has just started to accumulate and only a limited literature upon the host's thyroid status influencing parasitism is available for comparison. Hence, at times different observations on this aspect of parasitism recorded in some laboratories are not easily accountable and full significance of this phenomenon is, as yet, not understood.
June, 1955] B. S. GILL 81 The regimen of thiouracil and thyroprotein feeding followed in these experi- ments had induced sufficient degree of hypo- and hyperthyroidism as indicated by change in size, weight and histology of thyroids. Thyroids of the thiouracil-fed group were almost 10 times enlarged than thyroids of the unmedicated group. Histologically, marked hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the columnar cells and complete absence of colloid from the lumen of acini and acute distension of blood vessels were seen. These macro- and microscopic changes are clear evidence of the effectiveness of thiouracil treatment. Thyroids of the ' protamone '-fed group were atrophied. This diminished thyroid size was similar to that reported by Irwin, Turner and Reineke [1943]; Turner, Irwin and Reineke [1944], and Wheeler et al., [1948]. Acini were almost replaced by fibrous tissue. Thyroids were considerably decreased in size and could be located and dissected out with difficulty. They had less than half the weights of thyroids of control groups. Acute atrophic picture of thyroids established the effectiveness of the thyroprotein treatment. Oocyst production Each group showed peak of oocyst production at the end of the 7th day of infec- tion after which a marked reduction in the oocyst population in faeces was noticed. This fact is in line with our knowledge of life cycle of the parasite in that the gamete stage is reached on the 6th day when fertilisation takes place, and a great majority of oocysts are eliminated on the 7th to 9th day. Later elimination of oocyst is kept up by the progeny of ' lag-phase '. Oocysts being the direct filial descendants of preceding stages, and the only stage in the life history of the parasite lending to numerical counts, can indicate with all its limitations, the growth rate of the parasite. Any factor influencing its growth, which is necessarily through schizogonous cycle, which incidentally is also the vulnerable stage inside the host, will be reflected in the quantitative change it has affected in the oocyst discharge. Therefore, counting of oocysts was relied upon to compare the overall growth rate of the parasite in the normal, hypo- and hyperthyroid hosts. Other standards., viz. haemotologic count and haemolglobin determination used by various authors indicate changes which are only manifesta- tions of the acute disease set up by massive doses. A single dose of 250 oocysts used in this experiment could produce only a mild infection, hence, these standards were not taken into consideration. The thiouracil-fed group produced the least number of oocysts. The control group produced 2.9 per cent more oocysts than the former lot. This difference is probably not a significant one, whereas the ' protamone '-fed group has produced a significantly more number of oocysts, viz. 501 and 489 per cent more than the hypothyroid and normal chicks respectively. The observation of Todd et al., [1949] that hyperthyroid chicks produced 11 times more oocysts than the control is similar to the present investigation but as their observation was made on the 23rd day of infection, and was not a count of the total oocyst production, the two observations cannot be fully compared. From the data presented, it is evident that moderately elevated B. M. R. of host chicks has favoured growth of the parasite, as is shown by the higher rate of
82 THYROIDAL ACTIVITY AND CAECAL COCCIDIOSIS [Vol. XXV, Part II, oocyst production for this group. This encouraged growth of the parasite might either have been due to the direct stimulating effect of the elevated B. M. R. of the host upon various endogenous stages or that the higher B. M. R. acted as a ' stress factor ' upon the host by depleting the latter of its essential vitality-keeping factors like vitamins [Ershoff, 1948]. Consequently, the host tissue offered little or com- paratively less resistance to the development of the parasite so that the parasite developed unhindered in thus devitalised tissue, or a possible protective factor, hitherto unknown, like a ' mucus anthelmintic' factor [Frick and Ackert, 1948] which ordinarily might be protecting the caecal mucosa against Eimeria tenella has been adversely affected. Another instance of hyperthyroidism favouring the parasite is available in the work of Larsh [1947]. While studying the effect of induced hypo- and hyperthyroidism in young and older mice upon their natural resistance towards the percentage development of eggs of Hymenolepis nana var. fraterna into cysticercoids recovered 92 hours post-infection, he found that hyper- thyrosis favoured heavier parasitisation by cysticercoids indicating lowered resistance of the host. Thiouracil treatment of mice did not change their resistance towards Hymenolepis. But the study of Leach and Spence [1951] on Notoedres scabie of rats that hyperthyrosis raised their resistance to the development of severe lesions, whereas hypothyrosis had the opposite effect and favoured the mites, is in sharp contrast to the above noted two observations. Hypothyroid chicks produced almost the same number of oocysts as did the controls. It would mean that either the lowered B. M. R. had no direct appreciable effect upon the parasite, or it did not affect any change in the resistance of the caecal tissue so that the growth rate of the parasite was proceeding at the same pace in both the hypothyroid and unmedicated chicks. Todd [1948a] found that hypo- and hyperthyroidism did not materially change the resistance of chicks to A scaridia galli and Heterakis gallinae, but the two worm attained significantly greater lengths in mildly hyper- and hypothyroid birds, respec- tively. This differential response of the parasite to the changes in B. M. E. of the host was not understood. Mortality rate and severity of caecal lesions Birds kept on thiouracil diet were very dull, registered more loss of appetite and presented more miserable appearance as compared to the ' protamone '-fed group. Chicks in the latter lot were definitely more bright and vigorous. Birds in the ' protamone' group showed marked loss of appetite on the 5th and to some extent on the 6th day of infection only. On these days, they huddled together under heating arrangement as done by the birds belonging to the other two groups from the late 4th day of infection till the 10th day when all the survivors were sacrificed to note the severity of caecal lesions. Clinically, the control birds were somewhat less affected than the hypothyroid birds. Data on the severity of lesions suffered show that the lot with elevated B. M. R. was definitely worse affected than the other two groups. The latter, as compared with each other, appeared equally affected. Differences in the lesions caused indicate the rate at which schizogony has been going on, i e. the rate of develop- ment of the parasite. Therefore, it can be logically concluded that the growth rate
June, 1955] B. S. GILL 83 of the parasite was higher in chicks with elevated B. M. R. whereas hypothyroidism had no appreciable effect in this respect. This conclusion is in agreement with and supports the observation on oocyst production. But oddly enough, birds with elevated metabolic rate suffered 5.4 and 26.4 per cent lesser mortality than the birds with normal and depressed B. M. R. respectively. This observation confirms the findings of Wheeler et al., [1948]. The two observations, i.e. the higher pace of multiplication of the parasite and lower mortality rate in hyperthyroid hosts are not easily reconcilable. Though these chicks were actually worst hit by the parasite, judging from the signs and symptoms, they appeared less affected. They were more lively and bright. Only on the 5th and 6th day of infection, they were seen huddled together round the heating arrangement in brooders and showed marked loss of appetite. Whereas, chicks in the other two lots behaved in this manner from the late 4th day to the 10th day of infection. Upto the 4th day of infection, control and hypothyroid birds showed 10 and 27.5 per cent higher rate of gain in body weights respectively than the hyperthyroid chicks. But between the 5th to the 8th day (both days inclusive) of infection both the former groups lost consider- able live-weight. They registered a decrease of 7.1 and 1.3 per cent in body weight respectively. On the contrary, the hyperthyroid lot actually recorded increase in body weight during these three days too though the rate of gain in body weight was impeded. This increase of 1.8 per cent in live weight, though a small one, is of significance here on comparative basis. These facts tend to show that hyperthyroid chicks tolerated the infection better than the other two lots. Probably their vitality, kept up by continued feeding during the infection especially round about the 5th day-critical stage of the disease, and such other indirect influences tipped the balance in their favour. Thus it seems that the mortality rate in the parasitised chicks is not an exact indication of the growth rate of the parasite, but perhaps it points more truly to the complex phenomenon of the host-parasite relationship. Thiouracil feeding though resulted in increased fat deposition did not benefit the birds against Eimeria tenella. Rather, they suffered the highest mortality: 26.4 and 17.5 per cent more than the chicks with elevated and normal metabolic rates respectively; though it may be recalled that the rate of development of the parasite in the latter two lots was much higher, and almost the same, respectively as compared to hypothyroid birds. Further, they gave a more miserable appearance and showed considerable decrease in their live-weights. Probably their lowered body vigour was responsible for higher percentage of deaths in them, as hypothyroi- dism is believed to be associated with a high degree of susceptibility to infections [Grollman, 1947] and thiouracil is known to produce leucopaenia [Gargill and Lesses 1945; Warren, 1945]. Whitlock [1945] observed that lambs fed thiouracil died early of strongylodosis. Todd [1948b] while surveying worm burden of chicks in Tennessee found that heavy breeds (whose B. M. R. is known to be comparatively lower, a change artificially induced by thiouracil feeding) harboured greater number of Heterakis gallinae than the lighter breeds of chicks. The present investigation which has supported works of Wheeler et al., [1948] and Todd and his associates [1949] is of interest in commercial poultry farming where thyroprotein and thiouracil are finding increasing use for conferring one benefit or the other to chicks. ' Protamone ' feeding has an inherent implication in that the hyperthyroidism favours a higher rate of oocyst production of 141 AR/54 2
84 THYROIDAL ACTIVITY AND CÆCAL COCCIDIOSIS [Vol. XXV, Part II, Eimeria tenella, which would help in building very high concentrations of infective oocysts on poultry farm. Chicks from hatcheries and brooders are highly susceptible to coccidiosis and when put first on such floors may pick up lethal doses of E. tenella with consequent high mortality and poor performance of survivors. Unless the farmer recognises this potentially dangerous contamination of floors, he stands to lose the advantage gained through ' protamone' feeding because of high chick mortality (due to coccidiosis) in his flocks. Thiouracil feeding not only results in higher mortality from caecal coccidiosis [present investigation and that of Wheeler et al., 1948] but also lowers general resistance to infections [Grollman, 1947] parti- cularly to coryza and Newcastle disease [Shaffner, 1947]. Hence, its use in poultry feeding schedules warrants and necessitates strict attention to be paid to sanitation of poultry houses, their floors and runs. Failing this, the advantage gained by its use on one hand will be lost on the other. Growth rate of the parasitised chicks Having investigated effects of thiouracil-induced hypothyroidism and ' protamone' induced hyperthyroidism on the growth of E. tenella, it would be of interest to compare their effects on the growth rate of the parasitised chicks. Reduction in B. M. R. accompanying thiouracil feeding, should decrease the basal energy requirement for maintenance resulting in increased fat deposition due to the conservation of energy (derived from digested nutrients) left after satisfy- ing maintenance requirements. Chemical analysis of the entire carcass and com- parisons between the caloric food intake and caloric value of gains have tended to bear this out [Andrews and Bohren, 1947]. Thiouracil feeding, in both experiments (Tables I and II), till the day of infection caused increased gains in weights. Post- mortem examination of the birds even after they had passed through heavy infection of E. tenella in two experiments, showed that carcasses of thiouracil-fed lot contained plenty of deposited fat which was entirely absent in birds of other two lots. This observation is in accord with that of Andrews and Schnetzler [1946] who also observed increased fat deposition after thiouracil feeding. Birds fed with ' protamone ', though were looking more bright and active, made comparatively poor weight gains. This too was expected in the light of the fact that the metabolic rate was artificially accelerated, with the result that much of the energy derived from ingested feed was utilised for supporting the increased B. M. R. Consequently, little could be left and utilised for increasing the live- weight. In the experiment on oocyst production, birds were lightly infected (250 oocysts of E. tenella each, a dose far below the lethal level). They did not evince any appreciable effect of infection on their health as the disease produced was a very mild one. This fact explains that observations on weight gains in this experiment (Table I) did not record any marked difference in growth rates of various groups of chicks before and during infection except that the rate of growth of hypothyroid chicks was proportionately lower for the 10-day-infection period than for the pre-infection days as compared to the other two lots. But this difference was not significant. Similarly, Todd et al., [1949] also failed to note any significant difference in weight gains by lightly infected chicks (50 days old) with normal and elevated metabolic rates.
June, 1955] B. S. GILL 85 In the experiment on mortality rate among different groups, chicks were given lethal infection of E. tenella. They suffered the worst type of the disease as revealed by the high percentage of deaths in them, severest lesions encountered in their caeca, and marked depression observed in their growth rates. It is here that differences, if any, in the growth rate of the parasitised chicks affected by the changed status of their thyroids could be expected to show up. Severe infection markedly depressed the growth rate of all the three groups. Relative shift in their live weights before and during the infection, when compared to each other, revealed that the growth rate of hypothyroid chicks was slightly more depressed than the other two groups. However, this difference in rate of gain in body weights was not a significant one. Body weights taken on the 5th and 8th day of infection revealed a point of interest. Judging from cessation or depression in growth, the hypothyroid group was the worst sufferer as it showed a drop of 7.1 per cent in body weight. Then came, in the order of suffering, infected controls (i.e. with unaltered B. M. R.) which lost 1.3 per cent body weight during these four days of infection. Hyper- thyroid chicks, on the other hand, showed a gain of 1.3 per cent in their live weights. Magnitude of shift in live weights during these four days when worst rigours of the disease were felt become real when we take into consideration the 17.3 per cent in- crease in live weights shown by healthy (i.e., uninfected and unmedicated) controls. The gain of 1.3 per cent in body weight of hyperthyroid chicks, though very slight, is of considerable significance. It clearly indicates that somehow or other under the influence of ' protamone ' these birds, though at least five times more densely parasitised, retained better appetite and digestive efficiency as compared to the other two lots. Physiological status of thyroid is known to influence assimilation of carbo- hydrates and fats [Read, 1950]. Therefore, it may be presumed that hyperthyroi- dism in the present investigation, perhaps through better maintenance of digestive efficiency of parasitised chicks, kept their general body vigour relatively at a higher level which might have been responsible for keeping the mortality rate significantly lower in them. This investigation has confirmed the findings of Wheeler et al., [1948] who observed that birds with depressed and normal metabolic rates suffered equal loss in body weight due to heavy infection of E. tenella, and birds fed ' prota- mone ' recorded a comparatively lighter loss in body weight as compared to the other two groups. SUMMARY Effects of induced hypo and hyperthyroidism on parasitism with E. tenella have been studied experimentally. Presence of several imperfections in similar ex- periments of Wheeler et al., [1948] and Todd et al., [1949] necessitated the present investigation as their work had indicated certain important inherent implications the use of thyroprotein and thiouracil in commercial poultry feeds has got on the susceptibility of chicks to caecal coccidiosis. Experiments were broad based and several variables kept constant. Hyperthyroidism stepped up four-fold the rate of oocyst production as compared to the unmedicated controls ; whereas hypo- thyroidism slightly lowered the oocyst production. However, this difference was insignificant. Chicks were given light experimental infection (300 oocysts per
86 THYROIDAL ACTIVITY AND CÆCAL COCCIDIOSIS [Vol. XXV, Part II, bird) to obviate complications caused by larger doses of the parasite and to facilitate counting of oocysts. In lethal experimental infection, hyperthyroid chicks suffered more severe caecal lesions (indicating the intensity of schizogonous cycles), listed appreciably lower mortality (50 per cent) than the hypothyroid (76.4 per cent) and unmedicated control (58.9 per cent) lots. Apparently the two observations, i.e. accelerated endogenous cycle and lower mortality in hyperthyroid hosts, and vice versa in hypo- thyroid ones, seem irreconcilable. But comparison of the growth rates of the three lots during acute stage of infection provided the clue. Hypothyroid chicks lost considerably (7.1 per cent) during the acute stage of disease (i.e. 5th to the 8th day), whereas hyperthyroid lot even then showed an increase in live weight (1.8 per cent). This increase though slight is significant as it indicates that these birds tolerated the infection better (as also shown by their brighter demeanour) than the other two groups. Probably their continued feeding habit (influenced by thy- roprotion, as both the other lots lost appetite during the crisis) kept up their vitality and hence there was lowered mortality in them. Thiouracil feeding, though resulted in increased fat deposition in chicks adversely affected them and caused high mortality. The present investigation has experimentally substantiated and confirmed conclusions deduced by Wheeler et al., and Todd and his associates. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author is indebted to Dr H. N. Ray (ex-Head of the Division of Parasi- tology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaon) at present Prof. of Protozoology, School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta, for the valuable guidance afforded in the conduct of experiments and for helpful criticism in proper presentation of the data ; and also to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the award of their Research Fellowship in Veterinary Parasitology (1952-54). REFERENCES Andrews F. N. and Bohren B.B. (1947). Influence of thiouracil and stilbestrol on growth, fattening and feed efficiency of broilers. Poultry. Sci., 26 : 447 June 1955] B. S. GILL 87 Reineke, E. P. and Turner. C. W. (1945). Seasonal rhythm in thyroid hormone secretion of chicks Poultry Sci. 24 : 499 Shaffner, (1947). Cited by Wheeler et al., 1948 Todd, A. C. (1948a). Thyroactive iodocasein and thiouracil in the diet, and growth of parasitised chicks. Poultry Sci., 27 : 818 SEX-DRIVE AND SEMEN PRODUCTION IN WATER BUFFALO By S. S. PRABHU and U. D. SHARMA, Animal Genetics Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, U. P. (Received for publication on 6 April 1954) INTRODUCTION MATING desire and sperm production are reported to behave independently in the majority of male animals [Zawadowsky, 1933 ; Hammond, 1925 ; Stone, 1939 ; Lagerlof, 1935 ; Anderson, 1945 ; McKenzie and Berliner, 1937; Beach, 1947]. Alifanow [1934], however, found a correlation between the sexual desire and sperm production in dogs. In dairy cattle, Milovanov and Smirnov-ugrjumov [1940] reported marked effect on semen production with introduction of new stimulii. Collins, Bratton and Henderson [1951] found a relationship between semen production and sexual excitement. When sexual excitement was increased by restraining the bulls, significantly larger ejaculates with higher concentration of sperm were obtained than when the sexual excitement was minimised. Further, Bratton, D' Arensbourg and Johnston [1952] who tried three levels of sexual excite- ment, viz. unrestrained, one false mount and two false mounts, prior to collection, found that semen characteristics could be markedly influenced by controlled sexual excitement. In the present paper are presented our observations on sex-drive and semen production in the Indian water buffalo, Bubalus bubalis, Linn. MATERIAL AND METHODS Ten mature healthy buffalo bulls of a breed common in Uttar Pradesh were utilised for the experiment. The test was run on two bulls at a time and consisted in allowing unlimited opportunities at a stretch for service in an artificial vagina using an anoestrous she-buffalo as a ' teaser '. The method is a modification of the one used by Carpenter [1933] in pigeons. Instead of fixing the test interval, unli- mited time was allowed with a view to finding out the persistency of the sex-drive at a time. The frequency of copulation according to Stone [1939] can be taken as a valid indicator of intensity of sexual-drive. For convenience, at a time the bulls were allowed only a maximum period of 15 minutes, made of three trials each of five minutes duration, near the 'teaser ' per ejaculate. If within this time, no response was forthcoming from the bulls, they were considered to have ' refused' service and were not tried again that day. In this manner, tests were run on alternate days on five different days. Lagerlof [1935], reporting observations in the bull on the influence of number of matings on sperm content, had suggested that a rest period of one night was sufficient to restore the normal sperm number on the follow- ing day. To be on safer side, we decided to increase the rest period between tests 89 141 AR/54 3
90 SEX-DRIVE IN WATER BUFFALO [Vol. XXV, Part II, to 40 to 48 hours. In addition to reaction time, the following observations were made on each of the ejaculates of the different bulls in the tests : (i) Volume (ii) Initial motility (iii) Sperm concentration (iv) Percentage of abnormal sperm (v) Total sperm in an ejaculate (vi) Initial pH The abnormality was counted according to the method suggested by Prabhu and Sharma [1953] and the pH was determined by the B. D. H. capillator. RESULTS Sex-drive In Table I are presented details of the number of ejaculates given by each bull in different tests. TABLE I Number of ejaculates Serial No. Bull No. Total number of ejaculates collected I test II test III test IV test V test Total 1 16 8 7 7 7 9 38 2 19 8 4 6 6 4 28 3 20 7 10 3 6 4 30 4 22 6 4 2 5 0 17 5 23 39 36 5 3 12 95 6 24 8 6 4 4 5 27 7 25 11 6 11 3 0 31 8 26 4 3 5 1 1 14 9 28 12 23 3 10 9 7 10 31 34 24 30 15 15 118 Total .. 137 123 96 60 59 475
June, 1955] S. S. PRABHU AND U. D. SHARMA 91 The results show considerable variation in the level of sex-drive among the 10 bulls. The largest number of ejaculates collected in a test was 39 and the largest total for the five tests was 118. If one took the average over-bulls and tests as approximating to the average level of sex-drive in these bulls, bulls no. 31, 28 and 23 appeared to possess sex-drive about 1½ to 3 times the average. The rest of the bulls fell below the average. Further, bulls no. 26 and 22 were decidedly ' poor ', while bulls no. 16, 19, 20, 24 and 25 had about the same level of sex- drive. Progressive loss in sex-drive. There is a general indication that there exists a progressive drop in the persistency of sex-drive with days of test. On the whole, the maximum response was present on the first day of test and the minimum on the last day. The response on the last day was nearly less than half of the initial day. To find out whether the ' trend' was statistically significant, appropriate statistical techniques were applied to the basic data after applying the square root transformation. The 't' value obtained was 3.60 for 9 d.f., which is statis- tically significant, showing that the drop in the persistency of sex-drive was due to a significant ' trend '. Possibly, this was due to the resting period between tests being inadequate. In these cases, rest periods of more than 40-48 hours are clearly indicated. Semen characteristics and reaction time The behaviour of each semen criterion in different ejaculates collected one after another in a test was studied by finding values of the regression coefficients for each bull. In view of the existence of trend, which suggested the influence of preceding test or tests on the results of subsequent tests, only the data collected in the first test were utilised for further study. The regression coefficients give the rate of change of the different criteria in each bull, and they are given in Table II. TABLE II Regression coefficients Serial No. Bull No. Volume Sperm con- centration Total sperm in ejaculate Per cent abnormal pH E. T. 1 16 +0.1833 92 SEX-DRIVE IN WATER BUFFALO [Vol. XXV, Part II, TABLE IIJune, 1955] S. S. PRABHU AND U. D. SHARMA 93 TABLE III Correlation coefficients Item Volume Sperm concen- tration Total sperm in ejaculate Initial pH. Percent of abnormal sperm Reaction time (A) First ejaculate and average of ejaculates in first test +0.7820** +0.9159** +0.7834** +0.8298** +0.6785** 94 SEX-DRIVE IN WATER BUFFALO [Vol. XXV, Part II, The following can be seen from Table III. (a) Volume : There was a positive significant correlation between first, second or average of first and second ejaculate figures and average figures of first or all tests. (b) Sperm concentration : Positive, significant correlation could only be found with first ejaculate and averages of first or all tests, as well as average values of first two ejaculates and average of first test. In other cases, there was no significant correlation. (c) Total sperm in ejaculate : There was positive significant correlation with first ejaculate value and average of first test values, but no significant correlation between first ejaculate value and average of all test values. The position was the same with regard to the second ejaculate values tooJune, 1955] S. S. PRABHU AND U. D. SHARMA 95 TABLE IV Regression values Serial No. Items studied Mean S. E. Remarks 1 Volume 96 SEX-DRIVE IN WATER BUFFALO [Vol. XXV, Part II, From Table V, the following interesting points emerge. (a) There was no significant correlation between sex-drive and values of semen criteria and reaction times based on first, average of first and second, or average overall values of all tests except in case of sperm concentration and initial pH. (b) The sperm concentration was negatively correlated with sex-drive except when average of first and second ejaculate figures of first test were used. The correlation coefficient obtained when overall average values of all tests were employed alone was statistically significant. (c) The initial pH was positively correlated with sex-drive and when average of all ejaculates in first test was employed for working out the correla- tion, the coefficient obtained approached 5 per cent level of statistical significance. The coefficient derived through use of overall average of all tests approached 1 per cent level of significance. (d) In general, it was noticed that the values of correlation coefficients were very much higher when, instead of other estimates, averages of all ejaculates in all tests were employed in the calculations. CONCLUSION The results show that a fair indication of a bull's worth as a semen producer can be had through a study of the semen in the first two ejaculates taken at short interval. There was a positive significant correlation between estimates such as volume, sperm concentration, pH and percentage of abnormal sperm derived from the study of these two ejaculates and estimates got through an exhaustive number of ejaculates taken in rapid succession as recommended by Walton and Edwards [1938] for bulls. There was, however, no significant correlation between semen characteristics as estimated from a consideration of first, average of first two, and average of all ejaculates in a test or all tests and sex-drive except in the case of sperm concentration and initial pH when average values of all tests were employed. Since a significant trend has been noticed among tests contrary to the findings of Hale, Almquist and Thacker [1953] on dairy bulls, it appears desirable to verify this finding using longer intervals between tests and then working out the correlation coefficients between sex-drive and average values of a number of independent and uninfluenced tests. For the present, it can safely be concluded that there is no significant correlation between sex-drive and estimates of semen quality and reaction time when values of first or average of first two ejaculates only are used. SUMMARY 1. The paper deals with the analysis of data on reaction time and semen quality of samples collected in five exhaustion trials carried out at intervals of 40-48 hours on 10 buffalo bulls. 2. Significant correlations were found between sex-drive as measured by the number of services in all tests and initial pH (+0.75) and sperm concentration (June, 1955] S. S. PRABHU AND U. D. SHARMA 97 4. Using values of first exhaustion trial only regressions worked out indicated that on an average, semen volume, sperm concentration, total sperm in ejaculate and percentage of abnormal sperm decreased with the number of ejaculates, while initial pH and reaction time increased with the number of ejaculates. Only the variation in the reaction time rate was statistically significant. 5. A fair indication of the average semen quality and reaction time of all eja- culates in a trial can be had from a study of only the average values of first two ejaculates. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are indebted to Dr P. Bhattacharya, Head of the Division of Animal Genetics, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukkteswar Kumaon for providing all facilities and to Shri V. N. Amble, Statistician (Animal Husbandry), Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for his ungrudging help and advice in the statistical treatment of the data. They are grateful to Dr S. Datta, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, for his keen interest and general encouragement. REFERENCES Alifanow, F. (1934). Artificial Insemination of dogs. Abstr. in A. B. A., 3, 285 Anderson, J. (1945). Semen of farm animals and its use for artificial insemination. Imp. Bur. Anim. Genet., Tech. Commu., viii + 151 Beach, F. A. (1947). A review of physiological and psychological studies of sexual behaviour in mammals. Physiol. Rev., 27, 240-307 Branton, C., D' Arensbourg, G. and Johnston, J. E. (1952). Semen production, fructose content of semen and fertility of dairy bulls as related to sexual excitement. J. Dairy Sci., 35, 801-807 Carpenter, C. R. (1933). Psycho:biological studies of social behaviour in Aves. I. The effect of complete and incomplete gonadectomy on the primary sexual activity of the male pigeon. J. Comp. Psychol. XVI, 25-96 Collins, W. J., Bratton, R. W. and Henderson, C. R. (1951). The relationship of semen production to sexual excitement of dairy bulls. J. Dairy Sci., 34, 224-227 Hale, E. B., Almquist, J. O. and Thacker, D. L. (1953). Observations on the sexual behaviour and semen production of dairy bulls. J. Dairy Sci. 36, 576 (Abstr.) Hammond, J. (1925). Fertility and sterility in domestic animals. J. Farm. Club., 20, 232-233 Lagerlof, N. (1935). Ein Beitrag Zur Sterilitat in der Rinderzucht. Ziet. f. Zucht., B. Bd. 32, S 47-93 MacKenize, F. F. and V. Berliner, (1937). The reproductive capacity of rams. Mon. Agr. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. 265 Milovanov, V. K. and Ugrjumov, D. V. (1940). Problema racionaljnogo ispoljzo vanija proizvoditelei v svete ucenija akod I. P. Pavlova. Vistn. seljskohoz Nauki Zivotn. 5, 138-153 Prabhu, S. S. and U. D. Sharma. (1953). Accuracy of a simple method for estimating the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa in semen samples., Indian J. vet. Sci., 23, 4, 283-287 Stone, C. P. (1939).Sex drive, Chapter XXIII in Sex and Internal Secretions, Second edition Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore Walton, A. and J. Edwards (1938). Criteria of fertility in the bull. 1. The exhaustion test. Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Pro. 31st Ann. Meet. 254-259. Abstr. in A.B.A., 8, 131 Zawadowsky, M. M. 1933. Strife with impotency of farm animals. Probl. Anim. Husb., 4, 51-55 (Russian) 141 AR/54 5
TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION IN HARIANA HISSAR CATTLE EFFECT ON AVERAGE SPAN OF LIFE, BREEDING EFFICIENCY AND INCIDENCE OF INFECTION IN PROGENY By TULSA RAM, PhD. (U.S.A.), Veterinary Investigation Officer, Punjab, and RADHEY MOHAN SHARMA, Assistant Disease Investigation Officer, Punjab (Received for publication on 10 March 1954) INTRODUCTION THIS paper is the outcome of a study of the records of tuberculous and non- tuberculous cattle maintained at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar. It will not be out of place to give a brief history of the Hissar Farm. It started as a small private camel stud in 1809 and took up cattle breeding also in 1815 for the purpose of cattle improvement and to meet the requirements of heavy working bullocks for the army. With the passing of time and the changing needs of the country, breeding of horse, mule, buffalo, sheep and goat was also introduced. It is now the biggest livestock breeding farm in India and probably in the East, and lies 680 feet above the sea level. It comprises about 40,000 acres of land with about 8,000 head of Hariana-Hissar cattle and other species of livestock such as buffaloes, sheep, goats, donkeys and camels. The average rainfall in this tract is about 16.1 inches. The main object of the farm is the production of breeding sires for effecting improvement in the livestock breeds of the Punjab in particular and of different States of the Indian Union in general. The cattle are kept on semi- ranch system and mainly depend upon grazing in the reserved forests of the farm. Due. to scarcity of rains, almost every other year is a famine year. It is during the scarcity periods only that supplementary feeding with stored fodder and con- centrates is resorted to just to maintain the animals and to tide over the difficult periods. Tuberculosis infection was known to exist amongst cattle of the farm from quite early days as observed from post-mortem examinations performed at the farm hospital. The disease, however, received serious attention of the authorities only in 1941 when the whole stock comprising about 5,000 cattle was subjected to syste- matic tuberculin testing by the double intradermal method by Shri Sahai, the then Tuberculosis and Johne's Disease Officer at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar. The percentage of reactors then came out to be 20.25. The elimination of nearly 1,000 valuable breeding cattle by destruction was neither considered advisable for economic reasons nor was it practicable in this country in view of the 99 141AR/54 5
100 TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXV, Part II, religious sentiments of the people. Segregation of the affected animals was, there fore, the only feasible course and consequently the following steps were taken for the control of this disease. (i) Testing of the entire stock was undertaken at quarterly intervals in the beginning. The interval between the tests was raised to six months after the first few quarterly tests had been carried out. Yearly testing was introduced later when the incidence of infection was greatly reduced. (ii) The tuberculin positive cows, considered fit for breeding, were segregated in a separate block far away from the main negative herd. In order to prevent any mixing of the healthy and tuberculous cattle, a five feet high and seven miles long mud wall was constructed all round the segregation block. These cows were bred and their progeny remained suckling till 5 to 6 months of age when they were weaned and tested twice at one month's interval. The reactors were retained at the segregation block and the negative progeny were immediately transferred to the clean herd. (iii) The positive bullocks were used for agricultural operations in the segrega- tion block. It would thus be observed that the control measures adopted were mainly of the Bang's type except that (1) it was not practicable to wean the newly born calves immediately after birth in view of the semi-wild nature of the animals, (2) the clinical cases were allowed to die a natural death and were not slaughtered, and (3) the bulls used for breeding were either non-clinical but tuberculin positive, or in the absence of these, healthy tuberculin negative ones. As a result of the above measures, the incidence of the disease at the farm has been greatly reduced and it does not now exceed one per cent for the last about 10 years. In view of the encouraging results achieved by the above control measures and availability of relevant breeding records of reactor and non-reactor Hariana-Hissar cows, it was considered interesting to study the effect, if any, of tuberculosis infec- tion on (a) the average span of life, (b) breeding efficiency, and (c) the incidence of the disease in their progeny. MATERIAL (1) Records of all tuberculin positive cows born during the period from 1932 to 1934 numbering over 300 were examined and compared with those of tuberculin negative cows of the same age group. (2) Both positive and negative herds of cows were kept under almost identical environmental conditions of management, feeding, breeding, etc. The two herds were, of course, kept entirely separate from each other. (3) All animals dying at the farm were examined post-mortem in the farm hospital in order to determine the etiological diagnosis.
June, 1955] TULSA RAM AND RADHEY MOHAN SHARMA 101 (a) Effect of tuberculosis infection on average span of life For this purpose, animals in the two groups were taken in their serial order of entry in the livestock register and at least equal number of cows of each quarter in both the groups were included. Only such cows were considered in the study which had died a natural death due to any cause except contagious diseases, accidents and those destroyed. The results of the examination are summarised in Table I. TABLE I Effect of tuberculosis infection on average span of life in Hariana-Hissar cows No. Group No. of Animals Average span of life (days) Difference (days) t 1. Tuberculin positive 302 4690.73 } 90.43 4.630 2. Tuberculin negative 414 4781.16 Results. The span of life in the two groups ranged from 1,400 to 7,300 days in the positive herd and from 1,287 to 8,700 days in the negative herd with an average of 4690.73 and 4781.16 days respectively. The difference in the average span of life between the two groups is 90.43 days only which however, is highly significant statistically. The majority of deaths, i.e. 71.0 per cent in the reactor herd and 72.2 per cent in the non-reactors occurred between the age from 4,200 to 6,400 days. Post-mortem findings based on examination of 302 cases revealed that more than 80 per cent carcases of the reactors showed lesions localised in mediastinal and/or bronchial lymph glands only. The incidence of miliary tuberculosis was found to be about 15 per cent when internal organs like lungs were mostly affected in addition to the lymphatic glands. Cases of generalised tuberculosis were occa- sionally met with and their incidence did not exceed 5 per cent. (b) Effect of tuberculosis infection on breeding efficiency Breeding efficiency of 311 reactors and 417 non-reactors of the same age group was studied by determining the number of calves born to each animal during their span of life. Table II shows the results of the comparative study. TABLE II Effect of tuberculosis infection on the breeding efficiency of Hariana-Hissar cows No. Group No. of Animals No. of calves born (average) Difference t 1. Tuberculin positive 311 5.28 } 0.16 1.000 2. Tuberculin negative 417 5.44 Results. The average number of calves born was 5.28 and 5.44 in the above two groups of animals, the difference being 0.16 only which is statistically non- significant. The general level of breeding efficiency in both the groups is, however.
102 TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXV, Part II, low as compared to that observed in foreign countries. This is mainly due to low plane of nutrition on account of recurrent famine conditions prevailing in this tract. (c) Incidence of tuberculosis in the progeny of tuberculous cows As a result of the insidious nature and very variable incubation period of the disease, the incidence of infection is noticeable as the age advances. Hutyra et al., [1949] report that the mortality figure rises yearly from the suckling age and in cattle more than half the animals which react to the tuberculin test or are proved to be tuberculous at meat inspection, are past the sixth year of life. In view of the above fact records of the progeny of the reactor and non-reactor cows born during the period from 1939 to 1949, were examined in relation to the occurrence of reactors among them detected at the yearly tuberculin tests. In all, records of 441 progeny of the reactors and 508 progeny of the non-reactors were studied. Twenty cases in the progeny of the reactors and 16 animals from the progeny of the non-reactor herd proved positive to tuberculin according to results of tests conducted upto March, 1953. The results of analysis are summarised in Table III. TABLE III Effect of tuberculosis infection in dams on their progeny No. Group No. of progeny tested No. of reactors Reactors Difference X2 (Per cent) (Per cent) 1. Tuberculin positive 441 20 4.53 }1.38 1.241 2. Tuberculin negative 508 16 3.15 Results. It would be observed that in spite of the fact that the calves born of reactor cows remained with them and suckled them for about six months after birth, the difference in the incidence of infection in the two groups is non-significant statistically. Twenty animals out of 441 progeny of reactor mothers proved positive to tuberculin as compared to 16 animals from 508 progeny of tuberculin negative herd. DISCUSSION The entire reactor herd consisting of nearly 300 cows and eight buffaloes was examined and milk from six cows and two buffalo cows, which were extremely emaciated and could be suspected as clinical cases of the disease, was subjected to microscopical examination, guineapig inoculation and guineapig feeding trial with pooled sample of their raw milk. No acid-fast organisms could be seen under the
June, 1955] TULSA RAM AND RADHEY MOHAN SHARMA 103 microscope. Gruineapig inoculation and guineapig feeding trial also yielded nega- tive results. These findings are in conformity with the results previously obtained by Sahai and Dhanda [1944-45] who examined milk samples of 116 reacting cows of all ages and condition by guineapig inoculation for the presence of tubercle bacilli at this farm and found all the samples negative. Survey of tuberculosis carried out by tuberculin test in different districts of the Punjab shows that the incidence of infection is only 1-5 per cent under field conditions. Liston and Soparkar [1917] and Soparkar [1926] studied the susceptibility of several breeds of cattle and concluded that Indian breeds of cattle were more resistant than European breeds. Carmichael [1939, 1941] obtained the most striking evidence concerning the relative susceptibility of different breeds of cattle in Uganda. He found the incidence of tuberculosis, judged on meat inspection figures, 16 per cent in Ankole breed and 0.93 per cent in breeds originated from Zebu cattle and on tuberculin testing 54.9 and 4.6 per cent respectively. Carmichael by experimental inoculation of Zebu and Ankole calves observed that the disease in Zebu cattle was not progressive but the lesions were only moderate to slight whereas the infection proved fatal in Ankole calves within two to five months. He, therefore, concluded from both epidemiological and experimental evidence that the Ankole cattle were as susceptible as European cattle whereas the common Zebu cattle were much more resistant. The observations recorded in this paper also point out that 80 per cent cases of the disease examined post-mortem showed the infection localised in lymph glands only and that clinical cases of the disease exhibiting involvement of the udder and tubercle bacilli in the milk were not encountered. These findings are indicative of the comparatively higher resistance of the Hariana-Hissar cattle to the disease and appear to account for the non-significant differences in the breed- ing efficiency and incidence of the infection in their progeny. The difference in the average span of life is also not well marked. SUMMARY 1. Records of over 300 tuberculin positive cows were examined to study the effect of tuberculosis infection on (1) their span of life, (2) number of calves born during their life time, and (3) the incidence of the disease in their progeny. These results were compared with corresponding figures obtained from a similar study of over 400 tuberculin negative cows of the same age group. 2. The average span of life of the reactor animals was 4690.73 days against 4781.16 days of the non-reactors. The difference in the average span of life in the two groups is only 90.43 days which, however, is highly significant statistically. 3. The average number of calves born was 5.28 and 5.44 in the positive and negative groups respectively. The difference of 0.16 is not significant statistically. 4. Twenty animals out of 441 progeny of reactor cows proved positive to tuber- culin test as compared to 16 out of 508 produce of non-reactor cows. The difference of 1.38 per cent is again non-significant statistically, indicating thereby that the close contact of the progeny with their tuberculin positive dams for about six months had no significant effect on the incidence of the disease in them. 141 AR/54 7
104 TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXV, Part II, ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors feel indebted to Major A. C. Aggarwala, formerly Principal, Punjab College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Hissar, Punjab, and to Shri B. N. Handa, Director of Animal Husbandry and Warden of Fisheries, Punjab, for valuable suggestions in the writing of this paper. REFERENCESFrancis, J. (1947). Bovine Tuberculosis Hutyra, F. J. Marek and R. Manninger, (1949). Special Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic Animals, 5th Edition, I, 577 Records of Government Livestock Farm, Hissar (India) Sahai, L. and M. R. Dhanda (1944-45). Tuberculosis and Johne's Disease Scheme. Ann. Rep., Indian Counc. Agri. Res. Veterinary Investigation Officer (1936-1945). Ann. Rep. of V. I. O., Punjab
APPLICATION OF BENZENE HEXACHLORIDE FOR THE CONTROL OF ECTOPARASITES OF DAIRY CATTLE AND ITS EFFECT ON MILK YIELD By B. C. BASU, C. M. SEN GUPTA and P. BALARAMA MENON, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 14 October 1953) IN a previous communication, Basu et al., [1952] reported the result about the control of ectoparasites on dairy cattle by the use of DDT, Pyrocide 20, Pyrethrum, etc. and their formulations and effect on milk yield. Later on, a series of experiments were conducted on the same lines with another organic insecticide, viz., benzene hexachloride, the results of which are presented in this note. The most common ectoparasites recorded in the area are : 1. Musca nebulo, 2. Musca crassirostris, 3. Lyperosia exigua, 4. Stomoxys calcitrans, 5. Hippobosca maculata, 6. Hyalomma aegyptium and 7. Boophilus australis. MATERIALS AND METHODS Benzene hexachloride sprays were used in the following dilutions : A. 0.001 per cent gamma BHC in kerosine oil was sprayed every day for a month. B. 0.002 per cent gamma BHC in kerosine oil was sprayed every alternate day for a month. C. 0.003 per cent gamma BHC in kerosine oil was sprayed every week for a month. D. 0.005 per cent gamma BHC in kerosine oil was sprayed once in the be- ginning of the month. Twenty animals used in the experiment were approximately of the same lacta- tion. They were divided into five groups of four each. Four groups received one of the four sprays A, B, C and D while the group V remained as control. The spraying was done for one month during June and July. The animals were all of Hariana breed belonging to the Institute dairy farm. Spraying was done all over the body, excepting eyes and udder, by a hand sprayer every day at 6 o'clock in the morning. Approximately 60 c.c. of the mixture was used per cow per day. The spraying was continued for a month and separate con- trols were kept. The milk records, not only for the period during which the spray- ing operation was continued but also for one month both preceding and following the operation, were kept. In order to evaluate the increase and decrease in milk yield the following pro- cedure was adopted. In each group the milk record was kept for the period during which spraying operation was conducted as well as for one month both preceding 105 141 A.R./54 8
106 APPLICATION OF BENZENE HEXACHLORIDE [Vol. XXV, Part II, and following it. It can be seen that in Table I the milk yield per cow per month preceding the application of sprays is taken as the base while in Table II the figures for the period when the spraying was done are taken as the base. Over these bases the percentage of milk yield was calculated and was compared with the controls to find out the apparent increase or decrease in milk yield. RESULTS The result of the experiment during the period of spraying is presented in Table I which shows that an apparent increase in milk yield over the controls varies from 3.1 to 11.6 per cent, which is highly significant. TABLE I Milk yield in pounds during the month preceding spraying Group receiving spray Milk yield in lb. per cow per month for periods Percentage of base Per cent apparent increase over control 7-5-52 to 6-6-52 7-6-52 to 6-7-52 I 228.1 201.6 88.3 11.6 II 175.1 151.8 86.6 9.9 III 295.6 242.8 82.1 5.4 IV 205.5 164.0 79.8 3.1 V (control) 213.2 163.7 76.7 .. The record of milk yield for one month following the application of spray is presented in Table II. TABLE II Milk yield in pounds during the month following spraying Group receiving spray Milk yield in lb. per cow per month for periods Percentage of base Per cent apparent increase over control 7-6-52 to 6-7-52 7-7-52 to 6-8-52 I 201.6 205.5 101.4 2.6 II 151.8 156.1 102.0 3.2 III 242.8 243.8 100.4 1.6 IV 164.0 140.7 85.8 June, 1955] B. C. BASU, C. M. SEN GUPTA AND P. BALARAMA MENON 107 It will be noticed that excepting in Group IV the improvement in milk yield continued in all the groups of the experiments, even though the spraying had actual- ly been stopped. This can only be attributed to the continued effect which the spray had in keeping the population of ectoparasites in check. Not much im- portance can be attributed to Group IV as it received the spray only once in the beginning of the month. The effect of the spray did not last long which might be due to various reasons, namely, cleaning, washing, etc. Moreover, two animals of this batch had to be discarded in the middle of the experiment as they fell ill. There was also a slight variation in the results during the period of spraying and its after-effects between groups I and II. In a previous series of experiments [Basu et al., 1952] when the animals were sprayed daily with a 0.001 per cent solution of DDT, we recorded a maximum apparent increase in milk yield of 11.3 per cent during the month of spraying and 11.0 per cent during the month following spray. In the present series, the daily spraying of the animals with a solution of BHC at the same strength of 0.001 per cent gave a maximum apparent increase of 11.6 per cent and 2.6 per cent respec- tively during and following the months of spraying. It is interesting to note that though BHC showed a slightly better effect during the spraying period, its effect did not last as long as that of DDT when the spraying was discontinued. SUMMARY In order to ascertain the effect of the control of ectoparasites on the milk yield of cattle, gamma BHC in dilutions of 0.001 per cent, 0.002 per cent, 0.003 per cent and 0.005 per cent was tried on sixteen dairy cows divided into four batches of four each and four more were kept as control. The spraying was conducted for a month and about 60 c.c. of the solution were sprayed per cow per operation. The animals in batches I, II, III and IV were sprayed once with a 0.001 per cent solution every day, with 0.002 per cent solution every alternate day, with 0.003 per cent solution every week and with a 0.005 per cent solution at the beginning of the month, respectively. The animals of batch V remained as control. The milk record was maintained for the period during which the spraying opera- tion was carried out and also for one month preceding and following it. Of the four different trials, daily spraying of 0.001 per cent of gamma BHC was found to be most effective as it showed an increase of 11.6 per cent in milk yield when compared with control. Likewise batch II had shown an increase of 9.9 per cent, batch IIIFOETAL-MATERNAL ATTACHMENTS IN BUFFALO AND CAMEL By E. S.E. HAFEZ, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Cairo, Egypt (Received for publication on 23 July 1954) (With two text-figures) ALL mammals except the duck-bill and spiny ant-eater are viviparous. The minute ova contain so little yolk that they can never pass beyond the very early stages of development unless additional food material is provided. The pre- natal life starts with segmentation of the fertilized ova, then it is caught and lod- ged in the superficial tissue of the endometrium. The foetus is usually carried in the corresponding uterine horn. However, transuterine (internal) migration of the ovum has been reported in pig, sheep, goat, horse and certain members of Carnivora, Cheiroptera, Insectivora, Rodentia and Primates [Boyd, Hamilton and Ham- mond, Jr. 1944]. There is a mutual physiological attraction between the blasto- cyst and the endometrium. This attraction is responsible for the fixation of the former during the duration of gestation so as to ensure the exchange of metabolites. In the early phases of blastocyst development amnion, allantois and chorion are formed, essentially similar to those structures developed in reptiles and birds. Certain regions of the allantoic sac fuse with the adjacent chorion and enter into a very peculiar relation with the uterine wall. The nature and degree of intimacy in the association of foetal and maternal tissues are unequally established in the uteri of different mammals. In Eutherian mammals, the simplest form placenta diffusa occurs in horse, donkey and pig. Placenta cotyledonaria is found in Precora (ruminants) except the musk deer. Placenta zonaria is found in Carnivora whilst placenta discodalis occurs in Rodentia, Insectivora, Chiroptera and Primates [Amroso, 1952]. On the other hand, marsupial mammals (Metatheria, the kangaroo and its allies) produce only a weakly developed and briefly temporary placenta [Neal and Rand, 1948]. Thus in placental mammals, as compared to marsupials, the young are born at a relatively advanced stage of development and growth. The physiology of pregnancy in buffalo has been reviewed by Hafez [1952], the gestation period being about 314 days. The developmental changes in buffalo placentome have been investigated by Hafez [1954]. Knowledge concerning pla- cental physiology in camel is still obscure. The present investigation is a morpho- logical and anatomical study of the foetal-maternal attachments in the domestic buffalo and camel. MATERIALS AND METHODS The material was pregnant genitalia from 83 buffaloes and 34 camels. The animals were sacrificed at Cairo slaughter house and the genital organs were trans- ferred to the Animal Breeding Laboratory, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo. Notation was made on the location of corpus luteum of pregnancy in the ovaries. The uteri 109 141 AR/54 9
110 FOETAL-MATERNAL ATTACHMENTS [Vol. XXV, Part II, were cut opened and the placental membranes carefully dissected from the endome- trium. The type and degree of attachment were recorded. In buffalo, the position and number of the maternal cotyledons were observed. Non-pregnant genitalia of buffaloes and camels were dissected as control. The micro-anatomy of the atta- chments was studied under a dissecting microscope. The conceptus was completely removed from the uterus and the placental membranes were examined. RESULTS In the buffalo, the non-pregnant endometrium was subdivided into two parts, the uterine caruncles and the intercaruncular areas. These caruncles were essen- tially local thickening of the sub-epithelial dense connective tissue which elsewhere existed as a thin layer beneath the epithelium. The cotyledonary burrs were more or less of the same size and were visible to the naked eye as small circular areas on the surface of the uterine mucous membrane. They were arranged in linear arrangement ranging from five or six rows in the uterine body to two rows at the extremities of the horn. During early pregnancy, fine villi appeared as buds on the surface of the chorionic membranes opposite to the maternal caruncles. They then started to develop, fitting into the concavities of the protruding cotyledons. By mid-pregnancy there was a good degree of adherance between the chorionic villi and the interlocking lamellae of the maternal cotyledons. Later there was a large system of branching in the placentomes. The free surface of the ripe cotyledons (mid-pregnancy) was markedly convex and the base of attachment was constricted to a narrow pedicle. In the gravid horn, the average number of cotyledons varied from 31 in the early stages to 89 in late stages. In the non-gravid horn the average number ranged from 11 in the early stages to 58 in the late stages. The maximum number was 110 in the gravid horn and 107 in the non-gravid. The number of cotyledons in the gravid was in excess of that in the non-gravid, sometimes as much as 600 per cent. The diameter of the cotyledons varied markedly with the stage of pregnancy as well as the position in the uterus. The cotyledons of the largest diameter (some 13 cm.) were situated near the middle of the allantio-chorionic sac opposite to the dorsum of the foetus (Fig. 1). In all the cases observed the foetus was found in the uterine horn corresponding to the same side of ovulation, i.e. there were no signs of ova migration. The two ends of allantois were terminated by necrotic tips, these were mainly of puss-like material. The necrotic tip of the non-gravid horn was more abundant than that in the gravid horn. In the amnion, there were numerous amniotic pustules. They were pale spots during early pregnancy and yellow elevations of 4 mm. in diameter during mid and late pregnancy. The histological study of the sections showed that there was an intimate con- nection between the foetal villi and the endometrium. The uterine epithelium covering the base of maternal cotyledons was completely denuded and disappeared, leaving the chorion in contact with the connective tissue of the uterus (Fig. 2). In the camel, the non-pregnant endometrium did not show any elevations (caruncles). The foetal-maternal attachments were much simpler than those in the buffalo. The pregnant genitalia of the camel showed considerable oedema
June, 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ 111 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Schematized diagram showing species differences in the foetal-maternal attachments between the buffalo and camel. 1. Ovary with corpus luteum of pregnancy. 2. Ovary without corpus luteum of pregnancy. 3. Fall- opion tube. 4. Necrotic apex of foetal membrane (only present in the buffalo). 5. Gravid uterine horn. 6. Vitelline sac. 7. Allantio-chorionic membranes. 8. Endometrium. 9. Chorionic villi. (Note they are segregated in restricted cotyledons in the case of buffalo, being bigger in the gravid horn. In the camel they are distributed all over the chorion.). 10. Amnion. 11. Amniotic fluid. 12. Foetus. 13. Body of the uterus being small relatively to the gravid uterus in both species. 14. Cervix. (Note the annual folds in the buffalo and the S shape in the camel). 15. Non-gravid horn. 16. Amniotic pustules (only present in the buffalo). 17. Umbilical cord. 18. Meconium.
112 FOETAL-MATERNAL ATTACHMENTS [Vol. XXV, Part II, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Schematized diagram showing tissue attachments between the foetus and the mother in the buffalo and camel.
June, 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ 113 and increased vascularity. The chorionic villi were uniformly distributed on the outer surface of chorion. They appeared as small reddish spots, with a diameter ranging from one to three millimeters. They were all of the same size and density in the two uterine horns and with advancing pregnancy tended to unite in small patches. The rate of development in their height and diameter seemed to be negli- gible throughout pregnancy. The placental membranes were filled with its fluids but did not show any signs of necrotic apex at either end (Fig. 1). The hippomane were not present in the allantois as well as the amniotic pustules. Meanwhile, the amnion contained a good amount of meconium which might indicate the occurrence of defaecation in the pre-natal life. In 30 per cent of the cases the foetus was observed in the uterine horn opposite to the site of ovulation (corpus luteum of pregnancy); this was an evidence of ova migration. There was no intimate fusion between the chorionic villi and the endometrium as they were easily freed. In the histological sections the maternal tissues were preserved intact and the chorionic epithelium came in direct contact with the maternal uterine epithelium (Fig. 2). A comparative study of the placentation in the buffalo and camel is summarised in Table I. TABLE I Placentation in the camel and buffalo Ova migration 114 FOETAL-MATERNAL ATTACHMENTS [Vol. XXV, Part II, DISCUSSION Amongst cotyledonary ruminants, the cotyledons vary remarkably in number, size, form and structure according to the genus and species. The buffalo is a poly- cotyledonary type, the number of cotyledons ranging from 42 to 147. The number ranges from 160 to 180 in the goat and giraffe. In the oligocotyledonary type such as the roe deer, the number is 5 or 6 [Amroso, 1952]. Sheep and cows occupy an intermediate position, the number varying from 88 to 96 in the ewe [Ellen- berger and Baum, 1921; Cloette, 1939] and from 70 to 142 in the cow [Rorik, 1907; Sommer, 1912; Hammond, 1927]. Most authorities agree that the cotyledons are arranged in rows in the gravid and non-gravid horns of the uterus. In the buffalo they are arranged in linear arrangements (from six to two rows). In the cow there is a similar arrangement (four rows in the body, three in the middle of horn and two in the anterior extremity) [Craig, 1930] while in sheep the cotyle- dons are arranged in four irregular rows [Grant, 1933]. The free surface of the ripe cotyledon (in the second half of pregnancy) also varies with genus and species. It is markedly convex in the buffalo and cow whilst it is concave in sheep and goat and less so in the blackbuck (Antelope cervicapara). In the Baker's antelope, the cotyledons have flat surface and flat attachments [Amroso, 1952]. The cotyledons of ruminants have been classified into those exhibiting slender villi which branch at acute angles and those possessing broad villi which branch at obtuse angles [Strah], 1912]. In the camel, the presence of the foetus in one uterine horn and a corpus luteum of pregnancy in the ovary of the other horn is only a theoretical proof for migration of fertilized ovum. In this respect, the original corpus luteum in the cow may atrophy followed by the ripening and rupture of a second grafian follicle in the other ovary accompanied by June, 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ 115 type. In the buffalo, with less tissue separating the two blood streams, the placenta changes in construction during embryonic life. SUMMARY Genitalia from non-pregnant and pregnant genital organs of buffaloes and camels were dissected. There was no ova migration in the buffalo while in camel it was in 30 per cent cases. The placentation of the buffalo was cotyledonary and syndes- mochorial. Chorionic villi were only observed in the cotyledons, the number of cotyledons ranged from 42 to 147. The number as well as the diameter and height of cotyledons varied with the stage of pregnancy and position in uterus; a diameter of 13 cm. was recorded. The allantois was terminated by necrotic tips while the amnion contained amniotic pustules. Placentation in the camel was diffused and epitheliochorial. Chorionic villi were uniformly distributed on the chorion in both horns. The number and height of the villi did not vary much with the advancing pregnancy. There were no necrotic tips of allantois nor amniotic pustules in the amnion. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work was carried out at the Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo, Egypt. The investigation is still in progress and detailed accounts of these experiments will appear elsewhere. Thanks are due to the University of Cairo for granting part of the funds. REFERENCES Amroso, E. C. (1952). Placentation, Chapter 15, In Marshall's Physiology of Reproduction, Longmans, London, Volume II. Boyd, J. D., Hamilton, W. J. and Hammond, J. Jr. (1944) J. Anat. 78, 5 Cloette, J. H. L. (1939). Onderstepoort J. vet. Sci. 13, 417 Craig, J. F. (1930). Fleming Vererinary Obstetrics, 4th Edition London Ellenberger, W. and Baum, H. (1921). Handbuch der Vergleichenden Anatomie der Haustiere, Berlin Grant, R. (1933). Vet. J. 89, 271 Hafez, E, S. E. (1952). Indian. J. vet. Sci. 22, 257 MILK DIET IN TRYPANOSOMA EVANSI INFECTION IN RATS By H. G. SEN, B. N. DUTTA AND H. N. RAY, School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta (Received for publication on 20 October 1954) IN a previous communication, we reported that starvation of the host could not alter the development of flagellates T. evansi significantly from that in well-fed animals [Sen, Dutta and Ray, 1954]. Based on the above observations we sug- gested that deficiency diet in respect of certain vitamins and amino acids, etc. have hardly any effect on the course of experimental T. evansi infection in rats. The effects of various diets on the different species of trypanosomes have been reported by some workers. Recently the effect of milk diet on different protozoal infections has attracted the attention of the parasitologists, when it was found that it had some suppressive effect on the course of different plasmodial infections [Maegraith, Deegan and Jones, 1952; Dutta, Chaudhuri and Sett, 1953]. The mechanism of suppression by this diet has been attributed to deficiency in PABA, folic acid [Hawking, 1953, 1954], and cortisone [Fulton, 1954]. But it is still complex to be understood for any of these or other unknown factors may be involved in the growth of the plasmodia [Maegraith, 1954]. The effect of milk diet on T. evansi has not been reported so far and with a view to exploring the host-parasite relationship under this dietary condi- tion the present study was undertaken. EXPERIMENTAL Young white rats were used as the experimental hosts. The details such a species and strains of the parasite, method of inoculation and counting procedures have been described in our previous paper (loc. cit. 1954). The rats were divided into two homogeneous groups, taking equal number in each. One group was kept on the normal laboratory diet while the other one was offered about 100 c.c. of pasteur- ised milk every day. The milk pots were changed frequently during the day so as to prevent milk from curdling. They were infected about the same time by the subcutaneous route. RESULTS The results obtained in the two experiments are given in Tables I and II. 117 141 AR/54
118 TRYPANOSOMA INFECTION IN RATS [Vol. XXV, Part II, TABLE I Number of trypanosomes per 1000 erythrocytes Number of days after inoculation Rat No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Control 231 -ve -ve -ve -ve v.s. 95 * 232 -ve -ve -ve -ve v.s. 42 196* 233 -ve -ve -ve -ve v.s. 32 94 * 234 -ve -ve -ve 3 48 290 * 235 -ve -ve -ve v.s. 5 30 123 345June. 19.55] H. G. SEN, B. N. DUTTA AND H. N. RAY 119 TABLE II120 TRYPANOSOMA INFECTION IN RATS [Vol. XXV, Part II, the normal cytochemical pattern of the trypanosomes was not altered in any way and it may perhaps be concluded that milk diet in infected rats had no effect on the metabolic process of the organism. Similar experiments showed that this diet could not arrest the development of P. gallinaceum in fowls [Ramkrishnan, 1953] and Babesia canis in puppies [Maegraith, 1954]. Both of these are endoglo- bular parasites and the mechanism of suppression therefore does not probably depend on the intra or extracellular habitat of the parasite. Different factors added to milk, such as PABA, folic acid, and cortisone were found to reverse the parasite control induced by milk in plasmodial infections in- dicating that milk may be deficient in these principles or interfere with the forma- tion or functions of these substances which play considerable role in plasmodial metabolism. Hawking [1954] showed by bio-assay experiments that milk was deficient at least in PABA. But the trypanosomes in this respect behaved differently to the plasmodia and suggested that at least these factors used singly were not so vital to the metabolism of the trypanosomes. This was also supported by our obser- vations that simultaneous administration of PABA or folic acid to infected rats treated with antrycide did not modify the course of infection significantly from those treated with antrycide alone. All these facts go to suggest that the physiological requirements of trypanosomes, Babesia canis and P. gallinaceum are completely different from those of the mam- malian plasmodia. Further researches in these lines are, however, necessary in order to elucidate the interrelationships of various growth factors in different protozoal infections. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT Our thanks are due to Dr S. C. Dutta, formerly Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun and Dr R. N. Chaudhuri, Director, School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta, for giving proper facilities throughout our work. The award of a research fellowship by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. New Delhi, to one of us (H. G. Sen) is gratefully acknowledged. REFERENCES Bray, R. S. and Garnham, P. C. C. (1953). Brit. Med. J., 1, 1200 Dutta, B. N., Chaudhuri, R. N. and Sett, D. (1953). Bull. School of Trop. Med., 1, 7 Fulton, J. D. (1954). Lancet, J. 16, 162 Hawking, F. (1953). Brit. Med. J. 1, 1201 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA IN MADRAS I. THE FURCOCERCOUS CERCARIAE* By C. T. PETER, Ph.D., Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 27 July 1954) (With Plate VI and one appendix) FURCOCERCOUS group of cercariae consists of a wide variety of forms, all of which being characterised by the presence of a forked or bifid tail. Though a large number of furcocercous cercariae have been described from India, only a few are known to occur in the city of Madras. While investigating into the incidence of cercarial infection in fresh-water molluscs in Madras City during 1947-49, nine species of furcocercous cercariae have been encountered. They are enumerated below and have been assigned to different groups based on Miller's [1926] scheme of classification. I. Apharyngeal brevifurcate distomes (1) Cercariae indicae XXX Sewell, 1922122 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA [Vol. XXV, Part II, Cercaria mudaliari is named after Shri S. V. Mudaliar, Retired Principal of the Madras Veterinary College, under whose guidance the work was conducted. Grateful thanks are due to Shri K. S. Nair, Retired Director of Animal Husbandry, Madras, for his keen interest in these studies. The snails were kindly identified by the Director, Zoological Survey of India. INCIDENCE OF FURCOCERCOUS CERCARIAE. Of the fresh-water molluscs collected from all the available sources in the city of Madras, only the following four species were found to discharge furcocercous cercariae: (1) Indoplanorbis exustus (Deshayes) (2) Limnaea acuminata (Lamarck) (3) L. luteola f. succinea (Deshayes) (4) Vivipara bengalensis (Lamarck) The percentage of infection of furcocercous cercariae in each species of snail is given in the Appendix. It is seen from the appendix that Cercariae indicae XXX and the cercaria of Schistosoma spindalis do not exhibit any host-specificity since they have been found to occur in both Indoplanorbis exustus and Limnaea spp. of snails. This is in accordance with the observations made on these cercariae by previous workers [Soparkar, 1921a; Rao, 1932a; and Bhalerao, 1943]. Though the percentage of infection of furcocercous cercariae in I. exustus is the lowest, the snail acts as the intermediate host of five furcocercous cercariae; whereas, infection rate is highest in Vivipara bengalensis, but it serves as host of only one type of cercaria. The occurrence of a cercaria of the ' Vivax ' group in V. ben- galensis is significant for there is no previous record in India of this snail acting as a primary host of any furcocercous cercaria. CERCARIA MUDALIARI, SP. NOV. This is a pharyngeal, longifurcate, distome larva occurring only in Limnaea luteola f. succinea. The cercariae are negatively phototropic and their swimming movement is typical of the strigeids. They move upwards with tail in advance, the body being pulled behind in short dashes. At intervals, they keep suspended in water with the tail up and the furcal rami spread out, acting as a float. On a glass-slide under a cover-slip, the progress is very slow, the ventral sucker playing an important role in the crawling movements. Unless disturbed, they will be at rest, with their body and tail normally relaxed. The shape of the body is very variable, depending on the amount of contraction and extension which the animal is capable of to a great extent. In a relaxed state, the body is usually spindle- shaped with its greatest width anterior to the acetabulum, and the two extremities are narrower, the anterior being bluntly rounded and the posterior somewhat trun- cated. When the body is fully elongated the sides become parallel, acquiring a width almost the same as that of the tail-stem. During contraction, it assumes an oval or globular shape. It is the pre-acetabular region of the body that contracts or extends appreciably, thus causing a great variability in its general shape. The anterior end is in the form of a protrusible snout, capable of being pushed out and drawn in.
PLATE VI [ Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXV, Part II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Cercaria muduliari, sp. now Microphotograph of a live specimen. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Cercaria muduliari, sp. now Camera lucida drawing of the body and proximal part of tail- stem. ABBREVIATIONS USED actJune, 1955] C. T. PETER 123 The tail is attached to the posterior end of the body and forks distally into two rami. The tail-stem is cylindrical and is highly contractile. When contracted, its cuticle will be thrown into a number of wrinkles. As is common with all longifurcate larvae, the rami are not delimited from the tail-stem. They are broadly lanceolate in shape and end in sharp points. On either side of the caudal excretory vessel are eight clear and thin-walled cells124 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA [Vol. XXV, Part II, opening which is guarded by the anterior piercing spines. The organ measures 36 by 24 microns. The highly muscular ventral sucker is situated at the junction of the middle and posterior third of the body, with an average diameter of 25 microns. Its free edge is furnished with two or three rows of spines. The anteriorly situated mouth opening measures 10 microns across and leads into a narrow vestibule, the prepharynx which traverses the anterior penetrating organ. This is followed by a well-defined muscular pharyngeal bulb measuring 6.5 by 4.5 microns and a short oesophagus which divides at a point midway between the two suckers into two intestinal caeca. From the point of bifurcation, the caeca run outwards and backwards dorsal to the penetration glands. They encircle the lateral borders of the acetabulum, slightly converge behind the sucker and then turn outwards and run posterior to end just a little beyond halfway between the acetabulum and the excretory vesicle. The caeca gradually become broader as they run backwards. The penetration or secretory glands are four in number arranged in pairs on either side of the median line in front of the ventral sucker and bounded laterally by the intestinal forks. In each pair, the outer one is situated posterior and the inner, anterior. All the glands are of the same size and contain finely granular protoplasm which takes neutral red stain very readily. Their ducts run in pairs on either side towards the mouth. At about the level of the caecal bifurcation the duct of the inner gland crosses that of the outer one and comes to lie lateral to it. Thereafter, the lumen of the duct increases slightly. On reaching the posterior border of the anterior penetrating organ, the ducts get again constricted and then pierce the anterior organ in which they run as dilated tubes to open through paired pores situated lateral to the mouth opening. At the posterior extremity of the body is situated the bladder which is globular in shape with a slight constriction in the middle. The bladder opens out dorsally through a minute pore located at the point of attachment of the tail to the body. From the antero-lateral aspect of the bladder on either side is given off the main excretory trunk which has a bulbous origin. The basal dilatations of these vessels are so prominent that they together with the bladder assume the appearance of a triglobular or tripartite structure which is quite characteristic in the present cercaria. Each main canal runs forwards lateral to the distal portion of the caecum of the corresponding side and forms at the postero-lateral angle of the acetabulum a tangle from which arise the anterior and posterior collecting tubules. The transverse excretory tube or commissure connecting the main canals is placed anterior to the acetabulum. The anterior collecting tubule proceeds forwards and divides at the level of the eye-spot into two branches. The shorter branch traces its course back- wards for a short distance to divide into two capillaries capped with flame cells which are located anterior and lateral to the acetabulum. The other branch con- tinues its course cephalad and splits up into capillaries which drain the two flame cells present in the anterior region of the body behind the penetrating organ. The posterior collecting tubule during its backward course gives off two branches, one receiving the capillaries from the two flame cells found behind the tangled mass of the main vessels and the other from two cells located at the posterior end of the body near the bladder. The backward continuation of the posterior collecting
June, 1955] C. T. PETER 125 tubule enters the tail-stem and finally divides into two capillaries which end in flame cells in the proximal part of the tail. Thus, there are altogether 20 flame cells ; eight pairs in the body (each anterior and posterior collecting tubule receiving two sets) and two pairs in the proximal part of the tail-stem. Such an arrangement can be represented by the following formula : 2[(2 + 2) + (2 + 2) + 2] = 20 A distinct median caudal tubule passes from the excretory vesicle down the tail- stem and divides at the bifurcation of the tail, each tributary so formed opening on the inner margin of the furcal ramus about half its length. The ' Island of Cort' is absent in this cercaria. The genital system is represented by a cluster of small cells occupying a position in the median line anterior to the bladder. The cercariae develop in white elongate sporocysts in the digestive gland of the molluscan host. The parthenitae are so slender that they entangle themselves to appear like a mass of cotton wool. Entire sporocyst measuring up to 6.3 mm. in length has been obtained. The organism bulges out at varying intervals throughout its length and the lumen varies accordingly from 0.084 to 0.500 mm. The bulgings are caused by the assemblage or crowding of a number of mature cercariae which come out by bursting open the extended sporocyst wall. No birth-pore or excretory structures could be seen in the sporocyst. Cercaria mudaliari, sp. nov., closely resembles Cercaria douglasi Cort, 1917, and the cercaria of Cotylurus flabelliformis [Faust, 1917] described by Olivier and Cort [1941]. The latter two forms, while agreeing in many of the essential points with those of the larva under study, differ from it in the following respects : The ' for- ward projecting' spines found dorsal to the mouth opening are long and vary in number from 16 to 20. The ventral sucker possesses several rows of spines which are thin and elongate. Only one pair of bristles are found on the body, and the flagellets (number not definite) on the tail-stem do not seem to be arranged in pairs. Typical caudal glands are not present. Instead, only ' inconspicuous stellate cells grouped along excretory tubule of tail-stem' are to be found. The eye-spots appear as clear areas without pigment. The caeca and penetration glands have been des- cribed as inconspicuous. The duct of the inner gland does not cross that of the outer one. The excretory vesicle does not exhibit the appearance of a triglobular structure. A small' Island of Cort' is present. In the cercaria of Cotylurus flabelli- formis the tail-stem is longer than the body. Cercaria sanjuanensis Miller [1927], while resembling the present one in possessing a similar flame cell pattern, a pre-acetabular transverse commissure, tangle of main vessels and four penetration glands anterior to ventral sucker, can be easily separated from it in that in the former the eye-spots are lacking, no structures corresponding to the caudal glands are present in the tail-stem, the caeca are made up of disjointed parts, the penetration glands are coarsely granular and the transverse commissure sends off short blind tubes anteriorly. Among the Indian species, its nearest relative perhaps is Cercaria hurleyi Rao [1933b] which can be distinguished from the new cercaria by the following features:
126 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA [Vol. XXV, Part II, only five pairs of flame cells are present in the body and six pairs of caudal glands in the tail-stem, the two penetration glands of either side are differentiated into an anterior larger one containing coarsely granular oxyphilic cytoplasm and a posterior smaller one with finely granular basophilic contents, and the body and tail setae are only four and six pairs respectively. SUMMARY An investigation into the incidence of the cercarial infection in fresh-water snails in the city of Madras revealed the occurrence of nine species of furcocercous cercariae, of which Cercaria mudaliari, sp. nov., Cercariae indicae II Sewell, 1922 and two unidentified forms have not been previously reported from there. The finding of a furcocercous cercaria in Vivipara bengalensis (Lamarck) con- stitutes a new record. Detailed description of Cercaria mudaliari, sp. nov., a pharyngeal longifurcate distome from Limnaea luteola f. succinea (Deshayes) has been given. REFERENCES Bhalerao, G. D. (1943). The cercarial fauna of the irrigated tract of the Nizam's Dominions with suggestions regarding their relationship to the trematode parasites in man and in domestic and other animals. Indian J. vet. Sci., 13, 294-296 Cort, W. W. (1917). Homologies of the excretory system of fork-tailed cercariae. J. Parasit., 4, 130-134 Miller, H. M. Jr. (1926). Comparative studies on furcocercous cercariae. Ill. Biol. Monogr., 10, (3) 1-112 June, 1955] C. T. PETER 127 APPENDIX Rate of occurrence of furcocercous cercariae in the city of Madras Furcocercous cercariae Molluscan hosts and percentage of infection Species (1) Indoplanor- bis exustus (2) Limnaea acuminata (3) Limnaea succinea (4) Vivipara bengalensis No. examined 3863 218 1545 99 (1) Cercariae indicae XXX 0.1 .. 2.8 .. (2) Schistocercaria spindalis 0.5 0.9 .. .. (3) Cercaria saundersi SCARIFICATION VERSUS SUBCUTANEOUS METHOD OF VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST IN GOATS AND SHEEP By RADHEY MOHAN SHARMA, Assistant Disease Investigation Officer (Sheep and Goats), Government Livestock Farm, Hissar ; and TULSA RAM, Ph.D. (U.S.A.), Veterinary Disease Investigation Officer, Punjab, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar (Received for publication on 24 September 1952) (With four text figures and one appendix) THIS paper is the outcome of work conducted under an item of the technical programme of the 'Scheme for Investigation of Sheep and Goat Diseases in the Punjab (India)'. Jenner [1800] reported the method of local skin infection as a satisfactory one for conferring general immunity against small-pox. Besredka [1930]* showed that vaccination against anthrax by the intracutaneous route con- ferred immunity of a more solid nature than that obtained by other methods of inoculation. Tuft [1931]* studied the relative values of various forms of inoculation, with particular reference to the intracutaneous route in immunisation against typhoid and found that the rate of antibody production by the intracutaneous route was equal to that by the subcutaneous route and slightly better than by the intramuscular, route, although total dose of antigen inoculated by the former was one-seventh of the amount introduced by the last two methods. It was also contended that since the skin is richly supplied with reticulo-endothelial cells it may well be adapted for the liberation of antibodies by the stimulus caused at the site of intracutaneous inoculation. Siddiqi [1944] published an account of immunisation of cattle against rinderpest by scarification method and reported that in most cases reactions following immunisation by scarification were slight or absent; he advocated its superiority over the subcutaneous method of vaccination. In view of the above findings it was considered that Goat Tissue Virus Vaccine (Goatis) which, by subcutaneous method of vaccination, causes severe reaction and even mortality in goats may, by employing scarification method, prove to be a more useful vaccine for conferring immunity in these animals. Accordingly, Nagina Singh [1949] carried out some work but mentioned that there was no difference in the degree of reaction which followed the two methods of vaccination130 VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST [Vol. XXV, Part II, MATERIAL AND METHODS The subcutaneous method of immunisation against rinderpest was compared with the scarification method in the following groups of animals : (a) Betal goats (b) Bikaneri sheep (c) Hissari sheep (d) Lohi sheep The scarification method adopted in these experiments was similar to the one used by Siddiqi [1944]. The vaccine used was Goat Tissue Virus Vaccine (Goatis) obtained from the Punjab Veterinary College, Hissar. For scarification method, 1 gm. of the vaccine was ground in a mortar and 1 c.c. of distilled water added to it to make it a paste. It was then transferred to 1 c.c. collapsible tubes, each tube containing about 50 doses. For subcutaneous method, 1 gm. of the spleen tissue was triturated with 100 c.c. of distilled water, the dose being 1 c.c. for each animal. OBSERVATIONS (a) Betal goats Twenty four male betal kids (age 6 months to 1 year) were taken and divided into two groups of 12 animals each. One group of kids was vaccinated with G. T. V. (Brew No. 322, dated 11th December 1950) by scarification method and the other group was inoculated with 'Goatis' of the same brew by sub- cutaneous method. The temperatures of these 24 animals were recorded every morning for 10 days after inoculation. Reactions (Table I and Fig. I). All the 12 kids, inoculated by scarification method showed thermal reaction and three of them (No. 533, 535 and 513) died of rinderpest showing dullness, diarrhoea and ulcerations. Similarly the 12 kids inoculated by subcutaneous method showed almost identical thermal reactions. Two exhibited diarrhoea and one showed dullness without any diarrhoeic symptoms. Three of these (No. 540, 514 and 525) died of the disease. Composite charts (Fig. I) show the average thermal reactions of the above two groups of kids shown separately. An examination of Table I and Fig. I clearly indicates that there is no significant difference in the degree of reaction in the two methods. Further it was observed that the thermal response in the animals in both the groups lasted from third to seventh day after vaccination. The reaction recorded was severe, the temperature going as high as 105°F. or even more in some cases. There was 25 per cent. mortality in each of the two groups. (b) Bikaneri sheep One hundred Bikaneri female lambs age 6 months to 1Jane, 1955] R. M. SHARMA AND TULSA RAM 131 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Average thermal reaction of two groups of kids
132 VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST [Vol. XXV, Part II, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Average thermal reaction of two groups of lambs
June, 1955] R. M. SHARMA AND TULSA RAM 133 TABLE I Observations recorded Serial No. Descrip- tion of animals 1st day 2nd day 3rd day 4th day 5th day 6th day 7th day 8th day 9th day 10th day Remarks Scarification method 1 516 100.6 103.4 103.6 103.8 104.0 104.4 104.2 105.0 104.4 102.8 2 533 102.0 102.6 103.0 104.0 105.6 104.8* Died on 20th Decem her 1950. 3 515 100.0 103.2 103.6 104.2 103.4 103.2 103.0 103.4 102.2 102.2 4 509 101.0 103.4 103.8 104.8 105.2 104.0 104.4 103.8 103.4 102.6 5 519 100.8 103.4 104.2 105.6 103.6 103.4 104.0 103.8 103.8 103.2 6 530 101.6 103.8 103.4 104.4 103.8 104.8 104.6 104.2 102.6 101.6 7 513 102.6 103.2 103.8 104.8 105.8 104.2* 104.0 Died on 2 1st December 1950. 8 529 101.4 103.6 104.0 103.8 105.2 104.4 104.4 103.8 102.2 102.2 9 522 102.0 103.6 103.8 103.8 103.8 103.6 104.6 103.6 103.6 103.0 10 512 100.8 102.4 103.8 103.6 103.8 103.8 105.0 103.6 103.4 100.8 11 527 101.4 102.4 103.8 103.4 103.6 103.4 104.0 104.4 103.0 102.8 12 535 102.4 102.4 102.6 105.8 105.6* 105.4 105.0 106.2 103.4 103.6 Died on 24th December 1950 Average 101.4 103.1 103.6 104.3 104.5 104.2 104.3 104.2 103.2 102.5 Subcutaneous method 13 520 102.2 103.4 103.4 104.6 104.9 103.2 103.2 103.6 102.4 101.6 14 521 101.0 103.0 103.6 104.4 104.4 103.6 103.4 103.4 102.6 102.0 15 523 102.4 103.4 103.4 103.6 104.4 105.0 104.6 103.4 103.0 102.4 16 540 100.4 103.4 103.8 105.0 104.8134 VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST [Vol. XXV, Part II, TABLE II. Average thermal reactions in Bikaneri Sheep Serial No. Description of group No. of animals Temperature on 1st day 2nd day 3rd day 4th day 5th day 1 Scarification group 20 101.8 102.6 103.2 104.2 104.0 2 Subcutaneous group 20 101.6 102.0 102.8 104.2 104.1 Serial No. Description of group 6th day 7th day 8th day 9th day 10th day 1 Scarification group 103.3 102.8 102.3 101.8 101.4 2 Subcutaneous group 103.4 102.8 102.1 101.4 101.1 Reactions. Out of 50 lambs inoculated by scarification method, 20 were kept under observation and their morning temperature recorded for 10 consecutive days after vaccination. The animals showed moderate but definite reaction. Three showed diarrhoea without any symptoms of dullness. They kept on feeding. Similarly 20 of the animals inoculated subcutaneously showed more or less identical reactions. Three of the lambs exhibited diarrhoea without any dullness and in- appetance. The average thermal reactions in the two groups of lambs are shown in the composite charts (Fig. 2). An examination of the Table II and Fig. 2 indicates that there is no significant difference in the degree of reaction in the two methods. The slight increase (0.19°F) in the average reaction of 10 days in case of the subcutane- ous group is not significant. The thermal reaction was observed to last for three days from fourth to sixth day after vaccination. The reaction noticed was a moderate one, the temperature rise being two degrees or so above normal in both the cases. (c) Hissari sheep Ten female lambs varying in age from 6 months to 1June, 1955] R. M. SHARMA AND TULSA RAM 135 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Average thermal reactions in Hissari sheep
136 VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST [Vol. XXV, Part II, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Composite charts of the two groups of lambs
June, 1955] R. M. SHARMA AND TULSA RAM 137 TABLE III. Average reaction in Hissari sheep Serial No. Description of group No of animals Temperature on 1st day 2nd day 3rd day 4th day 5th day 1 Scarification group 5 101.2 101.2 102.2 103.2 103.7 2 Subcuteneous group 5 101.2 101.2 102.0 103.4 104.2 Serial No. Description of group 6th day 7th day 8th day 9th day 10th day 1 Scarification group 103.0 103.1 100.9 100.5 100.3 2 Subcutaneous group 103.9 103.4 101.8 101.6 100.8 Reactions. There was in general no apparent systemic disturbance observed in the above animals. They kept on feeding and did not show any dullness. The reaction on the whole was moderate. Fig. 3 shows the composite charts of the average reactions recorded. The slightly high reaction (average 0.39°F) in the subcutaneous group is not very significant. (d) Lohi sheep Twenty female lambs varying in age from 6 months to 1138 VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST [Vol. XXV, Part II, Fig. 4 shows the composite charts of the two groups of lambs. An examination of these charts indicates that the average reaction of 10 days (102.48°F) is slightly more marked in the scarification group as compared to the subcutaneous group in which the corresponding figure is 102.16°F. The difference of 0.32°F is not signi- ficant. The vaccinated animals showed dullness and loss of appetite. There is no evidence of any delay in the exhibition of thermal reaction in animals vaccinated by the scarification method. Two animals, one from the scarification and the other from the subcutaneous group, died as a result of reaction. The reaction was there- fore severe. Lall [1947] reported that sheep of Lohi breed, particularly the lambs, were the most susceptible and reacted like goats. He mentioned that the use of anti-rinderpest serum along with ' Goatis ' was necessary in this breed. Observations recorded in the above experiment are in conformity with his findings. Immunity test. In order to assess the immunising value of the two methods of vaccination, a comparative test was conducted on animals immunised by the above methods at the end of one year after vaccination. Twelve animals consisting of three Hissari, three Lohi and three Bikaneri female lambs and three Betal goats were included in each group. Two kids were kept to act as controls to ensure the potency of the testing virus. Three c.c. of fresh rinderpest goat blood virus obtained from Punjab Veterinary College, Hissar, was given to each of the animals under experiment, and the controls. The animals under test were allowed to mix freely with the reacting controls so that they were exposed to all possible outside chances of infection. Morning temperature of all the animals was recorded for 10 days following virus inoculation. Out of 12 animals vaccinated by scarification method, three (Hissari lamb No. 749, Bikaneri lamb No. 293 and Betal goat No. 583) showed thermal reaction on the fourth day, the temperature going as high as 105°F. The goat also exhibited diarrhoea on the fifth day. In the second group of animals immunised by subcutaneous method, only one (Hissari lamb No. 737) showed a break- down in immunity. Appendix shows reaction following vaccination and subsequent to challenge dose with virulent virus in the experimental animals. The four animals which showed breakdown in immunity were aged 10 months to 1June, 1955] R. M. SHARMA AND TULSA RAM 139 SUMMARY Immunisation of goats and sheep against rinderpest with 'Goatis' by scarification and subcutaneous methods has been described. The results obtained by the two routes of inoculation are compared and the following conclusions arrived at : (1) There is no significant difference in the degree of reaction obtained by two methods. (2) ' Goatis ' alone, whether by scarification or subcutaneous method, is not a safe vaccine for immunising goats against rinderpest. It causes 25 per cent mortality. For sheep of Bikaneri and Hissari breeds, ' Goatis ' can safely be used for conferring immunity but the simultaneous administration of anti-rinderpest serum is necessary in Lohi sheep to avoid severe reaction. (3) In goats and sheep that have long ears, the scarification method may appear a little more convenient but it presents difficulty and inconvenience in vaccination in breeds of sheep which have very small ears such as the Bikaneri. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT We are indebted to Major A. C. Aggarwala, the then Director, Veterinary Ser- vices, and Warden of Fisheries, Punjab, for helpful suggestions and for correcting the paper, and to Shri R. R. Ghulati, formerly Superintendent, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar, for encouragement and healthy criticism. REFERENCES Hutyra, Marek and Manninger (1949). Special Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic animals, Fifth edition 272 Lall, H. K. (1947). Indian, J. vet. Sci. 17, 11-22 Nagina Singh (1949). Ann. Rep. A.D.I.O. (S. & G) Pb., 1948-49 Siddiqi, T. A. (1944). Indian J. vet. Sci. 14, 159-162.
140 VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST [Vol. XXV, Part II, APPENDIX Reaction following vaccination in animals under experiment Description of animals Time of reaction 1st day 2nd day 3rd day 4th day 5th day 6th day 7th day 8th day 9th day 10th day Subcutaneous group. Female Lamb Hissari 1. No. 752 F.C. 100.4 100.8 101.8 104.4 106.0 105.0 104.4 101.8 102.4 101.8 F.C. 100.6 100.8 100.6 100.6 99.6 100.8 100.0 100.1 100.3 99.7 2. No. 737 F.V. 100.4 102.4 102.4 102.4 102.0 102.4 103.2 101.8 100.8 100.0 F.C. 101.4 102.0 103.4 104.0 104.3 104.0 104.0 103.7 102.5 100.5 3. No. 758 F.V. 101.6 101.4 102.4 103.8 105.4 104.0 103.4 100.0 100.6 100.0 F.C. 101.6 101.1 100.2 101.8 99.7 101.0 99.8 100.0 100.1 100.0 Female Lamb Lohi 4. No. 67 F.V. 102.2 102.6 102.4 104.6 106.0 104.5 103.6 101.8 101.4 101.4 F.C. 101.2 101.0 100.8 101.0 99.2 101.3 100.0 100.1 100.2 100.1 5. No. 69 F.V. 101.2 102.2 102.6 102.8 102.0 102.2 102.0 101.4 101.4 100.8 F.C. 101.0 101.4 101.7 101.0 101.8 100.4 99.5 100.0 100.2 98.4 6. No. 72 F.V. 102.0 102.0 102.4 102.6 102.0 103.0 102.2 102.0 101.4 101.2 F.C. 102.0 101.6 102.0 101.0 101.0 100.6 100.1 100.3 100.1 100.1 Female Lamb Bikaneri 7. No. 267 F.V. 101.6 101.8 102.4 104.0 105.0 106.4 104.6 102.6 100.6 100.8 F.C. 100.8 101.2 101.4 101.4 101.7 101.5 101.4 100.8 99.9 100.3 8. No. 299 F.V. 102.2 103.4 103.8 105.9 105.0 104.0 103.0 102.2 101.0 101.0 F.C. 101.0 101.6 102.6 102.7 102.7 101.6 100.7 100.5 100.0 100.0 9. No. 285 F.V. 100.8 102.6 103.4 103.6 103.0 102.2 102.0 101.4 101.4 101.4 F.C. 99.2 100.9 101.0 100.1 100.0 100.4 99.6 100.1 99.5 99.5
June, 1955] R. M. SHARMA AND TULSA RAM 141 Description of animals Time of reaction 1st day 2nd day 3rd day 4th day 5th day 6th day 7th day 8th day 9th day 10th day Subcutaneous group Betal Goat 10. No. 585 F.V. 101.4 102.8 103.4 105.0 106.0 104.8 104.2 103.4 103.0 102.4 F.C. 100.3 99.7 99.0 101.6 99.7 101.0 102.0 100.7 100.3 100.4 Male Kid 11. No. 521 F.V. 101.9 103.0 103.0 104.4 104.4 103.6 103.4 103.4 102.4 102.0 F.C. 100.7 99.7 101.1 100.0 100.0 99.2 100.0 100.2 100.0 100.0 12. No. 523 F.V. 102.4 103.4 103.4 103.6 104.4 105.0 104.6 103.4 103.0 102.4 F.C. 101.3 100.4 101.5 100.8 100.0 100.8 100.5 100.1 100.4 100.0 Female Lamb Hissari. Scarification group 1. No. 749 F.V. 101.8 102.2 102.4 102.4 102.4 102.0 103.0 100.4 100.4 100.0 F.C. 102.0 105.0 105.7 105.2 105.6 103.0 103.0 103.9 103.0 101.0 2. No. 751 F.V. 100.6 100.4 101.4 104.2 105.6 104.0 104.4 100.8 100.0 100.4 F.C. 100.9 101.0 100.8 100.4 100.4 100.1 100.5 100.5 99.7 99.0 3. No. 748 F.V. 101.6 101.4 101.8 102.2 102.2 102.6 102.0 101.8 100.2 100.0 F.C. 101.3 100.9 101.0 101.3 100.4 100.5 100.6 100.5 100.2 98.6 Female Lamb Lohi 4. No. 73 F.V. 101.4 101.8 102.6 103.2 103.4 100.2 102.4 100.8 100.8 100.4 F.C. 101.5 101.0 101.8 100.2 102.0 101.4 101.8 101.3 100.7 100.3 5. No. 65 F.V. 101.4 102.0 102.6 102.8 102.8 102.4 102.0 100.4 102.0 101.6 F.C. 101.8 100.6 101.9 102.2 102.2 100.6 101.4 101.0 101.0 100.0 6. No. 64 F.V. 102.0 102.4 102.8 103.0 103.0 103.0 102.8 101.6 101.8 101.4 F.C. 100.9 102.0 102.0 101.2 101.6 101.2 101.4 100.8 99.6 100.3 141 AR/54 14
142 VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST [Vol. XXV, Part II, Description of animals Time of reaction 1st day 2nd day 3rd day 4th day 5th day 6th day 7th day 8th day 9th day 10th day Female Lamb Bikaneri 7. No. 254 F.V. 101.8 102.4 102.4 102.6 102.6 102.8 102.4 102.4 102.0 101.6 F.C. 101.8 101.8 102.0 101.2 102.0 102.0 100.5 100.4 100.6 99.5 8. No. 312 F.V. 101.4 102.0 102.4 103.0 103.0 102.8 102.8 102.4 102.0 101.2 F.C. 102.0 101.6 102.7 101.8 102.8 102.5 101.7 100.9 100.8 99.8 9. No. 293 F.V. 100.8 101.4 101.6 102.6 193.0 102.2 102.2 102.0 102.0 101.4 F.C. 102.0 104.3 104.6 104.1 105.1 103.6 102.0 102.3 101.7 100.0 Betal Goat 10. No. 583 F.V. 101.6 102.6 103.2 104.4 105.2 104.4 104.0 104.0 103.2 103.0 F.C. 99.8 101.5 102.7 104.5 98.8 99.0 100.4 101.9 100.8 100.2 11. Male Kid No. 515 F.V. 100.0 103.2 103.6 104.2 103.4 103.2 103.0 102.4 102.2 102.2 F.C. 99.5 100.5 99.4 100.1 101.3 101.2 101.2 101.3 101.0 100.7 12. Male Kid No. 516 F.V. 100.6 103.4 103.6 103.8 104.0 104.4 104.2 105.0 104.4 102.8 F.C. 101.4 100.2 100.8 100.8 101.7 101.0 101.3 100.5 100.3 100.1 Control 1. Male Kid No. 572 101.9 102.8 104.2 102.8 99.8 102.2 Died 2. Male Kid No. 576 101.2 103.4 103.4 104.1 104.4 104.0 104.0 103.2 101.9 100.9 F.V. Reaction following vaccination F.C. Reaction following challenge dose of virus
EFFECT OF STARVATION ON THE COURSE OF EX- PERIMENTALLY INDUCED TRYPANOSOMA EVANSI INFECTION IN RATS By H. G. SEN, B. N. DUTTA and H. N. RAY, School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta (Received for publication on 20 October 1954) (with one text-figure) IT has now been definitely established that a relationship exists between the nutritional status of the host and the course of different protozoal infections. McKee and Geiman (1946) observed that by fasting monkeys infected with P. knowlesi for 24-48 hours, the parasitic infection could be strikingly reduced but when methionine and PABA were administered, they became susceptible to infection and died due to overwhelming infections. These observations suggested that methionine and PABA were the growth factors of the simian plasmodium, P. knowlesi. Similar studies on the rodent parasite P. berghei showed that when fasting was started simultaneously with the inoculation of the parasites, the infection remained suppressed during the period of continued fasting. But when the period of starvation continued upto 8-10 days, a very low grade infection appeared in the peripheral blood and the number of parasites did not increase in the circulation even after they were put back to full diet [Dutta and Chaudhuri, 1953 ; Ramkrishnan, 1953]. Evidence of adverse effect of starvation on the growth of human plasmodia, P. vivax and P. falciparum was also obtained during the Bengal famine in 1943 [Chari, 1944; Dasgupta and Chaudhuri, 1943 ; Aich 1944]. The effect of starvation on other blood protozoa has so far not been investigated. Trypanosoma evansi has been selected for the purpose as these are extracellulur in character and multiply at a rapid rate in the blood stream, and differ from the plasmodia in their physiological adaptation. The present work is carried out to explore the host- parasite relationship in rats infected with T. evansi and possibly the nutritional requirements of these organisms. EXPERIMENTAL Experiments were made on young white rats weighing about 100 gm. For each set of experiments the animals were divided into two equal and homogeneous groups, so that the average weight of each group remained practically the same and the weights of the individual rats were within a small range of variation. The normal diet of these rats consisted of bread, milk, gram, green and root vegetables, viz. spinach, carrot, etc. supplemented by yeast and cod liver oil. The animals in one of the groups were kept on the usual normal diet while those in the other were kept fasting and were offered water only ad libitum. The strain of the parasite was that of equine origin, obtained from the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar and isolated in the year 1945. It was maintained by blood passages through the subcutaneous route. The dose of inoculum used varied from a few millions (5×106) to 100 millions in different sets of experiments, the route of ad- ministration used being the intraperitoneal or subcutaneous. The donor rat showing 143 141 AR/54 15
144 TRYPANOSOMA INFECTION IN RATS [VOL. XXV, PART II, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Average density of Trypanosoma evansi in the peripheral biculation in two series of rats (four in each group) kept on full diet and starvation respectively.
June, 1953] H. G. SEN, B. N. DUTTA AND H. N. RAY 145 10-20 trypanosomes per 100 r.b.c. was slightly etherized and blood was drawn by heart puncture. The parasitized blood was diluted with citrated saline as found necessary. 0.2 c.c. of the blood inoculum was used for infecting each rat and for a particular set of experiment, the same dose of inoculum was injected to each rat. With a view to getting more uniform results as well as to avoiding probable loss in viability of the parasite with time, inoculations were given in alternate turns to the rats in both the groups. Samples of blood were taken from the tail in thick wet smears at the early stage of the experiments. When a sufficient number of try- panosomes appeared in the circulation, thin smears were taken and stained with Giemsa or Heishman stain. Intensity of the parasitaemia was assessed by counting the total number of trypanosomes per 1000 erythrocytes. Infection having one or two trypanosomes in the entire thick wet smear was denoted very scanty and one or two trypanosomes per field (thick wet smear) was denoted as scanty. RESULTS The results of a typical experiment are shown in Fig. 1 in which the intensity of infection in each cage of four rats is shown as the mean of the logarithms of the number of trypanosomes per 20 fields in a thin blood film. This figure shows that the resultant infections were practically identical in both the control and fasting animals, there being no evidence of suppression of parasites in the latter case. The protocols of the three experiments are given below : Experiment I Two groups of rats (four in each group) were inoculated with about 100 million of trypanosomes I. p. Two days after inoculation, the number of trypanosomes per 1000 r.b.c. in the control and the fasting groups were 98 and 105 respectively and all of them died on the next day due to heavy infection. Comment. Inoculation by the I.p. route reduces the prepatent period significantly and results in death of the animals in three to four days. Fasting for three or four days has no effect on the course of Trypanosoma evansi infection in the host. Experiment II Two groups of rats (four in each group) were inoculated with 90X106 trypano- somes subcutaneously. The course of the infection is shown in Table I. TABLE I Intensity of parasitaemia expressed as number of trypanosomes per 1000 red cells Day of inoculation Control Fasting R168 R169 R170 R171 R172 R173 R174 R175 1 Neg. Neg. Neg. Neg. Neg. Neg. Neg. Neg. 2 Neg. Neg. Neg. V.S. V.S. Neg. Neg. V.S. 3 Neg. Neg. Neg. S. S. Neg. V.S. 6 4 70 32 5 102 78 35 115 90 5 dead dead 130 (treated) (sacrificed) dead dead (sacrificed) dead
146 TRYPANOSOMA INFECTION IN RATS [Vol. XXV, Part II, Comment. Inoculation with a heavy dose of inoculum by subcutaneous route also produces short prepatent period (a day or two later) and the results are more or less similar to those in experiment I. Experiment III This experiment was designed in such a way that the starvation group was kept fasting for four days before and six days after inoculation. The nutritional status of the host was assessed by taking weights on the day of inoculation and six days of starvation after inoculation; this is shown in Table II. It was found that the starving group of rats lost about 13-25 per cent of the initial body weights, while the control ones maintained more or less constant weights. The intensity of the infection in both the groups have been compared in Table III. TABLE II Nutritional deficiency of the host compared with the control group Weight in grams Control Starvation R182 R183 R184 R185 R186 R187 R188 R189 Initial weight (before inoculation) 102 94 87 103 100 104 92 99 Final weight (six days after inoculation) 107 93 86 106 75 90 77 79 Difference in weight + 5 June, 1955] H. G. SEN, B. N. DUTTA AND H. N. RAY 147 Comment. Gross nutritional deficiency of the host could not restrict the multi- plication of the parasites as compared with the control. This suggests that the trypanosomes are able to multiply in the absence of some factors which are not markedly affected during starvation. DISCUSSION The observations suggest that on fasting of the host, Trypanosoma evansi infection responds in a different way from the plasmodia. In contrast to the finding that starvation of the host infected with rodent or simian plasmodia suppresses the development of the parasites from the peripheral blood and also does not affect the normal development of immunity in the host, it has no effect either in suppressing the infection or in the development of immunity in Trypanosoma evansi infection. With the progress of fasting an essential factor necessary for the growth of the plas- modia is gradually depleted from the host tissues or blood with the result that the plasmodia cannot grow in the host after 8-10 days of continued starvation. McKee [1951] thought this substance to be some protein bound methionine or PABA or possibly the peptides of methionine and PABA in the case of P. knowlesi. Our present experiments suggest that the trypanosomes, on the other hand, require a completely different factor, the concentration of which is not much altered during starvation. The explanation and the difference in these varying behaviour of the malaria parasites and the trypanosomes can be sought in the fact that the trypanosomes are extracellular organisms depending much on the plasma for their nutrition. It is probable that as the red cells are depleted from the nutrients and metabolic constituents at a much rapid rate from the plasma, the malaria parasites grow very poorly in the starved hosts. The mechanism of suppression of protozoal infection by starvation is not quite clear. Several parasites of the intestinal tract can be completely eliminated by withholding food from the host and in this way it is possible to defaunate termites and to eliminate rumen ciliates [Cleveland, 1925; Mangold and Krahmer, 1927; Dogiel and Winogradowa Fedorowa, 1930]. In both the cases a very considerable decrease in glycogen content of the parasite occurred and it has been attributed that owing to loss of muscular energy due to depletion in glycogen the parasites cannot maintain themselves in the gut. Some other intestinal helminths (such as Ascaridia galli and Raillaetin cesticillus) can be removed between 48 to 96 hours and the period of starvation needed to eliminate the parasites varied with the different species [Reid, 1940, 1942a, b, 1944 ; Reid and Ackert 1941]. It is probable that the elimination of the parasite depends much on the nature of the habitat of the parasite and the variation in the composition of their environment. It has been suggested by von Brand [1938] that the tissue parasites can hardly be killed by the host. But Müller and Simons [1920] found retarded multiplication of pathogenic trypanosomes in starving hosts. Solazzo [1929], on the other hand, reported that Trypanosoma brucei could be maintained for several days in starving and not in fed pigeons. In certain experimental infections caused by rickettsia or virus which live in the tissues, adverse effects of starvation were observed. Our present observations suggest that gross nutritional deficiency of the host could neither alter the course of development of the flagellates, nor affect their 141 AR/54 16
148 TRYPANOSOMA INFECTION IN RATS [Vol. XXV, Part II, cytochemical pattern (such as acid and alkaline phosphatases, mucopoly- saccharides and nucleic acidsABSTRACTS Nutritional deficiencies in poultry. THOMAS H. JUKES (1943). Javma, 102, 19-98. IN the farm flocks, deficiencies have been recorded of vitamins A,D,E, riboflavin, biotin, the gizzard factor and the minerals150 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part II, The importance of numbers of spermatozoa in relation to semen quality and fertility of dairy bulls. C. BRANTON, H. C. KELLGREN and T. E. PATRICK (1953). J. Dairy Sci., 36, 1301-1307 THE studies consisted of routine semen quantity and quality observations and fertility data obtained in the field studies from ten bulls during 1949 and 1950- 51. Semen dilution experiment using two, six or twelve million motile spermatozoa per milliliter was also conducted. Semen samples which contained at least 50 per cent motile spermatozoa and a minimum of 500 million spermatozoa per milli- liter were diluted and shipped to the various artificial insemination centres in the field. During 1949, fertility increased with the increase in sperm concentration. The fertility levels were found to be uniform in 1950-51, when the semen was diluted on the basis of number of motile spermatozoa instead of by volume. In 1949, equal results were obtained from semen samples which had concentration of over 1300 M/ml. On the other hand, good results were secured in 1950-51, with semen samples having concentration as low as 600 M/ml., when they were diluted to contain a constant number of motile spermatozoa. In order to obtain more uniform fertility results, semen should be diluted on the basis of number of motile spermatozoa instead of on volume basis. Approxi- mately, a minimum of six million motile spermatozoa per milliliter are necessary for obtaining optimum fertility rate. (S.N.L.) Effect of stimulation of the reproductive organs of the cow on the release of an oxytocin-like substance. R. L. HAYS and N. L. VANDFMARK (1953). Endocrinology 52 (6), 634June, 1955] ABSTRACTS 151 The antigen for the test was standardized against standard dried antiserum recommended for use, internationally, in serum agglutination tests. 2, 3, 5-tryphenyl tetrazolium chloride was used for colouring the antigen instead of haematoxylin, which is used for colouring the antigen for Brucella abortus ring (A.B.R.) test, and which may be decolourised if the bacterial content of the sample of milk to be tested is high. Alum treatment of the antigen was said to reduce or eliminate zoning which occurred in some samples of milk tested with untreated antigen. For performing the R.M.A. test, which is comparable to the ordinary serum agglutination test, the author used more or less fat-free milk samples instead of whole milk used in the A.B.R. test. To maintain the colour and gross physical properties in all the dilutions of sample of milk under test, the diluting fluid consisted of fat-free milk from Brucella negative cow and not physiological saline. The test could be used as an aid to diagnosis of Brucellosis not only in herds but also in individual cows. (P.S.B.) Value of urea nitrogen in rations containing different carbohydrate feeds. H. C. BELL, W. D. GALLOP and C. K. WHITEHAIR (1953). J. Anim. Sci, 12, 4, 787152 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part II virus exhibited a high reaction and a few of them died of rinderpest. In order to bring about further attenuation of the lapinised virus it was decided to adapt the virus to chicken embryo. Accordingly, the virus was serially passaged through chick-embryos with occasional outpassaging through rabbits and by this method adoptation of the virus for chicken embryo could be achieved. In some cases the chicken embryos were inoculated through intravenous route. In this process, the virus developed marked increase in propagating property in and infectivity for chicken embryos. At the same time a considerable decrease in its pathogenicity for rabbits and cattle had been attained. The authors have, thus, been able to produce a lapinised avianized strain. This strain has maintained the property of propagation in an inoculated rabbit in which it produces the characteristic thermal reaction and lesions in Peyer's patches, though these signs of infection are not so prominent and constant as compared to those produced by the original lapinised virus. Attenuation of the virus for cattle has been noticed after 246 chicken embryo passages with 41 rabbit outpassages. At that stage it provoked a slight to moderate thermal reaction when inoculated into Japanese calves and Holstein-Friesian calves. This grade of infectivity was maintained by the virus through 19 further embryo passages. The virus at this stage did not give sufficient immunity to protect these animals against a challenge with bovine virus. However, after a total of 302 passages in embryos the virus has been found to produce similar reaction (i.e. infective but safe) in Korean calves which are as susceptible as the Japanese calves, but produces sound immunity against challenge with the bovine virus. According to the report the strain has undergone passage through 330 chicken embryos with 41 rabbit out-passages. The authors anticipate that this lapinised avianised virus will be safe and potent immunising agent for highly susceptible cattle. (M.S.M.) A quantitative study of rumen synthesis in the bovine on natural and purified rations. I. Protein, dry matter and non-protein nitrogen. I. P. AGARWAL, C. W. DUNCAN and C. F. HUFFMAN (1953). J. Nutri., 49, 1, 29-39 THIS investigation was carried out to obtain quantitative information on the biosynthesis of protein in the rumen of fistulated calves when urea was the sole source of dietary nitrogen. The amount and rate of disappearance of dry matter and non-protein nitrogen from the rumen was also studied. The experiments were conducted on three rumen fistulated calves and one intact calf, of approximately six months age weighing from 400 to 560 lb. The rumen fistulated calves were maintained on purified ration consisting of corn starch, glucose, cellophane, lard, mineral mixture and urea. The intact calf was maintained on natural ration consist- ing of grain mixture and brome-timothy hay. It was found that percentages of rumen dry matter and non-protein nitrogen increased appreciably within six hours after feeding, but that of crude protein increased in only four out of seven trials.
June, 1955] ABSTRACTS 153 The rate of passage of dry matter from rumen within a 6-hour period was approxi- mately the same on both the purified and natural rations (approximately 60 per cent). Approximately 90 per cent of the non-protein nitrogen disappeared from the rumen within six hours after feeding. The urea was thus converted into ammonia before it could be utilised by rumen micro-organism. The protein synthesised appreciably from urea in the bovine rumen within six hours after feeding, the amount of synthesised 'true' protein varying from 33 to 109 gm. in the seven trials. The authors assume that the increase in protein is due to the biosynthetic activity of the micro-organs in the rumen. (P.T.V.) The effects of freezing bovine spermatozoa in extenders containing antibacterial agents. H. O. DUNN, G. L. LARSEN and E. L. WILLETT (1953). J Dairy Sci., 36, 7, 728-732 THE presence or absence of sulfanilamide, penicillin and streptomycin in extenders in eight possible combinations and their effects on viability of sperma- tozoa at 75° C were studied in this experiment with semen from ten different bulls. The method of dilution and storage was the same as evolved by Polge C and L. E. A. Rowson [1952]. The final extenders contained 25 per cent egg yolk and 10 per cent glycerol with 0.3 per cent sulfanilamide or 500 units of penicillin or streptomycin per milliliter in each extender. Both frozen and unfrozen samples of semen at 75° C and 5° C were stored for a period of 30 hours in the respective eight treatments. In samples stored at154 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part II, by vaccines. The two species of organisms differ widely in their cultural, serological and biochemical properties. According to the author, a careful examination should be carried out on isolating the pleuropneumonia-like organisms from the goats to study their properties, so that they may be accurately identified and the organism of contagious pleuropneu- monia of goats may not be mistaken for the organism of contagious agalactia. Further, it was shown that pathologically caprine pleuropneumonia resembled bovine pleuropneumonia and that the causal organisms of the two said diseases possessed similar cultural properties. The complement fixation test also indicated that they might have common antigens. In two of their properties, the decolouriza- tion of horse erythrocytes by the supernatant from a six-day fluid culture and liquefaction of inspissated serum, they differed from all other organisms of the pleuropneumonia group. The organisms may, therefore, according to the author, not belong to two different species but may be two varieties of one-species. (C.L.S.) The use of culture virus in the preparation of foot and mouth disease vaccine. W.M. HENDERSON and IAN A. GALLOWAY (1953). J. Hyg., 51. 546-558 THREE experiments were performed for the preparation of vaccines for the immunization of cattle against foot and mouth disease and the efficacy of vaccine prepared from virus passaged in cattle, compared with vaccine prepared from virus passaged in culture. In the case of virus strains in cattle, the epithelium was collected from the tongue lesions about 20 hours after inoculating cattle intradermally into the tongue with the suspension of cattle tongue epithelial tissue from a reactor and stored at 4° C in equal parts of glycerine and M/25 phosphate buffer solution, pH 7.6. The passage of virus strains in culture was carried out by collecting cattle tongue from an abattoir and within two hours of slaughter the superficial layers of the mucous membrane were removed by traction. The exposed deeper layer of the mucous were collected aseptically, minced in Tyrode's solution-pH 7.6, and stored at 4° C until required. The material for culture passages of each strain consisted of a Sietz filtrate of 1 : 25 suspension of virus infected epithelium from cattle tongue lesions in a mixture of equal parts of M/25 phosphate buffer solution and Hartley's digest broth pH. 7.6. Subsequent passages were made with the filtrate prepared in the same way. Before each culture passage, minced tongue tissue was added to the virus filtrate and stored at 4°C for three to four hours. About 2 gm. of tissue was then transferred from the filtrate to 725 ml. flasks containing 45 ml. Tyrode's solution, 5 ml. normal cattle serum and 50,000 units of Na-penicillin. Air in the flasks was replaced with 95 per cent oxygen and 5 per cent CO2, the flasks were sealed and incubated at 37°C for 18-24 hours. The maximum infectivity of the tissue was reached at about 18-24 hours incubation. After inoculation, tissue was separated from the culture by centrifugation and pooled. The virus content of the infective material was estimated by multiple inoculation technique of Henderson,
June, 1955] ABSTRACTS 155 The vaccines prepared were of formalinized aluminium hydroxide type. The culture virus vaccines were prepared from the culture tissue collected after 18 to 24 hours incubation. The cattle were vaccinated subcutaneously in the dewlap. In the third week after vaccination they were challenged intradermally into the tongue with 10,000 1D50 of an appropriate strain of virus. Though primary lesions developed at the site of inoculation, animals with no secondary lesions were classed as 'protected'. According to the author, three different strains were tried. With two virus strains, the virus content of the culture at the peak of infectivity was about the same as that of vesicle epithelium from the tongues of reacting cattle, while variable and less satisfactory results were obtained with the third strain, but one culture passage yielded tissue of sufficiently high virus content for the preparation of vaccine of sufficient potency. As a result of passage in culture, no modification in the antigenic behaviour of the strains was detected. (B.K.K.) Compost (built-up) litter as a sanitation procedure. D. C. KENNARD (1954). World's Poult. Sci., 10, 40-41 IN the past the sanitation procedure in the brooder and laying houses was mostly limited to the frequent removal of floor litter, cleaning, scrubbing spraying and starting again with fresh litter. In theory this was alright for preven- tion or control of diseases such as coccidiosis of chickens, but in actual practice over a long period of years it failed to be dependable and increased the incidence of certain diseases. The author, therefore, made experiments with compost built-up litter as a sanitary procedure by virtue of its chemical and biological activities, comparable to those of the compost heap, sewage disposal practices and those of the soil. According to the author, compost (built-up) litter is one that starts with new thick layer of litter and continues with the use of the same litter for successive broods of chicks or flocks of layers. It is necessary that the litter be used for two or three previous broods of chicks (20-24 weeks) or used by adult birds not less than six months; during this period, it becomes a partially composted back to earth material with a depth of 6 to 8 inches or more. It is during the first six months that the litter acquires its sanitation properties and is comparable to that which occurs in the compost heap. The results of the experiments over a period of five years which included 20,000 chickens, indicate that compost litter aids in the prevention and control of coccidiosis and B.W.D. It seems, likewise, private farmers from the U.S.A. have reported similar results. Poultrymen, therefore, need not consider it necessary to sacrifice their valuable old used compost litter simply because of an outbreak of disease in a previous brood of chicks. (S.G.I.)
156 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part II, The utilisation of molasses and urea in the rations of growing dairy cattle. V. R. VOHMAN, G. W. TKIMBERGER, J. K.LOOSLI and K. L. TURK (1954). J. Dairy Sci., 37, 3, 284-293 THE utilisation of molasses at high levels of supplementation and of urea with molasses as the only carbohydrate supplement, has been studied with 80 dairy heifers over a two-year period in two separate experiments. Poor quality hay was supplemented equally with (1) molasses and urea, (2) corn and soybean oil meal, (3) molasses and soybean oil meal and (4) molasses, corn and urea respectively, in four similar groups. The rations containing soybean meal resulted in significantly higher rates of growth than those containing urea and molasses. However, a small amount of corn increased the efficiency of urea and/or molasses ration. Replacement of poor quality hay by good quality hay brought about an improvement in the utilisation of molasses. Digestion and balance studies were also conducted with eight bull calves in two replicates of a 4×4 Latin square design. The nitrogen balance data substan- tiated the growth data. The digestibility of nitrogen was highest in the corn- soybean ration and lowest in the soybean-molasses ration. The amount of urinary nitrogen was greatest in the urea supplemented rations, and thus significantly more nitrogen was stored from soybean meal rations than from either of the urea supple- mented rations. Apparently molasses was not an adequate carbohydrate for the synthesis of protein from urea. Molasses also depressed the digestibility of dry matter, organic matter, ether extract and crude fibre. (S.S. N.) Wool growth as affected by nutrition and by climatic factors. I. E. Coop (1953). J. Agric. Sci., 43, 456-472 THE present investigation was undertaken to study the effect of environmental factors under different levels of nutrition on the rate of wool growth. The weight, length and quality (fineness) of the monthly clips of the wool produced on the delineated skin areas of grazing corriedale sheepJune, 1955] ABSTRACTS 157 The fundamental cause of seasonal rhythm in wool production remains obscure but the rhythm is so strong that it cannot be masked by nutrition, pregnancy or lactation. The seasonal rhythm of solar radiation is, no doubt, one of the factors but not the only factor affecting wool growth. Environmental temperature has got no direct effect on wool growth, nevertheless, it is suggested that it may be a second factor (V. N. M.) Effect of transportation upon fertility of dairy bulls. E. L. WILLETT and G. L. LARSON (1953). J. Dairy Sci., 36, 1186-1189 THIRTY-SIX bulls of different breeds were transported over long distance and their rate of fertility and semen characteristics were studied. The data collected indicate a significant rise in the semen volume but the increase in fertility rate and number of spermatozoa per milliliter was not significant. It has been concluded that the fertility of the bulls was not impaired by transporta- tion. [S.K.D.] The influence of glycerol level and various temperature aspects and certain other factors on the survival of bull spermatozoa at sub-zero temperatures. W. L. MILLER and N. L. VANDEMARK, J. Dairy Sci., 37, 1, 45-51 THE paper deals with effects of variations in glycerol levels, rates of cooling and thawing and storage temperatures, on bull semen frozen in the egg-yolk-citrate diluent. If glycerol is added slowly to semen diluted 1 : 1 with yolk-citrate diluent at 5°C., the spermatozoa is not affected by the level of glycerol upto 30 per cent. An experiment carried out to determine the effect of sperm number and glycerol level on survival of sperm after freezing to 158 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part II, parts and then added slowly (10 minutes). Instantaneous addition of glycerol decreas- ed motility slightly. An equilibration of spermatozoa with glycerol for six hours before freezing resulted in higher survival after thawing than for lower equilibration time. The best rate of freezing was found to be 1 to 4° C. per minute, upto 5 to June, 1955] ABSTRACTS 159 of the fibres to swell and become rubbery. When such fibres are rubbed, the surface scales are lost and the property of migration and shrinkage are lost. (The article mainly keeps business aspects of wool technology in view. The vital point interesting to us is the study of the ratio of primary to secondary follicle in the various breeds of sheep in India, which will give an idea of the type of breed for particular industry.) [G. S. L.] The survival of Salmonella gallinarum in poultry carcases. F. T. W. JORDON, [1954]. Brit. vet. J. 110, 387-392 THE author describes experiments to assess the viability and consequent infec- tivity of Salmonella gallinarum in poultry carcases. Fourteen carcases from eight acute outbreaks were tested after exposure to atmospheric conditions for varying periods during different parts of the year. Antimortem infection with Salmonella gallinarum in opened carcases was con- firmed by plating material on D. C. S. S., by staining with gram, by sugar reaction and by their titration against Salmonella type D antisera. Cultural tests of cloacal swabs were considered confirmatory in case of unopened carcases. Post-mortem material was seeded into 10 C.C. of selenite F broth and subcul- tured on D. C. S. S. plates to get Salmonella colonies. Maggots preying on such carcases and their internal tissues were separately tested for detecting organisms. Biochemical tests demonstrated organisms in liver upto 11 days, in bone marrow upto 25 days, in the bone marrow of unopened buried carcase after 32 days, in water of submerged carcase upto nine days and in maggots for 25 days. [B.M.G.) Stilboestrol and the control of sex in poultry. SPICER ARNOLD [1954]. Brit. Vet. J. 110, 358-359 WITH a view to studying the effect of stilboestrol on sex in poultry, the author has carried out some experiments by implanting 30 mg. stilboestrol tablets in cockrels whose testes had not fully developed. It was found, that intraperitoneal implantation, irrespective of the dose used, had longer period of effectivity, with no danger of encapsulation, as compared to subcutaneous implants in the upper part of the neck. Stilboestrol did not damage the testes. These cockrels selected 4-5 months after implantation, when put to breeding on the pullets born of implanted cockrels, increased the number of females in the second and subsequent generation. (Such experiments are worth a trial in India) [P.S.R.] Keeping qualities of live rinderpest vaccines. H. S. PURCHASE, M. L. BURDIN, G. R. Scott and J. G. BROTHERSTONE [1953]. Vet. Rec. 37-65, 590-592 THE author presents in a tabular form, an account of viability trials of freeze- dried caprinised (K. A. G.) rapinised rinderpest vaccine when stored at tem- perature conditions of 160 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part II, The observations revealed that after a storage period of 11½ months the cap- rinised vaccine when tested on susceptible animals maintained its original immuno- genic titer of 2 × 1: 40,000. Likewise the lapinised vaccine showed no fall in its titer of 2 X 1 : 10,000 after 14½ months storage at the above quoted temperatures. (K.V.S.) The effects of age upon calcium utilisation and maintenance requirements in the bovine. SAM L.HANSARD, C. L. COMAR, M. P. PLUMLEE, (1954). J. Anim. Sci. 13, 25-36 CHEMICAL and radiocalcium balance studies were simultaneously carried out with 34 Hereford cattle varying in age from 10 days to 190 months. Absorption and true digestibility values were highest in young animals, decreasing rapidly at sexual maturity and then more slowly until maturity and were further decreased in the aged animals. Daily endogenous faecal calcium increased, with advancing age and body weight, from 0.42 gm. at 10 days to 3.3 gm. at six months and to eight grams at maturity. The quantity, milligram per kilogram body weight of endogenous faecal calcium, was remarkably constant from one month of age to maturity. However, the low level in 10 days old animals and the slightly higher level in aged animals indicated a trend towards an increase with age. Maintenance requirements per 100 pounds body weight calculated from the endogenous and true digestibility values ranged from 0.5 grams at 10 days to two grams at six months and remained relatively constant to maturity. (B. D.) Evidence of epistatic action of genes for antigenic substances in sheep. J. RENDEL, A. N. SORENSEN and M. R. IRWIN (1954), Genetics 39, 396 IN this study three classes of sheep blood have been described whereas only two were known hitherto. In concordance with genetical practice the pre- viously described factors R and O are reckoned as R and r and the new recessive gene 'i' epistatic to dominant R and probably to r. The authors assume that these factors are controlled by genes at two loci. From an analysis of 399 sheep bloods of various breeds 222 were classified as R, 151 as r and 26 as i. These factors were absent in the blood of young lambs below one month old. By coating experi- ments the blood cells of one group were changed into another by incubating them in serum of the second group for five hours at 37°C followed by 15 hours storage in the refrigerator. It is presumed that R and r substances are taken up by the cells from the surrounding plasma. (J. D. S. K.) New advances in the electro-ejaculation of the bull. WILIAM G. R. MARDEN,(1954). Dairy Sci. 37, 556 CONSIDERABLE advance has been made in the technique of electro-ejacula- tion by the use of a cylindrical lucite electrode containing four longitudinal metallic strips. The electrodes are connected in pairs 180 degrees apart. Ejacu- lation is obtained by placing the electrode entirely inside the rectum and using an
June, 1955] ABSTRACTS 161 electric pulse. Spike or square waves will not give success but only the sine wave pulse with a frequency range of 12 to 70 cycles can give good results. Rest of the results occurred between 20 and 30 cycles. Fractionation of the semen was possible. No harmful effects have been obser ved although two bulls were systematically made to ejaculate by this method for a period of 12 months. (S.D.) The effect on cattle of long-continued cutaneous application of DDT. W. J. ROULSTON, H. F. HITCHCOCK, A. W. TURNER and A. D. CAMPBELL (1953). Austr. J. agri. Res. 4, 4, 469-480 THE authors report on the result of experiments conducted in Australia to investigate the hazard involved in the use of DDT for continuous long periods for the control of ectoparasites of cattle. In one series of experiments, 18 Hereford cross steers about 12 months old were weighed every week and 300 ml. of peanut oil containing 22.5 gm. pp1-DDT rubbed on their backs for a period of three years. Six of these animals were selected at random as controls which after the 33rd week had only 300 ml. of peanut oil applied without any DDT. At the end of each year, some animals were slaughtered and samples of brain, spinal cord, liver and kidney were taken for histological examina- tion, and samples of brain, liver, spleen, kidney, omental fat, dorsal fat, urine and bile for chemical examination. At the end of the first year no abnormalities were observed in the tissues and no outstanding difference in the total chloride from the treated and control groups. During the second year a difference in the mean live weight of the two groups developed which, when investigated, showed that though heavy DDT dressings might produce an initial adverse effect on weight gain, this effect subsequently lessened. Third year's results showed no signs of DDT poisoning and the histological examination of the tissues of both the groups did not reveal abnormalities. The adipose tissues contained DDT in amounts up to 425 p.p.m., whereas no difference was seen in non-adipose tissues from the treated and control animals. In another series of experiments, 16 Shorthorn heifers aged 15 months were subjected to weekly application of the same dosage of DDT in peanut or substitute oils. No signs of DDT poisoning were observed at any stage in the animals or in their calves, and no abnormalities observed in the histological examination tissues. Samples of milk collected after 20 months of treatment during which 1935 gm. of pp1-DDT had been applied to each animal, contained 3-4 p.p.m. of DDT. Three calves born of the treated mothers did not absorb toxic amounts of DDT within 5-6 months, either from the milk or from the coats of their mothers. It is concluded that dipping cattle in aqueous suspensions of 0.5 per cent pp1- DDT for tick control would be quite harmless. (P.B.M.)
AN ANNOUNCEMENT COLONEL AMIR CHAND TRUST PRIZES FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH LIEUT-COLONEL AMIR CHAND, ex-Principal, Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi, has made a donation of Rs. 50,000/- to the Indian Council of Medical Research for the purpose of awarding prizes for the best published research work in the field of Medical sciences. The Governing Body of the Council has constituted a Trust called the, 'Colonel Amir Chand Trust' for the administration and management of the Funds. SIX PRIZES, of almost equal value, of which some may be in the form of medals, are awarded annually on an All-India basis for the best published research work in any subject pertaining to all fields of medical sciences in general including clinical research. The term, 'Clinical research' will imply research into the mechanism and causation of disease, including its prevention and cure. It covers not only work in patients in hospitals, but also field studies in epidemiology and social medicine and observations in general practice. THREE of the Prizes are known as, 'BASANTI DEVI AMIR CHAND PRIZE' and the other THREE, 'SHAKUNTLA AMIR CHAND PRIZE'. TWO OUT OF THE SIX PRIZES shall be awarded to graduates of not more than ten years standing counting from the date of graduation, provided that the work for which the prizes are to be awarded is of approved merit. THE COMPETITORS for the prizes may be MEDICAL or NON-MEDICAL graduates. THE SELECTION of candidates for the award of the prizes will be made by a Selection Board appointed for the purpose. IN A JOINT PUBLICATION the prize shall be divided between the joint workers in such proportion as the Selection Board may recommend. IT has been decided to award during 1955 six prizes of the value of Rs. 300/- each for the best research papers in medical science published by workers during the year 1954 (1st January to the 31st December, 1954). THE AWARD of the prizes will be announced at the annual meetings of the Scientific Advisory Board and the Advisory Committees of the Indian Council of Medical Research, to be held at Nagpur in November/December, 1955. THE CANDIDATES are required to submit 15 REPRINTS of their papers published during 1954. These should be sent to the SECRETARY, INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH, 'P' BLOCK, RAISINA ROAD, NEW DELHI, so as to reach him NOT LATER THAN THE 1ST SEPTEMBER, 1955. THE PAPERS should be accompanied by a short biographical sketch and two copies of PASSPORT SIZE PHOTOGRAPHS of the worker or workers concerned. 163 MGIPCORIGINAL ARTICLES BIOCHEMICAL STUDY OF FLUORINE INTOXICATION* I. ETIOLOGY, PROPHYLAXIS AND CURE By A. MARIAKULANDAI, Ph.D. and P. VENKATARAMAIAH, M.A., Chemistry Section, Agricultural Research Institute, Coimbatore. (Received for publication on 24th March 1954) In Kurnool district of Madras State (now Andhra State), a cattle disease commonly known in the region as Vayunoppulu or Vayupotlu (in Telugu vayu means rheumatic and Potlu or Noppulu means pricks or pains) is prevalent in an endemic form. The malady has striking resemblance to osteomalacia and arthritis and at one time was supposed to be caused by lack of calcium and phosphorus in the ration. Workers in the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Madras, [Pandit, Raghavachari et al., 1940] working on similar symptoms in man had traced the etiology of the disease in Nellore district to the presence of fluorine in potable waters in addition to the vitamin C deficiency in the dietary of people there. This affection is commonly referred to as fluorine intoxication or fluorosis in literature [Robolm, 1937]. As close examination of the affected animals threw some doubt on the exact etiology of the affection as met with in Kurnool district, an investigation was undertaken in 1939, (i) to ascertain the causes and symptoms of the disease among cattle, and (ii) to suggest prophylactic as well as curative measures to the farmers of the affected locality. ETIOLOGY OF THE MALADY IN CATTLE The investigation was commenced with a survey of the districts of Kurnool and Nellore in which the disease was reported to be prevalent. Water samples were collected from all the water sources in this area and analysed for their fluorine content. The results of this analysis are presented in Table I. From the Table it is evident that almost all the water sources in the affected areas had a flourine content of one part per million or more, which has been established to be the toxic limit by previous workers [Smith et al., 1931]. *This work was done under the Madras Animal Nutrition Scheme from 1939 to 1942. 165 27 AR/55 1
166 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-I [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE I Analysis of water samples (From Kurnool and adjoining areas in the affected zone) Serial number Source Village Taluk and district Fluorine P.P.M. Total solids at 105°C p.p.m. pH 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Affected villages 1 Kurnum well Veepanaguntla Nandikotkur Kurnool 2.10 608 7.89 2 Bommanna well September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 167 TABLE I168 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-1 [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE ISeptember 1955] MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 169 TABLE I170 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-I [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE ISeptember 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 171 grown in an affected or unaffected area contained fluorine and the 'spreading' had more fluorine than the 'bunch' evidently due to its longer duration of growth. This finding was, therefore, in favour of the bunch variety and did not go to support the popular belief that the incidence of the disease was more acute after the introduc- tion of the 'bunch' variety. TABLE II Comparison of the fluorine content of bunch and spreading varieties of groundnut Lab. No. 1940-41 Variety Source Incidence of fluorosis Fluorine (mg. per gram ash) In kernels without oil In shells Total 1069 Bunch Koilkuntla, Kurnool Dt. Acute 0.3270 0.0744 0.4014 1070 Spreading 172 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-I [Vol. XXV, Part III, Afterwards, a sample of groundnut haulm from the affected area was compared with groundnut samples from an unaffected area with regard to their feeding values and mineral content. From the results of this analysis presented in Table IV, it is evident that the sample from the affected area (Kurnool) compared favourably with that grown in the unaffected area (Tindivanam) in all respects except phos- phorus, which is comparatively low in the Kurnool sample. TABLE IV Feeding value of groundnut haulms (A comparison between Kurnool and Tindivanam samples) (On dry basis) Place Moist- ure Ash Crude proteins Crude fibre Ether extract- ives Carbo- hydrates Albu- minoides Lime (CaO) Phosph- oric acid (P2O5) per cent per cent per cent per cent per cent per cent per cent per cent per cent Kurnool 7.56 10.11 7.81 27.97 1.79 44.76 5.58 2.04 0.20 Tindivanam Farm 7.13 9.77 8.30 35.35 1.39 38.06 6.04 2.10 0.40 Ryots field in Tindivanam. 7.75 10.61 8.53 29.53 1.23 42.30 0.25 1.92 0.34 From a pasture survey conducted by the staff of the Madras Agricultural Chemist throughout the Madras Presidency, it was shown that an imbalance of the chief minerals, calcium and phosphorus, existed in the affected area, and, therefore, the groundnut haulms only reflected the general poverty of the area for phosphorus. B. Aphosphorosis: This factor was probably the prime cause of enhancing the fluorine intoxication rather than the alleged 'bunch' variety of groundnut. Considered from the generally accepted proportion of Ca : P as 1 : 1 in the ration, there was an imbalance between these two minerals in the pasture grasses of the Ceded Districts, while they were well balanced in other parts of Madras State [Ramiah, 1939-41]. This probably would explain why cattle in the affected areas of Nellore in spite of high fluorine content of potable waters was not so badly attacked by fluorine, as in the Kurnool and adjoining areas of the Ceded Districts, whereas the malady in cattle was due to the combined effect of fluorine ingestion and phosphorus deficiency. Apart from the evidence produced by the analysis of the pasture grasses, the blood analysis of cattle from the affected area presented in Table V, also showed that the area must be deficient in phosphorus. The blood phosphorus was very low compared to the normal range of 4.5 to 5 mg. per 700 ml. of blood and as the blood is known to reflect the mineral deficiency of the area in which the cattle are nurtured (Becker et al., 1933; Palmer et al., 1927) the tract must be deficient in phosphorus.
September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 173 TABLE V Blood analysis of affected cattle in Kurnool district Serial No. Place Animal Range in age Number of animals analysed Blood inorganic phosphorus (mg. 100 cc. blood) (average) Serum calcium (mg. 100 cc. serum) (average) 1. Ramachandrapuram, Kurnool taluk, Kurnool district. Bullocks 4-8 years 5 1.52 11.5 2. Veepanaguntla, Nandikotkur taluk, Kurnool district. 174 FULORINE INTOXICATIONSeptember 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 175 The affected zone and its geological formation. As fluorine in the water must have probably originated from the underlying rocks, a study of such rocks was made. From the geological map of the affected area it was noted that the underlying forma- tions were as given below : 1. The Cuddapah-Kurnool formations. 2. Unclassified crystalline granites and gneisses. 3. Granite and syenite formation. 4. Dharwar series. Typical rock samples from each of these formations were collected and analysed for their fluorine content and the result is given in Table VII. TABLE VII Analysis of rock samples (from the geological formations underlying the affected area) Serial No. Source Name of the rock formation Name of the rock samples Fluorine P.P.M. 1 Mantrala pass, Nallamalais, Kurnool District. Cuddapah formation Light yellowish white shale 370 2 do. do. Reddish brown shale 450 3 do. do. Grey shale 620 4 Nandikotkur, Kurnool District Kurnool formation Brown limestone 700 5 Somayajulupallaghat, Kurnool District. Cuddapah formation Crystalline limestone 330 6 do. do. Banded limestone 960 7 do. do. Shales 790 8 Nandyal, do. Kurnool formation Grey limestone 780 9 do. do. Light chocolate limestone 670 10 Panyam, Nandyal taluk do. Quartzite 390 11 do. do. Sandstone 630 12 Karivemulla, Nandyal taluk Unclassified crystalline and gneisses formation. Granite 490 13 Kodunuru Nandyal taluk do. Quartzite 390 14 Well rock, Amadaguntla do. Tourmaline crystals 655 15 do. do. Quartz and felspar 320 16 do. do. Schistose 495 17 Kenchenguda, Siruguppa, Bellary District. do. Mica granite 380 18 Bhattorahalli, Siruguppa Road, Bellary District. Granite and Syenite formation Red granite 45 19 Bevenhalli, do. Dharwar series Horablands trap 140
176 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-I [Vol. XXV, Part III, The rock formations underlying the affected area were, therefore, to a greater or lesser extent, a permanent source of supply of fluorine to the waters which flow through them. Similarly the soils produced by weathering from these rocks contain large amounts of fluorine. A soil sample from Veepanaguntla, Kurnool taluk, had a fluorine content of 310 parts per million and another sample from Chinna- bhodanam, Sirvel taluk, contained 410 parts per million fluorine. The plants grown on these soils too were analysed and found to contain good amounts of fluorine ranging from 0.1 to 0.26 mg. per gram of plant ash. Thus the fluorine originally contained in the rock and soil got into the forage and fresh water and due to the combined action of the fluorine in the feed and water, the animal got the toxicosis. Summing up it may, therefore, be stated that this disease is caused by lack of phosphorus in the soils and hence in the herbage, and also due to the presence of fluorine in the water as well as the roughage which is made up of cereal straws and groundnut haulms. Symptoms. The first indication of the disease is seen in the lameness of one or more limbs, more often the fore limbs and more acutely in the shoulders, which appear to be thrown forward. When the hind limbs are affected, the gait is of a swinging nature. This meta-static lameness soon spreads to all the four limbs pro- ducing in a few months a stiff, cramped and laboured gait. Anorexia and loss of condition ensure. Swollen joints, especially of the knee and hock joints, followed by ankylosis mark the next stage of the disease before advanced emaciation resulting in death. PROPHYLACTIC AND CURATIVE MEASURES It became clear from the field survey that the disease among cattle in the affected area was due to both a deficiency in phosphoric acid and the presence of fluorine in waters. Hence, it was evident that the preventive and curative measures should include addition of mineral supplements containing phosphoric acid and removal of fluorine from contaminated waters. Work in this direction was attempted in 1940 : (a) by removing fluorine from potable waters, and (b) by feeding bone meal as a phosphatic supplement. Removing fluorine from potable waters The problem of removing fluorine from potable waters has been the subject of some study in the U. S. A. and elsewhere, but the methods suggested are mostly expensive and are more suited for application in large municipalities and corpora- tions with a protected system of water distribution from reservoirs. For conditions which prevail in Kurnool district, where wells provide water for all the needs of men and animals and that too to a very limited extent, no method involving ex- pensive procedure or elaborate equipment can be recommended. Laboratory trials were made on the use of a number of reagents on a solution of sodium fluoride containing 10 parts per million fluorine. Table VIII gives details of treat- ment and fluorine content before and after treatment.
September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 177 TABLE VIII Reagents tried for fluorine removal Serial No. Reagents Fluorine P.P.M. In original solution In treated solution Fluorine removed p.p.m. 1 Boric acid 10 8.59 1.41 2 Potash alum 10 8.59 1.41 3 Tricalcium phosphate 10 7.64 2.36 4 Commercial superphosphate 10 9.55 0.45 5 Borax 10 9.55 0.45 6 Alumina cream 10 3.34 6.66 7 Calcium carbonate 10 8.59 1.41 8 Lime (CaO) 10 0.95 9.05 9 Lime and superphosphate 10 0.95 9.05 10 Lime and potash alum 10 0.76 9.24 In this trial it was seen that lime alone and lime with alum were the most effec tive, having removed 9 parts of fluorine out of 10 per million. The effect of lime at varying concentrations ranging from 100 to 4,000 parts per million was tried next on a similar synthetic solution of fluorine. Results are given in Table IX. TABLE IX Effect of different concentrations of lime Serial No. Treatment Fluorine concentration P.P.M. pH. Original water After one day After two days After three days After four days After six days Original water After six days 1 4000 p.p.m. i.e. 4 gm. of CaO per litre of F. water. 10.0 2.86 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 6.44 9.6 2 3000 p.p.m. i.e. 3.0 gm. of CaO per litre of F water. 10.0 2.86 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 6.44 9.6 3 2500 p.p.m. i.e. 2.5 of gm.CaO per litre of F water. 10.0 2.86 1.91 0.95 0.95 0.95 6.44 9.6 4 2000 p.p.m. i.e. 2.0 of CaO per litre of F water. 10.0 2.86 1.43 0.95 0.95 0.95 6.44 9.6 5 1500 p.p.m. i.e. 1.5 gm. of CaO pet litre of F water. 10.0 3.34 2.39 1.43 1.43 0.95 6.44 9.6 6 1000 p.p.m. i.e. 1.0 gm. of CaO per litre of F water. 10.0 3.34 2.39 1.43 1.43 1.43 6.44 9.6 7 500 p.p.m. i.e. 0.5 gm. of CaO per litre of F water. 10.0 3.34 2.39 1.43 1.43 1.43 6.44 9.6 8 200 p.p.m. i.e. 0.2 gm. of CaO per litre of F water. 10.0 8.11 7.16 7.16 7.16 7.16 6.44 8.1 9 100 p.p.m. i.e. 0.1 gm. of CaO per litre of F water. 10.0 8.11 7.16 7.16 7.16 7.16 6.44 7.8
178 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-I [Vol. XXV, Part III, It was seen that lime alone at 1,500 parts per million brought down the fluorine content from 10 parts per million to 0.95 parts per million in six days. The fluorine in the form of calcium fluoride settles down and is easily removed. The same treat- ment was then applied to natural well waters of Kurnool and Coimbatore districts. Table X gives details of treatment and fluorine content before and after treatment. TABLE X Lime treatment in natural waters Serial No. Lab. No. 39September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 179 Fluorine removal directly from wells To ascertain whether this method of lime treatment to remove fluorine is suitable for application to the water in the well itself, a step well was chosen for treatment at Gospad, an affected village in the Kurnool district. This well which was mainly used by animals, was treated with lime for removal of fluorine. The diameter of the well was 22 feet and the depth of water 24 feet. Slaked lime at roughly 500 parts per million was added straight into the well and six men were made to swim, dive and churn with poles to ensure complete mixing of the lime added. Samples of water were taken for analysis before adding lime and after adding lime. The lime settled down completely in 36 hours. Samples of water were taken for analysis of fluorine, total solids, CaO and pH on three succeeding days after treatment and after 18 days from the date of treatment. The results of analysis are given in Table XI. TABLE XI Removal of fluorine in wells. Heads of analysis 16-12-1942 Well water sample collected on Before lime treatment After lime treatment 17-12-42 18-12-42 19-12-42 3-1-43 Fluorine (P. P. M.) 4.750 3.325 3.325 2.850 2.850 4.75 Total solids 180 FLUORINE INTOXICATIONSeptember 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 181 SUMMARY Fluorine intoxication was noted in Kurnool and parts of Nellore districts of Madras State (now Andhra State). The etiology of the disease was locally attri- buted to the greater incorporation of groundnut haulms in the feed of the animal due to increased cultivation of groundnut after the introduction of the short duration 'bunch' variety of groundnuts in the tract. But no evidence to support the belief of the locality could be adduced from this study. However, it was noted that the phosphorus deficiency of the tract might have been a contributing cause in the more severe manifestation of the affection initially due to fluorine ingestion through potable water, and this explained also the lesser affection in the cattle of Nellore district as against those in Kurnool. The primary cause of the disease was definitely correlated to excess of fluorine in the drinking water, which was shown to be derived from the underlying soil and rocks of the area. Prophylactic measure comprised removal of fluorine from the drinking waters by treatment with freshly slaked lime and through correction of the phos- phorus deficiency by bone meal feeding. Lime at 500 parts per million was found to be effective in reduction of the fluorine contents of natural waters below the toxic level, while three ounces of bone meal per diem per animal was suitable to amel- iorate the fluorine intoxication which was enhanced through aphosphorosis. REFERENCES Becker, R. B., Neal, W. M. and Shealy, A. L. (1933). Florida Univ. Agri. Exp. Sta. Bull., 2644 Majumdar, B. N., Ray, S. N. and Sen, K. C. (1946). Indian J. vet. Sci. XII, 95 Palmer, L. S. and Eckles, G. H. (1927). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med., 24, 307, 1927, Chem. Absh. 21, 2492 Pandit, C. G., Raghavachari, T. N. S., Rao, D. S. and Krishnamurthi, V. (1940). Indian J. med. Res., 28, 533 _______and Rao, D. S. (1940). Indian J. med. Res., 28, 559 Raghavachari, T. N. S. and Venkataraman, K. (1940). Indian J. med. Res., 28, 517 Ramiah, P. V. (1939-40) (1940-41) Report of the Animal Nutrition Work, Coimbatore, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi Roholm, K. (1937). 'Fluorine intoxication', Published by Lewis & Co., London Smith, M. C., Lanz, E. M. and Smith, H. V. (1931). Univ. Arizona Tech. Bull. No. 32 27 AR/55 3
BIOCHEMICAL STUDY OF FLUORINE INTOXICATION* II. METABOLISM OF FLUORINE By A. MARIAKULANDAI, Ph.D., and P. VENKATARAMAIAH, M.A., Chemistry Section, Agricultural Research Institute, Coimbatore (Received for publication on 24th March 1954) (With three text figures) INVESTIGATIONS done into the etiology of fluorine intoxication by the authors (1939-1941) indicated that insufficiency of phosphorus in the ration and the presence of fluorine in waters in toxic amounts are two main factors that cause the affection in the cattle of Kurnool and adjoining tracts. To confirm this by controlled study, an experiment was conducted in 1940-41 to induce fluorine intoxication arti- ficially in calves, by feeding sodium fluoride solution, while noting side by side the protective effect of bone meal in preventing the onset of the disease. Metabolism studies were conducted on the animals both indirectly through balance experiments and directly by slaughter technique. The gross symptoms of the intoxication were also noted. These are presented in this paper. MATERIALS AND METHODS Urine and faeces were collected in the metabolism experiment. Bones, tissues and organs were sampled for analysis at the time of the post-mortem examination of the experimental calves. Blood was drawn from the jugular vein for analysis. Fluorine was estimated by the Willard and Winter method [1933]. Blood phosphate was assayed by Kay's method [1930]. The modified method of Larson and Greenberg [1938] was used for estimation of serum calcium and the micro- colorimetric method of Kuttner and Lichstenstein [1932] adopted for blood inorganic phosphorus. PROCEDURE Six calves of nearly the same age and size were procured and divided into three groups of two each as follows: Group I184 FLUORINE INTOXICATIONSEPTEMBER 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 185 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1.186 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-II [Vol. XXV, Part III, (h) Post-mortem examination: Calf No. 4 died in the middle of the experiment, i.e. on 22nd June 1941 and calf No. 5 succumbed on 18th August 1941, both due to fluorine feeding. From the examination, it was found that apart from bone exos- tosis and overgrown hoofs, which could be seen externally, autopsy revealed acute inflammation of the gastro-intestinal tract, the small intestines being particularly congested and highly inflamed. Effect on blood (a) Blood inorganic phosphorus and calcium: The results of the periodic examination made in all the six calves are presented graphically in Figs. 2 and 3. From the data obtained it will be clear that fluorine feeding does not seem to affect the calcium or inorganic phosphorus of blood. (b) Blood fluorine: When no variations from normal in the blood mineral content of fluorosis calves were noted, it was sought to see whether there was any variation in the fluorine content of blood. From the data obtained in the latter half of the experimental period presented in Table I, it was clearly seen that blood fluorine also does not vary from the control due to fluorine feeding. TABLE I Periodic estimation of blood fluorine in the experimental animals (Mg. per 100 c.c. blood) Serial No. Date of examination Group I Control Group II Fluorine + Bonemeal Group III Fluorine Calf I Calf II Calf III Calf IV Calf V Calf VI 1 20th February 1941 1.79 1.07 1.31 .. 1.49 1.43 2 6th March 1941 1.49 1.31 1.19 2.15 1.19 1.07 3 20th March 1941 1.25 1.13 1.19 1.37 1.07 0.96 4 3rd April 1941 1.07 1.19 1.07 1.19 1.01 0.90 5 17th April 1941 1.31 0.96 1.19 1.01 1.07 0.90 6 1st May 1941 1.13 2.27 1.49 1.19 1.67 1.79 7 15th May 1941 1.13 1.19 2.15 1.19 1.19 1.31 8 29th May 1941 1.19 1.19 1.49 1.25 1.31 1.07 9 11th June 1941 1.37 1.33 1.49 1.37 1.31 1.37 10 24th July 1941 0.95 1.01 1.34 .. 1.79 1.37 11 12th August 1941 1.19 1.34 1.97 .. 1.79 2.03
SEPTEMBER 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 187 Fluorine metabolism Storage of fluorine was computed by working out the fluorine balance in two ways: (i) Indirect method: By a metabolism experiment on all the six calves during their life period by noting fluorine retention indirectly from the amount of excretion. (ii) Direct method: By a total metabolism, by noting the amount of fluorine retained directly in the carcasses of calves No. 1, No. 4 and No. 5 from the total fluorine fed throughout the experimental period. (i) Indirect method: Actual fluorine intake in the form of feeds and sodium fluoride were estimated daily for four days. The daily excretion on these days in the form of dung and urine were collected separately and the fluorine excreted in these were estimated. The intake per diem was as follows: Calf No. 1 288 mg. of fluorine Calf No. 2 254 188 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-II [Vol. XXV, Part III, From Table II it will be seen that the control group absorbed 24 per cent of the fluorine ingested. This fluorine was from the 'native' sources like straw, con- centrates, etc. The fluorine-fed groups II and III retained 49 per cent and 57 per cent of the total fluorine intake, both from the native sources and the sodium fluoride fed. From the figures obtained, it will be seen that the animals of the bone meal group retained on an average 8 per cent lesser fluorine than the pure fluorine group, which is a factor in favour of bone meal feeding. (ii) Direct method of working out the fluorine balance: In this, the amount of fluorine retained was directly estimated in the carcasses. This method of working out the fluorine balance was adopted in the case of calves No. 1, No. 4 and No. 5, which represented each of the three groups under study. Calf No. 4 died in the middle of the experiment and had received 151.3 grams of sodium fluoride while calf No. 5 which survived for a longer period had received 262.1 gm. of sodium fluoride, during the experimental period. Calf No. 1 which was slaughtered on the death of calf No. 5 was taken to represent the normal fluorine content of organs, tissues and bones. The individual analysis of every part of the animal in the case of calves No. 4 and No. 5, which died due to fluorine intoxication and calf No. 1 which was slaughtered to get the normal fluorine contents, are pre- sented in Tables III and IV. TABLE III Analysis of organs and tissues Serial No. Organs and tissues Fluorine (mgm. per gram ash) Control group calf 1 F+Bonemeal group calf 4 Fluorine group calf 5 1 Brain 0.0717 0.3041 0.2962 2 Lungs 0.3489 0.4776 0.6306 3 Heart 0.3071 0.5967 0.8143 4 Stomach 0.4037 0.8956 0.6009 5 Small intestines 0.3095 0.9672 0.7843 6 Large intestines 0.3301 0.5939 0.5051 7 Liver 0.1022 0.4474 0.5289 8 Kidneys 0.2649 0.6714 0.7526 9 Spleen 0.2201 0.3915 0.5982 10 Gall bladder 0.3551 0.7736 0.6664 11 Musculature 0.2182 0.4237 0.8116 12 Skin with hairs 0.2601 0.4851 0.7456
September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 189 TABLE IV Analysis of bones, hoofs, etc. Serial No. Bones, etc. Fluorine (mgm. per gram ash) Control group Calf 1 F+Bonemeal group Calf 4 Fluorine group Calf 5 1 Incisors 0.514 1.240 2.716 2 Molars 0.667 2.386 3.803 3 Mandibles 2.150 6.640 10.860 4 Lumber vertebrae 2.020 7.845 13.490 5 Ribs 1.683 4.724 14.230 6 Humerus 1.759 5.284 11.160 7 Radio-ulna 1.834 5.866 10.500 8 Metacarpus 1.755 6.950 11.050 9 Scapula 1.735 4.724 10.700 10 Femur 1.692 6.138 11.730 11 Tibia-fibula 1.727 4.670 9.423 12 Meta-tarsus 1.455 6.427 9.610 13 Hoofs 0.924 1.771 3.615 14 Horns 1.351 4.678 5.041 It will be seen from the results obtained that bones stored the highest amount of fluorine and increased fluorine feeding as in calf No. 5 had caused considerable increase in the fluorine (nearly 10 times) of bones, with slight increase in tissues and organs. Among the bones, the cancellated bones like the lumbar vertebrae and ribs seemed to have a high fluorine content. Teeth, hoofs and horns contain much less fluorine than the bones. The alimentary canal, musculature, kidneys, gall bladder and the heart have comparatively more fluorine than other organs and tissues. From the individual fluorine analysis of every part of the carcass and the total weight of each part, the total fluorine retained in the carcass of calves No. 1, No. 4 and No. 5 was worked out and presented in Table V,
190 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-II [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE V Total fluorine content of the carcasses of experimental animals Serial No. Parts of the carcass Fluorine (in mgm.) Control group Calf 1 Bonemeal group Calf 4 Fluorine group Calf 5 1 Skull with teeth 3361.318 5657.243 9397.750 2 Skeleton 9736.000 16460.000 34123.000 3 Hoofs and horns 7.266 8.156 12.986 4 Skin with hairs 49.510 38.590 36.560 5 Musculature 179.600 47.432 37.254 6 Internal organs 35.712 79.030 112.800 Total fluorine retained by carcass 13369.406 mgm. or 13.369 gm. 22290.451 mgm. 22.290 gm. 43780.350 mgm. 43.780 gm. The fluorine retained by the control calf No. 1 was entirely from the 'native' sources. As all the three calves received the same kind of feed, the fluorine retained by calf No. 1 per kilogram body weight, can be taken as due to natural sources and by subtracting this from the fluorine stored per kilogram body weight by calves No. 4 and No. 5 the value due to sodium fluoride feeding alone was easily computed. The results thus obtained are presented in Table VI, the last column representing the percentage fluorine retained from the sodium fluoride fed to Groups II and III animals. TABLE VI Fluorine retention by the experimental animals (As assessed by direct analysis of the carcass) Group NaF fed as fluorine (in gm.) Total fluorine retained (in gm.) Body weight in kgm. (average of last 7 days) FLUORINE RETAINED Per kgm. body weight (in gm.) Difference over control (in gm. per kgm. body weight. From the NaF fed (in gm.) From the NaF fed (per- centage) I. Control (Calf No. 1) .. 13 173 0.075 .. .. .. II. Bone meal plus Fluorine (Calf No. 4) 69 22 52 0.431 0.356 18 26 III. Fluorine (Calf No. 5) 119 44 54 0.815 0.740 40 34
September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 191 From Table VI it will be seen that calf No. 5 had retained more fluorine than calf No. 4 per kilogram body weight. Percentage retained by calves No. 4 and No. 5 from the total 'Na-Fluorine' fed is presented in the last column of the above Table. Calf No. 4 of the bone meal group retained 26 per cent of the fluorine fed from sodium fluoride while calf No. 5 retained 34 per cent; the difference of 8 per cent lesser storage in the former, being due to bonemeal feeding. The retention values obtained by the direct method of working out the balance in the carcass agreed very closely with those obtained in the indirect method. In both the methods of assessing the retention, the bonemeal group was found to retain 8 per cent lesser fluorine. Within individual metabolism discrepancies, the agreement was very close in the percentage retention obtained by either method of working the fluorine balances, though the indirect method was during the life period, full four months before the same balance was done directly in the carcase of the animals. These duplicate values obtained for fluorine retention, by entirely two different methods of approach showed the lower retention of fluorine in bone- meal-fed animal. Bonemeal amelioration From the live weight chart (Fig. 1), it will be seen clearly that bonemeal did not prevent retardation of growth in the case of group II animals. As the initial one ounce dose of bonemeal was found to be ineffective the dosage was in- creased to 2 ounces and finally to 3 ounces per day during the experiment but to no avail. The inherent smell of bonemeal which became too repellent even at 3 ounce dosage in the concentrate mixture was the chief factor, which stood against any further increase in bonemeal dosage. Anyway to see whether the bonemeal supple- ment was adequate in supplementing Ca and P, 40 days after the increase to 3 ounces of bonemeal, a mineral metabolism experiment for calcium and phosphorus was conducted on the six calves for four days. The intake, excretion and balance of these two essential elements are summarised in Table VII. TABLE VII Consolidated balance table for calcium and phosphorus Calf No. Ingested in gm. Excreted in gm. Balance CaO P2O5 CaO P2O5 CaO P2O5 Group I 1 36.69 30.21 30.38 22.97 +6.31 +7.24 2 35.15 29.72 34.85 26.00 +0.30 +3.72 Group II 3 31.43 28.34 29.56 23.05 +1.87 +5.29 4 30.69 28.05 32.47 27.04 192 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-II [Vol. XXV, Part III, From the data presented in Table VII, it will be seen that CaO and P2O5 were much more than what was normally required for the Group I and II animals, while Group III animals received much below the normal standards, though in a state of positive balance in regard to P2O5 Thus, the experiment clearly showed that no further increase in bonemeal dosage was necessary for Group II animals, for they were receiving more than the stipulated normal standards for young growing bovines for the elements CaO and P2O5 (viz. 20 grams P2O5 and 20 grams CaO per day). Thus bonemeal, though fed in dosages much higher than required, did not prevent symptoms like bone exostosis, overgrown hoofs, etc. from developing in Group II animals due to fluorine feeding. The only point in favour of bonemeal feeding was the lesser storage of fluorine in the system as pointed out under 'Fluorine Metabolism'. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS The results obtained in the present experiment are discussed under the following main headings: 1. Pathological effects of fluorine feeding 2. Physiological effects of fluorine feeding 3. Improvement by bonemeal feeding 1. Pathological effects of fluorine feeding: Du Toit et al., [1932] induced fluorine intoxication in adult cattle by sodium fluoride feeding and noted inhibition of growth, poor milk yield, impaired gait, pronounced infant mortality, bone exostosis and swollen joints. While Taylor [1929], and Reed and Huffman [1930] also obtained the same symptoms of fluorine intoxication and irregular wearing down of the teeth, by feeding rock phosphate. Similarly Phillips, Hart and Bohsted [1934] also induced fluorosis by rock phosphate feeding and noted in addition to the above pathological effects, degeneration of the parenchymatous organs. Roholm [1937] by feeding cryolite and sodium fluoride obtained all the symptoms of fluorine in- toxication in all its transitional forms between the osteomalacic and osteosclerotic condition. The symptoms of fluorine intoxication observed in this study on South Indian calves were in close agreement with previous studies. In man, the most prominent symptom noticed was the mottling of teeth, while in rats, overgrown incisors and claws were equally pronounced [Roholm, 1937], but in cattle, teeth do not seem to figure so prominently in the intoxication symptom. Apart from wearing down irregularly and turning chalky in advanced toxicosis, mottling was not observed in the present study either in the deciduous or permanent teeth. However, the most prominent and as striking a symptom as mottled teeth in man, was the overgrown and twisted condition of the hoofs in growing cattle. Next in prominence, was the bone exostosis of the long bones in the limbs and ankylosis. Anorexia and inanition was a common invariable symptom observed both in this study as also in other studies by previous workers on induced fluoriosis. Work done in adult animals since 1941 at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, [Majumdar, Ray and Sen, 1946] has largely confirmed these pathological symptoms of fluorine feeding.
September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 193 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Periodic concentration of calcium in the blood serum of experimental animals.
194 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-II [Vol. XXV, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Periodic concentration of inorganic phosphocus in the blood of experimental calves.
September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 195 Necropsy had revealed in the present study that only the intestines, the small one in particular, was badly irritated and congested, while the parenchymatous organs revealed no abnormality microscopically, though very much shrunk and undersized. 2. Physiological effect of fluorine feeding: (a) Blood inorganic phosphorus: Price [1932] noted a general disturbance in the mineral content of blood when fluorine was fed in high concentrations. With regard to blood inorganic phosphorus, the results so far obtained by previous workers were inconclusive. In some cases a rise in blood phosphorus [Shortt et al., 1937; Phillips, 1932] had been noted, while in some others a fall [Parlovic and Bogdanorice, 1932] and in many cases no change from normal content of blood phosphorus [Biester et al., 1936; Greenwood et al., 1934; Hauck et al., 1933; Roholm et al., 1937; Majumdar et al., 1943] had been re- corded. The present study agreed with the latter finding, as no change from normal was met with in the course of the experiment. (b) Serum calcium: This, though definitely noted to be reduced in acute toxicosis [Gerschmann, 1930; Jodlbauer, 1932; Pavlovic and Bogdanovic, 1932] yet in chronic or sub-acute toxicosis, was rarely found to vary from normal [Biester et al., 1936; Greenwood et al., 1934; Hauck et al., 1933; Roholm et al., 1937]. But in some cases, however, a moderate decrease in serum calcium even in chronic intoxi- cation had been noted [Phillips, 1932]. A rise in serum calcium in chronic intoxi- cation had also been recorded [Shortt et al., 1937]. But the periodical estimations of serum calcium made in this experiment showed no variation from normal due to fluorine intoxication. Majumdar, Ray and Sen [1943] have since shown from their work on bulls that there is no change in either Ca, P or Mg content of the serum due to fluorine feeding. This confirms our findings made in 1941 and presented in this study. (c) Blood fluorine: Du Toit et al., [1932] reported that fluorine content of the blood in bovines varied with the fluorine in the ration, it being 0.17 mg. per 100 cc. blood in controls and 0.60 mg. per 100 cc. blood in fluorine-fed bovines. Workers at the Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar [Majumdar, Ray and Sen, 1943], have reported a blood fluorine concentration similar to Du Toit et al., [1932]. This investigation on calves, however, showed the normal value for cattle to be nearly 1 to 2 mg. per 100 cc. blood and the feeding of fluorine per os did not increase the blood fluorine values. This high value in the normal content was probably due to the high 'native' fluorine in the feeds of this locality. (d) Musculature: Death occurred in the fluorine-fed experimental animals in the present study after considerable muscular twitchings, convulsions and muscular rigidity. The brain and musculature were found to contain only slightly increased amounts of fluorine due to fluorine feeding but most of the stored fluorine was concentrated in the bones only. The greater deposition of fluorine in the bones has also been reported by Wolff and Kerr [1938] in humans, by Majumdar, Ray and Sen [1943] in Hill bulls of India and by Wadhwani [1953] in rats. Hence this precludes any possibility of poisoning from the meat, if ingested by man. In fact, the flesh of the fluorine-fed calves was wholly consumed by the local menials with no deleterious effect being felt.
196 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-II [Vol. XXV, Part III, (e) Mineral metabolism: McClure and Mitchell [1931] concluded from experi- ments on rats and pigs that calcium retention was probably reduced by fluorine feeding. Similarly Lanz and Smith [1934] found in rats that fluorine rats excreted much more calcium and phosphorus than the controls and the retention of these two important minerals were very much reduced due to fluorine feeding. So also Du Toit et al., [1937] reported decreased retention in rats, of both calcium and phosphorous but in bovines they noted slight increase in calcium retention and pronounced decrease in phosphorus retention. But Rek [1935] found no such uniform effect on rabbits. The mineral meta- bolism experiment conducted on the six experimental calves showed no difference from the normal variation either in excretion or balance due to fluorine feeding. The result of the experiment can be seen in Table VIII. TABLE VIII Fluorine metabolism in the experimental animals (in mg.) September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 197 TABLE VIII198 FLUORINE INTOXICATION-II [Vol. XXV, Part III, 26 per cent was retained, whereas in the case of calf No. 5, 40 grams out of the 119 grams fed was retained, i.e. 34 per cent retention (cf. Table VI). Wadhwani [1953] has shown in rats that the fluorine retention was 57.6 per cent of that absorbed as against 43.9 per cent of that absorbed by animals placed on diets deficient in Ca and P. But he contends that the F-toxicity was less in the higher F-retained group. This lower retention of F in the Ca and P deficient group is exactly the reverse of our observation in this study. Confirmation of our work is, however, seen in the work of Lawrenz and Mitchell [1941] with rats and in the work of Majumdar, Ray and Sen [1943] where an increase in dietary calcium depressed the retention of fluorine. Improvement by bonemeal feeding Lawrenz and Mitchell [1939, 1941] had shown by separate studies on the effect of dietary calcium and phosphorus on the assimilation of fluorine that fluorine retention was depressed from 13 to 16 per cent due to dietary calcium and that dietary phosphorus does not modify appreciably the total retention of fluorine. A similar finding was reported by Ranganathan also [1941]. In the present study, bonemeal had failed to prevent the symptoms of fluorosis, particularly exostosis, ankylosis, and overgrown hoofs, from making their appearance. It had only caused an increased excretion of fluorine and consequently lesser storage than the 'no bone- meal' group animals. This factor combined with the correction of the phosphorus deficiency present in the fluorosis affected areas of the Ceded Districts [Mariaku- landai and Venkataramaiah, 1939-41] can result in some improvement. Calf No. 4 retained only three-fourth of what calf No. 5 had retained. And so, it may be possible in a place where the fluorine content of water was near about the toxic level, i.e. 1 p.p.m., and animal with bonemeal supplement can escape toxicity as it will be retaining only three-fourth of what another animal with no bonemeal supplement would normally retain. SUMMARY 1. Fluorosis was experimentally induced in four calves by sodium fluoride feeding in water for over a period of 300 days. Chronic fluorine intoxication symp- toms, like cachexia, anorexia, inanition, ankylosis, bone exostosis and overgrown hoofs were produced. 2. Fluorine feeding was found to produce symptoms chiefly in the bones, hoofs and alimentary canal. 3. Fluorine feeding was found to have no effect on the normal blood content of (a) inorganic blood phosphorus; (b) serum calcium; and (c) blood fluorine. Fluo- rine ingestion also had no effect on the retention of CaO and P2O5 Fluorine was found to be stored predominantly in the bones. 4. Bonemeal supplements to fluorine-fed calves were found to cause perceptible lower retention of fluorine. The bonemeal-fed calf retained approximately three- fourth of what the fluorine group animal retained. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The work was done from 1939 to 1942 under the Madras Animal Nutrition Scheme which was financed by the Imperial (now Indian) Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi.
September 1955] A. MARIAKULANDAI AND P. VENKATARAMAIAH 199 REFERENCES Anonymous (1931). Iowa Agric. Exp. Sta. Ann. Rep., 52 Biester, H. E.,Greenwood, D. A. and Nelson, V. E. (1936). North Amer. vet., 17, 38, Cited by Green- wood Brandl, J. and Tappeiner, H. (1891). Z. Biol. 28, 518, Cited by Roholm Du Toit, P. J., Malan, A. I. Groenewald, J. W. and DeKock, G. V. D. W. (1932). 18th Rep. Dir. Vet. Services and Anim. Husb. Onderstepoort, Pretoria, II. 805 Du Toit, P. J., Smuts, D. B., Malan, A. I. (1937). Onderstepoort J. vet. Sci. 8, 359, Gautrelet, J. and Mallie, H. (1906). C. R. Soc. Biol. 50, 714, Cited by Roholm Gerschmann, R. (1930). C. R. Soc. Biol. 104, 411. Chem. Abstr. 25, 2483, 1931 Gottleib, L. and Grant, B. (1931). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. 29, 1293. Greenwood, D. A., Hewitt, E. A. and Nelson, V. E. (1934). Proc. Iowa Acad. Sci. 41, 143 Hauck, H. M., and Steenbock, H. (1933). Amer. J. Physiol. 103, 489 EFFECT OF FEEDING ALKALI AND WATER-TREATED CEREAL STRAWS ON MILK YIELD* By K. SAHAI, P. N. JOHRI and N. D. KEHAR, Animal Nutrition Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, U. P. (Received for publication on 18th January 1955) IN a previous article, Kehar [1954] pointed out that the feeding of alkali-treated straws was, in general, beneficial for the growth of young animals. It was also observed that in places where the plane of nutrition was low, the feeding of alkali- treated straws accentuated the rate of growth and showed a significant saving of time for the gain of 100 lb. in body weight. Encouraged by these findings it was decided to study the effect of alkali and water-treated straw on milk yield by simple feeding experiments in gowshalas, pinjrapoles and private farms. It was decided that during the course of experimentation, except introducing the particular straw, untreated and treated for the control and experimental groups respectively, the routine procedure practised in these places in regard to the feeding and manage- ment of animals, should be maintained undisturbed. The investigation was con- ducted in several centres representing wheat and paddy zones. From the data arising out of these experiments, the economies of large scale feeding on alkali and water-treated straws was worked out. In the present com- munication the results obtained on milch animals are presented. EXPERIMENTAL Selection of animals Apparently healthy animals, more or less identical with regard to age, live- weight, period and number of lactations, breed and other conditions, were selected and divided into two groups of six each. The animals in the control group were fed on the farm ration containing untreated straw. The same dietetic prescription was followed for the experimental groups, except that alkali or water-treated straw was fed in place of the untreated straw. The supplementary feeding stuffs were the same in both the groups, depending on the availability of the material on the farms. During the course of the experiment all the animals were weighed every week and the record of food consumption and daily milk yield was regularly main- tained. Any untoward symptoms exhibited by the animals during the experi- mental period were also recorded. The observations extended over a full lactation period.*This investigation was carried out under the auspices of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. 201 27 AR/55 7
202 ALKALI-TREATED STRAW [Vol. XXV, Part III, Selection of centres The centres selected for studying the effect of alkali-treated straw on growth of young animals [Kehar, loc. cit.] were used for these experiments also. It was, however, realised by experience at these four centres that the quantity and quality of the concentrates fed to the animals were very much dependant on their availability and prevailing prices. As a result, the ration, more often than not, did not conform to any scientific formulation. It was well recognised that milk secretion is very susceptible to variations with the current nutrition of milch animals. If the concentrate feeding happens to be haphazard, the trend of milk secretion will be erratic and under such circumstances the relative merit of treated and untreated straw will be difficult to assess. Thus, to make this investigation wider in its application, it was felt that certain amount of controlled feeding was imperative. Unfortunately, however, to introduce this control, one was to upset the routine practice followed at the farms which was neither considered practicable at this stage nor did it form a part of the technical programme. Apart from the feeding difficulties, there are other important factors associated with milk record- ing. In most of these farms, the weaning is not practised. The calves are always allowed to suckle preparatory to milking. The quantity of milk suckled is difficult to assess, as it varies with the whims and fancies of the milkers. In view of these difficulties it was proposed that one experiment with such animals might be carried out at the Animal Nutrition Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, which would be similar to the field centres but would be free from such uncontrolled factors as mentioned above, and would have the advantage of close supervision. The number and type of animals used as also the duration of experiment (Table I) differed at different centres. The number and type of animals selected for the experiment was determined by their availability and although the experiment was intended for full lactation, the reason for different observation periods at different centres was that, if in one group one animal went dry, its counterpart in other group or groups was also discontinued. TABLE I Number and type of animals used and the duration of experiment Centre Duration of experi- ment (in weeks) Straw used Number and type of animals Cows Buffaloes Untreated straw group Alkali- treated straw group Water- washed straw group Untreated straw group Alkali- treated straw group Water- washed straw group Rampur 10 Wheat 5 5 .. .. .. .. Puri 21 Paddy 6 6 .. .. .. .. Sodepur 11 do. 6 6 .. .. .. .. Izatnagar 14 do. 3 3 3 3 3 3 Sardarnagar 10 do. 3 3 3 3 3 3
September 1955] K. SAHAI, P. N. JOHRI AND N. D. KEHAR 203 Treatment of straw The procedure adopted for the treatment of straw with dilute alkali was the same as reported earlier by Kehar [1953 and 1954]. Water washing of the straws was carried out in the same tanks and by the same procedure except that alkali was not added to water. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS Average straw consumption In all the centres, the animals were given free access to straw after they had consumed their scheduled allowance of concentrate and green fodder. The animals at Puri were stall fed, whereas those at Rampur, Sodepur, Izatnagar and Sardar- nagar were let out for grazing also. The average consumption of straw by the animals of the experimental and control groups at different centres is summarised in Table II. TABLE II Average straw consumption in pounds per animal per day in different centres Centre Type of straw Alkali treated straw group Water-washed straw group Uutreated-straw group Cows Buffaloes Cows Buffaloes Cows Buffaloes Rampur Wheat straw 8.0 .. .. .. 8.0 .. Puri Rice straw 14.0 .. .. .. 14.0 .. Sodepur do. 8.0 .. .. .. 6.0 .. Izatnagar do. 9.5 11.8 9.5 11.5 9.5 11.5 Sardarnagar do. 11.5 12.0 11.5 12.8 11.5 12.5 It is apparent from the data in Table II that the consumption of treated and untreated-straw was almost the same. The treated straw was, however, preferred as the experimental group animals always took less time in eating than the control group. Milk yield Milk data collected at centres other than Izatnagar could not be considered as scientifically accurate due to their being affected by various extraneous factors such as the allowance of free suckling, collection of data from farm registers instead of being recorded by the supervisors, and the most important of all, the uncontrolled and unspecified nutritional levels at various centres. Accordingly, it was felt that the milk yield data collected at Izatnagar alone, which did not suffer from any of the above disabilities, should be subjected to statistical analysis. The particulars of the animals selected at Izatnagar as also the data in regard to milk yield of cows and buffaloes at this centre are given in Tables III, IV and V.
204 ALKALI-TREATED STRAW [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE III Particulars of animals selected at Izatnagar centre Animal No. Breed Order of lactation Live- weight in lb. Date of calving Milk yield in lb. Ration Remarks Control Group Cows 1 Hariana 2 660 6-4-46 1.9 1. Paddy straw 10 lb. After third week the animals were allow- ed to go out for grazing. 2 do. 3 530 13-5-46 8.2 2. Green fodder 15 lb. for 3 weeks and 10 lb. for the remaining 11 weeks. 3 do. 3 740 3-6-46 16.7 3. Conc. Mix. 1½ lb. for maintenance and 1 lb. for every two lb. milk. 4. Grazing 5. Salt 2 oz. Buffaloes 1 Murrah 4 1,250 10-4-46 17.1 1. Paddy straw 12 lb. 2 do. 2 1,140 15-4-46 17.0 2. Green fodder 20 lb. for 3 weeks and 19 lb. for the remaining 3 weeks. 3 do. 3 950 29-4-46 16.7 3. Conc. Mix. 2½ lb. for maintenance and 1 lb. for every 2 lb. milk. 4. Grazing 5. Salt 2 oz.
September 1955] K. SAHAI, P. N. JOHRI AND N. D. KEHAR 205 Alkali-treated group Cows 1 Hariana 2 550 10-4-46 5.0 Same as in the control group except that alkali-treated straw was substituted for untreated straw. 2 do. 3 650 3-5-46 9.1 3 do. 3 770 20-6-46 15.7 Buffaloes 1 Murrah 4 1,220 2-4-46 19.7 2 do. 2 1,160 12-4-46 16.4 3 do. 3 940 24-4-46 17.9 Water-washed group Cows 1 Hariana 2 560 12-4-46 5.2 Same as in the control group except that water-treated straw was substituted for untreated-straw. 2 do. 3 630 18-5-46 9.4 3 do. 3 700 28-5-46 18.1 Buffaloes 1 Murrah 4 1,240 4-4-46 18.3 2 do. 2 1,150 10-4-46 15.1 3 do. 3 930 20-4-46 13.0
206 ALKALI-TREATED STRAW [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE IV Weekly milk yield of cows in pounds expressed as average per day at Izatnagar centre Weeks Control group Average Alkali-treated straw group Average Water-washed straw group Average 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 0 1.9 8.1 16.7 8.9 5.0 9.1 15.7 9.9 5.2 9.4 18.1 10.9 1 1.9 8.2 16.7 8.9 4.2 9.0 17.6 10.3 4.7 10.5 18.7 11.3 2 1.9 9.6 18.3 9.6 3.9 10.7 18.0 10.9 4.3 11.1 20.6 12.0 3 1.6 9.6 15.9 9.0 3.9 10.9 17.4 10.7 4.0 12.1 19.8 12.0 4 2.3 8.8 15.9 9.0 3.9 10.3 17.3 10.5 4.1 11.5 20.8 12.1 5 2.2 9.6 15.1 9.0 4.3 11.0 16.1 10.5 5.5 12.0 18.1 11.9 6 2.5 9.4 13.8 8.6 5.0 9.9 14.2 9.7 5.2 10.6 17.0 10.9 7 3.1 9.1 14.6 8.9 5.0 9.1 14.9 9.7 5.1 9.8 19.0 11.3 8 3.0 8.5 13.0 8.2 4.4 9.8 14.7 9.6 4.3 8.3 16.7 9.8 9 2.6 7.2 12.9 7.6 4.4 8.0 15.2 9.9 4.0 6.1 15.3 8.5 10 3.1 7.0 14.9 8.3 4.1 8.6 15.0 9.2 5.1 6.9 15.6 9.2 11 2.1 3.3 12.4 5.9 3.8 8.0 15.7 9.2 4.5 5.4 15.4 8.4 12 1.9 5.9 11.6 6.5 4.1 8.5 13.5 8.7 3.6 5.2 11.6 6.8 13 1.4 5.4 8.3 5.0 3.9 7.0 12.0 7.6 3.6 5.2 10.9 6.6 14 1.5 4.0 8.3 4.6 4.0 6.7 12.9 7.9 3.7 5.9 7.4 5.7
September 1955] K. SAHAI, P. N. JOHRI AND N. D. KEHAR 207 TABLE V Weekly milk yield of buffaloes in pounds expressed as average per day at Izatnagar centre Weeks Control group Alkali-treated straw group Water-washed straw group 1 2 3 Average 1 2 3 Average 1 2 3 Average 0 17.1 17.0 16.7 16.9 19.7 17.9 16.4 18.0 18.3 15.1 13.0 15.5 1 17.1 17.8 17.3 17.6 19.5 15.4 16.4 17.1 18.1 15.6 15.5 16.4 2 15.9 15.7 15.1 16.5 22.0 17.7 17.7 19.1 17.6 13.1 15.4 15.4 3 15.2 15.5 14.6 15.4 19.5 13.9 14.4 15.9 17.6 12.3 15.6 15.2 4 16.8 15.6 15.4 15.1 22.3 15.1 16.3 17.9 18.1 12.3 15.4 15.3 5 16.3 15.4 15.7 15.5 22.6 14.9 17.3 18.3 17.5 12.4 14.7 14.9 6 16.6 16.9 15.3 15.4 22.2 13.5 17.1 17.6 17.8 12.2 15.0 15.0 7 16.0 16.3 14.0 16.1 21.1 12.9 16.5 16.8 18.7 9.9 14.7 14.4 8 16.3 16.3 15.2 15.2 21.0 13.5 16.1 16.9 18.6 9.9 14.8 14.4 9 15.9 16.2 14.4 15.8 21.5 13.2 15.9 16.9 17.6 9.7 13.8 13.4 10 15.8 15.4 14.1 15.3 20.8 13.2 15.9 16.6 15.9 8.3 13.8 12.7 11 15.8 14.1 13.1 14.8 18.9 11.9 15.7 15.5 16.5 7.6 11.3 11.8 12 14.8 14.5 12.7 13.6 18.1 12.2 14.8 15.0 13.7 7.8 13.0 11.5 13 14.7 11.6 11.3 13.6 19.1 11.7 14.4 15.1 14.3 5.0 11.4 10.2 14 14.1 12.5 10.0 11.5 18.6 10.9 14.0 14.5 15.4 8.1 11.0 11.4
208 ALKALI-TREATED STRAW [Vol. XXV, Part III, Similar data were collected for other centres also, but since these have not been subjected to statistical analysis, they have not been reported here. Like other centres the milk data for Izatnagar centre also referred to unknown lactation numbers of some animals. It is well-known that milk yield depends a good deal on the lactation number. The randomisation of this factor, as has been done in the present case, has, therefore, increased the inherent variation in the data but has not made the application of a statistical test invalid. The results of statistical analysis of the data are presented in Table VI. TABLE VI Analysis of variance of milk data from feed trials on cows, collected at Izatnagar Source of variation Analysis of variance table for yields from cows d.f. M. S. (lb.)2 Between weeks 10 7.3501 Between groups 2 177.3786 Interaction between weeks and groups 20 1.1798 Between feeds 2 60.9811** Interaction between feeds and groups 4 41.0784 Error 60 0.9439 TOTAL 98 Standard error of difference between two feed means =0.239 Critical difference for such means=0.239 x 1.96 =0.468 Means of feed Alkali-treated straw Control Water-washed straw 17.15 15.67 14.43 All different significantly
September 1955] K. SAHAI, P. N. JOHRI AND N. D. KEHAR 209 Analysis of variance of milk data from feed trials on buffaloes, collected at Izatnagar Source of variation Analysis of variance table for yields from baffaloes d.f. M. S. (lb.)2 Between weeks 10 8.9712 Between groups 2 1293.1280 Interaction between weeks and groups 20 40.9620 Between feeds 2 41.8771** Interaction between feeds and groups 4 3.7906 Error 60 0.5633 TOTAL 98 Standard error of difference between two feed means =.185 Critical difference for such means=1.85 X 1.96 =.363 Feed means Water-washed straw Alkali-treated straw Control 10.67 9.95 8.46 All significantly different. It will be seen from the above analysis of variance that there appears to be significant difference between feeds, no pair being of equal effect. The feed effects, when tested against their critical differences, can be arranged in the following descending order of efficacy. Cow milk. Alkali-treated straw: control: water-washed straw group. Buffalo milk. Water-washed straw: alkali-treated straw: control. It can be seen that in so far as the augmentation of both cow and buffalo milk is concerned, the alkali-treated straw proved better than the untreated straw but the results in respect of water-washed straw were not homogeneous for the two types of milk. It proved best for buffalo milk and worst for cow milk. This is possibly due to one cow in the water-washed group having a severe attack of foot and mouth disease while another had mastitis. Economics of alkali and water-treated straw feeding Since the only variant in the feeding trial is the treated and untreated straw, the economic appraisal will obviously hinge round the gain in the form of augmented amount of milk against the cost of treatment. 27 AR/55 8
210 ALKALI-TREATED STRAW [Vol. XXV, Part III, It has been shown by Kehar [1954] that if the cost of untreated straw is taken to be Rs. 2 a maund, the cost of alkali treated straw works out at Rs. 4-6-0 a maund. Calculations, on a similar basis, indicate that the cost of water-washed straw would be Rs. 2-10-0 a maund. Calculating the cost of feeding the processed straw in relation to the augmented yield of milk, it was found that the net profit resulting from the feeding of processed straw was only marginal. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS General observations recorded during the feeding regime at various centres are briefly given below: Rampur. Feeding trials were started on the 21st June 1945, on the dairy cows of Messrs. Govin Brothers. Soon after the experiment made any headway, the experimental animals were attacked by foot and mouth disease, and, in course, it was found that no useful purpose would be served by continuing with the affected animals. A fresh batch of 10 cows was selected and the experiment was restarted on the 10th August 1945. The majority of the animals in the new batch, although otherwise suitable for the experiment, were unfortunately almost half way through their lactation period. The duration of the experimental period could not, therefore, be what was visualized. Though some of the animals were in milk for more than 10 weeks, as one of the animals of the experimental group went dry, the observations for 10 weeks only were taken into consideration. Puri. The observations at Puri were conducted on the dairy cows of the local gowshala. Nothing untoward happened at this centre. Though the experiment ran for 32 weeks the observations for 21 weeks were only considered as one animal went dry in the 22nd week. Sodepur. The observations at Sodepur were carried out on the dairy cows of the Pinjrapole. Observations for 11 weeks were only taken into consideration when all the animals were in milk. Izatnagar. The observations were conducted on cows and buffaloes at the Animal Nutrition Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar. The plan of work was almost the same as adopted at the other centres. Due to paucity of sufficient number of suitable cows, nine cows and nine buffaloes were taken. Each group thus consisted of three cows and three buffaloes. This, however, provided an opportunity to study the reaction of buffaloes also towards the treated straw. After 14 weeks, some of the animals of the experimental group were affected by a severe outbreak of foot and mouth disease. Later on, all the animals were naturally affected. Though some of the animals were in milk for 19 to 26 weeks after the feeding of processed straw was started, observations for 14 weeks were only taken into consideration when all the animals were in milk. Sardarnagar. The experimental observations were conducted on cows and buffaloes at Sir Surendra Singh Majithia's farm. The pian of investigation was practically the same as adopted at Izatnagar. Soon after the experiment was started, an outbreak of foot and mouth disease was observed and the experiment was stopped for some time. After six months the work was restarted with a new batch of animals, and feeding observations were continued for 10 weeks when all the animals were in milk.
September 1955] K. SAHAI, P. N. JOHRI AND N. D. KEHAR 211 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Earlier observations [Sen et al., 1942] in the Animal Nutrition Laboratories, Izatnagar, showed that alkali treatment increased the digestibility coefficient of total carbohydrates from 51 to 72 and from 57 to 76 for wheat and paddy straws res- pectively. This increased digestibility enhanced the total digestible nutrients in the straws to the extent of about 45 per cent. Further, it was also found that alkali treatment removes 70 to 80 per cent of the deleterious potassium oxalate in the straw, as a result of which the assimilation of calcium from a ration containing treated rice straw is materially improved. It was also shown that the feeding of treated straw affects greater utilization of protein. In view of these findings a developmental scheme was undertaken to study by simple feeding experiments, the practicability of using alkali-treated and water- washed wheat and paddy straws in the ration of milch animals under field conditions. These feeding experiments were thus carried out in the paddy straw area at the Sodepur pinjrapole in Bengal, the gowshala at Puri in Orissa, at the Animal Nutrition Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, and at Sir Surendra Singh Majithia's dairy farm at Sardarnagar in Uttar Pradesh. In the wheat straw area the dairy farm selected was that of Messrs. Govin Brothers at Rampur in Uttar Pradesh. It was decided that during the course of experimentation, except introducing the particular straw, untreated and treated for the control and experimental groups respectively, the routine practice in these piaces in regard to feeding and manage- ment of animals should remain undisturbed. Feeding trials showed that the palatability of the treated and untreated straw was almost the same with the only difference that the alkali-treated straw was preferred by the animals and they always took less time in eating their quota. As regards the effect of alkali-treated and water-washed straws on milk produc- tion, the data obtained at centres other than Izatnagar, lacking scientific precision, essentially, in view of (i) free suckling of calves for priming purposes, (ii) unscientific formulation of ration, and (iii) lack of control over milk records, have not been subject- ed to statistical analysis. The statistical analysis was, thus, confined to Izatnagar centre only which did not suffer from any of the above disabilities. The results have not been uniform for cow and buffalo milk yields particularly, in respect of the water-washed straw which proved best for buffalo milk while worst for cow milk. The economics of the feeding of these straws have been worked out and there appears to be only a small marginal profit (after deducting the cost of treatment of straws). In view of the non-uniform results for cows and buffaloes it is considered necessary to repeat the experiments on a larger scale under properly controlled conditions. From these findings, however, it appears that if one is only to consider in terms of milk augmentation, there is hardly any economic advantage. But considering the effect of the improved fodder, from which the deleterious substances have been removed, and the greater utilization of protein, it may be advisable to feed milch animals also with the treated straw. It may, however, be emphasized that the feeding of the treated straw can be undertaken with advantage on a large scale in Government or private farms, pin- jrapoles and gowshalas or in villages on co-operative basis where the number of animals
212 ALKALI-TREATED STRAW [Vol. XXV, Part III is hundred or above. The individual farmers could improve the straw by treating it in large earthen pots (kunds). In places where water is not abundantly available the straws could be soaked in water and the waste water could be used, as pointed out by Kehar [1953], by adding 0.5 per cent lime. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Grateful thanks are due to Sir Datar Singh, Sir Surendra Singh Majithia, Messrs. Govin Brothers, and the Directors, Veterinary Services, U. P., Orissa and Bengal, and the management of the pinjrapoles at Sodepur and gowshala at Puri for their wholehearted co-operation in extending every facility in executing this project. We take this opportunity of expressing our gratitude to the Statistician, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, for analysing the experimental data. The authors also express their appreciation of the assistance rendered by Messrs. Niamat Khan, Asgher Ali, S. L. Mukerjee and N. Patnaik, Supervisors at Rampur. Sardarnagar, Sodepur and Puri respectively. REFERENCES Kehar, N. D. (1953). Indian Fmg. II, 11, 14 HORMONES AND LACTATION By S. N. LUKTUKE, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 27th July 1954) (With one text-figure) STERILITY in cattle accounts for much of the wastage occurring in dairy herds throughout the world. The work on artificial induction of lactation by hormonal methods has opened a new era and it has become possible to make many unproductive animals produce milk. The aim of this article is to describe in brief as to how the mammary gland in a cow develops, what hormones are called into action for this development and initiation and maintenance of lactation, and how lactation can be produced artificially in dry barren cows. GROWTH OF THE MAMMARY GLAND The mammary gland is concerned with the production of milk. The structure of the udder reveals the presence of a net-work of milk ducts which have an outlet in the teat. It is composed of (i) alveoli, where the cells are actually involved in the production of milk, (ii) ducts, through which the manufactured milk is drained and is accumulated in the cistern and (iii) cistern (milk tank) in which the milk is stored temporarily prior to its letting down. The mammary glands are rudimentary in the immature females and remain so till puberty. At puberty they undergo striking change in size. The development continues till fourth or fifth lactation when the udder attains full size. The development of the mammary gland, the initiation of milk production and maintenance of lactation is controlled by a wonderful co-ordination between various endocrine glands. These endocrine or ductless glands produce hormones which are carried by blood or lymph vessels from their place of manufacture to the different parts of the body. The endocrine glands which are concerned with the development of the udder and the initiation and maintenance of lactation are as follows: (i) Pituitary [Hypophysis]. This lies beneath the brain and regulates the activity of the other endocrine glands by means of its own hormones. (ii) Ovary. This gland in addition to the production of ova (eggs), also produces a hormone called oestrogen. This is responsible for producing desire for mating, popularly known as 'heat'. (iii) Corpus luteum. (Yellow body in the ovary)214 HORMONES AND LACTATION [Vol. XXV, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Hormones responsible for the development of the mammary gland and initiation and main- tenance of lactation. 1. Adrenocorticotrophin influences lactation through adrenals. 2. Gonadotrophins (F.S.H. and L.H.) influence the development and function of gonads. 3. Oxytocin aids in discharge of formed milk. 4. Prolactin (Lactogenic hormone) initiates and maintains lactation. 5. Mammotrophins (ASEPTEMBER 1955] S. N. LUKTUKE 215 (v) Adrenals. These lie near the kidney and produce adrenaline and cortical hormones. (vi) Placenta. This acts as an endocrine gland during pregnancy. As already mentioned, the heifer in calf, for the first time, has a very little development of the alveoli in her udder up to the fourth month of gestation. After this period the level of oestrogens in the blood system rises, the alveolar develop- ment begins and this progresses until the end of pregnancy. Progesterone, the hormone of the corpus luteum, is responsible for the development of the duct system in the udder. Oestrogen and progesterone, in conjunction with two hormones from the anterior portion of the hypophysis (mammogenic duct growth hormone and mammogenic lobule-alveolar growth hormone), are concerned with the growth of the udder and if there is a short supply of any one of these hormones, full development of the mammary gland does not take place. At the time of birth, the level of oestrogen in relation to progesterone is very high and this gives rise to the onset of parturition. At this time, a hormone is liberated from the posterior part of the pituitary. This is called as oxytocin. This hormone assists in the contraction of walls of the uterus at the time of parturition and helps the expulsion of foetus from the uterus. During advanced pregnancy, a hormonal imbalance is created because of the excess of oestrogenic hormones secreted by the placenta, resulting in the arrest of milk pro- duction. Placenta thus checks the milk secretion and at parturition this check is removed. When the young one is born, the pituitary gland is called upon to produce a hormone prolactin, which causes the secretion of milk in the developed udder. Oxytocin controls the ejection of milk from teats. Suckling of teats by calf sets up certain stimuli which influence the liberation of oxytocin through the central nervous system, and increases the glandular pressure to squeeze out the milk from alveoli and smaller ducts. Similar stimuli are produced by rattling of milk buckets in a milking shed, washing the udder with warm water, etc. Stimuli of a different nature such as fright cause the secretion of adrenaline which prevents the ejection of milk. A constant production of the lactogenic hormone216 HORMONES AND LACTATION [Vol. XXV, Part III, 1,000 cows and an equal number of control cows from a panel of 38 different farms for giving a wide trial to synthetic thyroxine. The cows were daily fed with a fixed dose of this hormone during the period of experimentation. In this investigation, it was found that the increase in milk yield resulting during the period of hormonal treatment was completely negatived by a shortening of lactation period, showing thereby that this treatment was unprofitable. ARTIFICIAL INDUCTION OF LACTATION IN DRY BARREN COWS The hormones responsible for the development of udder during pregnancy have already been described. It is possible to reproduce this condition artificially with the use of oestrogenic hormones, so as to obtain milk from heifers and cows without the necessity of pregnancy. Oestrogens acting in conjunction with proges- terone (already present in the body) will stimulate the liberation of lactogenic hor- mones from the pituitary. If this hormone is administered to cows in milk, it will cause them to go dry, as the first action of the oestrogen is to influence the growth of the alveolar cells and then milk secretion. Stilboestrol is a cheap synthetic oestrogenic hormone available for the purpose of induction of artificial lactation in mature virgin heifers and dry barren cows. This drug is easily soluble in oil and is administered in the form of injections. These injections have got to be repeated several times before the lactation could be induced. To avoid this, stilboestrol tablets can be implanted in the subcutaneous tissue of the neck region of the cow. Two weeks after the implantation of the tablets, thin colostrom-like fluid appears in the teats. Normal lactation is initiated within three weeks after the treatment. The milk yield attains peak within 8.10 weeks when the withdrawal of implanted tablets is absolutely necessary. If the tablets are not removed, the hormone will act adversely on lactation and the animal will go dry much earlier. This induced lactation usually lasts for a period of 8.9 months. Experiments conducted at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, have revealed that this lactation will persist for a much longer time if the cow at the time of implantation of tablets has large cysts in her ovaries. In one such cow, the lactation persisted for over a period of six years, giving on an average 5 lb. of milk per day. Out of the three heifers and six Hariana cows in which lactation was produced artificially, the best response was shown by a cow which yielded 2324 lb. in 343 days, with a peak yield of 11 lb. per day. This was her second in- duced lactation. She had given 1245 lb. of milk in 209 days in the first induced lactation and 2910 lb. in 307 days in the preceding normal lactation. The important question which remains is about the composition of milk secreted by the mammary gland under artificial hormonal stimulation. It has been found that the initial colostrom-like fluid has a high oestrogen content but after about a week the lactation starts, milk becomes quite normal and absolutely safe for human consumption.
September 1955] S . N. LUKTUKE 217 HAZARDS IN THE APPLICATION OF HORMONAL METHOD Hormonal therapy may lead to certain complications in the animals. Often after treatment, the cows are seen constantly in heat and at times this results in rarification of pelvic bones. There is every likelihood that such cows get their pelvic bones fractured when they are jumped upon by other cows or bulls in the herd. If this hormone therapy is tried in normal cows, the chances for their conception become remote due to the endocrine imbalance created by the administration of hormones That is why this technique is not recommended for general field use. The veteri- narians should try to attempt to restore normal fertility in sub-fertile cows as far as possible. Artificial lactation may be attempted only in cows which have been diagnosed as absolutely sterile. It is, however, emphasised that only genetically heavy milkers, and not any scrub cows, can be expected to show good response to this treatment. 27 AR/55 10
STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA IN MADRAS II. A NEW SPECIES OF ECHINOSTOME CERCARIA* By C. T. PETER, G.M.V.C., PH.D., Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar. (Received for publication on 12th November 1954) (With one text-figure) THE main distinguishing character of the echinostome cercariae is the presence of collar spines. Sewell [1922] brought under Echinostome cercariae, the 'Megal- ura' group of Cort [1915] as its members possess many features in common with the typical echinostome larva, though they are not provided with collar spines. Among the echinostome larvae found in India, only Cercariae indicae xxiii Sewell, 1922 was known to occur previously in the city of Madras [Rao, 1932]. During the present investigations, four species of echinostome cercariae have been encountered. They are arranged below under the different divisions to which they belong together with their respective snail hosts: I. Echinatoides group of Sewell: (1) Cercaria nairi, n.sp., from Indoplanoribis exustus (Deshayes). II. Eehinata group of Sewell: (1) Cercaria echinostomi revoluti Beaver, 1937, from Limnaea luteola f. succinea (Deshayes). (2) Cercariae indicae xxiii Sewell, 1922, from Limnaea luteola f. typica (Lam- arck) and L. luteola f. succinea (Deshayes). III. 'Megalura' group of Cort: (1) Cercariae indicae iv Sewell, 1922, from Melanoides (plotia) scabra Muller and M. tuberculatus Muller. There is no previous record of the occurrence in India of the cercaria of Echino- stoma revolutum. The echinostome larva from Indoplanorbis exustus is a new species for which the name Cercaria nairi is proposed. INCIDENCE OF ECHINOSTOME CERCARIAE Table I shows the percentage of infection of the different species of echinostome cercariae in their primary snail hosts in Madras City. In Limnaea and Melanoides spp. of snails Echinostome infection was very high while in Indoplanorbis exustus it was comparatively low. Limnaea luteola f. succinea harboured two varieties of Echinostome cercariae while the other four species of snails had only one type each. Both Cercariae indicae iv and xxiii developed in two species of snails, though the two molluscan hosts of each larva belonged to the same genus, Melanoides in the former and Limnaea in the latter. *Part of a thesis approved by the University of Madras for the Degree of Master of Science. 27 AR/55 219 11
220 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE I Rate of occurrence of Echinostome Cercariae in the city of Madras Molluscan hosts Percentage of infection Species No. examined Cercaria nairi, n.sp. Cercariae indicae xxiii Sewell, 1922 Cercaria ech. revoluti Beaver, 1937 Cercariae indicae iv Sewell, 1922 Total Indoplanorbis exustus 3,863 0.2 .. .. .. 0.2 Limnaea luteola 901 .. 10.4 .. .. 10.4 f. typica L. luteola f. succinea 1,545 .. 1.4 0.8 .. 2.2 Melanoides (plotia) 211 .. .. .. 1.4 1.4 scabra M. tuberculatus 282 .. .. .. 9.6 9.6 Cercaria Nairi, N. Sp. Cercaria nairi, n.sp. (Fig. 1) is the only echinostome larva found developing in Indoplanorbis exustus (Deshayes) in Madras city. It is a very active swimmer and is propelled by the vigorous lashing movements of the tail. The creeping movements are accomplished by an alternate contraction and extension of the body, and are aided by two suckers. The general features are in conformity with those of the other echinostome larvae. The body is capable of considerable contraction and extension, more especially in the pre-acetabular region, while the tail is less so. When elongated, the body assumes the typical 'echinostome' shape but in a semi-contracted state it is pyriform, the widest portion being at about the level of the ventral sucker. The body and tail measurements in millimeters of specimens, both live and fixed, are given below: Specimens Body Tail Live contracted 0.219 X 0.158 0.368x0.045 extended 0.396x0.086 0.462x0.042 FormalinSeptember 1955] C. T. PETER 221 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Cercaria nairi, n.sp. Camera lucida drawing of the body. Organs of only one side are represented and cystogenous glands omitted. Key to abbreviations act222 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA [Vol. XXV, Part III, Both the body and tail are aspinose, except for the presence of 'collar-spines'. Eye-spots are absent. Beneath the cuticle of the body are present rounded or nearly ovoid cystogenous glands filled with rod-like bodies arranged in two or three bundle- like formation. The cercaria is provided with well-developed oral and ventral suckers. The oral sucker which occupies the anterior bluntly rounded extremity of the body is smaller than the ventral and is spherical in shape with a diameter of 0.045 mm. The anteriorly directed acetabulum is a large, heart-shaped highly muscular organ, situated at about two-thirds to three-quarters of the total body length from the anterior end. The radiating muscle fibres at the margin of the sucker give the appearance of a fencing or a frill. The organ is wider horizontally than antero-posteriorly and measures 0.050 by 0.059 mm. At the anterior end of the body behind the region of the oral sucker is a ridge which is in the form of a distinct collar, carrying a number of spines alround it except on the ventral aspect. There are 41 spines in allSeptember 1955] C . T. PETER 223 the body. It consists of a large, reniform posterior chamber and a small anterior one. The bladder opens out posteriorly on the dorsal surface of the body at the point of attachment of the tail, by a small excretory pore. Main excretory trunks or canals take their origin medially from the anterior chamber of the bladder. At first they are slightly sinuous and thick-walled, and pursue an outward and forward course to the sides of the acetabulum where they describe a lateral loop, after which they continue forward as very wide tubes lateral to the secretory glands. The dilated portions of the main vessels contain very large and conspicuous excretory granules, the number of which may vary from four to seven on either side. The granules are roughly oval in shape and are of different sizes, those occupying the middle region being larger. They are highly refractile and some of the bigger ones may exhibit one or two transverse lines denoting the fusion of smaller granules. Each main vessel on reaching the level of the pharynx becomes suddenly narrower and forms a loop (characteristic of all echinostome larvae) and passes backwards as a narrow tube to the acetabular region where it bifurcates into the anterior and posterior collecting tubules. The anterior collecting tubule divides into two branches, each one giving off three capillaries capped with flame cells, whereas the posterior collecting tubule divides into three branches each leading to a set of three flame cells. Thus, there are 15 flame cells on either side of the body, six connected with the anterior collecting tubule and nine with the posterior tubule, all of them occurring in groups of three. The flame cell arrangement of Cercaria nairi can be represented by the following formula: 2[(3+3)+(3+3+3)]=30. A longitudinal caudal canal which starts from the posterior aspect of the bladder extends through the greater part of the length of the tail. About one-sixth the distance from the root of the tail, this canal gives off a pair of lateral tubes which open out through minute pores. The genital organs are represented by two masses of round cells, a larger mass lying posterior to the acetabulum between it and the excretory bladder, and a smaller mass, probably representing the rudiments of the genital pore, occupying the narrow triangular space, bounded by the anterior margin of the acetabulum and the proximal portions of the two diverging caeca. The cercariae, like those of other echinostomes, develop and attain maturity in redia, which infest the digestive gland and sometimes the reproductive organs of the molluscan host. The affected organs of the snail are coloured orange-brown. The redia resembles in general those of the other allied members of the group. The mature ones contain golden yellow pigment granules in the body wall and measure on an average 1.96 X 0.21 mm., while the young or immature forms do not show any pigmentation and measure 0.380 X 0.073 mm. They are capable of independent movement. The anterior end is bluntly rounded, and about one-ninth of the total length from the extreme tip is a circular groove representing birth-pore. At about one-third the distance from the posterior end of the body are present the characteris- tic well-developed blunt ventro-lateral protrusions, known as the 'locomotor appen- dages' or 'ambulatory processes'. The terminal mouth-opening is in direct con- tinuation of the cavity of the globular pharynx which measures 0.04 mm. in diameter, This is succeeded by a sac-like gut filled with a dark reddish-brown granular content. In young specimens, the gut may extend posteriorly to the level of the ambulatory processes while in grown-up forms it stops short at a point behind the collar region. The proximal part of the gut is surrounded by a group of small granular salivary 27 AR/55 12
224 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA [Vol. XXV, Part III gland cells, the ducts of which are not clearly defined. A group of three flame cells are seen on either side of the body at about the level of the ambulatory processes. In the immature redia, the region of the body behind the gut is occupied by germ balls which in mature specimens develop into varying stages of cercariae filling up the available space inside the mother organism. The cercariae encyst within the primary molluscan host. Cysts are globular and transparent, measuring 0.149 mm. in diameter. Cercaria nairi exhibits all the characters of the 'Echinatoides' group as defined by Sewell [1922]. The only larva that bears a close resemblance to the present one is Cercariae indicae xlviii Sewell, 1922, belonging to the 'Echinatoides' group. However, Cercariae indicae xlviii is quite distinct from the one under study in the following specific features: The rod-shaped granules contained in the cystogenous cells are all arranged parallel to each other and do not occur in separate bundles, the peculiar refractile body found at the anterior region of the dorsal surface of the present cercaria is absent, the cephalic spination is entirely different: out of a total of 43 spines in all, 35 are arranged in a double row around the dorso-lateral region of the collar and remaining eight form 'angle' spines in two groups of four each, the secretory glands on either side consist of four cells instead of three in the present material, the excretory bladder is not divided into two compartments, and only 14 pairs of flame cells are present. SUMMARY Four species of echinostome cercariae are recorded from the city of Madras of which Cercaria nairi is described as a new species. The occurrence of the cercaria of Echinostoma revolutum (Froelich) in India is recorded for the first time. REFERENCES Beaver, P. C. (1937). Experimental studies on Echinostome revolutum (Froelich), a fluke from birds and mammals. Ill. Biol. Monogr., 15:1A REDESCRIPTION OF PARAMPHISTOMUM GOTOI FUKUI, AN INDIAN RECORD OF THE SPECIES By R. S. TANDON, M.Sc., Research Assistant [Helminthiasis Scheme, Indian Council of Agricultural Research] Lucknow University, Lucknow (Received for publication on 18th October 1954) (With five text-figures and one appendix) FUKUI [1926] described Paramphistomum gotoi as a rare parasite from the rumen of Bos taurus in Japan. Later Dawes [1936] recovered a few immature specimens from buffaloes in Malaya. While collecting amphistomes from the animals at the slaughter houses in Lucknow, a large number of specimens of this fluke were recovered on many occasions. It, thus, appears that this form is not uncommon in Lucknow. Further, the account given by earlier workers is not only inadequate but also defective in certain respects. Paramphistomum gotoi Fukui, 1926 The worms measure 4.828-10.6 mm. in length and 1.685-3.21 mm. in breadth. The cuticular papillae described by Fukui as extending over the body, were not found by Dawes. In the present specimens, there were numerous well-developed papillae both at the anterior and posterior ends of the body. The cuticle is modified into flattened spines at the margin of the mouth (Fig. 1, 2a and 2b) and continues as a thick lining in the oral sucker, and a ridge lining the oesophagus. The mouth is terminal and a large number of spines are present at its margin. The characteristic oral sucker is relatively large and conspicuous and is further divided into an anterior and posterior part (Fig. 1, 3). Many large papillae with flattened spines are present, as observed by Fukui and Dawes, in the anterior two- fifth of the oral sucker. In our specimens 20-30 papillae, each bearing 1-7 spines, are present on either side of the lumen of the oral sucker. The spines are hollow and triangular with flattened bases. The spines are also present in the posterior part of the oral sucker, but are smaller than those of the anterior part. In the terminal portion only small papillae are present. The length of the oral sucker is greater than its breadth, which is 0.77-1.28 mm. The posterior sucker is slightly larger than the oral sucker and measures 0.975-1.554 mm. in diameter. The oesophagus is slender and short and bears a muscular pad at its origin from the oral sucker. The lumen of the oesophagus is lined with a cuticle giving it a serrated appearance. The oesophagus is surrounded by muscular tissue and bears a large number of conical flattened cells all along its course. The intestinal caeca are folded (not alternately constricted and swollen as described by Dawes) and the folds are extended inwards upto the median line. The terminal ends of the caeca are dilated and curved inwards lying one behind the other. These dilatations measure 0.294-0.836 mm. in width. 27 AR/55 225 13
226 A REDESCRIPTION OF PARAMPHISTOMUM [Vol. XXV, Part III, The excretory system (Fig. 4) is typical of the amphistomes. The main excretory ducts begin on either side of the oesophagus near its origin. These ducts run posteriorly medial to the intestinal caeca to open into the elongated excretory bladder which opens on the dorsal side of the body through the excretory pore. Each main duct gives a median transverse duct slightly behind the intestinal bifurca- tion. These transverse ducts unite in the middle, giving the system a typical H-shaped appearance. The transverse ducts give out anteriorly two pairs of branches to the oesophagus. Besides these, the main ducts give off branches to the intestinal caeca, reproductive organs and other parts of the body, forming a net- work, like that described by Thapar and Sinha [1945] in the genus Olveria. The lymphatic system (Fig. 5) consists of only one pair of lateral longitudinal vessels, running medial to the intestinal caeca. Anteriorly each longitudinal vessel divides into three branches that surround the oral sucker. Posteriorly the main ducts cross the intestinal caeca and run on the sides to reach the acetabulum which is richly supplied on all sides by a large number of branches. The main ducts during their course give branches to the various organs of the body forming plexuses bound them. The testes are two in number, more or less spherical with slightly lobed margins and lie in the middle of the body. The anterior testes is generally smaller than the posterior. It measures 0.772-1.104 x 0.945-1.545 mm. in size. The posterior testis, lying just behind the anterior, measures 0.975-1.316 mm. X 1.085-1.6 mm. The vasa defferentia arising from the anterior margins of the two testes unite a little in front of the anterior testis to form the vas deferens. The vas deferens, after a short course, forms a muscular vesicula seminalis, which makes a few coils and leads into an elongated cirrus to open to the outside through the genital atrium situated near the intestinal bifurcation. The ovary is oval and is situated behind the testes in front of the acetabulum. The oviduct arises from the antero-lateral margin of the ovary. After a short course it meets the Laurer's canal and the common vitelline duct to form the oötype, which is surrounded by Mehlis' gland cells. The uterus emerges from the posterior end of the oötype, and after making a few coils behind the ovary it runs forward anteriorly to open at the female genital pore in the genital atrium. The eggs are oval and operculated and measure 0.1085-0.1209 mm. long and 0.0684- 0.0744 mm. broad (Fig. 6). The vitellaria consist of well-developed small follicular structures lying on the lateral sides of the body extending from the caecal bifurcation to the acetabulum. The Laurer's canal opens anterior to the excretory pore, as described by Dawes. Fukui described its opening behind the excretory pore, but Dawes explains this departure to variability of character; in none of our specimens, however, the opening was posterior to the excretory pore. A comparative table of characters showing variations pre-previous descriptions is given in Appendix I. Host. Bos bubalis Location. Rumen Locality. Lucknow
September 1955] R. S. TANDON 227 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. General anatomy ventral view. KEY TO ABBREVIATION ac. b.228 A REDESCRIPTION OF PARAMPHISTOMUM [Vol. XXV, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2a. Solid spines at the rim of the mouth. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2b. Same magnified. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2c. Hollow spines lining the lumen of the oral sucker.
September 1955] R. S. TANDON 229 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Longitudinal section through the mouth, oral sucker and oesophagus.
230 REDEBCRIPTION OF PARAMPHISTOMUM [Vol. XXV, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Excretory system
September 1955] R. S. TANDON 231 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5. Lymphatic system
232 A REDESCRIPTION OF PARAMPHISTOMUM [Vol. XXV, Part III, ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author was entrusted by Dr G. S. Thapar, the Officer-in-charge of the Helminthiasis Scheme, to redescribe the species and clear the incongruities existing on the morphology of these forms. The author is deeply indebted to Dr Thapar for entrusting this work to him and also for his guidance. He is also thankful to Dr Thapar for placing his personal library at the disposal of the author for consultation. The author wishes to express his gratitude to the Council for the financial assistance granted for this investigation. REFERENCES Baylis, H. A. (1929). A Manual of Helminthology, Medical and Veterinary, London, pp. 55-57 Dawes, B. (1936). On a collection of Paramphistomidae from Malaya, with a revision of the genera Paramphistomum Fisch., 1901 and Gastrothylax Poirier, 1883. Parasit. 28: 330-354 Fukui, T. (1926). Three new species of amphistomata from Mammals. J. Fac. Sci., Imp. Univ. Tokvo., sec. 4, 1: 97-113 September 1995] R. S. TANDON 233 APPENDIX I Comparison of the descriptions of P. gotoi Form described by Body length Body width Length Oral sucker Posterior 3/5 Acetbulum Intestinal caeca Muscular tissue at the begin- ning of oesophagus Opening of laurer's canal Eggs Anterior 2/5 Palillae Spines Papillae & spines Fukui 5-7.3 mm. 2-3 mm. 1/6 of the body length 15-20 3-10 on each papilla Papillae only present 1/5-1/4 of the body Wavy and stout (Neither dilated nor inturned) Not noted Posterior to the excretory pore Not describe Dawes 1.5-5.1 mm. Not given 1/5-1/4 of the body length Not signifi- cantly different Could not make out Makes no men- tion of it 1/6-1/5 of the body length Wavy and stout dilated at several places besides the terminal parts and are inturned at the ends Present Anterior to the excretory pore Got only immature forms Present author 4.82-10 mm. 1.68-3.21 mm. 1/4-1/6 of the body length 20-30 1.7 on each papilla Both Papillae & spines in the anterior and papillae only in the osteprior region 1/7-1/4 of the body length Wavy and stout dilated at terminal part and inturned at the ends Present Anterior to the excretory pore Oval and operculated 0.1085-0.12094 ×0.068-0.074 mm. 27 AR/55
OVARIAN ACTIVITY IN PREGNANT BUFFALOES By E. S. E. HAFEZ,* PH.D. (CANTAB.), Faculty of Agriculture, University of Cairo, Egypt (Received for publication on 22nd February 1955) (With Plate VI and two text-figures) IN Eutherian mammals, oogenesis occurs rhythmically throughout the sexual life in relation to the ovulation cycle. In the cow the right ovary is consistently heavier than the left [Reece and Turner, 1938]. This trend is apparent even before sexual maturity. In the cow, ovulation is more frequent in the right ovary [Asdell et al., 1949] while in the mare it is more prominent in the left [Amoroso et al., 1948]. The foetus is usually carried in the corresponding uterine horn. However, trans- uterine (internal) migration of the ovum has been reported in the pig, sheep, goat, cow, horse and certain members of Carnivora, Cheiroptera, Insectivora, Rodentia and Primates [Boyd et al., 1944]. Oestrus and the rhythm of reproductive organs are normally suspended during pregnancy. Meanwhile oestrus may occur during almost all stages of pregnancy as recorded in the ewe [Grant, 1934] and the cow [Wewey, 1952]. In most species, the corpus luteum is maintained, at least anatomically, during pregnancy. In the cow it is believed that the corpus luteum persists until parturi- tion and some days post-partum. Regression of the corpus luteum in the ewe starts long before the end of pregnancy [Voss, 1950]. Pregnancy will be maintained in this species after the removal of the corpus luteum at the first third of gestation [Casida and Warwick, 1945]. In the mare, however, the regression of the corpus luteum at the first month of pregnancy is associated with subsequent ovulations and formation of secondary corpora lutea [Amoroso et al., 1948]; this coincides with the high concentration of serum gonadotrophin. In twin pregnancies, the corpus luteum is smaller compared to single pregnancies [Kupfer, 1928]. The domestic buffalo, Bos (Bubalus) bubalis L., is a member of the ox-tribe, sub-family Bovinae. During non-pregnancy, spontaneous ovulation takes place every 21.14+0.72 days [Hafez, 1952a], the duration of oestrus being 28.47 hours [Hafez, 1954]. During pregnancy, oestrus is not manifested at all [Hafez, 1955] while it is expressed at 35 ± .01 days post-partum [Hafez, 1952b]. The physiology of reproduction in the buffalo has been reviewed and augmented [Hafez, 1952] and the anatomy of the reproductive tract has been investigated [Mansour, 1953]. The present work is a study of the anatomical changes in the ovaries of pregnant buffaloes with particular reference to the side of ovulation and conception and the macroscopic appearance of the corpora lutea and graafian follicles. * Present Address: Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury, Mass., U.S.A. 235 27 AR/55 15
236 OVARIAN ACTIVITY IN PREGNANT BUFFALOES [Vol. XXV, Part III, MATERIALS AND METHODS The material for this study was constituted of ovaries from non-pregnant and pregnant Egyptian buffaloes. Twenty-four pairs of ovaries from non-pregnant buffaloes represented different phases of the oestrus cycle. The phase of the oestrus cycle was determined by the macroscopic appearance of the ovaries. Large graafian follicles or a pale corpus luteum denoted late dioestrus orprooestrus small pinkish; corpus luteum denoted early dioestrus whilst large protruding and veined corpus luteum periodicum denoted mid-dioestrus. The exact date of conception was not known but the approximate age of pregnancy was determined by the weight and diameter of the foetus (the diameter being more accurate than weight in determining the age of pregnancy). In the majority of cases, the previous history of animals was not known. In certain cases, such as the animals from the Animal Breeding Research Farm, however, the history of the buffalo-cows was available. Fifty pairs of ovaries from pregnant buffaloes re- presented different phases of recent, early and mid-pregnancy and this study covers these different stages. They were classified into five stages (P-I, P-II, P-III, P-IV and P-V) according to the weight and diameter of the foetus (Table I). The animals were slaughtered during April and May 1953, at Cairo slaughter- house, the reproductive organs were so removed that the ovaries and ovarian bursa were maintained intact. They were sent to the laboratory for dissection and examination. Immature animals and pathological conditions were excluded from this study. The side of the most recent ovulation was recorded and the site of the foetus in one of the two uterine horns was also noted in the gravid genitalia. The ovaries were weighed and examined macroscopically and described. As the thickness of the ovary varied to a great extent with the size and position of the corpus luteum and the degree of prominence of the rupture point, this was not recorded. A thin central longitudinal section was made through the ovaries with a sharp razor. Notations were made on the internal structure with particular TABLE I Different phases of pregnancy under investigation Phase of pregnancy No. of cases Foetus Weight (gm.) Diameter (gm.) Range Mean Range Mean P-I 0 0.1September 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ 237 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Histograms showing the weight of ovaries of pregnant buffaloes at different stages of pregnancy. Each column represents the weight of two ovaries at a certain age of gestation, the white area represents the C. L. ovary and the black area the N. C. L. ovary.
238 OVARIAN ACTIVITY IN PREGNANT BUFFALOES [Vol. XXV, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Diameters of corpus luteum and graafian follicle in C.L. and N.C.L. Ovaries.
September 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ 239 reference to the number and diameters of growing graafian follicles and functioning or old corpora lutea. The size (average diameter) of the graafian follicle and the corpus luteum was considered as the mean of three diameters: (i) length, including the protrusion from the ovarian surface, (ii) width at right angles to the length, and (iii) width at 45° to the length. This was done to the two halves of the ovary exposed by the section. The following two abbreviations are used in the writing of this article240 OVARIAN ACTIVITY IN PREGNANT BUFFALOES [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE II Weight of ovaries during pregnancy and non-pregnancy Reproduc- tive phase Particulars No. of cases Wt. of C. L. ovary Wt. of N. C. L. ovary in gm. *Wt. of two ovaries in gm. *Wt. Ratio C. L. ovary/ N. C. L. ovary Range Mean Range Mean Pregnancy P-I 6 4.2PLATE VI] Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXV, Part III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A. Pairs of ovaries from pregnant (P) and non-pregnant (N.P.) buffaloes. Note the two in each pair are unlike. The corpus luteum is protruding from the ovarian surface. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] B. The morphology of corpus luteum of pregnancy in buffaloes (painted with Indian ink). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] C. Luteal scars (coloured blue or brown in the ovaries) were more abundant during pregnancy (P) than during non-preg- nancy (N.P.) in the buffalo.
September 1955] E. S. E. HAFEZ 241 Graafian follicles During pregnancy the C. L. ovary contained one or two follicles of relatively large size in 41 per cent of the cases. The N. C. L. ovary contained from one to three follicles of relatively large size in 97 per cent of the cases. Whenever developing follicles were observed they were in different sizes showing waves of growth; also, they were all filled with liquor folliculi. A large portion of the growing follicles were on the surface of the ovary. The average diameter of the largest follicles in the N. C. L. ovary during pregnancy varied from 0.8 to 0.9 cm., while it ranged from 0.8 to 1.3 cm. during non-pregnancy. The average diameter was unchanged throughout recent to mid-pregnancy whilst it was correlated with the stage of the oestrus cycle during non-pregnancy. The follicle diameter was significantly bigger TABLE III Size of most recent corpus luteum during pregnancy and non-pregnancy Reproduc- tive phase Particulars No. of cases Mean wt. of C. L. ovary (gm.) Diameter of most recent C. L. (cm.) Ratio of C. L. diameter to ovary weight ×100 Range Mean Pregnancy P-I 6 5.7 1.6242 OVARIAN ACTIVITY IN PREGNANT BUFFALOES [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE IV Size of graafian follicles during pregnancy and non-pregnancy Reproduc- tive phase Particular Follicle diameter in C. L. ovary Follicle diameter in N. C. L. ovary Largest Next largest Largest Next largest Range Cm. Mean Cm. Range Cm. Mean Cm. Range Cm. Mean Cm. Range Cm. Mean Cm. Pregnancy P-I 0.4September 1955 ] E. S. E. HAFEZ 243 The chief interest in the ovary lies in the corpus luteum. Its constant big size during pregnancy suggests that its life is prolonged by maintenance of favourable conditions of life rather than direct stimulus to growth during pregnancy. Although the actual size of the corpus luteum does not change during pregnancy, its form and position in relation to the ovarian stroma alters. The changes in colour asso- ciated with the age of the corpus luteum of pregnancy are due to its blood content and to the concentration of luteal pigment. The latter is associated with lipoid drop- lets deposited in the luteal cells. There is an occasional occurrence of a hollow centre, not filled with fluid. In cattle it is filled with a pool of fluids [Asdell et al., 1949]. It seems that all corpora lutea go through a cavity stage after the initial organization of this body [Hammond, 1928]. During pregnancy there are series of graafian follicles of different sizes which develop in relays. Large graafian follicles from these do not give rise to ovulations as it was observed that there were no newly formed corpora lutea. They undergo an incomplete cycle without the process of ripening. The undischarged follicles atrophy with the subsequent formation of coloured luteal scars; this also occurs in the pregnant cow. It should be mentioned here that the external manifestation of oestrus has never been reported in the pregnant buffalo [Hafez, 1955]. Mean- while oestrus has been reported in the cow during pregnancy [Hammond et al., 1928]. It is suggested that the progesterone level is low in the pregnant buffalo, this inhibits the maturation of the developing graafian follicle. In the cow, however, it may also be possible that the circulating oestrogens during pregnancy are high enough to inhibit the effectiveness of the progesterone. The normal endocrine balance during pregnancy and non-pregnancy must be worked out before one can draw any conclusive evidence. In the N. C. L. ovary, the diameter of the largest follicles is bigger during non- pregnancy than during pregnancy whilst the diameter of the next largest is bigger during pregnancy than during non-pregnancy. The pre-ovulatory development of the graafian follicle during non-pregnancy inhibits any further development of the next follicle in relay. Since the follicles during pregnancy do not reach the pre- ovulatory stage of development, this allows the next largest follicle to have more chances of development. The occurrence of the luteal scars is very frequent during pregnancy in the buffalo, mainly in the N. C. L. ovary. This is associated with the more frequent follicular development in this ovary than in the C. L. ovary. The presence and pressure of an active corpus luteum in the C. L. ovary would tend to lower the chance of nutrition being favourable for follicular development in that ovary since the cells of each (of corpus luteum and of graafian follicles) are of the same origin and probably draw on the same source of nourishment. Luteal scars due to undischarged follicles are also observed during non-pregnancy in species with non- spontaneous ovulation (rabbits and ferrets) as reported by Marshall [1943]. The luteal scar is always coloured and is easily differentiated from the old corpus luteum periodicum (after actual ovulation). During the process of absorption of luteal cells on involution of the corpus luteum they become concentrated and give rise to a deep colour. 27 AR/55 16
244 OVARIAN ACTIVITY IN PREGNANT BUFFALOES [Vol. XXV, Part III SUMMARY Post-mortem examination of ovaries from 50 pregnant (recent to mid-preg- nancy) and 24 non-pregnant buffaloes were carried out. 1. The two ovaries were unlike in shape and form. There was always a single ovulation; in 75 per cent of the cases this was in the right ovary. 2. There was no ova migration or twinning. 3. The average weight of the two ovaries during pregnancy ranged from 7.6 to 9.6 gm.; this did not vary from that during non-pregnancy. 4. The weight ratio of C. L. ovary to N. C. L. ovary during pregnancy ranged from 136 to 245 per cent; this was always higher than that during non-pregnancy. 5. The average diameter of corpus luteum of pregnancy ranged from 1.9 to 2.2 cm. Its form but not size varied throughout pregnancy whilst it occasionally had a cavity not filled with fluids. 6. The average diameter of corpus luteum (full size) during non-pregnancy was slightly smaller than that during pregnancy. 7. Graafian follicles developed during pregnancy and did not rupture but degenerated leaving coloured luteal scars mainly in the N. C. L. ovary. 8. The average diameter of largest follicles in N. C. L. ovaries varied from 0.8 to 0.9 cm. during pregnancy; this was smaller than that during non-pregnancy. 9. The average diameter of next largest follicle in N. C. L. ovaries ranged from 0.4 to 0.5 cm. during pregnancy; this was bigger than that during non-pregnancy. REFERENCES Amoroso, E. C., Hancock, J. L. and Rowlands, I. W. (1948). Ovarian activity in the pregnant mare, Nature, 161: 355-356 Asdell, S. A., de Alba, J. and Roberts, S. J. (1949). Studies on the oestrus cycle of dairy cattle: Cycle length, size of corpus luteum and endometrial changes. Cornell Vet., 39: 389-402 Boyd, J. D., Hamilton, W. J. and Hammond, J. (Jr.) (1944). Transuterine (Internal) migration of the ovum in sheep and other mammals. J. Anat., 78: 5-14 Casida, L. E. and Warwick, E. J. (1945). The necessity of the corpus luteum for the maintenance of pregnancy in the ewe. J. Anim. Sci., 4: 34-37 Grant, R. (1934). Studies on the physiology of reproduction in the ewe. Trans roy. Soc. Edin. 58:1-29 Hafez, E. S. E. (1952a). Conception rate and periodicity in the buffalo. Emp. J. Exp. Agric., 21: 15-21 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA ABORTUS EQUI VACCINE By M. R. DHANDA, J. M. LALL and M. M. SINGH Pathology and Bacteriology Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaun (Received for publication on 16th February 1954) OSTERTAG [1901] described a gram-negative streptococcus as the specific organism responsible for infectious abortions in mares, but the finding was not confirmed for a number of years. Later researches by de Jong [1912], Van Heelsbergen [1913], Lautenbach [1913], Meyer and Boerner [1913], however, led to the conclusion that a bacterium of the paratyphoid group was generally the cause of abortion in mares; and a large volume of literature has subsequently accu- mulated to show the importance of Salmonella abortus equi in causing huge economic loss in countries where horse breeding is done. The disease got a very firm foot- hold during and after the World War I especially in Germany, France and Japan owing to deficiency in the feeding and care of animals and frequent intermingling of positive cases with healthy ones. India had also been badly affected by it and, therefore, studies on the disease with the aim of formulating control measures and evolving a suitable vaccine, were started at the Indian Veterinary Research Insti- tute as far back as 1920, and it was after 10 years of extensive investigation that in 1930 it became possible to produce a satisfactory prophylactic vaccine against it. The vaccine, as it was prepared in 1930, consisted of an emulsion of one part of each of the 12 strains of B. abortivo-equinus and two parts of a strain of 'Mare abortion coli' in 0.5 per cent carbolic acid in normal saline solution, brought to S.O. 60 and killed at 65°C for three hours. After five years of trial with this bacterin the 'mare abortion coli' was eliminated and only three strains of Salmonella abortus equi were incorporated and the opacity of the vaccine was reduced to S. O. 50. In 1946, all the previous cultures were substituted by three freshly isolated Coleyana strains. These organisms, after being grown upon agar in Roux flasks and incu- bated at 37°C for 24 hours, were emulsified in 0.5 per cent carbolic acid in normal saline solution and diluted with the same suspending fluid to an opacity equal to B.W. 4. This suspension was then killed in a water-bath at 56°C for ½ hour. The vaccine was issued to the field till 1949 when it was found that following its inocu- lation sometimes symptoms resembling those observed in toxaemic conditions developed. The symptoms were more marked in the previously unvaccinated animals receiving the vaccine for the first time while those that had been injected with it previously hardly showed any untoward effect. The important symptoms observed were dysponea, shivering, frequent attempts at micturition, defaction, colicy pains, etc. which generally developed in about 20-40 minutes after injec- tion of the vaccine and passed off in a few hours. On close scrutiny of records of the past 19 years or so, no history of such symptoms having been observed could be traced. However, the temperature charts always showed a rise of 1° to 4°F follow- ing vaccination and a fairly pronounced swelling at the site of inoculation which 245 17
246 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA ABORTUS [Vol. XXV, Part III, generally disappeared in three or four days. The temperature-rise with the brews of 1949 was in no way more severe than that in the previously recorded ones, nor, was the swelling more pronounced. These symptoms were observed in experimental ponies following an injection of 20 c.c. of the vaccine, a flat dose employed for conducting safety test in the labo- ratory before issuing the product for use in the field. The previous brews had also been tested at this high dose. However, when the dose was reduced to the one employed in the field and adult healthy ponies in good condition were tested, very mild reaction was produced, which could hardly be noticed without very careful observation. Nevertheless, this was considered a serious disqualification for the vaccine and work was taken up to modify it so as to render it absolutely safe. Formol-killed vaccine: In the first instance, additon of formalin was tried with a view to detoxicating it, and three brews were prepared by emulsifying the growth of three strains of Salmonella abortus equi, S.128, S.129, S.130, in normal saline solution to an opacity equal to B.W. 4 and treating with formol in the concen- tration of 0.25 per cent for seven days at 37°C. This, however, did not bring about the desired effect for, when injected into a mule which had never received a dose of Salmonella abortus equi vaccine earlier, all the previously observed symptoms were noticed. But when tested on a very large number of ponies, it was found that formalin-treated vaccine produced comparatively mild symptoms. Formol-killed and alum precipated vaccine: Since even formol-killed vaccine had not given very satisfactory results, it was considered advisable to add to the formol-treated vaccine potash alum in the concentration of 1 per cent in order to precipitate the toxins, so that absorption from the site of inoculation would be slowed down. Three brews were thus prepared and tested for safety on nine ponies, each brew being given subcutaneously to three ponies at the rate of 20 c.c. per animal. The experimental ponies were divided into three groups such that each lot contained two ponies, which had received the Salmonella abortus equi vaccine previously, and one pony, which had not been vaccinated at all or at least not during the last 10 years or so. Not a single pony showed any of the untoward symptoms of toxaemia observed earlier but all excepting one developed abscesses at the site of inoculation, which even after surgical treatment took a very long time to heal. This was considered even a more serious disqualification for the vaccine than to have produced toxaemic symptoms in a few ponies, as the horse-owners would never allow the use of a product, which would produce unsightly abscesses at the site of inoculation. In order to overcome this serious drawback of the newly-evolved vaccine, a change in the route of administration was tried and the same brews in dosage of 20 c.c. were given intramuscularly at two or three places in the same ponies. Neither any toxaemia nor abscess formation occurred in the ponies. Four more brews were prepared by treatment with 0.25 per cent formalin at 37°C for seven days and by the addition of potash alum in 1 per cent concentration and each brew was tested on two ponies (one, which had received the vaccine pre- viously and the second that had not been vaccinated during the past 10 years or so) by the intramuscular route and in not a single animal treated in this manner any untoward effect was noticed. The vaccine was also given field trials in a number of stud-farms and from nowhere any adverse report was received. Since then only formol-killed, alum precipitated vaccine is being issued for field use from the Institute with very satisfactory results.
September 1955] M. R. DHANDA, J. M. LALL AND M. M. SINGH 247 Pathogenicity of Salmonella abortus equi to mice In the absence of a suitable potency test to assess the value of Salmonella abortus equi vaccine in preventing abortion in mares, it was considered desirable that some method whereby the antigenic value of the vaccine could be judged should be evolved. A reference to the available literature did not show any record of the effect of artificial inoculation of Salmonella abortus equi into laboratory animals. Since abortion is one of the symptoms exhibited by mares, infected with this orga- nism, it would be reasonable to assume that any protection afforded against the infection would also result in a corresponding abatement of symptoms generally attributed to this organism including abortion. It was, therefore, decided to study the pathogenic effect of the three strains of Salmonella abortus equi (S. 128, S. 129 and S. 130) used in the preparation of mare abortion vaccine at this Institute in white mice, and, if found pathogenic, to see whether the vaccine when administered to mice would afford any protection against the pathogenic effect. The strains had been isolated from natural cases of abortion in mares at Coleyana in the year 1946. To begin with, it was found that subcutaneous inoculation of a fairly large dose of young culture suspensions from each strain (agar wash) would kill white mice in a day or two and in each case the organisms could be isolated from the heart blood of the mice after death. When repeated in a comparatively smaller dose of 1 c.c. (24-hour-old broth culture), death occurred of bacillaemia in one to five days, the organisms being again recovered from the heart blood in each case. To determine the M.L.D. of each strain, groups of two mice were inoculated subcutaneously with ten-fold serial dilutions representing 10-6 to 10-2 of a 24-hour-old broth culture of each strain. As the course of the disease was noted to be pretty long when small doses of cultures were used for artificial infection, the mice were kept under observation for one month. The results are presented in Table I. TABLE I Effect of different strains in varying doses on mice Strain Dose No. of mice Results Cultural examination of heart blood of dead mice S. 128 10-6 2 S D24 (other cause) __ 10-5 2 S D9 Not examined 10-4 2 S D15 + 10-3 2 S D13 + 10-2 2 S D6 +
248 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA ABORTUS [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE ISeptember 1955] M. R. DHANDA, J. M. LALL AND M. M. SINGH 249 TABLE II Effect of higher concentrations of strains on mice Strain Dose No. of mice used Results Result of cultural examination of heart blood of dead mice S. 128 10-2 4 SS D6 D9 ++ 10-1 4 D6 D7 D7 D9 ++++ Undiluted 1 c.c. 4 D1 D2 D2 D2 ++++ S. 129 10-2 4 S S S D6 + 10-1 4 S S S D7 + Undiluted 1 c.c. 4 D2 D2 D2 D3 ++++ S. 130 10-2 4 S S S S 10-1 4 S S D2 D6 ++ Undiluted 1 c.c. 4 D1 d2 d4 D6 ++++ S=Survived an observation period of one month D=Died with the figure indicating the number of days after which the death occurred +=Positive culture In order to see whether any exo or endotoxins lethal to white mice were liberated by these cultures, and also if the vaccine as was previously used for immunising mares would prove antigenic in white mice and whether inoculated mice would withstand a challenge with live cultures, experiments were undertaken to study the effect of (i) filtrates of broth cultures, (ii) centrifuged and washed bacilli killed by heating at 56°C for 30 minutes and (iii) cultures killed by heating at 56°C for 30 minutes. Effect of filtrate of broth cultures (a) Filtrate of unheated culture : Twenty-four-hour-old broth culture of each of the three strains was passed through Seitz filter and the bacteria-free filtrate was inoculated subcutaneously into groups of four mice in doses of 2 c.c. to see evidence of any exotoxins liberated by these cultures. No untoward effect was noticed in the mice over a period of observation of a fortnight, except in the case of two mice inoculated with culture filtrate of strain S. 130, both of which were found to have died of infection with haemolytic streptococci which on further study were found to belong to group G. (b) Filtrates of cultures heated at 56°C for 30 minutes : Twenty-four-hour-old broth culture of each strain heated at 56°C for 30 minutes and filtered through Seitz filter was given subcutaneously in a dose of 2 ml. each into groups of eight
250 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA ABORTUS [Vol. XXV, Part III, white mice. It was interesting to note that the filtrate proved toxic to white mice as per results shown in Table III, thereby showing that endotoxins could be easily liberated from the organisms by the effect of heat and set free in the surrounding fluid, although the amount of toxin liberated was not complete as judged by the results shown in Tables III and IV. TABLE III Effect of filtrates of cultures heated at 56°C for 30 minutes Strain No. of mice used Results P. M. notes S. 128 8 D5 D15 D16 S S S S S Organs congested, cultures sterile S. 129 8 D1 S S S S S S S Cultures sterile S. 130 8 D1 D2 D3 D1 D4 S S S Organs congested, cultures sterile S=Survived; D=Died with figure indicating the number of days after which the death occurred. Effect of centrifuged, washed and heat-killed bacilli Broth cultures of each strain centrifuged and washed twice with N.S.S. and resuspended in N.S.S. were strandardised to match B.W. opacity tube No. 4 and then killed by immersion in a water bath at 56°C for 30 minutes. This suspension was injected subcutaneously in a dose of 2 ml. each into groups of eight mice. The results are shown in Table IV from which it is observed that killed cultures, washed free of all aggressions, etc., if any, proved lethal although the time taken was comparatively longer than that with live cultures indicating clearly the presence of a potent endotoxin. TABLE IV Effect of washed and heat-killed bacilli Strain No. of mice Results P. M. Notes S. 128 8 D4 D6 D7 D8 D16 D17 D S S Organs congested, cultures sterile S. 129 8 D1 D3 D3 D3 D6 D7 D7 S do. S. 130 8 D3 D4 D6 D8 D9 D29 S S do. S=Survived; D=Died with the figure indicating the number of days after which the death occurred.
September 1955] M. R. DHANDA, J. M. LALL AND M. M. SINGH 251 Effect of heat-killed whole cultures Twenty-four-hour-old broth cultures were heated at 56°C for 30 minutes and injected subcutaneously into groups of four mice each in doses of 1 ml. The results as shown in Table V indicated that in the dose in which these cultures were used, they were lethal to some of the mice and, therefore, for the purpose of vaccination the dose would have to be suitably adjusted. TABLE V Effect of heat-killed whole cultures on white mice Strain No. of mice used Results P. M. notes S. 128 4 D8 S S S Cultures sterile S. 129 4 D2 D4 S S do S. 130 4 D2 D5 D9 S do The experiment was repeated on groups of 12 mice by using a suspension of cultures containing equal parts of each of the three strains in a dose of 0.5 c.c. sub- cutaneously into each mouse. This dose was well tolerated with all the 12 mice used in the experiment surviving, and it was decided to use this as a vaccinating dose for mice to be later challenged with the live cultures. Comparative tests on the protective values of the 'hcat-killed-phenol-preserved-vaccine' and the new 'formalin-detoxicated-alum-precipilated-vaccine '. Having fixed a safe dose for immunising mice, experiments were carried out to study the comparative protective value in white mice of the old heat-killed vaccine and the new vaccine. For this purpose groups of eight mice were vaccinated with the two products and after an interval of 13 days they were challenged with the mixture of live culture containing all the three strains used for the preparation of the vaccine. The challenge dose was fixed at 0.2 ml. of the mixture on the basis of an experiment on mice in which it was found that a dose of 0.5 ml. killed all the four mice in one to six days and that of 0.2 ml. killed them within seven days. The latter dose was used in the challenge experiments. The results of the immunity test are shown in Table VI.
252 STUDIES ON SALMONELLA ABORTUS [Vol. XXV, Part III, TABLE VI Results of immunity tests No. of mice used Type of vaccine and dose No. of mice challenged Challenge dose Results of challenge after 13 days Survival percentage 8 8 Heat-killed pheno- lized 0.5 ml. 8 0.2 ml. of mixed culture 13 days after vaccination. D5 D6 D7 D11 50 Formal alum vaccine. 8 September 1955] M. R. DHANDA, J. M. LALL AND M. M. SINGH 255 SUMMARY As a result of extensive investigation, it became possible to replace the heat- killed phenolized Salmonella abortus equi vaccine, which was being issued from this Institute for the last many years and had the disadvantage of producing, at times, toxaemic symptoms in equines, with a much more safe vaccine. The newly evolved vaccine is prepared by treating the suspension of S. abortus equi strains with formalin and precipitating the toxins by the addition of potash alum. Pathogenicity of S. abortus equi towards mice has been studied, and a potency test in mice developed to judge the antigenic value of this vaccine. It has been shown that the heat-killed phenolized S. abortus equi vaccine as well as the newly-evolved formalin-treated and alum-precipitated vaccine, afford protec- tion to mice to the extent of 50 per cent and 86 per cent respectively against a certain lethal dose of Salmonella organisms, which killed 100 per cent of the unvaccinated mice. The formalin-killed alum-precipitated vaccine has been found definitely superior to the heat-killed phenolized vaccine in affording protection to white mice against a lethal dose of the Salmonella cultures. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Thanks are due to Messrs. Jayaraman, R. N. Seth, P. C. Gangulee and K. P. Balakrishnan for assistance in the preparation of the vaccines and observing the symptoms in the experimental ponies. REFERENCES Good, E. S. and Smith, W. V. (1916). Further investigations of the etiology and control of infectious abortion in mares. Ky. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. 204 Hutyra, H. and Marek, J. (1938). Special Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic Animals. 1, 187-191 Kasai, K. and Hirato, K. (1940). Experimental studies on the infectious abortion in mares. VII. The vaccination with live cultures of Salmonella abortivo-equina for the prevention of abortion. Jap. J. vet. Sci, 2, 20-22 Kelser, R. A. (1921). Equine infectious abortion. J. Amer. vet. Med. Ass., 59; 284-294 Verge, J. (1938). La prophylaxie de l' avortement infectious des juments provoque' par Salmonella abortus equi. XIII int. vet. Congr. Zurich., 1, 507-518 27 AR/55 18
ABSTRACTS Viability and immunizing potency of freeze-dried bovine contagious pleuro-pneu- monia culture vaccine. GREY, D. F. and TURNER, A. W. (1954). J. Comp. Path., 64, 116-125. IN order to meet the emergent demands of mass scale vaccination in Ethiopia, and to offer the most hopeful solution for storage and transhipment without any appreciable loss of potency, an attempt made by the authors at lyophilization of living attenuated culture vaccine of bovine contagious pleuro-pneumonia by freeze-drying, met with encouraging results. Contrary to the earlier concept of Priestly et al., there was no suggestion in these experiments of exaltation of virulence of the surviving population of such a freeze-dried attenuated culture. The authors enunciate in detail the techniques employed by them for lyophi- lization of living cultures of A. mycoides in BVS-OS medium by freeze-drying, and evaluate the viability and immunizing property of the resultant product which was stored both at 4°C and at room temperature. In the initial phase of freeze-drying, coincident with the water loss, the orga- nisms suffered a high mortality, the viable count being reduced to 1 per cent of the original. However, once lyophilized, the vaccine was relatively stable, the viability being maintained at a virtually constant level for at least 41 months at room tempe- rature and was found improved on refrigeration. After 27 months of storage at room temperature, the vaccine was reconstituted with distilled water, and 30 head of cattle were vaccinated intracaudally. Fifteen unvaccinated animals of similar origin and age were kept as controls. The recons- tituted vaccine which contained in the standard dose about 10 viable organisms gave rise to tail reactions and CF responses that were more delayed, less frequent and less extensive than in usual after the use of fresh liquid vaccine, in which the number of organisms is about 400 times greater. Excepting a solitary individual in a lot of 15, all the unvaccinated animals were susceptible on challenge, whereas of the 30 vaccinated with the reconstituted freeze-dried product, only 6 were inter- preted susceptible on the basis of macroscopic lesions with recovery of organism, from the thoracic and mediastinal lymph glands. As compared to about 97 per cent of animals immunized when fresh liquid vaccine is used, this gives a percentage value of 80. The authors opine that if the number of surviving viable organisms in the inoculating dose could be increased a greater percentage of immunity might result. For achieving this it is suggested that baches of vaccine with the highest possible initial count may be selected for lyophilization, and the lyophilization process itself be improved by utilisation of better vehicles or protective adjuvants like glucose, lactose or by reducing the degree of desiccation in the absence of glucose and subsequent low temperature storage. (N.A.) 255 27 AR/55 19
256 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part III, A herd outbreak of mastitis caused by pasteurella multocida. BARNUM, D. A. (1954.) Canad. J. Comp. Med. 18, 113-119 THE article presents a detailed study of a severe clinical outbreak of mastitis due to Pasteurella multocida in an ill-kept dairy herd involving 30 quarters in 14 animals. The clinical manifestations started with the failure of milk to filter promptly followed in 24 hours with slight swelling of the quarter, a drop in milk yield and the presence of the yellowish viscid stringy clots in the fore-milk only. Within a few days all the milk from affected quarters consisted of thick, viscid, yellowish clots and the secretion decreased rapidly leading to loss of function, atrophy and fibrosis of the quarter. None of the affected animals showed any increase in temperature or other symptoms of generalized infection. The milk samples were plated on 5 per cent sheep blood agar and after incubation for 18 hours, large greyish white, very mucoid colonies developed which were described as a "mucoid" variant. The biochemical reactions produced by the organisms were those of P. multocida. In order to assess the value of therapy the antibiotics, aureomycin, terramycin and streptomycin were tried. Though none was very successful, the streptomycin showed promising resutls. (R.L.) Effects of inbreeding on a flock of Ossimi sheep. M. T. RAGAB and A. A. ASKER (1954). J. Hered., 45, 2, 89-81 THE Ossimi sheep flock with the Animal Breeding Department of Cairo Univer- sity since 1934, had no outside blood after 1939. A study of the 1940 to 1950 records pertaining to birth weights weaning weight at four months age and marketing weight at six months revealed that inbreeding had resulted in a decrease of the weights in single born lambs of both sexes, specially the males. Marketing weight was the one most markedly affected. The twin born however showed no definite effect. Sires were selected on personal merit in birth weight and growth, but did not offset the adverse effect of inbreeding. Inbred dams did not have any significant effect on the weight of their offspring. By 1950, however, 15 blind lambs were born which traced back to a purchased sire. These died soon thus minimising the increase of gene frequency for this blind- ness. It was estimated that by eliminating defective animals it would take 80 years to reduce the frequency of gene 'b' from 0.07 to 0.061. For quicker progress the heterozygotes would need sorting out by testing with the double recessives. (S.V.C.)
September 1955] ABSTRACTS 257 The control of leucosis in the fowl. F. B. HUTT. World's Poult. Sci. J. 7, 1, 16-25 LOSSES from this disease can be reduced to an insignificant figure by strict isolation of growers from older birds. Where complete isolation cannot be practised, losses can be reduced by brooding chicks as far away as possible from the old birds. Breeding for resistance is by far the most promising. Two procedures can be followed for this purpose: (1) Mass selection which consists in breeding from yearling hens for even older, which are obviously the resistant survivors, the most susceptible ones having been eliminated by natural selection, (2) Progeny testing consists in breeding from sires and dams proven to produce offspring that are comparatively resistant to the disease and otherwise desirable, the testing period being from 43 to 599 days. In breeding for resistance to this disease, selection for other economic characters like egg size, body size, ability to lay and reproduce, can also be made as none of these characters is incompatible with resistance to this disease. To carry out the susceptibility test a randomised sample258 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part III, The results of these trials indicate that the rations containing urea and molasses were not as adequate for growth as those containing soybean oil meal. Molasses could not be considered a suitable carbohydrate for utilization of urea by the mi- croflora when fed without or with little starchy carbohydrate. Incorporation of 1.2 lb. of corn to the ration containing molasses and urea reflected in an increase in daily gain but the increase was not statistically significant. The nitrogen balance studies indicated that adequate synthesis of protein from urea did not occur. Molasses depressed the digestibility of dry matter, organic matter, crude protein, crude fibre and ether extract. Corn and soybean oil meal ration was found to produce more rapid gains than the molasses and soybean oil meal ration. Excellent growth rate was, however, obtained when good quality leguminous hay replaced poor quality hay in the molasses urea ration, thus showing that high levels of molasses can produce satisfactory gains when the fodder is rich in protein. (P. N. J.) Results of experimental trials with antibiotics. K. J. CARPENTER, World's Poult. Sci. 9, 1, 16-20 THE possible benefit in poultry husbandry to be obtained by the use of anti- biotics such as aureomycin, bactiracin, terramycin, procaine penicillin, etc. as dietary supplements for healthy chickens, is an increased body weight at four weeks of age, which according to the author is of no direct value to the average poultry- keeper. In Great Britain the production of table eggs is by far the most important section of the industry while feed cost is the major item. Results of experiments carried out by workers in America and Scotland, have shown that antibiotics in general are of no benefit for laying birds. For breeding stocks, the antibiotics have failed to increase fertility or hatchability when added to good rations. In respect of table bird production and the use of antibiotics to stimulate live- weight increase, 11 per cent weight gain was obtained at 12 weeks of age while no significnat difference in quality of the meat was detected. When fed at a general level of 20 grams per ton of feed, aureomycin, bactiracin, terramycin and procaine penicillin were equally active, the last preparation, however, was active even at low levels such as 2 grams per ton. Crude fermentation residues containing vitamin B12 were the first poultry supplements used in the past, but it has now become economic to add pure antibiotics for livestock feeding. The author cautions that the use of antibiotics only will not improve the poor quality rations. Results of feeding trials with Turkeys using the antibiotics, have also shown sti- mulation of growth during the early stages as in chickens. (S. G. I.)
September 1955] ABSTRACTS 259 Studies on Trichostrongylus axei. II The pathogenesis of T. axei in sheep maintained on a high plane of nutrition. GIBSOH, T. E. (1954). Comp. Path. Thera., 64, 4, 360-370 THE author has described investigations on the pathogenicity of Trichostrongylus axei in sheep maintained at a high plane of nutrition. He used six two-month Dorset Horn lambs maintained under worm-free conditions, out of which three were infected with this parasite and the others kept as worm-free controls. Each of the three lambs received a dose of 4,000 infective larvae, repeated daily until a total dose of 120,000 larvae had been given. All the lambs were maintained at a high plane of nutrition, the diet consisting of hay and concentrates including bran, flaked maize, crushed oats and linseed cake fed adlibitum. The three control lambs gained in weight steadily throughout the experimental period. In one of the infected lambs, the rate of weight gain was arrested when the infestation became patent. It subsequently lost weight and at the time of death it was 16 pounds lighter than at the beginning of the experiment. The second infected lamb gained in weight very slowly, for the first nine weeks by eight pounds. Sub- sequently it lost weight and was 11½ pounds lighter at death than at the beginning of the experiment. The third infected lamb suffered check in weight gain at the time when the infestation became patent, but later on it gained in weight and at the end of the experiment it was 50 pounds heavier than at the beginning. The blood picture in all the control lambs was normal. There was no signi- ficant change in the blood picture of the infected lambs. On post-mortem examina- tion, two lambs showed acute inflammation of the abomasum. One of them showed hydropericardium and fatty degeneration of the liver. Both the lambs were heavily infested with this parasite, one of them having 22,200 worms while the other having 30,000 worms in the abomasum. The worm burden in the third was low, only 1,800 worms being present in the abomasum. This lamb showed ring-worm-like healed ulcers formed in the mucous membrane of the abomasum. He concluded that lambs maintained at a high plane of nutrition developed severe parasitic gastritis due to T. axei. Lambs which recovered, suffered a check in weight gain from the time the infestation became patent till the resistance was developed. Acute inflammation of the abomasum resulted in lambs which suc- cumbed, while ring-work-like ulcers scattered over the mucuous membrane of the abomasum developed in the lambs which survived the infestation. The author has drawn interesting comparisons with his previous observations in which infected lambs kept at a low plane of nutrition developed anaemia. It was postulated that this anaemia might have been caused by worm abosrbing large amounts of trace-elements or vitamins from the gut contents of the infested sheep. (P.G.D.)
260 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXV, Part III, Play in domestic cattle in Britain: An analysis of its nature. BROWNLEE A. (1954), Brit. Vet. J. 110, 2 (1) The manifestations of play in domestic cattle and the conditions of its occur- rence have been described. (2) The theory is proposed that play in cattle, instead of being, as Groos thought, manifestations of a number of instincts before they were actually required for serious purposes, is in fact one instinct with its own drive, releasers, emotion, consummatory phase and goal. (3) The goal of play is not to be found in the animal's environment but is tissue- trophic and serves to exercise and thereby maintain tone and adequate vascularisa- tion of the play muscles and the other structures involved in play behaviour. (4) A drived survival value of play is the familiarising to the animal of certain items in its environment in relation to its play movements: play continues in an environment long after this familiarity has been established. (5) There is variation in the type of releaser to which individual cattle respond. (6) Sex and age modify the manifestations of play. (7) Rivalry, if it operates at all in play in cattle, is only a minor motive. (8) Whether the tendency during play for the behaviour pattern to switch in succession from one type to another should be interpreted as being due to diffusion of stimuli from one centre to another within the central nervous system or whether the releaser of play is a gestalt and all the play items in that gestalt become valent together is discussed. (9) The tendency for a bovine animal to play is influenced by its state of nutri- tion. (10) The classification of mounting by bullocks and by dioestrous and pregnant females is discussed and reasons for putting this behaviour under the rubric of play are given. (11) The term para-activity is suggested for play to indicate that, although play resembles in its behaviour the patterns of combat, self-defence, flight, and sex mounting, it is in fact an entirely separate phenomenon. (H. K. L.) (Author's own summary)
REVIEWS INDEX OF TREATMENT BY W. HAMILTON KIRK (Published by Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, London, 1954, pp. 888, price 45s.) IN bringing out the third edition of this book, the author has greatly succeeded in making available the latest information on the subject to the benefit of animal practitioners. The chapters on sera and vaccine therapy, vitamins and hormones therapy are few of the well-written chapters. The chapter on electro and actino therapy is written in a simple way. The latest treatment for distemper described in the book is well worth a trial in this country. The list of numerous proprietary drugs used in practice will, no doubt, help the practitioner a great deal, but additional information on their dosage and therapeutic uses would have added to its usefulness. Special mention should be made of the chapter on Hormone Therapy in which the author has attempted to furnish exhaustive information on this modern method of treatment. The book should serve as a good reference book on canine and feline therapeutics. Moreover, the fact that within a period of six years the third edition of the book has been printed clearly indicates its popularity among general practitioners and senior veterinary college students to whom the publication is invaluable. The book is very well bound and illustrated and contains full posological table, list of proprietary preparations and index. Coming as it is from the hands of an experienced practitioner, the book should prove a useful aid to animal practitioners. (M. R. M.) GENETIC HOMEOSTASIS BY I. MICHAEL LERNER (Published by Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh, 1954, pp. 143) HOMEOSTASIS is the totality of the interactions in the living system with the internal and external environments, and is extremely useful in biology. In various physiological fields, this biological aspect has been fairly widely recognised. It is, therefore, heartening to find that the author has very diligently woven together the widely scattered facts of genetic homeostasis into a sound whole. Undoubtedly, this theme centres round the Mendalian conception of heredity. The general hypothesis stresses its specific applicability on cross-fertilized genetic systems of population; the response of population to selection for metric traits; the role of heterozygosity in population of the domestic animals; the adverse effects of inbreed- ing; heterozygosity in drosophila, etc. The author stresses on the fact that natural selection in animals encourages organisms to possess better homeostatic system. 261
262 REVIEWS [Vol XXV, Part III, The author's hypothesis is based on the principle of additive inheritance of quan- titative traits and may be applicable to unimproved population for any desired traits, but they may not produce immediate results. The book is divided into three parts. The first part deals with the meaning of homeostasis and general hypothesis connected with it. The second part is dedicated to specific evidences of the subject matter while the third part deals with the inter- pretations of various findings. The book is suitably illustrated and contains a comprehensive bibliography. This book should prove very useful for students of genetics. (P. B.) FERTILITY AND INFERTILITY IN THE DOMESTIC ANIMALS BY J. A. LAING (Published by Bailliere, Tindall and Cox Ltd., London, 1955, pp. 256, price 35s.) FULL reproductive efficiency in animals is one of the fundamental requisites for economical production of animals and, consequently, of food. In recent years particularly, considerable attention has been paid to the different aspects of fertility and infertility in domestic livestock. The subject is so vast, and it treads into so many different fields, that the presentation in the form of a text-book of up-to-date knowledge of the subject, derived from extensive personal experience of the author as well as reports and observations scattered widely in literature, must indeed have been a difficult task. There is also likely to be much difference of opinion about what should, and what should not, be included in a text-book meant for the use of not only veterinary sugreons but also veterinary and agriculture students. Nevertheless, Dr Laing has given an excellent book which contains practically all that the student and the field worker should know about the subject. It is a welcome addition to veterinary literature, and is expected to serve a very useful purpose. Those engaged in animal production or in teaching should find much valuable material in this book. The subject matter is divided into 17 chapters and covers reproductive physio- logy of male and female animals of different species, methods of clinical examina- tion, technique of artificial insemination, diagnosis of pregnancy, and infectious and non-infectious diseases affecting fertility. Good space is devoted to the important role of infection in the aetiology of infertility, but the chapter dealing with nutritional disorders and infertility might also have been allotted a little more space. The general get-up of the book is good and it is well illustrated with 27 highly instructive plates and about as many figures. It is hoped due care will be taken to ensure that future editions are completely free from proof-correction lapses and minor flaws in language. It might have been advisable to omit the sub-title. since it does not read well with the title. (R.N.M.) MGIPCFIELD APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE264 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-III [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, TABLE I Details of collections at the three artificial insemination centres Names of centres Serial No. of bulls Brand No. or names of bulls Breed Total number of collections per Average volume of ejaculate per c.c. per REMARKS Bull Breed Species Bull Breed Species B. indicus Calcutta 1 Eng. 1 x-bred 3 524 2.80 2 Eng. 2 Do. 46 49 4.11 4.15 10.15 3 Multani Sahiwal 19 19 3.86 3.86 10.19 4 Hiralal Nagore 77 77 4.49 4.49 10.15 Patna 5 7/2 Thari 79 3.71 4.06 10.01 6 57/2 Do. 74 208 3.65 7 158/2 Do. 55 3.79 Bangalore 8 Windfall Gir 1 5.60 8.51 10.78 4.49 10.08 9 Wonderful Do. 6 12 10.00 10 Tanji Do. 5 8.52 11 Unique Red Sindhi 23 4.56 5.36 10.25 12 281 Do. 34 6.59 13 Zimen Do. 1 3.00 14 Tasman Do. 26 4.57 15 484 Do. 3 104 4.80 16 574 Do. 2 5.25 17 Xavier Do. 6 8.58 18 Warriorson Do. 3 5.00 19 Malnad Builder Do. 4 3.75 20 Sector Do. 2 3.40 21 Basavaraja Hallikar 4 35 4.58 3.77 10.20 22 Kusigalstar Do. 31 3.67 23 Tulsiraj Thari 20 20 7.66 7.66 10.58 B.Baurus 24 Bright lad Ayrshire 6 6 6 6.51 6.51 10.73 6.51 10.73 B. bubalis Calcutta 25 B. Murrah 43 213 213 20.4 2.71 10.12 2.71 10.12 26 No. 2 Do. 20 2.17 Patna 27 S. P. 439 Do. 17 2.27 28 S. P. 441 Do. 63 2.40 Bangalore 29 Winston Do. 24 6.31 30 132 Do. 40 2.25 31 Janardhan Do. 6 2.50
December, 1955] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 265 (a) Number Out of the 31 bulls, less than 10 collections were taken from 14; 20 or less but more than 10 from four, while the maximum constituting 83 per cent of the total collections were made from the remaining 13 bulls. Among the B. indicus bulls, the largest number of collections (79) were made from the Thari bull 7/2 of Patna. The highest for B. bubalis was 63266 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-III [Vol. XXV, Part IV, A comparative statement of the average semen volumes of like bulls from 1946-48 is given in Table III. With the exception of three figures, all other averages were based on more than 20 observations. TABLE III Average semen volumes of bulls Bull No. or name Average Semen volume per ejaculate 1946 1947 1948 B. indicus X-bred 2 2.44 3.32 4.11 Multani 2.41 3.39 3.86 Hiralal 2.84 3.86 3.41 158/2 3.07 3.66 3.86 57/2 2.90 3.22 3.38 7/2 3.23 3.41 3.72 Unique .. 3.39 4.56 B. bubalis S. P. 439 3.42 2.92 2.21 S. P. 441 3.62 2.51 2.36 With the exception of ' Hiralal ', all other Bos indicus bulls show a progressive increase in average semen volumes with years. On the contrary, in the buffalo bulls, there is a progressive decrease in semen volumes with years. The yearly difference in both the cases are statistically significant. An yearly increase in average semen volumes is expected, but yearly decrease is difficult to explain, since the bulls when brought on to artificial insemination service were quite young. Whether the yearly decrease is purely accidental or represents any peculiar condi- tion in buffaloes, the data at our disposal are too scanty to suggest. DETAILS OF INSEMINATION Details of inseminations performed from semen of various bulls at the three artificial insemination centres are presented in Table IV. The distribution of the total services among the 31 bulls is as follows:
December, 1955 ] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 267 TABLE IV Details of inseminations at the three artificial insemination centres Names of centres Serial No. of bulls Brand No. or names of bulls Breed Total number of inseminations per Average No. of insemination per Remarks Bull Breed Species Bull Breed Species B. indicus Calcutta 1 Eng. 1 X-bred 33 5985 11.00 11.06 * Includes the Thari Bull at Bangalore centre. 2 Eng. 2 do. 519 552 11.20 11.27 3 Multani Sahiwal 243 243 12.79 12.79 4 Hiralal Nagore 1,007 1007 13.08 13.08 Patna 5 7/2 Thari 1,192 15.09 6 57/2 do. 984 2983 13.30 13.28* 7 158/2 do. 807 14.67 Bangalore 8 Windfall Gir 3 3.00 9 Wonderful do. 11 24 1.83 2 .00 10 Tanji do. 10 2.00 11 Unique Bed Sindhi 199 8.66 12 281 do. 406 11.94 13 Zimen do. 8 8.00 14 Tasman do. 206 8.00 15 484 do. 8 2.67 16 575 do. 48 971 24.00 34 17 Xavier do. 36 6.00 18 Warriorson do. 18 6.00 19 Malnad builder do. 9 2.25 20 Sector do. 33 16.50 21 Basavaraja Hallikar 16 4.00 22 Kunigal Star do. 145 161 4.68 23 Tulsiraj Thari 44 44 2.20 B. taurus 24 Bright lad Aryshire 9 9 9 1.50 1.50 1.50 B. bubalis Calcutta 25 R Murrah 147 773 773 3.42 3.61 3.61 26 No. 2 do. 43 2.15 Patna 27 S. P. 439 do. 65 3.82 28 S. P. 441 do. 373 5.92 Bangalore 29 Winston do. 42 1.75 30 132 do. 87 2.12 31 Janardhan do. 16 2.67
268 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-III [Vol. XXV, Part IV, Bulls Inseminations Over 1,000 2 901December, 1955] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 269 TABLE VI Details of service or conception rates at the three artificial insemination centres Name of centre Serial No. of bulls Brand No. or names of bulls Breed Total No. of cows whose calving data were No. of cows hold- ing to service Average service rate per conception and (conception rate) per known unknown Bull Breed Species Calcutta B. indicus 1 Eng. 1 x-bred 21 12 14 1.50 (66.67) 2 Eng. 2 do. 370 149 245 1.51 (66.22) 1.51 (66.24) 3 Multani Sahiwal 175 68 121 1.45 (69.14) 1.45 (69.14) 4 Hiralal Nagore 695 313 459 1.51 (66.22) 1.51 (66.22) 5 7/2 Thari 1,192 .. 808 1.48 (67.79) Patna 6 57/2 do. 984 .. 705 1.40 (71.65) 1.43 (69.77) 7 158/2 do. 807 .. 573 1.41 (71.00) 8 Windfall Gir 3 .. 3 1.00 (100.00) 9 Wonderful do. 11 .. 5 2.20 (45.45) 1.71 (58.33) 1.48 (5 8.33) 10 Tanji do. 10 .. 6 1.67 (60.00) 11 Unique Red Sindhi 193 6 127 1.52 (65.80) 12 281 do. 390 16 238 1.64 (61.03) 13 Zimen do. 8 .. 4 2.00 (50.00)
270 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-III [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, TABLE VIDecember, 1955] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 271 The overall conception rates for all the centres was 69.47 per cent for cows and 68.53 per cent for buffaloes. The rates for the two species at the three centres are given in Table VII. TABLE VII Conception rates for cows and buffaloes at different centres Name of centre Total bred Total "holding" Percentage concep- tions Cows Buffaloes Cows Buffaloes Cows Buffaloes Calcutta 1,261 158 839 119 66.53 75.32 Patna 2,983 438 2,083 282 69.83 64.38 Bangalore 1,157 138 830 102 71.74 73.91 Total 5,401 734 3,752 503 69.47 68.53 A comparative statement of conception rates got from the same bulls during 1946 to 1948 is given in Table VIII. TABLE VIII Conception rates for the same bulls in different years Bull No. or name Conception rates in 1946 1947 1948 B. indicus bulls X-bred 2 54.9 (113) 64.9 (256) 66.2 (370) Multani 66.7 (54) 51.3 (172) 69.0 (175) Hiralal 64.5 (129) 52.4 (321) 66.2 (695) 158/2 76.9 (120) 76.9 (319) 73.0 (807) 57/2 75.8 (374) 76.9 (354) 72.5 (984) 7/2 78.7 (355) 78.1 (319) 67.6 (1192) Unique .. 43.1 ( 72) 65.8 (193) 281 .. 50.0 ( 44) 61.1 (390) Tasman .. 44.4 ( 56) 62.9 (199) B. bubalis bulls S. P. 439 78.1 ( 98) 67.1 (214) 58.5 ( 65) S. P. 441 74.6 ( 67) 70.4 (223) 65.4 (373) Figures in brackets denote number of inseminations 36 AR/55 2
272 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-III [Vol. XXV, Part IV, The conception rates of buffaloes, show a definite year to year decrease. Ana- lysis of variance of the B. indicus bull- figures omitting the last three ones, show that the difference in rates between bulls was significant at. 5 per cent level, while that between years was not statistically significant. The summary of the analysis of variance is given in Table IX. TABLE IX Analysis of variance Variation D. F. S. S. M. 8. P. Between years 2 27.44 13.72 .. Between bulls 5 807.74 161.54 3.62 Error 10 466.08 44.60 .. TOTAL 17 1281.26 .. .. Monthly variation in conception rates The average monthly rates in conception among cows averaged over the years 1946 to 1948, are presented in Table X. For want of sufficient data, like figures for buffaloes were not worked out. TABLE X Monthly conception rates among cows Name of month Calcutta centre Patna centre Bangalore centre January 65.44 (162) 71.76 (340) 61.29 (62) February 58.21 (201) 77.30 (445) 50.00 (52) March 62.33 (223) 76.34 (410) 52.63 ( 57) April 58.29 (187) 74.88 (414) 54.72 ( 53) May 60.07 (293) 76.03 (463) 54.39 ( 57) June 65.44 (217) 77.84 (555) 57.82 (147) July 58.43 (178) 76.33 (566) 56.88 (160) August 58.23 (158) 74.00 (477) 65.41 (159) September 61.90 (210) 74.90 (522) 53.25 (154) October 69.13 (230) 71.57 (591) 52.30 (174) November 58.10 (210) 69.14 (525) 68.18 (132) December 67.98 (325) 69.22 (536) 55.38 (186) Figures in brackets denote number of inseminations
December, 1955] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 273 Monthly and seasonal variations in conception rates of artificially bred cows are discussed separately [Prabhu and Bhattacharya, 1953]. The analysis showed that the conception rates had varied significantly from centre to centre and from year to year. There was, however, no significant variation in the rates from month to month or from season to season. These findings are in agreement with the report of Salisbury [1944]. Semen dosage and conception rate Details of semen dosage in terms of neat semen in the dose and conception rates are presented in Table XI. TABLE XI Semen dosage and percentage conception rate Name of centre Dosage in c.c. 0.05 0.06 0.1 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.4 0.5 1.0 Patna Cows 63.33 (60) 66.67 (54) 68.38 (136) 70.18 (16,33) .. 69.39 (49) 72.86 (70) 69.16 (107) 73.47 (49) Calcutta .. .. 78.26 (23) 65.78 (263) 66.07 (666) 68.86 (228) 59.26 (27) 75.00 (28) .. Bangalore 61.43 (280) .. 54.46 (303) 56.47 (356) 69.47 (95) .. 55.88 (34) 56.41 (39) .. Figures in brackets denote number of inseminations No clear cut trend in the conception rates with dosage of semen injected could be detected from the above figures. No analysis was carried out for buffaloes as the data were scanty. Age of semen used and conception rate In Table XII is summarised the information on age of the stored semen used or insemination and the conception rates obtained. Due to lack of sufficient data, no summary of information pertaining to buffaloes is given.
274 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-III [Vol. XXV, Part IV, TABLE XII Age of semen and conception rate Age of semen (hours) 0-1 1.1-6 6.1-12 12.1-18 18.1-24 24.1-30 30.1-36 36.1-42 42.1-48 48.1-54 54.1-60 60.1-66 66.1-72 Name of centreDecember, 1955 ] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 275 No data beyond 78 hours was available at the Calcutta and Patna centres. Considering only the average rates over all centres and also those rates which includ- ed figures from all centres, it appears that no marked drop in conceptions occurred when semen stored for 72 hours outside the body in an extender was used for breed- ing. The average rate over these periods was 64.54±1.15 per cent (Range 59.14 to 68.89 per cent). Pooling the data into age periods of 12 hours, statistical analysis was carried out on figures of all centres upto the age of 60 hours. Though figures for all centres were available in the 60.1 to 72 hours period, due to small number of inseminations on which the Patna figure was based, this period was not included in the analysis. The results of the analysis are summarised in Table XIII. TABLE XIII Analysis of variance Source of variation D. F. S. S. M. S. F. Between centres 2 336.36 168.18 8.66** Between age periods 4 1.70 0.42 .. Error 8 155.40 19.42 .. TOTAL 14 493.46 .. .. **Significant at 1 per cent level It will be seen from the above analysis that though the difference in concep- tion rates among centres was highly significant, the variation in rates between age groups of semen was not significant. SUMMARY The data gathered during the calendar year 1948 at the Calcutta, Patna and Bangalore field artificial insemination centres, operated by the Animal Genetics Division of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, and comprising 6758 insemina- tions made from 737 ejaculates drawn from 23 Bos indicus, one Bos taurus and seven Bubalus bubalis bulls of the centres are analysed and discussed. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are thankful to Shri D. B. Mukherjee, Ch. Chetram and Shri S. V. Chandiramani, respective officers-in-charge of the Calcutta, Patna and Bangalore artificial insemination centres, for their help in introducing the new technique in the field. The basic data collected by these officers of the centres were freely drawn in preparing this article. Thanks are also due to Major J. M. Lahiri, Principal, Bengal Veterinary College, Shri S. K. Sen, Director, Animal Husbandry Depart- ment, Bihar, and Dr. K. C. Sen, Director, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Banga- lore, for their keen personal interest and for providing all facilities for work. To the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, the authors are grateful for help and advice at all stages during the operation of the scheme. 36 AR/55 3
276 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-III [Vol. XXV, Part IV, REFERENCES Bhattacharya, P. (1948). Preliminary report on the field application of artificial insemination in India. Proc. 36th Indian Sci. Congr., III(4), 96 FIELD APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-IV By P. BHATTACHARYA and S. S. PRABHU, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 20th February 1954) IN previous reports [Bhattacharya 1948; Bhattacharya and Prabhu, 1952, 1953 (a) and (b)] the data on the field application of artificial insemination in cattle collected during the years 1945 to 1948 by the regional artificial insemination centres operating under the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar have been discussed. The present paper deals with the data gathered during the year 1949 by the Calcutta, Patna and Bangalore centres of artificial insemination. DETAILS OF BULLS In 1949, there were 23 bulls278 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-IV [Vol. XXV, Part IV, DETAILS OF COLLECTIONS Full particulars of the collections made from the various bulls at the three centres are given in Table I. Number Out of the 23 bulls, less than 10 ejaculates were taken from 6; less than 20 ejaculates from 2; while the maximum number of ejaculates constituting 91.59 per cent of the total for all centres came from the remaining 15 bulls. Among B. indicus bulls the largest number of collections (78) were made from the Thari bull 57/2 of Patna, while the highest for the bulls of the other species were 85, taken from S. P. 441, also of Patna. On an average, these figures work out at slightly more than one collection per week. With the exception of Patna centre, the bulls at the centres were surplus to requirement as seen from both the total collections made, and the number of animals inseminated from each of the bulls during the year. For example, at the Bangalore Centre, out of the 22 bulls from two more than 50, from four 21 to 36 and from the rest less than 20 ejaculates were taken. Actually, two Red Sindhi, one Hallikar and two buffalo bulls would have sufficed for this centre on the basis of one collection per week. More bulls were used mainly on account of the programme of progeny testing at the Institute where the centre was located. Out of the seven bulls at the Calcutta Centre, only from two more than 50, and from one more than 40 ejaculates were taken. The ejaculates from other bulls worked out to one ejaculate per fort- night. At the Patna Centre, more than one ejaculate per week from three bulls, and from the remaining one per fortnight were taken. From a study of all the relevant information so far collected, it would seem that for a centre of the type operating under the Institute with a target annual figure of three to four thousand inseminations, if only one breed per species is used, two bulls per species should completely meet all demands for semenDecember, 1955] P.BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 279 TABLE I Details of collections at the three artificial insemination centres Names of centres Serial No. of bulls Brand No. or names of bulls Breed Total number of collections per Average volume of ejaculate per Bull Breed Species Bull Breed Species Remarks B. indicus Calcutta 1 Eng. 1 X-bred 5 3.84 ± = S.E. 2 do. 2 do. 5 10 4.90 4.37±1.53 3 Multani Sahiwal 23 23 5.19 5.19±1.14 4 Har. 12 Hariana 61 69 4.01 3.87±0.49 5 Mar. 48 do. 8 2.79 6 Hiralal Nagore 67 67 1.39 4.05±0.52 7 7/2 Thari 76 4.23 8 57/2 do. 78 187 531 3.69 4.08±0.10 3.93±0.20 Patna 9 158/2 do. 25 3.75 10 Tulsiraj do. 8 7.50 11 Unique R. Sindhi 17 3.76 12 281 do. 36 6.54 13 484 do. 18 3.81 14 575 do. 9 132 4.40 4.78±0.45 15 Warriorson do. 24 4.67 Bangalore 16 17 568 Warspite do. do. 21 7 4.48 2.43 18 K. Star Hallikar 20 4.09 19 Suguna Select do. 23 43 2.61 3.17±0.48 B. bubalis Calcutta 20 R. Murrah 44 1.58 Patna 21 S.P. 441 do. 85 1.88 Bangalore 22 132 do. 83 266 266 1.60 1.79±0.38 1.79±0.38 23 Janardhan do. 54 2.11
280 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-IV [Vol. XXV, Part IV, The difference was statistically significant. The statistical significance of difference in average semen volume of bulls of any two breeds is given in the two-way Table below: TABLE II Average semen volume of bulls Breed X-bred Sahiwal Hariana Nagore Thari Sindhi Hallikar Murrah X-bred .. .. .. .. .. .. .. * Sahiwal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. * Hariana .. .. .. .. .. .. .. * Nagore .. .. .. .. .. .. .. * Thari .. .. .. .. .. .. .. * Sindhi .. .. .. .. .. .. * * Hallikar .. .. .. .. .. * .. * Murrah * * * * * * * .. * Statistically significant These conclusions are restricted to the bulls of the breeds studied. For a comparative study of the semen volumes of breeds, a more extensive study comprising larger number of bulls is required. However, the limited data gathered by the centres appear to suggest that bulls of milk breeds like Gir, Sindhi and Sahiwal give ejaculates of larger volume than other breeds. A comparative statement of the average semen volumes per ejaculate of same bulls observed during the different years is given in Table III. TABLE III Average semen volume per ejaculate Bull No. 1946 1947 1948 1949 B. indicus bulls X-bred 2.44 (28) 3.22 (41) 4.11 (46) 4.90 (5) Multani 2.41 (20) 3.39 (22) 3.86 (19) 5.10 (23) Hiralal 2.84 (31) 3.86 (49) 3.41 (77) 4.05 (67) 158/2 3.07 (21) 3.66 (57) 3.86 (54) 3.75 (25) 57/2 2.90 (84) 3.22 (55) 3.38 (74) 3.69 (78) 7/2 2.23 (73) 3.41 (29) 3.72 (79) 4.23 (76) Unique .. 3.39 (23) 4.56 (23) 3.76 (17) 281 .. 7.57 (13) 6.59 (34) 6.54 (36) B. bubalis bulls S.P. 439 3.42 (16) 2.92 (37) 2.21 (17) .. S.P. 441 3.62 (11) 2.52 (43) 2.36 (63) 1.88 (85) The figures in brackets are the number of collections on which the averages are based On an average, in case of B. indicus bulls the average semen volume appears to show a progressive increase with years,while it is the other way about in the case of buffalo bulls. The difference between years in both cases was statistically signi- ficant. It is difficult to determine without additional data whether this represents a general situation or peculiarity of the bulls in use at the centres.
December, 1955] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 281 DETAILS OF INSEMINATIONS Details of inseminations made from the semen of various bulls at the centres are presented in Table IV. The distribution of the total services between the bulls was as follows : TABLE IV Details of inseminations at the three artificial insemination centres Names of centres Serial No. of bulls Brand No. or names of bulls Total number of inseminations per Average number of inseminations per Bull ejaculate per Remarks Breed Bull Breed Species Breed Species B. indicus. Calcutta 1 Eng. 1 X-bred 50 99 10.00 9.90 2 do. 2 do. 49 9.80 3 Multani Sahiwal 234 234 10.17 10.17 4 Har. 12 Hariana 547 8.87 5 do. 48 do. 70 617 8.75 8.94 6 Hiralal Nagore 247 247 9.64 9.64 Patna 7 7/2 Thari 1,809 23.80 8 57/2 do. 1,659 21.00 9 158/2 do. 506 4,115 7,233 20.24 22.01 13.62 10 Tulsiraj do. 141 20.14 Bangalore 11 Unique R. Sindhi 214 12.59 12 281 do. 469 13.03 13 484 do. 170 9.44 14 575 do. 164 1,606 18.22 12.17 15 Warriorson do. 165 6.88 16 568 do. 346 16.48 17 Warspite do. 78 11.14 18 K. Star do. 101 5.05 5.94 19 Suguna Select do. 214 315 6.48 B. bubalis Calcutta 20 R. Murrah 121 2.75 Patna 21 S. P. 441 do. 523 944 944 6.15 3.55 3.55 Bangalore 22 132 do. 180 2.17 23 Janardhan do. 120 2.22
282 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-IV [Vol. XXV, Part IV, Inseminations Bulls Over 1,000 2 From 501December, 1955] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 283 At centres run solely for the purpose of grading local indigenous breeds of live- stock with semen of superior sires, as for example the key-village artificial insemina- tion centres, a careful watch on the number of services performed per ejaculum would enable one to effect considerable economy in the budget of the centres since the cost of maintenance of bulls is one of the major items of expenditure. DETAILS OF REACTION TIME Details of reaction times of various bulls at the three artificial insemination centres are presented in Table V. The data show considerable variation in reaction time from bull to bull, and with a given bull, from collection to collection. The longest time taken for a collection was one hour and six minutes (Bull No. 57/2 of Patna) and the shortest time was seven seconds (R. S. Bull No. 484 and buffalo bull No. 132). Reaction time also appears to increase with length of artificial service. For example, in the case of the Patna Centre where the same bulls were in use for three to four years, there was a distinct increase in reaction time. Perhaps this was due to the practice of collection from on 'heat' teasers284 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-IV [Vol. XXV, Part IV, TABLE VDecember, 1955 ] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 285 TABLE VI(a) Details of service and conception rates at the three artificial insemination centres Names of centres Serial No. of bulls Brand No. or name of bulls Breed Total No. of cows whose calving data were No. of cows holding to service Average service rates per conception ox conception rate percentage per Remarks Known Unknown Bull Breed species B. indicus Calcutta 1 Eng. 1 x-bred 38 12 22 1.73 or 57.89 1.89 or 55.56 2 Eng. 2 do. 43 6 23 1.87 or 53.49 3 Multani Sahiwal 185 49 112 1.65 or 60.54 4 Har. 12 Hariana 442 105 254 1.74 or 57.47 1.75 or 57.09 5 Har. 43 do. 52 18 28 1.86 or 53.85 6 Hiralal Nagore 526 120 290 1.81 or 55.13 1.81 or 55.13 Patna 7 7/2 Thari 1,668 141 935 1.69 or 59.05 8 57/2 do. 1,534 125 918 1.67 or 59.84 9 158/2 do. 476 30 287 1.66 or 60.08 1.69 or 59.10 1.73 or 57.64 10 Tulsiraj do. 126 15 59 2.14 or 46.83 11 Unique R. Sindhi 200 14 111 1.80 or 55.50 12 281 do. 427 42 220 1.94 or 51.52 Bangalore 13 484 do. 159 11 92 1.73 or 57.86 14 575 do. 155 9 97 1.60 or 62.58 1.88 or 53.22 15 Warriorson do. 136 29 63 2.16 or 46.32 16 568 do. 325 21 104 1.98 or 50.46 17 Warspite do. 71 7 37 1.92 or 52.11 18 K. Star do. 92 9 67 1.37 or 72.83 1.43 or 69.95 19 Suguna select do. 111 11 75 1.48 or 67.57 6,766 774 3,903 B. bubalis Calcutta 20 R. Murrah 102 19 95 1.07 or 93.14 Patna 21 S. P. 441 do. 488 35 265 1.84 or 54.30 Bangalore 22 132 do. 174 6 122 1.43 or 70.11 1.59 or 63.04 1.59 or 630.4 23 Janardhan do. 110 10 69 1.59 or 62.73 874 70 551 36 AR/55 5
286 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-IV [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, Using the conception rates given by the same bulls over the past years, an analysis was carried out to find out whether the rates had varied from year to year. The F. ratios for variation between years and bulls were statistically significant at 5 per cent level. Summary of the analysis is presented in Table VI(b). TABLE VI(b) Analysis of variance Variation D.F S.S M.S F Between years 3 520.94 173.64 4.50* Between bulls 5 719.46 143.89 3.73* Error 15 577.92 38.52 Total 23 1818.32 *Significant at 5 per cent level Since the conception rates depend on a variety of factors, among which (a) the skill of the artificial insemination technician, (b) stage of oestrum of the cows and (c) length of storage of semen outside the body are important, the effect of these factors on conception rates were studied. (a) Skill of the artificial insemination technician and conception rates Foreign artificial breeding co-operatives have observed that the freshly trained technicians take some time before they reach the desired level of efficiency as artificial insemination technicians. The efficiency was measured by the conception rates based on percentage of 'non-returns'. Distinct individual to individual variation in efficiency was observed, some taking longer time than others to reach the desired level of proficiency. Further, even in otherwise skilled technicians, difference in efficiency was noted. To see whether the conception rates at the three centres were influenced by the skill of operators, the conception rates obtained by the differ- ent persons who performed the inseminations at the centres were worked out and they are presented in Table VI(c).
December, 1955 ] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 287 TABLE VI(c) Efficiency of artificial insemination operators Name of centre Initials of operators No. of animals inseminated Number pregnant Percentage of conception Calcutta 1. S.G.S. 2. B.K.B. 3. R. 4. S. 5. O.C.N. 6. Ch.C. 7. R.K.Y. 338 356 146 53 19 2,992 403 196 239 93 30 11 1,818 207 57.99 67.13 63.70 56.60 57.89 60.76 51.36 Patna 8. C.R. 9. P.N.Y. 10. R.L.S. 11. S.V.C. 12. H.S.V. 102 76 223 553 445 53 51 127 320 260 51.96 67.11 56.95 57.87 58.43 Bangalore 13. K.M. 14. D.N. 15. D.L.S. 765 135 81 452 83 37 59.08 61.48 45.68 Total/Average 15 6,687 3,977 59.47±1.46
288 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-IV [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, It appears that significant variation did exist from operator to operator. The lowest rate was 45.68 per cent and the highest 67.13 per cent with the overall average standing at 59.47±1.46 per cent. With the exception of operator No. 5, the per- centages are based on sufficiently large number of cases so that the chances of the precision of the estimates being influenced by the varying number of observations may be taken as small. If the average over all conception rate, namely 59.47 per cent is taken as the desired level of efficiency, it would be seen that three of the 15 operators fell significantly below this level. All the operators included in the study had three to four or more years of experience and the low conception rates obtained by some of them could hardly be said to be due to their being new to the job. The observed bull to bull variation was probably not due to the inclusion of inseminations performed by operators having 'low' index of efficiency, for (1) there was no evidence to show that they used semen of only certain bulls for the inseminations and (2) two of these men belonged to Patna Centre, where the bull to bull variation in rates was negligible. Thus, this study while establishing operator to operator difference in efficiency failed to account for the wide variation noted in conception rates of cows bred from different bulls. (b) Stage of oestrum of the cow and conception rate The stage of oestrum was measured by the number of hours elapsing from the onset of heat till the time of insemination. For this study only approximate times were used. The time of occurrence of heat was fixed by closely interrogating the owners of the animals and through examination of the condition of the 'os uteri' and vagina. For convenience, the animals were grouped into six-hourly blocks. In Table VI(d) are brought out the data so summarised. TABLE VI(d) Data showing hours of heat in cattle Name of centre Hours of heat 1.6 6.1.12 12.1.18 18.1.24 24.1.30 30.1.36 36.1.42 42.1.48 Cows Calcutta 64.21 60.47 63.10 57.66 47.83 54.29 31.25 43.78 (95) (382) (290) (248) (138) (35) (48) (16) Patna 64.59 64.58 62.75 50.32 38.20 38.89 31.25 12.50 (836) (1200) (835) (473) (178) (36) (32) (24) Bangalore 61.37 56.19 58.86 52.56 47.20 60.00 .. .. (321) (420) (440) (371) (125) (25) Buffaloes Calcutta .. .. Data scanty .. .. .. .. Patna 55.94 62.21 47.47 23.08 20.00 .. .. .. (143) (172) (99) (13) (5) Bangalore 80.49 67.09 74.42 59.18 64.71 (82) (79) (62) (49) (17) Figures in brackets are the numbers of inseminations
December, 1955 ] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PEABHU 289 From Table VI, it would be seen that there was a general drop in the conception rates with the increase in the time lag between onset of heat and time of insemination. This was found in both species and at all the three centres. The drop was marked after a lapse of 18 hours. Results of statistical analysis of cow data are summarised in Table VII. Only figures upto 36 hours of oestrum were used. No analysis of buffalo data was done, as the information was scanty. TABLE VII Analysis of variance Source of variation D.F. S.S M.S. P. Between Centres 2 67.2422 33.6211 1.08 Between lengths of heat 5 808.7389 161.7477 5.21* Error 10 310.0400 31.0040 Total 17 1,186.0211 *Significant at 5 per cent level The variation in conception rates between centres was not statistically significant, while the variation in conception rates between the first six periods of oestrum was significant at 5 per cent level. (c) Age of stored semen and conception rates In Table VIII are summarised the data on conception rates obtained with semen samples of different ages. TABLE VIII Age of semen and conception rates Age of semen (hours.) Conception rates Calcutta Centre Patna Centre Bangalore Centre Cows 1-12 62.28 (448) 61.63 (1285) 59.09 (506) 12.1-24 56.03 (257) 60.44 ( 594) 54.43 (158) 24.1-36 58.95 (285) 59.57 ( 831) 56.29 (286) 36.1-48 51.75 (114) 60.60 ( 305) 55.32 (141) 48.1-60 49.00 (100) 54.52 ( 343) 54.23 (201) 60.1-72 63.64 ( 22) 59.09 ( 22) 60.47 ( 86) 72.1-84 .. 58.82 ( 17) 47.65 (149) 84.1-96 .. .. 52.63 ( 57) 96.1-108 .. .. 53.76 ( 93) 108.1-120 .. .. 65.79 ( 38) 120.1-132 .. .. 44.00 ( 25) 132.1-144 .. .. 57.89 ( 19) 144.1-156 .. .. 33.33 ( 12) 156.1-168 .. .. 50.00 ( 6) 168.1-180 .. .. 60.00 (5) Figures in brackets are the numbers of inseminations
290 ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION IN CATTLE-IV [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, At the Calcutta and Patna centres semen preserved for more than 84 hours was not used. At the Bangalore Centre, information was available upto the age of 180 hours. But as the number of inseminations made beyond 132 hours of age was small and in the absence of like figures for other centres, analysis was carried on data upto 72 hours of preservation and the results are summarised in Table IX. TABLE IX Analysis of variance Source of variation D.F. S.S. M.S. F. Between centres 2 25.8459 12.9229 1.70 Between age-groups 5 157.3332 31.4666 4.15* Error 10 75.6903 7.5690 Total 17 258.8694 *Significant at 5 per cent level The analysis revealed that while there was no difference in conception rates between centres, the rates differed significantly among age groups. Willett, Fuller and Salisbury [1940] have noted no significant difference in conception rates when semen preserved upto 96 hours was used for insemination. General A fact of considerable interest to veterinarians was the high rates of abortions and calf mortality observed at Calcutta which represents conditions found in a typical large city. Out of the 700 pregnant cows, 103 aborted, 13 dropped still-births, while 120 of the normally born calves died subsequently. The corresponding figures for buffaloes were 72 pregnant, 6 abortions, 1 still-birth and 28 calf deaths. The rate of aborted calvings worked out at 14.71 per cent for cows and 8.33 per cent for buffaloes. The respective calf mortality figures were 17.14 per cent and 38.89 per cent. These high abortion and calf mortality rates could not be due to artificial insemination, for at the other two Centres no such evidence was obtained. These rates appear part of the normal conditions prevailing in that city. SUMMARY Data gathered during the year 1949 by the Calcutta, Patna and Bangalore Field Artificial Insemination Centres run by the Animal Genetics Division of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute and comprising 8177 inseminations made from 797 ejaculates drawn from 19 Bos indicus and 4 Bubalus babalis bulls of the Centres are analysed and discussed. The paper also includes the study of three factors, namely (a) skill of artificial insemination technicians (b) stage of oestrum of the cow and (c) effect of age of preserved semen on conception rates.
December, 1955 ] P. BHATTACHARYA AND S. S. PRABHU 291 ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors wish to thank Shri Gajjan Singh, Ch. Chetram and Shri S. V. Chandi- ramani, Officers-in-charge of the Calcutta, Patna and Bangalore centres respectively for their help in introducing the new technique in the field. The basic data utilised in this paper were collected by them. Thanks are also due to Major J. M. Lahiri, Principal, Bengal Veterinary College, Shri S. K. Sen, Director of Animal Husbandry, Bihar and Dr. K. C. Sen, Director, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore, for their personal interest and for providing all facilities for work. To the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar the authors are grateful for help and advice at all stages during the operation of the Scheme. REFERENCES Bhattacharya., P. (1948). Preliminary report on the field application of artificial insemination in India. Abstr. Proc. 36th Indian Sci. Congr., III(4), 96 SEASONAL CHANGES IN THE HISTOLOGY OF THE THYROID AND THE TESTIS OF BUFFALO By D. S. BHATNAGAR, D. P. MUKHERJEE and P. BHATTACHARYA, Division of Animal Genetics, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 7th January 1955) THERE is seasonal variation in semen qualities of Indian farm animals, viz. bulls, sheep and goats [Mukherjee and Bhattacharya, 1952; Shukla and Bhatta- charya, 1952, a & b]. In all these farm animals it has been observed that the qualities of their semen deteriorate during the part of the year when air temperature is high associated with high relative humidity and rainfall. The qualities improve when air temperature is moderate coupled with low humidity and scanty rainfall. Seasonal variation in the reproductive activity of rams is caused not directly but indirectly through the thyroid gland [Berliner and Warbritton, 1937; Bogart and Mayer, 1946]. High or low environmental temperature cause hypo or hyper thyroidism respectively in rams as a result of which the semen qualities decrease or increase. Opinion of workers on the role of the thyroid on the testicular function varies. Some believe that the action is not due to endocrine imbalance but to changed metabolic status [Moor, 1939], changed nervous irritability [Lerman, 1942], general growth disturbances [Schneider, 1939] or to complex inter-relations between the endocrine system and body metabolism as a whole [Cameron, 1945]. In spite of disagreement among the thyroid physiologists regarding the action of the thyroid on the testicular function, there is unanimity of opinion that the thyroid does influence fertility in male [Oloufa et al., 1951]. Buffalo being an important farm animal of India and there being no information available on the thyroid and the testis of this animal, it was considered worthwhile to study the effect of climatic changes on the two glands of this species and their inter-dependence, if any. EXPERIMENTAL The thyroid and the testicular materials were obtained from 32 adult buffalo- bulls slaughtered at the peak of four different seasons in a local abbatoir. As far as possible, the materials were obtained from animals which were in good condi- tion of health, free from visible symptoms of any disease and between 6½ to 8½ years of age as determined by their dental formation. The materials were obtained from each animal immediately after it was slaughtered. The thyroid materials were fixed in 5 per cent formalin for 4 to 5 hours followed by 24 hours in Susa and the testicular materials were fixed in Bouin's fluid. Paraffin sections were made of a thickness of 8u and the sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. 293 36 AR/55 6
294 CHANGES IN THE HISTOLOGY OF THE THYROID [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, The thyroid sections were studied for changes in (i) the diameters of the lobules and (ii) the heights of their epithelial cells. To study the diameter of the lobule, at least 50 lobules cut transversely were selected at random from the slides prepared from the material obtained from each animal. In each selected lobule, the two diameters at right angles to each other were measured by means of an ocular micrometer and the mean of the two was taken as the diameter of the lobule. The height of the epithelial cells lining the lobules was determined by means of an ocular micrometer and oil immersion lens. The testicular sections were studied for the diameters of the seminiferous tubules. To study the diameter of the tubules, at least 70 tubules which were cut transversely were selected at random from slides prepared from the materials obtained from each animal and the mean diameter was determined as in the case of the thyroid lobule. During the months the materials were collected, daily maximum and minimum air temperatures and relative humidity were recorded in a well-ventilated shed situated in the Institute area at a distance of about a mile from the slaughter house. RESULTS For the purpose of this study, the year was generally divided into four seasons as described by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952], namely, (i) May to July, summer, (ii) August to October, autumn, (iii) November to January, winter and (iv) February to April, spring. As stated before, the materials were collected at the peak of the seasons except in autumn (see below). The collections were made in summer, from middle of May to end of June; in autumn from middle of July to middle of August; in winter from middle of December to middle of January and in spring from middle of February to middle of March. Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952] characterised autumn as a season with highest humidity and almost as high air temperature as in summer. In this experiment highest humidity associated with high air temperature was observed between middle of July to middle of August. The materials for autumn were, therefore, collected during this period. Table I shows the range of variation and average of air temperature, relative humidity, diameter and height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobule and the diameter of the testicular tubule in different seasons. It will be seen from the Table that during summer, when average air temperature was highest with lowest relative humidity, the diameter of the thyroid lobule was more than in any other season. In autumn when average air temperature was almost as high as in summer with highest relative humidity, the height of the epithelial cells and the diameter of the testicular tubule were lower than in the remaining three seasons. The measurements showed reverse trend during spring when the average air temperature was moderate (neither so low as in winter nor so high as in summer) associated with moderate relative humidity.
December, 1955 ] D. S. BHATNAGAR, D. P. MUKHBEJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 295 TABLE I Range and average variation in the air temperature, relative humidity, diameter of the thyroid lobule, height of the epithelial cells and the diameter of the testicular tubule in four seasons Season Air temperature (ºF) Relative humidity (per cent) Diameter of the thyroid lobule (u) Height of the epithelial cells of lobule (u) Diameter of the testicular tubule (u) Range Average Range Average Range Average Range Average Range Average Summer 69 to 113 93.6 25.0 to 96.8 49.0 66.64 to 516.46 236.4 1.66 to 6.64 3.69 99.96 to 316.54 187.95 Autumn 73 to 108 87.2 50.0 to 96.0 72.0 83.3 to 332.2 187.65 1.66 to 6.64 3.09 108.29 to 266.56 168.27 Winter 42 to 76 58.6 49.0 to 94.5 70.5 49.98 to 474.81 209.06 1.66 to 6.64 4.47 141.61 to 316.54 192.85 Spring 48 to 88 67.9 45.0 to 89.0 64.2 83.3 to 383.18 202.32 1.66 to 6.64 4.79 116.62 to 274.89 195.91 TABLE II Statistical analysis of the difference in means between the diameter of the thyroid lobules, height of the epithelial cells and the diameter of the testicular tubules Seasons Thyroid Lobule Diameter Height of the epithelial cell Diameter of the Testicular Tubule Mean (u) P7 Mean (u) P7 Mean (u) P7 Summer 236.40±3.84 3.69±0.006 187.95 ±3.02 (490) (570) (570) Autumn 187.65±2.89 Dif 1-2 &lt;0.01 3.09±0.07 Dif 1-2 &lt;0.05 168.27 ± 2.71 Dif 1-2 &lt;0.50 (562) (300) (560) Winter 209.06±3.43 Dif 1-3 &lt;0.02 4.47±0.08 Dif 3-1 &lt;0.01 192.85±3.07 Dif 3-1 &lt;0.50 (545) Dif 3-2 = 0.01 (470) Dif 3-2 &lt;0.01 (561) Dif 3-2 &lt;0.01 Spring 202.32±3.23 Dif 1-4 &lt;0.01 4.79±0.08 Dif 4-1 &lt;0.01 195.91±3.12 Dif 4-1 &lt;0.10 (560) Dif 4-2 &lt;0.02 (480) Dif 4-2 &lt;0.01 (564) Dif 4-2 &lt;0.01 Dif 3-4 &lt;0.50 Dif 4-3&gt; 0.10 Dif 4-3 &lt;0.50 * Probability of chance occurrence of the difference between means from Fisher's table of t value * Underlined differences are significant Figures in brackets show the number of observations made
296 CHANGES IN THE HISTOLOGY OF THE THYROID [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, Statistical analysis of data To find out if the variations in the measurements of the glands during different seasons were due to chance only, the data were subjected to statistical analysis. The results of the analysis are presented in Tables II to IV. Table II shows analysis of differences in the mean diameter of the thyroid lobule, height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobule and the diameter of the testicular tubule in four seasons. In the Table, the differences underlined are statistically significant. It is apparent from the Table that there was no significant variation in the diameter of the thyroid lobule and in the height of the epithelial cells during spring and winter. There was also no significant difference in the mean diameter of the testicular tubule between summer, winter and spring. The statistical analysis of data indicates that the diameter and the height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobule and the diameter of the testicular tubule undergo seasonal changes. In this study, seasons have been classified on the basis of air temperature and relative humidity. To find out if one or both the atmospheric factors were responsible for seasonal changes in the two glands, partial correlation coefficients between the atmospheric factors and the various measurements of the two glands have been determined. This is presented in Table III. It will be seen from the Table that the partial correlation coefficient between air temperature and the height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobules was negative and highly significant. This indicates that when relative humidity was held constant, the increase in air temperature decreased the height of the epithelial cell of the thyroid lobule. Similarly, the increase in air temperature decreased the diameter of the testicular tubule when the other factor, viz. relative humidity, was held constant. Air temperature had no significant effect on the diameter of the thyroid lobule. Increase in relative humidity, when air temperature was held constant, decreased the diameter of the thyroid lobule. Similarly, increase in relative humidity decreased the height of the epithelial cells and the diameter of the testicular tubule when air temperature was held constant. Multiple correlation coefficients (R) which indicate the effect of combined variable atmospheric factors on the variates studied are as follows: R for the height of the epithelial cells= 0.869** R for the diameter of the thyroid lobule= 0.660** R for the diameter of the testicular tubule= 0.727** (** Significant at 1 per cent level) All the values of R are highly significant, and they suggest that among the three charateristics studied, it was the height of the epithelial cell which was most sensitive to atmospheric changes. Among the two diameters, the diameter of the testicular tubule was more sensitive to changes in air temperature and relative humidity than that of the thyroid lobule. Multiple regression equations X1 for air temperature, X2 for relative humidity and Y the estimated value are as follows: (1) Y (for the diameter of the thyroid lobule)= 352.54December, 1955 ] D. S. BHATNAGAR, D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 297 TABLE III Partial correlation coefficients between atmospheric factors and the various measure- ments of the two glands Air temperature Relative humidity Diameter of the thyroid lobule 298 CHANGES IN THE HISTOLOGY OF THE THYROID [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, Examinations of equations 2 and 3 will indicate that in the two equations, the coefficients for X1 and X2 are equal. This suggests that 1 degree rise in air tempera- ture caused as much change to the height of the epithelial cells or the diameter of the testicular tubule as was due to 1 per cent change in relative humidity. Examina- tion of equation indicates that coefficient for X2 is almost 2 times more than X1. This indicates that 1 per cent change in relative humidity caused two times as much change in the diameter of the thyroid lobule as was due to 1 degree change in air temperature. Thus, for variations in diameter of the thyroid lobule, relative humi- dity was comparatively more responsible than air temperature, whereas for variations in the height of the epithelial cells or the diameter of the testicular tubule both the atmospheric factors were equally responsible. To find out the effect of seasonal changes of one gland on the other correlation coefficients between the diameters of the thyroid lobule and the height of the epi- thelial cells, between the diameters of the thyroid lobule and the testicular tubule and between the height of the epithelial cells and the diameter of the testicular tubules have been worked out and presented in Table IV. It will be seen from the Table that there was highly positive correlation coefficient between the height of the epithelial cell and the diameter of the testicular tubule. It seems, therefore, that when the height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobule increased, the diameter of the testicular tubule also increased. Partial correlation coefficient between the height of the epithelial cells and the diameter of the testicular tubule when air temperature and relative humidity were held constant has been found to be 0.013 and non-significant. It indicates that variation in the height of the epithelial cells has no direct effect on the diameter of the testicular tubule. DISCUSSION The thyroid has provision for storage of hormone in the central lumina of the follicles. In periods of most active secretion, the stored hormone may be discharged in the blood stream and the glandular cells elongate under the stimulation of increased secretion of the pituitary thyrotropic hormone. During periods of thyroid inactivity, hormone may be stored up in the lumina of the follicles and the glandular cells shorten and become less active [Watzka, 1938; Baker, 1949; Holm, 1949]. From the histological studies of the thyroid of buffaloes it seems, that in spring and winter when air temperature was much lower associated with higher relative humidity than in summer the diameter of the lobules was significantly smaller and the height of the epithelial cells highly significant, more than in summer. During the active state more of the thyroid hormone was produced and discharged into the blood as a result of which the lumina of the lobules were smaller and the height of the epithelial cells more than that in summer. During summer when air temperature was high, coupled with low relative humidity, the bigger lobules with lower epithelial cells having flattened nuclei indicated that the hormone was stored up in the gland and very little was discharged into the blood. In autumn when average air tempera- ture was slightly lower with conspicuously higher relative humidity than in summer, there was a significant decrease in the diameter of the thyroid lobule and the height of the epithelial cell than in summer. This result indicates that during autumn
December, 1955 ] D. S. BHATNAGAR, D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 299 the stored hormone was discharged into the blood due to lower air temperature caused by high relative humidity but the production of hormone was lowest of all seasons. Partial correlation coefficients between the atmospheric factors, the diameter and the height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobules indicated that in buffaloes increase in humidity may cause the thyroid to discharge more of its stored hormone into the blood, as a result of which the lumina of the follicles become smaller. The production of hormone, however, as indicated by the height of the epithelial cells, depends on both air temperature and relative humidity. Increase in either of the two atmospheric factors when the other was held constant decreased the production of the thyroid hormone. That the thyroid hormone is controlled by the environ- mental temperature has been found in rats [Dampsy and Astwood, 1943; Hurst and Turner, 1947; Maqsood and Reineke, 1950], in birds [Reineke and Turner, 1945] and in sheep [Berliner and Warbritton, 1937 ; Bogart and Mayer, 1946]. In buffaloes it seems that besides air temperature, relative humidity also has an influence on the thyroid activity. Testes differ from the thyroid in the sense that they cannot store their product and as such the increase in the diameter of the tubule may be an indication of their higher activity and vice versa. Thus in winter and spring when the diameter of the tubules in buffaloes was more in comparison to that in autumn, it indicated that the activity of the testes in the two seasons was more than in autumn. Although there was no significant difference between winter, spring and summer with regard to the diameter of the testicular tubule, the histological study of the tubules indicated that in winter and spring the rate of spermatogenesis was more. As the correlation coefficient between the height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobule and the diameter of the testicular tubule was positive and highly significant, it indicates that greater the thyroid activity the greater is the testicular activity. But, as stated before, this action of the thyroid may not be direct but indirect. SUMMARY The thyroid and the testicular materials from 32 adult buffalo-bulls slaughtered at the peak of four different seasons, viz. summer, autumn, winter and spring were studied. The thyroid materials were studied for seasonal variation in the diameter of the thyroid lobule and the height of the epithelial cells of the lobule and the testicular materials for the diameter of the tubules. The study revealed the following: (1) In autumn, the diameter of the thyroid lobule was significantly lower than in other season. In summer, the diameter of the thyroid lobule was significantly more than in winter and spring. (2) In autumn, the height of the epithelial cells was significantly lower than in any other season. In summer, the height of the epithelial cells was significantly lower than in the rest of the three seasons. (3) The mean diameter of the testicular tubule in autumn was significantly lower than in the rest of the three seasons. The diameter of the testicular tubule in summer was in between that of autumn and winter.
300 CHANGES IN THE HISTOLOGY OF THE THYROID [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, (4) No significant difference between winter and spring with regard to the variations in the thyroid and the testicular materials has been found. (5) The height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobules seems to have an indirect effect on the diameter of the testicular tubule. (6) Partial correlation coefficients between air temperature and the height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobule and between air temperature and the diameter of the testicular tubule was negative and highly significant. (7) Highly significant negative partial correlation coefficients between the relative humidity and the two diameters and the height of the epithelial cells have been obtained. (8) The height of the epithelial cells of the thyroid lobule has been found to be most sensitive to changes in air temperature and relative humidity than the two diameters studied. Of the two diameters, the one of the testi- cular tubule was comparatively more sensitive than that of the thyroid lobule to variations in air temperature and relative humidity. REPERENCES Barker, S. B. (1949). J. Endocrinol., 6(2), 137 Berliner, V. and Warbritton, V. (1937). Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod., 137 Bogart, R. and Mayer, D.T. (1946). Amer. J. Physiol. 147, 320 Cameron, A.T. (1945). Recent advance in endocrinology. 5th Edn., Blackstone Co., London Dampsey, E.W. and Astwood, E.B. (1943). Endocrinology 32, 509 Holm, E.O. (1949). Amer. J. Physiol., 158, 337 Hurst, V. and Turner, W. (1947). Amer. J. Physiol. 150, 686 Lerman, J. (1942). Amer. Med. Assn. 335N. Dearborn St., Chicago Maqsood, M. and Reineke, E.P. (1950). Amer. J. Physiol. 162, 24 Moore, C.R. (1939). Biology of testesENVIRONMENTAL CAUSES OF VARIATION IN THE LENGTH OF GESTATION OF BUFFALOES By Y. S. GHANEM,1 A. ABUL-FADL, A. ZAHER2 and F. A. SOLIMAN, Department of Zoology and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cairo University (Received for publication on 16th December 1954) (With one Text figure) THE Egyptian farmer has learned through years of experience that his buffalo is expected to calve 10 months and 10 days after service, which is approximately 310 days. Levine [1920] found the average length of gestation in buffaloes to be 312 days. Ragab and Asker [1951] gave an estimate of 316.7 days. Kanneth [1953] cited estimates of gestation period in the buffalo ranging from 310 to 316 days. The scientific study of the various factors influencing the length of gestation in farm animals has stimulated the interest of many investigators. Some of these factors are the season and month of parturition, sex of young, age of dam, etc. The season of calving has been found by Herman and Spalding [1947] and Alexander [1950] to affect gestation length in cattle. They observed that cows calving during the winter had the longest gestation and those calving during the summer had the shortest. Other investigators [Knapp et al., 1940; Jafar et al., 1950] did not observe any influence of season of calving on gestation length. Many studies indicate that males are carried for a longer duration than females in cattle [Knoop and Hayden, 1934; Jafar et al., 1950]; however, in buffaloes, Ragab and Asker [1951] and Weaver et al. [1947] failed to show any effect of the sex of calf on the duration of pregnancy. The age of dam has been found to affect gestation period by some investigators [Knoop and Hayden, 1934; Herman and Spalding, 1947], while others did not observe such an effect [Knapp et al., 1940; Weaver et al., 1947; Jafar et al., 1950; Ragab and Asker, 1951]. In the present study, it was intended to investigate the effects of the different environmental factors discussed above on the duration of pregnancy in the Egyptian buffalo. MATERIAL AND METHODS The data used in this study were obtained from the breeding records kept on Bahteem farm of the Egyptian Agricultural Society from 1935 to 1951. They included 424 gestations, which terminated in the birth of living normal calves, from 126 buffaloes. These buffaloes were kept for milk production and were given dry ration during the summer and autumn, while in the winter and spring they were allowed to graze in clover fields. The length of gestation was computed from the day of service to the day of calving, both days inclusive. 1 Present address: Zoology Dept., Faculty of Science, Cairo University 2 Present address: Animal Production Dept., Faculty of Agriculture, Heliopolis University 301 36 AR/55 7
302 VARIATION IN THE LENGTH OF GESTATION [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, The data was examined statistically, using the 'analysis of variance' method [Snedecor, 1946]. The method of expected subclass numbers [Snedecor, 1934] and the method of unweighted means [Yates, 1934] were used in those cases of multiple classification where the numbers in the subclasses were disproportionate. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The average length of gestation in all the data was found to be 316.4 days, with a standard deviation of ±7.86 days. This estimate is close to that reported by Ragab and Asker [1951]. Figure 1 shows the frequency distribution of gestation lengths, which seems to be slightly skewed [Sk=December, 1955 ] Y. S. GHANEM, A. ZAHER, A. A. FADL AND P. A. SOLIMAN 303 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Frequency distribution of gestation period in buffaloes
304 VARIATION IN THE LENGTH OF GESTATION [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, TABLE II Analysis of variance of gestation length for month and season of calving Source of variation Degrees of freedom Mean square Seasons 3 290.7** Months within seasons 8 38.9 Within months 412 60.5 ** P &lt;0.01. Year and season of calving The gestations obtained from the year 1944 to 1950 were used to study the effect of year and season of calving, since there were sufficient number of gestations during each of these years. The analysis of variance did not show a significant effect of year of calving on gestation length, while the season effect was highly significant [Table III]. TABLE III Analysis of variance of gestation length for year and season of calving (method of expected subclass numbers) Source of variation Degrees of freedom Mean square Years 6 125.2 Seasons 3 253.3** Interaction 18 76.0 Within subclasses 361 59.9 ** P &lt;0.01. TABLE IV Average length of gestation according to sex of calf and season of calving Season of calving Male Female Total Number Average Number Average Number Average Winter 57 318.2 34 318.8 91 318.5 Spring 50 316.0 30 318.1 80 316.8 Summer 59 315.7 61 317.6 120 316.6 Autumn 61 313.2 72 315.7 133 314.5 TOTAL 227 315.7 197 317.2 424 316.4
December, 1955 ] Y. S. GHANEM, A. ZAHER, A. A. FADL AND F. A. SOLIMAN 305 Sex of calf and season of calving Table IV shows the average gestation lengths ending by the birth of male and female calves during the different seasons. Female calves were carried 1.5 days longer than males. This difference was found significant [Table V], and was responsible for 2.2 per cent of the total variance. The variation due to season of calving was highly significant and was responsible for 4.1 per cent of the total variance. Other investigators, however, [Knoop and Hayden, 1934; Jafar et al., 1950; Ragab and Asker, 1951] observed that male calves are carried longer than females. No satisfactory explanation for this controversy could be suggested. TABLE V Analysis and estimates of variance of gestation length for sex of calf and season of calving (Method of unweighted means) Source of variation Degrees of freedom Mean square Expected value of mean square Variance component Per cent of total variance Sexes 1 358.5* 210.9?x2+?2 1.4 2.2 Seasons 3 334.9** 104.6?x2+?2 2.6 4.1 Within subclasses 416 59.7 ?2 59.7 93.7 * P &lt;0.05. **P &lt;0.01. Age of dam The lengths of 159 gestations from buffaloes of known ages were available for studying the effect of age of dam on gestation length. They were adjusted for season of calving and sex of calf; then they were divided into two groups according to the age of the dam. The older buffaloes (above six years of age) carried their calves 319 days, while the younger ones (2 to 6 years old) carried their calves 316 days. The difference was highly significant, and was responsible for 8.0 per cent of the total variance [Table VI]. The age effect may be due to the slowing down of physiological processes, including the control of pregnancy, in older buffaloes. TABLE VI Analysis and estimates of variance of gestation length for age of dam Source of variation Degrees of freedom Mean square Expected value of mean square Variance components Percent of total variance Between ages 1 340.3** 71.7?a2+?2 4.1 8.0 Within ages 156 47.4 ?2 47.4 92.0 ** P &lt;0.01. 36 AR/55 8
306 VARIATION IN THE LENGTH OP GESTATION [Vol. XXV, Part IV, SUMMARY The data relating to the length of 424 gestations in Egyptian buffaloes were used in the study of the effects of certain environmental factors on pregnancy dura- tion: 1. The average length of gestation was found to be 316.4,±7.86 days. 2. Differences due to season of calving were found highly significant. Gesta- tions ending in winter calvings were found to be the longest, and those ending in autumn calvings were the shortest. 3. The year of calving did not influence the length of gestation. 4. Female calves were carried in utero for a significantly longer period than males. 5. Old buffaloes (above six years of age) carried their calves for significantly longer periods than younger ones (2 to 6 years old). ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are indebted to the Egyptian Agricultural Society for providing the breeding records, which were necessary for carrying out this investigation. REFERENCES Alexander, M. H. (1950). Length of Gestation in the Five Major Breeds of Dairy Cattle, Abstr. J. Dairy Sci., 33 : 377 Herman, H. A. and Spalding, R. W. (1947). A Study of Factors Affecting the Length of Gestation in Dairy Cattle. J. Dairy Sci., 30 : 545-546 Jafar, S. M., Chapman, A. B. and Casida, L. E. (1950). Causes of Variation in Length of Gestation in Dairy Cattle. J. Anim. Sci., 9 : 593-599 Kenneth, J. H. (1953). Gestation Periods, a Table and Bibliography. Commonwealth Bureau of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Tech. Commu., 5, third edition Edinburgh Knapp, Jr., B., Lambert, W. V. and Black, W. H. (1940). Factors Influencing Length of Gestation and Birth Weight in Cattle. J. agric. Res., 61 : 277-285 Knoop, C. E. and Hayden, C. C. (1934). A Study of the Length of Gestation and Service Record of Dairy Cows. Ohio Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull., 19 : 8-14 Levine, C. O. (1920). The Water Buffalo, A Tropical Source of Butterfat. J. Heredity, 11 : 51-64 Ragab, M. T. and Asker, A. A. (1951). Factors Influencing Length of Gestation Period in Egyptian Cattle and Buffaloes. Indian J. Dairy Sci., 4 : 159-169 Snedecor, G. W. (1934). The Method of Expected Numbers for Tables of Multiple Classification with Disproportionate Subclass Numbers. J. Amer. Stat. Ass., 29 : 389-393 GENETIC CAUSES OF VARIATION IN THE LENGTH OF GESTATION OF BUFFALOES By Y. S. GHANEM1, A. ZAHER2, A. ABUL-FADL and F. A. SOLIMAN, Departments of Zoology and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cairo University (Received for publication on 16th December 1954 ) THE fact that the length of gestation is a species characteristic [Lush, 1945], seems to suggest that it might be due to direct genetic influence. Variations in gestation length also exist within species, and are attributed partly to differences in the genetic make-up of the individuals belonging to the same species, and partly to certain environmental factors such as season and year of service or parturition age of dam, etc. Significant differences in gestation length between breeds of cattle were observed by Rife et al., [1943] and Livesay and Bee [1945]. It has been suggested that these inter-breed differences are hereditary [Shrode and Lush, 1947]. Other evidences of the effect of heredity on pregnancy duration have been provided by several studies of correlations between relatives. Significant differences in the gestation lengths of calves sired by different bulls were reported by Rife et al. [1943], Bonadonna and Valerani [1946], Alexander [1950], and Jafar et al., [1950]. Similar results were obtained by Ragab and Asker [1951] in the buffalo. The effect of the dam on gestation length has also been found significant in cattle [Knapp et al., 1940 ; Jafar et al., 1950] and in buffaloes [Ragab and Asker, 1951]. The components of variance in pregnancy duration were estimated by Jafar et al., [1950] and they con- cluded that the genotype of the calf was responsible for 48 per cent of the total variance. MATERIAL The lengths of 424 gestations of 126 buffaloes out of 15 sires, covering the period from 1935 to 1951 were used in this study. They were obtained from the breeding records of Bahteem farm of the Egyptian Agricultural Society and were described by Ghanem et al., [1954]. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS The data were adjusted for sex of calf and season of calving according to the results previously obtained by Ghanem et al., [1955]. Statistical analysis was then carried out, using the analysis of variance method described by Snedecor [1946]. Paternal half sibs The progeny of ten sires that had the largest number of offspring were used to study the differences between paternal half sibs. These differences were found to be highly significant [Table I]. The intraclass correlation between paternal half sibs was 0.0571 ± 0.05. 1 Present address : Zoology Dept., Faculty of Science, Cairo University 2 Present address : Animal Production Dept., Faculty of Agriculture, Heliopolis University 307 36 AR/55 9
308 LENGTH OF GESTATION IN BUFFALOES [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, TABLE I Analysis and components of variance of gestation length in families of paternal half sibs Source of variation Degrees of freedom Mean square Expected value of mean square Variance component Percent of total variance Between sib families 9 187.5** 37.9December, 1955 ] Y. S. GHANEM, A. ZAHER, A. A. FADL AND P. A. SOLIMAN 309 Components of variance The correlation between paternal half sibs contains one-fourth of the variance due to additive genes and about one-sixteenth of the epistatic deviation from the additive scheme [Wright, 1935; Lush, 1945]. These components are also included in the maternal half-sib correlation together with the variance caused by common maternal environment. Thus, simply subtracting the paternal half sib correlation from that of the maternal half-sibs gives an estimate of the variance caused by per- manent maternal traits. The correlation between full sibs is an estimate of half of the variance due to additive genes, one-quarter of the dominance deviations, about one-quarter of the epistatic deviations and the variance due to permanent maternal characteristics. Three simultaneous equations were obtained by using the above definitions and were then solved [Table IV]. The variance due to permanent maternal traits TABLE IV Correlations among different sets of sibs and estimates of their theoretical components Relationship Number Intraclass correlation Estimated components Paternal half sibs 413 0.0571±0.05 ¼7?g2+1/16 ?i2 Maternal half sibs 402 0.3018±0.05 ¼?g2+1/16?t2+?m2 Pull sibs 168 0.4086±0.08 ½?g2+¼?d2+¼?i2 +?m2 Variance due to additive genes ?g2=0.312 310 LENGTH OF GESTATION IN BUFFALOES [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, to dominance deviation December, 1955] Y. S. GHANEM, A. ZAHER, A. A. FADL AND F. A. SOLIMAN 311 SUMMARY The records of 424 gestations were used to study the genetic causes of variation in gestation length of the Egyptian buffalo. The partitioning of the total variance yielded 31.2, 3.1 and 24.5 per cent for the additive genetic variance and the variance due to dominant deviations and permanent maternal traits respectively. REFERENCES Alexander, M. H. (1950). Length of Gestation in the Five Major Breeds of Dairy Cattle, Abstr. J. Dairy Sci., 33 : 377 Bonadonna, T. and Valerani, L. (1946). Investigations and Observations on the Fertility of Several Lombardy Herds. Zootech. e Vet., 1: 129-150 and 274-287. (Anim, Breed. Abstr., 15 : 174, 1947) Ghanem, Y. S., Abdul Fadl, A., Zaher, A. and Soliman, F. A. (1955). Environmental Causes of Variation in the Length of Gestation of Buffaloes (in the present issue) Jafar, S. M., Chapman, A. B. and Casida, L. E. (1950). Causes of Variation in Length of Gestation in Dairy Cattle. J. Anim. Sci., 9: 593-599 Knapp, Jr. B., Lambert, W. V. and Black, W. H. (1940). Factors Influencing Length of Gestation and Birth Weight in Cattle. J. Agric. Res., 61 : 277-285 Livesay, E. A. and Bee, U. G. (1945). A Study of the Gestation Periods of Five Breeds. J. Anim. Sci., 4 : 13-14 Lush, J. L. (1945). Animal Breeding Plans, Third Edition, Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. PHYLOGENETIC SIGNIFICANCE OF SPINA BIFIDA IN ZEBU CATTLE By H. EPSTEIN, Lecturer in Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, Hebrew University, Jerusalem ( Received for publication on 12th August 1954.) ( With Plates VII-VIII ) HUMPED cattle may be grouped into two main divisions : the flesh-humped and the fat-humped. In flesh-humped cattle the hump is cervico-thoracic in situation and muscular in structure, while in fat-humped animals the situation of the hump is thoracic and the structure musculo-fatty [Curson and Bisschop, 1935]. Flesh-humped cattle include two groups : the flesh-humped zebu and the flesh-humped sanga. The flesh-humped zebu is recorded from ancient Egypt and Elam. But only one flesh-humped zebu breed has survived, i.e. the Afrikander cattle of South Africa, which have descended from the cattle of the Hottentots [Eps- tein, 1933]. The flesh-humped sanga cattle, found in Abyssinia and the savanna belts of Africa, originate from the interbreeding of flesh-humped zebu and straight- backed longhorn cattle. Fat-humped cattle also comprise two groups : the fat-humped zebu and the fat- humped sanga. The fat-humped zebu ranges practically throughout the whole of southern Asia. During recent centuries it has been introduced into East Africa by Arab and Indian traders, from whence it has rapidly extended its range south- wards and westwards owing to its superiority to the flesh-humped sanga cattle in hardiness and production. Fat-humped sanga breeds are found in Madagascar and throughout those parts of Africa where fat-humped zebus have interbred with flesh-humped sangas or humpless longhorn cattle. Humped cattle are occasionally encountered also among breeds which do not include a zebu strain. The feral park cattle of Chillingham, for instance, which have no connection with the zebu group, occasionally develop humps [Owen, 1856]. A cervico-thoracic hump occurs also in some of the brachyceros cattle of Egypt and western Asia, although there are no flesh-humped zebu cattle among their ancestors. In addition to the hump and some other less significant conformational characteristics, the zebu group as a whole, irrespective of the situation and structure of the hump, is distinguished by the shape and direction of the spinous processes of the dorsal vertebrae. From the seventh vertebra on the spinous pro- cesses are bifid, whereas in humpless cattle of both the longhorn (primigenous) and shorthorn (brachyceros) basic types they are generally single [Curson and Epstein, 1934]. 313 36 AR/55 11
314 PHYLOGENETIC SIGNIFICANCE IN ZEBU CATTLE [Vol.. XXV, Part IV, In the flesh-humped sanga cattle the spinous processes of the anterior dorsal vertebrae display considerable variability. In some the fissure is moderately deep, although commonly not quite so deep as in the zebu cattle ; in others it is hardly perceptible. Even within one and the same breed the differences are considerable. The variability of this feature among flesh-humped sanga cattle is due to their derivation from a mixture of flesh-humped zebu characterised by bifid spinous processesPLATE VII] [Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXV, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Ninth dorsal vertebra of flesh- humped zebu (Afrikander) cow. After Curson and Epstein. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Ninth dorsal vertebra of fat-humped zebu (Bengal) Bull and Cow. After Curson. 36 AR/55.
PLATE VIII] [Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXV, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Ninth dorsal vertebra of brachyeeros (West Africa) bull. After Curson and Epstein. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Ninth dorsal vertebra of flesh- humped sanga (Ovambo) cow and (Zulu) ox. Oondersteport collection [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5. Ninth dorsal vertebra of fat-humped sanga (Madagascar) cow. Oonder- stepoort collection. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 6. Different developmental types of the processus spinosi in mammals. After Mijsberg.
December, 1955 ] H. EPSTEIN 315 comes into operation ; thus, if the embryo is slow in developing, the abnormality is marked, whereas if the factor takes effect only at an advanced stage of develop- ment, the abnormality is slight. In Homo sapiens the neural spines of the 2nd to 5th cervical vertebrae are com- monly bifid, while bifurcation in the 6th cervical vertebra is rarer, and in the 7th entirely absent. This, however, applies only to Europeans; in the Australian aborigines, Negroes, Andamans, Tasmans, Hottentots, Bushmen, the natives of Tierra del Fuego and the Senoi only the epistropheus is bifid, while the neural spines of the 3rd to 5th cervical vertebrae are but seldom terminally cleft. Also in Japanese, bifidity of the cervical neural spines is less common than in Europeans, and the spines are shorter. In the chimpanzee the epistropheus is nearly always bifid ; in the gibbon this character is frequent, but in the orung-utan, the gorilla and the more primitive primates it is of rare occurrence. In all apes and monkeys the processus spinosi of the other cervical vertebrae are normally undivided, although exceptions from this rule have been described [Von Eggeling, 1922a]. Mijsberg [1926] points out that phylogenetically spina bifida is a specialised character in relation to the more generalised undivided processus spinosi, while ontogenetically the neural spines evolve from two separate bases. In the most primitive type (Plate VIII, Fig. 6-1), the neural spine develops from the cartilaginous tissue formed by the terminal union of the bilateral neural arches which are devoid of any protuberances at the tips. In the more specialised types (Plate VIII Fig. 6-2a and 2b), the tips of the bilateral neural arches are thickened, and these pro- tuberances share in the basis of the neural spine, the major part of which evolves, however, from the cartilage formed by the coalescence of the neural arches. In the third type (Plate VIII, Fig. 6-3), the protuberances at the tips of the neural arches are so strongly developed that the median tip formed by the fusion of the neural arches rises above and absorbs the lateral hyperapophyses only at a comparatively late stage of development. In the fourth type (Plate VIII, Fig. 6-4), the protuber- ances grow into long processes which subsequently unite into the single spine, with the median cartilage retaining but slight importance in the formation of the process. In the fifth type (Plate VIII, Fig. 6-5), the lateral protuberances fuse at first at the base only, the single spine evolving after a bifid stage. In the sixth type (Plate VIII, Fig. 6-6), the fusion of the two original halves of the processus spinosus remains restricted to the base throughout the life of the individual, with spina bifida as the result. Von Eggeling [1922b] suggests that in analogy with many other skeletal crests and ridges the development of bifid spinous processes may be due to the influence of the muscles and sinews attached to the spinous processes ; while in the case of the dorsal vertebrae of zebu cattle, Duerst [1931] regards the bifurcation of the spinous processes as functional of the weight of the hump. But in view of the fact that certain humped zebus are devoid of the bifid character, whereas spina bifida may occur in unhumped sanga specimens, the validity of this theory is doubtful. Mijsberg [1926] ascribes the bifurcation of the neural spines of the cervical vertebrae in Homo to a factor inhibiting the full development of the median cartilaginous tissue formed by the fusion of the bilateral neural arches, with the result that the
316 PHYLOGENETIC SIGNIFICANCE IN ZEBU CATTLE [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, hyperapophyses, forming the main portion of the spinous process, remain terminally separate. This would indicate a genetical basis of spina bifida, such as Hammond [1940] postulates for this character in the rabbit. While opposing the hypothesis that mechanic agency due to increased muscular development may be responsible for the evolution of spina bifida, Mijsberg does not deny the possibility that reduced mechanic requirement may be a contributory factor "as it is very probable that the bifurcated processes are to be regarded as less strong than those in which the halves are completely joined." However, there is no proof that reduced mechanic pressure has any greater significance in the formation of spina bifida than has increased mechanic requirement. From its rather erratic occurrence in other animals, including man, in the most various parts of the spine, it would appear that spina bifida in zebu cattle has neither positive nor negative selective value. It is doubtless genetically linked to the hump factor ; but the exceptions indicate that the linkage is not complete. The mode of inheritance of spina bifida in the cross-breeding of zebu and straight- backed cattle is still unanalysed. Along with the hump, which like the fat tail and fat rump in sheep has been evolved under domestication, spina bifida in the neural spines of the anterior dorsal vertebrae of zebu cattle appears to be a domes- tication feature, offering no clue in the quest of the wild ancestors of the zebu. REFERENCES Curson, H. H. and Bisschop, J.H.R. (1935). Some Comments on the Hump of African Cattle. Anatomical Study No. 60. Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci. 5. 2 SEASONAL VARIATIONS IN REACTION TIME AND SEMEN QUALITIES OF BUFFALO-BULLS By N. S. KUSHWAHA, D. P. MUKHERJEE and P.P.BHATTACHARYA, Division of Animal Genetics, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 14th January 1955) (With two text-figures) ALTHOUGH in farm animals spermatogenic activity goes on continuously after the attainment of puberty and they are capable of mating throughout the year, there are evidences in the literature to show that their semen quality and quantity vary in different geographical regions as well as during different seasons of the year. Seasonal variation in semen qualities under Indian climatic conditions have been studied in the case of bulls by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952] while in the case of sheep and goats by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1952 a and b]. As buffalo is an important species of farm animals and is entirely different from the other species of experimental animals studied by previous workers, it was considered worthwhile to study the seasonal variation, if any, in the semen qualities of buffalo. MATERIAL AND METHODS The experimental animals comprised six Murrah buffalo bulls. All the bulls were of four to six years of age at the commencement of the experiment. During the entire experimental period of two years the bulls were kept under uniform mana- gerial and dietary regime. The ration supplied to each bull consisted of a concentrate mixture containing linseed cake 50 parts, wheat bran 30 parts, crushed oats 10 parts and crushed maize 10 parts. All the animals, excepting one bull, No. 22 which due to lighter body weight received 4 lb. of the mixture, received 5 lb. of the mixture and 2 oz. of common salt per day. Beside the mixture, each animal received 6 lb. of dry roughage and 30 lb. of green fodder. They were also allowed free grazing for four to five hours a day. During the pre-experimental period, the animals were trained to mount an anoestrous buffalo-cow confined in a service crate and to ejaculate seamen in the artificial vagina. In order to estimate the monthly variations in semen quality and quantity of the individual bull weekly collections of a semen sample from each animal were made throughout the experimental period of two consecutive years. The semen character- istics studied were, (i) volume, (ii) initial pH, (iii) initial motility of spermatozoa (iv) sperm concentration per unit volume of semen, (v) total number of spermatozoa per ejaculate and (vi) percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. Each sample was examined for its volume, pH and initial motility was made immediately after collec- tion. Volume was measured to the nearest 1/10 ml. The degree of motility was scored in terms of criteria as recommended by Erb et al., [1942]. Hydrogen-ion concentration and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa were determined accor- ding to the methods described by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952]. 317 36 AR/55 12
318 SEMEN QUALITIES OF BUFFALO-BULLS [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, Besides the above mentioned semen characteristics, the reaction time of the animals was also noted at the time of collection of the semen. Reaction time as stated by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952], is the time interval between the release of the bull near the cow and the actual moment of ejaculation. This has been expressed in seconds. During the experimental period, daily records of maxi- mum and minimum air temperatures and that of relative humidity were kept. RESULTS Data regarding the average reaction time and semen attributes of the buffalo- bulls together with the meteorological data of each month are presented in Table I. Examination of data reveals that there did not exist any relationship between the reaction time and the quality and quantity of semen produced. No marked varia- tion seems to exist in volume of semen and initial motility of spermatozoa. Average monthly variations in reaction-time, semen characteristics, air temperature and relative humidity are presented in Fig. I. From the graph it is apparent that the curves for sperm concentration and total number of spermatozoa show a uniform trend of variation. Curves for air temperature and relative humidity are also uniform and show monthly variations. It seems from Fig. 1 that when the relative humidity increases the air temperature decreases. Four seasons were distinguished for the purpose of studying the effect of seasons on reaction-time and semen characteristics as reported previously by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952] and Shukla and Bhattacharya [1952, a and b]. They are August to OctoberDecember, 1955 ] N. S. KUSHWAHA, D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 319 TABLE I Monthly average of reaction time, semen characteristics, air temperature and relative humidity during the experimental period Factors January February March April May June July August Septem- ber October Novem- ber Decem- ber 1949-50 Reaction time in seconds 40.0 47.0 74.0 44.0 50.6 52.2 53.6 37.1 32.5 28.3 42.0 42.9 Volume of semen in ml. 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.3 1.7 1.8 2.1 2.3 Initial motility of spermatozoa 3.5 3.6 4.3 4.5 3.7 3.2 3.5 3.1 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.5 Initial pH of semen 6.8 6.7 6.6 6.7 6.7 6.8 6.8 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 6.7 Sperm concentration millions/ml. 899.2 1012.9 1056.0 1187.5 1162.3 875.4 927.7 1019.8 790.7 802.5 777.0 752.9 Total number of spermatozoa millions/ejaculate 1744.0 2039.2 2308.4 2656.9 2798.2 2571.5 2389.3 2238.1 1307.1 1511.8 1735.9 1653.8 Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa 7.6 5.5 4.1 2.7 5.6 7.1 7.4 14.4 6.8 4.8 5.1 8.5 Minimum air temperature Oº F 48.6 48.9 57.6 67.7 77.6 79.6 79.3 79.3 77.7 68.2 50.4 44.3 Maximum air temperature Oº F 72.6 73.6 83.5 89.3 105.4 100.3 90.4 89.2 88.8 86.3 79.4 77.0 Relative humidity per cent 76.6 62.5 50.1 32.0 38.1 61.3 82.4 88.2 82.6 67.3 67.3 60.9 1950-51 Reaction time in seconds 49.2 51.6 77.6 59.5 63.1 45.9 53.6 43.3 58.4 54.8 57.0 59.7 Volume of semen in ml. 3.1 2.2 2.6 2.4 2.5 2.8 3.3 3.0 2.9 2.4 2.5 2.6 Initial motility of sepermatozoa 3.6 3.9 4.5 4.2 3.9 4.1 4.3 3.6 3.2 3.3 3.1 3.3 Initial pH of semen 6.7 6.9 6.7 6.5 6.7 6.7 6.6 6.6 6.8 6.8 6.9 6.8 Sperm concentration millions/ml. 837.9 874.9 894.4 929.3 1003.0 1234.6 1003.1 1036.3 1004.6 839.9 861.0 957.5 Total number of spermatozoa millions/ejaculate 2646.4 1775.6 1985.7 2120.6 2614.8 3362.8 2907.8 3096.6 2700.0 1910.1 1948.1 2612.9 Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa 9.7 10.7 4.1 8.2 8.2 8.9 7.2 7.2 6.6 5.9 6.8 10.0 Minimum air temperature Oº F 46.2 51.0 59.0 67.7 79.6 85.6 80.1 78.9 75.0 62.1 51.2 45.7 Maximum air temperature Oº F 68.9 76.3 87.9 94.5 104.4 105.2 99.2 89.6 89.1 88.2 82.1 72.7 Relative humidity per cent 77.9 65.1 50.9 41.5 44.2 55.7 69.4 86.0 79.2 67.4 64.4 69.1
320 SEMEN QUALITIES OF BUFFALO-BULLS [Vol. XXV, Part IV, TABLE II Summary of the analysis of variance of semen characteristics and meteorological data Factors analysed Source of variation Between bulls Between years Between seasons Interac* tion between seasons and years Between months within season Reaction time ** ** * 0 0 Volume of semen ** ** 0 0 0 Initial motility of spermatozoa ** ** ** ** 0 pH of semen ** 0 0 0 ** Sperm concentration ** 0 ** ** ** Total number of spermatozoa ejaculate ** ** ** * 0 Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa ** ** ** ** ** Average temperature Deceber, 1955 ] N. S. KUSHWAHA, D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 321 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Monthly variation in reaction-time and semen qualities of buffalo-bulls with variation in air temperature and relative humidity.
322 SEMEN QUALITIES OF BUFFALO-BULLS [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, between years. It will be seen that although the animals during the first year of the experiment took less time to give an ejaculate in the artificial vagina, the quality of semen as judged by volume, initial motility and total number of sperma- tozoa was superior to the quality obtained in the first year. There was however, significant increase in the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa in the second year of the experiment. Table IV shows critical difference, at 5 per cent level, of variable factors between seasons. It may be seen from the Table that the average reaction time in autumn was significantly lower than in spring. Average reaction time in winter was signi- ficantly lower than in summer and spring. The semen quality, as judged by initial motility and sperm concentration deteriorated in winter and autumn and improved in spring and summer. The total number of spermatozoa increased significantly in summer. The percentage of abnormal spermatozoa decreased significantly in spring, and between the remaining three seasons, variations were not significant. In summer, more of the tailless and in winter more of the coiled and bent-tail spermatozoa were found in the ejaculates. In autumn all the three types of abnor- malities were present. In climatic variations, it is apparent from the Table, that there were significant variations in air temperature between seasons but the relative humidity varied only between spring and the rest of the three seasons. DISCUSSION Reaction time Analysis of data showed that there was significant variation in reaction time. Seasonal variation in reaction time has not been observed in bulls by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952] and in sheep by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1952, a]. The latter authors, however, observed seasonal variations in this respect in goats. They found that in summer the average reaction time of goats was significantly lower than in other seasons. In the present study, significantly lower reaction time was obtained in autumn. The purpose of undertaking study on reaction time was to determine whether there was any correlation between the sex vigour and the quality of semen obtained. It seems there is no such relationship. In winter and summer when the quality of semen varied greatly, the average reaction time did not vary significantly. Similarly, in summer and spring when there was no significant variation in reaction time, the quality of semen as judged by initial motility, total number of sperma- tozoa and the percentage of abnormal sperms varied significantly. This result on the whole agrees with those obtained in bulls by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952] and in sheep and goats by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1952, a and b]. Volume of semen No significant variation has been observed in the volume of semen. This result agrees with the result obtained in bulls by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952] but is contrary to what have been obtained in sheep and goats by Shukla and Bhatta- charya [1952, a and b].
December, 1955 ] N. S. KUSHWAHA, D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 323 Volume depends mostly on the secretions of the accessary reproductive organs, viz., seminal vesicles, prostate and Cowper's glands, etc. In big farm animals like buffalo-bulls and bulls where the volume of semen is more than in the small animals like sheep and goats, the secretions of the accessary reproductive organs are more. It seems, therefore, that the variation, if any, in secretion of different accessory reproductive organs due to climate in relation to the total volume obtained may not be so great as in the case of small animals. As a result, the data on volume in bulls and buffalo bulls failed to show any significant difference between seasons. pH of semen The hydrogen-ion concentration of semen failed to show significant variation between seasons. This result is in agreement with those obtained in bulls by Mukher- jee and Bhattacharya [1952] and in goats by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1952, b] but is contrary to what has been obtained in sheep by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1952, a]. Bogart and Mayer [1946] have pointed out that among the farm animals, the most marked seasonal change in the physiology of reproductive organs occurs in rams. The results obtained in the present experiment and those obtained in bulls, sheep and goats confirm the observations of Bogart and Mayer. As the most marked seasonal change takes place in sheep and as pH is an indirect estimation of sperm concentration, it may be the reason why seasonal change in pH of ram semen has been observed and not in any other farm animals. Initial motility This was determined by microscopical examination of a drop of fresh semen. Its rating, therefore, depends on (i) activity and (ii) concentration of spermatozoa in the sample. It was expected, therefore, that higher the sperm concentration greater would be the initial motility. It may be seen from Table IV that this is so, and the results obtained on the whole agree with the results obtained in bulls, sheep and goats. In summer and spring, there was no significant variation in sperm concentration but there was significant variation in initial motility which was significantly lower in summer than in spring. This may be due to the percentage of abnormal spermatozoa being significantly higher in summer than in spring. Sperm concentration Of the semen characteristics studied in the present experiment, the number of spermatozoa per unit volume of semen is the most important and reliable characteri- stic in evaluating the quality of semen. The results obtained show that in winter sperm concentration was significantly lower than in spring and summer. In autumn, the concentration was significantly lower than in summer. This result is contrary to what has been obtained in bulls by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952] and in sheep and goats by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1952, a and b]. In these three species of farm animals, lowest sperm concentration was obtained in autumn and highest in spring. Winter was the second best season, and in summer the concentration was higher than in autumn. In the present experiment, lowest sperm concentration was obtained in winter and there was neither significant variation between autumn
324 SEMEN QUALITIES OF BUFFALO-BULLS [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, TABLE IV Critical difference at 5 per cent level of variable factors between seasons Variable factors Value of CD. Average of seasons arranged in ascending order Autumn Winter Summer Spring Reaction time in seconds 8.39 42.38 48.43 53.16 58.93 Autumn Winter Summer Spring Initial motiliy of spermatozoa 0.22 3.34 3.40 3.75 4.15 Winter Autumn Spring Summer Sperm concentration ml. of semen 84.26 847.58 915.59 992.49 1034.39 Winter Autumn Spring Summer Total number of spermatozoa ejaculate 443.66 2,057.1 2,135.6 2,147.8 27,740.9 Spring Summer Autumn Winter Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa 1.10 5.88 7.39 7.61 7.95 Winter Spring Autumn Summer Average air temperature (OºF) 6.56 61.26 71.41 81.03 90.56 Spring Winter Autumn Summer Average percentage of relative humidity 11.92 42.80 68.69 71.37 73.82
December, 1955] N. S. KUSHWAHA, D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 325 and spring nor between spring and summer. It is apparent from Table IV that among the two atmospheric factors which may be responsible for this peculiar seaso- nal variation in sperm concentration, air temperature may be an important factor as it varied significantly between seasons. To make a comparative study of this pattern of variation from that of bull, monthly variations in sperm concentration of the two species together with air temperature are given in Fig. 2. It may be seen from the figure that in autumn both in buffalo and bull, sperm concentration showed a down- ward trend from summer. With the advent of winter the curve took an upward trend. The trend was slow in buffalo, whereas in bull it was marked and rapid. Throughout winter, the sperm concentration in bull was maintained at higher level than in summer and autumn. The concentration reached its peak at the middle of spring, after which with the increase in air temperature it began to decrease. In buffalo the increase initiated at the advent of winter continued slowly throughout winter and spring and began to decrease slowly with the advent of summer. It might be that due to this slow change there was no significant difference between autumn and winter, between spring and summer and between autumn and spring. Bhatnagar, Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1954] studied seasonal variation in the histology of the thyroid and the testis of buffalo at the peaks of the four seasons. The periods during which the activity of the two glands were studied are shown in Fig. 2 by circle marks. It was observed that the testicular activity in spring and winter was more than in autumn ; between autumn and summer, the activity was more in summer. As the quality of semen is dependent on the testicular acivity, it seems from the results obtained from the histological study of the gland that the effect of climate on semen quality was the same as in the case of other farm animals like bulls, sheep and goats. This result is contrary to what has been obtained in the present experiment. The apparent contradictory results obtained may be explained from Fig. 2 which shows that in summer and autumn when the gland was studied, the trend of sperm concentration was towards decrease while in winter and spring it was towards increase. This was reflected in the histological structure of the gland. In spring, although the level of sperm concentration was lower than in summer, it is apparent from the figure that during spring it was towards increase as against summer when it was towards decrease. This may be the reason why the gland showed hyperactivity in spring in comparison with summer. From the above discussion it seems that climate influences the semen quality in buffalo in the same way as in other farm animals. The difference in the trend of seasonal variation in sperm concentration of the buffalo from that of other species of farm animals may be due to the reason that in buffalo the fluctuation in sperm concentration due to the fluctuation in air temperature is not so rapid and marked as in other species. This may be due to the reason that in buffalo the thermo-re- gulatory mechanism is not so much developed as in bulls, sheep and goats. Total number of spermatozoa The result of analysis of data on total number of spermatozoa showed that there was highly significant variation between seasons. This result is contrary to those obtained in bulls by Mukherjee and Bhattacharya [1952] but is in agreement with 36AR/55 13
326 SEMEN QUALITIES OF BUFFALO-BULLS [Vol. XXV, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Monthly variation in sperm concentration/ml. of semen with air temperature in buffalo-bulls and bulls *Data for the graphs for bulls have been obtained from a previous paper published in the Indian. J. vet. Sci. 22(2), 74.
December, 1955 ] N. S. KUSHWAHA, D. P. MUKHERJEE AND P. BHATTACHARYA 327 those obtained in sheep and goats by Shukla and Bhattacharya [1952 a and b]. In sheep and goats, total number of spermatozoa was found to be lowest in autumn and highest in spring. In the present experiment, significantly higher total number of spermatozoa was obtained in summer than in any other seasons. As total number of spermatozoa was calculated from data on sperm concentra- tion and volume of semen, and as the former was higher in summer, it may be for this reason that significantly higher total number of spermatozoa was obtained in summer. Percentage of abnormal spermatozoa It has been observed that in summer and autumn the tailless spermatozoa and in winter the bent-tail spermatozoa were more in the ejaculates. In spring, both types of abnormality were less. As a result there was significantly less number of abnormal sperms in spring than in other seasons. The result obtained in this respect on the whole agrees with the previous results on bulls, sheep and goats. SUMMARY Seasonal variation in reaction time and semen characteristics of six Murrah buffalo-bulls were studied during two consecutive years. Highly significant variations were observed among buffalo-bulls in reaction time and in all the characteristics of semen studied. Reaction time in autumn was found to be significantly less than in summer and spring. Reaction time seems to be independent of semen quality. Between years, highly significant variations were found in reaction time, volume of semen, initial motility of spermatozoa, total number of spermatozoa and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. In the second year of the experiment, the averages of variable characteristics of semen and reaction time were more than in the first year. Between seasons, significant variation in reaction time and highly signi- ficant variation, in initial motility, sperm concentration, total number of sperma- tozoa were found. The differences in volume and pH of semen were non-signi- ficant. Sperm concentration showed a reverse seasonal trend than that in bulls, sheep and goats. The trend has been explained by the fact that in the buffalo the thermo- regulatory mechanism is not so well-developed as in other species of farm animals. Between months within a season, highly significant variations were found in pH of semen, sperm concentration and percentage of abnormal spermatozoa. The two atmospheric factors which were studied, viz. air temperature and relative humidity, varied highly significantly between seasons. Variations between years and between months within season were non-significant.
328 SEMEN QUALITIES OF BUFFALO-BULLS [Vol. XXV, Part IV, ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are thankful to the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for his kind interest in the work. REFERENCES Bogart, R. and Mayer, D. T. (1946). Res. Bull. 402 Bhatnagar, D. S., Mukherjee, D. P. and Bhattacharya, P. (1954). (unpublished) Erb. R. E., Andrews, F. N. and Hilton, J. H. (1942). J. Dairy Sci. 25, 815-826 Mukherjee, D. P., and Bhattacharya, P. (1952). Indian J. vet. Sci. 22(2), 73-91 Shukla, D. D. and Bhattacharya, P. (1952, a). Indian J. vet. Sci. 109-122 STUDIES ON BLACK GRAM AS A CONCENTRATE CATTLE FEED By B. K. D AS, N. C. MUKHERJEE and B. SEN, Animal Nutrition Research Scheme, Assam, Gauhati ( Received for publication on 26th March 1954 ) BLACK gram (P. radiatus) which comes under the natural order leguminosæ (Papilionaceæ) is known as matikalai in Assam. It is a kharif crop. Its grains are widely used in Assam both as pulse and a concentrate feed for cattle. Matikalai grains are covered with a hard polished seed-coat. Animals do not relish green matikalai. Moreover, a good quantity of the grains when fed green is invariably found to come out undigested along with the faeces. This peculiar morphological character of matikalai is probably responsible for the usual custom in Assam to boil the grains with water so as to form a broth before it is served to animals. Though matikalai is universally used in Assam as a concentrate feed for cattle, its chemical composition and nutritive value are not known and, therefore, the quantity added to rations is simply based on assumptions. The object of the present investigation is to find out the chemical composition and the nutritive value of matikalai grains as a concentrate feed for cattle. Matikalai broth Matikalai grains are first winnowed to make them free from dust and sand. Two pounds are then weighed into a wide-mouth tin can and about four pounds of water is poured over it and kept overnight. Next morning another eight pounds of water is added to it boiled for half an hour, cooled and macerated. The broth is then ready to be served to the animals. Matikalai as a concentrate feed Four adult Assamese bullocks weighing about 500 lb. were exclusively fed on paddy straw for a period of 31 days and their faeces were collected during the last 10 days. Residues left by the animals during the collection period were kept sepa- rately and accounted for. The experimental animals were allowed to take liberal quantities of water and one ounce of common salt mixed with it per day. After this period, freshly prepared matikalai broth with one ounce of common salt added to it was supplemented to the usual paddy straw feed of the experimental animals for another 31 days and as before, faeces and urine were collected during the last 10 days. On every day the broth was fed to the animals at a regular interval of 24 hours and immediately before the paddy straw feed was given to them. In this case also liberal quantities of water were offered to the animals. 329 36 AR/55 14
330 STUDIES ON BLACK GRAM [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, The chemical composition of matikalai and paddy straw feed and that of theTABLE residues left by the animals are given below in Tables I and II. TABLE I The chemical composition of matikalai Nutrients On per cent dry basis Crude protein 23.63 Ether extract 1.33 Ash 4.21 Crude fibre 5.83 N-free extract 65.00 Total carbohydrates 70.83 Organic matter 95.79 Calcium (Ca) 0.21 Phosphorus (P) 0.55 TABLE II Chemical composition of paddy straw feed and paddy straw residues Nutrients On per cent dry basis Feed Residue Crude protein 4.31 4.38 Ether extract 1.94 1.51 Ash 20.94 22.27 Crude fibre 32.39 30.61 N.free extract 40.42 41.23 Total carbohydrates 72.81 71.84 Organic matter 79.06 77.73 Calcium (Ca) 0.18 0.24 Phosphorus (P) 0.06 0.07
December, 1955 ] B. K. DAS, N. C. MUKHERJEE AND B. SEN 331 The chemical composition of matikalai in Table I shows that it is rich in crude protein and is much richer than that of most of the grains used as concentrate, such as barley, cotton-seed, different varieties of gram, oats, maize, etc. [Sen 1938]. TABLE III Digestibility coefficients of the organic nutrients of paddy straw feed Animal No. Intake (gm.) Excreted in faeces (gm.) Amount digested (gm.) Digestibility coefficients (per cent) Average digestibility coefficients Dry matter 1 4415 2480 1935 44 46 3 4256 2188 2068 49 4 4571 2476 2095 46 5 4425 2488 1937 44 Crude protein 1 189.5 158.5 31.0 16 16 3 182.6 152.6 30.0 16 4 196.4 169.1 27.3 14 5 190.0 156.8 33.2 17 Ether extract 1 90.1 42.4 47.7 53 55 3 87.7 36.8 50.9 58 4 92.5 40.6 51.9 55 5 90.3 41.8 48.5 54 Crude fibre 1 1448.5 517.3 931.2 64 68 3 1399.8 422.1 977.7 70 4 1496.2 454.6 1041.6 70 5 1451.5 490.1 961.4 66 N-free extract 1 1776.1 899.7 876.4 49 51 3 1710.6 783.1 927.5 54 4 1840.5 919.3 921.2 50 5 1780.3 908.1 872.2 49 Total carbohydrates 1 3224.6 1417.0 1807.6 56 58 3 3110.4 1205.2 1905.2 61 4 3336.7 1373.9 1962.8 59 5 3231.8 1398.2 1833.6 57
332 STUDIES ON BLACK GRAM [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, The digestibility coefficients of the organic nutrients of matikalai and paddy straw feed and the calcium, the phosphorus and the nitrogen balances per day under matikalai feeding are shown in the following Tables. TABLE IV Digestibility coefficients of the organic nutrients of matikalai Animal No. Intake from paddy straw (gm.) Intake from matikalai (gm.) Total intake (gm.) Excreted in faeces (gm.) Total amount digested (gm.) Amount digested from paddy straw (gm.) Amount digested from matikalai (gm.) Digesti- bility coeffici- ents (per cent) Average digesti- bility Dry matter 1 5117 924 6041 3064 2977 2354 622 67 65 4 5289 924 6213 3207 3006 2433 573 62 5 5166 924 6090 3106 2984 2376 608 66 Crude protein 1 220.2 218.3 438.5 252.8 185.7 35.2 150.5 69 57 4 227.8 218.3 446.1 307.1 139.0 36.4 102.6 47 5 222.4 218.3 440.7 285.3 155.4 35.6 119.8 65 Ether extract 1 100.8 12.3 113.1 52.4 60.7 55.4 5.3 43 52 4 103.4 12.3 115.7 51.6 64.1 56.9 7.2 59 5 101.6 12.3 113.9 52.2 61.7 54.9 6.8 55 Crude fibre 1 1663.9 53.9 1717.8 539.9 1177.9 1131.5 46.4 86 82 4 1716.6 53.9 1770.5 554.5 1216.0 1167.3 48.7 90 5 1678.9 53.9 1732.8 553.2 1179.6 1141.7 37.9 70 N-free extract 1 2065.3 600.6 2665.9 1240.9 1425.0 1053.3 371.7 62 67 4 2136.2 600.6 2736.8 1246.2 1480.6 1089.5 401.1 67 5 2085.5 600.6 2686.1 1194.6 1491.5 1063.6 427.9 71 Total carbohydrates 1 3729.2 654.5 4383.7 1780.8 2602.9 2184.8 418.1 64 68 4 3852.8 654.5 4507.3 1800.7 2706.6 2256.8 449.8 69 5 3764.4 654.5 4418.9 1747.8 2671.1 2205.3 405.8 71 From the data in Table IV above, it appears that the protein digestibility though as high as 57 per cent, can not be considered satisfactory. The reasons for not obtaining expected high protein digestibility are difficult to say definitely at this stage. It may be due to the nature of protein present in matikalai or the heat involved in the process of preparation of the broth of matikalai making some of the protein constituents undigestible or the paddy straw used as a basal ration in some way interfering with the physiology of digestion of the animals.
December, 1955 ] B. K. DAS, N. C. MUKHRJEE AND B. SEN 333 From the average digestibility coefficients the digestible protein and starch equivalent [Kellner] have been calculated and are shown below along with some of the well-known grains and seeds used as concentrate feeds in the country. TABLE V Digestible nutrients in matikalai as compared to some of the well-known grains and seeds used as concentrate feeds Name of grains and seeds Digestible 100 lb. of nutrients per the raw stuff D.P. (lb.) S. E. (lb.) Matikalai 12.49 55.77 Barley (Punjab) 8.07 76.4 Barley (Bangalore) 6.65 76.1 Cotton-seed (Lyallpur) 11.24 77.0 Oats 7.07 66.1 Maize 7.40 84.0 Gram (Bangalore) 12.90 70.7 Gram (Pusa) 12.03 71.3 Gram (Punjab) 10.76 72.2 From the Table above, it appears that matikalai is comparable to many of the well.known grains and seeds used as concentrates in the country. CA, P AND N BALANCES UNDER MATIKALAI FEEDING Under the same dietetic conditions of the above digestibility trial calcium, phosphorus and nitrogen balances per day of the experimental animals were deter- mined and shown in Table VI. TABLE VI Calcium, phosphorus and nitrogen balances per day Animal No. Intake from paddy straw (gm.) Intake from matikalai (gm.) Total intake (gm.) Excreted in faeces (gm.) Excreted in urine (gm.) Total excreted (gm.) Balance (gm.) Calcium 1 8.98 1.94 10.92 14.41 0.23 14.64 334 STUDIES ON BLACK GRAM [ Vol. XXV, Part IV The negative calcium balance indicates the lack of physiological utilisation of the mineral. The amount of total calcium intake appears to be too low to assure positive calcium balance under paddy straw feeding as basal ration [Carbery, Chatterjee and Talapatra, 1937]. The animal No. 3 fell ill immediately after this trial so it was omitted during the metabolic trial with matikalai as concentrate feed. SUMMARY Black gram (P. radiatus) of the natural order leguminosae (Papiliomceae) is known as matikalai in Assam. Its grains are widely used in Assam both as pulse and a concentrate feed for cattle. Matikalai contains on dry basis 23.63, 65.0 and 70.83 per cent of crude protein, N-free extract and total carbohydrates respectively. The digestibility coefficients of crude protein, N-free extract and total carbohy- drates are 57, 67 and 68 respectively. The digestible protein and starch equivalent [Kellner] per 100 lb. of the raw stuff are 12.49 and 55.77 lb. respectively. The digestible nutrients compare well to many of the well-known grains and seeds used as concentrate feed in the country. Nitrogen and phosphorus balances per day were found positive but calcium balance was recorded negative. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors gratefully acknowledge the indebtedness to Shri G. K. Mehra, Director of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Department, Assam, Gauhati, for his interest in the work and valuable suggestions. REFERENCES Carbery, M., Chatterjee, I. B. and Talapatra, S. K. (1937). Indian J. vet. Sci. VII, (III) Sen, K. C. (1938). The nutritive values of Indian cattle foods and the feeding of animals, I.C.A.R. Misc. Bull. 25
STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA IN MADRAS III. A NEW SPECIES OF XIPHIDIO-CERCARIA* By C. T. PETER, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 18th March 1955) (With Plate IX) THE group Xiphidio-cercariae is an unnatural assemblage of larval trematodes exhibiting diverse features. But, the presence of an anteriorly directed simple, lancet-like boring spine or ' stylet ' at the proximal end of the body of the cercaria is a feature common to all the members of this heterogenous group. Luhe [1909] recognized four groups under the Xiphidio-cercariae, viz. (i) 'Cercariae armatae', (ii) 'Cercariae ornatae', (iii) 'Cercariae virgulae', and (iv) 'Cercariae microcotylae'. Subsequent workers have sub-divided them into smaller sub-groups. During the present investigations, five species belonging to this group have been encountered. They are enumerated below under different groups, following, in the main, Luhe's scheme of classification : I. 'Cercariae armatae' (body length more than 0.25 mm., bladder Y-shaped) : (i) Cercariae indicae xvii Sewell, 1922. ('Polyadena' group of Cort, 1915 modified by Sewell, 1922) (ii) C. indicae X Sewell, 1922. (' Daswan ' group of Sewell, 1922) (iii) Cercariaeramanujami, n.sp. (' Conniae ' division of Brooks, 1943) II. 'Cercariae ornatae' (tail provided with fin-fold): (i) Cercariae indicae xxiv Sewell, 1922. (' Prima ' group of Sewell, 1922) III. " Cercariae microcotylae " (body length less than 0.2 mm., bladder bicor- nuate) : (i) An unidentified species Except Cercaria ramanujami, n.sp., and the unidentified form of the 'Cercaria microcotylae' group, the others were previously known to occur in the city of Madras [Rao, 1932]. Cercariae indicae xvii and x were obtained from Indoplanorbis exustus [Deshayes], Cercaria ramanujami from Limnaea luteola f. australis [Annandale and Rao], Cercariae indicae xxiv from L. luteola f. succinea [Deshayes] and the unidentified species from Melanoides tuberculatus [Muller]. The percentage of infection of the different species of Xiphidio-cercariae in their primary molluscan hosts in Madras City is given in Appendix I. * Part of a thesis approved by the University of Madras for the Degree of Master of Science 335 36 AR/55 16
336 STUDIES ON CERCARIAL FAUNAPLATE IX] [ Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXV, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Cercaria ramanujami, n.sp.December, 1955 ] C. T. PETER 337 one-third length from the tip. The ' shoulder ' actually is made up of two promi- nences, a larger and rounded posterior one and a smaller and pointed anterior one. The mouth is subterminal and leads back into the cavity of the oral sucker, the latter being connected by a short pre-pharynx to a spherical pharynx measuring 0.018 mm. across in living specimens. Beyond the pharynx, no other structures constituting the gut could be detected. The penetration glands located antero- lateral to the acetabulum are composed of 8 cell units in each, containing well- marked nuclei and finely granular protoplasm. Narrow ducts arising from these cells pass forwards to the sides of the oral sucker, where they exhibit a certain amount of dilatation and then turn inwards around the dorsal aspect of the oral sucker to open out on the anterior border of the mouth. Surrounding the pharynx and occupy- ing the region behind the oral sucker is a mass of cells which stain dark with haema- toxylin. The exact nature of this cellular structure is not known. The excretory bladder situated at the posterior end of the body is a Y shaped thick-walled organ consisting of a bulbous posterior or caudal vesicle and a cornuated anterior vesicle. The bladder opens out through an orifice on the dorsal aspect of the body at the point of attachment of the tail. The main excretory tubes originate from the antero-lateral aspects of the bladder and extend forwards to divide at the acetabular region into the anterior and posterior collecting tubules. The anterior branch divides into three capillaries each ending in a flame cell, one located at the antero-lateral aspect of the acetabulum, another at a point midway between the two suckers and the third in the neighbourhood of the oral sucker. The posterior collecting tubule also divides in a similar manner, receiving capillaries from three flame cells, two of which are found in the region between the ventral sucker and the anterior arm of the bladder, and the other lateral to the base of the bladder. Thus, there are six pairs of flame cells, of which three are pre-acetabular and three post-acetabular. The flame cell formula can be represented as 2 [(l+l+1)+(l+l+1)]=12. The genital system is located dorsal to the acetabulum and it has more or less the shape of the letter ' C ', which can be roughly divided into three parts. The posterior portion found behind the acetabulum is horizontally placed and consists of a main mass, representing the ovary and two lateral extensions which are probably the rudiments of the Laurer's canal and the vitelline duct. The ovarian mass continues forwards on the left side of the acetabulum to form the vertical portion338 STUDIES ON CERCARIAL FAUNADecember, 1955 ] C. T. PETER 339 APPENDIX I Rate of occurrence of Xiphidio-cercariae in the city of Madras Xiphidio-cercariae Molluscan hosts and percentage of infection Species Indopla- norbis exustus Limnaea australis Limnaea succinea Melanoides tubercu- latus No. examined 3863 214 1545 282 (1) Cercariae indicae XVII .. 0.8 .. .. .. (2) C. indicae X .. 0.1 .. .. .. (3) Cercaria ramanujami .. .. 4.7 .. .. (4) Cercarie indicae XXIV .. .. .. 0.5 .. (5) Cercaria (sp. ?) .. .. .. .. 0.7 36 AR/55 17
CALCIUM CONTENT OF SOME FISHERY WATERS OF UTTAR PRADESH By M. P. UPADHYAYA, Department of Fisheries, Uttar Pradesh (Received for publication on 5th August 1954) CALCIUM is one of the essential nutrients in water for good growth of fish ; it plays an important role in increasing biological activity which results in enhanced production of fish food. Calcium occurs in the form of carbo- nates, chlorides and silicates, the quantity of each depending on the type of soil over which the water stands. It causes hardness in water, which is usually expressed in terms of calcium carbonate, although it also includes hardness due to magnesium, iron and aluminium. Fish production is poor in soft waters and good in hard waters. Ohle [1934] found that the biota of the lakes in North Germany was ' poor ' if calcium was less than 10 p.p.m. (25 p.p.m. CaCO3), ' good ' when it ranged between 10 and 25 p.p.m. (25-62.5 p.p.m. CaCO3) and ' very good ' to ' rich ' if it exceeded 25 p.p.m. (62.5 p.p.m. CaCO3). Juday, Birge and Meloche [1938] also made similar obser- vations. Chacko and Ganapati [1949] have stated that a minimum of 650 p.p.m. of calcium carbonate is essential for ' really good production '. If a pond is found deficient in calcium it can be made good by applying 6.5 maunds of slaked lime per acre, which is usually sufficient for about five years. During the study of the physico-chemical characters of fishery waters of Uttar Pradesh, the calcium content of many pond waters was determined. Seventy-six samples of waters from 27 ponds situated in eight Districts were analysed. The determination was done by concentrating 500 ml. of water to 100 ml. and making it acidic with hydrochloric acid. Salts of iron, aluminium, etc. were precipitated by ammonia and calcium precipitated from the filtrate by adding saturated solution of ammonium oxalate. The precipitate was titrated against N/10 potassium permanga- nate, after dissolving it in 10 per cent hot sulphuric acid. (1 ml. of N/10 KMnO4 equivalent to 0.005004 gm. CaCO3). Classifying waters according to Ohle [1934], of the 76 samples of waters examined, 9.2 per cent were poor (values less than 25 p.p.m. CaCO3), 32.8 per cent were good (values between 25 and 62.5 p.p.m. CaCO3) and 57.9 per cent were very good (values above 62.5 p.p.m. CaCO3). It is surprising to note that not a single sample of water during the present investigation contained 650 p.p.m. CaCO3 as required by Chacko and Ganapati [1949] for really good production. DISCUSSION The minimum value of calcium (CaCO3) found in the samples of waters was 14 and the maximum was 256.5 p.p.m. (Appendix I). In the Garha tank, Lucknow,. having an area of about one acre, the growth of fish was fairly good and calcium in the pond varied from a minimum of 79.2 to a maximum of 256.5 p.p.m. The high values of calcium in some months specially during summer, were due to appre- ciable lowering of the water level (Appendix I), otherwise the values ranged between 79.2 and 97.5 p.p.m. The tank was stocked with 3165 fingerlings of Rohu (Labeo rohita), Nain (Cirrhina mrigala) and Catla (Catla catla) on the 13th March, 1949 341 36 AR/55 18
342 CALCIUM CONTENT OF SOME FISHERY WATERS [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, and again with 1210 fingerlings of the same species on the 13th January, 1950. Netting was started from the 17th June 1950 and continued till 17th July, 1951. The fish yield from this tank in two years (1949 to 1951) was 31 maunds, 12 seers and 12 chataks (1278 lb. per year per acre) yielding a revenue of Rs. 1,085-10-6. According to Ganapati and Chacko [1950] a ' very good ' tank yields about 2000 lb. of fish per year per acre and for really ' good production ' about 650 p.p.m. of calcium as carbonate is essential [Chacko and Ganapati, 1949]. Turki tank, Lucknow, with an area of about two acres did not have such good growth as was the case with Garha tank and the values for calcium (CaCO3) in this tank ranged between 21 and 135 p.p.m. In this tank also, the calcium values were high during summer, otherwise they ranged between 20 and 30 p.p.m. From this it appears that calcium content varies with the depth of water in ponds. Turki tank was stocked on 4th February, 1950, with 1200 fingerlings of Rohu, Nain and Catla. The fish yield from this tank was only eight maunds in one year and 10 months from Feburary 1950 to November 1951 (357.8 lb. per acre per year). The hydrobiological conditions prevailing in these two tanks are given in Appendix II and the chemical constituents of the bottom soil are given in Appendix III. The work on the growth of fish in tanks enriched by adding slaked lime is under progress and will be published later. CONCLUSIONS In the samples of waters analysed calcium as carbonate ranged between 14 and 256.5 p.p.m. The values of calcium were high during summer due to appreciable reduction in the depth of water. Of the water samples, 9.2 per cent were poor, 32.9 per cent were good and 57.9 per cent were very good, when classified according to calcium contents. ACKNOWLEDGMENT Thanks are due to Dr A. J. Faruqi, Lucknow, Sarvshri K. H. Alikunhi, Cuttack, and P. I. Chacko, Calicut, for valuable suggestions during the preparation of this paper. Plankton data were supplied by Shri R. N. Misra, Technical Assistant, to whom the author is also thankful. Thanks are also due to Dr R. L. Kaura, Director of Animal Husbandry, Uttar Pradesh, for granting permission to publish the paper. REFERENCES American Public Health Association and the American Water Works Association (1946). Standard Methods for the Examination of water and sewage, ninth edition Chacko, P. I. and Ganapati, S. V. (1949). Increased fish production in inland waters. Indian Geog. J., 24, (4), 1-10 Faruqi, A. J. (1953). Total fish yield in a stocked tank. Proc. Indian Sci. Cong., 213 Ganapati, S. V. and Chacko, P. I. (1950). Suggestions for stocking fish ponds in Madras. Madras Agric. J., 37, 1.5 Hora, S. L. (1943). Manuring ponds and artificial feeding of fishes. Indian Fmg., 4, (11), 559-62 Judy, C., Birge, E. A. and Meloche, V. W. (1938). Mineral content of the lake waters of Northeastern. Trans. Wis. Acad. Sci., 31, 223-76 Marsh, M. C. (1907). The effect of some industrial waters on fishes. Water Supply and Irrigation Paper No. 192, U. S. Geol. Surv., 337-48 Ohle, W. (1938). Chemische and Pyhsikalische untersuchugen norddeutscher seen. Arch. Hydrobiol., 26, 386 464 Weigelt, C., Saare, C. and Schwab, L. (1885). Die Schadigung von Fischerei ond Fischzucht durch Industrie und Haus Abwasser, Archiv fur Hygiene Bd. 3, s. 39-117
December, 1955 ] M. P. UPADHYAYA 343 APPENDIX I Calcium content of fishery waters of Uttar Pradesh Name of the tank Date of collection Calcium CaCO3 p.p.m. Depth in ft. Area in acres Allahabad District Baijupur ki garhi 26-12-50 57 .. .. Banaras District Parish pond 25-7-51 66 3 0.44 14-9-51 46 .. .. 6-11-51 175 .. .. Benipur 30-12-50 187 6-2-51 80 16-4-51 56 18-6-51 72 14-9-51 38 6 Aerodrome I 6-2-51 71 19-4-51 55 0.18 19-6-51 84 14-9-51 44 0.18 Aerodrome II 6-2-51 46 19-4-51 90 19-6-51 59 24-7-51 50 16 14-9-51 31 Aerodrome III 14-9-51 58 Aerodrome IV 14-9-51 24 Mahata 14-9-51 70 Barabanki District Bahadarpur 16-1-51 38.5 Takhmama 21-4-51 71.7 4.5 Jeoli 6-6-52 159.0 1.3 Gorakhpur District Boundary 17-8-50 25.1 1-11-50 14 Palm 17-8-50 21.6 1-11-50 14 Jaunpur District Naigang 31-7-50 94.8 Masjid 31-7-50 62.5 0.95 Lucknow District Turki 30-8-50 35.6 9 2 28-9-50 23.0 7 31-10-50 27.5 6 30-11-50 23.9 6 29-12-50 35.0 5.5 25-1-51 27.0 5 23-2-51 23.0 4 14-3-51 21.0 3.75 26-6-51 68.0 .. 26-7-51 61.0 2
344 CALCIUM CONTENT OF SOME FISHERY WATERS [ Vol. XXV, Part IV, APPENDIX IDecember, 1955 ] M. P. UPADHYAYA 345 APPENDIX II Hydrobiological conditions of Garha and Turki tanks, Lucknow Particulars Garha Turki Date 26-9-1950 28-9-1950 Temperature of water 84°F 84°F Temperature of atmosphere 85°F 90°F pH 7.7 7.7 Solids p. p. m. a. Volatile 439.2 76 b. Fixed 248.0 84 c. Total 687.2 160 Carbon dioxide p.p.m. 10 7.5 Total hardness p.p.m. 103 60 Total ammonia p.p.m. 0.4 0.54 Chlorides p.p.m. 174 9 Calcium Ca CO3 p.p.m. 122.3 23 Dissolved oxygen p.p.m. 0.78 9.8 Zoo-plankton Coleps hirtus Vorticella Urceolus Phyto-plankton Trachelomonas volvocine. Tra- chelomonas his- pida. Phacus pleuromectes Closterium Sphaerocystis Trachelomonas volvocina. Pha- cus iongicaudus Pandorina Ple- odorina Volume of plankton residue in 100 ml. water 0.2 ml. 0.24 ml. No. of micro-organisms per 100 ml. water 30 36 APPENDIX III Chemical constituents of soil of Garha and Turki tanks, Lucknow Particulars Garha Turki Date 26-9-1950 28-9-1950 Volatile solids 3.7 per cent 4.5 per cent Silica SiO2 71.6 per cent 85.25 per cent Iron Fe2O3 13.3 per cent 14.64 per cent Calcium CaCO3 3.0 per cent 2.85 per cent MGIPC