Vol. XXVI, Part I March 1956 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual Subscription Price per part Rs. 9 or 15s. Rs. 2-4 or 3s. 9d. ICAR. 6. XXVI. 1 780.
CONTENTS Vol. XXVI, Part I (March 1956) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this Journal Original articles Pages ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA IN SOME MALNAD TRACTS (HILLY AND HEAVY RAINFALL REGION) OF MYSORE STATE WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO CEREBROSPINAL NEMATODIASIS AS ITS PROBABLE CAUSE (WITH PLATES ICONTENTS Vol. XXVI, Part II (June, 1956) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in the Journal. Original Articles Page THE PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF LEUCO- CYTIC BLOOD PICTURE IN TUBERCU- LOUS CATTLE A. F. Hathoot, A. H. Gobba and I. H. Moustafa 1 OBSERVATIONS ON THE TREATMENT OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE M. R. Dhanda, V. R. Gopala- krishanan and H. S. Dhillon 13 INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX-DRIVE ON SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES-II (WITH PLATES VII-IX) S. S. Prabhu 21 LIMITED VERSUS AD LIBITUM FEE- DING OF WHITE LEGHORN PULLETS Alex Reed and John G. Velu 35 MEDULLATION IN WOOL-V TREAT- MENT OF MEDULLATED WOOL WITH WOOL PROTETN EXTRACTS T. K. Desai and M. R. Padhye 45
CONTENTS Vol. XXVI, Part III (September 1956) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this Journal. Original Articles Pages SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE MORPHOLOGY AND PATHOGENICITY OF MONIEZIA EXPANSA (RUDOLPHI, 1810) (WITH TWO TEXT-FIGURES) A. K. Varma 103 IN-VITRO TRIALS OF SOME NEW ANTI- TUBERCULOUS COMPOUNDSCONTENTS VOL. XXVI, PART IV (December, 1956) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in the Journal. Original Articles Page. A NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION K. S. Krishnan 149 STUDIES ON THE SCOPE FOR IMPROVEMENT OF BELLARY SHEEP M. N. Das and V. R. Rajagopalan 171 CHEAPER HIGH PROTEIN VERSUS EXPENSIVE LOW PROTEIN RATIONS FOR GROWTH AND FATTEN- ING OF PIGS IN INDIA O. P. Agarwala and D. Sundaresan 185 THE USE OF DATE PRODUCTS IN THE RATION OF THE LACTATING DAIRY COW AND THE WATER BUFFALO Khalid T. Ali, N. C. Fine, Mahommad Faraj and N. H. Sarsam 193 EFFECT OF AUREOMYCIN AND VITAMIN B12 ON THE GROWTH OF WEANED PIGS FED A HIGH PROTEIN DIET (WITH ONE TEXT FIGURE) Alex Reed and 0. P. Agarwala 203 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN INDIA Gobind Singh Thapar 211 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA I. TRIALS ON ADJUVANT VACCINE M. R. Dhanda, M. S. Das, J. M. Lall and R. N. Seth 273 ABSTRACTS 285 31 AR/56
ORIGINAL ARTICLES ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA IN SOME MALNAD TRACTS (HILLY AND HEAVY RAINFALL REGION) OF MYSORE STATE WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO CEREBROSPINAL NEMATODIASIS AS ITS PROBABLE CAUSE* By SYED MOHIYUDDEEN, PH.D. (U.S.A.), Mysore Serum Institute, Bangalore (Received for publication on February 18, 1955) (With Plates I2 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, opinion the lesions of the paraplegic goat were not those of viral or bacterial ence- phalomyelitis but simulated the histopathological picture of proved cases of cere- brospinal nematodiasis, except that the nematode was not found. Shoho [1954] has reported that Pillai and Innes (unpublished work) recently have found malacic lesions associated with the nematode in the spinal cord of an equine paralytic case (Kumri) in Ceylon. Shoho [1952], Pillai and Perara [1953] have found Caricide (1-Diethyl carbamyl-4-Methyl piperazine citrate), a filaricidal drug, effective in cases of cere- brospinal nematodiasis of domestic animals. Bush [1951] is of the view that mineral deficiencies play a very decisive role in producing paraplegia in animals, especially sub-normal or low serum phosphorus levels, and treatment with calcium, phosphorus and magnesium is said to have proved successful in curing more than 100 out of 244 cases of paraplegia in goats and sheep treated by him in Japan. His experiments to produce lumbar paralysis in sheep and goats with microfilaria of Setaria digitata are reported to have yielded negative results, when factors like mineral deficiencies were eliminated. In his opinion, therefore, lumbar paralysis in sheep, goats, cattle and horses may correctly be termed as nutritional paresis. Neelakanta Iyer and Seetharaman [1953] reported complete cure in five out of six cases of bovine paraplegia which they treated in South Kanara District with magnesium sulphate and calcium borogluconate. They are of the view that combined calcium and magnesium deficiency resulting in para- plegic symptoms in a large number of animals at one time in certain areas, might easily be mistaken for an outbreak of some infectious diseases. They contend that the onset of paraplegia might occur after the passing of minimal critical magnesium and calcium levels in the blood and in the ailing animals, magnesium and calcium content of blood might be within the normal range. Russell [1944] quoted Tufts and Greenberg's findings [1937-38] that symptoms of magnesium deficiency did not appear when serum magnesium was minimal. Green [1939] and Duckworth and Godden [1941] believed that the condition might be due to distur- bance in endocrine mechanism concerned with the maintenance of serum magne- sium level. McG Black [1954] reported that magnesium deficiency alone produced paralytic symptoms, coma and death in cattle. BOVINE PARAPLEGIA IN MYSORE STATE An obscure disease among cattle characterised by paraplegic or complete paralytic symptoms is prevalent in parts of Hosnagar, Sagar and Sorab taluks of Shimoga district of Mysore State and in areas bordering south and north Kanara districts of Madras and Bombay States respectively. Bovine paralysis in south Kanara district, Madras State with identical symptoms and course was reported by Viswanathan [1946], Sastry [1948] and Ramakrishnan and Ananthapadmana- bhan [1953] from Madras and a similar disease termed as " undiagnosed disease " among cattle and buffaloes of north Kanara district was reported by Kulkarni [1952] from Bombay State. Enzootic bovine paraplegia, as observed and investigated in some Malnad tracts of Mysore State, appears to be regional in its distribution and seasonal in inci- dence. A marked increase in the number of outbreaks is generally observed during and after the monsoon rains from June to October. The endemic area of this obscure
March, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 3 nervous disease in Hosnagar, Sagar and Sorab taluks of Shimoga District forms part of the Western Ghats and is contiguous with south Kanara of Madras State and north Canara of Bombay State, where a similar condition has been recorded. The area is characterised by dense forests and valleys with an average rainfall of over 150 inches annually. The valleys abound in strips of wet land which are more or less exclusively under paddy and arecanut cultivation. On the slopes surround- ing the valleys are here and there small villages and hamlets and their cattle graze on adjoining hills and jungles. Except the working animals used for paddy cultiva- tion, the rest of the cattle of this Malnad area are not fed on any concentrates or mineral supplement. Sheltering of animals at nights is peculiar to these parts and consists of their being huddled together without being tied or secured, inside an enclosed ill ventilated stall. Their bedding consists of dried or green leaves, depending on the seasons. The daily collection of dung and urine from the animals are allowed to get mixed up with the leaves and at intervals of a fortnight or so fresh layer of leaves is spread on the floor without removing the previous accumula- tion and this process continues till the onset of cultivation season, when the whole decayed matter is removed to the lands and used as manure. During the rainy season the animals lie down on such a type of bedding soaked in dung and urine and get severely exposed to dampness and moisture. In some parts of Sagar taluk the low lying pastures become water-logged due to continuous heavy rains and cattle seldom have access to any grass as it is practically submerged in water. During this period, they just subsist on whatever vegetation they can eat in the dense forests. In summer when pastures get dried up, animals have to feed on the leaves of trees and bushes. Consequently the condition of the animals in these parts is generally poor and their quality inferior. Heavy rainfall, dense forests and poor condition of the cattle are the outstanding features of the endemic area of this obscure disease while a variety of blood sucking insects are not uncommon in the locality. This obscure nervous disease of bovines, characterised by paraplegia and progressive paralysis, prevalent in some parts of Shimoga, south Kanara and north Kanara districts of Mysore, Madras and Bombay States respectively has been attributed by different workers to different conditions at different times. Viswa- nathan [1946] in Madras suspected the disease to be bovine contagious pleuropneu- monia. Ramakrishnan [1953] thought that the condition might be a form of Botulism, but failed to produce the disease in healthy animals by feeding them with emulsion of bones collected from affected areas. He quoted personal communications from Hurley [1949] and Rajagopalan [1950] instructing the de- partmental staff in Madras to eliminate the possibility of acute amphistomiasis, theileriasis and hydrocyanic acid poisoning and recorded that materials from a number of affected cattle with paraplegia, when chemically analysed, did not show any evidence of hydrocyanic acid poisoning. Kulkarni [1952], while recording a similar disease in north Kanara district (Bombay State) thought that it might be pulmonary haemorrhagic septicaemia. Ramakrishnan and Ananthapadmanabhan [1953] suggested that the disease might be either latent trypanosomiasis or some form of cerebro-spinal microfilariasis, while Neelakanta Iyer and Seetharaman [1953] believed that the condition might
4 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, be some form of nutritional paresis caused by combined hypo-calciamia and hypo- magnesimia. SUSCEPTIBLE ANIMALS From the observations made by the author in Hosnagar, Sagar and Sorab taluks of Shimoga district in Mysore State, only cattle were found to be affected. It may be because in the so-called endemic area of the disease in the State other species of ruminants are not usually reared excepting a few buffaloes for purposes of milk or work (wet cultivation) and these are generally well taken care of. Cattle of all ages were observed to suffer from the disease although the incidence was most common in adult animals. Typical ailing cases were observed in the following villages where the disease broke out in 1954 : 1. Nittur Hosnagar taluk 2. Ebagodu hamlet of Brahmanwada village 3. Nithrabailu hamlet of Byse village 4. Kalgadde 5. Malali 6. Bardavalli Sagar taluk 7. Marthur 8. Chanagonda 9. Ambargodlu 10. Hebse 11. Kalgodu 12. Tumari Symptoms of the Disease From the observations made on the symptoms and the course of the disease, three types or forms could be recognised, viz. (i) acute (ii) sub-acute and (iii) chronic. The disease in all the three forms was non-febrile. In acute cases, the onset of paralysis of the entire body was somewhat sudden and the course of the disease extended only to about 48 to 72 hours and in a few cases death occurred within 12 hours. Such cases were regarded as peracute type. The chief symptoms characterising the acute form were sudden signs of shivering, unsteadiness of the limbs, staggering gait, animal lying down with its head turned to one side resembling the characteristic posture of animals suffering from milk fever complex, profuse salivation, paralysis of the tongue and its protrusion to one side, hard breathing, finally prostration, convulsions and death. In subacute cases the disease was characterised by the onset of paraplegia symptoms and in chronic cases, of immobility of tail followed by paraplegia. However, in both forms gradual progressive paralysis of the entire body was the ultimate result. Such animals were observed to lie down frequently while grazing, due probably to weakness of hind quarters, although their apparently healthy looks did not show their illness, and they also continued to feed normally. The course of the disease in subacute form extended up to a week or so, while in chronic form it ran up to a month or even more. The ailing animal
March, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 5 had no control over the tail, which appeared to hang loose, there being no attempt at swishing at any time. The response to pin pricks on the tail was either very slow or imperceptible. In the beginning micturition was normal but latter on frequency of micturition increased and urine was passed in drops with some strain. This was followed by a gradual onset of anterior paralysis, involving the muscles of the tongue resulting in an involuntary flow of saliva. The neck was bent to one side and tongue protruded out. Mortality. In acute cases the mortality was almost 100 per cent, while in subacute and chronic forms recovery was rare and if any, it was mostly in chronic cases. Post-mortem lesions. Detailed post-mortem examinations were conducted on 4 typical cases in the field. In three cases post-mortem was done within 3 hours after death and in one about after 12 hours. Two of the four cases had acute course of the disease extending not more than 3 days, while the other two cases had subacute course extending up to a week. In the two acute cases where the disease was characterised by complete paralysis of the body, the brain and spinal cord were slightly congested and softened and in the other two subacute cases which had only paraplegia, no microscopic lesions were evident. In two cases congestion of small intestines and haemorrhagic patches on epicar- dium and endo-cardium were observed, while in one case heavy infestation of param- phistomes in the rumen was noticed. METHODS AND MATERIAL During the period of investigation which lasted for about two years (1952-1954), the following materials were obtained from typical cases for examination : 1. Blood smears (from peripheral veins) 2. Heart blood, spleen and liver impression smears 3. Cerebro-spinal fluid 4. Heart blood and spleen cultures 5. Blood samples (defibrinated) 6. Blood samples (citrated) 7. Serum samples 8. Lumbar portion of spinal cord and brain (half in glycerine and half in 10 per cent formalin) 9. Pieces of lungs, liver, spleen, heart and kidneys 10. Blood sucking flies of cattle collected from endemic areas 32 ailing cases (microscopical examina- tion) 12 carcasses (microscopical examina- tion) 8 fresh carcasses (microscopic as well as cultural examination) 4 fresh carcasses (cultural examination) 4 ailing cases (biological test) 2 ailing cases (chemical analysis) 10 ailing cases (chemical analysis and chemical test for surra) 4 carcasses (biological test and histopathological examination) 4 carcasses (Histopathological examina- tion) 6 for entomological study 59AR/55 3
6 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI, Part 1, EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED 1. Biological tests (a) Two ailing cattle with typical symptoms of paraplegia at Ebagodu hamlet of Nagar area, reported to be ailing for three days were selected and were bled from the jugular vein and immediately the blood was injected intraperitoneally in 2 c.c. doses to 2 guineapigs and 2 rabbits and the animals were kept under observation for 5 weeks examining their blood smears every day, to study the possibility of latent try- panosomiasis. (b) Similarly blood was drawn from two typical cases of bovine paraplegia in a sterile flask with glass beads and was defibrinated by constant shaking. Two bull calves were injected with the defibrinated blood at 15 c.c. intravenously and the animals were kept under observation for a month with a view to finding out if there was any infective agent in the blood. (c) Lumbar portion of spinal cord and brain were collected aseptically in sterile glycerine from two typical cases of bovine paraplegia soon after the death of the animals. Emulsions of the spinal cords were prepared in sterile water and 20 c.c. of emulsion injected subcutaneously into two bull calves, 5 c.c. of emulsion injected intraperitoneally into two rabbits and 0.2 c.c. intracranially into two guineapigs. All these experimental animals were kept under observation for a month to study the possibility of virus being an etiological factor. Besides, lumbar portion of the spinal cord from a typical acute case was sent in 50 per cent glycerine to I. V. R. I., Mukteswar, for biological transmission experi- ments. 2. Chemical analysis (a) Ten serum samples collected from typical ailing cases of bovine paraplegia were analysed chemically for calcium, magnesium and phosphorus contents. (b) Two citrated blood samples collected from typical cases of paraplegia were tested for copper deficiency. (3) Chemical test for surra Ten serum samples collected from 10 typical ailing cases of bovine paraplegia were subjected to stilbamidine test as recommended by Ray [1950]. (4) Histopathological examination Lung, liver, spleen, heart, kidney, brain and lumbar portion of spinal cord from 4 typical cases of bovine paraplegia were collected in 10 per cent formalin and paraffin sections were prepared. Histological sections of lung, liver and spleen, heart and kidney tissues were stained with haematoxylin and eosin and with Castroveijo's trichrome stain. The spinal cord and brain from two acute cases and the lumbar portion of spinal cord from two subacute cases were collected in 10 per cent formalin. After 48 hours of preservation, the tissues were taken out for
March, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 7 embedding and sectioning and the formalin solution which had become turbid was centrifuged. The sediment was examined carefully for larval forms of nematodes as suggested by Niimi (quoted by Innes [1953]) who thought that in some cases the nematodes may drop off the nervous system after the brain and spinal cord are placed in the fixative. A few pieces of softened portion of the spinal cord and brain were also emulsified in sterile water and thick smears were prepared and stained with haemotoxylin and eosin and giemsa's stains for microscopic examina- tion. Protocols Case No. 1. A cow about 5 years of age belonging to Ebagodu hamlet of Nagar hobli of Hosnagar taluk, Shimoga district, Mysore State. Symptoms of paraplegia observed on 28th May 1954. Complete paralysis of all the four limbs, neck bent to one side, course was acute, death occurred on 30th May 1954. Brain and spinal cord removed soon after the death of animal. Case No. 2. A cow of about 6 years of age belonging to Ebagodu hamlet of Nagar hobli, Hosnagar taluk, Shimoga district, Mysore State. Symptoms of immobility of tail observed on 21st June 1954 and complete paraplegia was observed on 25th June 1954, course was subacute, animal died on 27th June 1954. The lumbar portion of the spinal cord was removed one hour after the death of the animal. Case No. 3. A cow belonging to Sirur village of Sagar taluk, Shimoga district, Mysore State. Typical symptoms of paraplegia were observed on 29th June 1954. Course was subacute, animal died on 5th July 1954. Spinal cord was removed about 12 hours after death of the animal. Case No. 4. A cow of about 6 years of age belonging to Ambargodlu village of Sagar taluk, Shimoga district, Mysore State. Onset of complete paralysis of all the four limbs was sudden when observed on 25th August 1954. The disease had acute course and the animal died on 28th August 1954 (within three days). Brain and spinal cord were removed about three hours after the death of the animal. RESULTS Microscopic examinations Blood smears from 32 typical ailing cases in different stages of the disease from 10 villages of Hosnagar and Sagar taluks were examined microscopically, but none of the smears revealed any specific bacterial or protozoan organisms. Heart blood and spleen impression smears from 12 cases and cerebro-spinal fluid smears from 8 cases collected within 6 to 8 hours after the death of the animals were also found negative, except the heart blood smears from one case which revealed numerous sarcocytis spores. Detailed microscopic examination of the nervous tissue sediment obtained after centrifugation of the fixative which contained the spinal cord and brain of two acute cases (Case No. 1 and 4) revealed three complete nematode larvae (Plate I, Fig. 1 and Text Fig. 1-A and Fig. 2-A, D) and in about 25 thick smears made from the emulsion of the spinal cord, two complete larvae (Plate I, Fig. 2 and Text Fig. 2-A and B.) and four incomplete larvae (Fig. 2-C, E, F and G.) were revealed by a few smears. All these larvae were sheathed. Of the five complete larvae the largest one
8 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI. Part 1, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. 0.1 m.m=100 microns
March, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 9 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2.
10 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, measured 810 microns in length and 24 microns thick at the head end and 28 microns in the middle (Plate I, Fig. 1, and Text Fig. 1, A). Other complete larvae measured 340 microns in length (Fig. 2, D), 310 microns (Fig. 2, B), 320 microns (Fig. 2, A) and 450 microns (Fig.2, H). Result of cultural examination Cultures of heart blood, spleen and cerebro-spinal fluid from four typical cases did not reveal any bacterial growth on agar, blood agar, broth and Robertson media even after 72 hours of incubation. Results of biological tests Samples of defibrinated blood obtained from typical cases of bovine paraplegia, when injected subcutaneously and intravenously into bull calves did not produce the disease during a period of one month's observation and thus the possibility of a transmissible infective agent in the blood was eliminated. Emulsions of fresh spinal cord when injected into bull calves, rabbits and guineapigs subcutaneously, intraperitoneally and intra-cranially respectively, failed to produce the disease in the experimental animals. Blood, cerebro-spinal fluid and emulsions of brain and spinal cord obtained from typical cases of bovine paraplegia on cultural and biological tests were found negative for bacteria, virus and protozoa and the disease was non-transmissible to buffalo- calves and laboratory animals. This was confirmed by the results received from the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, where biological tests with the spinal cord were conducted in laboratory animals. Blood smears of guineapigs and rabbits injected intraperitoneally with fresh blood from typical cases of bovine paraplegia were found negative for Trypanosomes for a period of five weeks and hence the possibility of latent trypanosomiasis was also ruled out. Results of chemical test for surra Nine out of 10 samples of sera obtained from typical cases when subjected to stilbamidine test (M. & B. 744) yielded negative results, while one serum sample which was considerably haemolysed showed doubtful reaction. Results of chemical analysis Calcium, magnesium and phosphorus contents of serum samples from 10 ailing cases are given in Table 1. Serum calcium level in 9 cases was within the normal range and in one case it was considerably low, while serum magnesium level was slightly below the normal range in six cases and normal in four cases. (The slight low serum magnesium level is subject to correction since there is no established data regarding the normal range of serum magnesium level in local cattle of the Malnad tracts). The serum phosphorus level in all the 10 cases was within the normal range. Results of entomological study The blood sucking flies collected from the area were of the two types, one large and the other small and by their mouth parts were found to belong to the family Tabinidae and genus Tabanus.
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXVI, PART 1 ] PLATE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Nematode larva found in the spinal cord of a cow, acute case of bovine paraplegia (larva found in the tissue sediment got by centrifugation of the fixative fluid which contained the lumbar portion of the spinal cord of Case No. 1). ..................................................H.E. ×190 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Complete larva of nematode spinal cord of a cow (larva found in the smears of lumbar portion of spinal cord of the Case No. 4). Note the sheath distinctly visible ..........................H.E. ×500 59AR/55
PLATE II [ Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXVI, PART I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Spinal cord, bovine paraplegia, cow (Case No. 2) showing malacic lesions in the white matter with microcavitation. ..................H.E. × 105 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Spinal cord, bovine paralysis, cow (Case No. 4) showing acute liquefaction and a prominent vessel with thickened walls due to denser reticulum. ........................H.E. × 350
March, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 11 TABLE I Calcium, magnesium and phosphorus contents of serum samples from ten ailing cases Description of animals Duration of the disease Calcium content in milligrams per 100 c.c. serum Magnesium content in mgm. per 100 c.c. serum Phosphorus content in mgm. per 100 c.c. serum (1) Red bull calf from Nagar area (Ebagodu village) 6 days (subacute case with paraplegia) 14.4 2.22 7.52 (2) Black cow from Nagar area (Byse village) 30 hours after the disease and 12 hours before death (acute case with complete paralysis) 5.2 6.52 8.45 (3) Reddish grey cow from Sagar area (Bar- davalli village) 5th day (subacute with paraplegia only) 9.8 3.19 7.83 (4) Black cow from Sagar area (Baradavalli village) 2 days (acute case with complete paralysis) 10.4 3.7 6.92 (5) Cow from Sagar area (Kosgodu village) 6 days (subacute case with paralysis) 10.00 1.75 8.42 (6) Heifer from Sagar area (Kosgodu village) 5 days (subacute case with paraplegia) 9.40 1.82 7.02 (7) Cow from Sagar area (Ambargodlu village) 3 days (subacute case with paraplegia) 10.20 1.81 8.51 (8) Bullock from Sagar area (Channagonda village) 2 days (acute case with complete paralysis) 9.80 1.57 6.54 (9) Cow from Sagar area (Karigodu village) 3 days (subacute case) 7.6 0.88 6.05 (10) Bullock from Sagar area (Tumari village) 3 days (subacute case) 8.0 1.33 7.82
12 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, Treatment with calcium and magnesium salts The line of treatment followed was subcutaneous injections of 100 c.c. of 20 per cent magnesium sulphate solution and 40 c.c. of 25 per cent calcium borogluconate solution each day for 3 or 4 consecutive days injected subcutaneously. The results are given in Table II. Six chronic and subacute cases gradually improved and recovered, while five acute and subacute cases died without any signs of im- provement after treatment. Histopathological examination Sections of liver, spleen, kidney and heart revealed normal histological features, while sections of lungs from two cases had slight congestion and in other two cases the lungs were normal. However in none of the four cases, lungs had any indication of pleuropneumonia. Histopathology In one of the four animals (Case No. 3), sections of spinal cord did not reveal any characteristic histopathological features, while the sections of brain and spinal cord of the other three cases (Case No. 1, 2 and 4) had the following lesions. The white matter of the spinal cord was chiefly involved although the grey matter was also affected to a lesser extent. The lesion was one of acute softening, in which there was not only the myelin degeneration but also the ground substance was loosened and destroyed, resulting in a status spongiosus which was an impending factor in the preparation of intact paraffin sections (Plate IV, Fig. 1). In spite of good fixation of the brain and spinal cord, removed immediately after the death, this defect could not be improved. The most distinctive histological feature was the presence of numerous radially disposed vessels with prominent thickened walls due to denser reticulum (Plate II, Fig. 2) lying in disorderly cracks and crevices. Focal cellulor infilteration, liquefaction and microcavitation were observed in all the three cases (Plate II, Fig. 1 and 2). Definite changes in axis cylinders were cons- tantly present. Swollen scanty axis cylinders, distorted and irregularly globose, within the transversely cut tube representing myelin sheath were seen in haemo- toxylin eosin stained sections. Perhaps, many of the empty round spaces seen in the paraffin sections might be the result of the falling out of such irregularly globose bodies, contained in those spaces (Plate IV, Fig. 2). On the whole the histological picture of the spinal cord in all the three cases resembled the lesions of focal lique- factive encephalomyelomyelomalacia as described by Innes [1951] and stated to be the only diagnostic feature of cerebro-spinal nematodiasis. The most important finding of the histological study besides the microscopic lesions already described was the detection of sections of immature nematodes (Plate III, Fig. 1 and 2) in the lumbar portion of the spinal cord of two cases (Case No. 1 and 4). The nematode observed in the sections of the tissues appeared more developed than those in the preservative fluid (Plate III, Fig. 1). DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION The bovine paraplegia and paralysis observed in Hosnagar and Sagar taluks of Shimoga district of Mysore State in its nature, course and symptoms appeared to be identical with the so-called " Hidden disease " of south Kanara district in
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXVI, PART I ] PLATE III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Spinal cord, bovine paralysis, cow (Case No. 4) showing malacic lesion with a transverse section of an immature nematode. Note the oesophagus of the worm with a distinct triradiate lumen. ...................H.E. X120 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Spinal cord, bovine paralysis, cow (Case No. 1). Note the right upper mar- gin showing small area of liquefaction and microcavitation in the white matter, note also in the left lower corner, a section of the immature nematode. ..........................H.E. X90
PLATE IV [ Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXVI, PART I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Spinal cord, bovine paraplegia, cow (Case No. 2) showing not only myelin degeneration but also destroyed ground substance. ................H.E. X 92 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Spinal cord, bovine paraplegia, cow (Case No. 2) showing empty spaces as a result of the falling out of swollen axis cylinders. (Note giant neurones also.) ................H.E. X 120
March, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 13 TABLE II Results of subcutaneous injections with calcium and magnesium salts Description Duration of disease and symptoms Period of treatment Results 1. A black cow aged 6 years from Nagar area (Ebagodu hamlet) Reported to be sick for 3 days, animal had complete paraplegia, animal dull, off fed 1st injection on 29-5-54 2nd injection on 30-5-54 No improvement and animal died 2. A red bull calf 1½ years old from Nagar area (Ebagodu hamlet) Reported to be ailing for 6 days, animal had complete immobility of tail but slight paraplegia, animal active and feeding normal 1st injection on 29-5-54 2nd injection on 30-5-54 3rd injection on 1-6-54 Animal recovered 3. A grey cow of 5 years age from Nagar area (Ebagodu hamlet) Reported to be sick for 3 days with immobility of tail and paraplegia, animal active and feeding normal 1st injection (M. F. C.) on 28-5-54 2nd injection on 29-5-54 3rd injection on 30-5-54 Considerable im- provement and finally recovered 4. A grey bull calf of 2 years age from Nagar area (Ebagodu hamlet) Reported to be ailing for 24 hours with slight immobility of tail and staggering gait but no paraplegia, feeding normal, animal active 1st injection on 28-6-54 2nd injection on 29-6-54 3rd injection on 30-6-54 Gradual improve- ment and finally recovered 5. A red heifer of 3 years age from Nagar area (Nithrebailu hamlet) Reported to be sick for 6 hours with immobility of tail and staggering gait, animal active, feeding normal 1st injection on 29-6-54 2nd injection on 30-6-54 3rd injection on 1-7-54 Gradual improve- ment and finally recovered 6. A black cow of 5 years age from Sagar area (Bardavalli village) Reported to be ailing for 4 days with complete paraplegia and paralysis of the entire body and sub-normal temperature, animal dull and comatose 1st injection on 30-6-54 2nd injection on 1-7-54 3rd injection on 2-7-54 No improvement ob- served, animal died 59 AR/55
14 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, TABLE IIMarch, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 15 Madras State and the " undiagnosed disease "of cattle of north Kanara district, Bombay State. The regional and seasonal conditions of these contiguous tracts of Mysore, Madras and Bombay States being almost identical, the animals of these hilly and heavy rainfall tracts are subjected to the same environmental conditions. The observations made so far in Mysore State and those reported from Madras and Bombay States regarding bovine paraplegia indicate that the obscure disease of cattle in the contiguous areas of all the three States may be one and the same and, therefore, the endemic zone for this disease could be demarcated as comprising contiguous areas of Shimoga, south Kanara and north Kanara districts of Mysore, Madras and Bombay States respectively. DIFFERNTIAL DIAGNOSIS Haemorrhagic septicaemia : All cases of bovine paraplegia studied in Mysore had an afebrile course and no lesions in the lungs were observed. Microscopic and cultural examination of heart blood collected from four typical cases immediately after death of the animals were found negative for pasteurella organisms. Besides, blood drawn from a typical case only a few hours before death was injected into a rabbit which remained unaffected for 3 weeks during which it was kept under observation after injection. Haemorrhagic septicaemia in whatever form it might be, being a septicaemic disease, its casual organisms could neither escape detection in heart blood cultures made soon after the death of the animals nor in the rabbit inoculation test with the blood from a typical case drawn just a few hours before death. Contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia Post-mortem examination of four typical cases of bovine paraplegia did not reveal any pneumonic lesions in the lungs. Sections of lung tissue were normal in histological features except for slight congestion. In two cases much laboured breathing was observed just before death suggesting some lung lesions, but on post-mortem examination lungs were found perfectly normal. The symptoms of respiratory distress observed appeared to be due to paralysis of diaphragm and other respiratory muscles rather than to pneumonic lesions in the lungs. Acute theileriasis and anaplasmosis Bovine paraplegia was always a non-febrile condition whether it was acute, where the onset of paralysis was sudden, or subacute and chronic. Such an afeb- rile condition could not be associated with the infection of blood protozoan parasites like piroplasms. Besides, peripheral blood smears taken just before death and heart blood smears taken soon after death did not reveal either Theileria or Ana- plasma like bodies in red blood corpuscles and Koch's blue bodies in spleen in spite of detailed microscopic examination. Thus the possibility of this obscure disease being either the pulmonary form of haemorrhagic septicaemia or contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia or acute theileriasis or anaplasmosis was definitely ruled out by systematic investigation. Latent trypanosomiasis Trypanosomes in bovines may not appear in peripheral circulation and hence may not be detected by examination of blood smears only, as the parasites get into deeper tissues like cerebrospinal and reticulo-endothelial systems. To eliminate
16 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, the possibility of latent trypanosomiasis not only blood smears from 32 ailing cases were examined in detail for the presence of trypanosomes, but also smears made from 8 samples of cerebrospinal fluid after centrifugation were examined. None of these revealed any indication of trypanosomes. Besides, 10 samples of serum from typical ailing cases were subjected to stilbamidine test (chemical test for surra) and all were found negative, except one which developed doubtful reaction. Blood from two typical ailing cases of paraplegia was drawn and immediately injected into guineapigs and rabbits intraperitoneally. These guineapigs were maintained for more than a month and their blood smears were examined every day for trypanosomes with negative results. Thus all tests, viz. microscopic biolo- gical and chemical, for detection of trypanosomiasis having yielded negative results definitely ruled out the possibility of latent trypanosomiasis. Virus etiology of the disease Virus, as the probable etiological factor, was sometimes thought of in connec- tion with this obscure disease. During the investigation the disease could not be produced experimentally in bull calves, rabbits and guineapigs by injecting fresh blood and emulsions of brain and spinal cord from typical cases of paraplegia indica- ting that the causal agent if it was virus, was not present in blood or brain and spinal cord of the affected animals. Although many animals died of the disease at one time in the same place, observations made in the field did not indicate that the disease was infectious in nature, tending to spread from one animal to another by contact. The epidemiological features of the disease were highly suggestive of some insect vector playing some role in transmitting the disease. Two varieties of blood sucking flies one fairly large sized and the other small, were examined and found to belong to the genusMarch, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 17 the exact mode of its therapeutic action cannot be explained satisfactorily. (This is subject to correction since the normal range of serum magnesium level in Malnad cattle is not known). Cerebrospinal nematodiasis The cause of bovine paralysis and paraplegia, though prevalent as seasonal enzootic in some Malnad tracts of Mysore State for several years, had remained obscure because the investigations undertaken were limited to the search of etiolo- gical factors of bacterial, viral or nutritional origin. None of the previous investiga- tors seems to have attempted a detailed histopathological study of the cerebrospinal system. The present study is, therefore, a new approach for the elucidation of the etiology of the disease in this country. The pathological evidence, such as the presence of fully developed larvae of a nematode observed in the softened portion of the spinal cord and transverse sections of immature nematode in the histological sections of the spinal cord with malacic lesions, seem to suggest that enzootic bovine paralysis and paraplegia of some hilly tracts of Mysore State is very probably a form of cerebrospinal nematodiasis. The larvae were sheathed forms but their exact identity could not be determined from the larval and immature forms observed in the cerebrospinal system. The causal nematode is probably a filarid worm. All the work published so far on cerebrospinal nematodiasis of domestic animals in Japan, Korea and Ceylon indicate that microfilaria of Setaria digitata whose natural hosts are cattle, produce cerebrospinal nematodiasis in unnatural hosts like, sheep, goats and horses. Innes [1952] is of the opinion that Setaria equina might produce cerebrospinal nematodiasis in cattle and an unnatural host might be necessary for this condition. At the same time Innes [1951] states that " most text books on parasitology admit of great ignorance concerning the life cycle of Setaria species and what they do in natural and unnatural hosts ". He also men- tions that " some statements in Mukteswar reports imply the possibility that the same disease of goats and cattle exists in different parts of India ". He also quotes unpublished work of Jensen and Bracken [1950] wherein similar lesions have been described in the sections of brain and spinal cord of cases of a peculiar haemorrhagic encephalomalacia in cattle occurring in the U. S. A. In the Malnad tracts of Mysore State, where bovine paraplegia is prevalent in the form of enzootic, cattle and buffaloes are predominant and other species of domestic ruminants like sheep and goats are rare. Horses are generally not found in those parts and, therefore, the probability of Setaria equina being the causal nematode can easily be ruled out. Of course the hilly and the heavy rainfall area of Mysore State, where bovine paraplegia is prevalent is surrounded by dense forest, abounding also in a variety of wild fauna, including herbivorous animals like deers, antelopes, bisons, etc. as well as a large number of blood sucking insects. Bell [1934] states that species Setaria labiotopapillosa occurs not only in the peritoneal cavity of the ox but also in African buffaloes, and various species of deers and ante- lopes. As cerebrospinal nematodiasis has been observed as a factor associated with the causation of bovine paralysis in Mysore State, the author thinks that the nema- tode is very probably a filariod worm. If the sheathed larvae encountered in this condition were presumed to be of Setaria species, the possible explanation that could
18 ENZOOTIC BOVINE PARAPLEGIA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, be offered for the incidence of cerebrospinal nematodiasis is that infestation of an unnatural host by a nematode may not always be necessary and the condition may even be produced by it in a normal host. Though the definite identification of the nematode whose larvae and immature forms were observed in the cerebrospinal system of acute cases of bovine paraplegia and paralysis was not possible, the epidemiological aspects of the disease are highly suggestive of some blood sucking insects playing a role in its transmission. In the endemic area of Mysore State where bovine paraplegia is prevalent, a large number of blood sucking flies are found and cattle are reported to be much harassed by them. As a result of further investigation, some of the blood sucking flies may prove to be the insect vectors in the transmission of the infective larvae. SUMMARY (1) Results of investigation of enzootic bovine paraplegia in Mysore State carried out during the period of two years (1952-54) are detailed. (2) The possibility of this obscure disease being an aberrent form of haemorr- hagic septicaemia, contagious bovine pleuropneumonia, acute theileriasis, latent trypanosomiasis or some specific virus disease, etc. is ruled out. (3) Histopathological studies of the cerebro-spinal systems, particularly the brain and the lumber portion of the spinal cord from affected animals, have revealed that enzootic bovine paralysis in some Malnad tracts of Mysore State is associated with cerebrospinal nematodiasis. (4) This seems to be the first record of cerebrospinal nematodiasis among bovines. ACKNOWLEDGMENT I am highly grateful to Dr. P. M. Narainswamy Naidu, Director of Animal Husbandry in Mysore, Bangalore, for the encouragement and facilities provided during this investigation and for his guidance in my research work. I am thankful to Shri. M. R. Dhanda, Head of the Division of Pathology and Bacteriology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, Kumaon for conducting biologi- cal transmission experiments in laboratory animals. I am also thankful to Dr. N. S. Krishna Rao, Parasitologist, Mysore Serum Institute, for his kind co-operation in carrying out surra test, identification of insects, microscopic examination of the nematode and preparation of camera lucida drawings. My thanks are due to Shri H. S. Lakke Gowda, Nutritional Chemist, Mysore Serum Institute, for chemical analysis of blood and to Sarvashri M. Veerabhadrappa, Photomicrographic Technician and Shri M. Safeeulla, Research Scholar, Central College, Bangalore, for their help in preparation of photomicrographs. Lastly I am thankful to Sarvashri V. S. Kuppuswamy Mudaliar, Superintendent, Mysore Serum Institute, K. Srikantiah, Assistant Director, Animal Husbandry, Shimoga, L. R. Phadki and B. S. Kuppu- swamy, Veterinary Inspectors of the area for their co-operation in the course of this investigation.
March, 1956] SYED MOHIYUDDEEN 19 REFERENCES Bell, F. N. (1934). A microfilaria in the blood of cattle. J. Amer. vet. med. 38, 747-759 Bush, D. L. (1951). Lumber paralysis of bovine species in Japan reportedly caused by Setaria digitata. J. Amer. vet. med. Ass., 68, 388-394 Crawford, M. (1939-42). Annual reprints. The Government Veterinary Surgeon, Ceylon Duckworth J. and Godden W. (1941). I Biochem. J. 35, 816 Green, H. H. (1939). Recent Advances in our knowledge of diseases associated with Mineral Balance in the Blood of Ruminants. Vet. Rec, 51, 1179 Innes, J. R. M. (1951). Necrotising Encephalomyelitis (or Encephalomyelomalacia) of unknown etiology in goats in Ceylon with similarities to Setariasis of sheep, horses and goats in Japan. Brit. vet. J., 107, 187 A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON CYMBIFORMIASIS IN SHEEP AND GOATS OF UTTAR PRADESH HILLS By R. D. KATIYAR, Animal Husbandry Department, Lucknow (Received for publication on May 10, 1955) (With Plate V) CYMBIFORMA indica [Bhalerao, 1942] belongs to the family Notocotylidae of trematodes. Trematodes of Notocotylidae family are characterised by the absence of ventral sucker. The eggs of these trematodes bear long filaments at both ends. These parasites are usually found in the intestines of aquatic birds and mammals. The Notocotylidae are generally regarded to be comparatively harmless. However, Szidat reported that Catatropis dhner, 1905, which occurs in the caeca of the fowl, duck, goose and wild aquatic birds attacks the mucosa of caeca and causes erosions. Cymbiforma indicum was recorded first by Bhalerao in 19 2 in sheep, goats and cattle in India. So far these parasites were considered harmless. Heavy infestations with these trematodes have also escaped the notice of the workers. From the investigations carried out in this State, Cymbiforma indica appears to be a serious parasite of sheep and goats. Severe infestations with this parasite developed quite rapidly during the winter season and inflicted heavy loss specially in sheep. Two outbreaks due to heavy infestation with Cymbiforma indica have been en- countered amongst the sheep of Kamaun hills during the past one year. Heavy infestation of Rampur Bushair sheep of the Government Sheep Farm, Gwaldam, district Garhwal, with Cymbiforma indica was detected for the first time in February, 1954. The disease was limited to Rampur Bushair sheep that had gone to Ali Bugiyal for summer grazing in 1953. Ali Bugiyal meadow is situated about 1200 ft. above sea level in the Kumaun hills and about 15000 sheep and goats are annually sent there from the surrounding villages for summer grazing, i.e. from May to October. Twenty-five Rampur Bushair rams which were transferred in December, 1953 from Gwaldam to the Stud Ram Centre, Badiakote, district Almora, were also affected with Cymbiformiasis. These rams belonged to the same flock of the Gwaldam Farm, which had gone to Bugiyal previous year. Merino and Hissar dale rams which were not sent along with the Rampur Bushair sheep to Ali Bugiyal escaped infestation with Cymbiforma indica. It appears that the Rampur Bushair sheep got the infestation with the parasite at Ali Bugiyal. Frequent intermittent snowfall with unusual heavy winter rains during the months of January and February 1953, were responsible to a great extent for the general deterioration in the condition of sheep at Gwaldam and Badiakote. This lowered the vitality and coupled with heavy infestations with Cymbiforma indica caused severe mortality among the sheep. Forty out of 215 sheep and 13 out of 25 rams died at Gwaldam and Badiakote respectively. 21 59 AR/55 5
22 A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON CYMBIFORMIASIS [Vol. XXVI, Part I, Another outbreak of Cymbiformiasis occurred amongst the Rampur Bushair and Kashmiri rams at Kalsi, district Dehra Dun, during December, 1954. Forty stud rams (6 Hissar dale, 23 Rampur Bushair and 11 Kashmiri) were transferred from Chakrata hills (Dehra Dun) to Kalsi in the last week of November 1954. These rams developed the disease after a week of their arrival at Kalsi. The first case was detected on the 1st December, 1954 and 17 rams died within a period of ten days. The change in the environmental conditions together with the strain of long road march seems to be responsible for precipitating the impending attack of the disease. Symptoms The following clinical symptoms were manifested by the sheep affected with Cymbiformiasis : The affected sheep were first noticed dull and lagging behind the flock. Their general condition was poor and debilitated. In a day or two, diarrhoea started with passage of soft faeces which was later replaced by watery diarrhoea with foetid smell, containing flakes of mucous. In the last stages the animal was observed lying in a prostrate condition with the body temperature usually subnormal. Generally, there was no rise in the body temperature at any stage of the disease. Muco-purulent nasal discharge was also observed in a few affected sheep. The visible mucous membranes were not so pale and anaemic as are seen in immature Amphistomiasis or in chronic cases of Fascioliasis. No oedematous swelling was seen in the affected cases at Kalsi. Four cases of Gwaldam Farm exhibited oedematous swelling in the submandibular region. These cases were found carrying mixed infestations of Dicrocelium dendriti-cum, Tricho-strongyles and Cymbiforma indica with the latter predominating and largely responsible for the symptoms observed. The duration of illness lasted from 4 to 8 days. Post-mortem lesions In all, 16 sheep have been post-mortemed so far. Twelve carcasses were autopsied at Gwaldam, Badiakote and Kalsi. Four sheep in extermis were sacrificed to study the disease. The post-mortem lesions observed were as follows : Heart, lungs, spleen, kidney, rumen, reticulum and omasum did not show any lesion of pathological significance. The thoracic cavity usually contained 8 oz. to 2 lb. of straw coloured serous fluid. The abdominal cavity invariably contained 1 to 3 lb. of serous fluid. The epicardial sac was found to contain 2 to 4 oz. of straw coloured fluid in 5 cases. Gall bladder was always found engorged with thick dark green coloured bile. Liver was slightly enlarged and congested. In six cases liver contained Dicrocaelium dendriticum in varying numbers from 44 to 226. Abo- masum contained few Ostertagia circumcineta in 4 cases. The pathological lesions and the trematodes Cymbiforma indica were detected only in the small intestine. Duodenum generally showed muco-purulent enteritis with marked thickening. The duodenum contained few parasitesPLATE V Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXVI, PART I ] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Cymbiforma indica attached to the asmall intestinal amucous mem- abrane. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Cymbiforma indica aattached to the asmall intestinal amucous mem- abrane. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Microphotograph of Cymbiforma indica.
March, 1956] R. D. KATIYAR 23 intestine on being opened was found full of these parasites Figs. I and II. In about 50 per cent cases haemorrhaegic enteritis was present with the blood tinged intestinal contents. In the rest of the cases linear congestion of the intestinal mucous membrane was noticed throughout the small intestine. These minute trematodes24 A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON CYMBIFORMIASIS [Vol. XXVI, Part I, Histopathology Small pieces of intestines from four sheep which died of Cymbiformiasis were forwarded in 10 per cent formalin to the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar for histopathological examination which showed evidence of superficial necorsis and marked cellular reaction with eosinophilic infiltration. In three cases navicular or boat shaped helminthic ova have been detected in the mucous mem- brane. Focal leucocytic infiltration into the mucosa were also seen. Faecal examination Faecal examination of rectal samples of faeces from affected cases revealed the presence of numerous filamented eggs of greenish colour. The maximum number of eggs of Cymbiforma indica seen in a single field under the low power of the micros- cope was 10. Examination of faeces from 30 sheep and 30 goats under microscope at Ali Bugiyal (height 12000 ft. above sea level) also showed that about 25 per cent sheep and goats were infested with Cymbiforma indica. The infestation of sheep and goats with Cymbiforma indica was confirmed by three autopsies conducted at Bugiyal. Cultural and other examination Cultures were prepared from heart blood, lungs, liver and spleen at the time of post-mortems. Examination of these cultures did not show any organism of patho- logical significance. Transmissions were tried in two healthy young sheep by intravenous injections of 10 c.c. of blood taken from affected sheep. The inoculated sheep were kept under observation for 10 days. These experimental sheep did not develop any signs of illness. Pathogenicity Manifestation of clinical symptoms accompanied with pathological lesions and mortality in the affected animals is indicative that these intestinal trematodesMarch, 1956] R. D. KATIYAR 25 Treatment. Treatment was undertaken with carbon-tetrachloride and hexachlo- roethane. All the sheep of the Government Sheep Farm, Gwaldam were divided into two equal groups. One group was administered carbon tetrachloride in the doses of 1 to 2 c.c. with 4-8 c.c. of liquid paraffin. Hexachloroethane was given to the other group in the doses of 2 to 4 drams. Administration of both the drugs was immediately preceded by dosing the sheep with 10 c.c. of 5 per cent copper sul- phate solution to close the oesophageal groove and to allow the passage of the drug direct into abomasum. Treatment was repeated after 21 days. Efficacy of the anthelmintics was checked by faecal examination and post-mortem examination of animals that died after treatment. The second dose of anthelmintics stopped the mortality and saved 60 per cent of the clinically affected sheep. Faeces were found negative for the filamented eggs. No fresh clinical cases occurred even after the first dosing. In five cases tetra-chloroethylene was tried without any appreciable benefit. All the remaining 25 stud rams at Kaisi out of which five were showing clinical symptoms of cymbiformiasis, were treated with carbontetrachloride in the doses of 2 c.c. with 8 c.c. of liquid paraffin. Administration of carbontetrachloride was immediately preceded by dosing with 10 c.c. of 5 per cent solution of copper sulphate. Two out of the five clinically affected rams died and the rest three recovered. The treatment was repeated after three weeks. No case of cymbiformiasis developed after that. The above line of treatment undoubtedly controlled the outbreaks of Cym- biformiasis. Both carbon tetrachloride and hexachloroethane proved equally satisfactory in combating cymbiformiasis. SUMMARY 1. Two outbreaks of Cymbiformiasis amongst the sheep of Uttar Pradesh hills are described. 2. Heavy infestation of intestines of sheep with Cymbiforma indica, produce a serious diseased condition accompanied with heavy mortality. These trematodes were considered so far harmless. 3. The duration of illness lasted 4 to 8 days with the clinical symptoms of anae- mia, debility and diarrhoea. In some cases the oedematous swelling in the lower jaw was noticed. 4. Muco-purulent enteritis with minute trematodes26 A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON CYMBIFORMIASIS [Vol. XXVI, Part I 6. Hexachloroethane and carbon-tetrachloride were found equally efficacious in combating cymbiformiasis. Tetra-chloroethylene was tried without any appreci- able-result. 7. This preliminary study indicates that Cymbiforma indica assumes pathogeni- city when present in large number and causes heavy mortality amongst sheep of Uttar Pradesh hills. ACKNOWLEDGMENT I am exceedingly grateful to Dr R. L. Kaura, Director of Animal Husbandry, U. P. for his guidance and the facilities given for the above work and also for his valuable suggestions in writing this note. Thanks are due to Shri G. P. Singh, Veteri- nary Assistant Surgeon, attached to the Assistant Disease Investigation Officer (sheep and goats) for assistance rendered in the above work. I am also thankful to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, for the grant of the scheme under which this work was carried out. REFERENCES Bhalerao, G. D. (1942). Parasitology, 34, 2, 133-137 Monining, H. O. (1942). Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology of Domestic Animals, III edition
STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA IN MADRAS-IV THE AMPHISTOME AND GYMNOCEPHALOUS GROUPS OF CERCARIAE* By C. T. PETER, G.M.V.C., PH.D., Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on August 17, 1955) AMONG the many forms of cercariae met with in an extensive study of the trematode infection in fresh-water snails in the city of Madras made during 1947-49, four were of the amphistome group and three of the gymnocephalous group. They are enumerated below under their respective groups : (a) Amphistome group (i) Cercariae indicae xxvi Sewell, 1922 (ii) C. indicae Sewell, 1922 (iii) Cercaria kylasami Rao, 1932 (iv) C. gastrodisci secundi Peter and Mudaliar, 1948 (b) Gymnocephalous group (i) Cercariae indicae iii Sewell, 1922 (ii) C. indicae vii Sewell, 1922 (iii) C. indicae viii Sewell, 1922 Excepting Cercariae indicae xxix which was discharged by Limnaea luteola f. succinea (Deshayes), the other three amphistomes were found developing in Indo- planorbis exustus (Deshayes) and all the gymnocephalous species in Melanoides tuberculatus (Muller). THE AMPHISTOME CERCARIAE These are amongst the largest known cercariae having a powerful muscular tail and a prominent body with two conspicuous eye-spots, a body-wall carrying cystogenous cells and in many cases dark pigment granules, a well-defined posteriorly- situated acetabulum, a triclad digestive tract and two main excretory trunks packed with globular refractile granules. They develop in redial parthenitae, are born immature and complete their development in the tissue of the host before they are discharged into the surrounding medium of water. They encyst readily in the open. The accepted classification of the amphistome cercariae at present is that of Sewell [1922], who created two sub-groups, viz. the ' Pigmentata ' and the ' Diplo- cotylea ', the main distinguishing feature of the two being the presence of an excretory cross-connection in the former and the absence of the same in the latter. Based *Part of a thesis approved by the University of Madras for the Degree of Master of Science 27 59 AR/55 7
28 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA-IV [Vol. XXVI, Part I, on this scheme, Cercariae indicae xxvi and C. indicae xxix come under the ' Pigmen- tata' and Cercaria kylasami and C. gastrodisci secundi under the ' Diplocotylea '. Excepting the latter species, the other three as well as Cercaria fraseri Buckley, [1939], which was not encountered during the present studies, were known to occur pre- viously in the city of Madras [Rao, 1932 a and b ; Anantaraman and Balasubra- maniam, 1949]. Cercariae indicae XXVI Sewell, 1922 Amongst the known amphistome cercariae in India, Cercariae indicae xxvi appears to be the one enjoying wide distribution throughout the country. It was first described by Sewell [1922] who recorded it from Calcutta and Malabar. Subse- quently, Rao [1932b] and Anantaraman and Balasubramaniam [1949] obtained it from Madras City, while Bhalerao [1943], from Hyderabad. In every case, Indo- planorbis exustus was found to act as the molluscan host. Out of a total of 3,863 specimens of I. exustus examined during the present investigation, 3.5 per cent of them discharged this larva, which constituted about one-half of the amphistome infection and nearly one-third of the total cercarial infection in the snail species in the city of Madras. Rao and Ayyar [1932] believed that the adult fluke of this cercaria, which they had raised by experimental means, was referable to Paramphistomum cervi (Zeder); whereas, Pande [1935] and Mudaliar [1945] thought that the larva would develop into Cotylophoron cotylophorum (Fischdr) and it was experimentally proved to be the case by Bhalerao [1945]. On the contrary, Bennett [1936], Srivastava [1938] and Sinha [1950] who studied the life-history of C. cotylophorum in detail described its cercaria as distinct from Cercariae indicae xxvi. Actual relationship, if any, of this larva to C. cotylophorum thus still remains to be elucidated. Cercariae indicae XXIX Sewell, 1922 This amphistome larva is found to develop in more than one species of snail host. Sewell [1922] first obtained it from Limnaea acuminata and Gyraulus euphraticus in Calcutta and from L. succinia in Malabar ; whereas, Rao [1932b] and Vaidyana- than [1941] in Madras, and Bhalerao [1943] in Hyderabad recorded it from Limnaea luteola. During the present studies, only L. succinea was found harbouring this cercaria in Madras City, the percentage of infected snails being 5.4 in 1,545 indivi- duals examined. C. indicae xxix has been shown to give rise to Fischoederius elongatus (Poirier) by Rao and Ayyar [1932] and Vaidyanathan [1941]. Cercaria kylasami Rao, 1932 Rao [1932a] first obtained this cercaria from Indoplanorbis exustus in Madras City. In comparison to the other amphistome cercariae in I. exustus, the frequency of occurrence of this larva has been found by the author to be the lowest, only 0.3 per cent of the snails carrying the infection.
March, 1956] C. T. PETER 29 Cercaria Gastrodisci secundi Peter and Mudaliar, 1948 This cercaria which was newly encountered in Indoplanorbis exustus during the present studies and proved to be the larva of Gastrodiscus secundus Looss by trans- mission experiments [Peter and Mudaliar, 1948], occurs very commonly in Madras City, making its appearance in all seasons of the year. The rate of infection with this amphistome in I. exustus is found to be 3.7 per cent which is the highest of all the different kinds of amphistome infection recorded in the snail species. Curiously enough, nowhere else the existence of this cercaria has been reported, although its adult, Gastrodiscus secundus, is frequently met with everywhere in this country as a common parasite in equines and rarely in elephants. THE GYMNOCEPHALOUS CERCARIAE Dawes [1946] recognized the group of Gymnocephalous cercariae as consisting of all the four sub-groups (Parapleurolophocerca, Isopori, Agilis and Reflexae) of the ' Distome Cercariae ' and one (Pleurolophocerca) of the ' Monostome Cercariae ' created by Sewell [1922]. The three gymnocephalous cercariae encountered during the present investigations in Melanoides tuberculatus belong to the ' Pleurolophocerca'. There is no previous record of their occurrence in Madras City. Apart from the absence of a ventral sucker in the members of this sub-group, they are characterised also by the presence of a pair of pigmented eye-spots, an armed oral sucker designed for penetration, a rudimentary alimentary canal, a pair of conspicuous salivary glands, a thick-walled reniform excretory bladder and a powerful muscular tail provided with well-developed cuticular fin-folds. Cercariae indicae III Sewell, 1922 This was originally recorded in India as a ' Small monostome ' from Melanoides tuberculatus and M. lineatus by Kemp and Gravely [1919]. Subsequently, it was fully described under the name Cercariae indicae iii by Sewell [1922] who reported its occurrence in M. tuberculatus at Calcutta, Bombay and Malabar, in M. scabra var. elegans at Malabar and M. lineatus at Calcutta. Only one specimen of M. tuberculatus was found to harbour this larva during the present studies in Madras. Cercariae indicae VII Sewell, 1922 This larva, which is very similar to Cercaria pleurolophocerca Sons., was first obtained from Melanoides lineatus, Acrostoma variabile and Bithynia sp. by Kemp and Gravely [1919] who considered it under the title ' Large monostome '. Sewell [1922] came across this species only in M. tuberculatus collected from Calcutta and Bombay and redescribed it as Cercariae indicae vii. As observed during the present studies, the occurrence of this species of cercaria in Madras City is also rare since only 3 out of 282 M. tuberculatus examined discharged it. This pleurolophocercous cercaria has also been reported from Andhra [Ramanujachari and Alwar, 1954]. Cercariae indicae VIII Sewell, 1922 This form was first found by Sewell [1922] in Melanoides tuberculatus at Calcutta, Bombay and Malabar, in Digoniostoma cerameopoma at Calcutta and in Acrostoma variabile var. spiniferum from Assam. It also occurs in Hyderabad [Bhalerao, 1943]
30 STUDIES ON THE CERCARIAL FAUNA-IV [Vol. XXVI, Part I, and in Andhra [Ramanujachari and Alwar, 1954]. In Madras City, eight out o 282 specimens of M. tuberculatus were found infected with this trematode larva. SUMMARY Four species of amphistome cercariae (two belonging to the ' Pigmentata ' type and two to the ' Diplocotylea ') and three of the gymnocephalous cercariae (belonging to the ' Pleurolophocerca ') were encountered in the city of Madras, of which the occurrence of Cercaria gastrodisci secundi Peter and Mudaliar in Indoplanorbis exustus and of Cercariae indicae iii, vii and viii Sewell in Melanoides tuberculatus has not been previously reported from there. REFERENCES Anantaraman, M. and Balasubramaniam, G. (1949). A study of Cercaria fraseri Buckley, 1939 in Madras. Curr. Sci., 18, 124-126 Bennett, H. J. (1936). The life history of Cotylophoron cotylophorum, a trematode from ruminants. Ill. Biol. Monogr., 14, 1-119 Bhalerao, G. D. (1943). The cercarial fauna of the irrigated tract of the Nizam's Dominions, with suggestions regarding the relationship to the trematode parasites in man and in domestic and other animals. Indian J. vet. Sci., 13, 294-296 INHIBITORY EFFECT OF KAMALA (MALLOTUS PHILIPPI- NENSIS) ON SUCCINIC DEHYDROGENASE OF TAPE WORM (MONIEZIA EXPANSA) By AJIT SINGH* and I. M. CHAK, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow (Received for publication on April 29, 1955) FOR nearly a century, kamala, consisting of hairs and glands of the fruits of Mallo- tus philippinensis Muel Arg. has been regarded as a good anthelmintic against tape worms and has been included as such in both the British Pharmaceutical Codex [1934] and the British Veterinary Codex [1953]. The drug is obtained by rubbing the small three-celled fruits and sifting the resulting powder. The precise way by which this drug exerts its anthelmintic action is, however, not known. An attempt has been made to find out whether the activity of kamala, could be correlated with any of its effects on the various enzyme systems [Buiding, 1949] present in the tape worm, and thus interfering with its metabolism. This article reports the results of study of the action of the drug on succinic dehydrogenase of Moniezia expansa. MATERIAL AND METHODS Enzyme preparation. The preparation was made from the whole worm (Moniezia expansa) obtained fresh from slaughter house in an iced container. The worms were crushed and extracted twice with phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) by adding 10 c.c. per 5 gm. of the worm tissue. The extract was then centrifuged at 3,000 R.P.M. and was employed as such. For each experiment a fresh extract was made in the above manner, except for the experiments carried out to study the effects of change in pH, where the worms were extracted in distilled water instead of phosphate buffer and the quantity of water used for this purpose was half that of the buffer used for the other experiments. Kamala solution. The solution was obtained by dissolving a known quantity of the drug in minimum quantity of caustic soda solution (10 per cent) neutralising this with HCL (10 per cent) and finally diluting the resultant solution with distilled water to the desired concentration. Sodium succinate solution. An M/3 stock solution of sodium succinate was first prepared and any desired concentration was subsequently obtained by suitable dilution with water. Methylene Blue. (1 : 5000) 0.2 gm. of the dye was dissolved in a litre of distilled water. Phosphate buffer. The two stock solutions of Na2HPO4 and KH2PO4 (M/15) were prepared according to Sorensen. Determination of succinic dehydrogenase acitivity. The enzyme activity was determined by employing Thunberg's technique, using methylene blue as an indi- cator. The time taken for 50 per cent reduction of the dye was determined by com- parison with the standard. Inhibition was studied at 37°C. in all experiments. * Fellow of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. 31 59 AR/55. 8
32 INHIBITORY EFFECT OF KAMALA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, The concentration of the different constituents taken are mentioned under each experiment described below. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND RESULT Experiment I. The degree of enzyme inhibition was studied by employing differ- ent concentrations of kamala on a known amount of the enzyme. 1 cc. of kamala solution (of different concentrations) and 0.3 cc. of the enzymic extract were taken in the hollow stopper and 1 cc. of methylene blue and 1 cc. of the substrate in the tube. The Thunberg tubes were then quickly evacuated, the contents mixed and the tubes kept at 37°C. till 50 per cent reduction of methylene blue was obtained. The time was recorded and the corresponding activity calculated. Each figure in the Table corresponds to mean of three observations obtained in this manner. The results are summarised in Table I. TABLE I Variation of inhibitory effect with change in concentration of kamala Number Concentration of Kamala Percentage activity (A=1/T×100) Percentage inhibition Control 0 11.1 0 1 1:5000 8.3 25 2 1:4000 4.0 64 3 1:3000 3.3 70 4 1:2000 2.2 80 5 1:1000 0.78 93 It will be seen from Table I that the percentage inhibition of the enzyme increases progressively with increase in drug concentration. Experiment II. The substrate (1 cc.), methylene blue (1 cc.) and the phosphate buffer (1 cc.) of required pH were taken in the tube, and 0.3 cc. of the enzymic extract and 1 cc. of the inhibitor in the hollow stopper. The rest of the procedure was identical with that followed in the Experiment I. Suitable controls were run at different pH levels by replacing inhibitor with water, and the percentage increase of time for 50 per cent inhibition was calculated at these pH levels. TABLE II The effect of change of pH on the inhibition produced by kamala Number. pH Time of reduction (in minutes) Percentage increases of time for 50 per cent inhibition With Kamala With water (control) 1 6.0 75 36 108 2 7.0 45 18 150 3 7.4 33 13 154 4 8.4 27 10 170
March, 1956] AJIT SINGH AND I. M. CHAK 33 It is evident from Table II that with the shift of pH towards the alkaline region the time for inhibition correspondingly increases. Experiment III. The same procedure (Experiment I) was employed except that substrate concentrations were in this series varied. The concentration of kamala used in this experiment was 1/1000. The results are given in Table III. TABLE III Variation of Inhibi ory effect of kamala with change in concentration of the substrate Number Concentration of the substrate Percentage Activity (A=1/T×100) Percentage inhibition 1 M/10 0.74 85 2 M/6 1.33 72 3 M/4 2.22 53 4 M/3 4.7 30 It is observed, that with a constant concentration of kamala the percentage activity of the enzyme increased with increase in substrate concentration, and the percentage inhibition of the enzyme was correspondingly reduced. Experiment IV. The enzyme and the inhibitor (kamala 1 : 2000) were kept together for different intervals of time to allow for the absorption of the inhibitor on the enzyme surface and then activity of the enzyme was determined by combin- ing it with the substrate, etc. in the manner outlined before. The results are presen- ted in Table IV. TABLE IV The effect of change in time of contact on the inhibition produced by kamala Number Time of contact (in hours) Percentage Activity (A=1/T×100) Percentage inhibition Control 0 11.1 0 1 0 3.3 73.0 2 2 2.5 74.0 3 4 2.0 81.9 4 6 1 .5 86.4
34 INHIBITORY EFFECT OF KAMALA [Vol. XXVI, Part I, It is clear from Table IV that with the increase in time of contact, the percentage activity of the enzyme lessens and the percentage inhibition increases accordingly. DISCUSSION The result of the present study show that the drug kamala, has a pronounced inhibitory action on the succinic dehydrogenase activity of Moniezia expansa. In view of the importance of succinic acid as one of the stages in the conversion of pyruvic acid to carbon dioxide and water, and the possibility of pyruvic acid being the intermediate not only in the carbo-hydrate metabolism (Kreb's), but also in the fat and protein metabolisms ; it is quite possible that inhibition of this enzyme by the drug may be one of the factors responsible for its anthelmintic properties. It was observed that increase in concentration of the drug brings about an in- crease in inhibition of the enzyme. Furthermore, it was found that the inhibition of the enzyme decreases with the increase in the concentration of the substrate. This indicates that the drug and the substrate may have the same point of attack on the enzyme. As the concentration of the substrate is reduced, the points of attachment for the drug on the enzyme surface are increased and hence there is an increase in inhibition. These findings suggest that the inhibition produced by kamala is of the competitive type. SUMMARY 1. Kamala inhibits the succinic dehydrogenase activity of the worm. 2. The degree of inhibition of the enzyme increases progressively with the increase in concentration of kamala. 3. The inhibition increases progressively in the alkaline region. 4. The percentage inhibition produced by kamala decreases with the increase in concentration of the substrate. 5. The inhibition increases with the increase in time of contact of the drug and the enzyme. REFERENCES Buiding, E. (1949). Physiological Reviews, 29, 195 The British Pharmaceutical Codex. (1934). 571 The British Veterinary Codex (1953). 188
CONTROL OF FERTILITY IN FARM ANIMALS By E. S. E. HAFEZ,* Faculty of Agriculture, University of Cairo, Egypt (Received for publication on July 23, 1954) LITTLE is known about the phenotypic and genetic correlations between animal fertility and high production. In the Swedish highland cattle [Lagerlof, 1950 ; Lagerlof and Boyd, 1952] hypoplasia is associated with more butter-fat, and cystic ovaries with greater quantity of milk. Thus selective breeding for high production tends to spread sterility. There is always an interaction between climate, husbandry methods and the genetic makeup of the animal. The main components of climate involved in the expression of fertility are the daylight environment and temperature. Their effects vary markedly with the species and locality. Bovine fertility is associated with the ultra-violet com- ponents of sunshine [Abrams, 1952]. It seems that short hours are detrimental in high latitudes whereas high temperatures are detrimental at low latitudes. In sheep, however, the short-days environment coincides with high fertility, especially at high latitudes [Hafez, 1952a]. Meanwhile high atmospheric temperature is inimi- cal to satisfactory gestation and causes a decrease in birth weight in sheep [Yeates, 1953]. The age and size at which the animals are bred are important factors with regard to the economics of milk production. In cattle, the highest milk yields and the greatest number of calves are produced when the first service is 16 to 18 months, the growth and development of subsequent production of the resulting calves being normal [Usakov, 1953]. There is always a positive correlation between milk production of the first half of lactation and the service period [Olds and Seath, 1953]. However, the fertility level is affected by the service period [Olds et al., 1949 ; Van Demark and Salisbury, 1950], as well as the time of service during the heat period [Trimberger and Davis, 1943 ; Trimberger, 1948], the season of mating [Badreldin, 1952 ; Sidky, 1953] and the method of breeding. In sheep, artificial insemination with mixed semen (from two rams) increases lambing percentage, birth weight and subsequent growth rate [Causovskii, 1952]. Inbreeding generally results in reduced fertility [Woodward and Graves, 1946] the exact degree of which depends on the male because bulls differ considerably in their fertility [Milk Marketing Board, 1950]. The bulls also differ in respect of their daughters' fertility. There is little evidence to show that herd differences in the fertility level are genetic [Trimberger and Davies, 1955 ; Olds and Seath, 1950]. In cattle, the heritability and repeatability of the cycle length is very low [Asdell, 1952]. Thus selection for fertility is not very effective. In the improvement of farm animals, special stress is laid on the development of certain characters like high milk production, high growth rate as well as high * Present Address : The Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury. Massachusetts, U.S.A. 35 59 AR/55. 9
36 CONTROL OF FERTILITY IN FARM ANIMALS [Vol. XXVI, Part I, fertility. The physiological means by which the activity of one particular part of the body is stimulated is largely through the hormones [Hammond, 1950]. The present study is an attempt to recommend practical husbandry methods to control fertility in ruminating farm animals. MATERIAL AND METHODS The experimental material of this investigation comprised 33 domestic buffalo- cows Bos (Bubalus) bubalis, 22 Egyptian cows, and 99 fat-tailed ewes (Ossimi and Rahmani breeds) of different ages. Fertile males for each class of animals were available. The animals were kept at the Animal Breeding Research Farm, Giza, and were previously inbred for over 12 years. Cows and buffalo-cows were fastened in double-row stables by means of chains and neck-halters while the ewes were running in open paddocks. All the males were ochred on the brisket with coloured grease and were joined with the females daily. Records were kept for the incidence of oestrus, mating and conception for over two years. The animals were fed on green clover Trifolium alexandrinum during the winter and with a mixture of concentrates (barley, horse beans, rice polish and cottonseed cake) and green maize during the summer months. In buffalo-cows and cows, rectal palpation was carried out at intervals in non-pregnant and in pregnant animals 60,90 and 120 days after service. Parturi- tions took place under close observation and the placental membranes (after-birth) were carefully examined for detection of any foetal mortality. In addition, the previous reproductive records of all the animals were inspected. Non-pregnant genitalia from 30 cows and 45 buffalo cows were brought from Cairo slaughter house during the months of September and October. The ovaries wore examined macroscopically to determine the ovulation rate of the three species of farm animals. Pregnant genitalia from 70 buffalo-cows and 40 cows were also examined to detect the percentage of healthy pregnancies. RESULTS In buffalo-cows, the percentage of conception, which required one, two and three or more services were 56,22,8 and 14 respectively. The average number of services per conception was 1.46 while the average breeding efficiency as a whole was 93 per cent. The average cycle length was 21.14 days. One silent heat occurred in 30 per cent of the cases, with an average cycle length of 44 days. Two successive silent heats occurred in 11 per cent of the cases with an average cycle length of 69 days. The interval to post partum oestrus ranged from 10 to 76 days with an average of 38 days. (Table I). In Egyptian cows the number of services required for conception ranged from 1 to 5 with an average of 2.0. The percentage of conceptins which required one, two, three or more services were 54,20,9, and 17 respectively. The interval to post partum oestrus ranged from 12 to 60 days with an average of 38 days. Post mortem examina- tion of the cows' ovaries after calving showed that the first post partum cycles were ovulatory.
March, 1956] E. S. E. HAFEZ 37 TABLE I. Fertility measures in Egyptian livestock (adults) Observation Buffalo-cows (per cent) Cows (per cent) Ewe Rahmani (per cent) Ossimi (per cent) Conception after : 1 service 56 54 50 0 2 services 22 20 10 42 3 services 8 9 10 16 more than 3 services 14 17 30 42 Average services per conception 1.46 2.0 1.8 2.3 Range of cycle length (days) 8.2538 CONTROL OF FERTILITY IN FARM ANIMALS [Vol. XXVI, Part I, examination of pregnant genitalia showed the incidence of embryonic mortality in 9 per cent of the buffalo-cows and 8 per cent of the cows. The dissection of the after birth showed no signs of embryonic remains in the three classes of animals. DISCUSSION In buffalo-cows the breeding efficiency was considerably higher than that reported by Hafez [1952b] from the breeding records under free mating conditions. The interval to post partum conception in the present study was shorter than that reported by Hafez [1954]. The previous records for the breeding efficiency was 85.80 per cent and the interval to post partum conception 43 days on an average. This shows that some of the oestrus cycles were either of short duration or of weak symptoms. Such cycles can be detected by close observation and by continuous association with the buffalo-bull. This point is of major significance in practical buffalo breeding. The proximity of the male has an effect on the degree of receptivity of the female and probably on the duration of oestrus [Hafez, 1954]. Cows which are classified as shy breeders (showing weak signs of oestrus) must be joined continuoulsy with the bulls when mating is desired. In general expectancy lists of oestrus must be kept for all the breeding females (calculating the expected cycle by adding some 21 days to the previous oestrus) so as to raise the reproductive efficiency. Since the interval from calving to conception is unduly prolonged, it is advisable to mate the buffalo- cow some 30 to 40 days after calving instead of the usual practice of 60 days. The probable decrease in the milk yield due to subsequent pregnancy would be less ex- pensive than cutting down the reproductive potentiality of the animal which is as good as risking a whole lactation. Since the genotype environment may be important in fertility [Hignett, 1950] breeds or types adapted to particular environments are required to obtain maximum fertility. The best genetic method for achieving fertility is not by selection but by crossing. A certain amount of risk is attached to the use of first claves (in sequence of calving) for breeding unless adequate reproductive records of ancestors and sisters of the dam are available, as data on the dams' own performance at that time are insufficient. The common measure of fertility usually used is the conception rate in various forms. This is unsatisfactory since it does not take into account those animals which fail to show reproductive regularity. Calving intervals are also used as a measure of fertility. They do not include animals which have calved and may be biased by deliberate extension of their intervals to obtain maximum production from persistent milkers. Meanwhile little is known about the extent to which dams differ in their ability to produce offsprings of high or low conception rate. On the other hand, there is little information on the extent to which the differences between bulls are genetic and are capable of being transmitted from bull to bull. The Egyptian fat-tailed ewe lambs showed their first oestrus during the shortest days of the year (December). This is in agreement with a previous report by Hafez (1952a). Conception in the Rahmani ewe lambs took place after an average of 1.1 ser- vices. This shows that the first oestrus was accompanied by ovulation. It is sugges- ted here that the first observed oestrus was preceded by one or more silent heats (ovulations without oestrus) as the ewe lambs show in the field some sexual desire
March, 1956] E. S. E. HAFEZ 39 about 16 days before the first heat. Lactation in the ewe did not inhibit the expres- sion of oestrus. Breed differences as well as individual differences were recorded for the age at first oestrus, and the number of services per conception. This is either due to the different inherited levels of output of the adenohypophysis among the breeds or to the different reactions of the individuals to the environment. There is much evidence of a general nature that the varying degrees of activity of the gland are inherited. Genetic analysis of this character is rather difficult due to the interaction of the different hormones and the genetic factors. SUMMARY In the expression of fertility there is an interaction between the components of climate (mainly daylight and temperature), husbandry methods and the genetic make- up of the animal. Thirty-three buffalo-cows, 22 Egyptian cows and 99 fat-tailed sheep were tested with ochred teasers daily. Fertile services were allowed and the conception and parturitions recorded. Rectal palpation was carried out in big animals while all the after-births were dissected. Non-pregnant and pregnant geni- talia of two classes of animals were examined to investigate ovulation rates and the health of pregnancy. In the buffalo-cow, the percentage of conceptions requiring one, two and three services were 56, 22 and 8 respectively. The average interval to post partum oestrus was 35 days in the buffalo-cow, 38 days in the cow and 40 days in fat-tailed ewes. Twin ovulations were never observed in the buffalo-cows and were rare in the cows Embryonic mortality occurred in 9 per cent of the buffalo-cows and 8 per cent of the cows. The breeding efficiency of the female of farm animals was raised by continuous association with ochred fertile males. Reproduction sheets are also recommended. The incidence of first oestrus, post partum oestrus, silent heat and reproductive disorders (mainly foetal mortality) must be considered. Rectal palpation of pregnant animals should be carried out at intervals to confirm healthy pregnancies. The after birth of breeding animals as well as the genitalia of culled animals should be examined. REFERENCES Abrams, J. T. (1952). Livestock and their environment, Part IV. The relationship of sunlight to bovine reproductive efficiency and productivity. Brit. vet. J. 108, 275-292 Asdell, S. A. (1952). A regional approach to problems of fertility and breeding efficiency in dairy cattle. Proc. 2nd Int. Congr. Physiol. Path., (Copenhagen) 2, 7-16 Badreldin, A. L. (1952). Frequency of successful conception under free mating conditions in the Egyptian buffaloes. Experientia (Basel) 8, 391 Cansovskii, A. A. (1952). The artificial insemination of ewes with mixed semen. Socialist Zovotn 14(11) 45-48 (Anim. Breed. Abstr. 21, 161). Hafez, E. S. E. (1952a). Studies on the breeding season and reproduction of the ewe. J. agric. Sci. 42, 189-265 40 CONTROL OF FERTILITY IN FARM ANIMALS [Vol. XXVI, Part I, Lagerlof, N. (1950.) Hereditary forms of sterility in Swedish cattle breeds. Fertility & Sterility 2, 230-239 OXYHEMOGLOBIN CRYSTALS OF EGYPTIAN BUFFALO AND CATTLE By E. S. E. HAFEZ * and A. Anwar, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt (Received for publication on June 8, 1955) (With Plate VI) IT has been reported in an earlier paper [Hafez and Anwar, 1954] that the com- parative studies of normal haematological values are of great significance in investigating the origin and evolutionary trends of species and breeds. Genera and species differences in the crystalography of haemoglobin have been extensively studied by Richard and Brown [1909] from the view points of the axial ratio, prism angle, angle B, extinction angle, optical character and the crystallographic system. In this respect, a study of the oxyhaemoglobin crystals of the Egyptian buffalo Bos (Bubalus) bubalis L., and cattle has been carried out. Oxyhaemoglobin crystals were prepared from the blood of adult Egyptian buffaloes and cattle. Fresh blood samples were centrifuged and the plsama-free corpuscles laked with ether. The solutions were saturated with ammonium oxalate and recentrifuged. A drop of the laked blood was allowed to evaporate on a slide and examined microscopically as well as by a " Reichert Wien " microprojector. Oxyhaemoglobin crystals of the buffalo were orthorhombic with 90° angle B. They were relatively very long, lath-shaped and (1 : 9.46) elongated on the vertical axis. The formed crystals ranged from 50 µ to 120 µ in length. In the cattle, the crystals were prismatic (1 : 6.72), orthorhombic with angle 90° B. The formed crystals ranged from 50µ to 170µ in length (Plate VI). The rate of formation of crystals was found to depend on the concentration of haemoglobin and of other ions in the solution, surface tension as well as temperature. The oxyhaemoglobin crystals of the Egyptian buffalo Bos (Bubalus) bubalis, L. are similar to those of ' Bos bison ', reported by Reichart and Brown [1909]. It does not seem that domestication has any effect on the crystallography of oxy- haemoglobin and it would appear that the picture of oxyhaemoglobin crystals is similar in both domesticable buffalo and non-domesticable buffalo 'Bos, caffer' of South Africa. This is an experimental evidence that the haemoglobin molecule in both the animals, (buffalo and bison) is identical. The oxyhaemoglobin crystals of the Egyptian cattle are similar to those of Bos, taurus [Reichert and Brown, 1909] being prismatic, orthorhombic with 90° angle B. (Table I). * Present address. The Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 41 59 AR/55 11
12 OXYHEMOGLOBIN CRYSTALS OF EGYPTIAN BUFFALO TABLE I Oxyhaemoglobin crystals in Egyptian buffalo and cattle Characteristics of crystals Buffalo Cattle Shape Orthorhombie (1 : 9.46) Orthorhombic (1 : 6 72) Anglo B 90° 90° Length (Range) 50-120 u 50-170 u Further comparative studies are required to find out the crystallographic cha- racters of oxyhaemoglobin in the Indian buffalo, which is considered to be the origin of improved breeds of buffaloes in many parts of the continent. The different pictures of oxyhaemoglobin crystals in the cattle and buffalo denote different positions along the evolutionary scale, this may explain the sterile matings between the two animals [Hafez, 1955]. Whether the matings between the buffalo and American bison are fertile or sterile is still an open question. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work has been carried out in the Animal Production Research Farm, Faculty of Agriculture, Giza, Egypt. Thanks are due to Prof. A. L. Badreldin, Faculty of Agriculture and to Dr M. H. Maghraby of the Ministry of Agriculture for providing facilities and help. REFERENCES Hafez, E.S.E. and Anwar, A. (1954). Nature, 174, 611 Reichert, E. T. and Brown, A. P. (1909). The Crystallography of Haemoglobins. Carnegie Inst. Washington Hafez, E. S. E. (1955). Unpublished data.
Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXVI, PART I ] PLATE VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Oxyhaeraoglobin crystals (X 200) Top : Buffalo, bottom : Cow.
ABSTRACTS Johne's disease in sheep. STAMP, J. T. and WATT, J. A. (1954), J. Comp. Path & Therap 64 (1), 26-40. ON the basis of histological changes the authors divided Johne's disease in sheep, as it occurs in Scotland, into four groups. In group I the mucous membrane of jejunum and ileum was thickened, granular and yellowish in colour, and the associated lymph modes were oedematous. Islands of epithelioid cell infiltration were found in the mucosa and submucosa of the intes- tines as well as in the subcapsular sinus of the lymph nodes. Pigmented variety of M. johnei was isolated and a large number of the organisms could be detected in the smears and sections of the intestines and lymph nodes. The intestinal mucous membrane in group II, showed no yellow discolouration and its thickness and granulation was frequently slight. The mucous membrane, the submucosa and the associated mesenteric lymph nodes showed varying degrees of epithelioid cell infiltration. Number of M. johnei in the smears and sections of the intestine was not as great as in group I. In group III, in the thickened lamina propria of the intestine was detected focal infiltration with epithelioid cells, many of which were multinucleated. Giant cells of Langhans or foreign-body types were seen distributed individually or in groups. The lymphoid follicles in the submucosa and the cortex of the enlarged and oedema- tous lymph nodes showed epithelioid cell infiltration with evidence of necrotic changes. In majority of the cases, smears and sections of the intestine and the associated lymph nodes failed to show M. johnei ; on cultural examination, however, 14 out of 21 cases proved positive for non-chromogenic type of the organism. In group IV, hard and calcified nodules were detected in the bowels and the swollen lymph nodes. The lesions showed definite encapsulation, necrosis, caseation and calcification. Similar lesions were also detected in the mesenteric lymph nodes. In eight out of nine cases smears and sections were negative for M. johnei, whereas from four of the cases, which proved positive on cultural examination, non-pigmented variety of the organism was isolated. Discussing the character of lesions in different groups with reference to the viru- lence and host resistance, the authors assumed that the pigmented variety of M. johnei was more virulent to sheep than the classical non-pigmented variety. (G. L. S.) 43 59AR/55 11
44 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVI, Part I, Lipid deficiency in the calf. M. R. LAMBERT, N. L. JACOBSON, R. S. ALLEN and J. H. ZALETEL (1954), J. Nutrit. 52, 259-270 INVESTIGATIONS in the role of lipid in the nutrition were made by feeding 20 young dairy calves a lipid-free semi-synthetic milk diet which contained casein (lipid-free) 3.5 per cent, fat 0.0-3.0 per cent, salt 0.2 per cent, lecithin variable, lactose 5.0 per cent and vitamins. In addition, each calf received 80 mg. of crystalline auryomycin hydrochloride per day. Responses to various lipid supplements, such as hydrogenated soybean oil plus lecithin, crude soybean oil, butter oil, methyl- estres of fatty acids (Oleate 50 per cent, linoleate 50 per cent), lecithin, pork-liver fat and free fatty acids, were also evaluated. Prior to feeding, the semi-synthetic milk diet was warmed to about 100°F. and vitamins were added. When lipids were used, they were added to the milk diet and the mixture was homogenized at 2500 lb. pressure. Calves which received fat-free diet had retarded growth. They had long dry hair, excessive loss of hair from tail, back and neck, and diarrhoea. These symptoms disappeared when various lipids were included in the diet. Prompt recovery was brought by the addition of butter oil, hydrogenated soybean oil plus lecithin, and mixed methyl esters of oleic and linoleic acids. Blood plasma 'Allen fat', total fatty acids, phospholipids and linoleic acid were significantly lower in the calves receiving lipid-free milk than in calves receiving lipids. Differences among the various dietary groups in blood plasma, linoleic acid and arachidonic acid contents were small. (B. S. G.) Seasonal variation in quality of eggs as measured by physical and func- tional properties. E. A. SAUTER, J. V. HARNS, W. J. STADELMAN and B. A. MCLAREN, Poult. Sci. 33(3), 519-524 THIS experiment was undertaken to study the effect of season of production on the physical measurements of eggs and the cooked products prepared from them. White Leghorn and New Hampshire pullets hatched within two weeks of each other were used for the experiment. Two different diets, one producing light yolk and the other producing dark yolk, were fed to each breed. The eggs were stored at 72°F at 65-70 per cent relative humidity and the samples were removed from storage for experiment at weekly intervals for five weeks, the following measurements were made (i) albumen index, (ii) albumen score, (iii) yolk index, (iv) yolk colour and (v) pH (using glass electrode). After the above measurements, cakes were made of the eggs and the quality of the cakes was evaluated by measuring the volume, penetration, flavour, texture and grain.
March, 1956] ABSTRACTS 45 Eggs laid from January to March were considered as winter eggs and those laid from May to July as summer eggs. Winter eggs were superior to summer eggs as regards albumen index, yolk index and albumen score. Even though eggs laid by New Hampshire were slightly superior to those of White Leghorn, this can be attributed to strain difference rather than to breed difference. The internal quality of eggs deteriorated from one to five weeks but the changes observed by pH measure- ments and yolk colour were not statistically significant, in storage or between seasons. But diet plays a definite role in yolk colour. Volume, flavour and texture of cakes decreased in summer as compared to winter season. Cakes made from stored eggs were poorer than those from fresh eggs. As summer advanced, albumen index and yolk index decreased with increase in albumen score. pH also increased slightly perhaps due to poor shell quality and concomitant loss of CO2. Flavour also was affected by storage. No significant differences were observed in functional or flavour properties of fresh eggs, produced during the months January to July, but season did have an effect on the physical qualities of eggs. The winter eggs were significantly superior to summer eggs in their keeping quality for one to five weeks at 72°F, with respect to physical quality, functional properties and flavour. (T. S. K.) Disappearance of the growth response of chicks to dietary antibiotics in an "old" environment. PAUL E. WAIBEL, O. J. ABBOT, C. A. BAUMANN and H. R. BIRD (1954). Poult. Sci. 33, (6) 1141-1146 THE authors describe experiments conducted in one environment over a three year period. They found consistent growth responses to antibiotics for nearly two years, but during the third year, responses became inconsistent and negligible. Many variations in composition were introduced in the diets, in an attempt to produce maximum growth in the absence of antibiotic. During the first 20 months, 66 positive responses were recorded in 69 observations by the addition of penicillin or aureomycin and none of the various nutritional supplements fed during this period eliminated the response to antibiotics. The quantitative responses to the antibio- tics tended to vary inversely with the growth of control groups. When the growth in the control group was relatively poor, the percentage increase due to the antibiotic was large and when growth in the control group was good, the improvement due to the antibiotic diminished. The dietary variations, therefore, played some part in the variability of response to antibiotics. The percentage increase in growth due to aureomycin ranged from 6 per cent to 39 per cent on different diets and a com- parable variability was noted in the presence of penicillin between certain diets. During the third year, the antibiotics failed to stimulate growth consistently. This lack of response might have been due to the change in the microbial balance with the decrease in the moisture in the room brought about by a change in cleaning practi- ces. Another possibility is that the harmful bacteria had been eliminated through continued use of antibiotics. But, whatever may be the explanation, it is apparent that a decrease in the growth promoting effect of the antibiotic occurred in an en- vironment continuously occupied by chicks. (S. B.)
46 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVI, Part I, Field study of the epidemiology and clinical manifestations of parasitic bron- chitis in adult cattle. J. F. MICHEL and A. SHAND (1955). Vet. Rec., 67, (14) THE authors describe and discuss 17 cases of outbreaks of husk in adult cattle and their histories, selected from a large number to illustrate the great diver- sity encountered. In the great majority of outbreaks the infection is said to be endemic on the farm, generally in a sub-clinical form. The various outbreaks have no simple factor in common. Whether any external factor renders the adult animals susceptible to infection does not emerge from this investigation, but inadequate nutrition also does not appear to be such a predisposing factor. Gradual exposure to infection is less dangerous than sudden exposure. The longer the animals remain unexposed to infection the more susceptible they become. The ultimate source of infection is the small number of larvae disseminated in the faeces of carrier animals and not those which persist on the ground through the winter. The indications are that the larvae do not persist on the ground even as long as five months. The small number of larvae disseminated by carrier animals may turn into a source of dangerous level of infestation on the ground in two ways : (i) by intervention of calves who become lightly infected but pass sufficient larvae in the faeces to raise the level of infestation of the pasture and (ii) directly, where the conditions are particularly favourable for the larvae. Lush ley pastures appear to represent a particularly favourable vehicle for the survival and transmission of the infection. The level of infection on the ground may remain dangerous even after an intervening hay cut has been taken. The symptoms appear 12 days or more after exposure to heavy infection or 12 days or less after a move to after-math, or even without any obvious precipitating cause. The nature of symptoms of husk varies according to their severity. The most severely affected animals may either get cough or their sudden acute illness or even death may be the first sign of an impending out-break. The less severely affected animals often develop symptoms later and then only cough. A continuous range of symptoms of increasing severity from an occasional mild cough to acute respiratory distress with pulmonary oedema and emphysema closely resembles the condition known as fog fever. This fog fever syndrome, when associated with para- sitic bronchitis, is most frequently seen in adults but may be found in young stock also. On its appearance the animal presents a pricture of extreme distress, and conveys the impression that death might supervene at any moment from oxygen starvation. The other clinical manifestations are : cessation of feeding and drinking, depression in milk yield, abortion in the later stages of pregnancy and loss of weight and condition. Complete recovery is possible within three weeks but severely affected animals may remain desperately ill for months. (S. R. G. M.) A study of the protein requirements of fattening feeder lambs. L. F. BUSH, J. P. WILLIAMS and P. B. MORRISON (1955). J. Anim. Sci. 14, 465-469 TWO hundred and ninety-seven feeder lambs were used in three experiments, spread over three years. Three levels of protein, viz. 10.0 per cent, 11.0 per cent and 11.8 per cent on the total ration basis were used every year. In addition, the effect of supplementation with various proportions of alfalfa hay to corn silage, the
March, 1956] ABSTRACTS 47 basic roughage, was also studied. The concentrates used were shelled corn and linseed meal, the latter being varied from group to group to give the required protein percentages. The lambs fed rations with about 11.8 per cent total protein made significantly more rapid gains but the carcasses were not, however, as fat as those fed rations containing 10.0 and 11.0 per cent protein. Between the last two groups, there was practically no difference. Supplementing the various rations with either 0.75 lb. or 0.5 lb. of alfalfa hay daily per animal did not significantly affect the rate of gain. The feed cost per cwt. gain in weight was lowest with the 'silage alone' group and highest in the 0.75 lb. 'hay supplemented' group. However, as the dry matter intake was very high in the 'silage alone' group, and as the lambs offered 0.5 lb. alfalfa hay had slightly better degree of finish, the authors advocate that a small amount of hay may be fed when corn silage is the only roughage. (S. N. R.) An investigation of antibody response in cattle vaccinated with the rabbit- passaged LA rinderpest virus in Korea. NAKAMURA, J., KISHI, S., KIUCHI, J. and REISINGER, R. (1955). Amer J. vet Res., 16 (58), 71-75 IN this paper the authors briefly describe the results of serological investiga- tions carried out in 1952 and 1953 on the animals that were vaccinated against rinderpest with LA (Lapinised-avianised) virus. In November and December 1952, 15,000 head of cattle were vaccinated and about the same number during the same period in 1953. Immunisation was done in South Korea for maintaining the immune zone below the 38th parallel. In the 1952 investigation, serum samples were collected before vaccination from 151 animals, and from 91 out of these, after vaccination ; antibody response shown by each of these animals was then investigated by means of complement fixation and virus neutralization tests. Among 151 pre-vaccination serums, 146 (96.7 per cent) were negative, four (2.6 per cent) doubtful and only one (0.7 per cent) was positive in a low titre. In contrast, among 92 post-vaccination serums, the development of the complement fixing antibody was demonstrated in 57 (62.6 per cent) of the vaccinated animals, 7 (7.7 per cent ) proving doubtful and 27 (22.7 per cent) negative. The virus neutrali- zation antibody was found in all the 10 animals positive by the complement fixa- tion test, in 5 of the 6 giving a doubtful C.F. reaction, and in 20 of the 27 animal proving negative by the C.F. test. In the 1953 trials, all the serums from 100 animals from which pre-vaccination samples were collected gave negative C.F. titre. Forty-eight animals whose post- vaccination serums were collected gave positive C.F. test in 30 animals (64.5 per cent). Immune response, following vaccination with LA virus as indicated by the development of virus neutralization and complement fixation antibodies, was proved
48 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVI, Part I, in the serum of 82 out of 91 (90.1 per cent) animals in 1952 while the complement fixation antibody was demonstrated in 64.5 per cent of the 48 vaccinated animals in 1953. Development of the virus neutralization antibody was far more regularly demonstrated than that of the complement fixing antibody. For indicating the immune response the virus neutralization test can be said to be more reliable than the complement fixation test, although neither of them is a correct indicator of true immunity. The complement fixation test, however, has a great advantage in application for mass study in a short time of the evidence of development of immunity. (M.S.M.) Use of rabbit-passaged strain of the Nakamura LA rinderpest virus for immunising Korean cattle. REISINGER, C., MUN, C. P. and LEE, N. S. (1954). Amer J. vet. Res. 15 (57), 554-60 THE authors have described about the utility of Lapinised-avianised (LA) vaccine for immunising Korean cattle against rinderpest. Lapinised virus Nakamura III strain was found very pathogenic for the hypersusceptible Korean calves. There- fore, the authors have used LA virus which was found quite suitable for immunising Japanese calves that have a susceptibility to the Lapinised virus comparable to that evidenced by Korean calves. Their experiments have proved that LA virus is less pathogenic to rabbits than the Lapinised virus. But on serial passage in rabbits the pathogenicity increased and mortality rate exceeded 85 per cent which is comparable to that observed in rabbits infected with the original Lapinised virus. In two preliminary experiments, four Korean calves were inoculated with the original LA virus received from Tokyo ; 5 c.c. of a 1:500 suspension of embryo spleen produced only a slight thermal reaction and the animals were found to have acquired solid immunity on challenge by the bovine rinderpest virus. It was thought that LA virus would regain its original pathogenicity for calves on serial passages in rabbits but there was no indication of this as it was found quite non-pathogenic to 120 calves that had been inoculated in the laboratory with rabbit-passaged virus of high concentration, and they survived the inoculation without any untoward reaction and revealed complete resistance to the challenge. More than 30,000 cattle were safely vaccinated in Korea during 1952 and 1953 with LA virus. No adverse reaction was observed in any of the vaccinated animals and more than 90 per cent revealed the immune response by production of com- plement fixation and virus neutralizing antibodies. The authors are of the opinion that the Nakamura LA strain of rinderpest virus gives a safe and effective immunity to Korean cattle and will be quite effective in immunising all species of hypersus- ceptible animals against rinderpest. (M.S.M.)
March, 1956] ABSTRACTS 49 On the invasion of the central nervous system by nematodes. I. The incidence and pathological significance of nematodes in the central nervous system. (1955) J. F. A. SORENT, Parasitology. 45, 1 and 2, 31-40. THE paper reviews the available literature on the incidence and pathological significance of nematodes in the central nervous system. It has been observed that a large number of nematodes invade the central nervous system and cause a variety of nervous symptoms. Living specimens of different nematodes have been recovered from the meningeal spaces and tissues of the brain and spinal cord by various workers. These nematodes belong to the orders : Ascaridoidea, Filariodea, Trichuroidea, Strongyloidea, Matastronygloides, Rhabditoidea and Dioctophymatidae. The pathological effect caused by these nematodes vary to a great extent depend- ing upon the size, mobility and the activity of the parasite. The pathological changes observed are haemorrhagic, degenerative or proliferative. These are all the direct effects of nematodes on the central nervous system and are mainly due to the trau- matic effect of the parasite on the central nervous system depending upon its size. Several parasites and their involvement in causing the pathological changes have been mentioned. It has been stated that Setaria spp. (Filariodea), in cattle and horses, cause the disease known as Kumree where in the parasites cause softening and congestion of the spinal cord. Similarly lumbar paralysis in goats, has been attributed to the invasion of central nervous system by the larvae of Setaria digitata. The symptoms vary according to the degree of invasion of the parasite on the central nervous system. There are nervous symptoms such as epilepsy. Nervous symptoms have also been described in somatic nematode infections. But no ex- planation could be given as to the occurrence of these symptoms and it remains rather obscure, though one school of thought considers that these symptoms are, probably, of allergic origin. This argument is based on the evidence that certain toxins are elaborated by some parasites such as Trichinella. It has also been experimentally proved that infection of the larvae of Ascaris suum induces a state of hypersensitivity, with allergic symptoms. The injection of ascaris extracts in animals already sensitised caused certain changes in the central nervous system. So, in all probability, these changes in the nervous system may be due to the allergic reactions brought about by ascaris antigen. It has been proved that these nematodes also transport viruses to the different parts of the central nervous system and thus act as a carrier of virus. It has been observed that Ascaris suum transmits a virus which causes infectious paralysis in pigs. However, there is no possiblity of poliomyelitis being transmitted by these nematodes, as observed by many workers. It is also doubtful whether there is any possibility of Setaria digitata transmitting the virus of Japanese B. encephalitis. (V.V.S.)
50 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVI, Part I. The dilution of semen with yolk of different breeds of poultry. (Zur Sperma verdunnung unter Verwendung Von Eidottern Verschiedener Hühnerrassen,) AEHNELT E. AND BROCKMANN, P. (1955). Dtsch. Tierarzt. Wschr., Beil. Fortpfl. U. Bes. der. Haustiere. V (6), 69-72 RESULTS are presented of 'in vitro' and 'in v' trials carried out on goat semen using yolks of different poultry breeds in the dilutor. The breeds tried were, New Hampshire, Sussex, Leghorn, and Italians. The sperm dilutor employed was the Spermasol, a German proprietary preparation containing 30 per cent fresh egg yolk. A dilution rate of 1:4 was kept throughout. From three adults and one young buck, 15 ejaculates per buck were taken for trial. Evaluation was done on the basis of average percentage of progressively motile and live sperms found when kept in the dilutors containing different yolks. A distinct overall buck to buck difference was noticed in the first instance. Semen kept in dilutor containing yolk of New Hampshire gave the best results (70 per cent progressive motility upto 96 hours and longevity upto 185 hours) while the same in Italians, the worst (70 per cent progressive motility upto 67 hours and longevity upto 139 hours only). Out of the 209 first inseminations carried out with semen preserved in the New Hampshire yolk dilutor, the percentage of non-returns was 85 as opposed to 76 per cent in the case of 205 like inseminations with the Italians yolk dilutor. The respective percentages of kiddings in the two dilutors were 85 and 74 with 205 and 199 inseminations. In the former, the rate decreased from 91 to 75 per cent while in the latter, from 85 to 60 per cent with the ageing of sperm from 0-48 hours. The authors, though unable to throw light on their results, suggest that the yolk of New Hampshire may be tried with profit in dilution and preservation of bovine semen. (S.S.P.)
REVIEW GAIGER AND DAVIES VETERINARY PATHOLOGY AND BACTERIOLOGY BY G. G. O. DAVIES (Published by Bailliere, Tindall and Cox Ltd., Fourth Edition, 1955, pp. 804, Price 42 s.) THE fourth edition of this well-known book has appeared some nine years after the third edition, which was reprinted twice. The present edition retains the get- up and the general format of the previous edition. As before, it is divided into three parts52 AN ANNOUNCEMENT JOHN MURRARY TRAVELLING STUDENTSHIP IN OCEANO- GRAPHY AND LIMNOLOGY The Council of the Royal Society is prepared to receive applications for the John Murrary Travel- ling Studentship in Oceanography and Limnology. Particulars and application forms may be obtained from The Assistant Secretary, Royal Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London, WI.
THE PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF LEUCOCYTIC BLOOD PICTURE IN TUBERCULOUS CATTLE By A. F. HATHOOT, A. H. GOBBA, and I. H. MOUSTAFA, Animal Breeding Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt (Received for publication on February 14, 1955) FOR the diagnosis and prognosis of tuberculosis, close co-operation is necessary to correlate the blood changes with the clinical findings. For prognostic pur- poses the sedimentation rate, the schilling haemogram, and to a less extent a careful analysis of the leucocytic count are of major value. Strohle [1950] concludes that tuberculosis in cattle does not appear to influence the sedimentation rate. Muller [1943] reviews all aspects of the blood changes which may be found in human tuberculosis. Thijn [1949] concludes that the morphological blood test may be of great help in finding animals having active tuberculosis. The tuberculin test gives no information about the activity of the focus [Topley and Wilson, 1949]. A positive reaction does not distinguish between infection and clinical disease. So our attention is drawn to the leucocytic changes in blood hoping to find a significant aid in judging such tuberculous cases. EXPERIMENTAL Prior to the tuberculin test, samples of blood were taken for examination from cows and bulls belonging to the Faculty of Agriculture, Giza. 10 ml. of blood was drawn from the jugular vein into a sterile receptacle containing 20 mg. sodium floride as an anticoagulant. The haematological examination was carried out at once. Neubauer haemacytometer was used for white cell count. Smears prepared by ' slide and cover method' and stained by the panoptic method of Pappenhein adopted by Piney [1931] were examined for differential leucocytic count, schilling haemogram, arneth index as modified by Cooke, and monocyte/lymphocyte ratio. The intradermal tuberculin test was performed on the animals under investigation. Twenty-five tuberculin-negative and apparently healthy animals were considered to represent their normal haemogram. Some of the positives were slaughtered at the abattoir ; ten of them showed pulmonary lesions and were tabulated under group I and eight were found to be affected by generalized tuberculosis ; these were tabu- lated under group II. Koch's bacilli were easily demonstrated in smears taken from the lesions. The data previously obtained from these positive cases, were compared with the normal haemogram. 1 2 AR/56 2
2 PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF LEUCOCYTIC BLOOD [Vol. XXVI, Part II, RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 1. Tuberculin-Negative Casess A. The white cell count In apparently healthy adult animals under discussion the white blood corpuscles ranged between 6,800 and 14,400 with an average of 10,816 per cu. mm. Delaune [1939] records an average of 10,225 w.b.c. per cu. mm. for adult animals between the age of 3 and 6.5 years. Storch [1901] records 15,739 w.b.c. per cu. mm. for calves, 11,614 w.b.c. per cu. mm. for young cattle, and 8,241 w.b.c. per cu. mm. for cows. TABLE I Apparently healthy tuberculin-negative adult cows and bulls (total and differential Leucocytic count) No. W.B.C. Young Neutr. Total Eos. Bas. Lym. Mon. band mature 1 7.200 2.5 24 26.5 0.5 0 65.5 6.5 2 11.000 1.5 17.5 19 5.0 0 71.5 4.5 3 7.400 4 16 20 1 0 67 4 4 10.800 8 32 40 0 0 52 8 5 11.000 3 16 19 5 0 70 6 6 6.800 2 16 18 5 0 70 7 7 14.200 4 22 26 1 0 67 4 8 9.00 5 19 24 5 0 66 5 9 11.600 3.5 22.5 26 3 0 70 1 10 9.00 5.5 22.5 28 0 0 70 2 11 14.000 1.5 18 19.5 5.5 0 72.5 2.5 12 9.400 3 25 28 4 0 66 2 13 12.200 6 23 29 1.5 0 68.5 1 14 11.600 3 17.5 20.5 0.5 0.5 76 2.5 15 12.000 2.5 22.5 25 2 2 67 4 16 8.800 4 17.5 21.5 5.5 0 67.5 5.5 17 9.400 3.5 28.5 32 8 0 53 7 18 8.200 5.5 21 26.5 2 0 66 3.5 19 13.800 4 21 25 4 0.5 66 4.5 20 9.600 2.5 22 24.5 2 0 68 5.5 21 13.200 6.5 24 30.5 6 0 56.5 7 22 12.000 7 23 30 4 0 63 3 23 12.000 6 33 39 8 0 47.5 5.5 24 11.800 5 26 31 4 0 62 3 25 14.400 4 19.5 23.5 9.5 0 60 7 Maximum 14.400 8 33 40 9.5 2 76 8 Minimum 6.800 1.5 16 17.5 0 0 47.5 1 Average 10.816 4.16 21.88 26.63 3.68 0.12 64.7 4.46
June, 1956] A. F. HATHOOT, A. H. GOBBA, I. H. MOUSTAFA 3 B. Differential leucocytic count The neutrophiles ranged between 17.5 per cent and 40.0 per cent with an average of 26.63 per cent, while the lymphocytes gave a maximum of 76 per cent, a minimum of 47.5 per cent and an average of 64.7 per cent. It is clear that the lymphocytes always outnumber the neutrophiles in the normal blood picture. The eosimophiles ranged from zero to 9.5 per cent with an average of 3.68 per cent. The basophiles were not demonstrated in majority of the cases under discussion with the exception of cases No. 14, 15 and 19 which gave 0.5 per cent, 2 per cent, and 0.5 per cent respectively. The monocytes ranged from 1 per cent for the minimum to 8 per cent for the maximum, with an average of 4.46 per cent. It is interesting to record some of the findings reported by different investigator for purpose of comparison. Author Animals Neutro Eosin. Bas. Lymph. Mono. Dimmock and Thompson (U.S.A.) Adult Cattle 13-45.8 (30.4) 3.8-26.6 (13.15) 1-1.2 (0.59) 31.76 (54.2) 0.2-3.3 (1.4) per cent Kohanwa (Berlin) do. 27.9-40.4 (33) 6.1-16.8 (10.9) 0-0.3 (0.1) 44.6-56.4 (51.7) 22-6.2 (4.3) per cent Fraser (England) do. 16.2-56.4 (28.4) 1.2-25.4 (9.9) 0-1.4 (0.1) 29-76.4 (54.7) 1.8-18.2 (6.7) per cent Findings in this work do. 17.5-40 (26.63) 0.9-5 (3.68) 0-2 (0.12) 47.5-76 (64.7) 1-8 (4.46) per cent N.B. The figures in the statement show the range while those in the brackets denote averages. C. Schilling haemogram (Table 1) Only mature and band forms of neutrophiles were present in the blood ; myelo- cytes and young forms were not met with. Band forms ranged from 1.5 per cent to 8 per cent with an average of 4.16 per cent while mature forms gave 16 per cent for the minimum, 33 per cent for the maximum, and 21.78 per cent for the average. Fraser [1929-30] records the index separately counting the myelocytes, young and band forms in 100 neutrophiles. For adult cattle he records 0.1 per cent young forms, 3.5 per cent band forms, and 96.3 per cent mature cells.
4 PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF LEUCOCYTIC BLOOD [Vol. XXVI, Part II D. Arneth Index as modified by Cooke (Table II) In applying the Arneth Index as modified by Cooke to these animals a hundred neutrophiles were counted and classified accordingly. It is found that the majority of the cells lie in Classes I and II with a few cells lying in Class III and a very few or none in classes IV and V as shown in Table II. TABLE II Apparently healthy tuberculin-negative cows and bulls (Arneth Index as modified by Cooke) Serial No. coinciding Table I I II III IV V 1 65 36 7 2 0 2 38 35 27 0 0 3 37 39 17 5 2 4 30 50 17 3 0 5 33 44 21 2 0 6 30 48 16 6 0 7 49 30 15 5 1 8 27 43 30 0 0 9 20 50 30 0 0 10 21 37 30 0 3 11 37 38 22 3 0 12 34 30 30 5 1 13 10 36 40 11 3 14 34 30 32 4 0 15 46 32 16 5 1 16 42 28 28 2 0 17 53 42 4 1 0 18 40 50 10 1 1 19 40 43 16 1 0 20 20 46 34 0 0 21 35 36 25 4 0
June, 1956] A. F. HATHOOT, A. H. GOBBA, I. H. MOUSTAFA 5 TABLE II6 PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF LEUCOCYTIC BLOOD [Vol. XXVI, Part II, TABLE IIIJune, 1956] A. P. HATHOOT, A. H. GOBBA, I. H. MOUSTAFA 7 II. Tuberculin Positive Cases A. The white cell count (Table IV) Group I. Case No. 10 showed slight leucocytosis recording 11,400 per cu. mm., while the remaining cases showed numbers fluctuated between 6,200 and 10,200 which was within the normal. Group II. Four cases (No. 14, 16, 17 and 18) showed slight leucocytosis, the count was 14,200, 13,800, 16,000 and 15,600 respectively. The count in the other four cases was within the normal. Medlar and Kastlin [1927] state that lencocytosis is the rule in cases not showing clinical improvement. B. The differential count (Table IV) Group I. The neutrophiles ranged between 10 and 30 per cent which was within the normal range. The eosinophiles ranged between 2 and 9 per cent which was within the normal. The basophiles were absent in all cases except case No. 2 which recorded 2 per cent. The lymphocytes showed an increase in four cases (No. 2, 3, 4 and 10) ; the count was 78, 84, 73 and 73 per cent respectively, the other six cases showed counts within the normal limit. The monocytes recorded an increase in six cases (No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 and 9); the count was 7, 7, 6, 5, 6 and 8 per cent respectively, the other four cases recorded counts within the normal limit. Group II. The neutrophiles recorded an increase in three cases ; it showed 45, 75, and 41 per cent for No. 11, 17 and 18 respectively. The eosinophiles ranged from 1 to 10 per cent which was within the normal. The basophiles were totally absent in all the cases. The lymphocytes showed tendency to decrease where the neutrophiles were high ; it recorded 38, 16 and 39 per cent for cases No. 11, 17 and 18 respectively. The monocytes showed an increase in all the cases with the excep- tion of No. 12 which showed 2 per cent, the remaining cases ranged between 5 and 24 per cent. Piney [1931] states that lymphocytes are present in the early stages of the disease in cases with good prognosis and that the absence of lympheeytosis, presence of neutrophilia and occurrence of leucocytosis are all bad signs. In miliary tuberculosis there is relative and absolute neutrophilia, but the number of leucocytes may be normally reduced or increased. C. Schilling Index (Table IV) Group I. The young forms were totally absent, the band forms ranged between 2.5 and 6 per cent and the mature forms ranged between 7.5 and 24.5 per cent. The schilling index showed no deviation from the normal in cases of this group. Group II. The young forms were totally absent in the eight cases under study. The band forms recorded an increase in all the cases and ranged between 9 and 26 per cent. The mature forms were within the normal range except in No. 17 which showed an increase up to 49 per cent. The data point to the fact that neutrophilia
8 PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF LEUCOCYTIC BLOOD [Vol. XXVI, Part II, with left displacement took place in advanced stage of the disease. Stasney and Feldmann [1938] attempted to produce a leukomoid reaction in calves by inocula- tion of a virulent strain of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Results provoked leuco- cytic increase mainly due to neutrophiles, there was decrease in number of lym- phocytes and over stimulation of myeloid tissue and immature cells were demonstra- able. TABLE IV Tuberculin-positive cows and bulls (total and differential leucocytic count) Name of animal W.B.Cs. Young Neutr. Total Eos. Bas. Lym. Mon. band mature Group I. Pulmonary T.B. Bent Olga 7.400 0 4.5 20.5 25 8 0 60 7 Zahiah 10.200 0 2.5 7.5 10 3 2 78 7 Sananeer 7.000 0 2.5 15.5 18 2 0 84 6 Souhair 8.000 0 4 14 18 3 0 73 5 Bent Darl 10.000 0 5.5 24.5 30 7 0 60 3 Florine 6.2000 0 5 21 26 3 0 68 3 Fibiana 9.400 0 3 17 20 9 0 65 6 Emeline 8.400 0 5 18 23 8 0 61 2 Darlington 9.000 0 6 18 24 6 0 60 8 Ibn Mabel 11.400 0 2.5 11.5 14 9 0 73 4 Group II. Generalized T.B. Sahiah 5.600 0 20 25 45 3 0 38 14 Hommos 6.400 0 9 15 24 9 0 65 2 Ibn Hana' 8.400 0 14 19 33 3 0 59 5 Mabel 14.200 0 13 18 31 10 0 53 24 Gessy 7.200 0 13.5 24.5 38 1 0 55 6 Nanit 13.800 0 17 17 34 3 0 61 6 Bent sehda 16.000 0 26 49 75 0 0 16 9 Ibn Darling 15.600 0 18 22 48 1 0 39 12
June, 1956] A. F. HATHOOT. A. H. GOBBA. I. H. MOUSTAFA 9 D. Arneth Index as modified by Cooke (Table V) Group I. Cells under classes I and II ranged between 50 and 70 per cent which was within the normal range in all cases except in one case (No. 8) which recorded sliglit increase up to 77 per cent and so a shift to the left took place in this case only. Group II. Cells under classes I and II recorded an increase which ranged between 85 and 97 per cent in eight cases. A shift to the left took place. According to Ponder and Flint [1927]. Arneth believes that this left handed deflection occurs in tuberculosis only. When it occurs in other infections, he thinks that these are to be regarded as superimposed on a tuberculosis basis. On the other hand Cooke [1914] states that the polymorphonuclear picture is changed in the great majority of cases, dependent on microbic infections. He emphasises the occurrence of a left handed deflection in tuberculosis as a constant occurrence but insists that it is not characteristic of that disease alone. If the case becomes worse, the left handed shift becomes greater, but if the case tends towards recovery the picture assumes its normal appearance. TABLE V Tuberculin-positive cows and bulls (Arneth Index as modified by Cooke) Name of animal I II III IV V Group I. Pulmonary T.B. Bent Olga 29 38 29 4 0 Zahiah 30 35 30 5 0 Sananeer 28 37 27 8 0 Souhair 25 25 30 15 5 Bent Darlington 30 40 20 10 0 Florine 20 50 30 0 0 Fibiana 25 30 30 10 5 Emeline 28 49 18 5 0 Darlington 17 46 20 12 5 Ibn mabel 29 38 29 4 0 Group II. Generalized T.B. Sahiah 38 47 13 2 0 Hommos 40 57 3 0 0 Ibn Hana' 53 41 6 0 0 Mabel 45 45 10 0 0 Gessy 35 51 15 0 0 Nanit 38 57 5 0 0 Bent Sahdah 48 55 7 0 0 Ibn Darlington 40 50 10 0 0 2 AR/56 3
10 PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF LEUCOCYTIC BLOOD [Vol. XXVI, Part II. E. The monocyte/lymphocyte ratio Group I. Eight cases out of ten gave ratio higher than the normal average (1:20.4). It was 1:8.6, 1:11.1, 1:14, 1:14.6, 1:20, 1:10.83, 1:7.5 and 1:18.2 respec- tively. Only two cases (No. 6 and 8) gave ratio within the normal range, it showed l:22.7 and 1:30.5 respectively (Table VI). Group II. Of eight cases, seven gave ratio higher than the normal average, it recorded 1:2.7, 1:11.8, 1:2.2, 1:9.17. 1:10.17, 1:1.8 and 1:3.25 respectively. The one case that gave ratio within the normal range was case No. 12 which recorded 1:32.5 (Table VI). TABLE VI Tuberculin-positive adult cows and bulls (the monocyte /lymphocyte ratio) Name of animal W.B.C. Lymph. per cent Mono. per cent Lymph. No. Mono. No. M/L ratio Group I. Pulmonary T.B. Bent Olga 7.400 60 7 4440 518 1:8.6 Zahiah 10.200 78 7 7950 714 1:11.1 Sananeer 7.000 84 6 5880 420 1:14 Souhair 8.000 73 5 5840 400 1:14.6 Bent Darling 10.000 60 3 6000 300 1:20 Florine 6.200 68 3 4210 186 1:22.7 Fibiana 9.400 65 6 6100 564 1:10.83 Emeline 8.400 61 2 5120 168 1:30.5 Darlington 9.000 60 8 5400 720 1:7.5 Ibn Mabel 11.400 73 4 8320 456 1:18.2 Group II. Generalized T.B. Sahiah 5,600 38 14 2125 782 1:2.7 Hommos 6,400 65 2 4150 128 1:32.5 Ibn Hana 8,400 59 5 4950 340 1:11 8 Mabel 14,200 53 24 7500 3408 1:2.2 Gessy 7,200 55 6 3950 432 1:9.17 Nanit 13,800 61 6 8400 828 1:10.17 Bent Sehda 16,000 16 9 2560 1440 1:1.8 Ibn Darling 15,600 39 12 6100 1872 1:3.25
June, 1956] A. F. HATHOOT, A. H. GOBBA, I. H. MOUSTAFA 11 It is clear that the ratio was markedly higher in cases of Group II than that of Group I which also was comparatively higher than the normal average. The data point out the severity of infection in cases of Group II and that such cases were going unfavourable. The two cases of Group I and the one case of Group II. however, did not give high ratios ; on the contrary, the ratios were within the normal range. This might be explained that the infection remained quiescent or toxins liberated were not of sufficient virulency to cause a reaction. Cunningham. Sabin and co-workers [1925] lay great stress on the importance of the M/L ratio. They conclude that the normal ratio in the rabbit is 1:2.97 and in experimentally infected animals where the reaction was constantly unfavourable the ratio rose to 1:0.79 whereas in favourable cases it lowered to 1:3.56. They believe that this ratio is an important law in connection with the disease. Dunlop and Melville [1930] state that the blood picture in tuberculosis differs from that of "health and the difference is not entirely due to secondary infection. It is mentioned above that in health the ratio between the neutrophiles and lympho- cytes is less than the ratio between the lymphocytes and monocytes. This picture is reversed in tuberculosis and the more it deviates from the normal, the worse is the prognosis. If neutrophiles be taken as expression of activity, the lymphocytes of resistance or healing, and the monocytes in certain circumstances of new tubercle formation and in others of healing, then by following the leucocytic picture week by week, it is possible that a very accurate index of the progress of the disease, and of the patients reaction to it may be obtained. SUMMARY 1. The twenty-five apparently healthy cases under study showed that the average of the white cell count was 1.0,816 per cu. mm. The lymphocytes and the neutrophiles averages were 64.7 and 26.63 per cent respectively ; so the lymphocytes outnumber the neutrophiles. The averages of the basophiles and the eosinophiles were 0.12 per cent and 3.68 per cent respectively ; while the monocytes average was 4.46 per cent ; the basophiles being the scantiest of all cells. As regards Schilling index no young cells were demonstrated and the average of band forms was 4.16 per cent. On applying the Arneth index, it was found that cells under classes I and II outnumbered those of classes III, IV and V. The average of monocyte/ lymphocyte ratio was 1 : 20.4. 2. In the tuberculin-positive cases, the data collected in this work and the different views established by the various workers showed that any or all of the blood elements may be affected in tuberculosis. It seemed that the leucocytic picture was dependent on the phase of the active tubercular process as well as on the resistance of the animal. Different workers stated that leucocytosis, leucopenia, or normal count may be met with in tuberculosis and that such variation depended on the severity of the disease. In this work leucocytosis was encountered in four cases of generalized tuberculosis (Group II). Normal counts were shown by the remaining cases in both groups. In pulmonary tuberculosis (Group I) slight lympho- cytosis took place in four cases and monocytosis in six cases, while no deviation from
12 PROGNOSTIC VALUE OF LEUCOCYTIC BLOOD [Vol. XXVI, Part II, the normal was present in the other cells. The Schilling index showed no displace- ment while the Arneth index illustrated a left shift in one of the ten cases. The monocyte/lymphocyte ratio was high in pulmonary tuberculosis except in two cases. In generalized tuberculosis (Group II) neutrophilia was evident in three cases and monocytosis in seven. Lymphocytes showed a tendency to decrease in the presence of neutrophilia. A deflection took place in all cases, the band forms ranged between 9 per cent and 26 per cent which was higher than the normal average. A shift to the left occurred in all cases. The monocyte/lymphocyte ratio was com- paratively higher in all cases of this group than in Group I. 3. It was found that the blood elements in cases of generalized tuberculosis were more affected ; leucocytosis with neutrophilia occurred. In all cases. Schilling index showed a displacement and the Arneth index demonstrated a left shift. The mono- cyte/lymphocyte ratio was markedly high. On the other hand, slight lymphocyte sis and monocytosis occurred, in pulmonary tuberculosis ; these were favourable signs in the pulmonary type of the disease. 4. The blood picture was comparatively prognostic for tuberculosis. REFERENCES Cooke, W. F. (1914-1915). J. Path. Bact. 19, 494. Cunningham, Sabin and Co-workers. (1925). John. Hopk. Hosp. Bull. 37, 231. Delaune, E. (1939). Proc. Soc. Evp. Biol. N. Y. 41, 482. Dimmock and Thomson. (1901). Amer. Vet. Rev. 30, 533. Dunlop and Melville. (1930). Edinburgh Med. J. Fraser, A. C. (1929). Univ. Cambridge. Inst. Anim. Path. 1st report. 114. Kohanawa, C. (1928). Folia. Haem. 41.86. Medlar and Kastlin. (1927). Amer. J. Med. Sci., 173. Muller, C. L. (1943). Clinical Significance of the blood in tuberculosis. The Common fund N. Y. Piney, A. (1931). Recent Advances in Haematology. Simpson, F. D. (1929). Quart. J. Exp. Phys. 19, 309 quoted by Fuad E. Haeiuacological Exam. of blood of cattle and horses, Thesis M. Sc. (Vet.) Liverpool 1932. Stasney, O. and Feldmann, W. H. (1938) Amer. J. Med. Sci. 195-20. Storeh, A. (1901). Inaug. Diss, Bern, quoted by Burnett, S. H. The Clinical Pathology of the blood of Domesticated animals (1917). Strohle, (1950). Inang. Diss. Munich. 42. Thijn, J. W. (1949). The Morphological blood picture in bovine tuberculosis, Rep. XIVth Int. Vet. Congr., 2. 251-56. Topley and Wilson G. S. (1948). Principles of Bacteriology and Immunity, Vol. II, 1345.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE TREATMENT OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE* BY M. R. DHANDA, V. R. GOPALAKRISHANAN AND H. S. DHILLON, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar14 TREATMENT OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, MATERIAL AND METHODS With a view to assessing the therapeutic value in the treatment of the disease, the following recommended drugs and other methods were tried. 1. Aphtisine-131 2. Lacto-therapy 3. Marking nuts 4. 'Mokhur' 5. 'Wilco' In all these controlled experiments, foot and mouth disease virus type strain Vallee 'O' was used for giving the infection, and depending upon the availability, either hill bulls or guinea-pigs were taken up for treatment. Tests were carried out in each case to determine the effect of the drug, both as a prophylactic and as a curative. Some of the drugs were supplied by the agents or manufacturers, while others, the beneficial effect of which was reported, were obtained locally for the test. Aphtisine-131 This product was supplied by Messrs Mohendra & Co., Bombay. It appeared to be a biological product of Poland Bordet Laboratories, Paris, and was claimed to be a curative and preventive for foot and mouth disease. The full details and the method of preparation were not given. The following experiment was carried out: (a) Three animals (two hill bulls and a calf) were given subcutaneously 10 and 5 c.c. of Aphtisine-131 respectively, followed 24 hours later by infection with the disease virus type 'O'. Two of them were given a second dose also. (b) Three animals (two hill bulls and a calf) were given the drug and the infection of virus simultaneously. (c) Three animals (two hill bulls and a calf) were given virus infection first, followed 24 hours later by a dose of the drug. Two healthy hill bulls receiving virus only were kept as controls. Results. The treated animals reacted severely showing both primary and secon- dary lesions. The drug appeared to have no beneficial effect against artificial infection with the disease virus type 'O' which is the most commonly prevalent type in this country. It was doubtful if the drug would be effective against infection with the
June, 1956] M. R. DHANDA, V. R. GOPALAKRISHANAN AND H. S. DHILLON 15 other two types and so in view of the high cost of animals, it was not considered advisable to undertake any further experimentation. Details are given in Table I. TABLE I Summary of treatment with Aphtisine-131 Serial No. Animal No. Date of injection Reaction Remarks Aphtisine-131 Virus Type 'O' 1 Hill bull No. 13 9-10-50 10-10-50 Reacted severely 2 Bull calf No. 152 do. do. do. Received 2 doses of the drug 3 Hill bull No. 157 do. do. do. 9th and 13th October 4 Hill bull No. 12 10-10-50 do. do. Died of foot and mouth disease on 20-10-50 5 Hill bull No. 90 do. do. do. 6 Bull calf No. 108 do. do. do. 7 Hill bull No. 1 11-10-50 do. do. 8 Hill bull No. 38 do. do. do. 9 Heifer calf No. 451 do. do. do. 10 Hill bull No. 40 16 TREATMENT OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, (c) Typical reaction was observed in the controls. As a curative, milk therapy seems to have no effect. As a protective, its effect is none the better ; besides, this method would hardly serve as a handy and practical one for disease control in the field. An earlier experimental trial in guinea-pigs proved that milk treatment is of no avail. Marking nuts Experimental treatment with marking nuts was undertaken at the suggestion of Lt. Col. M. S. Apte of Gwalior, who claimed to have had good results in the treatment and control of foot and mouth disease by the administration of marking nuts. He had also given details in regard to dose and mode of administration. Experiment : (a) Three hill bulls were given one marking nut each daily for seven days from 21st February 1951 at the end of which they were tested with live virus type 'O'. (b) Three hill bulls were given virus on 22nd January 1951 and were treated with marking nuts for five days from 23rd January 1951, each animal receiving in its feed two marking nuts daily. (c) Three healthy hill bulls were kept as controls, receiving virus only. Results. In the first lot, two hill bulls reacted and one did not show any reaction. In the second lot also two hill bulls reacted and one did not. Two of the controls reacted typically and one failed to show any lesion. In fact, in each lot one hill bull showed primary lesions, another primary and secondary lesions, and the third did not react probably having become immune due to previous infection. From the experiment it is evident that marking nuts have not proved of any avail both in the treatment and prophylaxis of the disease. 'Mokhur' Experimental treatment of foot and mouth disease was carried out at the instance of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, using Mokhur, a homeopathic drug supplied by Dr K. K. Lakhanpal of Delhi who had claimed great success with the drug and was giving a wide publicity to it amongst the members of the profession. He came personally to observe the experiment. He administered the drug orally in the dosage adequate for the guinea-pigs. Experiment. Four lots of four guinea-pigs each were used; the first lot received Mokhur, followed 24 hours later by virus type 'O'; the second lot received virus and Mokhur practically simultaneously ; the third lot was given virus first, followed 24 hours later by Mokhur; the fourth lot was kept as healthy controls receiving virus only. Results. All the guinea-pigs of the four lots developed lesions practically in an identical manner. There was no difference in the type of reactionJune, 1956] M. R. DHANDA, V. R. GOPALAKRISHANAN AND H. S. DHILLON 17 Institute for trial of its efficacy by him through the Ministry of Agriculture, Govern- ment of India, in 1948. It was experimentally tried on hill bulls and guinea-pigs and the results showed that the drug possessed neither curative nor prophylactic value against foot and mouth disease infection [Seetharaman, 1949]. TABLE II Details of treatment of foot and mouth disease with Mokhur Serial No. Guinea-pig No. Weight in gm. Date of giving Mokhur Date of giving Virus Type 'O' Reaction Remarks 22-9-51 23-9-51 24-9-51 1 281 310 20-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 2 282 320 20-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 3 283 360 20-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ Tongue epithelium peeling off 4 284 320 20-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 5 285* 320 21-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ *Mokhur was again given on 23rd September 1951 6 286* 300 21-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ do. 7 287 300 21-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 8 288 370 21-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ Tongue epithelium peeling off 9 289 310 22-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 10 290 300 22-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 11 291 300 22-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ Tongue epithelium peeling off 12 292 340 22-9-51 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 13 293 320 Virus controls not treated 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 14 294 380 do. 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 15 295 290 do. 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ 16 296 290 do. 21-9-51 +0 ++ ++ +0=Primary lesions only ++ = Primary and generalised lesions
18 TREATMENT OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, Experimental treatment was conducted using 'Wilco' foot and mouth disease cure, supplied by Dr Om P. Agrawal, Ayurvedacharya Homeopath, Hapur. It was on the same lines as the above experiment, using three guinea-pigs in each lot. The dose was three drops in water (10 drops dosage was recommended for cattle) and four such doses were given to guinea-pigs. All the treated guinea-pigs reacted typically showing primary and secondary lesion as also the control animals. So this drug did not prove in any way better than the other previous ones. Details of the experiment are given in Table III. TABLE III Details of treatment of foot and mouth disease with 'Wilco' Sl. No. Guinea-pig No. Weight in gm. Date of giving medicine Date of giving virus type 'O' Reaction 29-9-51 30-9-51 1-10-51 2-10-51 1 323 450 27-9-51 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 2 324 410 27-9-51 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 3 325 340 27-9-51 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 4 326 410 28-9-51 28-9-51 +0 +0 ++ ++ 5 327 340 28-9-51 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 6 328 340 28-9-51 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 7 329 390 29-9-51 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 8 330 370 29-9-51 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 9 331 430 29-9-51 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 10 332 330 Virus Controls not treated 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 11 333 290 do. 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ 12 334 380 do. 28-9-51 +0 ++ ++ ++ + 0=Primary lesions only ++ = Primary and generalised lesions
June, 1956] M. R. DHANDA, V. R. GOPALAKRISHANAN AND H. S. DHILLON 19 DISCUSSION The results of these experiments clearly indicated that none of the drugs and other substances used had any curative effect, nor was there any indication in the tested animals that the severity of reaction was controlled or mitigated. Neither the onset of the disease was arrested nor was its course modified in any appreciable way. It has been reported that chemo-therapeutic treatment has some beneficial effect in mitigating the course or severity of the disease [Stirling, loc. cit.]. However, it should be remembered that a comparatively large dose of the drug may affect the condition of the animal and thus make it unable to react to the infection with virus. Such an observation was made [Galloway, loc. cit.] in guinea-pigs treated with lugol's iodine. Though normal dosage did not prevent the development of primary and generalised lesions in guinea-pigs, yet when larger doses of iodine were given some animals did not develop lesions. This was attributed to the illness caused by large doses of iodine. In foot and mouth disease reaction, it is well-known that animals that are not in good condition fail to react. Some of the drugs that were tested experimentally are reported to have been used by field workers in actual outbreaks. Conclusions in regard to the effect of the drugs are generally conflicting. It is, however, difficult to assess the value of a drug by large scale treatment of animals in various stages of the disease in an outbreak, unless carried out under controlled conditions. The experiments carried out with the drugs and other substances as recorded in this article give clear and sufficient proof of the futility of therapeutic treatment for foot and mouth disease. Agents of drugs and patent medicines seem to advertise their products and bring them for sale in the open market without subjecting them to controlled experimental tests to ensure their efficacy. They even approach the Government, not to speak of professional workers, with a claim of efficacy for their products. It is, therefore, necessary for professional workers and the public to guard themselves against the indiscriminate use of such drugs against so highly an infectious disease as foot and mouth disease. SUMMARY Details are given of the experiments carried out to assess the therapeutic value of five drugs and substances, claimed to be effective against foot and mouth disease infection. Against artificial infection with disease virus, none of them appears to have any beneficial effect, either as a curative or as a prophylactic. Observations on the chemo-therapeutic treatment of other workers elsewhere are discussed.
20 TREATMENT OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXVI, Part II ACKNOWLEDGMENT The work has been carried out under a scheme of research financed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. REFERENCES Andrews, W. H. and Coll (1931). Fourth Progress Report of the Foot and Mouth Disease Research Committee, App. I, 126 Borisovich, F. (1946). Vet. Bull., 20, (2), 77 Galloway, I. A. (1931). Fourth Progress Report of the Foot and Mouth Disease Research Committee, App. III, 213 Maitland, H. B. (1928). Third Progress Report of the Foot and Mouth Disease Research Committee, App. II, 81 Seetharaman, C. (1949). Annual Report of the Foot and Mouth Disease Scheme, 1948-42 Stirling, R. F. (1927). J. Comp. Path. & Therp. 274 Walker, G. K. and Taylor, W. (1926). Department of Agriculture, Punjab, Vet. Bull., 17.
INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX-DRIVE ON SEMEN PRODUCTION OF BUFFALOES-II By S. S. PRABHU, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, U. P. (Received for Publication on February 15, 1955) (With Plates VII-IX) SOME of the major and essential factors governing the initial appearance, maintenance, disappearance and subsequent revival of male behaviour pattern are now clear from the numerous experiments carried out mostly on laboratory animals [Moore, 1938; Stone, 1939 ; Ball, 1939, 1940 ; Milovanov and Smirnov- Ugrjumov, 1940 ; Beach, 1940, 1942 (a), (b) and (c), 1944 ; Petersen et al., 1941; Evlampieva, 1945 ; Smirnov-Ugrjumov, 1945 ; Beach and Holz, 1946 and Ras- mussen, 1952]. Walton [1950] summarises the information on the structural pattern of male sex-behaviour as follows: (i) The male pattern is not sex-specific and is not dependent upon the possession of male organs, (ii) the pattern is innate and not learned, (iii) sex-response is elicited by the sum of the excitatory value of the sexual object and the sex-drive of the male, (iv) response is not 'all or nothing', but is graduated by varying completeness of expression and (v) performance of the sexual pattern may be facilitated or inhibited by the development of conditioned reflexes. Response is elicited by the sum of the sex-drive (increased by abstinence or decreased by use) and the algebraic addition of conditioned facilitation or inhibi- tion. The importance of more information on the sex behaviour of farm animals is being increasingly felt with the rapid adoption of the technique of artificial insemina- tion as an accepted method of breeding. A few reports have appeared in which the earlier experiments of Milovanov and Smirnov-Ugrjumov [1940] on cattle were repeated [Hart, Mead and Regan, 1946 ; Sarthou-Mountegou, 1950 ; Hell- strom, 1947 ; Collins, Bratton and Henderson, 1951 and Branton, D'Arensbourg and Johnston, 1952]. These papers cover but a fraction of the vast field remaining unexplored and only bring out the necessity of undertaking such experiments in cattle. With buffaloes, on the other hand, very little work on the subject had been undertaken so far. Buffaloes are of particular interest to India, for, compared to their relative size in population, they contribute a large proportion of the overall production of milk and milk products. In an earlier paper [Prabhu and Bhattacharya, 1954] results of a detailed investi- gation on buffaloes where the effect of short term sex stimulus, in the form of provid- ing an 'on heat' cow instead of the usual anoestrous dummy at the time of collection, 21 2AR/56 5
22 INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX-DRIVE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, on the reaction time and semen characteristics were reported. It was found that the physiological condition of the dummy had no significant effect on sex-drive as judged by reaction time and quality of the semen obtained. Further, no ' carry over' effects due to frequent change in dummies which formed part of the experi- mental design employed could be detected. In the present study the effect of the following additional factors, introduced as before for a short period and then changed, were tried and their effect on sex-drive and semen quality determined. Factors investigated : (i) Male as teaser (ii) Different males as teasers (iii) Different coloured females as teasers (iv) Effect of five minutes cold shower bath prior to collection (v) Making collections in the evenings (vi) Making collections at night under artificial light EXPERIMENTAL The experiments were conducted on non-descript buffaloes purchased through the Institute contractors. At purchase, they possessed full mouths and appeared healthy and vigorous. A short term test which consisted in obtaining semen in an artificial vagina and typing it for quality was carried out on all animals presented for selection and only those which approached certain standards were selected. During the experimental period, the animals received rations consisting of wheat bhoosa, greens and concentrates. The last mentioned was made up of crushed oats and linseed cake in the proportion of 2 : 1 by weight. It was given at the rate of 3 lb. per 800 lb. body weight. The appearance and condition of bulls can be judged from the photographs on Plate VII. Bulls Nos. 40 and 26 which died are not included in the Plate. The experimental design employed was the same as used in our earlier study (loc. cit.) and consisted in changing over bulls between treatments following each collection. The horn number of bulls and their distribution in each of the six experiments are given below : Experiment I (Male as teaser). Two series were run, one after the other. The first series was started on the 25th May 1953 and came to a close on the 6th June 1953. There were ten bulls. The group in which the first ejaculate was taken with male as teaser contained bulls Nos. 26, 28, 22, 20 and 25. The other group in which the first ejaculate was taken on the usual dummy consisted of bulls Nos. 40, 36, 16, 33 and 37. In the second series, the former group had bulls Nos. 16, 28, 31, 33 and 36 while the latter was made up of bulls Nos. 20, 22, 25, 37 and 40. The collections consisting of two ejaculates per collection were taken thrice a week. The number of teaser bull was 38.
Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXVI PART II] PLATE VII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PLATE I. Photographs of experimental buffalo bulls. The tatoo numbers of the bulls appear on the lower right hand corner.
June, 1956] S. S. PHABHU 23 Experiment II (different males as teasers). Only one series was run. It commen- ced on the 14th July 1953 and ended with a collection on the 25th July 1953. The teasers employed were bulls Nos. 31 and 40. There were only seven bulls in this experiment. The groups in which the first ejaculate was taken with bull No. 31 in the service crate had other bulls Nos. 37, 25 and 36 in it while the group wherein the other bull was used consisted of bulls Nos. 20, 22, 16 and 28. Collections were taken twice a week. Experiment III (different coloured cows as teasers). Only a single series was run. It started on the 2nd March 1954 and came to a close on the 15th March 1954. There were 12 bulls in this experiment. One of the cows was dark and the other light in colour. Photographs of these two animals are given on Plate IX, Figs. (3) and (4). Bulls Nos. 23, 33, 28, 37, 24 and 22 had their first ejaculate taken on the light coloured female, while bulls Nos. 31, 20, 36, 38, 16 and 25 had theirs taken on the dark coloured females. Two collections per week were taken. Experiment IV (shower bath prior to collection). One series was run. The experi- ment commenced on the 12th April 1954 and closed on the 22nd April 1954. There were 8 bulls. The teaser used was the one routinely used. The bulls in the group receiving the bath were Nos. 33, 22, 16 and 23. The other group was made up of bulls Nos. 37, 24, 28 and 25. Two collections per week were taken. Experiment V (evening collection). This experiment was run side by side with experiment IV on the same lot of bulls. The morning collections commenced at 8-30 A.M., while the evening collections were taken at 3-30 P.M. Experiment VI (night collectton). Only one series formed the experiment. It was begun on the 25th March 1954 and came to a close on the 7th April 1954. Using the routine female teaser, collections were taken from 10 bulls divided into two groups. In the group in which the first ejaculate was taken during the day collection, were bulls Nos. 16, 24, 37, 23 and 38, while Nos. 25, 33, 28, 22 and 31 had the first ejaculate taken first during the night collection. Collections during the night were made with the aid of a Petromax lamp having 300 candle power. Two collections per week were taken. It may be mentioned here that on the termination of each experiment, reassess- ment of bulls based on their latest performance of reaction time and semen quality was made and fresh groups formed at random for the subsequent experiment. That is why the same bulls were not carried in the same groups in all the experi- ments. In addition to reaction time, the following semen criteria were studied in all the experiments : (i) Volume, (ii) initial motility, (iii) sperm concentration, (iv) per- centage of abnormal spermatozoa, (v) total spermatozoa in ejaculate and (vi) initial pH.
24 INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX-DRIVE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, RESULTS The average values of reaction time and semen characteristics actually observed in the six experiments are presented in Table I. Summary of the analysis of variance appropriate to the ' Switch-back' design carried out is given in Table II. The figures mentioned are proportional quantities. TABLE I Average semen criteria and reaction time in the different experiments Experi- ment No. Factor studied Eja- culate No. Volume (c.c.) Initial motility Sperm concen- tration (M/cc) Percen- tage of abnormal sperm Total sperm in ejaculate (M) Initial pH Reaction time (seconds) I On male I 1.6 1.1 617 10 898 6.9 32 II 1.1 1.6 635 8 607 6.9 27 On female I 1.4 1.9 630 10 699 6.9 54 II 1.3 0.8 782 9 998 7.0 53 I(a) On male I 1.5 1.3 531 10 672 6.9 30 II 1.0 0.9 670 8 665 6.7 37 On female I 1.6 0.4 473 9 730 6.7 66 II 1.2 1.0 672 8 700 6.9 34 II On bull I 1.4 1.9 633 9 1,012 6.9 42 No. 31 II 1.0 1.4 748 10 744 7.0 71 On bull I 1.5 1.9 746 10 956 6.9 49 No. 40 II 1.3 2.0 724 8 881 6.9 74 III On light colour- ed female I 2.1 2.1 916 19 2,265 6.9 37 II 2.0 2.5 1,180 26 2,480 6.9 43 On dark female I 2.4 2.1 1,030 25 2,044 6.9 45 II 2.0 2.4 1,204 21 2,132 6.9 45 IV With bath I 3.7 2.6 833 6 2,947 6.7 68 II 3.2 2.6 989 6 2,581 6.7 90 Without bath II 3.8 2.3 600 5 2,074 6.7 53 II 3.5 2.6 768 5 2,473 6.8 60 V Morning I 3.9 2.3 623 7 2,442 6.6 65 II 3.4 2.7 783 6 2,316 6.8 75 Evening I 3.6 2.5 810 5 2,580 6.7 55 II 3.2 2.6 974 5 2,738 6.7 75 VI Day I 3.7 2.3 520 22 2,048 6.8 51 II 3.0 2.3 556 21 1,458 6.8 55 Night I 3.5 2.3 814 18 2,511 6.7 55 II 2.5 2.5 806 13 1,632 6.8 55
June, 1956] S. S. PRABHU 25 TABLE II Analysis of variance Serial No. Item studied. Eja- culate No. Variation Experiment I(a) Experiment 1(6) Experiment II Experiment III Experiment IV Experiment V Experiment VI D.F. M.S. D.F. M.S. D.F. M.S. D.F. M.S. D.F. M.S. D.F. M.S. D.F. M.S. 1 Volume I Treatment 1 8.65 1 0.33 1 5.66 1 7.23 1 72 1 0.98 1 1.68 Error 8 68.64 8 0.16 5 12.73 10 24.13 6 3329 6 33.25 8 34.02 II Treatment 1 135.65 1 0.25 1 0.16 1 23.60 1 181 1 0.41 1 93.02 Error 8 74.22 8 0.88 5 13.09 10 13.54 6 3521 6 35.45 8 32.40 2 Initial motility I Treatment 1 36.10 1 0.89 1 2.00 1 0 1 34.50* 1 3.13 1 0.90 Error 8 64.37 8 27.73 5 41-00 10 4.94 6 2.48 6 6.04 8 2.88 II Treatment 1 22.10 1 1.00 1 23-47 1 3.00 1 0.12 1 3.12 1 19.35 Error 8 61.80 8 3.78 5 55.82 10 3.59 6 1.56 6 1.06 8 9.22 3 Sperm concentration Treatment 1 4175744 1 0 1 245473 1 8361690 1 8652800 1 8820000 1 20377563* Error 8 11372608 8 91019 5 1238889 10 12442023 6 3540925 6 3513058 8 3365680 II Treatment 1 14624000 1 18865 1 32805 1 6838790 1 9746113 1 3087613 1 7921000 Error 8 6235720 8 119925 5 1704913 10 9306559 6 881929 6 9941679 8 2467120 4 Percentage of abnormal I Treatment 1 2622464 1 0.01 1 6 1 4961* 1 145 1 1018 1 1989 sperm Error 8 17513467 8 9.20 5 40 10 681 6 437 6 292 8 2436 II Treatment 1 7430440 1 18.88* 1 72 1 5208 1 685 1 12 1 8237 Error 8 3367743 8 3.25 5 242 10 1594 6 129 6 186 8 3589 * Significant at 5 per cent level
26 INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX.DRIVE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, TABLE IIJune, 1956] S. S. PRABHU 27 Experiment I There was no marked change, as judged from the analysis, when a male was substituted for the routine teaser. As for reaction time, however, statistically significant differences were observed in both ejaculates following the substitution of teaser. The over-all bulls' average reaction time with routine cow was 107 seconds and with male teaser 59 seconds. In the second series, however, no such significant difference was noticed in re- action time. The respective over-all bulls' average reaction time with routine cow was 100 seconds and with the male teaser 67 seconds. Detailed examination of the bulls in the experiments showed that in the first series all the bulls recorded a higher reaction time (total of 1st and 2nd ejaculates) with the routine cow. In the second series, out of the 10 bulls, 7 bulls behaved as before, while the remaining 3 bulls, showed slightly higher values with male as a teaser. As regards semen quality, the only departure from the results of the first series was the significant variation observed in respect of percentage of abnormal sperma- tozoa in the second ejaculate. The respective average values with routine cow and male teaser were 8.3 and 7.8 per cent. Experiment II No significant difference in respect of both reaction time and different criteria of semen was observed when two different males were used as teasers. Experiment III The colour of the cow in the service crate at collection also did not yield, in general, any significant influence on the reaction time and quality of semen. Only in respect of percentage of abnormal spermatozoa there was a significant variation between first ejaculate values with the two different coloured cows. The actual averages over bulls were 19.1 and 24.9 per cent respectively with light and black cows. The difference was significant at 5 per cent level. Incidentally, this experi- ment also indicated lack of marked effect with use of different females as teasers. Experiment IV The results obtained under this experiment showed that five minutes cold water shower bath administered to bulls prior to collection had no marked effect on reaction time and quality of semen28 INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX-DRIVE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, Experiment VI There was no significant change in the time taken when collections were made at night under the artificial light instead of during the day under sunlight. In semen quality, however, a significant difference in variation was observed in respect of sperm concentration of the first ejaculates. The average over bulls for day collections was 520 millions per c.c. as compared with 814 millions per c.c. of night collections. Sex-drive and short term change in sex stimuli. Using the average over bulls and over experiments as an estimate of the intensity of sex-drive inherently present in the bulls of our experiments, the results obtained when different stimuli were applied, were re-arranged in the descending order of reaction time values and the figures are presented in Table III. Out of the 14 bulls in the experiments, No. 23 had the highest average reaction time and bull No. 16, the lowest. It was noticed that while the latter jumped at once and gave a thrust, the former took time to explore the dummy and gave a thrust only after one or two attempts. A comparison of the reactions of these two extreme types to the new sexual stimuli would give an indication of their relative behaviours. If we take only the experiments involving the change of dummies and leave out of consideration the experiments like giving bath and changing the time of collection since they deal with effects other than sex ones, marked reaction could be observed in bull No. 23 to the change in sex stimuli and small or negligible in the case of bull No. 16. Similar also is the case with bull No. 40 which came near to bull No. 23 in sex-drive and bull Nos. 19 and 21 which had sex-drives nearer to bull No. 16. In the intervening cases the effects were rather not clear cut. If we divide all the bulls into two broad groups depending upon their level of sex-drive, viz. those with sex-drive of 60 and less seconds and those having sex-drives above 60 seconds, then the first five bulls namely, Nos. 23, 40, 24, 26 and 25 fall in the latter category, while the remaining 9 bulls fall in the former. If now we consider their behaviour in experiments I (a) and (b), II and IV, we find that in the above 60 seconds group, out of 9 cases only in one case the results were different from the expected rest, while in one it was equal. In the below 60-seconds group, out of 30 cases there were 9 cases in which the results were different and two cases in which they were equal. This appears to suggest that bulls having higher reaction time are more susceptible to change in sex stimuli than bulls with lower reaction time Considering now the experiments in which cold shower bath was given prior to collection or collections taken during evening or at night and retaining again the two broad divisions in respect of sex-drive, we find that in the group with longer reaction time, out of 9 instances in two cases they behaved differently; while in the group with shorter reaction time, out of 17 cases in 7 cases the results were different from the others. This also shows that the bulls with reduced reaction time are less likely to notice any change than bulls with higher reaction times.
June, 1956] S. S. PRABHU 29 In addition to the results discussed already, certain peculiarities in the sex behaviour were exhibited by certain bulls which are briefly described below : TABLE III Sex-drive and reaction of bulls to different stimuli Experiment No. Average overall Stimuli tried R. T. No. of bulls 23 40 24 26 25 22 37 33 20 28 36 31 38 16 145 128 116 76 63 53 43 38 34 24 21 19 15 14 (24) (20) (24) (10) (52) (52) (52) (44) (36) (52) (36) (32) (16) (52) I (a) On male .. 48 .. 58 33 77 10 14 18 15 14 .. .. 6 On female .. 134 .. 92 36 79 12 65 58 29 16 .. .. 11 (b) On male .. 125 .. .. 15 50 61 11 21 37 15 15 .. 10 On female .. 228 .. .. 41 48 21 55 36 26 18 16 .. 11 II On 31 .. .. .. .. 91 47 174 .. 24 19 13 .. .. 28 On 40 .. .. .. .. 91 62 152 .. 43 30 24 .. .. 24 III Shower 150 .. 128 .. 53 34 14 34 .. 23 .. .. .. 13 No shower 155 .. 143 .. 120 50 60 46 .. 37 .. .. .. 20 IV On light coloured cow 80 .. 87 .. 67 68 15 29 37 21 31 20 13 15 On black cow 125 .. 61 .. 75 34 15 27 32 21 37 26 16 11 V Day 125 .. 132 .. 108 33 21 40 .. 24 .. 20 16 14 Night 176 .. 140 .. 56 32 16 52 .. 26 .. 21 14 13 VI Morning 150 .. 129 .. 120 50 14 46 .. 37 .. .. .. 13 Evening 155 .. 143 .. 53 34 60 34 .. 22 .. .. .. 20
30 INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX-DRIVE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, The normal reaction of the buffalo bull trained for artificial service is to show sudden interest as it approaches the site of service as evidenced by hastened move- ment and low bellowing. On reaching the dummy, the outer labia are licked. If as a result of licking the dummy micturates as it normally does, the bull will sip the outflowing urine and open his lips exhibiting the teeth in a characteristic pose which is said to denote sexual excitement and pleasure. The exposure of the teeth are accompanied by a slight to and fro movement of the head. This is followed by a pause or the initial process may be repeated once or twice. It then gets ready to jump ; the back is curved and with everted penis it will jump over the teaser and after exploring with the penis give a thrust where the penis finds the warm lubricated surface of the artificial vagina. It then falls back and regains the normal posture. The two characteristic poses of service are shown in Plate VIII, Figs. 1-4 for bulls No. 23 and 25. In our studies we observed the following variations : bull No. 25 for example used to 'stroke ' the artificial vagina before ejaculation. It was also in the habit of dancing, i.e. shifting the body weight in the mounted position alternately from one of the hind foot to the otherIndian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XXVI PART II] PLATE VIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PLATE VIII. Photographs taken of some of the bulls at the time of collection 1. Bull No. 23 near the ' dummy '. Note the characteristic exhibition of teeth denoting sexual excitement 2. Bull No. 25 showing sexual excitement 3. Bull No. 23 giving the ' thrust' in the A. V. 4. Bull No. 25 giving the ' thrust' in the A. V. This bull was in the habit of stroking the A. V. and dancing 5. Bull No. 25 resting on the back of the ' dummy' after giving the ' thrust' 6. Bull No. 23 resting on the back of the ' dummy'
Indian J. vd. Sci. Vol. XXVI PART II ] PLATE IX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Bull No. 22 ejaculating in the A. V. in the standing posture 2. Bull No. 37 ejaculating in the A. V. in the standing posture 3. Photograph of the light coloured ' dummy ' cow 4. Photograph of the dark coloured ' dummy ' cow.
June, 1956] S. S. PRABHU 31 further tests, they were able to show that high sexual activity with oestrous cows was not due solely to the special odour of cows on heat, but appeared to be due to the constant change of cows that provided the novel and varied stimuli. In natural mating each cow by itself provides the novel and varied stimuli. But in artificial service, since collections are taken under uniform and unvaried sets of conditions, a factor of importance in the initial stages to train the bull to the technique through conditioned reflex, depending upon the length of service and the nature of the bulls, the reaction of the bulls is likely to get 'dulled'. It is then that the change of stimuli are best calculated to produce the desired results. Evalmpieva [1945] working on rabbits found direct correlation between the appearance of internal inhibition of sexual reflexes on the one hand and the monotony of the mating environ- ment on the other. The more stereotyped and uniform were the conditions under which matings took place sooner the inhibition occurred. An increase of the inter- val between each mating to 48 hours as well as the alteration of environmental conditions slowed down the development of inhibition. The latter was evoked at an unequal rate in different males, failing to develop in some animals on account of variable type of nervous activity (temperament), peculiar to each animal. Smirnov- Ugrjumov [1945] classified temperamental types into four classes : (1) impetuous or uncontrollable, (2) lively, (3) quiet and balanced and (4) weak. Males of type (1) were not liable to develop inhibition due to external factors and were incapable of developing differential inhibition resulting in extinction of sexual reflexes, and did not show any signs of internal inhibition clue to frequent matings in the same environment. Those of type (2), exhibited a transitory inhibition due to external factors, readily developed both positive and inhibitory sexual reflexes and quickly showed the symptoms of internal inhibition, if mated frequently in the same environment. The type (3) behaved mainly as type (2) but development of positive and inhibitory sexual reflexes occurred more slowly. Those of type (4) rapidly developed inhibition in sexual reflexes as a result of external and internal factors. The buffalo bulls in our experiments belonged to types (2) and (3). Types (1) and (4) were absent. Since we had tried only the effect of short term changes of sexual stimuli and change of environment and given only one chance consisting of three ' tries ' of five minutes duration, the effect of such changes could best be assessed through the reaction time values. In general, it was noticed that those with lower sex-drive responded better than those with higher sex-drive. These results bear out the findings of the Russian workers. But unlike the Russian workers, we had employed a delicate experimental design and analysis of the results showed significant variation only in the following : (i) reaction time when a bull was substituted for the routine anoestrous female in Experiment I(a), (ii) percentage of abnormal sperm in the second ejaculate of Experiment I(b), (iii) percentage of abnormal sperm in the first ejaculate of Experiment III, (iv) initial motility in first ejaculate of Experiment IV and (v) sperm concentration in the first ejaculate of Experiment VI. No significant variation could be detected in other cases. The significant change in reaction time when the bull was substituted for the routine anoestrous cow was in all probability due to radical change in. teasers. The negative results obtained when the experiment was repeated indicate that probably
32 INFLUENCE OF FACTORS AFFECTING SEX-DRIVE [Vol. XXVI, Part II, the bulls had got used to the new change. The significant differences observed in respect of semen quality offer a problem on which further work alone can throw some light. SUMMARY 1. Experiments were carried out with 14 buffalo-bulls to study the effect of (1) substituting a male for a female as teaser, (2) using different males as teasers, (3) using different coloured females as teasers, (4) giving 5 minutes cold water shower bath prior to collection, (5) making collections in the evenings and (6) making collec- tions at night by artificial light, on the reaction time and quality of semen. 2. Only limited period consisting of 3 ' tries ' of 5 minutes duration was given for the trial. The treatments were changed following the ' switchback' design of experimentation. 3. Significant variation was obtained in respect of (i) 'reaction time' when a male was substituted for the routine female as teaser, (ii) 'percentage of abnormal sperm' in the second ejaculates of the second series of experiment with male as teaser, (iii) ' percentage of abnormal sperm ' in the first ejaculates of the experiment with different coloured teasers, (iv) ' initial motility ' in the first ejaculate of the experiment in which the bulls were subjected to a shower bath prior to collection and (v) 'sperm concentration ' in the first ejaculate of the experiment in which collections were made at night. In the rest of the cases, and in items studied no significant differences could be detected. 4. It was observed that bulls with lower sex-drive showed greater reaction to change in the excitatory object or change in the time of collection than bulls with higher sex-drive. Estimates of sex-drive for this purpose was the over-all experi- ment. 5. Certain peculiar sex behaviour patterns of buffalo bulls are described. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author is thankful to Dr P. Bhattacharya, Head of the Division of Animal Genetics for his keen interest in this work and for encouragement. To the Dire- ctor, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, thanks are due for providing all facilities. REFERENCES Ball, J. (1939). Male and female mating behaviour in prepubertally castrated male rats receiving estrogens. J. Comp. Psychol., 28, 273-283 June, 1956] S. S. PRABHU 33 Beach, F. A. (1944). Experimental studies of sexual behaviour in male mammals. J. Clin. Endocr., 4 126-134 LIMITED VERSUS AD LIBITUM FEEDING OF WHITE LEGHORN PULLETS By ALEX REED1 and JOHN G. VELU2, Department of Animal Husbandry, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U. P. (Received for publication on November 26, 1955) IN most commercial egg producing areas the usual practice in feeding the birds is to feed either all or a part of the ration ad libitum. Approximately three- fourths of the feed consumed by a laying hen is used for body maintenance and only one-fourth for egg production [Vernon et al., 1942]. The maintenance require- ment will be satisfied before any feed is utilised for egg production [Halerow 1947]. Halerow [1947] reports that Montana flocks with the highest income were fed 90-100 lb. of feed per hen annually. This amount is more than 4 oz. per hen per day. Jull [1938] states that a Leghorn hen laying approximately 200 eggs annually should consume about 81 lb. of feed per year. This is about 3.5 oz. per day. Heuser [1946] reporting on work of Temperton and Dudley states that restrictions on feed of laying pullets resulted in lower egg production and lower final body weight as compared with pullets fed ad libitum. Romanoff and Homanoff [1949] report a positive correlation between body weight and total egg production of pullets. In villages in India, generally eggs are produced without feeding the hens. The only feed which the hen receives is what she can pick up for herself around the village. The villager, therefore, assumes that the eggs he obtains from these hens is a profit. There are differences of opinion in India as to whether it is profitable to feed a laying flock for maximum production. One common practice in feeding the laying flock is to limit the amount of feed provided daily. In an attempt to determine the effect of a limited feeding as compared to ad libitum feeding for egg production, it was considered desirable to compare the two systems of feeding in the case of two similar groups of pullets. EXPERIMENTAL Sixty-two White Leghorn pullets about six months of age raised on the Agri- cultural Institute Farm from day-old chicks were divided into two groups36 FEEDING OF WHITE LEGHORN PULLETS [Vol. XXVI, Part II, cocks were placed in each pen. The following ingredients in the ratios indicated were ground together, thoroughly mixed and fed to both groups of layers. Maize 36 per cent Groundnut cake 22 per cent Wheat bran 12 per cent Gram 8 per cent Wheat 12 per cent Fish meal 5 per cent Limestone 2 per cent Mineral mixture 3 per cent (50 per cent salt, 50 per cent steamed bonemeal, 0.05 per cent potassium iodide) Group A received this mixture ad libitum offered in a self-feeder. Group B received the same mixture at the rate of 3 oz. per hen per day fed in two parts, morning and evening. Fresh greens were fed daily to both groups in equal amounts. Clean fresh water was supplied to both groups. Body weight of each bird was deter- mined and recorded at the beginning of the project on October 1 and each month thereafter throughout the six months of the test. Trap-nests were provided and the eggs produced daily were recorded for individual hens. The eggs produced on the first and third Wednesday of each month were weighed and the average weight of eggs for these two days was considered the average for that month. The experi- mental period, October to March, is the cooler part of the year in Allahabad, the maximum air temperature being about 90°F and minimum about 40°F. At the end of November after a two-month period the feeding systems were reversed. The Group A was put on limited feeding and Group B on ad libitum. At the end of January the systems were reversed again to the original procedure with Group A on ad libitum and Group B on limited feeding which continued up to April 1. Under this procedure Group A was fed ad libitum through October and November, limited feeding during December and January and ad libitum again during February and March. Group B was on limited feeding during October and November, on ad libitum during December and January and on limited feeding through February and March. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION There was wide variation in the number of eggs produced by individual hens (Table I). With the exception of Group B during Period I, there was a direct relationship between the total production by periods and the system of feeding. Statistical analysis of the data shows a highly significant difference in egg production in favour of ad libitum feeding [Snedecor, 1946, page 422], (Appendix Table I). Ad libitum feeding resulted in greater egg production to the extent of 3.60 eggs per two-month period, with standard error of 1.02 eggs. Data on egg production and feed consumption are summarized in Table II.
June, 1956] ALEX REED AND JOHN G. VELU 37 TABLE I Egg production per hen in two-month feeding periods from October 1 to March 31 Group A Group B Period I (ad lib.) Period II (limited) Period III (ad lib.) Period I (limited) Period II (ad lib.) Period III (limited) 36 11 5 19 20 14 43 8 39 43 38 31 28 13 33 41 41 35 42 42 42 43 35 39 43 28 30 14 10 18 19 13 36 26 23 22 26 25 26 21 24 28 27 27 34 28 25 32 16 11 21 34 32 19 21 16 37 31 30 18 44 41 31 36 42 27 51 43 38 33 43 20 41 40 35 38 37 27 43 45 28 21 19 23 7 23 28 41 35 36 33 31 25 33 22 38 20 28 30 35 30 23 34 39 44 33 36 24 38 27 25 33 33 27 17 29 35 31 23 24 42 32 43 18 18 14 5 9 17 46 36 29 36 37 38 35 27 35 8 17 32 41 32 21
38 FEEDING OF WHITE LEGHORN PULLETS [Vol. XXVI, Part II, TABLE IJune, 1956] ALEX REED AND JOHN G. VELU 39 The hens in Group A on ad libitum feeding gained 0.52 lb. per hen during Period I while those in Group B on limited feeding during this period gained only 0.39 lb. per hen. During Period II when Group A was on limited feeding the birds gained at an average 0.23 lb. per hen while those in Group B on ad libitum feeding gained 0.35 lb. per hen during the same period. During the third feeding period the average weight per hen decreased in each group. The average weight per hen decreased by 0.62 lb. in Group A and 0.86 lb. in Group B respectively during the third feeding period, on ad libitum and limited feeding. Although the average body weight decreased more than half a pound, the hens in Group A produced more eggs during this period than during any other period of the experiment. The hens in Group B decreased by more than three-fourths of a pound per hen in body weight during Period III and produced the smallest number of eggs of any period during the ex- periment. The weights of individual hens at the beginning and end of each feeding period are shown in Table III. When changes in body weight of individual hens are calculated for the different feeding periods and analysed in the same manner as for egg production, there is a significant difference in body weight changes in favour of ad libitum feeding. However, disagreement with regard to A and B would also arise if the natural trend of weight is substantially curved, as the data suggest. The data show a gain in body weight during the first two two-month periods followed by a loss in the third period and even though the changes appear to be influenced by feeding there is some doubt as to the true nature of the treatment effect. TABLE III Body weight (in lb.) of individual hens at the beginning and end of different feeding periods Group A Group B Period I (ad lib.) Period II (limited) Period III (ad lib.) Period I (limited) Period II (ad lib.) Period III (limited) Oct. 1 Nov. 30 Jan. 31 March 31 Oct. 1 Nov. 30 Jan. 31 March 31 2.8 3.1 3.4 3.4 3.2 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 4.5 3.0 3.4 3.9 3.7 3.5 3.1 3.3 3.9 3.1 3.4 3.8 3.6 3.5 3.5 4.0 3.8 3.4 4.2 4.4 5.2 4.1 3.1 3.6 4.0 3.4 3.6 4.1 5.0 3.6 3.3 3.9 4.5 3.7 3.6 4.1 4.5 3.5 34 3.9 4.2 3.3 3.5 3.9 3.9 3.3 3.1 3.8 3.5 3.4 4.2 4.9 5.1 4.3
40 FEEDING OF WHITE LEGHORN PULLETS [Vol. XXVI, Part II, TABLE IIIJune, 1956] ALEX REED AND JOHN G. VELU 41 There was no apparent difference in egg size attributable to the system of feeding. Group B on limited feeding produced eggs slightly larger than those of Group A on ad libitum feeding during October and November. Egg size was maintained by Group A during December and January while on limited feeding. Eggs produced by Group A during February and March while on ad libitum feeding were slightly larger than those produced by Group B on limited feeding during the same period. Egg size of both the groups was smallest during March. SUMMARY Two groups of 31 hens each were used in a double reversal feeding trial for comparing ad libitum and limited feeding for egg production. The difference in egg production under the two systems of feeding was highly significant in favour of ad libitum feeding. Ad libitum feeding resulted in greater egg production to the extent of 3.60 eggs per two-month period, with standard error of 1.02 eggs. The Group-A hens produced eggs more efficiently on ad libitum feeding while Group-B hens produced eggs more efficiently on limited feeding. There is some indication that ad libitum feeding had a significant influence upon body weight but due to the curved trend in weight data there is some doubt as to the true nature of treatment upon the body weight. There was no correlation between initial body weight and first month's egg production nor between initial body weight and total egg production. There was no significant relationship between egg size and system of feeding in this experiment. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors express their appreciation to Mr H. W. Norton, Professor of Agricultural Statistics, University of Illinois, U. S. A. for his kindness in checking the statistical analysis of the results of this experiment. REFERENCES Bird, H. R. (1948). "Nutritive Requirements and Feed Formulae for Chickens." U. S. D. A. Circular 788 Halerow, H. G. and Cushman, H. E. (1947). " Guides to Poultry Profits in Montana." Montana State Col. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bul. 443 Harrop, F. B. and Florence Harrop. " The Feeding of Adult Poultry. " Dept. Agric. Leaflet No. 47 Heuser, Gustave F. (1946). Feeding Poultry. John Wiley, New York Jull, M. A. (1938). Poultry Husbandry. McGraw-Hill Co., New York Romanoff, A. L. and Romanoff, A. J. )1949). The Avian Egg. John Wiley, New York Snedecor, George, W. (1946). Statistical Methods. Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa " The Feeding of Poultry." Dept. Agric. S. S. and F. M. S. Poult. Ser. Leaflet No. 1 Vernon, W. M., Whitfield, W. R. and Wilcha, H. L. (1942). " Feeding and Management of Hens." Iowa State College of Agric. Ext. Circ. 200 Winter, A. R. and Funk, E. M. (1947), Poult. Sci. and Practice, J. B. Lippincott and Co., Chicago. Illinois
42 FEEDING OF WHITE LEGHORN PULLETS [Vol. XXVI, Part II, APPENDIX I Eggs produced by individual hens by two-month periods Group A Group B P1 (ad lib.) P2 (limited) P3 (ad lib.) P1June, 1956] ALEX REED AND JOHN G. VELU 43 APPENDIX I-contd. Eggs produced by individual hens by two-month period Group A. Group B P1 ad lib. P2 limited P3 ad lib. P144 FEEDING OF WHITE LEGHORN PULLETS [Vol. XXVI, Part II, APPENDIX II Net changes in body weight of individual hens during each two-month feeding period Group A (lb.) Group B (lb.) P1 ad lib. P2 limited P3 ad. lib. P1MEDULLATION IN WOOL46 MEDULLATION IN WOOL [Vol. XXVI, Part II, Secondly the polypeptide synthesis from anhydrocarboxy acids has to be consi- dered inside the fibre. The possibility of such synthesis inside the fibres has not been tried so far though it sounds promising. It is proposed to be undertaken. The last choice is on the lines of the present work where the techniques of regene- ration of keratin fibres is tried to fill up the medullary hollow space in coarse wool. Such an investigation is very useful specially for the hairy coarse Indian wool, since if the hairy portions could be filled by appropriate polypeptides, the physical properties of the fibres would change to make it suitable for more useful purpose than merely as carpet wool. The methods tried during the present work were almost similar to those used for the synthetic polypeptide fibres but suitably modified to suit the present problem. Proteins were extracted by aqueous solutions of sodium sulphide and also of urea and precipitated by hydrochloric acid. The precipitated proteins were dissolved in alkali either alone or after blending with casein. A coarse hairy sample of wool with degree of medullation (hairiness) was treated with a solution similar to the one used in the spinning bath and was subse- quently treated with solution of proteins and finally given the hardening treatment. EXPERIMENTAL The diameter of the sample was measured by microprojection by taking over 200 readings and mean-diameter and coefficient of variation calculated by the usual statistical methods. The percentage of medullation is described as the per- centage of the length of hairy portion in the fibre to the total length and is measured by microprojections as discussed in part II of the present series. Extraction of proteins from wool Seventy grams of wool was dispersed in 2 litres of 25 per cent sodium sulphide under inert atmosphere of argon form 48 hours and undissolved portion was filtered off through a metal gauze. The dissolved protein was precipitated by bringing the clarified extract to pH 4 by the addition of hydrochloric acid. The precipitate was washed and dried. It was found that when extraction was done in air the yield was very poor and the mass became rather pulpy but under inert atmosphere the yield was over 60 per cent and the extraction neat. The precipitated protein was used to prepare two solutions for treatment. Solution I. Five grams of protein was mixed with 15 gm. of lactic casein in 75 cc. of distilled water and kept stirring for one hour. 5 cc. of 20 per cent caustic soda was added and the concentration of free caustic soda in the solution adjusted to 0.5 per cent. Solution II. Fifteen grams of protein was soaked in 50 cc. of distilled water for one hour. Cuprammonium solution was prepared and precipitated according to the method of Happey and Worwell. The precipitate was dissolved in concentrated ammonia and finally adjusted to pH 8. Solution III. Five grams of wool was dissolved in saturated aqueous urea at room temperature and the undissolved portion filtered off. The protein solution was diluted to 400 cc. Preparation of wool samples The samples were carefully scoured, first with 0.1 per cent neutral soap solution at about 70°C and then degreased by soxhlet extraction with benzene (20 times).
June, 1956] T. K. DESAI AND M. R. PADHYE 47 It was finally washed in distilled water and dried. The samples before being treated with different protein solutions were pre-treated with solutions of the type usually suggested for spinning bath. For Solution I, a weighed quantity of the sample of wool was pre-treated with solution containing 5 per cent sulphuric acid, 10 per cent sodium sulphate, and 30 per cent hydrated magnesium sulphate. Two batches of four lots of 2.5 g. each of wool were treated in this solution for two hours and eight hours each. Two samples from each of these batches were taken and washed in distilled water at room, tempe- rature and dried while the remaining two samples from each of the two batches were dried at room temperature without washing. One washed and one unwashed sample from each of the two batches with two hours and eight hours treatment were treated with solution I for one hour and four hours respectively. All these eight sam- ples were treated with a hardening bath containing 10 per cent sodium sulphate and 1 per cent formaldehyde and washed with distilled water, dried and taken for exa- mination. The diameter, C.V. and medullation are given in Table I. TABLE I Effect of 'Solution I' treatment on medullated wool. Serial No. Pre-treatment 5 per cent H2SO4, 10 per cent Sod. sulphate and 30 per cent hydra- ted magnesium sulphate Other treatments Solution I treatment Mean Diameter in µ. C. V. in percentage Medulla- tion in percent- age Original .. .. .. 43 46 22 1 2 hours Washed and dried One hour 47 35 24 2 2 hours Washed and dried Four hours 45 39 22 3 2 hours Unwashed and dried One hour 47 45 24 4 2 hours Unwashed and dried Four hours 45 43 23 Original .. .. .. 43 56 32 5 8 hours Washed and dried One hour 37 51 28 6 8 hours Washed and dried Four hours 40 49 30 7 8 hours Unwashed and dried One hour 42 46 22 8 8 hours Unwashed and dried Four hours 38 45 24
48 MEDULLATION IN WOOL [Vol. XXVI, Part II. For solution II treatment similar pre-treatment was given to another batch of eight samples and treated with protein solution II as in the previous case. The same hardening bath was used. The results of the treatment are given in Table II. TABLE II Effect of 'Solution II' treatment on medullated wool. Serial No. Pre-treatment 5 per cent H2SO4 10 per cent Sod. sulphate and 30 per cent Hydra- ted Magnesium sulphate Other treatments Solution I treatment Mean Diameter in µ C. V. in percentage Medulla- tion in percent- age Original .. .. .. 42 39 30 1 2 hours Washed and dried One hour 42 46 26 2 2 hours Washed and dried Four hours 40 41 18 3 2 hours Unwashed and dried One hour 39 43 19 4 2 hours Unwashed and dried Four hours 43 49 14 Original .. .. .. 68 55 48 5 8 hours Washed and dried One hour 60 50 46 6 8 hours Washed and dried Four hours 54 55 48 7 8 hours Unwashed and dried One hour 58 52 48 8 8 hours Unwashed and dried Four hours 60 59 46
June, 1956] T. K. DEASI AND M. R. PADHYE 49 For solution III treatment, four weighed lots of wool samples were soaked in distilled water at 60°C for eight hours and were put in oven at 70°C. The lots were successively removed from oven after one hour, 2½ hours, 4 hours and 6 hours, and then treated with 100 cc. of solution III for 1¼ hours. The samples were washed and dried. The results are given in Table III. TABLE III Effect of Solution III treatment on medullated wool. Serial No. Treatment with distilled water at 60°C Period of drying in oven at 70°C Solution III treatment Mean diameter in µ. C. V. in percentage Medulla- tion in percentage- Original .. .. .. 64 66 49 1 8 hours One hour 1½ hours 59 65 42 2 8 hours 2½ hours 1½ hours 46 67 34 3 8 hours Four hours 1½ hours 51 65 37 4 8 hours Six hours 1½ hours 50 57 38 DISCUSSION The results show that two hours pre-treatment followed by Solution I treatment for one or four hours does not change the properties of the fibres. The fibres show a decrease in medullation with eight hours pre-treatment followed by Solution I treat- ment on unwashed samples for one hour and four hours. The medullation falls from 32 to about 23 per cent. Since the mean diameter does not change, it shows that the protein has penetrated inside the fibres. It is clear that washing the sample after pre-treatment does make a difference. In the case of Solution II, Table II shows that two hours pre-treatment followed by one or four hours treatment with solution II reduces the medullation considerably. In the case of sample 4 it falls to 14 from 30 per cent. The reduction of medullation in four hours treatment in washed sample is about the same as one hour in unwashed sample. Curiously enough Solution II does not change the characteristics of wool after eight hours pre-treatment. In the case of Solution III the characteristic improves as the drying time is increased successively up to two and a half hours after soaking for eight hours in water. It, however, does not show further improvement on drying after increasing the drying time before Solution III treatment. 2 AR/56 11
50 MEDULLATION IN WOOL [Vol. XXVI, Part II, The results show the expected change in the characteristics of the fibres. The fibres maintain their other characteristics of ' feel ', ' tensile strength ' which were shown by the preliminary experiments. As to whether such a modification in fibre characteristics increases the spinning value of the fibres or not has yet to be seen. It is very likely that the treatment with N-carboxy ?-amino anhydride may give more promising results. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are grateful to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for financial help for this scheme and also for financial help to one of them (T.K.D.) and for giving them permission to publish these results. REFERENCES Astbury, W. T., Dalgliest, C. E., Darmon S. E., and Sutherland, G. B. B. M. (1948). Nature, 162, 596 Baldwin, A. W., Barr., T., and Speakman, J. B. (1946). J. Soc. Dyers and Colorists, 62, 4 Bamford, D .C. H., Hanby, W. E. and Happey, F. (1949). Nature, 164, 751 Happey, F. and Wormell, R. L. (1949). J. Text. Inst., 40, P. T. 855 Leggett Bailey, J. (1950). J. Chem. Soc., 3461 SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE MORPHOLOGY AND PATHOGENICITY OF MONIEZIA EXPANSA (Rudolphi, 1810) By A. K. VARMA, Livestock Research Station, Patna, Bihar (Received for publication on August 10, 1955) (with two Text-Figures) THREE species of the anoplocephaline genus Moniezia, M. expansa [Rudolphi, 1810], M. benedeni [Moniez, 1879] and M. denticulata [Rudolphi, 1810], have proved to be of veterinary interest. These species are mainly based on the presence or absence of and the character of the interproglottidal glands, which are saccular in M. expansa, linear in M. benedeni and totally absent in M. denticulata. Bhalerao [1935] records the occurrence of all these three species in certain localities of India. M. expansa appears to be by far the commonest and most widespread species in the world and in India too. The morphology of this parasite has been fairly well studied by a number of helminthologists in different countries. The object of this article is to record some interesting observations of diagnostic value and to stress the importance of this worm as a significant etiological agent in causing mortality in young stock, particularly buffalo calves. Hitherto not much attention has been focussed on this parasite and the consensus of helminthological opinion holds only Ascaris as a common cause of calf-mortality in buffaloes. During the last four years the writer has been critically studying a large collection of materials of this parasite from sheep, goats, cattle and buffaloes from different localities in Bihar (India), and has made some observations on the morphology of the adult worm and its eggs, which are described below and illustrated. Recently, some evidence was derived from a post-mortem case on the significance of this parasite in causing death of a buffalo calf; and it is believed that a thorough inquiry may bring out valuable information about this parasite as a factor responsible for heavy calf- mortality in this country, particularly buffalo calves. The adult The morphology of the adult worm in general agrees with the descriptions furnished by previous authors. In a single specimen, collected from a sheep at Daltonganj, the arrangement of the testes showed some variations in that they were grouped in some segments in the form of two triangles, one on either side, which did not meet together in the mid-line (Fig. 1). This was the distinctive feature of the species M. trigonophora, proposed by Stiles and Hassall in the year 1893. Theiler [1924], doubting its specific value, states that " my experience is that the testes in M. expansa may be roughly arranged in two broad triangles which usually meet in the mid-line, or in a continuous band thinning slightly towards the mid-line, or they may be as numerous in the median field as elsewhere'. She continues further that " all three types may be found in one individual or only one type may be present". Baer [1927] in his " Monographie des Anoplocephalidae ", nevertheless, maintained this species. Taylor [1928] after examining a series of segments of several worms noted the variable nature of this character even in the segments of the same individual. His photographic illustrations are valuable in this connection. Again, Southwell [1930] described this feature in young segments of M. benedeni. In the present study, Taylor's observations are confirmed. 103 12AR/56 2
104 PATHOGENICITY OF MONIEZIA EXPANSA [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Segment of Maniezia expansa showing arrangement of the testes, CS=Cirrus Sac; GP=Genital pore OV=Ovary; EV=Excretory Vesicle; Vit=Vitellaria; T=Testes and IPG=Inter-proglottidal glands. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Ova of Moniezia expansa.
September, 1956] A. K. VARMA 105 The eggs Different descriptions and measurements have been given by different authors for the eggs of M. expansa and the illustrations furnished by them are so varying and confusing that the laboratory man is often baffled. Baylis [1929] records that the eggs measure 0.05 to 0.07 mm. in diameter and figures them as spherical in shape. Bhalerao's [1935] measurements are 0.050-0.090 mm. for diameter and his text- figure also indicates that they are spherical in shape. But, Monnig [1950] describes them as somewhat triangular in shape, containing a well developed pyriform appara- tus, and measuring 56-67 µ. in diameter. In the present study the fresh eggs examined in a series of faecal samples by sugar floatation method presented a different picture altogether. They were neither spherical nor triangular but had rather a rhomboidal shape, the sides of which measured 40-55 µ. and the diameter 50-65 µ. Instances of individual variations from triangular to spherical shape were met with but very rarely. These are all illustra- ted by furnishing camera lucida drawings [Fig. 2]. Examination of these eggs in utero in stained preparations of the segments did not show any uniformity or constancy in their morphology, as they were shrivelled up presenting spherical, triangular or rhomboidal shape with irregular outline, and perhaps this accounts for the variations in observations of the previous authors. Monnig's [loc. cit.] figure of the egg of M. benedeni resembles more or less the eggs of M. expansa observed by the author in the present study. Pathogenicity A good deal of controversy exists in the available literature over the pathogenicity of this parasite and some authors believe that these worms are not harmful at all. Monnig [1950], however, maintains that heavy infestations with this parasite are common but even one or a few worms are able to produce disease. Lafenetre [1948], while recording an epizootic of monieziasis in sheep in France with losses ranging from 5 to 25 per cent, observed that although the infected animals were in good condition, the death was sudden. Kates and Goldberg [1949 and 1951] observed the contrary in America and found that lambs heavily infected experimentally with M. expansa showed no clinical symptoms or any observable injurious effect and that there was no significant retardation in growth or differences in weight. Hansen Kelley and Todd [1950], however, noticed retardation in growth and some reduction in the haemoglobin and the packed cell volume of erythrocytes, with loss in market- able weight in lambs infected experimentally with M. expansa. Link and his associates [1950] also supported that heavy infestation with M. expansa was considered to be the cause of severe loss in a calf-herd in Illinois. Harries [1953] found that in a sheep flock heavily infected with M. expansa, both the ewes and the lambs were in poor condition and there was some mortality. Infection of ruminants with this parasite, particularly lambs, kids and calves is not uncommon in India. Bhalerao [1947] remarked that in India infection with M. expansa was very heavy in some localities and caused considerable mortality among livestock, particularly in ovines. He observed that the records of a sheep
106 PATHOGENICITY OF MONIEZIA EXPANSA [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, breeding farm near Mysore showed that nearly 90 per cent lambs succumbed annually to the infection of this parasite. The infected animal shows progressive anaemic and debilitating symptoms and retardation in growth. The infection has, however, been rarely held to be of any pathological significance in buffalo calves. The following case report will illustrate its pathogenicity and significance as an etiological agent for calf-mortality in buffaloes : " On the 5th May, 1955 five buffalo calves were brought at the Bihar Veteri- nary College Laboratory for some safety tests of the newly evolved Bain's H. S. vaccine. One of these died on the 11th May after show- ing the following daily temperatures recorded both in morning and evening. The animal was about ten months old and the general con- dition was suspicious of helminthiasis. Date Morning temp. Evening temp. 6-6-55 .. 100°F September, 1956 ] A. K. VARMA 107 SUMMARY 1. Some observations on the arrangement of the testes in Moniezia expansa are recorded with illustration in confirmation of the findings of some previous authors. This supports invalidation of the species M. trigonophora Stiles and Hassall, [1893]. 2. An illustrated account of the morphology of the eggs of M. expansa is fur- nished in settlement of the disputed variations in their shape and size appearing in the existing text books. 3. A case of monieziasis in a buffalo calf is described to illustrate its pathogeni- city and significance as an etiological agent for calf-mortality in buffaloes. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author is thankful to Shri D. N. Sahay and Shri S. M. Hadis of the Bihar Veterinary College Laboratory for kindly affording an opportunity to study the cases of monieziasis in buffalo calves. REFERENCES Baer, J. G. (1927). Monographie des cestodes de la famille des Anoplocephalidae. Bull. Biol. France et Belg., Suppl. X, Paris, pp. 241 Baylis, H. A. (1929). A Manual of Helminthology (Medical and Veterinary), London Bhalerao, G. D. (1935). Helminth parasites of the domesticated animals in India. Sci. Monogr Coun. agric. Res. India, No. 6, pp. 365 IN-VITRO TRIALS OF SOME NEW ANTI-TUBERCULOUS COMPOUNDS-I* By M. R. DHANDA, GAJINDAR SINGH, M. P. KHARE and J. M. LALL (Received for publication on December 1, 1955) SINCE the early days of the empirical use of salts of heavy metals in human medicine, for combating infection due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis, much progress has been witnessed in the chemotherapy of this disease. Each promising compound is now assessed quantitatively for its activity in the test-tube and in experimental animals before being introduced to the veterinary and human medicine. According to Hart, the pioneer work on these lines against tubercle bacillus was started with the experimental trial of sulphanilamide by Rich and Follis [1938]. The large volume of literature on this subject that has since accumulated has equipped the clinician with more effective weapons for fighting the scourge, e.g. TB1 (p-acetamido-benzaldehydethiosemicarbazone), PAS (para-amino-salicylic acid), INH (iso-nicotinic acid hydrazide), etc. None of the compounds synthesised so far can, however, rid the system of all the bacteria responsible for the disease and, consequently, quest for more effective drugs against tuberculosis continues. In his search for more efficient anti-tuberculous compounds, the chemist has, among other things, been guided by the revelation of the chemical structure of the tubercle bacillus itself. The presence of fatty acids in the superficial layer of the bacillus led Robinson [1940] to conjecture the suitability of lipophilic and basic compounds as potent remedies against tubercular infection. With the same object in view the authors have tested in-vitro the anti-tuberculous activity of several 4-acyl-4-aminodiphenyls and their N-4-diphenylyl amidines. Ortho, meta and para- cresotinic acid hydrazides and their substituted N'-benzylidene derivatives have also been tested in pursuance of the findings of Buu Hoi [1952] in respect of anti-tuber- culous properties of non-pyridinic hydrazides, especially in the hope of being able to correlate their structural features with activity. Although the authors are aware of the absence of quantitative relationship between the in-vitro and in-vivo activities of drugs against infective agents ; trials in guinea-pigs were, like many other workers, omitted in the preliminary stage in order to conserve time, funds and labour. MATERIAL AND METHOD The bacteriostatic properties of these compounds were studied on floating culture pellicles, the use of submerged cultures for the purpose having been abandoned for want of adequate number of colorimetrically matched tubes. *Work conducted under the aegis of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. 109 12AR/56 4
110 ANTI-TUBERCULOUS COMPOUNDS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, The synthetic medium employed for these trials had the following composi- tion : I-Asparagin 14.0 gm. Dipotassium phosphate (K2 HPO4.3H2O) 1.8 gm. Sodium citrate (Na3 C6 H5 O7.5½ H2O) 0.9 gm. Magnesium sulphate (Mg. SO4 7H2O) 1.5 gm. Ferric citrate scales 0.3 gm. Dextrose 10.0 gm. Glycerol C. P. 100.0 gm. Distilled water upto 1 litre Reaction: PH7. Sterilisation by autoclaving at 11 to 12 lb. for 25 minutes. As all the compounds synthesised were sparingly soluble in water, they were added to the medium in the form of suspensions obtained by triturating 50 mgm. of each separately in 5 ml. quantities of 0.15 per cent aqueous agar solution and sterilising in an autoclave at 10-11 lb. pressure for 25 minutes. 1 ml. of the suspension was added, with sterile precautions, to 99 ml. of the synthetic medium contained in each flask. Two sets of trials were put up in duplicate, one without agar and the other with 0.15 per cent agar incorporated in the medium to render it more viscous so as to increase its capacity for holding insoluble particles in suspension; control flasks without drugs as also with known anti-tuberculous drugs, like INH, were kept in each series for comparison. The culture of Mycotuberculosis used for this trial was of the strain PN, a human, virulent type maintained at this Institute for tuberculin preparation and passaged occasionally through guinea-pigs for retaining virulence. Young (12 days' old) vigorously growing culture in the form of a thin surface pellicle on gly- cerine broth was used for seeding the experimental and control flasks. So far as possible, uniformity in the size of inoculum in each flask was aimed at. RESULTS Comparative observations against drug-free controls were made at weekly intervals for three weeks and the results are presented in Table I. It will be seen that compounds No. 9, 13, and 18 compared favourably with p-amino-?-phenyl pyridine and INH* in their in-vitro anti-tuberculous activity, while compound 1 tended to approach that limit. *Isonex (Dumex) tablets of 50 mg. each were used for this trial.
September, 1956 ] M. R. DHANDA et. al. 111 At the end of five weeks of incubation, almost the entire inoculum from each of the flasks containing compounds No. 9, 13, 18, 35 and 36 was transferred to fresh flasks of drug-free synthetic medium, in order to know if some of the bacilli were still viable, a possibility to be expected only in the event of drug inhibition being partial. Subcultures were, at the same time, also made from control flasks without drugs for comparative study. The results observed at the end of a month and a half of incubation are indicated in Table II. The efficacy of compounds No. 1, 9, 13 and 18 showing an appreciable inhibi- tion at 10 mg. per cent dilution, was also tested in varying concentrations vis a vis INH and PAS; the results obtained are given in Table III. DISCUSSION Perusal of Tables I and III indicates only 4'-Butyro-4-aminodiphenyl (Lab. Ref. No. 13) to be as effective as INH or PAS in dilutions up to 1 : 100,000, whereas three other compounds (Lab. Ref. Nos. 1, 9 and 18) compare favourably with them in somewhat lower dilutions (i.e. up to 1 : 40,000). It is apparent that the suitability of any of these chemotherapeutic agents for clinical application will largely depend on their concentration levels permissible in the body, without producing toxic symptoms and that they will have to be rendered water soluble for the purpose, by introducing hydrophilic groups, even at the risk of possible reduction in activity. It cannot, however, be ignored that these trials have got to be evaluated at a credit for the disadvantage of lack of easy diffusion through the medium on account of low solubility as also for the larger molecular structures of these compounds, as compared to INH and PAS, which do not allow the production of comparable molar concen- trations at each W/V dilution. An anomaly in the results, set out in Table I is also worth consideration. Con- trary to expectation, the medium in which agar had been incorporated for keeping the drugs in a uniform suspension did not prove better than the agar-free medium ; in most of the cases it allowed better growth of Myco. tuberculosis, indicating thereby, a lower drug activity. The authors consider one or both of the following possibi- lities to be responsible for this phenomenon:112 ANTI-TUBERCULOUS COMPOUNDS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, TABLE I Showing the in-vitro anti-tuberculous activity of the compounds Lab. Ref. No. Name of Chemical Amount of growth (including inoculum) on the Remarks 8th day of incubation 15th day of incubation 22nd day of incubation Agar medium Plain medium Agar medium Plain medium Agar medium Plain medium 1 4'September, 1956 ] M. R. DHANDA et. al. 113 TABLE I114 ANTI-TUBERCULOUS COMPOUNDS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, TABLE II Showing the results of viability tests after five weeks of incubation on 10 mg. per cent drug concentration Description of flasks from which culture attempted Date of subculture on drug- free medicum Date of observa- tion Growth observed Remarks Compound No. With or without agar 9 Without agar 12-8-54 29-9-54 Profuse growth Resembling control flasks. 9 With agar do do Slight growth About 3 sq. cm. in area 13 Without agar do do No growth Inoculum still floating 13 With agar do do do do 18 Without agar do do do do 18 With agar do do do do 35 Without agar do do do do 35 With agar do do Growth present About 12-15 sq.cm. in area. 36 Without agar do do No growth Inoculum floating. 36 With agar Not available for subculture due to contamination ControlSeptember, 1956 ] M. R. DHANDA et. al. 115 TABLE III Showing the in-vitro anti-tuberculous activity of compounds No. 1, 9,13, and 18 vis a vis INH and PAS at varyiug dilutions Compound No. Date of inoculation Date of observation Amount of growth at various drug concentrations Remarks 10 mg. per cent 7.5 mg. per cent 5 mg. per cent 2.5 mg. per cent 1.0 mg. per cent 1 8-12-54 {18-12-54 28-12-54 + + + + +1½ } Comparable with INH and PAS. 116 ANTI-TUBERCULOUS COMPOUNDS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, SUMMARY Thirty-four compounds have been tested in-vitro for their anti-tuberculous activity, only four of which have shown promise; correlation of their liphophilic nature and basicity with activity could not be established. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are thankful to Dr V. S. Misra, Lecturer, Department of Chemistry, Lucknow University for his keen interest in this work and to Shri B. R. Sen Gupta for technical assistance. REFERENCES Buu Hoi et. al., (1952). Compt. rend. 235, 329 (Cited by Misra and Khare, 1954) Hart, P. D'A. (1946). Brit. med. J. Dec. 7th 849. Misra, V. S. and Khare, M. P. (1952). J. Indian chem. Soc. 29, 695 LUMBAR PARALYSIS IN SHEEP AND GOATS By RADHEY MOHAN SHARMA1 and H. M. BHATIA2 (Received for publication on April 5, 1955) AN obscure disease has been occurring amongst sheep and goats at the Govern- ment Livestock Farm, Hissar almost every year since 1944. It was, however, observed for the first time in 1935 at the farm. The disease is of seasonal occurrence and prevails from the beginning of September to the end of November or beginning of December. All breeds of sheep, i.e. Bikaneri, Hissari and Lohi and all breeds of goats, Betal, Hill, Desi and Angora maintained at the farm were found affected irrespective of the age of the animal. Symptoms The symptoms observed in affected cases are : Staggering gait, inco-ordination of movement of hind legs which are carried wide apart, weakness, lying down, inability to stand and general dullness. The animal seems to be drunk and reels to and fro. There is no appreciable rise of temperature. It may be subnormal in advanced stages of the disease. The animal keeps on feeding even when lying down, if hand fed. There is generally no irregularity of the bowels nor complete loss of sensation of any part. The course of the disease is protracted and varies from one to three weeks. In later stages the affected animal keeps on lying in a very helpless condition and one generally thinks that it would die during the night but it lingers on for a number of days. Post-mortem lesions Post-mortem lesions show engorgement of the blood vessels of brain, con- gestion of the brain substance and spinal cord. The piameter shows pin point haemorrhages. In chronic cases, both in sheep and goats, there is appreciable inflammation of the abomasum and of the small intestines. Kidneys in some cases show congestion. Heart, lungs and liver are usually normal. Little is known about nervous diseases of sheep and goats. The literature on this subject has been reviewed by Innes [1950]. Emoto [1923] reported paralysis among goats in Japan which occurred from 1911 to 1924 amongst animals as im- ported from Switzerland. He mentioned that the disease has been seen each year in the late summer and autumn and that adult animals were usually affected. He designated the condition as a non-purulent lymphocytic meningitis with cerebro- spinal malacia. Crawford [1939-42] made observations on a disease of goats known as "Lumbar Paralysis" which occurred in Ceylon amongst animals imported from India or their progeny. He reported that there was motor weakness and posterior inco-ordination and the onset of the disease was sometimes dramatically sudden; there was no rise of temperature in affected cases and that the course of the disease was either acute or subacute. He could neither transmit the disease by sub-cuta- neous or intramuscular inoculation of brain and cord emulsions into healthy goats, rabbits, guineapigs and mice, nor observe growth of any pathogenic organism on cultural examination of blood, spinal cord and brain of the typical cases. Further 1 Govt. Livestock Farm, Hissar 2 Punjab College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Hissar 117 12 AR/56 5
118 LUMBAR PARALYSIS IN SHEEP AND GOATS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, work in Ceylon by Pillai, Mahmooth and Malkani [1950] confirmed Crawford's findings and revealed that the disease affected a variety of Indian breeds imported into CeylonSeptember, 1956 ] R. M. SHARMA AND H. M. BHATIA 119 (3) Once it was suspected that this condition may be due to the animal eating certain poisonous weeds and grasses. A botanist from the Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun visited the farm and collected 102 samples of different weeds and grasses for examination. He reported the following weeds and grasses to be poisonous: (i) Datura (ii) Lycium curopelm (iii) Solanum melingen (iv) Xanthium strumeri- um (v) Andropogan-Janvaranous (vi) Cardrospermum habiacaum (vii) Farsattie- Jaequerontin (Seed poisonous) (viii) Fluggo-virisa (ix) Fribulus ferrestris and (x) Sorghum helipensi. Accordingly pieces of spleen, liver, kidneys and stomach wall and stomach contents from a number of cases that died of the disease were sent to the Chemical Examiners of the Punjab and Uttar Pradesh Governments but no poison could be detected in any of the materials sent. (4) Pieces of brain and spinal cord from three cases of the disease on histo- pathological examination at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, revealed changes associated with encephalomyelitis such as haemorrhagic foci, neuronophagia and nerve cell degeneration. The whole brain and long pieces of spinal cord from different parts of the vertebral column of a typical case of the disease were also sent to the Research Officer, Disease Investigation Section, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar for detailed histopathological studies as desired by Innes. The changes observed were : Cerebrum. Congestion, focal necrosis and slight but distinct neuronophagia. There was congestion of the membranes as well. Cerebellum. Capillary congestion and slight but distinct neuronophagia. Medulla oblongata and spinal cord. There was only slight congestion. No neuronophagia could be detected. Careful examination of sections from various parts proved negative for helminthic infection. On the other hand similar examination of the pieces of brain and spinal cord from four other typically affected cases failed to reveal any of the above mentioned pathological changes. (5) The Research Officer, Disease Investigation, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, on the basis o early histopathological studies felt that the disease might be of virus origin. He, therefore, advised vaccination of healthy stock with a 4 per cent carbolised brain emulsion prepared from the brain substance of a typical case of the disease destro yed in extremis. One hundred and twenty-six goats and 108 sheep were vaccinated with the above vaccine in three batches during the years 1950-53. An equal number of these animals of the same age-group were kept as controls under identical conditions of feeding and management for comparative study. Results judged on 150 vaccinated animals showed that ten cases of the disease occurred in the two groups, six in the vaccinated and four in the control group. It was also noticed that one animal, male goat No. 515, which suffered from the disease in 1950 in spite of the vaccination, had a second attack in 1951 and a third attack in 1952. The third attack was as severe as the second. This work showed that vaccination had no good effect and that one or more attacks of the disease did not confer any protection against a subsequent attack.
120 LUMBAR PARALYSIS IN SHEEP AND GOATS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, (6) The possibility of the disease being due to Listerella infection was reasonably excluded by subjecting serum samples from 11 recovered cases of the disease to agglutination test for listerellosis at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. Nine samples proved negative and two gave doubtful reaction when tested with antigen prepared from Mukteswar stock Listerella culture. (7) Attempts were made to grow the so called virus of the disease on chorio- allantoic membrane of the developing chick embryo. The material was passed in four passages. No satisfactory and uniform results could be achieved. There were no lesions on the embryos after death. There was only congestion and haemorrhage in some cases. (8) In view of the fact that the disease could not be transmitted in spite of repea- ted experiments, and that it appeared in the vaccinated animals, it is likely that the disease in question is not of virus origin. The inability to demonstrate any bacteria in blood, brain substance, and cerebrospinal fluid by microscopical, cultural and serological tests excludes the possibility of a bacterial infection. Negative results on chemical analysis of samples of fodder fed to these animals, and viscera from affected cases point to the absence of any fodder or other poisoning. In consideration of the above observations coupled with clinical symptoms shown by the affected cases and findings of Johnson, Hamilton, Nevens and Boley [1948] recording more or less similar condition in the calf due to thiamine deficiency, it was suspected that the disease in question may be a vitaminosis B1. It was, therefore, considered desirable to give a trial to thiamin administration. Sixteen cases of the disease (11 caprine and 5 ovines) were divided into two groups with 8 animals in each group. Animals in group No. 1 were treated with vitamin B1 (Berin), a preparation of Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd., by intramuscular route and by mouth. Animals in group No. 2 were not given any treatment. Animals in both the groups were kept in the hospital under identical conditions of feeding and management. Seven animals (4 caprine and 3 ovine) got cured in group No. 1. Out of the 7 cured cases, one goat had a relapse about one month after the treatment and died. In group No. 2, 7 animals died and one recovered without any treatment. The results are tabulated below : Group of animals No. of animals Cured Died Percentage recovery 1. Vitamin B1 treated 8 7* 1 87.5 2. Non-treated 8 1 7 12.5 *One goat out of seven cured cases had a relapse one month after the treatment and died. The line of treatment consisted in the intramuscular administration of 1 c.c. of Berin, 100 mg. each c.c. daily for the first 6 days followed by 1 c.c. of Berin on alternate days during the second week. The animals were given orally 6 Berin tablets, 10 mg. each tablet on the days when no injections were given.
September, 1956 ] R. M. SHARMA AND H. M. BHATIA 121 Ordinarily the cases recovered after the first 6 injections. Some required treatment during the second week. The treatment was, however, continued for two weeks. It was purposely given for a longer time to avoid occurrence of any relapse. The above doses were for adult animals. For young kids and lambs, the doses were reduced accordingly. The results obtained in the above trial were encouraging and warranted further work in this direction. Consequently 28 more cases were given the above treatment during the period from 1950 to 1953. Out of these 28 cases thus treated, 22 made complete recovery, two showed partial improvement and four died. These results indicate that vitamin B1 has some part to play in the causation of the disease. It is believed that vitamin B is normally synthesised in the rumen of ruminants and, therefore, it is contended that ordinarily there is no deficiency of this vitamin in the polygastric animals. It is likely that some factors such as deficiency of trace elements like copper, cobalt and iron may be interfering with the normal synthesis of vitamin B complex in these animals. (9) Accordingly a mixture consisting of cobalt sulphate 20 mg., copper sulphate 20 mg. and ferrous sulphate 100 mg. was administered once every week for 6 months from 1st April to 30th September for two consecutive years to a total of 92 lambs, 30 Betal goats and 20 Betal kids. An equal number of these animals were kept as controls under identical conditions of feeding and management for comparative study. The results were judged at the end of the usual season of the disease and it was observed that 12 animals from the two groups developed the disease, three from the treated and 9 from the untreated group. These observations indicate that deficiency of the above trace elements may be playing some role in the causation of the disease. To obtain direct evidence in this direction, five samples of suspected fodder obtained from the grazing fields of Chhaoni block and Goat Breeding Section were sent to the Head of the Division of Animal Nutrition, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar for estimation of their copper, cobalt and iron con- tents. Results received in respect of two samples showed that there was a definite deficiency of copper in one sample and cobalt content in it was on the border line. (10) The effect of feeding gram ration122 LUMBAR PARALYSIS IN SHEEP AND GOATS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III Work so far carried out here indicates that deficiency of vitamin B1 in sheep and goats plays some part in the etiology of lumbar paralysis. It has not been possible to establish so far as to whether the deficiency is primary, i.e. as a result of deficiency of the vitamin in the fodder or is secondary, i.e. due to some factors causing interference in the vitamin B complex in the rumen of the animals. The possibility of trace elements, copper, cobalt and iron has been explored and it appears that copper and cobalt may be the factors responsible for interfering with the vitamin B synthesis in rumen of the affected animals. SUMMARY 1. An obscure disease occurring amongst sheep and goats at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar has been described. 2. The results obtained with administration of thiamine in the treatment of clinical cases of the disease have been reported to be encouraging. 3. The effect of administration of trace elements, copper, cobalt and iron, on the incidence of the disease has been studied and it appears that a deficiency of trace elements plays some part in the causation of the disease. 4. It has neither been possible to isolate any pathogenic organism from the affected cases, nor the disease could be reproduced in sheep, goats and laboratory animals. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors feel indebted to Shri B.N. Handa, Director Animal Husbandry and Warden of Fisheries, Punjab, Simla for useful suggestions, to Dr Tulsa Ram, Veterinary Investigation Officer, Punjab, Hissar for continuous interest and advice during the course of investigation and to Shri M.R. Dhanda, Head of the Pathology and Bacteriology Division, Dr N.D. Kehar, Head of the Division of Animal Nutrition and Shri P.R.K. Iyer, Research Officer, Disease Investigation, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for guidance and examination of the materials sent to them. REFERENCES Crawford, M. (1939-42). Ann Repts. Govt. Vet. Surgeon, Ceylon Ensminger, M.E. and Bowland, J.I. (1947). J. Anim. Sci. 4, 409-423 Hutyra, F., Marek, J. and Manninger, R. (1949). Special Pathology and Therapeutics of Diseases of Domestic Animals, 5th. Ed. Vol. III Innes, J.R.M., (1951). Brit. Vet. J. 107,187 Iyer, D.N. and Seetharaman, J. (1953), Indian Vet. J. 30-142,137 Innes, J.R.M., Shoho, C., and Pillai, C.P., (1952). Brit. vet. J. 71,83 Johnson, B.C., Hamilton, T.S., Nevens, W.B. and Boley L.E. (1948). J. Nutrition, Feb 10, 35-2 Olafson, P. (1946). Cornell Vet. 30, 141.
ACUTE THEILERIASIS IN SHEEP By K. RAGHVACHARI and A. MADHAVAKRISHNA REDDY, Veterinary Investigation Officer's Laboratory, Hyderabad-Deccan (Received for publication on February 12, 1955) A perusal of the available literature on the subject of theileriasis in sheep indicates that only two species of Theileria parasites have so far been recorded in sheep and goats and designated as Theileria ovis and Theileria herci. The former parasite is considered non-pathogenic because it does not produce any clinical symptoms of disease while the latter is associated with a definite and recog- nisable fatal disease. In Theileria herci infection, besides the small ring or rod shaped parasites in the red blood cells of sheep and goats, structures which are interpreted as Koch's blue bodies have been encountered in blood and organs including bone-marrow. During the monsoon frequent deaths at the Mahbubnagar Farm occurred in sheep and the Manager who was unable to diagnose the cause of death sought the help of the senior author who visited the place of outbreak and examined the (11) ailing cases. On examination of blood smears it was found that the cause of death was acute theileriasis. These theilerial parasites were found along with Koch's blue bodies, both free and in the large mononuclear leucocytes, in the blood smears. A lamb of about one year age was sub-inoculated intravenously with 20 c.c. of blood direct from an ailing case showing high temperature and theilerial parasites with Koch's blue bodies in the circulatory system. This lamb reacted after 16 days and the strain has been maintained in the laboratory. The article is a preliminary note and the detailed experiments covering all the aspects with regard to modes of infection, treatment, method of immunisation, preventive measures, etc. are on hand and are being worked in greater detail and the data accruing on this will form the subject matter of a further detailed report. With a view to find out the host specificity of the strain, 6 goats, 2 buff-calves and one cow-calf were sub-inoculated intravenously with 20 c.c. of blood, but all these animals proved refractory to infection, whereas all the sheep sub-inoculated simultaneously along with these animals in batches on different dates with the same strain had reacted and succumbed to the disease, proving thereby that the strain is specific only to sheep. Two rabbits and two guineapigs which also received 5 and 3 c.c. of virulent blood respectively did not react. 123 12 AR/56 7
124 ACUTE THEILERIASIS IN SHEEP [ Vol. XXVI, Part III According to literature the pathogenic strain of theileria, viz. Theileria herci, is a parasite which affects both sheep and goats. But the strain, which we have on hand, appears to distinguish itself from Theileria herci in being specific to sheep only in our host specificity experiments conducted so far. At first we hazarded to call it a new strain, of which there seems to be very little doubt, yet we refrain to call it so until we complete our programmed work on all aspects. Sulphamezathine 33 1/3 per cent when inoculated intravenously in doses of 5 to 7 c.c. supported daily by half the initial dose, gave roughly 70 per cent recoveries. Few deaths which could not be avoided in the apparently recovering cases about one week after their reaching normal temperature were due to extreme emaciation and damage caused by the disease to the vital organs like liver, spleen, kidneys and lymphatic and alimentary systems and aggravated by heavy worm burden. These cases were microscopically negative for the presence of the parasites on death. The disease could be controlled satisfactorily by resorting to dipping and Copper's dip, a patent, was utilised in the field for this purpose. Two varieties of ticks have been collected off the ailing sheep and these are (i) Hyalomma sowignyi (Gervais, 1844) and (ii) Rhipicephalus haemaphysaloides (Supino), the former being predominant. Experiments are designed to transmit the disease through the agency of ticks and their progeny to see whether one or both the species of the above men- tioned ticks are vectors in this disease. REFERENCES Gaiger, S.H. and Davies G.O. (1938). Vet. Pathology and Bacteriology, 390 Richardson, U.F. (1948). Vet. Protozoology, 59 Wenyon, C.M., (1926). Protozoology, 1037.
CYTOLOGICAL, PHYSIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL STUDIES OF EGYPTIAN BUFFALO BLOOD By E.S.E. HAFEZ1 and A. ANWAR2 (Received for publication on June 8, 1955) (with one Text-Figure) THE comparative study of the normal values of blood constituents and the physiological variations which occur in the absence of any definite pathological condition, is of great academic and practical importance for clinical hematology and animal husbandry especially in the tropics, since certain blood components are related to heat tolerance, environmental stress and disease immunity. Normal hematological values vary considerably amongst different classes of farm animals. In general the erythrocyte count is inversely proportional to the body size of the species. In man, horse, swine, dog and cat the neutrophils are the most frequent leucocytes while in ruminants, laboratory rodents and chicken the lymphocytes are predominant [Olsen, 1937]. In this respect the hematological values of the Egyptian buffalo Bos, (Bubalus), bubalis, L. were determined. MATERIAL AND METHODS Experimental animals Thirty healthy adult Egyptian buffalo-cows aged from three to ten years were available at the Animal Production Research Farm, Faculty of Agriculture, Uni- versity of Cairo, Giza. Blood samples were taken for the cytological, physiological and chemical studies during the period from January to April, 1953. Technique 1. Cytological studies. Four smears were prepared from each blood sample. They were stained with Delafield Hematoxylin and Eosin, Giemsa stain, Wright's stain and Leishman's stain. The corpuscle diameters were measured using the stage micrometer and the micrometric eye-piece. A Thoma-Zeis hemocytometer was used for the erythrocyte and leucocyte counts. 2. Physiological studies. The specific gravity of the whole blood was measured using the copper sulphate method of Weises [1950], the pH number using " Beckman " pH meter, the sedimentation rate after one hour in " Westergeren " pipettes and the clotting time using " Sabrazs " capillary tubes. Hemoglobin content was determined colorimetrically using a " Halden " hemoglobinometer and the hematocrit using " Wintrobe " tubes in a centrifuge of 3000 rotations per minute for 30 minutes. (1) Faculty of Agriculture, University of Cairo, Egypt. Present address : The Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury, Mass., U.S.A. (2) Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo, Egypt. 125 12 AR/56 8
126 STUDIES OF BUFFALO BLOOD [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, 3. Chemical studies. Whole blood sugar was determined using the method of Folin and Wu, [1920], the plasma proteins and the non-protein-nitrogen fractions using the technique of Van Slyke and Cullen [1914], plasma sodium using the uranyl- zinc-acetate method of Weinbach [1935], potassium using the technique of Looney and Dyer [1942], calcium using that of Roe and Kahn [1929] and phosphorus using the technique of Fiske and Subbaraw [1925]. RESULTS The average diameter and the differential count of the blood cells from normal healthy animals are shown in Table I (see also Fig. I). TABLE I Cytological constants of the blood Blood cell Average diameter (microns) Count/mm. cu. Range Average ±S.D. Erythrocytes 5.5 5.75 × 106 September, 1956 ] E. S. E. HAFEZ AND A. ANWAR 127 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG, 1 Frequency distribution of blood counts in 30 healthy buffalo cows. Black columns indicate erythrocytes ×10128 STUDIES OF BUFFALO BLOOD [Vol. XXVI, Part III, Blood sugar per 100 ml. ranged from 72 to 90 mg. with an average of 81.4 mg., while plasma proteins ranged from 6.82 to 7.68 with an average of 7.43 gm./100 ml. plasma. The total non-protein nitrogen per 100 ml. blood ranged from 25 to 42 mg. The average amounts of sodium, potassium, calcium and phosphorus per 100 ml. plasma were 415, 26, 10 and 28 mg. respectively (Table III). TABLE III Chemical constants of the blood Items Unit Range Mean±S.D. C.V. per cent Sugar mgm./100 ml. 72-90 81.4±3.411 4 Plasma proteins gm./100 ml. 6.82-7.62 7.43±0.266 4 Plasma non-protein nitrogen. mgm./100 ml. 25-42 36±3.142 8 Plasma sodium mgm./100 ml. 400-430 415±6.53 2 Plasma Potassium mgm./100 ml. 23-29 26±1.00 3 Plasma calcium mgm./100 ml. 9-11 10±0.156 2 Plasma phosphorus mgm./100 ml. 26-31 28±1.032 3 DISCUSSION The blood picture of the animal is a result of an interaction between environ- mental and hereditary and nutritional factors. The blood corpuscles of the buffalo possess the same staining affinity as that of other mammals. The neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils are similar to those of cattle in shape and granulation. Neutrophillic granules are spherules, different from those of chicken where they are large and elongated and from those of guinea pig and rabbit where they are rod- shaped. Eosinophillic granules are round-shaped and larger than those of neutro- phils but still smaller than the specific eosinophillic granules of the horse. The basophillic granules are as large as the granules of eosinophils and evenly distributed in the cytoplasm. In certain species (e.g. the dog) they are assembled in a small compact group. The erythrocyte diameter is almost the same as that of the horse,
September, 1956 ] E. S. E. HAFEZ AND A. ANWAR 129 ox, and larger than that of sheep. Hematological values of domestic animals have been reviewed by Dukes [1952], Maximow and Bloom [1952] and Trautmann and Fiebiger [1947]. In the buffalo, the erythrocyte count is higher than in cattle and lower than in sheep and horse, while the leucocyte count is less than in cattle, horse and sheep. The study of the differential count shows that the percentage of lymphocytes, monocytes and eosinophils are higher in the buffalo than in sheep and horse and lower than in cattle. The neutrophils are lower than in sheep and horse but higher than in cattle. The basophils are almost of the same frequency (1 per cent) in all farm animals. The specific gravity of the buffalo blood is slightly lower than that of the horse and higher than that of cattle and sheep. The pH number varies within narrow limits, it is within the normal range of pH of mammalian blood. The sedimentation rate in the buffalo is much higher than in cattle and lower than in horse, while the clotting time of buffalo blood is longer than in sheep, shorter than in horse and similar to that of cattle. A comparison between the hematological values of the Egyptian and Indian buffalo is shown in Table IV. TABLE IV Hematological values of Egyptian buffalo as compared with that of the Indian buffalo Item Unit Egyptian buffalo Indian buffalo Red count million/mmc. 6.8 6.1 Hemoglobin gm./100 ml. 12.96 7.7 Hematocrit Percentage 44.3 35.5 Plasma proteins gm./100ml. plasma 7.43 7.46 Sugars mg./100 ml. 81.4 79.4 Author Present experiment Kehar and Murty [1951] The hemoglobin content as well as the sugar level is higher in the buffalo than in all other farm animals. The plasma proteins and the non-protein-nitrogen are similar to that of cattle and higher than that of other farm animals. As far as the minerals are concerned, the buffalo blood is characterized by a relatively high con- tent of phosphorus and a low content of calcium and sodium. Potassium is almost the same in all farm animals. 12 AR/56 9
130 STUDIES OF BUFFALO BLOOD [ Vol. XXVI, Part III SUMMARY Thirty healthy adult Egyptian buffalo-cows aged from three to ten years were available at the Animal Production Research Farm, Faculty of Agriculture, Uni- versity of Cairo, Giza, Egypt. Cytological, physiological and chemical constants of their blood were studied. 1. In the buffalo, the blood corpuscles possessed the same staining affinity as in other mammals. The erythrocyte count was 6.8 × 106/mm.c. while the leucocyte count was 6.7 × 10/mm.c. In the leucocytic differential count the percentage of lymphocytes, neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils and basophils were 51, 36, 8, 5 and&lt;1 respectively. 2. The specific gravity of the buffalo blood was 1.058 gm./ml. The pH number was 7.45 the sedimentation rate after one hour was 6 mm. and the clotting time was 6.75 minutes. The hemoglobin content was 12.96 gm./100 ml. blood and the hematocrit was 44.3 per cent. 3. In buffalo the blood sugar was 81.4 mg./100 ml. while the non-protein- nitrogen ranged from 25ISOLATION OF SALMONELLA-LITCHFIELD FROM AN OUT- BREAK IN CHICKS IN THE INDIAN UNION By S. B. V. RAO, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on January 3, 1956) "IN spite of the frequency of paratyphoid fevers in man and the general importance of the Salmonella problem in public health, including meat and milk inspection, the animal Salmonella problem has been scarcely touched, the chief reason being the dearth of trained workers and the mass of general diseases that confronts the animal pathologist." The authors of this statement, Shirlaw et al., [1945] listed a few Salmonellae isolated in animals in India by previous workers, viz. Sal. abortus equi in horses, Sal. gallinarum in chickens, Sal. enteritidis in pigeons, Sal. dublin in calves and Sal. typhi-murium in hounds. Since the publication of this report, little has been added to our knowledge of the incidence of salmonella infections in animals in India probably due to the same reasons. Of late, due to the establishment of large government poultry farms as a means for increasing food production, the attention of animal pathologists has been drawn to this problem, mainly to prevent poultry mortality ; their efforts, however, have been confined to organized farms. No attempts are made, however, to determine the incidence of salmonellae in the rural poultry population which is the main source of supply to the markets. The adult chickens in the villages are most likely to be carriers and reservoirs of these organisms, particularly due to their feeding habits which are essentially scavenging in manure dumps, cesspools, and waste lands around hutments. The single factor which keeps down the spread of these pathogens to man is the cooking of poultry- meat and eggs before consumption. The handling of these products, the use parti- cularly by invalids, of eggs in the raw state and in bakery products, and the frequent presence of chickens within the homes of the villagers, are the public health risks which cannot be over-emphasized. Salmonella typhi-murium was first isolated from a mouse epizootic in 1890 by Loeffler. It has since been reported in many animals and man. Kauffmann [1941] states that from surveys carried out in England, Germany and Denmark, Sal. typhi- murium was responsible for an average of 65 per cent of the cases of salmonellosis in man. Iyer and Rao [1950] reported an outbreak of the disease in India, in a chicken farm due to this organism. Sal. anatum in ducks was recorded by Rettger and Scoville [1920], and since then it is known to have caused the disease in poultry and man in many parts of the world. It was often the cause of serious mortality among ducks in the Army Development Farms in India in world war II [Rao, *Resident Fellow Colombo-plan Training National Salmonella and Shigella Typing and Reference Centre, Laboratory of Hygiene, Ottawa132 ISOLATION OF SALMONELLA-LITCHFIELD [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, 1946]. Dixit [1951-1952] isolated Sal. anatum in baby chicks in Bombay Province. Pande et al., [1933] isolated a motile strain of Salmonella from baby chicks, which was subsequently typed as Salmonella bovis morbificans in England. The author isolated three strains of Salmonella (other than S. pullorum) in 1952-53 from serious outbreaks, two in chickens and one in a rabbitry. All three were identified by preliminary biochemical and serological tests as Sal. typhi-murium, and were confirmed by Dr J. D. Blacksland of the Weybridge Laboratory (Annual Reports I.V.R.I. 52-53). A fourth one was subsequently isolated from baby chicks, and was taken to Canada for identification and forms the subject of this report. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE The organism was isolated from a large military poultry farm where it accounted for 50 per cent mortality in a lot of 3,000 hatchery chicks, ages ranging from 7 days to 4 weeks. The general symptoms observed were crowding of the chicks together under the hover, droopiness and diarrhoea. Over 100 autopsies conducted revealed no definite symptoms, except pallor of the internal organs and the skeletal muscles. Rapid whole-blood agglutination test of the laying flock with an "O" antigen, pre- pared from the specific organism isolated, failed to detect any carriers. The disease was, however, brought under control by dosing with sulphamezathine (a 16 per cent solution of the sodium salt) in drinking water, at a level 0.2 per cent sulphamezathine, for 6 days. Cultures were regularly obtained from heart-blood and liver on agar slants, while the organism was isolated from the intestinal contents after enrichment in brilliant green and tetrathionate broth and subsequent sowing on MacConkey plates. The strain was maintained for a year on plain agar before final identification was carried out. The organism was a Gram-negative, motile rod which possessed the morphological and cultural characters of the Enterobacteriaceae. Arabinose, dextrose, dulcitol, galactose, levulose, maltose, mannitol, mannose, rhamnose, soribitol, lactose and zylose were fermented promptly with the production of acid and gas. Acid and gas were produced in cellobiose after 7 days, and acid only was found in dextrin and glycerol in 7 and 14 days, respectively. Adonitol, inositol, inulin, lactose, raffinose, salicin and sucrose were not fermented. Indole was not formed and the cultures failed to utilize citrate, liquefy gelatin or decompose urea. The organism fermented d-tartrate, was Methyl Red positive and Voges-Proskauer negative. Slide agglutination tests with Salmonella O sera showed the following results: Agglutination Pool 1 (O factors 1,2,3,4,5,9,10,12,15,19,21,26,27) Delete 'Lactose' on page 132, para. 5, line 3.
September, 1956 ] S. B. V. RAO 133 The culture appeared to be predominantly in the second phase, reacting strong ly in "1,2" and single factor "2" H antisera. Phase suppression was carried out with "1,2" absorbed H sera on swarm agar plates. Three transfers on suppression plates were necessary before the "1,2" phase could be suppressed and the phase 1 antigenic structure demonstrated. When tested with phase 1 antisera, strong agglutination was obtained only in "l,v", "l,w" and "v" antisera ; no agglutination was observed with absorbed "w" antiserum. In tube tests, the organism agglutina- ted to titre in "l,v" and "v" sera, thus confirming the results of the slide tests. 'Therefore, its antigenic structure is 6,8; l, v-1,2, identified as Sal. litchfield. DISCUSSION Sal. litchfield was first isolated by Pomeroy from a turkey poult in 1940 [Edwards and Bruner 1940] and later from human sources, but has not been previously reported in chickens. The occurrence of this pathogen in chickens further confirms the present- ly accepted view of several workers, including that of Seligmann et. al., [1943], that Salmonellae are not host-specific and that every one of the three hundred odd ones is potentially capable of producing groups of clinical processes, like gastro- enteritis, enteric fever, meningitis, etc., and that animals and birds may act as reser- voirs. It is generally conceded today that animals, particularly poultry, are the principal reservoirs of most of the Salmonellae, thus emphasizing the great need for controlling the disease in animals, as a most important public health measure. SUMMARY A Salmonella organism isolated from baby chicks, which caused a mortality of 50 per cent in a large military poultry farm in India, has been identified as Sal. litchfield (6,8 ; l, v-1, 2). Experimentally, the organism was found to be pathogenic for young chicks, while the adults became carriers. Sulphamezathine in drinking water controlled the disease effectively. The need for organized efforts to control animal reservoirs of Salmonella as a public health measure is stressed. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author expresses his indebtedness to the Government of Canada for sponsoring his training under the Colombo Plan. He acknowledges with thanks the advice and expert guidance he received in the technique of the preparation of the various sera required in general for typing of Salmonella from Dr E. T. Bynoe, Chief, Bacteriological Laboratory Services, and Dr W. R. Bailey, Bacteriologist- in-Charge of the National Salmonella and Shigella Typing and Reference Centre, Laboratory of Hygiene, Department of National Health and Welfare, Canada. Thanks are also due to Miss R. Laidley for her help.
134 ISOLATION OF SALMONELLA-LITCHFIELD [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, REFERENCES Dixit, S. D. (1951). Indian vet. J., 22, 281-283, THE EFFECT OF AUREOMYCIN AND VITAMIN B12 ON THE GROWTH RATE OF CHICKS ALEX REED1, and JOHN VELU2, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U. P. (Received for publication on February 17, 1956) MANY investigators have reported increased growth rate and feed efficiency when chicks are fed rations fortified with aureomycin and vitamin B12 [Biely et al., 1952, Machlin et. al., 1952 and Sizemore et. al., 1953]. Groschke and Evans [1950] reported that aureomycin exerted a definite stimulating effect upon growth when fed to chicks. Heuser and Norris [1952] compared a number of antibiotics when fed to chicks and reported variability in response to the same antibiotics in different experi- ments. They obtained the greatest response with chicks of four weeks of age. This is in agreement with Scott and Glista. [1950] but at variance with Berg et. al., [1950]. Davis and Briggs [1951] in studying the effects of aureomycin, penicillin, bacitracin and terramycin report that growth stimulation resulted in most cases and that antibiotics improved feed efficiency. Saxena et. al., [1952] fed penicillin at three levels of protein, 21, 18, 15 per cent respectively. They reported significant and consistent response in growth to penicillin at all levels of protein tested. Biely and March [1951] report no response to antibiotics in rations containing above normal amounts of vitamins but in rations low in riboflavin, folic acid and or nicotinic acid, antibiotics gave significant growth increases. Scott et. al., [1952] in studying the influence of aureomycin on the protein requirements of chicks found the improvement in protein efficiency no greater than the improvement in feed efficiency, so there was no protein sparing action from the antibiotic. They also reported that chicks on a 20 per cent protein ration gave no response to aureomycin. Bose et. al., [1955] fed Fortracin-6 (bacitracin and vitamin B12) to chicks of eight weeks of age and obtained increased growth from the antibiotic. Since most of the work reported on the use of antibiotics for chicks has been done outside India and with more complete diets than are generally available here, it was considered desirable to investigate the effects of aureomycin and vitamin B12 when fed to chicks on a common ration. EXPERIMENTAL White Leghorn chicks obtained from Government Farm, Mathura were used in this study. Three-day-old chicks were randomly distributed into eight groups of eleven chicks each and randomly assigned to pens in wire cages. The groups were 1 University of Illinois, College of Agriculture, doing teaching and research in Animal Nutrition at Agricultural Institute. 2 Member staff, Animal Husbandry Department, Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U.P. 135 12AR/56 11
136 GROWTH RATE OF CHICKS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, rotated each week to eliminate possible effect of position. Feed and water were supplied ad libitum. The feed remaining each day was weighed back and not offered again. Records of weekly weights, mortality and feed consumption were kept. TABLE I Composition of basal diet Basal diet parts Ground yellow maize 50 Wheat bran 10 Groundnut cake 30 Fishmeal 5 Steamed bonemeal 2 Limestone 1 Lucerne leaves 1 Salt ½ Sharkliver oil ½ The basal diet shown in Table I contained approximately 21 per cent protein (6,25 × Nitrogen). The basal diet was fed to four groups of 11 chicks each. The other four groups of 11 chicks each received the basal diet plus 9 grams aureomycin and 9 milligrams vitamin B12 per ton of feed (Aurofac at rate of 5 lb. per ton). The experiment was originally planned to continue for an eight-week period but due to a serious outbreak of fowl pox during the early part of the seventh week, resulting in a number of deaths in birds, it became necessary to summarize the results at the end of six weeks. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A summary of the data obtained on growth and gain per lb. of feed fed, is shown in Table II. TABLE II Effect of aureomycin and vitamin B12 on the growth rate and feed consumed by White Leghorn chicks up to six weeks of age Diets No. of Chicks Average weight per chick (grams) Gain per l b. feed consumed (gm.) Start 2 weeks 3 weeks 4 weeks 5 weeks 6 weeks Basic only 44 47.6 74.5 94.0 125.3 164.3 211.1 67.2 Basic aureomycin and B12. 44 47.2 81.5 108.4 147.8 188.4 242.1 71.4 Least significant mean difference September, 1956] ALEX REED AND JOHN VELU 137 The addition of aureomycin and vitamin B12 gave a significant increase in growth of chicks from three to six weeks of age. The response from three days to two weeks of age was evident but not quite significant statistically at the 5 per cent level of probability. Growth rates were markedly lower than those reported by many other workers. Bose et. al., [1955] report an average weight of 243 gm. for the control and 290 gm. for the treated chicks at six weeks of age. Saxena et. al., [1953] report 340 gm. for untreated chicks and 372 gm. for treated chicks at four weeks of age. This may be due in part to extremely unfavourable temperature during the experiment as it was conducted during April and May. The official maximum temperature at Allahabad was as much as 114°F. during the experimental period. Results also indicate that there is wide variation in growth rate between individual chicks with a range from 89.2 gm. for the smallest to 521.3 gm. for the largest chick. This suggests need for more rigid selection for rate of growth and uniformity in breeding stock. SUMMARY 1. Aureomycin and vitamin B12 gave a significant and consistent growth res- ponse when fed to chicks from two to six weeks of age. Response to two weeks was indicated but the difference was not great enough to be significant at the 5 per cent level of probability. 2. Aureomycin and vitamin B12 reduced the amount of feed per unit gain, however, the difference was not significant. 3. The wide variation in growth rate between chicks indicates a lack of uni- formity in the inherited growth rate stimulus in these chicks. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors gratefully acknowledge the kindness of Lederle Laboratories (India) Ltd., Bombay, in furnishing the Aurofac (aureomycin and Vitamin B12) used in this experiment. REFERENCES Berg, L. R., Gordon, E. Bearse, James McGinnis and Miller, V. L. (1950). "The Effect of Removing Supplemental Aureomycin from the Ration on the Subsequent Growth of Chicks." Archives of Biochem V. 29 No. 2 (reprint) Biely, J., March, B.E. and Smith, D. F. (1942). "The Effect of Feeding Antibiotics on the Carbohydrate and Protein Requirements of the Chick". Poult. Sci. 31: 863-780 138 GROWTH RATE OF CHICKS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, Heywang, Burt, W. (1952). "The effect of Antibiotics on the Growth of White Leghorn Pullets". Poult. Sci. 31: 857-862 Kratzer, F.H. (1952). "The Effect of Liver Concentrate and Aureomycin Upon the Growth of Chicks." Poult Sci. 31: 899-901 Machlin, L.J., Dentont, C.A. Kellog, W.L. and Bird, H.R. (1952). "Effect of Dietary Antibiotic upon food Efficiency and Protein Requirement of Growing Chicks." Poult. Sci. 31:106-109. (abstract) Matterson, L.D. and Singsen, E.P. (1951). "A Comparison of Several Antibiotics as Growth Stimulants in Practical Chick-Starting Rations." Storrs Agricultural Exp. Station, Storrs Connecticut Pepper, W.F., Slinger, S.J. and Motzok, I. (1953)ABSTRACTS The control and treatment of certain forms of mastitis. EDWARDS, S. J. (1954), Vet. Rec., 66. 37-40 WHILE reviewing the incidence of mastitis in various herds in different parts of England the author attributes the reduction in general incidence of infection to better conditions of dairy hygiene and the use of therapeutics. The success achieved in the control of infection was found to be intimately connected with the milking technique employed in a herd, the less the manipulation of teats during milking the better the success in the control. According to Edwards about 90 per cent of cows infected with Str. agalactiae respond well to the treatment of two doses of 100,000 units of penicillin injected at an interval of 48 to 96 hours. The cows which retain infection even after this treatment may be living under defective hygienic conditions and usually have teat sores. He suggests the following measures for controlling Strept. agalactiae infection : 1. Conduct the bacteriological examination of composite milk samples of each cow. 2. Treat the infected cows and dry cows with two injections of 100,000 units penicillin in each quarter at three-day interval. Milkers should apply some anti- septic cream on their hands before milking, for a week. 3. Stop hand stripping and use separate sterile cloth for washing the udder of each cow with a suitable disinfectant before milking. 4. Retest the herd and retreat all infected cows. 5. A further test after three months should be done and if infection disappears, washing with disinfectants should be discontinued. 6. Thereafter, repeat the test at six months interval. Obstinate cases showing sore teats should be dressed and re-treated. Those found infected still, should be separated. Edwards recommends the use of 100,000 units of penicillin injected four times at 48 hours intervals, for the treatment of staphylococcal infection and feels that maintaining cows free from infection was a difficult proposition and could be achieved by adopting a policy of elimination on the lines practised for Str. agalac tiae. [M.S.S.] 139 12AR/56 2
140 ABSTRACTS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, A pathogenic pleuropneumonia-like organism from goats. D. R. CORDY, H. E. ADLER AND R. YAMAMOTO (1955). Corn. Vet. XLV. 50-68 AN outbreak in a herd of French Alpine goats caused by a pleuropneumonia- like organism (PPLO) and characterised mainly by fever (103°-106°F) and arthritis is described. Course of the disease varied from 24 hours to 5 weeks, acute type being met with mostly in kids. While experimental transmission of infection to healthy kids, sheep, lambs and pigs was possible, the disease could not be produced in guinea-pigs, mice and calves. In experimental cases the period of inoculation varied from within 24 hours by I/V and I/P routes of infection to 108 hours by conjuctival instillation ; and the course lasted for 2 to 11.5 days. Apart from the most characteristic fibrinopurulent arthritis with variably enlarged articulations (mainly affecting the carpal joints), hyperaemia and degen- erative changes, leading to necrotic foci in protected cases, in lymph glands, liver, spleen and kidneys, accompanied by neutrophilic infiltration in these situations and enlargement in the case of lymph glands and spleen, were conspicuous pathological features. None of the affected animals, except for two experimental lambs, showed pneumonia ; the histopathological evidence of hyperaemia and alveolar oedema found in the lungs of some cases could probably be ascribed to a failing heart. Udders of the three lactating females, although reddened, did not present any clini- cal manifestations of mastitis or alteration in the appearance of their secretion; microscopic change, however, consisted of hyperaemia and some oedema accom- panied, in two cases, by neutrophilic invasion. PPLO could be recovered in cultures on serum agar from affected joints and spleen. Culturally, the organism almost resembled the contagious caprine pleuro- pneumonia organism. Antigen prepared from the PPLO isolated was aggulu- tinated by homologous serum (1 : 640) and by goat pleuropneumonia serum (1 :10) but not by agalactia serum. Coliform contiaminants were encountered in the lungs and livers of long standing cases of the disease. Inoculation of 0.2 ml. of a 5th culture passage of this PPLO in six day old embryonating eggs via the chorio-allantoic or yolk sac killed the embryos in three days. None of the antibiotics tried (penicillin, streptomycin, terramycin and aureo- mycin) gave promise of being a useful remedy. The authors consider this outbreak to be different from pleuropneumonia or agalactia on grounds of clinical and serological observations as also due to lack of host specificity. [G. S.]
September, 1956 ] ABSTRACTS 141 The effects of age upon calcium utilisation and maintenance requirements in the bovine. HANSARD, S. L., COMAR, C. L. and PLUMLEE, M.P. (1954). J. Anim Sci. 13, 25-36 IN the present study, the authors have made use of concepts and experimental methods developed by them recently through the application of the radioac- tive tracer technique. These methods enable separate computation of the different components that constitute faecal calcium output, viz. unabsorbed portion from the feed, the fraction which has been absorbed but re-excreted, and the quantity lost from the body stores. The conventional balance experiments are utterly inade- quate in this respect. The investigation involved concurrent chemical and radioisotope balance experiments conducted on 34 cattle belonging to seven different age groups (10 days to 190 months), after the administration of a single dose of radiocalcium. In these experiments, positive calcium balance was maintained in the young animals, but the mature (36-73 months) animals were in slightly negative balance. It was significant that in the case of old cattle (144-190 months) the calcium excretion greatly exceeded the intake, even when the feed was fortified with calcium phosphate. The computed values for endogenous calcium excretion per kg. body weight remained practically constant from one month of age to maturity (1.44-18.0 mg.). However, the level was lower in 10 days old animals and higher in aged cattle. The true digestibility figures were: 98 per cent at 10 and 30 days, 34 per cent in adults and 22 per cent in aged cows. The maintenance requirements per 100 lb. body weight were estimated at 0.55 gm. at 10 days about 2.0 gm. from 6 months to maturity and 4.5 gm. for aged cattle. The paper includes a valuable discussion on faecal calcium partition and its significance. [R.M.] The effect of environmental temperature and humidity on the respiration rate and the frequency of the heart beat of Ayrshire calves: W. R. BEAKLEY and J. D. FINDLAY (1955). J. Agric. Sci. 45, 452-468 THE authors recorded the respiratory and heart rates of three four-month-old Ayrshire bull calves in individual six-hour daily exposures to 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 and 40°C. dry bulb temperatures at 17 mg./1 absolute humidity and at 7 mg./1 saturation deficit at temperature 30, 35 and 40°C. The schedule of experiments on each animal lasted 45 days consisting of five replications of these 9 environmental conditions. The experiment was conducted in a temperature controlled labora- tory, the respiration rates and heart rates of three experimental and three control animals were measured in a holding room before the experimental animals of each pair were transferred to the hot room.
142 ABSTRACTS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, The results showed that the frequency of respiration and heart rate of all experimental animals increased with increasing environmental temperature above 20°C and with increasing humidity above 30°C. Respiration rate rose to a maximum value which occurred in the second and third hour of exposure. The magnitude of this maximum value varied linearly with environmental temperature by 4.9 respiration/min/°C. The variations of the respiration rate at the last hour of exposure with environmental temperature was non-linear whereas after the second hour of exposure to environmental temperature above 25°C, the heart rates of the experimental animals declined with the increasing- time of exposure to a given environmental temperature. The general behaviour of respiration rate at high humidity at 30 and 35°C was similar to that at low humidity. The effect of change in humidity at 30°C on the heart rate was not significant but at 35°C and high humidity, the heart rates of all animals increased with increas- ing time of exposure. High humidity at 40°C increased panting considerably and caused profuse salivation, the heart rate also increased rapidly to a very high level. The authors concluded that though various workers have attempted to fit empirical equations to describe the effect of environmental temperature on respira- tion rate but this relation might be unreliable and of little value if it was used as an index to measure the animal's aptitude to withstand the thermal stress. The vari- able nature of heart rate with change of temperature and humidity and with other factors, namely feeds and presence of observer make it unreliable index of heart tolerance in young bovine. [ D. N. M. ] The incidence and pathological significance of nematodes in the central nervous system ; J.F.A. SPRENT (1955). Parasitology, 45. No. 1&2. pp. 21-40 THE paper reviews the available literature on the incidence and pathological significance of nematodes in the central nervous system. It has been observed that a large number of nematodes invade the central nervous system and cause a variety of nervous symptoms. Living specimens of different nematodes have been recovered from the meningeal spaces and tissues of the brain and spinal cord by various workers. These nematodes belong to the orders of: Ascaridoidea, Filariodea, Trichuroidea, Strongyloidea, Metastrongyloidea, Rhabditoides, and Dioctophymatidae. The pathological effect caused by these nematodes vary to a great extent depen- ding upon the size, mobility and the activity of the parasite. The pathological changes observed are haemorrhagic, degenerative or preliferative. These are all the direct effects of nematodes on the central nervous system and are mainly due to the traumatic effect of the parasite on the central nervous system depending upon its size.
September, 1956 ] ABSTRACTS 143 Several parasites and their involvement in causing the pathological changes have been mentioned. It has been stated that Setaria spp. (Filariodea), in cattle and horses, cause the disease known as "Kumree" wherein the parasites cause softening and congestion of the spinal cord. Similarly lumbar paralysis, in goats, has been attributed to the invasion of central nervous system by the larvae of Setaria digitata. The symptoms vary according to the degree of invasion of the parasite on the central nervous system. Nervous symptoms have also been described in somatic nematode infections. But no explanation as to the occurrence of these symptoms can be given; one school of thought, however, considers that these symptoms are probably, of allergic origin. This argument is based on the evidence that certain toxins are elaborated by some parasites such as Trichinella. It has also been experimentally proved that infection of the larvae of Ascaris suum induces a state of hypersensitivity, with allergic symptoms. The injection of ascaris extracts in animals already sensitised, caused certain changes in the central nervous system. So, in all probability, these changes in the nervous system may be due to the allergic reactions brought about by ascaris antigen. It has been proved that these nematodes also transport viruses to the different parts of the central nervous system and thus act as carriers of virus. It has been observed that Ascaris suum transmits a virus which causes infectious paralysis in pigs. However, there is no possibility of poliomylitis being transmitted by these nematodes, as observed by many workers. It is also doubtful whether there is any possibility of Setaria digitata transmitting the virus of Japanese B. ence- phalitis. [V.V.S.] The effect of sodium sulphaquinoxaline and sodium sulphamezathine in interrup- ted schedules of treatment on the development of Eimeria tenella : DAVIES, S. F. M. and KENDALL, S. B. (1954). J. Comp. Path. Vol. 64, No. 2., 87-93 DAVIES AND KENDALL review literature accounting for irregularities in results obtained in the treatment of caecal coccidiosis with known fully-effective sulpha drugs. Briefly, it is ascribed partly to varying susceptibility of various developmental stages of the organism and partly to the irregular rate of develop- ment of individual parasites. In this paper they record results of their experiments on the treatment of caecal coccidiosis in experimentally heavily infected chicks with sodium salts of sulpha- quinoxaline (SQX) in 0.043 per cent and 0.0645 per cent concentrations, and sulpha- mezathine (SMT) in 0.2 per cent cencentration in drinking water. Two different schedules of treatment were adopted, namely 2-3-2-3-2 schedule, i.e., three two-day periods of treatment with intervals of three days without treatment ; 3-2-3 schedule, i.e., two three-day periods of treatment with a two-day interval without treatment All groups of chicks received infection on the same day while treatment was given to successive groups on successive days, starting treatment two days before the infection for the first group under each section, second group receiving treatment one day before the infection and so on. Mortality rate was the criterion kept for evaluating results.
144 ABSTRACTS [ Vol. XXVI, Part III, Under both schedules of treatment 0.0645 per cent concentration of SQX was more effective than 0.043 per cent. 2-3-2-3-2 schedule could not completely control infection, the lowest mortality rate being 70 and 45 per cent with SQX (0.043 per cent and 0.0645 per cent concentrations respectively) and 20 per cent with SMT treatment when medication was started 48 hours after infection. On the other hand, 3-2-3 schedule completely controlled infection with both the drugs when medication was started 48 and 24 hours after infection with SMT and SQX (0.0645 per cent) respectively. 0.043 per cent concentration of SQX was less efficacious as at best it could reduce mortality to 40 per cent with a treatment started 48 hours after the infection. The authors conclude that any form of interrupted therapy, including with- drawal of drug for a period exceeding two days, is likely to be less successful, and 3-2-3 schedule of interrupted therapy assures better control of the disease than the 2-3-2-3-2 schedule. [B. S. G.] Antibiotics and surface active agents in chick nutrition : B. E. MARCH, M. BURDELL and JACOB BIELY (1954). Poult. Sci. 33, 300 THE experiments conducted by the authors to investigate the effect of two surface active agents Tween-80 (Polyoxyethlene) sorbitan monooleate and Santo- merse-80 (an alkylarly sulfonate) on the growth of chicks, indicated considerable differences in the growth stimulating properties of these agents. The surface active agents and/or antibiotics were incorporated in diets of different composition to examine the response of chicks to these substances. The inclusion of Tween-80 to a chick starting ration improved the growth response and feed efficiency. In a second experiment, the addition of antibiotics as well as Santomerse-80 increased the growth rate of chicks fed folic acid deficient diet, but the addition of Tween-80 did not. The combination of Santomerse-80 and penicillin produced a slightly faster rate of growth than that of penicillin alone, whereas no additional response was recorded beyond that observed with antibiotics, when Tween-80 was fed in conjunction with the antibiotics. The addition of herring oil to a chick starting ration supplemented with Santo- merse-80, alone or in combination with penicillin, depressed the growth stimulating effect of the surface active agent, that was observed when it was supplemented to the above ration with no added oil, whereas penicillin alone increased the growth of chicks irrespective of the oil content of the ration fed. The inclusion of Santomerse-80 and/or aureomycin to three different diets, had an insignificant effect on growth rate and feed utilization in either the basal rations or the rations supplemented with oil. The differences in the growth stimulating properties of these surface active agents are difficult to explain. However, it is evident that the differences in the composition of the ration may to some extent account for the variations in the
September, 1956 ] ABSTRACTS 145 response of these surface active agents, which was apparent only when the chicks were four weeks old. The response to a surface active agent was in no instance better than the one obtained by supplementing an antibiotics to a similar diet. [V. N. M.] Uber den oestrogengehalt verschiedener Futter gräser (Oestrogen content of different fodder grasses) : G. SCHOOP, H. KLETTE and G. RENNER (1955). Dtsch. tierärztl. Wschr. Beilage : Fortpflanzung, Zuchthygiene und Haustierbesamung 5 (9), 103-107 FOURTEEN kinds of meadow grasses were examined for oestrogen content. They were, (i) Festuca pratensis, (2) Poa pratensis, (3) Avena flavenscens, (4) Alope- curus pratensis, (5) Poa fertiles (Serotina), (6) Agrostis alba, (7) Avena elatior, (8) Phleum pratense, (9) Dactylis glomerata, (10) Lolium perenne, (11) a German pasture grass (variety : odenwälder), (12) a German pasture grass (variety : N. F. G.), (13) Festuca rubra, (14) Lolium italicum (multiforum). The respective amounts of oestrogenic substances in terms of mouse units per kilogram found in these 14 grasses were approximately, 1200, 500, 3400, 50, 800, 1250, 6000, 700, 1000, 700, 7000, 5600, 13000 and 12300. With the exception of two grasses, all were cut 1-3 weeks before flowering. Plant oestrogens were found to be more efficacious when administered orally than when injected, showing that probably they were different from oestrogens of mammalian origin. The authors suggest that plant oestrogens play an important part in the metabolism of animals. If for example, a maximum limit of oestrogens in food is passed, sexual troubles may follow. Similar disturbance in sexual cycle may attend the presence of too small quantities of these in food. [S. S. P.]
REVIEW Züchtung, Ernährung und Haltung der landwirschaftlichen Haustiere Allgemeiner Teil. By SCHMIDT, J., PATOW, C. V. AND KLIESCH, J. (1956E) (Breeding, feeding and keeping of farm animals148 REVIEW [ Vol. XXVI, Part III In the chapters on keeping livestock, after discussing the basic principles, specific suggestions, illustrated by neat diagrams and photographs of buildings and sheds to house the different kinds of livestock are presented. The book has excellent getup. Though the practical suggestions are based chiefly on conditions met with in Germany, the book as a whole should prove useful to Indian students also. It is a pity that a book of this type that gives at one place all relevant information on theoretical and practical aspects of animal husbandry and breeding is yet to be written in India, for use of Indian students of the subject. (S. S. P) MG1PC-MERRATA Read page numbers in the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry of March 1956 as commencing from 52.
HERBAGE ABSTRACTS AND FIELD CROP ABSTRACTS These two quarterly journals, prepared by the Commonwealth Bureau of Pastured and Field Crops, Hurley, England, are composed of abstracts from the world's current scientific literature. Herbage Abstracts deals with grass- lands, fodder crops and their management and Field Crop Abstracts with annual field crops, including rice. Both Journals include a review article with each number as well as abstracts dealing with crop husbandry, varieties, crop botany, control of diseases, pests and weeds, and a section devoted to book reviews and notices. For those engaged in agricultural research or in the giving of agricultural advice or information, the reading of these two journals offers a ready means of keeping abreast of current developments without recourse to the labour of scrutinizing the mass of agricultural publications now appearing in many languages. The annual subject and author indexes, dating from 1930 and 1948, respectively, from a valuable source of reference to past work. The price of each Journal (with index) is 36/- per annum, post free, in the British Commonwealth and 45/- in other Countries. Orders should be sent to Commonwealth, Agricultural Bureaux, Central Sales Branch, Farnham Royal, Bucks, England.
A NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION BY K. S. KRISHNAN, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi (Received for publication on April 3, 1956) AN important aspect of the breeding programmes for dairy cattle is the evalua- tion of the breeding worth of the different bulls. Two methods are in common use for this purpose. One is the daughter average index which is the simple average of the milk yield of all daughters of a sire. The other is the commercial Mount Hope Index, also known as the Intermediate Index, obtained as: I=2D150 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, course of this work the above limitation of the two common-sire indices became increasingly clear and this led to the development of a new index which has been found to be superior to both. This new index is described in the present article and the method of calculating it is explained. The superiority of the new index over the other two is also illustrated by comparing the three indices in respect of 69 sires from six herds. The new index The proposed index is obtained from the formula: S=DDecember, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 151 equal to the heritability coefficient for the herd. One half of the additively genetic superiority or otherwise of each parent over the average of the whole lot can be expected on an average, to be transmitted to the offspring. Thus if a dam is selec- ted on the basis of its milk yield which is higher than the herd average by x lb. and is mated to a bull of average merit, the. resulting progeny, if daughter, may be ex- pected to yield h2/2 x lb. more milk than the herd average, where h2 is the heritability coefficient. This implies that, even under the assumption of equal contribution from both the parents, the appropriate correction to be applied for the daughters' average in order to eliminate the influence of differential production levels of the dams mated to different bulls is h2/2 times the average phynotypic superiority of the dams mated to the bull concerned, over the herd average. This quantity should be algebraically subtracted from the daughters' average, i.e. numerically subtrac- ted or added according as the average production of the dams mated to the bull concerned is higher or lower than the herd average. It has been shown by Lush [1945] and others that twice the intra-sire regression of daughter's yield on that of its dam usually provides the best estimate of the herita- bility coefficient for a herd. This has been seen to be the case in respect of the Indian herds so far studied. The intra sire regression accordingly provides the best esti- mate for the factor h2/2 in the correction term. Using this estimate the correction may be seen to be the one given in the formula for S given earlier. Computational procedure The computation of the new index from actual data will be illustrated with the help of the records pertaining to the Hariana herd maintained at the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar. The first lactation yields over 300 days or less, measured in units of 10 lb., are analysed. These yields in respect of each of the 10 sires tested are given in Table I. The quantities that are required to be calculated are (a) the herd average, (b) the intra-sire regression coefficient,(c) the corrected index and (d) the standard error of the index. The herd average required for the calculation of the corrected index is obtained as the average of the dam's yields without repeating the dams having more than one daughter. This average worked out to 130.8 units in the present case. The average for the herd will be taken as 1300 lb. in the nearest round figure. The steps in the calculation of intra-sire regression are shown in columns (3) to (13) in Table II. As an illustration, the procedure for obtaining these figures
152 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE I First lactation yields (in 10 lb. in 300 days or less) of the dams mated to different sires and their daughters (Hariana herd, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar) Sire I Sire II Sire III Sire IV Sire V Sire VI Sire VII Sire VIII Sire IX Sire X Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield Dam's yield Daugh- ter's yield 176 134 127 121 108 261 200 141 68 93 186 129 235 202 43 128 47 123 94 114 222 118 231 142 177 219 108 82 74 99 67 158 28 77 168 161 152 92 188 116 222 174 207 196 177 135 91 156 87 151 208 283 73 117 168 107 229 220 138 177 82 136 109 139 228 211 107 158 232 183 208 160 73 125 219 230 62 60 87 166 32 66 154 85 105 119 179 86 141 164 68 190 268 227 219 139 62 172 54 71 66 110 154 162 204 190 57 152 141 171 73 151 26 93 238 272 187 202 .. .. 66 131 154 84 204 199 56 176 123 121 25 131 .. .. 161 130 187 223 .. .. 201 194 142 74 204 120 164 184 50 168 .. .. .. .. .. .. 19 178 .. .. .. .. .. .. 203 176 78 79 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 209 94 .. .. .. .. .. .. 203 43 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 88 135 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 273 142 .. ..
December, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 153 TABLE II Calculation of corrected daughter average indices and their standard errrors (10 lb. unit) (Hariana herd, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar) Sire No. Daughter dam pairs Total for dams Total for daughters Sum of squares for dams Sum of squares for daughters Sum of products Crude C.T. Corrected Crude C.T. Corrected Crude C.T. Corrected (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) I 8 1067 1063 186405 142311 44094 151905 141246 10659 156572 141778 14794 II 8 1278 1003 215532 204160 11372 138543 125751 12792 165374 160229 5145 III 10 1813 1673 344597 328697 15900 315915 279893 36022 299742 303315 154 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IIDecember, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 155 for one bull, viz. Sire I, is explained, below : Total for dams mated, repeating each dam's record as many times as the number of daughters from the same sire =176+222+222+82+32+66+66+201 =1067................................................ (Col. 3) Total for daughters =134+118+174+136+66+110+131+194 =1063................................................ (Col. 4) Crude sum of squares for dams, repeating each dam's record =(176)2+(222)2+(222)2+(82)2+(32)2+(66)2+(66)2+(201)2 =186405.............................................. (Col. 5) Correction term for sum of squares for dams = (Total for dams)2 / Number of pairs = (1067)2 / 8 =142311............................................... (Col. 6) Corrected sum of squares for dams =Crude S.S.156 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, Correction term for the sum of products (Total for dams) (Total for daughters) Number of pairs = (1067) × (1063) / 8 =141778................................................(Col. 12) Corrected sum of products =156572December, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 157 Average for daughters =1063 / 8 =132.9 .............................................. (Col. 17) Corrected Index =Daughter av.158 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, is based. Experience in the analysis of breeding data at the Indian Council of Agricultural Research suggests that the bias involved in using the simplified method being of an order of less than one per cent is negligible, unless the data available for estimating the intra-sire regression is very scanty. The component of the sampling variance of the regression coefficient is Residual S.S. / n-1 × (Dams' averageDecember, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 159 TABLE III Comparison of different Sire Indices (Kangayam bulls, Livestock Research Station, Hosur) Bull No. Daughter- dam pairs Dams' Average Simple Daughter Average Intermediate Corrected Daughter Average* Rank according to Index S.E. Index S.E. Index S.E. (4) (6) (8) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 307 54 1673 1176 101 679 168 1098 90 16 15 16 306 45 1818 1245 94 672 170 1155 88 12 16 13 35 34 1442 1546 91 1650 207 1534 96 9 7 7 90 30 1661 1748 123 1835 217 1673 111 3 5 4 269 28 1645 1249 97 853 190 1179 91 11 12 12 231 26 1518 1182 77 846 164 1148 76 15 13 14 85 20 1292 1654 90 2016 212 1685 96 6 3 3 391 12 1408 1185 59 962 161 1183 66 14 10 11 104 11 2421 1706 180 991 571 1414 225 5 9 9 50 9 1673 1717 212 1761 362 1639 193 4 6 6 33 9 1203 1608 115 2013 174 1665 89 7 4 5 34 8 1806 1585 115 1364 347 1468 139 8 8 8 132 8 1729 1340 148 951 394 1246 166 10 11 10 554 7 1894 1073 170 252 391 931 172 17 17 17 39 7 2046 2360 482 2674 899 2174 466 1 1 1 47 7 1614 1186 115 758 320 1124 136 13 14 15 119 6 1873 2135 289 2397 547 1999 272 2 2 2 *Corresponding to the herd average of 1,400 lb.
160 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IV Comparison of different Sire Indices (Tharparkar bulls, Government Cattle Farm, Patna) Bull No. Daughter- dam airs Dams' Average Simple Daughter Average Intermediate Corrected Daughter Average* Rank according to Index S.E. Index S.E. Index S.E. (4) (6) (8) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 39 45 3340 2704 172 2068 416 2679 176 10 11 10 26 29 3297 3128 193 2959 423 3110 193 4 5 4 599 26 3441 3160 261 2879 542 3128 263 3 6 3 24 24 3948 3020 277 2092 511 2951 283 5 10 6 1461 21 3594 3345 315 3096 648 3342 319 2 3 2 77 20 3310 2780 268 2250 438 2758 261 9 8 9 20 14 3272 2876 211 2480 381 2856 206 8 7 8 16/0 14 3783 3639 374 3495 864 3582 385 1 1 1 885 13 3484 2160 181 836 541 2125 190 13 13 13 18 10 3101 2673 172 2245 351 2666 168 11 9 11 16 8 2694 2891 256 3088 649 2913 258 7 4 7 27 6 3700 2605 565 1510 1550 2554 539 12 12 12 1/0 6 2625 3002 721 3379 1394 3029 654 6 2 5 *Corresponding to the herd average of 3,000 lb.
December, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 161 TABLE V Comparison of different Sire Indices (Sindhi bulls, Livestock Research Station, Hosur) Bull No. Daughter- dam pairs Dams' Average Simple Daughter Average Intermediate Corrected Daughter Average* Rank according to Index S.E. Index S.E. Index S.E. (4) (6) (8) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) ((12) 255 27 4019 2974 239 1929 497 2917 236 13 13 13 8 25 3651 4363 272 5075 506 4372 258 3 3 2 144 23 4118 3192 315 2266 713 3117 323 12 11 12 236 18 3860 3923 475 3986 995 3895 477 7 6 7 38 17 3664 4023 226 4382 396 4029 212 6 4 6 65 12 4029 3262 269 2495 641 3203 282 11 10 10 139 11 4827 4261 362 3695 509 4060 303 4 7 5 282 11 4320 3278 481 2236 1076 3167 490 10 12 11 124(0) 11 3364 3283 495 3202 953 3343 481 9 8 9 98 10 4499 3813 360 3127 557 3670 310 8 9 8 56 9 4298 5083 850 5868 1698 4976 841 1 1 1 238 7 4646 4470 426 4294 1096 4301 451 2 5 3 136(0) 6 2998 4163 318 5328 644 4288 317 5 2 4 * Corresponding to the herd average of 3,700 lb.
162 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VI Comparison of different Sire Indices (Sindhi bulls, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore) Name of bull Daughter- dam pairs Dams' Average Simple Daughter Average Intermediate Corrected Daughter Average* Rank according to Index S.E. Index S.E. Index S.E. (4) (6) (8) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) Erab 19 3363 2699 308 2035 617 2577 302 8 10 9 Ziman 19 2930 2629 299 2328 575 2587 279 10 8 8 Unique 18 2541 3283 318 4025 729 3312 324 3 2 2 Erio 13 4117 2781 430 1445 853 2519 424 7 11 10 H. Gulam 12 2131 2693 368 3255 767 2798 362 9 5 6 Sulaiman 10 3282 2843 523 2403 723 2735 452 6 7 7 Tazman 10 2898 3197 266 3496 507 3160 242 4 4 4 Sikander 9 2542 2396 457 2250 1152 2425 492 11 9 11 Xavier 9 2479 3063 578 3647 1499 3104 628 5 3 5 H. Raj 7 2773 1810 573 847 973 1797 525 12 12 12 Warrior 7 3807 3368 442 2929 1061 3163 462 2 6 3 Victory 6 2679 3819 251 4959 651 3823 236 1 1 1 *Corresponding to the herd average of 2,700 lb.
December, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 163 TABLE VII Comparision of different Sire Indices (Hariana bulls, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar) Bull No. Daughter- dam pairs Dams' Average Simple Daughter Average Intermediate Corrected Daughter Average* Bank according to Index S.E. Index S.E. Index S.E. (4) (6) (8) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) I 8 1334 1329 138 1324 222 1319 101 8 9 9 II 8 1598 1254 151 910 274 1167 139 10 10 10 III 10 1813 1673 200 1533 440 1523 210 2 7 3 IV 9 1156 1349 138 1542 344 1391 153 7 6 7 V 8 1145 1438 123 1731 213 1483 101 5 2 4 VI 7 1193 1717 201 2241 385 1748 182 1 1 1 VII 6 1172 1402 247 1632 84 1440 122 6 3 6 VIII 7 1737 1667 230 1597 371 1539 200 3 5 2 IX 11 1377 1492 165 1607 364 1470 163 4 4 5 X 5 1122 1288 193 1454 378 1340 182 9 8 8 *Corresponding to the herd average of 1,300 lb.
164 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIII Comparison of different Sire Indices (Gir bulls, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore) Name of bull Daughter- dam pairs Dams' Average Simple Daughter Average Intermediate Corrected Daughter Average* Rank according to Index S.E. Index S.E. Index S.E. (4) (6) (8) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) Windfall 10 3368 3123 222 2878 280 3009 162 1 2 2 Yakub Khan 8 2192 2163 393 2134 631 2414 383 4 3 3 Ranji 5 2598 3057 444 3516 1063 3182 499 2 1 1 Wonderful 5 3189 2343 614 1497 1436 2284 672 3 4 4 *Corresponding to the herd average of 3,000 lb.
December, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 165 These results can be seen clearly by a comparison of the mean square errors for the three indices for all six herds (Table IX). The mean squares for the intermediate and the simple average indices, when averaged over all the herds, were about 437 and 103 per cent respectively of the mean square for the corrected index. The standard error of the corrected index, when averaged over all sires, was only 45.4 per cent of the standard error for the intermediate index and 97.8 per cent of the error for the simple daughter average index. TABLE IX Pooled mean square errors for the different indices (10 lb. unit) Herd d.f. Mean Square for Simple daughter average Intermediate Corrected 1. Kangayam (Hosur) 304 3536 12166 3173 2. Tharparkar (Patna) 223 13936 63850 13938 3. Sindhi (Hosur) 174 21177 88410 20855 4. Sindhi (Bangalore) 127 18467 80645 17716 5. Hariana (Hissar) 69 2558 9425 2189 6. Gir (Bangalore) 24 10248 38857 9806 Pooled 921 11547 48998 11219 The relative rankings of the bulls in each breed according to the three indices are given in columns (10), (11) and (12) of Tables III to VIII. It may be seen that for all the herds studied, the bull ranked first according to the corrected index retained the same rank according to the intermediate index or to the ordinary daughter average index. The only exception was the Gir herd, where the best bull would have been rated as the second best if the ordinary daughter average 31 AR/56 3
166 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, index was used. For all the six herds, the worst bull would have been rated as such according to any of the three indices. The rankings for other bulls also are in close agreement. The values of the rank correlation of the corrected index with the intermediate index and the simple daughter average index are given in Table X. The rank correlations are uniformly high for all the herds, showing thereby that the use of the simple daughter average index will seldom lead to materi- ally different conclusions, if the object is merely to order the bulls according to their relative merits, provided that the average production levels of the dams mated to different bulls do not differ to a great extent. Whenever such variations are present, or when the estimates of the sire indices are desired with a greater precision, the corrected index is to be preferred. TABLE X Rank correlation between different sire indices Herd Number of sires Simple daughter average and intermediate Corrected average and simple daughter average Corrected average and intermediate Kangayam (L. R. S., Hosur) 17 0.874 0.918 0.976 Tharparkar (Cattle Farm, Patna) 13 0.813 0.997 0.857 Sindhi (L. R. S., Hosur) 13 0.890 0.984 0.939 Sindhi (I. D. R., Bangalore) 12 0.669 0.909 0.930 Hariana (Cattle Farm, Hisar) 10 0.697 0.964 0.780 Gir (I. D. R. I., Bangalore) 4 0.600 0.600 1.000 DISCUSSION For sire evaluation and other breeding studies, it is generally the practice in foreign countries and also in some farms in India, to take the yield in the first 300 days or the complete lactation yield when the period is less than 300 days. When such data are not available as was the case in respect of the herds other than the HarianaDecember, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 167 ascribed wholly to random environmental causes. The lower lactation lengths are at least in part due to poorer genotypes. The actual lactation yield168 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, final selection of a bull as proved for extensive use, or for the selection of his sons for further propagation should be based on a test carried out on the records of twelve or more daughter-dam pairs. In order to provide records of 12 daughters, about 30 dams may have to be mated to a sire in order to make allowance for sex ratio, mortality of calves, etc. SUMMARY The limitations of the two common measures of the transmitting ability of bulls, viz. the simple daughter average index and the intermediate index have been dis- cussed and an alternative index termed as the corrected daughter average index is proposed. This index is shown to be superior to either of the indices in current use. The detailed procedure for the calculation of the corrected index and its standard error is illustrated with the help of the data on the Hariana herd at Hissar. The superiority of the corrected index was also demonstrated with the help of the data pertaining to 69 bulls from six herds. An examination of the relative rankings of the bulls in these herds, according to the three indices, revealed close agreement, the best and the worst bulls for a herd remaining generally the same for all the three indices. The rank correlations between any two indices are uni- formly high for all the herds, showing thereby that the use of the simple daughter average index will seldom lead to materially different conclusions, if the object is merely to order the bulls according to their relative merits, provided that the average production levels of the dams mated to different bulls do not differ sub- stantially. Whenever such variations are present, or when the estimates of the sire indices are desired with a greater precision the corrected index seems to be the appropriate one to use. Corrections for the lactation length and the order of lactation have been discussed. The number of daughter-dam pairs required to test a sire by the use of the proposed index has also been examined. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author feels greatly indebted to Dr V. G. Panse, Statistical Adviser and to Shri V. N. Amble, Statistician (Animal Husbandry), I.C.A.R., for their guidance and encouragement in the preparation of this paper. He also acknowledges the permission given by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for making use of the data collected under a Council scheme, and to the Heads and other staff of the cattle breeding farms from where the data were collected. The computational help rendered by Messrs B. B. Nayar and P. N. Soni is also acknowledged with thanks. REFERENCES Kempthorne, O, and Tandon, O.B. (1953). The estimation of heritability by regression of offspring on parent (Biometrics Vol. 9, No. 1) Lush, J.L. (1945). Animal Breeding Plans, Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa Sukhatme P.V. (1944). Note on the method of calculating Sire Index for milk production in Cattle Indian J. vet. Sci. Vol. XIV, Part II
December, 1956] K. S. KRISHNAN 169 APPENDIX I Comparison of the relative efficiency of the three indices Let ?2d and ?2M be the variances for the daughters and dams respectively, b the intra-sire regression of daughter's performance on that of its dam, and n the number of daughter-dam pairs. The variance of the simple daughter average index is given by V(D)=I / N ?2D The variance of the intermediate index is V (I) = V (2D-M) = 4 V (D)+ V (M)170 NEW SIRE INDEX FOR MILK PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, The efficiency of the corrected index compared to the intermediate index is given by V(I) / V(S)=I/N[4?2D+?2M(1STUDIES ON THE SCOPE FOR IMPROVEMENT OF BELLARY SHEEP By M. N. DAS*, and V. R. RAJAGOPALAN172 IMPROVEMENT OF BELLARY SHEEP [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, MATERIAL The work on the scheme started with two flocks of Bellary sheep. The foundation of the pure bred flock consisted of 58 farm-bred and 24 purchased Bellary ewes- all, excepting 12, of which were white-bodied with black face, the remaining all black. The other flock, composed of 100 black Bellary ewes (all purchased) formed the foundation of the stock to be graded up with white-bodied Bikaneri rams purchased from Hissar. During the 14 years of the scheme four generations of sheep were raised from either flock, the number of lambs born in each generation are given in Table I. TABLE I Distribution of lambs born in the different generations Flocks Kind Generation Bellary Flock I II III IV TOTAL Male 199 65 18 4 286 Female 202 70 26 5 303 Total 401 135 44 9 589 Graded Flock Male 149 79 38 17 283 Female 142 109 56 12 319 Total 291 188 94 29 602 The ewes were mostly mated during the months of April and May. Those which did not conceive in this season, together with others which matured in Septem- ber-October, were mated during these latter months. Sire-daughter mating was avoided in order to reduce inbreeding. The ewes were shorn twice a year, once in the month of March and again in October. The lambs were weighed at birth and thereafter fortnightly up to the age of six months. The stud rams were given 1 lb. of concentrates daily throughout the year. All the ewes were given 1 lb. of concentrates daily throughout the year except in the months of September to November, when enough of grazing was available. Culling was reduced to the barest minimum in order to permit a proper, study of the scope for improvement through selection. During the entire period, only 17 pure Bellary lambs out of 303 and 28 graded lambs out of 318 were culled. There was no culling of the adult female stock.
December, 1956] M. N. DAS AND V. R. RAJAGOPALAN 173 The salient findings from a statistical examination of the data pertaining to the two flocks are presented in the following sections separately in respect of the different aspects studied. Colour pattern of sheep At the outset, the findings as regards the colour pattern of the two flocks in different generations may be briefly summarised as follows : In the case of the pure bred Bellary flock, the progenies of W.B.F. ewes in all the generations showed segregation into three patterns, pure white, W.B.F. and black in the proportions of 1 : 3 : 1 ; those of the black ewes were of two colours, viz. W.B.F. and black in the ratio 1 : 1. The actual distribution was as shown below together with the values of x2 obtained on the hypothesis that the colours were distributed in the ratio 1 : 3 : 1. TABLE II Frequencies of the progenies having different colours Dams (W.B.F.) White W.B.F. Black x2 on 2 d.f. Foundation ewes 80 228 90 1.86 First generation 13 48 24 2.67 Second generation 10 22 7 .78 Polled 108 298 121 3.41 Black dams White body Black Over-all generations 24 27 The distribution of colour patterns among the graded progenies varied in the different generations. The progenies in the first generation had mixed colour, i.e. mixtures of black and white and of black and brown in 92 per cent of cases, black colour in 3 per cent of cases and W.B.F. in 5 per cent of cases. The mixed coloured progenies of the first and second generations produced W.B.F. and mixed progenies in the ratio 5 : 1. The W.B.F. progenies of the second generation again produced both W.B.F. and mixed progenies in the ratio 4 : 1. Thus about 80 per cent of the lambs born as a result of repeated crossings with Bikaneri rams had white fleece. It may, in this sense, be claimed that both the policies of breeding could attain a fair degree of success so far as fleece colour was concerned. The data pertaining to colour pattern offer an opportunity to study the inheritance of the character in question in Bellary and Bikaneri sheep. This aspect of the problem is being studied.
174 IMPROVEMENT OF BELLARY SHEEP [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, Mortality of lambs The success of any breeding policy in sheep depends to a large extent on the effective control over mortality of lambs. The failure of the policy of evolving a pure white flock of ewes reported by Littlewood was actually due to the high mortality among pure white lambs. In the present case, the overall mortality of the female progenies of less than one year of age was 37 per cent and 27 per cent respectively, in the pure breed Bellary and graded flocks. The higher mortality rate of the progenies in the pure bred flock was in this case also due to the high mortality of the pure white lambs. It is interesting to note that no such adverse effect could be found in the case of the graded progenies of the same colour. Table III shows the mortality of below one year of age of the female progenies of different colours. TABLE III Mortality of lambs born in different generations Colours Pure Bellary progenies Graded progenies No. born Per cent dead in less than one year No. born Per cent dead in less than one year Pure white 64 57.8 35 37.1 White with black face (W.B.F.) 169 35.3 116 33.6 Mixed December, 1956] M. N. DAS AND V.R. RAJAGOPALAN 175 the same order but that of the graded flock increased to 3 lb. The life-time per- formances of 75 ewes of Bellary flock and 126 ewes of the graded flock are summarised in Table IV. TABLE IV Life-time performance of ewes Bellary flock Graded flock generation Overall 1 2 3 No. of ewes 75 97 26 3 126 Av. No. of clips per ewe 7.5±.43 7.1 8.0 10.3 7.3±.37 Av. yield per clip per ewe (oz.) 19.2±.26 23.9 25.9 27.1 24.4±.25 Total yield per ewe (lb.) 9.1±.52 10.6 12.9 17.5 11.1±.57 In order to see how in the course of the different generations the yield changed specially in the graded flock, a detailed study for generationwise comparisons was undertaken. The variate considered for such comparisons in the Bellary flock was the total yield from the first two clips as it was found that it bears a high correlation of the order of .75 with the life-time yield of the ewes. In the graded flock the yield of wool in the third and fourth clips together, was taken for the comparisons because of the fact that in the case of some of the ewes of this flock only one clip, instead of the normal two, had been taken in the first year. In the pure Bellary flock as might be expected no generation to generation variation could be found. The relevant results are summarised in Table V. TABLE V Pure Bellary flock : yield of first two clips (in oz.) Generation No. Average S.E. Foundation stock 56 43.2 0.94 First 65 31.6 0.96 Second 12 34.2 2.24 It is clear from the Table V that the foundation stock yielded much more than the subsequent progenies. A possible explanation for this may be that whereas the foundation stock consisted of ewes selected on the basis of their performance, they were not uniformly of superior genetic merit as a consequence of which their un- selected progeny did not have an equally high average yield. The poor prepotency of the rams selected to head these ewes could also be a contributory factor.
176 IMPROVEMENT OF BELLARY SHEEP [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, In the graded flock, the yield increased from generation to generation as can be seen from the results given in Table VI. TABLE VI Graded flock : total yield from the third and fourth clips (oz.) Generations No. Average S.E. Foundation ewes 88 35.1 0.96 First 81 51.7 1.00 Second 34 56.8 1.55 Third 9 62.4 3.01 The increase observed cannot be ascribed to hybrid vigour alone as in that case the yield should have fallen in the generations subsequent to the first. As the yield actually increased from generation to generation, it can be claimed that some genetic improvement, in so far as wool yielding capacity is concerned, had been achieved through up-grading. A comparison of the daughters' yield with that of their dams confirmed that in the pure Bellary flock, there was no significant change from generation to genera- tion subsequent to the first. In the graded flock, however, the daughters yielded more than their dams in the first and second generations. In the third generation the daughters' yield was more than their dams ' on an average, but the number of observations was too small to provide a conclusive evidence (Table VII). TABLE VII Daughter-dam differences in wool yield (in oz.) (Generations of daughters) Flock First Second Third No. Av. S. E. No. Av. S. E. No. Av. S. E. Pure-bred 20 12.4 .63 12 .03 .22 .. .. .. Graded 73 15.4 .15 34 5.4 2.46 9 6.8 5.97
December,1956] M. N. DAS AND V. R. RAJAGOPALAN 177 In order to assess the extent of scope for selection if any, among the ewes of different generations in either flock, the fraction of additive genetic variation to the total variation among the ewes in each generation or the coefficient of heritability, as it is called, was estimated by the method of intra-sire regression of daughters on dams. The estimates were obtained as given in Table VIII. TABLE VIII Heritability of wool yield (total of 2 clips in a year) (in oz.) Flock d. f. Generations Foundation stock First Bellary 16 178 IMPROVEMENT OF BELLARY SHEEP [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, It appears from a comparison of the averages that in the graded flock the medulla - tion percentage fell down significantly with the advance of generations. It would thus appear that the quality of wool in regard to medullation improved with succes- sive grading to Bikaneri. But in the pure Bellary flock though up to the third generation there appears to have been a. fall, the difference between the first and second generation averages is not significant. The third generation average is significantly lower than the previous two averages. In the pure-bred flock there was thus some improvement in wool quality, although none in yield. In some farms in India the general practice is to select lambs for breeding accord- ing to the quality of wool as measured by the medullation index. It is important to study the effect of such selection on the quantity of wool. Available data were utilised to find the association between the medullation index and the quantity of wool obtained from the clip at the age of one year. The correlation coefficient between the characters was .03 in pure Bellary flock and .23 in the graded flock. Neither of the coefficients is significant. Admittedly these correlation coefficients include both genetic and environmental components and in seeking an answer to the above question it is the genetic correlation which has to be estimated. The data, however, were inadequate to allow probing deeper into the problem. Data on length, fineness and density of wool fibres collected from only six animals in each flock were too meagre to draw any firm conclusions regarding the relative merits of the two flocks and also of the three fibre characteristics, viz. fine, strong and medullated in respect of these characters. The averages and standard error of these attributes are given in Table X. TABLE X Fibre attributes Attributes Pure Bellary Ewes Rams Fine Strong Medullated Fine Strong Medullated Length (in) 2.0±0.15 2.3± .15 3.8± .25 2.1± .27 2.7± .27 4.2± .18 Diameter (M) 27.5±1.55 36.3±1.55 .7±8.24 28.4±1.30 38.1±1.30 112.8±4.93 Fleece density (No. of fibres per sq. c.m.) 573 ± 38 120 ± 20 312 ± 19 643 ± 23 115 ± 13 310 ± 10
December, 1956] M. N. DAS AND V. R. RAJAGOPALAN 179 TABLE X180 IMPROVEMENT OF BELLARY SHEEP [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE XII Average body weights at different ages (in lb.) Flocks Weaning Six months One year One year and a half No. Average No. Average No. Average No. Average Pure Bellary M 188 26.3±.54 163 39.4±.90 F 206 23.8±.43 186 32.8±.63 115 41.1±.91 91 55.1±1.84 Graded M 177 27.5±.56 161 39.0±.71 F 234 26.6±.46 208 36.1±.71 115 43.6±.85 185 56.3±1.04 Comparisons of sires For each type of breeding 14 rams were used for stud during the period of the scheme. These rams were progeny-tested with respect to birth weight of progenies and wool yield in cases where at least six dam-daughter pairs were available. The results of the test suggest that none of the Bellary rams proved outstanding in improving the progenies over their dams in these two respects. On the contrary, one ram, No. 224 brought about a significant decrease in respect of birth weight and two other rams, viz. Nos. 84 and 419 lowered the wool yield of progenies signifi- cantly, i.e. by 6.9±1.2 lb. and 3.7±1.3 lb. respectively, as compared against the yield of their dams. The comparison of Bikaneri rams was complicated because of the fact that they were used at different times and consequently on groups of ewes differing in their potential level of performance as a result of grading. So the results of progeny testing cannot but underestimate the worth of rams used in later periods. One approach is to convert the yield records in later generations to first and second generation basis and then conduct the comparison. A satisfactory method for such conversion is under investigation. From a somewhat subjective comparison of the rams taking into account the period in which they were used, it, however, appears that two of the Bikaneri rams, viz. Nos. 316 and 566 proved good, while ram No. 816 was inferior to others. Miscellaneous studies (a) Study of the effect of season and pregnancy on growth of wool: As stated earlier there were two mating seasons, viz. April-May and September-October and the
December, 1956] M. N. DAS AND V. R. RAJAGOPALAN 181 ewes were shorn twice a year, viz. once in March-April and again in August-Septem- ber. A study of the effects of seasons of clipping and pregnancy conditions in- dependently of each other reveals that the yield of the clips taken in August-Sep- tember was greater than that of the other clip. Also the pregnant ewes yield clips significantly higher than the non-pregnant ewes. Table XIII shows the average yields from the two clips and in different pregnancy conditions. TABLE XIII Average yield in different seasons and pregnancy conditions (in oz.) Season of clipping Pure Bellary flock Graded flock No. Av. S. E. No. Av. S. E. March-April 154 17.5 .31 216 20.9 .28 August=September 162 23.8 .31 254 29.7 .28 Pregnant 123 21.3 .32 308 27.0 .29 Not pregnant 193 18.8 .32 162 23.1 .29 (b) Mode of change of clip yield with age of ewes : As the ewes grow old, a stage is reached when their wool yielding capacity decreases and they prove uneconomic. As there was no culling of old ewes in the present investigation, a. study was possible to find the age. Considering the ewes which lived longer, the average annual wool yield at the different ages of the ewes was obtained. A comparison of the averages shows that in the first year the yield was lower, afterwards from the second to the sixth year the yield was more or less constant, after which there was a tendency towards fall. A similar study on Bikaneri ewes in Hissar revealed that the yield had a tendency towards fall from the age of three years. As the results obtained here are not based on a sufficient number of observations, they cannot be taken as very conclusive. Another study based on relatively larger number of ewes, viz. 20 and 37 as against 9 and 18 respectively, that lived at least five years also has shown a similar trend. TABLE XIV Average wool yield at different ages (in oz.) Flock No. 1st year 2nd year 3rd year 4th year 5th year 6th year 7th year Pure Bellary-Flock 9 35.3 41.1 37.9 40.4 40.7 44.9 39.6 ±5.1 ±5.1 ±5.1 ±5.1 ±5.8 ±5.8 ±5.8 Graded Flock 18 46.3 54.9 53.3 52.3 55.8 54.3 48.7 ±2.29 ±2.29 ±2.29 ±2.29 ±2.29 ±2.29 ±2.29
182 IMPROVEMENT OF BELLARY SHEEP [Vol. XXVI, Part V, (c) Gestation period . The gestation period estimated from the service records of nearly 500 services in each flock came out to 150.3 days on an average for both the pure Bellary and graded ewes. It did not differ from generation to generation in any flock, nor was it affected differently by the season of lambing or the sex of the lamb carried. (d) Association between the birth weight of lambs and their first clip yield. It is always the aim of breeding to get sturdier lambs at birth. While sturdiness has got its own advantages, a study conducted to find the association between birth weight and the first clip yield shows that it contributes towards greater yield also. The correlation coefficient between the two characters worked out to 0.34 for pure Bellary lambs and 0.33 for graded lambs. Both these values were significantly greater than zero indicating thereby that there is a definite positive association between the two characters. SUMMARY Bellary sheep which form one of the wool yielding breeds in South India are generally black in colour and are low yielders. Earlier efforts (1925-33) to get white and sturdy sheep with more yield under controlled breeding in Hosur Farm, revealed that the breed responds well to improved farming but it is not possible to get a completely white flock of pure Bellary sheep owing to the very weak constitu- tion of the white sheep. Efforts were next directed to th breeding of ewes with white fleece with any other face colour in the Hosur Farm under a scheme financed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. A statistical study of the records collected on the scheme (1938-52) has revealed the following salient features. 1. Efforts made to raise white bodied progenies by crossing Bellary ewes with white bodied Bellary rams on the one hard and by upgrading Bellary ewes with white bodied Bikaneri rams on the other proved successful. 2. Mortality of lambs was greater in pure Bellary flock than that in the graded flock. 3. The graded progenies yielded more than the pure progenies and the yield of the graded progenies increased from generation to generation from about 35 oz. per two clips in a year to about 62 oz. 4. There was a considerable improvement in the graded progenies in respect of wool quality as measured by medullation percentage which fell from about 40 to 13 in four generations. In the Pure Bellary Flock also some improvement was noticed. 5. The lambs in the graded flock recorded increase in birth weight from genera- tion to generation. But the growth of the progenies was slower than that of the pure Bellary lambs. 6. Bikaneri ram Nos. 316 and 566 proved good as judged from the sire indexes in respect of birth weight and wool yield of progenies. Most of the Bellary rams failed to improve the progenies over their dams.
December, 1956] M. N. DAS AND V. R. RAJAGOPALAN 183 7. The wool yield from clips taken in August-September was significantly greater than that from the clips in March-April. 8. As the age of ewes increased, the annual yield showed a rise in the second year, and not much fluctuation thereafter till the seventh year of age when there was a noticeable decrease. 9. There was evidence of some positive association between the birth weight and first-clip-wool yield of lambs. 10. The average number of six-monthly clips that could be obtained from a ewe was 7.5 in the case of Pure Bellary Flock and 7.3 for graded progenies. The total wool yield from a ewe during her life-time was estimated to be on an average 9 lb. for pure Bellary ewes and from 10½ to about 17 lb. in the successive genera- tions of graded ewes. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are grateful to Dr V. G. Panse, Statistical Adviser and Shri V. N. Amble, Statistician (A.H.) of the I. C. A. R. for their help in improving the paper. They are also indebted to the Superintendents of the Livestock Research Station, Hosur, Madras, under whose supervision and control the Scheme was executed and the data collected. They also acknowledge the help of the staff of the Livestock Research Station, Hosur, who conducted the scheme and collected the data and also to the staff of the Statistical Branch of the I. C. A. R., particularly Shri Iswar Dayal and Niranjan Singh who rendered all computational help for the statistical analysis of the data. REFERENCE Littlewood, Capt. R. W. (1936). Livestock of South India. Publication of the Government of Madras. 31 AR/56 7
CHEAPER HIGH PROTEIN VERSUS EXPENSIVE LOW PROTEIN RATIONS FOR GROWTH AND FATTENING OF PIGS IN INDIA By O. P. AGARWALA and D. SUNDARESAN, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad (Received for publication on December 9, 1955) IN any livestock enterprise involving meat production it is necessary to devise feed mixtures which will produce greatest gain in weight with the least cost. Swine husbandry in India has not been very profitable, since cereals specially maize considered necessary in pig feeds, are expensive and are also needed for human consumption. Theoretically, excess protein (over the current need) fed to any animal is deaminised and used as carbohydrate for energy production. This study was planned to observe whether a by-product like groundnut cake with high protein content could be introduced in the diet to replace a considerable part of the high energy maize in the feeding of swine. Maize, however, was not subs- tituted entirely by groundnut cake because of the possibility of maize having some essential constituents such as vitamin 'A' in the form of cryptoxanthin and easily assimilable carbohydrate that are lacking in groundnut cake and which help the growth of pigs. Keith and Miller [1938, 1941] fed rations varying in crude protein content from 12 to 27 per cent to different groups of pigs and found that maximum and most economical gains from weaning to 75 lb. were made by the pigs fed the highest per cent of protein. Almost similar results were obtained by McElroy and Lobay [1947]; Carroll and Burroughs [1939], Crampton and Ashton [1942]; Catron et al., [1952], Becker et al., [1954] and Ullrey et al., [1954]. Sewell et al., [1953] found that 16 to 20 per cent protein gave a slow growth in baby pigs from 2 to 30 days of age. They further noted that 32 per cent protein gave fastest growth and most efficient feed utilization, but 24 to 28 per cent protein gave relatively satisfactory results. Reber et al., [1953] reported that a diet containing 41 per cent protein produced maximum weight and feed efficiency in young pigs from, 12 to 24 days of age and as the pigs approached 8 weeks of age 20 per cent protein appeared to be as efficient as the high level protein. 31 AR/56 185 8
186 CHEAPER PROTEIN FEED FOR PIGS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, Dobbins et al., [1950] in a feeding trial with 9 pairs of pigs concluded that yellow corn containing 11.7 per cent protein was no better than yellow corn containing 8.2 per cent when furnished with some amount of protein in ration. Warden et al., [1951] while comparing various soyabean oil meals with meat and bone scrapes at two levels of protein (18 and 16 per cent) reported no significant difference in gains of pigs between the two levels of crude protein fed. The result of study conducted by Wallace et al., [1954] showed that a corn-soyabean oil meal ration containing 14.3 per cent crude protein fortified with minerals and vitamins was just as satis- factory for weight gains of healthy weaning pigs fed in dry lot as rations containing 17.6 and 20.9 per cent crude protein. The studies reported above deal with feeding conditions wherein the protein feeds in general are more expensive than carbohydrate feeds. The problem there has been to find as low a level of protein in feed as is desirable. In our country the problem is just the reverse. Protein feeds like oilcakes and pulses are cheaper than carbohydrate feeds like cereals. Therefore, it is necessary to devise a feed mixture with as high a protein content. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE Two studies each of six months duration were undertaken. The first study started on the 18th April 1954, and terminated on the 17th October 1955 (hence- forth to be referred to as summer study). The second study was undertaken from the 25th September 1954 to 26th March 1955 (henceforth to be referred to as winter study). In each study piglings born about the same time were used just after weaning (two months) and were divided into groups (A, B and A1, B1 for summer and winter studies respectively). Each group in each study had the same number of piglings as the corresponding group. Each pigling in each group had a corresponding pigling of the same sex and parentage in the other group. The piglings were so distributed as to have the initial total weight of each group in each study similar in the corresponding group of the same study. The distri- bution of piglings to each group is given in Table I. In summer study each group had three piglings (2 males and one female) while in winter study each group had six piglings (5 females and one male). Each pigling of each group was weighed initially and thereafter weekly, throughout the period of study. Male piglings of each study were castrated at the age of one month. Piglings of each group of each study were kept in pukka pens all the time.
December, 1956] O. P. AGARWALA AND D. SUNDARESAN 187 TABLE I Distribution of piglings to the studies SUMMER STUDY Group188 CHEAPER PROTEIN FEED FOR PIGS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, Each group was fed ad libitum the concentrate mixture assigned to that group as given in Table II. TABLE II Concentrate mixture fed ad libitum to piglings Constituents of ration Summer study Winter study Group A Group B Group A1 Group B1 lb. lb. lb. lb. Yellow maize 50 10 40 10 Groundnut cake 10 50 20 50 Gram 20 20 20 20 Wheat bran 20 20 20 20 Mineral mixture 5 5 3 3 Digestible protein % 12 % 27 % 16 % 27 Total protein 16 31 20 31 Total digestible nutrients 72 75 74 75 Cost per 100 lb. (At the time of experi- mental period). Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 14.02 11.59 13.40 11.59 Note. The mineral mixture fed consisted of: 50 per cent salt 50 per cent bone meal and 0.3 per cent potassium iodide For the first three months of the summer study the mineral mixture in addition to the above had traces of cobalt chloride, magnesium sulphate, copper sulphate and ferrous sulphate. The concentrate mixture in winter study for piglings of Group A1 was slightly altered from that of Group A, to give to the ration 16 to 17 per cent digestible protein which was considered the minimum desirable for growing pigs. The record of feed consumed by each group was maintained. At noon each day each group of piglings was supplied as much green as the pigs were able to consume in four hours. Water was available to them at all times. In winter study one gilt of Group B1 died on the 5th February 1955 and as such her corresponding sister of group A1 was removed on the same day from the study. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In summer study during the entire period, piglings of the Group A consumed 1649.6 lb.of concentrate mixture while the piglings of Group B consumed 1411.2 lb., 238.4 lb. less than the Group A. The total initial weights of piglings of Group A and B were 58.0 and 55.8 lb. respectively. At the end of the study the final total weights of piglings of Group A and B were 509.0 and 429.0 lb. respectively. In winter study during entire period of the study, piglings of Group A1 and B1 consumed 3940.0 lb. and 3981.6 lb. of feed respectively. The total initial weight
December, 1956] O. P. AGARWALA AND D. SUNDARESAN 189 of piglings in Group A1 and B1 were 108.2 lb. and 111.4 lb. respectively. At the end of 19th week and at the end of the study their total group weights were 858.0,822.4 and 962.0, 988.0 lb. respectively. A summary of the findings comparing the economics of two groups in each study is given in Table III. TABLE III The economics of high protein feed for pigs Summer study Winter study Group A Group B Group A1 Group B1 Lb. Lb. Lb. Lb. Average initial weight/pig 19.4 18.6 18.0 18.6 Average final weight/pig 169.6 143.0 192.6 197.6 Average daily gain/pig in weight 0.8 0.6 1.0 1.0 Average daily feed intake/pig 3.0 2.6 3.6 3.8 Average feed intake per lb. of gain 3.66 3.78 4.61 4.54 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Average cost per lb. of gain in weight 0.513 0.438 0.618 0.526 Average sale price per pig at the end of study if slaughtered and sold retail at Rs. 0.625/lb. 106.0 89.4 120.4 123.5 Average actual feeding cost per pig from weaning to end of study 77.0 54.5 93.6 82.3 Surplus or deficit over feed cost 29.0 34.9 26.8 41.2 Net return per 100 rupees of feed expense 37.7 64.5 28.6 50.0 It can be noted from the Table III that while there is almost no difference in feed intake to produce a unit weight of flesh between groups in each study, due to low cost of high protein ration, there is considerable difference in cost in favour of high protein ration to produce a unit weight of flesh. Though this was a preli- minary study with a small number of pigs and spread for a duration of one year only, there is sufficient evidence to suggest that pigs can be raised economically by substituting a higher per cent of groundnut cake in the concentrate mixture. In this study the carcass quality of the pigs fed different rations was not studied. The casual observation indicated that the low-protein-ration pigs had a thicker fat layer. However, customers normally prefer more muscle and less fat in pork products, and it would seem that high protein rations would produce meat that has greater demand. Following the method of Snedecor [1947] weekly weight of Group A and A1 were compared statistically with the groups B and B1 respectively. The results of statistical analysis are given in Table IV. The summer study indicated that the pigs fed a higher maize content ration were significantly heavier at the end of the study than the pigs fed a higher groundnut-cake-content ration. However, for the winter study the pigs fed a higher groundnut cake-ration were significantly heavier at the end of the study than the pigs of the other group. The reverse effect in summer and winter seems unexplainable. It is possible that season has its effect on assimilation of high protein ration. However, further evidence is needed to confirm or contradict such a proposition.
190 CHEAPER PROTEIN FEED FOR PIGS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IV Average weekly weights per pig fed different concentrate mixture Summer study Winter study Average weekly weights per pig in lb. (Total pigs in each group 3) Average weekly weights per pig in lb. (Total pigs in each group: 6 till 19th week, thereafter 5 Group A Group B Difference ADecember, 1956] O. P. AGARWALA AND D. SUNDARESAN 191 TABLE IV192 CHEAPER PROTEIN FEED FOR PIGS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, SUMMARY Two studies one in summer and the other in winter, each of 6 months duration with weaned piglings were undertaken to investigate whether groundnut cake with high protein content can be used more effectively in place of maize in pig rations. In summer study piglings getting 12 per cent digestible protein ration containing 10 per cent groundnut cake gave significant gain in weight over piglings getting 27 per cent digestible protein ration containing 50 per cent groundnut cake. However, in winter study it was the group of piglings getting higher digestible protein ration (27 per cent) containing 50 per cent groundnut cake which gave significant weight difference over the group getting lower digestible protein ration (16 per cent) containing 20 per cent groundnut cake. In the summer study the group of piglings getting higher groundnut cake content ration gave a net return of Rs. 64.0 for every 100 rupees of feed consumed, while the corresponding group on high maize content ration gave a net return of only Rs. 37.7, a reduction of Rs. 26.8 per 100 rupees of feed cost. In the winter study the higher groundnut-cake-fed group gave a net return of Rs. 50 per 100 rupees of feed cost. While the corresponding figure for the other group was 28.6, a difference of Rs. 21.4 per 100 rupees of feed cost. REFERENCES Becker, D. E., Ullrey, D.E. and Terrill, S. M. (1954). Protein and amino acid intakes for optimum growth rate in the young pigs. J. Anim. Sci. 13, 346 Becker, D. E. Lassiter, J. W., Terill, S. W. and Norton, H. W. (1954). Levels of protein in practical rations for the pigs. J. Anim. Sci., 13, 611 Carroll, W. E. and Burroughs, W. (1939). An attempt to locate the most advantageous percentage of protein in the ration of growing pigs of different weights. Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod. 31, 132 Carton,D.V., Jensen, A. H., Hoemyer, F. C., Maddock, H. M. and Ashton, G. C. (1952). Re. evaluation of protein requirements of growing-fattening swine as influenced by feeding an antibiotic. J. Anim. Sci., 11, 221 Crampton, H. W. and Ashton, G. C. (1942). The feed requirement of market hogs. Sci. Agric., 22, 390 Dobbings, F. A., Krider, J. L., Hamilton, T. S., Early, E. B. and Terill, S. W. (1950). Comparison of high and low protein corn for growing fattening pigs in dry lot. J. Anim. Sci., 9, 625 Keith, T. B. and Miller, R. C. (1939). The protein requirements of the young pigs. Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod., 32, 128 THE USE OF DATE PRODUCTS IN THE RATION OF THE LACTATING DAIRY COW AND THE WATER BUFFALO By KHALID T. ALI, N. C. FINE, MAHOMMAD FARAJ, and N. H. SARSAM' Animal Husbandry Division, Abu-Ghraib Experiment Station, Iraq (Received for publication on March 22, 1956) IRAQ is the largest date producer in the world having an annual production of about 350,000 metric tons. Much of this production is not suitable for human consumption and thus large quantities of dates are sold well below the prices of certain concentrates used normally for livestock feed. Although dates and date pits have been fed to cattle, sheep, and horses from very ancient times, there appears to be very little published information on the use of these products as livestock feeds. Ali, Sarsam, and McLeroy [1954] found that macerated dates (dates from which the pits have been removed) and date pits, soaked or ground, were not eaten by sheep in quantities enough to make fattening possible. In later work with fattening sheep, the feeds produced excellent results when mixed with ground barley and sesame-seed-oil meal in such proportions that the dates or date pits constituted about 34 per cent of concentrate mixture. Even higher proportions gave good results on small scale trials. In this article a series of trials which were carried out to obtain information on the value of macerated dates and ground date pits in the concentrate mixtures fed to the lactating dairy cow and buffalo has been reported. MATERIAL AND METHODS Trials with the dairy cow Three trials were carried out with dairy cows. In first two trials two concen- trate mixtures containing 25 per cent and 50 per cent macerated dates were tested. In the third trial the concentrate mixture contained 40 per cent macerated dates and 25 per cent ground date pits, making a total of 65 per cent date products. The mixtures fed, together with the chemical composition of the different ingredients, are shown in Table I. The design used was the reversal or switchback experiment involving two groups of five cows each. Rations were exchanged at the end of 30-day periods. Five- day transition periods were used just before the first 30-day period and each time a switch was made. Milk samples for butter-fat tests were taken during the transi- tion period and at or near the middle of the 30-day period. The concentrate allowance of each cow was taken from the grain feeding tables of Morrison [1954]. The amount of concentrates fed in the three trials ranged from 3.3 lb. per day for the lower producing cows up to 14 lb. per day (for a short period) for one of the highest producing cows. The roughage was green alfalfa soilage fed at the approxi- mate rate of 9 lb. per 100 lb. of liveweight. 31 AR/56 193 9
194 THE USE OF DATE PRODUCTS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE I Composition of feeds Feed No. of analyses Dry matter (Per cent) Crude protein (Per cent) Crude fat (Per cent) Crude fibre (Per cent) N-free extract (Per cent) Ash (Per cent) Barley 2 90.4 9.0 1.0 5.0 72.4 3.0 Date pits 2 91.1 6.0 7.2 14.7 60.1 3.1 Macerated dates 1 79.5 2.6 0.5 3.4 70.8 2*2 Oats 2 89.0 9.9 2.6 7.2 65.0 4.4 Sesame oil meal 2 92.3 37.0 6.8 5.4 27.7 15.4 Wheat bran 3 93.6 13.7 3.8 9.3 61.4 5.3 Wheat screenings 2 90.7 10.8 1.4 2.8 73.5 2.1 Whole cottonseed + 92.7 23.1 22.9 16.9 26.3 3.5 BarleyDecember, 1956] KHALID T. ALI ET AL. 195 Macerated dates were prepared by putting whole dates through a special macerating machine which removes the pits. Date pits were ground to a medium degree of fineness in a burr mill. The feed ingredients were mixed in a Hobart mixer which has a kneading type of mixing action. The machine is not a necessity for mixing dates with other feeds. The mixing can be done with hand labour by first placing macerated dates on a smooth clean surface, pouring the other in- gredients over the dates, and then cutting and working them all together with a spade. The dates break up into small lumps and will no longer stick together. Whole dates may be mixed with other feeds in the same manner as the macerated dates. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In all three trials with milking cows (Tables II, III and IV) the concentrate mixtures containing dates or dates and date pits were eaten very readily. There were no cases of tympany. The maximum amount of macerated dates fed per day was to cow No. 1 in the third trial. This cow received as much as 14 lb. of con- centrates, 40 per cent of which (5.6 lb.) was macerated dates. At the same time she also ate 3.5 lb. of ground date pits in the 14 lb. of concentrates, making a total of 9.1 lb. of date products. TABLE II Four per cent fat-corrected milk produced by two groups of cows (in lbs.) (First trial 25 per cent macerated dates) Group Cow 30-day periods 25 per cent dates No dates 25 per cent dates Comparison a b c a 196 THE USE OF DATE PRODUCTS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, In the second trial three cows (Nos. 1, 4 and 10) were sick for a part of the time and, therefore, their records are not suitable for statistical analysis. Two of the cows had mastitis, one case being the result of an external injury to the udder. The third cow (No. 1, Table III) had a sickness during the second 30- day period the cause of which was not known. She seemed to have completely recovered in the third period. In the first trial, in which a concentrate mixture containing 25 per cent mace- rated dates was tested, the difference in favour of the macerated dates was not statis- tically significant according to the method of analysis described by Snedecor [1946]. While no attempt was made to analyse statistically the data of the second trial, it appears that the mixture containing 50 per cent macerated dates also turned out satisfactorily from the standpoint of production of milk. It should be noted that both the 25 per cent and the 50 per cent macerated date feeds (Table I) showed a slightly higher protein content than the regular herd concentrate mixture. This happened because the feed analyses of Table I were not complete at the time these mixtures were made up for the feeding trials. The proportions of the ingredients TABLE III Four per cent fat-corrected milk produced by two groups of cows (in lb.) (Second trial 50 per cent macerated dates) Group Cow 30-day periods Comparison 50 per cent No dates 50 per cent a b c a December, 1956] KHALID T. ALI ET AL. 197 in the mixtures had to be based on estimates of the composition of some of the ingre- dients. The protein percentages of the regular non-date mixture and both the 25 per cent and 50 per cent date mixtures should provide more than enough protein for cows receiving legume soilage. In the last trial, the lower protein percentage- was planned deliberately to see if the usual level of production could be maintained on a lower level of protein in the concentrate. From Table IV it can be seen that the difference was in favour of the non-date mixture but the difference was not statistically significant. Because of the high protein content of alfalfa there would be reason to expect that a lower protein concentrate mixture would be satisfactory for milk production. The use of high protein alfalfa permits the use of low protein high-energy date feeds. It may be possible to reduce further the protein of the con- centrate mixture without serious detriment to milk production; thus, dates may have their greatest value when the roughage is high quality legume. The results obtained with feeding dates and date pits should encourage greatest use of these feeds in dairy cow concentrate mixtures. According to the prices pre- vailing during these three trials, the cost of a ton of macerated dates or ground date pits was less than half the cost of a ton of barley. Since these feeds are lower in protein than barley it is necessary to provide more protein-rich supplement and that increases the cost somewhat; but even so the ingredients in the 25 per cent date mixture cost 83.6 per cent of those in the non-date feed ; the ingredients in the 50 per cent mixture cost 77.2 per cent and the ingredients of the date-date pit mixture cost 65.4 per cent. The results with the last mixture suggested that lower protein combinations may be used successfully when high quality legume roughage is fed, thus effecting even greater saving in the purchase of the protein-rich supplements. Trial with water buffalo During the summer of 1955, a feeding test with lactating buffaloes was carried out in co-operation with a herd owner in Baghdad. Due to the fact that the Experi- ment Station had no herd of buffaloes, it was necessary to seek the co-operatoin of a private owner in carrying out a rather crude feeding test. During the summer of 1955, a buffalo owner in Baghdad agreed to co-operate in a short trial. The plan followed was to feed first for one week a mixture made up of equal parts of barley, wheat bran, and wheat screenings. The mixture was poured over barley straw and the buffaloes were allowed to eat all they wanted. The average consumption of concentrates was about 32 lb. per buffalo per day. Unfortunately there was no way to feed each buffalo individually. Green alfalfa was fed at about the rate of 10 lb. per buffalo per day. Production was recorded by one of the authors who visited the herd twice daily at milking time. On the seventh day samples of milk were taken from each buffalo and tested for fat. The method of feeding used in the first week appears to be fairly typical of what may be found in the Baghdad area, except for the use of a higher fat concentrate. Buffalo herdsmen insist that a high-fat concentrate such as whole cottonseed or rice bran will increase the yield of gemmer (buffalo cream). In the second seven-day
198 THE USE OF DATE PRODUCTS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IV Four per cent fat-corrected milk produced by two groups of cows (in lb.) (Third trial, 65 per cent date products) Group Cow 30-day periods Comparison 40 per cent dates, 25 per cent date pits No dates 40 per cent dates, 25 per cent date pits a b c a December, 1956] KHALID T. ALI, ET AL. 199 period, following a two-day period allowed for changing the ration, a mixture con- taining 25 per cent each of barley, wheat bran, wheat screenings, and whole cotton- seed was fed. In the third seven-day period the concentrate mixture was changed to 25 per cent whole cottonseed, 30 per cent macerated dates, 15 per cent wheat screenings, 7.5 per cent sesame-seed-oil meal, and 7.5 per cent barley. After allowing two days for the buffaloes to become accustomed to this mixture the production was recorded for seven days. The calculated chemical compositions of the mixtures are given in Table V. The average daily production of the ten buffaloes for the three seven-day periods may be found in Table VI. TABLE V Composition of concentrate mixtures fed to buffaloes Concentrate mixture Dry matter Crude protein Crude fat Crude fiber N-free extract Ash per cent per cent per cent per cent per cent per cent Mixture No. 1 Barley 33 ? per cent Wheat bran 33? per cent Wheat screenings 33? per cent 91.3 11.2 2.1 5.7 69.0 3.5 Mixture No. 2 Barley 25 per cent Wheat bran 25 per cent Wheat screenings 25 per cent Cottonseed 25 per cent 91.8 14.1 7.3 8.5 58.4 3.4 Mixture No. 3 Macerated dates 30 per cent Sesame meal 7.5 per cent Wheat bran 15 per cent Wheat screenings 15 per cent Barley 7.5 per cent Cottonseed 25 per cent 88.4 13.7 7.3 7.8 55.6 4.6
200 THE USE OF DATE PRODUCTS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VI Seven-day average production of milk and fat tests of buffaloes fed on three concentrate mixtures Mixture No. 1 Mixture No. 2 Mixture No. 3 Animal No. 33? per cent barley 33? per cent wheat bran 33? per cent wheat screen- ings 25 per cent barley 25 per cent wheat bran 25 per cent wheat screen- ings 25 per cent cottonseed 25 per cent cotton seed 30 per cent dates 7.5 per cent sesame meal 15 per cent wheat bran 15 per cent wheat screen- 7.5 per cent barley Milk (lb.) Fat (per cent) Milk lb. Fat (per cent) Milk lb. Fat (per cent) 1 18.8 7.6 19.2 8.5 20.4 8.1 2 19.6 6.0 15.7 8.1 16.6 8.3 3 19.3 6.9 20.9 8.2 21.6 8.1 4 17.8 7.0 17.9 8.8 18.4 7.9 5 18.0 64 17.5 7.0 14.2 6.6 6 10.8 9.2 10.6 9.1 10.8 8.0 7 10.0 10.0 17.1 9.8 19.1 9.4 8 19.7 7.0 26.5 7.7 28.1 8.1 9 12.6 10.2 11.7 10.5 12.2 10.5 10 13.6 7.8 12.0 9.5 11.7 8.7 Average 16.0 7.5* 16.9 8.6* 17.3 8.3* * Weighted average. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Adding whole cottonseed to the concentrate mixture might have had some effect on the fat tests, as the average fat tests of the second and third periods were higher than the first period. Individually, eight of the buffaloes showed an increase in the second and third periods but two (Nos. 6 and 7) showed a slight decrease. Since there are so many uncontrolled factors which may have affected the fat tests, these results offer only a bare hint that cottonseed helps the fat test. Perhaps more critical tests could be devised on this point. It should be noted that in addition to increasing the fat content of the concentrate mixture cottonseed also increases
December, 1956] KHALID T. ALI ET AL. 201 the protein content. When the animals were given the concentrate mixture con- taining dates the production was maintained. The trial gives some evidence that date feeds will be palatable to the buffalo and that they are not likely to depress produc- tion. Further work on this problem is contemplated. SUMMARY In three different reversal trials involving 30 lactating cows it was possible to secure relatively good milk production when three concentrate mixtures containing 25 per cent macerated dates, 50 per cent macerated dates, and 40 per cent macerated dates plus 25 per cent ground date pits were compared with a non.date containing control mixture. Loss of data due to sickness prevented a statistical analysis of the trial with 50 per cent macerated dates, but in the case of the other two date containing concentrate mixtures there were no significant differences between them and the control mixture as measured by the production of 4 per cent fat-corrected milk. Satisfactory results were also obtained when a concentrate mixture containing 30 per cent macerated dates was fed for a seven-day period to 10 lactating buffaloes. Macerated dates and ground date pits were eaten readily when mixed with other feeds. The maximum amount of dates consumed by any one cow was 5.6 lb. per day. The chief advantage of the date feeds was their low cost per ton. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank the Date Association of Iraq for providing the macerated dates and ground date pits used in this investigation. Mr Frank Winter of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization Mission to Iraq and Dr Ghazi Hamid, Technical Director of the Date Association were particularly helpful in making the necessary arrangements to obtain the dates and mix the feeds. Mr Denha Iwass Mekhael, Agricultural Chemistry Section, Abu-Ghraib Experiment Station made most of the chemical analysis of the feeds. REFERENCES Morrison, F. B. (1954). Feeds and feeding. XXI Ed. The Morrison Publishing Co., Ithaca, New York Sarsam, N. H., Ali, K. T., and McLeroy, G. B. (1954). Preliminary report on the use of date by pro- ducts in the ration of the fat-tailed sheep. Western Section, Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod., Proc. 5:57 Snedecor, G. W. (1946). Statistical methods. 4th Ed. The Iowa State College Press, Ames., Iowa. 31 AR/56. 10
EFFECT OF AUREOMYCIN AND VITAMIN B12 ON THE GROWTH OF WEANED PIGS FED A HIGH-PROTEIN DIET By ALEX REED1 AND O. P. AGARWALA2, Agricultural Institute, Allahabad (Received for publication on April 24, 1956) (With one text-figure) T is generally agreed that the use of aureomycin or terramycin tends to increase the rate of gain in weight when fed to growing pigs. Catron et al., [1952] found that when fed 10 mg. aureomycin per pound of ration, the pigs gained an average of 0.12 lb. more per day and consumed 2.3 lb. less feed per 100 lb. gain than the pigs receiving the antibiotic. Burnside et al., [1951] compared the effect of aureomycin when fed with high, intermediate and low protein levels and concluded that the aureomycin improved all rations. Hoeffer et al., [1952] fed terramycin at 5 mg. per lb. of total ration and observed a highly significant effect on the rate of gain and also improved efficiency of the gain. Terrill et al., [1952] fed 5 mg. aureomycin hydrochloride per lb. of a 20 per cent crude protein " corn, solvent-soybean-oil-meal", ration properly fortified with minerals and vitamins to pigs from weaning to 100 lb. weight. They report a 27 per cent increase in rate of gain (highly significant) from the use of aureomycin. Ashton et al., [1955] fed aureomycin to pigs on various levels of protein from 10 to 20 per cent. As the per cent of protein in the diet was increased from 10 to 20 there was a decrease in back-fat depth and an increase in per cent of lean cuts. They report that the pigs fed on a ration containing 20 per cent protein resulted in carcasses with a significantly greater proportion of lean than those on rations containing lower amounts of protein. Lassiter et al., [1955] compared various levels of protein from 10 to 20 per cent for growing pigs and found that the feed requirements per lb. of gain decreased somewhat when protein levels increased to 16 per cent. Braude et al., [1953] in a review of literature on the use of antibiotics in swine nutrition, report that in experiments conducted throughout the United States, aureomycin increased the daily gain of growing swine about 35 per cent. Davey et al., (1955) fed aureomycin at different rates to three generations of swine and noted no adverse effect upon birth weight or weaning weights. Feeding at the rate of 50 mgm. per lb. feed gave the highest daily gain. Hanson et al., (1955) found that the addition of vitamin B12 in the ration for pigs gave a highly significant increase in the rate of gain. The addition of aureomycin produced an additional significant increase in the rate of gain. Most of the work done on the feeding of aureomycin to pigs has been with normal or below normal levels of protein, with the main object to save expensive protein supplement. In certain areas of India groundnut cake is cheaper than cereals such as maize, wheat or barley. Agarwala and Sundaresan [1955] found that the pigs on a ration containing 27 per cent protein (50 per cent groundnut cake, 10 per cent maize, plus other ingredients) made cheaper gains than the pigs on a 16 per cent ration (20 per cent groundnut cake, 40 per cent maize, plus other ingredients). 1 University of Illinois, College of Agriculture, U. S. A. On assignment to Allahabad Agricul- tural Institute for research in animal nutrition. 2. Member, Animal Husbandry Department Staff, Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U.P. 203 31 AR/56 11
204 AUREOMYCIN AND VITAMIN B12 [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, With the economic relationship between cereal grains and groundnut cake favouring a ration much higher in protein than that usually fed to swine, it was considered desirable to determine the effect of aureomycin and vitamin B12 when fed to swine on a high-protein-low-maize diet. EXPERIMENTAL Sixteen weaning pigs, four barrows and twelve gilts from three litters, were separated into two groups by arranging them in pairs according to litter, sex, size and general health, then randomly assigning one pig of each pair to each group. The groups were assigned by chance to one of two adjacent pens and one group was designated by chance as the treatment group with the other as control. Weights of individual pigs were recorded at the beginning and at weekly intervals throughout the experiment. Group B or control group had free access at all times to the basic ration as shown in Table I. Group A or treatment group received the basic ration to which had been added 27 gm. aureomycin and 27 mgm. vitamin B12 per ton of ration. This ration was self fed in the same type of feeder as that used in Group B. A small portion of greens was given in equal amounts to each group daily. Records were kept of the amount of feed consumed by each group. Water was provided at all times to both groups. TABLE I Composition of basic ration Ration Per cent Maize 10 Groundnut cake 47 Gram 20 Wheat bran 20 Fish meal 3 Plus regular Institute mineral mixture (50 per cent salt, 50 per cent steamed bonemeal, plus 0.03 lb. potassium iodide per 100) at the rate of 3 lb. per 100 lb. of ration. The experimental period was 26 weeks. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION There was a significant difference in average gain per pig in four weeks and five weeks of feeding in favour of the group A pigs fed aureomycin and vitamin B12. After six weeks feeding the difference was not quite significant at the 5 per cent level of probability. There was no significant difference in total gains after six weeks feeding. There was no significant difference in total gains for the 26 weeks feeding period. The treated pigs had a greater average gain than the control pigs at the end of each week throughout the experiment (Table II). The greatest difference occurred after 16 weeks of feeding when the treated group averaged 24 lb. more than the untreated group. This difference was not statistically significant,
December, 1956] ALEX REED AND O. P. AGARWAL 205 TABLE II Initial weights, total gain at indicated periods and final weights of treated and untreated pigs Group A206 AUREOMYCIN AND VITAMIN B12 [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, After 18 weeks feeding the difference in average gain remained fairly uniform (Fig. I). There is evidence to indicate that aureomycin and vitamin B12 gave a growth stimulus during first 16 weeks of feeding, although this was not statistically significant. Pigs 1a, 1b, 2a, 2b, 3a and 3b were from one litter, 4a, 4b, 5a and 5b from another litter and 6a, 6b, 7a, 7b, 8a and 8b were from a third litter. The pigs in this litter were about three weeks younger than the others at the beginning of this project. The average daily gain for the 26 week-feeding period was 0.9 lb. daily for the treated group and 0.8 lb. daily for the control group (Table III). TABLE III Initial weight, final weight, average daily gain, feed per lb. gain and cost per lb. gain from weaning through 26 week-feeding period Group A (Treatment) Group B (Control) Average initial weight 16.8 lb. 17.2 lb. Average final weight 184.7 December, 1956] ALEX REED AND O. P. AGARWALA 207 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. The difference in average gain of treated over untreated pigs at weekly intervals from weaning through 26 weeks feeding period.
208 AUREOMYCIN AND VITAMIN B12 [Vol. XXVI, Part IV Treated pigs made a slightly higher daily gain and required slightly more feed per pound gain than control pigs during 26 weeks feeding. The results of this experiment indicate that there is no advantage in feeding aureomycin and vitamin B12 more than 16 weeks. Although aureomycin and vitamin B12 gave a significant increase in growth up to 5 weeks feeding, further evidence is needed to determine if this increase is economical. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors gratefully acknowledge the kindness of Lederle Laboratories (India) Ltd., Bombay, for furnishing the Aurofac (aureomycin and vitamin B12) used in this experiment. REFERENCES Agarwala, O.P. and Sundaresan, D. (1955). "High protein versus low protein rations for growth and faltening of pigs in India." Unpublished manuscript, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Ashton, G. C., Kastelic, J., Acker, D. C., Jensen, A. H., Maddock, H.M., Kline, E. A. and Catron, D. V. (1955). "Different levels of protein with and without antibiotics for growing-finishing swine : Effect on carcass leanness." J. Animal. Sci. 14: 82-93 Braude, R., Wallace, H. D. and Cunha, T. J. (1953). "The value of antibiotics in the nutrition of swine." Antibiotics and chemotherapy 3 : 271 Burnside, J. E., Gruner, R. H. Phillips, P. H., and Bohstedt, G. (1951). "The effect of vitamin B12 and aureomycin when fed wit high, intermediate and low protein levels to swine." J. Animal. Sci. 10 10 : 1042. Catron, D. V., Jensen, A. H., Homeyer, P.C., Maddock, H.M. and Ashton, G. C. (1952). "Re-evalua- tion of protein requirements of growing fattening swine as influenced by feeding antibiotics." J. Animal. Sci. 11 : 221. Davey, R. J., Green, W. W. and Stevenson, J. W. (1956)."The effect of aureomycin on growth and reproduction in swine." J. Animal. Sci.14:507-512. Hanson, L. E., Ferrin, E. F., Anderson, P. A. and Arnan, W. J. (1955). "Growth and carcass charac-. teristics of pigs fed antibiotics for part or all of the growing, fattening period. " J. Animal Sci. 14: 30-42. Hoeffer, J. A., Luecke, R. W., Thorp Jr., F. and Johnston, R. L. (1952). "The effect of terramycin on the growth of pigs fed different levels of protein." J. Animal. Sci. 11: 455 Lassiter, J. W., Terrill, S. W., Becker, D. E. and Norton, H. W. (1955). "Protein levels for pigs as studied by growth and self-selection." J. Animal. Sci. 14 : 482-491 Terrill, S. W., Becker, D. E., Adams, C. R. and Meade, R. J. (1952). "Response of growing fattening pig to bacitracin, aureomycin and other supplements." J. Animal. Sci. 11: 84
December, 1956] ALEX REED AND O. P. AGARWALA 209 APPENDIX I Weight of individual pigs at successive weeks after weaning (in lb.) (With Aurofac) GROUP A Weake after weaning 1a 2a 3a 4a 5a 6a 7a 8a 0 20.0 26.0 19.1 18.5 16.9 11.2 11.1 11.5 1 27.5 30.0 23.0 27.0 23.5 13.0 16.0 15.0 2 30.0 36.0 23.0 26.0 20.0 12.0 12.0 10.0 3 30.0 49.0 29.0 35.0 24.0 20.0 17.0 13.0 4 50.0 60.0 37.0 39.0 29.0 23.0 21.0 11.0 5 52.0 67.0 41.0 45.0 31.0 25.0 25.0 15.0 6 63.0 81.0 51.0 49.0 45.0 31.0 30.0 17.0 7 68.0 89.0 62.0 46.0 46.0 34.0 36.0 20.0 8 70.0 97.0 66.0 50.0 50.0 40.0 40.0 20.0 9 83.0 107.0 73.0 .. 57.0 49.0 46.0 13.0 10 92.0 118.0 85.0 .. 69.0 58.0 60.0 22.0 11 105.0 125.0 91.0 .. 75.0 61.0 67.0 25.0 12 118.0 143.0 107.0 .. 87.0 69.0 82.0 33.0 13 118.0 138.0 108.0 .. 92.0 72.0 84.0 38.0 14 135.0 150.0 119.0 .. 105.0 85.0 95.0 41.0 15 143.0 172.0 127.0 .. 111.0 78.0 103.0 53.0 16 152.0 172.0 134.0 .. 119.0 70.0 117.0 50.0 17 162.0 192.0 136.0 .. 122.0 67.0 122.0 46.0 18 160.0 190.0 140.0 .. 130.0 76.0 126.0 56.0 19 168.0 200.0 1 .0 .. 138.0 88.0 136.0 66.0 20 170.0 216.0 154.0 .. 150.0 88.0 146.0 72.0 21 180.0 223.0 149.0 .. 154.0 99.0 151.0 86.0 22 185.0 235.0 161.0 .. 165.0 107.0 163.0 95.0 23 192.0 238.0 172.0 .. 180.0 118.0 168.0 102.0 24 193.0 253.0 183.0 .. 184.0 127.0 173.0 113.0 25 211.0 254.0 178.0 .. 192.0 131.0 184.0 118.0 26 215.0 257.0 185.0 .. 195.0 132.0 185.0 125.0 Total gain 195.0 231.0 165.0 .. 178.1 119.8 173.9 113.5
210 AUREOMYCIN AND VITAMIN B12 [Vol. XXVI, Part IV. APPENDIX II Weights of individual pigs at successive weeks after weaning (in lb.) (Without Aurofac) GROUP B Weeks after weaning lb 2b 3b 4b 5b 6b 7b 8b 0 21.8 15.9 23.2 19.1 13.7 10.7 14.0 19.0 1 27.0 20.0 30.0 22.0 17.0 14.0 19.0 24.0 2 26.5 20.0 30.0 20.0 12.0 10.0 16.0 2.1 3 30.0 23.0 35.0 22.0 13.0 13.0 17.0 2.5 4 32.0 30.0 40.0 25.0 11.0 12.0 18.0 28.0 5 41.0 31.0 48.0 25.0 15.0 17.0 19.0 31.0 6 51.0 41.0 61.0 32.0 16.0 21.0 21.0 37.0 7 57.0 36.0 62.0 35.0 12.0 22.0 32.0 45.0 8 70.0 50.0 68.0 40.0 16.0 30.0 26.0 60.0 9 73.0 53.0 73.0 .. 13.0 33.0 31.0 53.0 10 86.0 67.0 90.0 .. 20.0 48.0 40.0 70.0 11 93.0 73.0 94.0 .. 20.0 55.0 57.0 75.0 12 91.0 81.0 103.0 .. 23.0 65.0 55.0 83.0 13 109.0 82.0 107.0 .. 23.0 62.0 57.0 89.0 14 119.0 95.0 118.0 .. 25.0 75.0 58.0 95.0 15 119.0 103.0 123.0 .. 35.0 83.0 53.0 109.0 16 130.0 94.0 128.0 .. 42.0 91.0 56.0 107.0 17 132.0 102.0 142.0 .. 50.0 93.0 65.0 122.0 18 146.0 113.0 146.0 .. 50.0 106.0 68.0 127.0 19 156.0 124.0 156.0 .. 61.0 116.0 82.0 128.0 20 160.0 130.0 166.0 .. 66.0 120.0 90.0 140.0 21 164.0 140.0 170.0 .. 75.0 126.0 92.0 147.0 22 171.0 153.0 175.0 .. 80.0 135.0 105.0 162.0 23 180.0 156.0 186.0 .. 94.0 146.0 115.0 178.0 24 185.0 163.0 193.0 .. 103.0 156.0 123.0 175.0 25 204.0 174.0 190.0 .. 114.0 166.0 128.0 178.0 26 197.0 165.0 197.0 .. 115.0 175.0 132.0 180.0 Total gain 175.2 149.1 173.8 .. 101.3 164.3 118.0 161.0
SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN INDIA By GOBIND SINGH THAPAR (Received for publication on November 10, 1955) THE work forming the basis of the present communication was carried out under a scheme of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research at the Lucknow University. The main object of the scheme was to study the helminthic infections of the domesticated animals in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Bengal (including East Bengal), Assam and Orissa. This survey was carried out throughout the area spread over several years by visiting important places in different States from time to time and examining the slaughtered animals at the abbatoirs and collecting the parasites recovered for identification. Some material was also received from the Department of Animal Husbandry of the above mentioned States, probably collected by their staff during their routine examinations of the diseased animals at the veteri- nary hospitals. Thus, Thapar and Sinha [1945]. reported a new genus Olveria with O. indica as the type species from the cattles and buffaloes at Lucknow. Tandon [1945] described a second species, Olveria bosi, from the buffaloes at the slaughter houses at Lucknow, thereby establishing the validity of the genus. Tandon [1955] gave an account of a rare parasite, Paramphistomum gotoi, recovered from buffaloes in India in large numbers. The work was extended to the study of the seasonal variations and the incidence and intensity of infection of helminth parasites of cattle, sheep, goats and buffaloes by taking a sample of each animal at the slaughter houses. This was particularly done at the headquarter where facilities were available for daily examination, by random sampling of each type of animal, and this was fairly accurate. Faecal samples received from several places in this area were also reported. The sphere of our activities was further extended to the examination of the ponds and other water reservoirs for the recovery of larval forms from the molluscan intermediaries, examination of the sullage farms for eggs and larvae, and the study of the eggs and larvae outside the body of the hosts. As a result of these investigations life histories of some of the parasites were studied in the scheme. Thus, Sinha [1950] described the life history of Cotylophoron cotylophorum. Thapar and Tandon [1952] gave a detailed account of the life history of the common liver fluke of India, Fasciola gigantica, from the cattle and buffaloes from India. Later Thapar and Singh [1954] described the life history of Trichuris (Trichocephalus) ovis of sheep and goats. In the course of our investigations, several methods for the study of the mor- phology and life histories of the helminth parasites were evolved or improved upon which have been reported in the works already published. Data thus established have 211 31 AR/56 12
212 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITE [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, given a clear picture of the position of the helminthic infections of the domestic ani- mals and the mode of their spread in the region under review. All these results help in the study of the control measures and can be applied under field conditions. I. SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES A large number of animals have been examined and a fairly large number of new records of parasites at the localities and in the hosts are reported in Tables IDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGE THAPAR 213 TABLE I214 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITE [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGE THAPAR 215 TABLE II New records of parisites in cattle Name of the parasites Location in host Locality with new records Cotylophoron cotyhphorum rumen Bareilly, Gorakhpur, Kanpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Moradabad, Muzaffarnagar (U.P.) Muzaffarpur, Patna, Ranchi (Bihar) Barhampur, Sambalpur, Cuttack (Orissa) Begarhat, Barhambasia, Burdwan, Dacca, Faridpur, Jessore, Jeypore, Kharagpur, Kurseong, Khulna, Mymensingh, Midnapore, Tippera (Bengal) Dibrugarh, Dhubri, Gauhati, Jorhat, Silchar (Assam) Eurvytrema pancreaticum! gall bladder Darjeeling, Kalimpong (Bengal) Gauhati, Jorhat, Silchar (Assam) Fasciola gigantica liver Agra, Bareilly, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Moradabad, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur (U. P.) Muzaffarpur, Patna, Ranchi (Bihar) Berhampur, Cuttack (Orissa) Burdwan, Darjeeling, Howrah, Raj- shahi (Bengal) Dibrugarh, Gauhati, Jorhat (Assam) *Fasciola hepatica liver Cuttack (Orissa) Fischoederius elongatus rumen Lucknow, Muzaffarnagar (U. P.) Berhampur, Cuttack (Orissa) Barisal, Kharagpur (Bengal) Dibrugarh (Assam) Paramphistomum cervi gall bladder, liver, bile duct Bareilly, Gorakhpur, Kanpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Moradabad, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur (U. P.) Patna, Ranchi (Bihar) Kharagpur, Khulna, Perojpore (Bengal) Dibrugarh, Gauhati (Assam) Gastrothylax crumenifer rumen Agra, Bareilly, Kanpur, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Muzaffarnagar, Saharan- pur, Shahjehanpur (U.P.) Arrah, Muzaffarpur, Patna, Ranchi, Samastipur, Kisnenganj (Bihar) *Rare record for India
216 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITE [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 217 TABLE II218 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITE [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 219 TABLE III New records of parasites recorded from sheep Name of parasites Location in host Locality with new records Fasciola gigantica liver Bareilly, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Nainital, Saharanpur (U. P.) Berhampur, Cuttack (Orissa) Fischoederius cobboldi rumen Lucknow (U. P.) Fischoederius elongatus rumen Lucknow (U. P.) Berhampur, Cutack (Orissa) Cotylophoron cotylophorum rumen Bareilly, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Nainital, Saharanpur, Moradabad (U. P.) Berhampur, Cuttack, Puri (Orissa) Ranchi (Bihar) Calcutta (Bengal) Dibrugarh (Assam) Gastrothylax crumenifer rumen Bareilly, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur (U. P.) Arrah, Ranchi, Samastipur (Bihar) Berhampur, Cuttack, Puri (Orissa) Calcutta, Dacca (Bengal) Dibrugarh (Assam) Paramphistomum cervi rumen Patna (Bihar) Paramphistomum explanatum rumen Lucknow, Muzaffarnagar (U.P.) Paramphistomum orthocoelium rumen Lucknow, Muzaffarnagar (U.P.) Schistosoma indicum hepatic portal veins Lucknow, Saharanpur (U.P.) Ascaris vitulorum intestine Arrah (Bihar) Bunostomum trigonocephalum intestine Bareilly, Meerut, Moradabad (U.P.) Ranchi (Bihar), Berhampur (Orissa) Calcutta, Dacca (Bengal) Dibrugarh (Assam) 31 AR/56 13
220 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IIIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 221 TABLE III (concld.) New records of parasites recorded from sheep Name of parasites Location in host Locality with new records Avitellina centripunctata intestine Bareilly, Etawah, Kanpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Moradabad, Muzaffanagar, Saharanpur (U.P.) Arrah, Muzaffarpur (Bihar) Berhampur (Orissa) Calcutta (Bengal) Avitellina lahorea intestine Lucknow (U.P.) Avitellina tatia intestine Lucknow (U.P.) Cysticercus tenuicollis abdominal cavity Lucknow, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur (U. P.) Muzaffarpur (Bihar) Cuttack (Orissa) Calcutta (Bengal) Echinococcus granulosus (lar- val forms and cysts) liver, lungs Bareilly, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Moradabad, Muzaffarnagar, Saharan- pur (U. P.) Berhampur, Cuttack (Orissa) Moniezia benedeni intestine Lucknow (U. P.) Moniezia denticulata intestine Lucknow (U. P.) Moniezia expansa intestine Bareilly, Etawah, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Moradabad, Muzaf- farnagar, Nainital, Saharanpur (U. P.) Arrah, Muzaffarpur (Bihar) Cuttack (Orissa) Calcutta (Bengal) Dibrugarh (Assam) Stilesia globipunctata intestine Etawah, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Muzaf- farnagar, Saharanpur (U. P.) Arrah, Ranchi (Bihar) Berhampur, Cuttack, Puri (Orissa) Calcutta (Bengal) Dibrugarh (Assam) Measles and sunflowerlike cysts inner lining of stomach Lucknow (U. P.)
222 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES [Vol, XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IV New records of parasites recovered from goat Name of parasites Location in host Locality with new records Gotylophoron cotylophorum rumen Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur (U. P.) Muzaffarpur, Ranchi (Bihar) Sambalpur Berhampur, Cuttack (Orissa) Burdwan, Calcutta, Chittagong, Dacca, Dinajpur, Howrah, Jaypore, Jalpai- guri, Jessore, Kharagpur, Raiganj, Rangpur, Tippera, (Bengal) Dicrocoelium sp. Bile duct Dibrugarh; Dhubri, Gauhati, Jorhat, Silchar (Assam) Darjeeling (Bengal) Eurytrema pancreaticum liver Darjeeling (Bengal) Dibrugarh, Gauhati, Jorhat, Shillong (Assam) Fesciola gigantica liver Bareilly, Lucknow, Meerut, Moradabad (U. P.) Muzaffarpur (Bihar) Berhampur (Orissa) Chuadanga, Dacca, Murshidabad (Bengal) Dibrugarh, Jorhat, Shillong (Assam) Fischoederius cobboldi rumen Gonda (U. P.) Samastipur (Bihar) Dibrugarh, Shillong (Assam) Fischoederius elongatus rumen Lucknow (U. P.) Jalpaiguri (Bengal) Gauhati (Assam) Gastrothylax crumenifer rumen Gonda, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur (U. P.) Sambalpur, Berhampur, Cuttack (Orissa) Muzaffarpur, Ranchi (Bihar) Barisal, Burdwan, Bagerhat, Bogra, Calcutta, Chittagong, Chuadanga, Dacca, Dinajpur, Jalpaiguri, Jessore, Mainapur, 24-Parganas, Raiganj (Bengal) Dhubri, Dibrugarh, Jorhat, Silchar, Gauhati (Assam) *Homalogaster paloniae caecum Shillong (Assam) * New host record.
December, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 223 TABLE IV224 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IVDecember, .1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 225 TABLE IV226 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, Besides these, there were several recoveries of the parasites reported from other animals, domestic and wild, that came under observation during the course of our investigations. They are listed in Table IV-A. Some of these were sent for identification by the Directors of the provinces under investigation. TABLE IV-A Parasites recovered from other animals Host Parasites Location in host Locality Elephant Fasciola jacksoni liver Gauhati (Assam) Gastrodiscus secundus intestine Jeypore (Orissa) Pseudodiscus collinsi stomach, intestine Muzaffarpur (Bihar) eggs at Gauhati Pseudodiscus hawkesii intestine Muzaffarpur, Assam Choniangium epistomum faeces Muzaffarpur, Assam Murshidia murshidia faeces Aska (Orissa) Muzaffarpur, Assam Quilonia renniei intestine Assam Sclerostome eggs faeces Gauhati (Assam) Cat Chlamydonema praeputialis stomach Burdwan (Bengal) Taenia pisiformis intestine Puri (Orissa) Lion's cub Texascaris leonina intestine Jeypore (Orissa) Horse Pseudodiscus collinsi intestine Patna, Chapra (Bihar) Habronema megastoma intestine Lucknow (U. P.) Belgachia (Bengal) Habronema muscae stomach Patna (Bihar) Oxyuris equi intestine Muzaffarpur (Bihar) Chapra (Bihar) Jalpaiguri (Bengal) Setaria equina eye Muzaffarpur, Chapra, Purnea (Bihar) Mymensingh (Bengal)
December, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 227 TABLE IVA228 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IVADecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 229 It would, thus, appear that in giving the above new records of the occurrence of the helminth parasites in domesticated animals in the area under review, the following points stand out prominently. Homalogaster paloniae, a common parasite of the buffaloes and cattle has been recovered also from goats in Shillong (Assam). Gastrodiscus aegyptiacus and Pseudodiscus collinsi, two common parasites of horses are being reported for the first time from cattle in India. This occurrence is unique, as it is generally believed that none of the parasites of horses are found in other domestic animals and man, and vice versa in spite of their close association from times immemorial and this falsifies the universally accepted principle. Fasciola hepatica, a common parasite of cattle, sheep and goats in Europe and other Western countries, is of rare occurrence in India, a single specimen being recovered from the liver of cattle in Cuttack (Orissa). The form generally found in India is Fasciola gigantica originally reported from Africa by Cobbold [1855]. Kemp [1919] recorded its occurrence for the first time in Seistan (Asia) from sheep. He, in his description, gave the distinguishing features of this species as against F. hepatica. Varma [1953], without reference to this work, assigned this Asiatic form under a new designation, Fasciola indica, basing his conclusions on the examination of the material collected by him from India from goats and buffaloes and also from the materials made available to him at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. He distinguished this new form mainly on the nature of the cuticular scales, size of the eggs and the presence of a post-buccal ring. If his contention of creating a new species is accepted, the form reported in this survey as Fasciola gigantica would naturally fall under F. indica. One point which has been overlooked by either of the two observers who have described this form under two different names for the form recovered by them respectively is the presence of several rows of spines on the cirrus. The cirrus is always armed in the Indian species. A new genus, Olveria, with two species has also been reported and described from cattle and buffaloes in India. Paramphistomum gotoi, a rare parasite reported so far from the Far East by Fukui [1926] and later by Dawes [1936] from Malaya, has also been recovered from the buffaloes in Lucknow on several occasions and appears to be fairly common in this country. MULTIPLE INFECTIONS It is worthwhile to mention that during the course of our survey of helminth parasites, several cases of multiple infections, i.e. the occurrence of two or more species of worms infesting the same organ of the same individual host, were observed. This multiplicity of parasites infecting the same organ in the body of the same host further undermines the health of the host and deserves special consideration. The details of such cases of multiple infections of helminths in the ruminants are given below: 1. Fasciola gigantica occurring along with : (a) Paramphistomum cervi230 SURVEY OF HELMINTH PARASITES [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, 2. Paramphistomum orthocoeliumDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 231 10. Gongylonema pulchrum232 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE V Statement showing incidence and intensity of infection in buffaloes Name of parasites April, 1939 May, 1939 June, 1939 No. examined No. infected per cent of Infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of Infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal Paramphisomum cervi 19 17 89.5 1,712 100 17 16 94.1 1,779 111 19 19 100 3,519 185 Paramphistomum explanatum 19 .. .. .. .. 17 .. .. .. .. 19 .. .. .. .. Parnmphistomum orthocoelium 19 3 15.8 108 36 17 .. .. .. .. 19 .. .. .. .. Cotylophoron cotylophorum 19 3 15.8 239 79 17 .. .. .. .. 19 1 5.2 5 5 Gastrothylax crumenifer 19 19 100 11,853 624 17 17 100 7,660 451 19 19 100 7,548 397 Fischoenerius elongatus 19 .. .. .. .. 17 .. .. .. .. 19 .. .. .. .. Fasciola gigantica 19 15 79 202 13 17 13 76.5 156 12 19 13 68.4 97 7 Mecistocirrum digitatus 19 2 10.5 156 78 17 .. .. .. .. 19 4 21 19 5 Setaria labiatopapillose 19 15 79 60 4 17 10 59 50 5 19 15 79 159 11
December, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 233 TABLE V234 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 235 TABLE V236 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 237 TABLE V238 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTHA [Vol. XXVI. Part IV, TABLE VDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 239 TABLE V240 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VI Statement showing incidence and intensity of infection in cattle. Name of parasites April, 1939 May, 1939 June, 1939 No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal Paramphstomum cervi 6 3 50 277 92 17 17 100 1,993 117 20 20 100 3,685 184 Paramphistomum explanatum 6 .. .. .. .. 17 .. .. .. .. 20 .. .. .. .. Paramphistomum orthocoelium 6 3 50 56 19 17 .. .. .. .. 20 .. .. .. .. Cotylophoron cotylophorum 6 3 50 188 63 17 7 41.2 666 95 20 9 45 826 92 Gastrothylax crumenifer 6 4 66.6 1,770 442 17 17 100 7,120 419 20 20 100 8,095 405 Fischoederius elongatus 6 2 33.3 179 89 17 1 6 9 9 20 .. .. .. .. Fasciola gigantica 6 .. .. .. .. 17 15 88.2 105 13 20 1 70 127 9 Bunostomum trigonocephalum 6 4 66.6 32 8 17 .. .. .. .. 20 .. .. .. .. Oesophagostomum radiatum 6 .. .. .. .. 17 .. .. .. .. 20 .. .. .. .. Mecistocirrus digitatus 6 .. .. .. .. 17 9 53 60 7 20 12 60 54 4 Setaria labiatopapillosa 6 2 33.3 6 3 17 12 70.6 39 3 20 15 75 54 3 Thelazia rhodesii 6 1 16.6 2 2 17 3 17.6 4 1 20 6 30 8 1 NOTE.December, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 241 TABLE VI242 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 243 TABLE VI244 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 245 TABLE VI246 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 247 TABLE VI248 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VII Statement showing incidence and intensity of infection in sheep Name of paras ites April, 1939 May, 1939 June, 1939 No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal Paramphistomum orthocoelium 22 4 18.2 94 23 24 2 8.3 59 30 25 8 32 330 41 Paramphistomum explanatum 22 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. 25 1 4 6 6 Cotylophoron cotylophorum 22 10 45.4 2,445 245 24 6 25 652 108 25 4 16 476 119 Gastrothylax crumenifer 22 15 68.2 3,358 224 24 19 79.2 3.305 174 25 24 96 4,161 173 Fischoederius elongatus 22 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. Fasciola gigantica 22 1 4.5 3 3 24 1 4.2 9 9 25 4 16 38 9 Haemonchus contortus 22 7 31.7 28 4 24 7 29.2 136 19 25 5 20 22 4 Bunostomum trigonocephalum 22 13 59.1 101 8 24 12 50 58 5 25 19 76 282 15 Gaigeria pachyscelis 22 4 18.2 4 1 24 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. Trichostrongylus colubriformis 22 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. Strongyloides papillosus 22 1 4.5 20 20 24 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. Oesophagostomum columbianum 22 15 68.2 182 12 24 19 82.5 364 19 25 23 92 643 28 Trichosephalus ovis 22 16 72.7 103 6 24 18 75 188 10 25 15 60 132 9 Moniezia expansa 22 21 95.5 65 3 24 24 100 81 3 25 25 100 65 3 Avtellina centripunctata 22 7 31.7 15 2 24 10 41.6 26 2 25 9 36 16 2 Stilesia globipunctata 22 16 72.7 68 4 24 14 58.3 42 3 25 22 88 516 23 NOTE. In the calculation of average load per infection fractions of one-half or less have been omitted and those more than one-half counted as one.
December, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 249 TABLE VII250 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 251 TABLE VII252 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VII-(contd.) Statement showing incidence and intensity of infection in sheep Name of parasites April, 1940 May, 1940 June, 1940 No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection Cotylophoron cotylophorum 25 16 64 3,089 193 26 17 65.4 1,714 101 24 16 66.6 1,953 122 P. orthocoelium 25 1 4 71 71 26 2 7.7 273 136 24 .. .. .. .. Gastrothylax crumenifer 25 10 40 1,585 158 26 18 69.2 3,458 192 24 20 83.3 3,486 174 Fasciola gigantica 25 .. .. .. .. 26 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. P. explanatum 25 1 4 116 116 26 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. Bunostomum trigonocephalum 25 23 92 432 19 26 24 92.3 225 9 24 16 66.6 69 4 Gaigeria pachyscelis 25 3 12 3 1 26 5 19.2 9 2 24 .. .. .. .. Haemonchus contortus 25 9 36 71 8 26 12 46.1 95 8 24 11 45.8 83 8 Oesophagostomum columbianum 25 21 84 149 7 26 8 30.8 62 8 24 15 62.5 68 4 Trichocephalus ovis 25 24 96 586 24 26 25 96.1 457 18 24 24 100.0 423 17 Trichostrongylus colubriformis 25 .. .. .. .. 26 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. Strongyloides papillosus 25 1 4 4 4 26 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. Moniezia expansa 25 25 100 54 2 26 26 100.0 57 2 24 24 100.0 47 2 Avitellina centripunctata 25 18 72 40 2 26 14 53.8 20 1 24 12 50.0 17 1 Stilesia globipunctata 25 23 92 262 11 26 26 1000 485 19 24 24 100.0 347 14 NOTE. In the calculation of average load per infection fractions of one-half or less have been omitted while those more than one-half counted as one.
December, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 253 TABLE VII254 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 255 TABLE VII256 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIII Statement showing incidence and intensity of infection in goats Name of parasites April, 1939 May, 1939 June, 1939 No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal Paramphistomum orthocoelium 22 8 36.3 539 67 24 2 8.3 142 71 25 5 20 244 49 Paramphistomum explanatum 22 .. .. .. .. 24 1 4.2 7 7 25 .. .. .. .. Cotylophoron cotylophorum 22 13 59.1 2,382 183 24 8 33.3 793 99 25 5 20 503 100 Gastrothylax crumenifer 22 12 54.5 2,140 178 24 20 83.3 2,351 117 25 22 88 3,369 153 Fischoederias elongatus 22 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. Faciola gigantica 22 3 13.6 35 12 24 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. HDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 257 TABLE VIII258 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIII-(contd.) Statement showing incidence and intensity of infection in goats Name of Parasites October, 1933 November, 1939 December, 1939 No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered from the infected animals Average load per animal Paramphistomum orth ocoelium 23 .. .. .. .. 23 .. .. .. .. 22 .. .. .. .. Paramphistomum explanatum 23 .. .. .. .. 23 1 4.3 2 2 22 .. .. .. .. Cotylophoron cotylophorum 23 11 48 2,357 214 23 16 70 3,792 237 22 17 74 3,571 210 Gastrothylax crumenifer 23 17 74 3,383 199 23 7 30.4 1,108 158 22 8 34.4 311 39 Fischoederius elongatus 23 .. .. .. .. 23 .. .. .. .. 22 .. .. .. .. Faciola gigantica 23 .. .. .. .. 23 .. .. .. .. 22 .. .. .. .. HDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 259 TABLE VIII260 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIIIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 261 TABLE VIII-(contd.) Statement showing incidence and intensity of infection in goats Name of parasites July, 1940 August, 1940 September, 1940 No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection Cotylophoron cotylophorum 27 9 33.3 1,310 145 25 22 88 5,229 238 24 18 75.0 3,183 177 Paramphistomum orthocoelium 27 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. Gastrothylax crumenifer 27 23 85.2 4,062 176 25 20 80 3,559 178 24 17 71.0 4,419 60 Bunostomum trigonocephalum 27 19 70.4 113 6 25 22 88 240 11 24 21 87.5 79 4 Haemonchus contortus 27 17 63.0 127 7 25 19 76 343 18 24 23 95.9 830 36 Gaigeria pachyscelis 27 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. Oesophagostomum columbianum 27 20 74.0 219 11 25 18 72 167 9 24 19 79.1 137 7 Trichocephalus ovis 27 27 100.0 617 23 25 25 100 837 33 24 24 100.0 557 23 Strongyloides papillosus 27 .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. Moniezia expansa 27 20 96.3 41 2 25 25 100 59 2 24 24 100.0 74 3 Avittelina centripunctata 27 14 51.8 24 2 25 11 44 33 3 24 8 33.3 14 2 Stilesia globipunctata 27 27 100.0 439 16 25 25 100 714 28 24 24 100.0 627 26 NOTE. In the calculations of average load per infection fractions of one-half or less have been omitted and those more than one-half counted as one.
262 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE VIIIDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 263 TABLE VIII-(concld.) Statement showing incidence and intensity of infection in goats Name of parasites January, 1941 February, 1941 March, 1941 No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection No. examined No. infected Per cent of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per infection Cotylophoron cotylophorum 23 10 43.5 963 96 16 3 18.8 109 36 22 4 18.1 294 73 Paramphistomum orthocoelium 23 .. .. .. .. 16 .. .. .. .. 22 .. .. .. .. Gastrothylax crumenifer 23 4 17.4 190 47 16 3 18.8 427 142 22 5 22.7 2,178 435 Bunostomum trigonocephalum 23 11 48.0 92 8 16 13 81.2 172 13 22 14 63.6 119 8 Haemonchus contortus 23 19 82.6 187 10 16 8 50.0 130 16 22 11 50.0 50 5 Gaigeria pachyscelis 23 .. .. .. .. 16 .. .. .. .. 22 .. .. .. .. Oesophagostomum columbianum 23 12 52.1 64 5 16 7 43.7 46 6 22 15 68.1 122 8 Trichocephalus ovis 23 20 87.0 277 14 16 15 93.7 147 10 22 18 81.7 237 13 Strongyloides papillosus 23 1 4.3 126 126 16 1 6.2 79 79 22 1 4.5 16 16 Moniezia expansa 23 20 87.0 28 1 16 14 87.5 25 2 22 22 100.0 29 1 Avitellina centripunctata 23 7 30.4 18 3 16 11 68.8 35 3 22 13 59.1 31 2 Stilesia globipunctata 23 23 100.0 282 12 16 15 93.7 145 10 22 20 90.9 270 13 NOTE. In the calculations of average load per infection fractions of one-half or less have been omitted and those more than one-half counted as one.
264 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IX A Incidence and intensity of infection with Olveria indica, Olveria bosi and Param- phistomum gotoi in buffalo of Lucknow from June, 1950 to May, 1951 Month Olveria indica Number examined Number infected Percentage of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per animal June 1950 10 9 90 550 61 July 1950 14 9 64.2 2,357 261 August 1950 22 10 45.4 6,488 648 September 1950 18 9 50 6,850 761 October 1950 16 11 68.7 3,380 307 November 1950 20 8 40 1,702 212 December 1950 18 10 55.5 2,510 251 January 1951 20 14 70 7,866 561 February 1951 18 14 77.7 5,176 369 March 1951 20 8 40 714 89 April 1951 21 10 47.6 13,276 1,327 May 1951 17 6 35.2 1,106 184
December, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 265 TABLE IX A266 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IX ADecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 267 TABLE IX B Incidence and intensity of infection with Olveria indica, Olveria bosi and Paramphistomum gotoi in buffalo of Lucknow from June, 1951 to May, 1952 Month Olveria indica Number examined Number infected Percentage of infection Total No. of parasites recovered Average load per animal June 1951 16 7 43.7 852 121 July 1951 19 8 42.1 1,455 181 August 1951 17 9 52.9 275 30 September 1951 19 8 42.1 5,825 728 October 1951 14 6 42.8 2,818 469 November 1951 17 11 64.7 5,171 470 December 1951 16 7 43.7 445 63 January 1952 17 8 47 7,821 977 February 1952 19 10 52.6 8,403 840 March 1952 18 9 50 7,515 835 April 1952 18 10 55.5 1,127 112 May 1952 21 13 61.9 6,342 487 31 AR/56 19
268 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE IX BDecember, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 269 TABLE IX B270 SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF HELMINTH [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, CONCLUSION Foregoing data reveal some very important results. It would be observed that some parasites are very common and show heavy degree of infection while others are rare and occasional. Of these, amphistomes are abundantly found in all the four ruminants, buffaloes, cattle, sheep and goats. Gastrothylax crumenifer and Cotylophoron cotylophorum are very common and show maximum degree of infection and heavy load per animal, the highest degree of infection being during the rainy season. Other amphistomes when present are not so abundant and are generally seasonal. Olveria indica [Thapar and Sinha 1945] is very common in cattle and buffaloes, while Olveria bosi [Tandon 1951] and Paramphistomum gotoi are very common in buffaloes, at any rate in Lucknow where the incidence and intensity of infection for these parasites have been studied. Fukui [1926] and Dawes [1936] have both re- ported the occurrence of P. gotoi as a rare parasite in the Far East and Malaya respectively. Our observations, however, at Lucknow indicate that it is fairly common in buffaloes, showing heaviest infection during the months of November to April when most of the specimens are immature. From May onwards mature specimens are encountered in this host. It may be observed that certain other amphistomes have been reported for the first time from the animals under review, especially from India. Particular mention is made of the occurrence of Gastrodiscus aegyptiacus and Pseudodiscus collinsi, the two common parasites of horses, reported to occur also in cattle, and thus the immunity against the parasites of horses in man and other domestic animals, as was believed, [Cameron 1926] is not eternal, at any rate for these two parasites. Fasciola hepatica is a parasite not commonly found in this country. In the area under review, only a single specimen was recovered during the entire period of the working of the scheme and is thus of a very rare occurrence in this country. The most commonly found species in India is Fasciola gigantica, which has recently been renamed by Varma [1953] as Fasciola indica. This form is more abundantly found in buffaloes and cattle than in sheep and goats in which animals it is found with moderate degree of intensity in some places. The cirrus is always armed with several rows of spines, a character which has escaped the attention of all previous workers. Amongst the Cestodes, Moniezia expansa is very common and M. benedeni is occasional. Avitellina and Stilesia are also found with moderate degree of intensity. Specimens of Stephanofilaria assamensis have been recovered, not only from the hump sore and the yoke, but also from the tail and the feet of cattle in certain parts of Assam, Bengal and Orissa, causing lesions identical to those occurring in the hump. It may be pointed out that this parasite is not found in the hilly tracts of Assam and Bengal and is absent from the Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Trichuris ovis and Bunostomum trigonocephalum are very common in sheep and goats, but cattle and buffaloes also show some infection with these parasites. Haemonchus contortus is very abundant, but Gaigeria pachyscelis is of rare occurrence in these animals. The latter parasite is not generally found in cattle and buffaloes. Oesophagostome species are commonly found in sheep and other ruminants and are reported in Tables I-IV. Gongylonema pulchrum is not so common.
December, 1956] GOBIND SINGH THAPAR 271 One important record, though not of helminthic origin, needs special mention, as it has not been reported so far from India. A case of Myiasis was caused by the occurrence of Eristalis larva specimens of which were referred to us by a veterinary assistant surgeon from Bengal. This is the first record of Eristalis larva from India. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author wishes to record his indebtedness to Sir Arthus Olver, sometime- back Animal Husbandry Commissioner with the Government of India, for the keen interest he took in the progress of this work at Lucknow in fact, it was mainly through his efforts that the work on the Helminthic Infections in the domesticated animals was initiated in India. His successors have constantly continued to encourage the working of the scheme at Lucknow and the author offers his thanks to all of them. The author is also thankful for active help and encouragement received from Shri P. N. Nanda, the present Animal Husbandry Commissioner with the Government of India who tried to place the scheme on a permanent basis at Lucknow. The author acknowledges the help and co-operation of the Directors of Animal Husbandry of all the five provinces. The author is also thankful to the authorities of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the financial aid and other facilities offered in the working of this scheme at Lucknow. REFERENCES Cameron, T. W. M. (1926). "The, Helminth Parasites of Animals and Human Disease." Proc. Rov. Soc. Med., 20 547-556 Cobbold, T. S. (1855). "Description of a New Trematode worm, Fasciola gigantica." Edin. Phil. J., N. S. 2 262-67 Dawes, B. (1936). "On a collection of Paramphistomidae from Malaya, with revision of the genera Paramphistomum and Gastrothylax." Parasit., 28 330-54 Fenwick, D. W. (1937). "A Census of the Intestinal Parasites of lambs in South Wales." J. Helminth. 15,167-176 Fukui, T. (1926). "Three New Species of Amphistomes from Mammals." J. Fac. Sci., Imp. Univ., Tokyo, sect, IV. Zool 1, 97-133 Kemp, S. (1919). "Liverfluke of sheep in Seistan." Rec. Ind. Mus. 5 62-63 Sinha, B. B. (1950). "Life History of Cotylophoron cotylophorum, a trematode parasite from the rumen of cattle, sheep and goats." Indian J. vet. Sci., 20 1-11 Swales, W. E. (1940). "Helminth Parasites and Parasitic Diseases of sheep in Canada. A survey and some preliminary studies on existing problems." Can. J. Res., 18 29-48 Tandon, R. S. (1951). "A new Amphistome, Olveria bosi n. sp. from the rumen of buffalo, Bos bubalis. from Lucknow." Indian J. Helminth., 3 3-100 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA I274 STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, In many endemic areas, heavy mortality continues to occur in spite of two inoculations carried out in a year and there are instances of even breakdown in immunity soon after the vaccination. In such cases plurality of strains within the species Past. septica was considered to be the probable cause. Investigations were, therefore, taken up at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute with a view to study the serological, biochemical and immunological differences in Past. septica isolated from cases of the disease in different outbreaks and from different parts of the country so as to select suitable strains for the preparation of haemorrhagic septicaemia vaccines. Serological studies: Rao [1953] typed serologically, by agglutination and agglu- tin-absorption tests, 73 authentic strains of Past. septica. Forty-one strains included in this study were isolated from cattle, i.e. 11 from buffaloes, one from a goat, 2 from sheep, 3 from rabbits (N. C. T. C.), one from a cavy (N. C. T. C.), one from a cat, one from a pig, nine from fowls, 2 from mice and one unclassified strain (N. C. T. C.). The results of these tests confirmed the earlier observations of several workers such as Jones [1921-22], Roderick [1922], Fitch and Nelson [1923], Lal [1927], Cornelius [1929], Yusef [1935], Khalifa [1936], etc. that on serological grounds, the strains of Past. septica cannot be classified according to the species of animals from which they are isolated and also that there are several serological groups within the species. In this study, 6 strains were found to correspond to Group I, 4 to Group II and 12 to Group IV of Cornelius. It was interesting to observe that 30 strains belonged to one group serologically indistinguishable from the I. V. R. I. stock strain P 52. However, the possibility of these strains belonging to Group III of Cornelius could not be completely ruled out, as the Group III strain available with Rao might not have been fully antigenic for absorption tests on account of its possible change to 'R' type. The remaining strains did not fall into any of the groups tested. On the basis of the above observations, Rao [1953] considered that the incorpo- ration of strains representative of all the different antigenic groups was highly essen- tial to overcome 'break-down' in the immunity produced by the present vaccines. Biochemical studies: With a view to find out if the biochemical reactions would follow the serological differences, Rao [1953] subjected all the 73 strains to biochemi- cal studies but did not find characters that might be considered specific for any serological grouping. Immunological studies: Twenty seven authentic strains of Past. septica, 24 from the cases of haemorrhagic septicaemia in bovines and three from the cases of fowl cholera, were subjected to immunological studies by the mouse protection tests on the lines of Roberts [1947] with a view to ascertain, if, like serological groups, there also existed different immunological groups. From these studies, it appeared that all the 24 strains from cases of haemorrhagic septicaemia in bovines belonged to one immunological group, corresponding to type I of Roberts while the three strains isolated from fowls belonged to a different immunological group(s). The immunological studies are, however, being pursued further with a larger number of strains collected from various parts of the country and specific anti-sera are being produced using formalinised as well as heat-killed antigens.
December, 1956] M. R. DHANDA ET. AL. 275 Preparation of the vaccine (a) As the I. V. R. I. stock strain P52 which had hitherto been employed for the production of H. S. Commercial broth and agar-wash vaccines, represented the largest serological group and all the strains isolated from cases of haemorrhagic septicaemia in bovines in this country subjected to immunological study appeared to belong to one group, this strain was selected for the preparation of the vaccine in the present study. (b) With a view to securing information on several other important points having a direct bearing on the production of a potent vaccine, investigations were carried out at the I. V. R. I. and the following data were obtained: Rajagopalan [1942] found that (i) a suspension of Past. septica in a concentra- tion of 3,000 million organisms per c.c. in 2 per cent phosphate buffer pH. 7.6 was completely sterilized when exposed for 5 minutes at 37ºC to the action of the follow- ing disinfectants at the concentrations shown: Lysot 0.11 per cent Merthiolate 1 in 22,500 Alcohol 12 per cent Formalin 0.5 per cent, (ii) that in this respect cresol and phenol were inferior to lysol. Cresol took 24 minutes at a concentration of 0.15 per cent and phenol 10 minutes at a concentration of 0.2 per cent, (iii) that carefully heat-killed (56ºC for 5 minutes) unpreserved vaccine was antigenically better than heated and preserved, or a preserved vaccine, (iv) that lysol and merthiolate significantly impaired the immunogenicity of the vaccine, but alcohol and formalin did not, (v) that alcohol prevented the growth of cocci and subtilis at a concentration of 7.5 per cent but not at 5 per cent, (vi) that formalin prevented the growth of the organisms at 0.01 per cent but not at 0.001 per cent, however, growth of fungus was not prevented by formalin until a con- centration of 0.5 per cent was reached, (vii) that vaccines made from broth cultures sterilised by heat (56ºC for ½ hour) or by disinfectants were inferior to vaccines of the same strength made from agar slants washed in buffer phosphate. If, however, the broth culture was washed and resuspended in phosphate buffer before steriliza- tion, the loss in potency did not occur. It appeared that the immunizing antigens were impaired when sterilization was carried out by heat or disinfectants with the organisms in contact with foreign proteins, (viii) that it was highly important to ensure that the structure of the essential parts of the germs, particularly of their surface layers did not suffer by the treatment adopted to kill them, and (ix) that a vaccine made from a 24-hour agar culture was as potent as one of the same strength from a 6-hour agar culture. (c) Later, during 1949-1952 experiments were undertaken with a view to explore the possibilities of evolving strains, which might be used for the production of living vaccines. (1) Passage of strains of Past. septica in developing chick embryo and on different media Three virulent strains of Past. septica (Past. 52, 50 and 5) were serially passaged for over two years in the developing chick embryo and on different media, viz. plain agar with different pH values, bile agar and penicillin agar in order to see if any of these treatments would reduce their virulence and render them suitable for vaccine production.
276 STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, Only one strain, i.e. the bile passaged strain 'P 52' was found to lose its virulence after it had undergone as many as 384 passages but at the same time it showed evidence of loss in its antigenicity. (2) Passage of a strain of Past. septica through albino rats On lines similar to those used for the attenuation of viruses, a virulent strain of Past. septica was passaged in albino rats, which are normally highly resistant to this organism, in the hope that the resulting attenuated strain might prove useful in the successful vaccination of cattle against haemorrhagic septicaemia. Thirty- one serial passages were carried out by the transference of blood from one rat to another and cultures obtained at the 5th, 10th, 15th, 20th and 31st passage were tested for virulence in white rats, guinea-pigs and white mice to see if there was any evidence of attenuation. The strain was found to have assumed an enhanced viru- lence for rats and guinea-pigs, but no evidence of attenuation for white mice could be noticed. In view of this finding, the strain was not tested in cattle, as no appre- ciable change in its pathogenicity for bovines could be expected. In view of the above findings coupled with the immunological studies, it was decided to prepare H. S. Vaccine on the following lines: (i) To incorporate stock strain P52 of Past. septica after freshly passaging it through a healthy bovine so as to ensure the full presence of capsular substance, (ii) To sterilise the vaccine by the addition of 0.25 per cent formalin and (iii) to add adjuvants with a view to induce maximal antibody response sus- tained over a long period. (d) Having briefly outlined the procedure for the production of vaccines, ex- periments were undertaken to select a suitable medium for the propagation of Past. septica that might yield a luxuriant growth and at the same time be economical. Several media such as nutrient agar with 0.2 per cent buffer salts (KH2PO4 and Na2 HPO4), nutrient agar containing 0.1 per cent creatinine, nutrient agar con- taining 0.5 per cent yeast extract, nutrient agar containing 0.5 per cent yeast extract and 04 per cent creatinine, nutrient agar containing 0.5 per cent yeast extract, and 0.1 per cent creatinine and ½ to 1 per cent glucose were tried, and the growth on each medium was compared. The following medium gave the best growth at our hands and was, therefore, adopted for the manufacture of the vaccine: Lab. Lamco. .3 gm. Peptone Difco .3 December, 1956] M. R. DHANDA ET. AL. 277 picked up and sown on the blood agar slants. The culture was then examined for capsulated (phase I) cells and if conforming to the desired characters, was inoculated in nutrient broth tubes, which were incubated at 37ºC for 24 hours. The roux flasks containing the yeast extract medium were seeded with the 24-hour old broth culture and incubated at 37ºC for a period of 24 hours. The growth was washed with formol-saline containing 0.25 per cent formalin. The washings were diluted with the same fluid to an opacity of 6-7 of Brown's scale and the product was kept overnight in the incubator. In the later brews, however, keeping in the incubator was eliminated and the vaccine was left at room temperature. Adjuvants were added to the bacterial suspension on the lines of Bain to give the following final product: Bacterial suspension 15 parts Liquid paraffin 10 parts Anhydrous lanolin 1 part The mixture was placed in a waring blender which was run for about five minutes. The final product was a thick white emulsion which has been found to remain stable for quite a long time. Contrary to the reports of experience of other workers in respect of the administration of such a thick vaccine, little difficulty has been en- countered in drawing in a syringe as well as in injecting this product with wide-bore (16 gauge) needle. However, in winter months the vaccine had to be sucked in the syringe directly with the nozzle after pouring it in a petri dish. (f) Effect of cultural conditions on the growth of Past. septica The following observations made at the Institute are reproduced as these are of interest in the context of this work. P 52 strain of Past. septica was grown on a liquid medium and it was found that (a) aeration increased the growth about four-fold, but when a stream of pure oxygen or hydrogen was passed, instead of air, nearly complete inhibition of growth occurred, (b) growth was not affected appreciably by (i) the complete removal of carbon dioxide from the environment, (ii) substitution of glucose with other common carbohydrates, or with some of the organic acids concerned with Kreb's cycle, (iii) addition of small quantities of certain hormones (thyroxine, stilboestrol, adrenaline, or insulin) and (iv) supplementation of plain broth with the common amino acids added singly. In the routine manufacture of the adjuvant vaccine, aeration of the cultures was not carried out as the process was laborious and time-consuming, and could hardly be suitable for employing on a large scale without special apparatus. The yield of the vaccine on the yeast-extract medium even without aeration was quite satisfactory and at an average 50-60 doses were obtained from a roux flask. Safety tests: The vaccine was tested for its safety on a very large number of cattle, buffaloes and calves under experimental as well as field conditions and was found to be quite safe. However, a small percentage of animals showed a rise of a degree or two in temperature and slight swelling at the site of inoculation, but these symptoms generally disappeared within 3 or 4 days. Potency tests: Series of tests were carried out in cattle with several brews to determine the immunogenic properties of the vaccine. The results are presented in Table II.
278 STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, TABLE II The results of potency test Brew No. No. of animals used in the experi- ment Details of inoculation Interval between vaccina- tion and challenge Challenge dose Result Percen- tage survival (vaccinated animals) Reac- tion in controls Percen- tage survivals (Controls) Result of bacterio- logical examina- tion in animals dying after chal- lenge Remarks Vaccina- ted animals Controls 1 5 1 ml. subcut 21 days 5 million mouse M. I. D. 0/2 0 0/1 0 ++ + 2 ml. subcut 21 days 2/2 100 2 31 1 ml. S/C. followed with another dose of 1 ml. S/C after 12 days 1 month do. 2/3 66.0 *1/1 100 + *Recovered after showing severe illness. 2 months do. 3/3 100 0/2 0 ++ 4 months do. 3/3 100 *1/2 50 + *do. 6 months do. 2/3 66.6 0/2 0 + ++ 2 ml. subcutaneously 1 month do. 3/3 100 *1/1 100 *do. 2 months do. 3/3 100 0/2 0 ++ 4 months do. 3/3 100 *l/2 50 + *do. 6 months do. 2/3 66.6 0/2 0 + ++ 3 32 2 ml. intramuscularly 15 days 5 million mouse M. I. D. 3/3 100 0/2 0 ++ 4 months 5/5 100 *l/2 50 + *do. 5 months 50 million mouse M. I. D. 3/5 60 0/2 0 ++ ++ 6 months 4/5 80 0/2 0 + ++ 8 months do. 3/4 75 0/2 0 + ++
December, 1956] M. R. DHANDA ET. AL. 279 TABLE II280 STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, It will be seen from these results that under laboratory conditions the adjuvant vaccine in a dose of 2 ml. to 4 ml. intra-muscularly confers adequate immunity in cattle weighing about 250 lb. for as long as 8 months, the maximum period tested so far. It may be stated, however, that for the test carried out after 8 months after vaccination only four animals were available, three of which survived and one died thereby indicating a survival rate of 75 per cent. Further tests will be carried out in due course of time to confirm this and to find out the longest period for which animals vaccinated with this new vaccine would remain immune. The animals were subjected to a very severe challenge, the dose of the virulent culture used for the test varying from 5 million mouse M. I. D. to as high a dose as 1,000 million mouse M. I. D. The virulence of the culture was determined in white mice each time a challenge dose was to be given. Trial on the comparative immunogenic value of the H. S. adjuvant vaccine with the routine commercial broth vaccine With a view to compare the immunogenic properties of the adjuvant vaccine with the routine commercial broth vaccine, the following immunity trials were carried out and the results are presented in Table III. TABLE III Comparative immunogenic value of the adjuvant vaccine and the commercial broth vaccine Trial No. No. of animals used in the ex- periment Details of inoculation Interval between vaccina- tion and challenge Challenge dose Result in vac- cinated animals Percen- tage survivals Results of bacteriologi- cal examina- tion in the animals dying after challenge I *23 Adjuvant vaccine 2 ml. intramuscularly 2½ months 50 million mouse M. I. D. ¾ 75 + Commercial broth vaccine 5 ml. S/C 21 days Do. ¼ 25 +++ Unvaccinated con- trols - Do. 0/2 0 ++ Adjuvant vaccine 2 ml. intramuscularly 5 months 50 million mouse M. I. D. 5/5 100 Commercial broth vaccine 5 ml. S/C 3 months and 6 days 50 million mouse M. I. D. 0/4 0 ++++ Unvaccinated con- trols December, 1956] M. R. DHANDA ET. AL.. 281 These results clearly show that the adjuvant vaccine is far superior to the routine commercial broth vaccine. It will be seen that in trial No. 1 in the case of adjuvant vaccine, the interval between vaccination and challenge was 2½ months and 5 months as compared to 21 days, and 3 months and 6 days respectively in the case of broth vaccine. Thus, the broth vaccine was at an advantage at the time of challenge. The experiment was planned in this manner, as it was considered that the broth vaccine was not likely to confer a lasting immunity, and the data obtained would be more conclusive if the adjuvant vaccine was found superior even when kept at a disadvantage. Trial on the comparative immunogenic value of the adjuvant vaccine and Bain's vaccine with the commerical broth vaccine During May, 1955, a consignment of Bain's adjuvant vaccines was received at this Institute for carrying out trials in regard to its safety and potency, for Indian cattle and buffaloes and in order to determine its efficacy as a prophylactic against haemorrhagic septicaemia in this country. This vaccine was found to be quite safe for cattle and buffaloes as well as for young calves and to possess quite good immuni- zing properties. Opportunity was availed to carry out tests with the Bain's vaccine and the adjuvant vaccine under study at this Institute to find out the comparative efficacy of the two products in relation to the old broth vaccine. The results are presented in Tables IV and V on the basis of trials in white mice and cattle respectively. Trial on mice Three groups each of 10 white mice were vaccinated with the three vaccines and five mice were left unvaccinated to serve as controls. All the surviving mice were challenged with a virulent culture of Past. septica after 21 days of vaccination. The results are set out in Table IV. TABLE IV Comparative immunogenic value of the Bain's vaccine and the adjuvant vaccine with the commercial broth vaccine No. of mice Details of inoculation Interval between vaccina- tion and challenge Challenge dose Result Percen- tage sur- vival Result of bacteriolo- gical examination in the animals dying after challenge 35 0.25 ml. intramuscularly (Bain's vaccine) 21 days 100 M.I.D. 4/5 80 + 0.25 ml. adjuvant vaccine do. do. 6/8 75 ++ Commercial broth vaccine 0.5 ml. S/C do. do. 2/8 25 ++++++ Unvaccinated controls - do. 0/5 0 +++++ NOTE. Numerators denote survivals. Denominators denote total number inoculated. + = Positive for P. septica on bacteriological examination. A 24-hour old broth culture of virulent P. septica was used for challenge purpose. Of this 1 ml. was determined to contain 1,000 million mouse M. I. D. Ten mice were inoculated with each vaccine but a few died of miscellaneous causes before challenge. 31 AR/56 22
282 STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, Trial on cattle On the basis of age, weight, etc. 30 hill cattle were divided into three equal groups of 10 animals and each group was vaccinated with one of the three vaccines. Besides, a fourth group of three animals was left unvaccinated to serve as controls. These controls were so selected as to represent all the three different age and weight groups of the vaccinated lots. After two months of vaccination, all the animals were challenged with ½ ml. of 10-1 of 24-hours broth culture of virulent Past. septica equivalent to 50 million mouse M. I. D. The results are presented in Table V. TABLE V Comparative immunogenic value of the Bain's vaccine and the adjuvant vaccine with the commercial broth vaccine No. of animals Details of inoculation Interval between vaccination and challenge Challenge dose Result Percentage survival Result of bacteriolo- gical examination in animals dying after challenge 0 3 ml. intra- muscularly (Bain's) 2 months 50 million mouse M. I. D. 10/10 100 10 3 ml. intra- muscularly. adjuvant vaccine 2 months 50 million mouse M. I. D. 10/10 100 10 5 m. subcu- taneously Commercial broth vaccine do. do. 0/10 0 +++++ +++++ 3 Unvaccinated do. do. 0/3 0 +++ NOTE. Numerators denote survivals. Denominators denote total number inoculated, + = Positive for P. septica on bacteriological examination. A 24-hour old broth culture of virulent P. septica was used for challenge purpose. Of this 1 ml. was determined to contain 1,000 million mouse M. I. D. The results in mice as well as in cattle clearly indicate that the adjuvant vaccine under study is as good as the Bain's vaccine in its immunizing properties, and that both the vaccines are far superior to the routine commercial broth vaccine. Field trials Three dairy farms having the history of annual recurrence of haemorrhagic septicaemia were selected for this study. In two farms, 699 animals were vaccinated with the adjuvant vaccine and the remaining stock numbering 463 with the commercial broth vaccine. At the third farm, 985 animals were vaccinated with the adjuvant vaccine, 891 with the Bain's vaccine and the remaining stock numbering over 15,000 with the commercial broth vaccine.
December, 1956] M. R. DHANDA ET. AL. 283 At one of the farms, the records of milk yield in respect of 166 buffaloes and 17 cows vaccinated with the adjuvant vaccine were compared with those of the milk yield of 93 buffaloes and 16 cows vaccinated with the broth vaccine. It was found that in both the groups there was an average fall in milk yield of about 0.8 to 1 lb. per animal for three days following vaccination and thereafter the milk yield returned to normal. This slight decrease in the milk yield is attributed to the inter- ference with the daily routine of the animals including handling and confinement to the stalls during this period. In the field trials, it could neither be possible to leave a few animals unvaccinated to serve as controls nor to subject a few representative animals of each of the vaccinated groups to an experimental challenge with a virulent culture, as the farm authorities were not prepared to take the risk involved. However, it is hoped that by comparing the figures of mortality due to haemorrhagic septicaemia in the different groups and also the death rate in the group of the animals vaccinated with the adju- vant vaccine with the average mortality figures of the past few years, some useful data regarding the efficacy of the vaccine under study will become available in due course of time. SUMMARY 1. The evolution of an adjuvant vaccine against haemorrhagic septicaemia is reported. 2. Large scale field and laboratory trials have shown that the vaccine is quite safe for cattle and buffaloes of all ages. 3. Tests have indicated that the immunity conferred by the administration of the vaccine is lasting for at least eight months against a heavy challenge with virulent P. septica. The results in respect of 8-month period, however, require to be confirmed on a larger number of animals as only four animals were used for challenge of which 3 (75 per cent) survived. 4. On comparative trials, this vaccine has been found to be definitely superior in its immunising properties to the commercial broth vaccine at present issued from the Institute. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are thankful to M/s. T. P. Banerjee, P. Chandra Sakariah and M. S. Sethi for technical assistance and to Shri S. Sen for compiling the figures given in Table I. They also thank Brigadier H. L. Bhandari, Col. Nayyar and Capt. W. H. Dean of the Remount, Veterinary and Farms Corps, Mr. D. N. Khurody, Milk Commissioner, Bombay and M/s. M. R. Marathe and N. R. Adker of the Aarey Milk Colony for their co-operation in field trials.
284 STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, REFERENCES Annual Report of the Pathology and Bacteriology Section (1942-43), Indian Veterinary Research Institute Bain, R. V. S. (1953). Personal communication Cornelius, J. T. (1929). An investigation of the serological relationships of twenty-six strains of Pasteurella J. Path. and Bact. 32, Pt. II, 355 Fitch, C. P. and Nelson, E. N. (1923). Prelim nary report on the differentiation of various organisms belonging to the haemorrhagic septicaemia group. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 63, 147 Jones, F. S. (1921-22). The types of Past. bubaliseptica in a dairy herd. J. Amer. Med. Ass. 63, 271 Khalifa, A. B. (1936). Pasteurella in animals and their inter-classification. Ministry of Agricul- ture, Egypt. Technical and Scientific Service, Veterinary Section, Bulletin No. 147. Quoted by Rao, U. R. K. (1953). Studies on Pasteurella septica. Thesis: University of Madras Lal, R. B. (1927). A study of certain organisms of the Pasteurella group with respect to specific complement fixation by the ice box method. Amer. J. Hyg. 7, 561 Rajagopalan, V. R. (1944). Haemorrhagic septicaemia in buffaloes and cattle. Indian Fmg. 5, No. 4, 176 Rao, U. R. K. (1953). Studies on Pasteurella septica. Thesis: University of Madras Roberts, R. S. (1947). An immunological study of Past. septica. J. Comp. Path., 57, 261 Roderick, L. M. (1922). Some antigenic relationships of Bipolaries septicus group of bacteria. J. Inf., Dis. 31, 313 Scientific report of the Division of Pathology and Bacteriology of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute for the year 1953-54 Yusef, H. S. (1935). A contribution to the serological classification of Pasteurella strains. J. Path. and Bact. 41
ABSTRACTS A comparison of the intradermal and subcutaneous routes in producing immunity to brucellosis in cattle. McDIARMID A. (1954). J. Comp. path. 64, 384-91 THE author has compared the results of immunity produced in groups of ten heifers vaccinated with 'Cotton strain 19' at the dose-rate of 0.2 ml. intradermal- ly, 0.2 ml. subcutaneously and 5.0 ml. subcutaneously. A batch of ten unvaccinated heifers was kept as controls. All the heifers were obtained from a non-vaccinated brucellosis-free herd. At the time of vaccination they were in calf for two months and negative to agglutination test for brucellosis. The reaction after vaccination by intradermal route was the production of a small local necrotic lesion which rapidly healed. Whereas slight oedematous area was observed in 0.2 ml. subcutaneous dose, 5.0 ml. dose exhibited usual systemic and local reactions. Serum samples from vaccinated heifers were tested for agglutinins from time to time. After three months of vaccination, all the animals were challenged by instilling into conjunctival sac 1 ml. of virulent Brucella abortus strain 544 containing 134 million live organisms. At parturition, serum titre was recorded and cotyledon foetal stomach-contents, colostrum, milk samples were examined culturally and biologically. The number of calves that were born full-term and survived after challenge in 0.2 ml. intradermal group, 0.2 ml. subcutaneous group and 5.0 ml. subcutaneous group was 6, 7 and 7 respectively, while in the unvaccinated controls all the calves were born dead. The immunity produced by 0.2 ml. intradermally was found to be equal to that obtained by the same quantity of vaccine given subcutaneously. However, in both of the 0.2 ml. groups and in the group vaccinated with 5.0 ml., the level of immunity was poor since 5 out of 10 animals were found infected in each group after challenge. These results are at variance with the previous findings of the author. The factor or factors responsible for such discrepancies are not known, but in the opinion of the author the possibilities are (a) that a pregnant heifer does not respond so well to the Brucella abortus antigen as does the non-pregnant heifer and (b) the short interval between immunization and challenge. The mode of administration of a correct challenge dose requires careful consideration whenever such immunity experiment are performed. The author affirms that vaccination of pregnant cattle with strain 19 vaccine can be carried out without any risk of abortion. The finding is of great importance when dealing with an abortion storm in a non-vaccinated herd (P.C.). Antibiotics and nitrogen utilization in growing cockerels. R. H. THAYER AND V. G. HELLER (1955). Poult. Sci., Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 97-102. EXPERIMENTS were carried out to determine the relative efficiency of protein utilization between antibiotic and non-antibiotic for chicks using both growth response and nitrogen balance techniques. The study consisted of four feeding 285 31 AR/56 23
286 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, trials conducted in battery brooders with the basal diet supplemented with 20 mg. per lb. of either procaine penicillin or aureomycin hydrochloride. The length of the feeding period varied from 27 to 33 days in the different trials. The nitrogen balance study was carried out with four-week old cockerels to determine the effect of penicillin and aureomycin upon dietary nitrogen utilization. It was observed that the net result of antibiotic feeding was to produce greater growth and more efficient feed conversion. The results indicated that penicillin and aureomycin brought about an increase in the amount of dietary nitrogen which was digested and absorbed from the digestive tract of the four-week old cockerels. A possible explanation is that the rate of digestion may have in some way been increased. The antibiotics may have reduced the number or type of competitive intestinal bacteria which used amino-acids as they were released in the digestion process. The data indicate that the increased growth response due to the addition of anti- biotics to rations for chickens may be due to an increased efficiency in the digestion and absorption of dietary nitrogen. (S. B.). The effect of sexual stimulation prior to service on the behaviour and conception rate. B. M. KERRUISH. Brit. J. Anim. Behaviour. Vol. III, No. 4, pages 125-130. IN this article the author has mentioned the behaviour of an. experienced bull running with the herd at precoital, coital and postcoital state. He has also mentioned the behaviour of bulls due to incomplete sexual stimulation under con- ditions of controlled mating and collection of semen by artificial vagina. Sex drive and vigour of the ejaculatory reflex are significantly lowered in following the rigid routine of controlled mating in most artificial insemination centres and farms. The bulls fail to get sufficient precoital excitement, which probably not only affect sexual organs but also plays a part in promoting the general metabolism of the body through the levels of secretion of endocrine glands, thus increasing the excita- bility and tone of the whole body in giving a vigorous and better co-ordinated ejacula- tion. The experiments revealed a significant rise in conception rate with increase in precoital stimulation. Animals not getting sufficient excitement prior to coitus appear to be disinterested and unresponsive to service and do not give collection readily. The fall in conception rate may be due to the poor quality of semen pro- duced. (D. P. M.). Familial resistance to Newcastle disease in strain of New Hampshires. FRANCIS, D. W. and A. F. KISH (1955). Poult. Sci. 34, 2, 331-336. IN this paper an attempt has been made to determine genetic differences among six family lines of New Hampshire chickens in respect of resistance to a standard challenge dose (LD 50) of Newcastle disease virus. Birds used in mating to raise chicks for challenge were selected from different families having mortality varying from 3 per cent to 17 per cent. The family differences in mortality rate following the challenge were used to evaluate the degree of resistance.
December, 1956] ABSTRACTS 287 A difference in mortality following challenge dose of virus was seen between lines from the various matings. The line raised from the family with the highest pre- challenge mortality showed a most rapid increase in deaths as compared with the line from the low-mortality-rate family. Great differences in the percentage of mortality were shown to occur between chicks challenged in warm battery room and those challenged under brooder-house conditions. There was 31 per cent mortality in the former case and 88.5 per cent to 96.6 per cent in the latter. To explain family differences in mortality following challenge with a standard dose of virus, the possibility of existence of a specific mechanism in either aiding or preventing the transport of virus in which red cells appear to play some role, has been suggested. (C. R.). On the invasion of the central nervous system by nematodes288 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVI, Part IV, Studies on the productive value of roughages and concentrates for lactation. J. K. LOOSLI, R. F. DAVIS and R. G. WARNER (1955). J. Dairy Sci. 38, 797-804. THE consistent increase in milk yield when concentrates were used to replace part of the hay on an equal T. D. N. basis is to evidence that the T. D.N. system does not accurately evaluate these two feed sources for milk production. This has been interpreted by some workers as indication that concentrates contain a specific unidentified factor(s) which stimulates lactation; while others have attributed the observed increase in milk production to an increase in the estimated net energy (ENE) intake on rations containing concentrates. To test the validity of the one or the other of the two postulates above, the present authors undertook reversible type experiments with 25 lactating cows; the basis of replacement was either equal TDN or equal ENE. They found that when the replacement was made on the basis of equal TDN (but more ENE) there was a considerably greater increase in milk pro- duction than when the replacement was made on the basis of equal ENE (but less TDN). Thus, cows, on an average, produced 2.5 lb. more FCN per head per day when 10.2 lb. hay was replaced by 6.8 lb. concentrates containing almost equal TDN (but more ENE). Replacing hay with concentrates according to the ENE system resulted, in an average, increase of 0.8 lb. FCN per head per day on the same ENE intake but less TDN. The significantly greater milk yield from the TDN above the ENE feeding system, the authors state, shows rather conclusively that Morrison's ENE values more accurately estimate the comparative productive usefulness of the energy in the roughages and concentrates studied than do the TDN values. Even ENE appeared to slightly overrate the value of roughages in comparison to concen- trates for lactation, but to a much lesser degree than TDN. The data presented, the authors conclude, disprove the lactation factor theory, which assumes the presence in concentrates of some specific unidentified factor(s) stimulating lactation. (B. N. M.). Beta-propiolactone as virus altering agent for New Castle Disease vaccine. WALTER N. MACH and ACHIT CHOTISEN, (1955). Poultry Sci. 34, 1010-1013. THE authors describe a Newcastle disease (Ranikhet disease) vaccine produced through chemical alternation of its pathogenecity. The virus was isolated from a recent clinical case, and propagated in the allantoic fluid of embryonating chicken eggs. It was then treated with 0.025 per cent beta- propiolactone and incubated for two hours at 37ºC. The vaccine so produced was injected intra-muscularly in doses varying from 0.5 ml. to 2 ml. into 43 ten-month old white Leghorn chickens of a disease-free flock. On the 16th day heart-blood from the vaccinated birds was collected to determine antibody titres, and all the vaccinated birds and controls were challenged with 0.2 ml. of virulent virus. Vaccinated birds did not show any disease symptoms, but 97.4 per cent of the controls got the infec- tion and 84.6 per cent died. The agglutination inhibition titre in the pre-vaccination serum was 1:10 while it rose to 1:320 or higher in the post-vaccination samples. Further trials with this method of preparing a vaccine are considered advisable as the risk of introducing the infection which accompanies the use of attenuated virus vaccine is avoided here. MGIPCVol. XXVII, Part I March 1957 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 9 or 15 sh.. Rs. 2-4 or 3 sh. 9 d. ICAR. 6. XXVII. I. 1,000.
CONTENTS Vol. XXVII, Part I (March 1957) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this Journal. Original Articles PAGE THE INCIDENCE OF SURRA AND TABANID FLIES IN RAJASTHAN (WITH 3 MAPS AND ONE TEXT-FIGURE) P. Balarama Menon 1 SEMINO VESICULITIS IN A BULL AT AN ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION CENTRE (WITH TWO TEXT-FIGURES) Mahendra Pratap Johari 17 FACTORS AFFECTING GESTATION LENGTH IN HARIANA CATTLE M. L. Kohli and K. R. Suri 29 FACTORS AFFECTING BIRTH WEIGHT IN HARIANA CATTLE M. L. Kohli and K. R. Suri 23 ABSTRACTS 39 REVIEW 43 A handbook of animal husbandry
CONTENTS Vol. XXVII, Part II (June 1957) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this Journal Original Articles Pages STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CREEPERSCONTENTS Vol. XXVII, Part III (September, 1957) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this Journal. Original Articles Pages NOTE ON OCCURRENCE UP A TYPICAL STRAINS OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE VIRUS IN INDIA M. R. Dhanda, V. R. Gopala- krishanan and H. S. Dhillon 79 SEX MATURITY IN DAIRY CATTLE AND THE PROBABLE CAUSES OF DELAYED PUBERTY (WITH 4 TEXT FIGURES) M. P. Johari and S. K. Talapatra 85 THE RELATION OF SOME FACTORS TO THE OCCUR- RENCE OF POST PAETUM OESTRUS IN HA- RIANA CATTLE M. L. Kohli and K. R. Suri 95 LONGEVITY AND PRODUCTIVITY IN HARIANA CATTLE (WITH 1 TEXT FIGURE) M. L. Kohli and K. R. Suri 105 A HIGH PROTEIN VERSUS A NORMAL PEOTEIN RATION FOR EGG PRODUCTION IN POULTRY Alex Reed and John G. Velu 111 THE LIFE HISTORY AND BIOLOGY OF THE REDU- VID Acanthaspis siva A PREDATOR OF THE INDIAN HONEY BEECONTENTS Vol. XXVII, Part IV (December, 1957) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this Journal. Page Original Articles STUDIES ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE VACCINATION IN INDIA. IITHE INCIDENCE OF SURRA AND TABANID FLIES IN RAJASTHAN* By P. BALARAMA MENON2 INCIDENCE OF SURRA IN RAJASTHAN [Vo . XXVII, Part I, Ajmer is a small State surrounded on all sides by Rajasthan with similar topo- graphy and climate. The breeding places for tabanid flies are mostly big tanks, as there are no canals. The average annual rainfall in the area is about 20 inches. Livestock census for Ajmer State for 1952 shows 3,32,421 bovines, 1,530 horses, 4,659 donkeys and 1,781 camels. In Ajmer State camel breeding is not carried out on such a large scale as in the south and south-western parts of Rajasthan. INCIDENCE OF SURRA Surra is the most important of camel diseases and the present investigation has shown that its incidence is very high in Rajasthan. It is believed that since the introduction of antrypol the disease has been under check. It usually runs a chronic course among camels extending even to three years. It is locally called 'Thribursa'; it weakens the animal at every relapse and finally proves fatal. Cases of surra reported from the different districts of Rajasthan in an average year are given in Table II. The figures for the incidence of camel surra are available for all the districts except Banswara and Dungarpur. The figures represent average. of four years for each district. It is seen that on an average every year about 6,000 surra cases among camels are treated in the veterinary dispensaries of Rajasthan. These figures are likely to be smaller than the actual number of cases, as many of the cases receive private treatment and are not included in hospital records. Besides, a large number is treated by the Rubbaires themselves as the drug antrypol and its method of administration are well known to them [Progress Report of the V. I. O., Rajasthan and Ajmer, Sankarnarayan, 1953-54]. Table II shows that though surra is prevalent throughout Rajasthan it is a scourge more in the southern districts. With its average number of 1,555 cases per year Pali has the greatest incidence of camel surra with the adjoining district of Udaipur coming next. These two districts have a number of tanks, lakes and canals with overhanging vegetation offering excellent breeding places for tabanid flies. Having extensive jungles and cultivation, these two districts afford good grazing and hence a large number of camels are bred and kept in these areas. Bikaner which is a very dry area is almost free from surra though it has a large camel population. Ganganagar which is adjacent is, on the other hand, largely canal irrigated and shows a fair incidence of surra. Seasonal variation. Table III shows the number of surra cases (in camels) treated at the City Veterinary Hospital, Udaipur, during three years from 1951 to 1953, during different months. From this Table, as well as the previous one, it is clear that the number of surra cases is on increase in the months following the monsoon rains and that the climax is reached during September, October and November when the fly breeding is also supposed to be at its zenith following heavy dains in July and August (Graph 1). The incidence continues to be high during rhe early part of the winter and gradually declines towards summer and is the lowest turing April and May when the water sources are dried up and fly breeding completely stops. Hospital records from Pali also show the incidence of surra, mostly in camels, throughout the year excepting the hot months of April, May and June. Cases are recorded even in extreme winter months of January and February.
March, 1957] P. BALAEAMA MENON 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MAP I4 INCIDENCE OF SURRA IN RAJASTHAN [Vol. XXVII, Part I, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MAP IIMarch, 1957] P. BALARAMA MENON 5 TABLE I Showing the average annual rainfall in inches in different months of the year at representative stations in Rajasthan (average of three years, 1951 to 1953)* Station Months of the year January February March April May June July August September October November December Total Jaipur 0.33 0.17 0.07 0.17 0.33 0.74 9.22 7.68 2.76 0.03 0.00 0.00 20.50 Jodhpur 0.04 0.02 0.00 0.04 0.11 0.92 7.10 4.81 1.79 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.83 Udaipur 0.87 0.09 0.01 0.35 0.05 3.87 10.70 6.90 2.04 0.07 0.50 0.00 25.45 Kotah 0.12 0.06 0.05 0.02 0.16 3.58 11.26 7.13 3.53 0.00 0.00 0.07 25.98 Bikaner 0.24 0.10 0.15 0.00 0.10 0.60 4.43 5.35 0.51 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.48 Total 1.60 0.44 0.28 0.58 0.75 9.71 41.71 31.87 10.63 0.10 0.50 0.07 98.24 Average 0.32 0.09 0.06 0.12 0.15 1.94 8.34 6.37 2.3 [0.02 0.10 0.01 19.65 * Based on data supplied by the Indian Meteorological department.
6 THE INCIDENCE OF SURRA IN RAJASTHAN [Vol. XXVII, Part I, TABLE II Number of surra cases reported from different districts of Rajasthan in one average year (average of 4 years) Name of Districts Months of the year January February March April May June July August September October November December Total Udaipur 26 33 42 9 14 24 67 202 78 288 249 67 1,103 Chittor 8 .. 3 3 2 51 10 15 4 43 29 74 242 Bhilwara 15 27 13 7 24 16 35 23 16 15 38 35 264 Kota 42 5 2 6 3 2 4 4 162 2 5 129 366 Bundi 18 32 35 18 30 32 7 13 171 96 39 10 501 Jhalawar 2 1 3 31 4 7 2 1 8 4 4 5 72 Jaipur .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 Dausa .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Sawai Madhopur .. 1 .. 1 1 .. 3 .. 2 .. .. 20 10 Bharatpur 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 2 4 10 Rajgarh 1 1 3 .. 1 .. 2 2 10 4 8 6 38 Kishengarh 1 1 2 1 .. 1 1 21 6 13 3 5 56 Alwar 3 3 6 1 2 .. 3 3 3 6 2 3 31 Jodhpur 15 12 5 7 9 8 17 86 64 89 94 30 406 Nagaur 22 13 14 18 10 14 22 51 37 83 66 30 380 Pali 36 169 9 22 24 94 68 117 229 404 163 120 1,555 Jalore 23 8 5 13 1 7 36 24 54 258 111 65 605 Banner 1 5 3 ... 5 10 11 2 22 23 2 5 89 Bikaner 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 1 2 8 Ganganagar 14 22 12 7 16 16 24 25 11 51 31 38 266 Total Rajasthan 229 235 160 145 145 282 313 590 979 1,376 819 630 6,006
March,1957] P.BALARAMA MENON 7 TABLE III Surra cases in camels treated at the City Veterinary Hospital, Udaipur, for 3 years, from 1951 to 1953, month by month Year January February March April May June July August September October November December Total 1951 54 95 121 5 .. .. 20 1 4 9 3 15 327 1952 30 1 1 .. .. .. 40 75 40 10 219 138 554 1953 1 7 3 .. 25 10 6 14 6 145 65 .. 282 Total 85 103 125 5 25 10 66 90 50 164 287 153 1,163
8 INCIDENCE OF SURRA IN RAJASTHAN [Vol. XXVII, Part I, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MAP IIIMarch, 1957] P. BALARAMA MENON 9 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] GRAPH I10 INCIDENCE OF SURRA IN RAJASTHAN [Vol. XXVII, Part I, Distribution The disease is found more common in moist regions, viz. eastern half of Rajasthan including eastern half of Jodhpur Division. Udaipur and Kota are the two Divi- sions affected most. Since camels of the arid region of Jodhpur and Bikaner Divi- sions come in contact with the diseased ones when taken for foraging, they get the infection during the fly season. Hence cases of surra are not uncommon in Jodhpur and are only occasionally reported from Bikaner Division. Surra cases are also reported from the State of Ajmer. From the reports available, the number of camels treated for surra in the State during 1951-52, 1952-53, and 1953-54 is 28, 238 and 51 respectively. But it is, however, doubtful whether all these were local cases. Majority of them were believed to be from camels brought from outside the State, i.e. from Rajasthan which surrounds it on all sides. Complete figures for surra are not possible as some cases receive private treatment and are not included in the hospital records. The above statement shows that surra is very much prevalent in Rajasthan and Ajmer and is as much a serious problem there as elsewhere, perhaps as camels are highly susceptible to the disease and Rajasthan is the most important camel breeding centre in India. THE VECTOR PROBLEM AND THE INCIDENCE OF TABANID ELIES It has been established that tabanid flies are primarily responsible for the trans- mission of surra. These flies are common in India and Basu, Menon and Sen Gupta [1952] have dealt with their detailed distribution. All the common species are blood-thirsty and voracious biters, being able to puncture the thick skins of equines and bovines in a few seconds and to cause an abundant flow of blood upon which the females become engorged. Warm blooded animals, including man, are subject to their persistent and unrelenting attacks. The adults are strong fliers and occur abundantly in the neighbourhood of water. They lay their eggs generally on leaves and stems of plants overhanging the water. After hatching, the larvæ fall into the water and develop. When mature, they crawl to dry soil, pupate and after a few days emerge as adult flies [Basu et al., 1954]. In the absence of water and sufficient atmospheric humidity tabanid flies cannot breed and survive, and since these flies act as mechanical transmitters of Trypanasoma evansi, the causal organism of surra, transmission of the disease cannot take place. Since surra cases are seen throughout Rajasthan, fly breeding must also be taking place. If surra cases are common in a locality even in the absence of these flies, there must be some vectors other than the tabanid flies. It has therefore, been, suggested that in portions of Rajasthan with scanty rainfall and dry and arid conditions, tabanids can not be a problem and that the trans- mission of surra must be taking place through the agency of some other vector. In fact, Cross and Patel [1921] reported transmission of surra by the ticks, Ornithodorus crossi and O. lahorensis, but their findings have not so far been con- firmed. Sankarnarayan [1948-50] found that camel ticks were incapable of
March, 1957] P. BALARAMA MENON 11 transmitting surra. The author also has failed to transmit surra in the laboratory- through the agency of ticks (unpublished). Since it is only a mechanical trans- mission without the parasite undergoing a development or cyclical changes inside the vector's body, it naturally follows that such transmission through bite from an infected animal to a healthy one should take place within a short period of time. So unless there is a developmental phase inside the ticks, it may not be possible for them to act as transmitters, as ticks do not move quickly from one animal to another for their feed. Biting flies alone are capable of doing it on account of interrupted feeding as those flies visit many animals in a herd in quick succession. During the present investigation it has been found that tabanid flies are present in all the Divisions of Rajasthan and they can breed and complete their life-cycle under the conditions prevailing there. During the present survey it has been possible to visit all major water collections in different parts of the State and to collect all stages of the fly, viz. the egg, larva, pupa and adult (Table IV). Large numbers of egg masses were collected from several lakes and ponds in all the Divisions except Bikaner from where only very few batches of eggs could be obtained. It had not been possible to visit Sri Ganganagar and other canal irrigated areas in Bikaner Division which may provide conditions suitable for the breeding of tabanid flies. Adult flies were caught while laying eggs on subaquatic vegetation and also while feeding on camels. Among the adults collected and identified, four species were found, viz. Tabanus rubidus Wiedemann, Tabanus striatus Fabricius, Tabanus macer Bigot and an undetermined species of Atylotus*. It may be mentioned here that Basu et al., [1952] reported 17 species of Tabanus from the north-western dry region of India in which Rajasthan is included and from where no record was available till then. Hence the four species of tabanids collected from Rajasthan during the present investigations, are new records for the locality. It may also be mentioned that T. rubidus is a well known carrier of surra and that T. macer is also one of the seven species of Tabanus which have been incriminated in the transmission of the disease. TABLE IV Breeding places of Tabanus flies in different parts of Rajasthan visited during the survey Locality Source of water Tabanid breeding Remarks 1 2 3 4 Jodhpur Mandour canal catchment area No breeding With overhanging vegeta- tion Jodhpur Balsaniand (lake) 12 INCIDENCE OF SURRA IN RAJASTHAN [Vol. XXVII, Part I, TABLE IV (contd.) Breeding places of Tabanus flies in different parts of Rajasthan visited during the survey Locality Source of water Tabanid breeding Remarks 1 2 3 4 Jodhpur Sardarsamand (lake) Many old egg batches found on a few dry Acacia plants standing in water and a few batches on casurina and calatropis plants in canals taking from the lake No marginal overhanging vegetations ; only rocky stones and boulders at the edges. These large lakes are not potential breeding places but the canals taking from it with plentiful grass and other vegetation are likely breeding places Pali Irrigation canal Fairly heavy breeding on both the banks From Sardarsamand to Pali the canal running with plenty of vegeta- tion Pali Pali lake March, 1957] P. BALARAMA MENON 13 TABLE IV (contd.) Breeding places of Tabanus flies in different parts of Rajasthan visited during the survey Locality Source of water Tabanid breeding Remarks 1 2 3 4 Ajmer Puskkar (lake) No breeding Steps of stone leading into the lake on all sides. No possibility of breeding excepting in a small patch in a corner where some grass is growing Ajmer Anasagar (lake) No breeding Lake with extensive catchment area and a stone and marble built embankment on one side. Possibility of breeding on the opposite side where grass, etc. are growing Ajmer Pisangan tanks No breeding No marginal vegetation Kota Kota tank A few eggs collected Marginal vegetation confined only to small patches on the south- west corner of the tank, rest being stony sides Kota Chambal river No breeding Plenty of water but no vegetation near about. A possible source of breeding Jaipur Jal Mahal tank Heavy breeding in small patches. Many- banches of eggs collected from a dry babul twig standing in water and some on isolated grass blades. Many adults caught while laying eggs No marginal vegetation ; Water saltish ; cattle grazing nearby
14 INCIDENCE OF SURRA IN RAJASTHAN [Vol. XXVII, Part I, TABLE IV (concld.) Breeding places of Tabanus flies in different parts of Rajasthan visited during the survey Locality Source of water Tabanid breeding Remarks 1 2 3 4 Jaipur Amber tank No breeding Water dry Jaipur Rawalji-ka-Bandha (tank) Fairly heavy breeding Plenty of marginal grass. Ideal place for breeding with water and abundant vegetation and elephant grass Jaipur Babuji-ka-Bandha (small tank) No breeding Without much vegetation. Cattle grazing nearby. No adults found Bikaner Devikund and Devikund Sagar (tanks) Evidence of breeding ; old egg shells on a creeper overhanging water Both the tanks are bereft of vegetation except a patch on the eastern side of Devi- kund. Eggs were found on old projecting twigs. Both the tanks dry up in summer Bikaner Kodamdeshar tank No breeding No vegetation From the statement given above (Table IV) it is clear that even the dry Bikaner is not free from tabanids. This survey was undertaken in the month of March when most of the sources of water were expected to be dry. After the monsoon, when all the tanks are full and there is plenty of vegetation at the banks, fly breeding in these areas is expected to be heavy and this has been proved by the high incidence of surra in post-monsoon months (Table II). It is reasonable to presume that a more detailed survey carried out in the post-monsoon months in Rajasthan may reveal the presence of some more species of tabanids. Since Tabanus flies are present in Rajasthan in a sufficient number it is only reasonable to suppose that, as in other places, transmission of surra is taking place in these areas through the agency of these flies. EGG PARASITES OF TABANUS It is known that the eggs of Tabanus flies are sometimes parasitised by other insects. Menon [1954] reported on a new species of Telenomus (Scelionidae: Hymenoptera) destroying large numbers of egg masses of Tabanus flies in certain villages around Izatnagar (U.P.). During the course of the present survey, among
March, 1957] P. BALARAMA MENON 15 the large numbers of egg masses collected from different Divisions of Rajasthan, it was observed that some of the batches of tabanid eggs obtained from Jal Mahal tank in Jaipur were parasitised and when they were kept in a moist chamber, large numbers of small hymenopterous insects were found emerging from them. These parasites appeared quite different from the species of Telenomus reported from Uttar Pradesh. The insects which emerged from the eggs collected from Jaipur were sent for identification and confirmation to the Commonwealth Institute of Entomology, London, and have been identified as belonging to an indeterminate species of Centrodora of the family Encyrtidæ (Hymenoptera). This appears to be the first record of this species parasitising eggs of tabanid flies in India. It was not possible to determine what species of Tabanidæ the parasitised eggs belonged to, but it was probable that they may be of Atylotus which were found laying eggs on grass in Jal Mahal tank in Jaipur from where the infected egg masses were collected. Many adults of Atylotus were collected while in the act of oviposition from the same site and no other species was in evidence at that time. The possibility of utilising these parasites in the biological control of tabanid flies is yet to be investigated. SUMMARY This report presents for the first time, data regarding the occurrence of surra and tabanid flies in Rajasthan and Ajmer. Though the area is generally dry, surra is prevalent in camels in Rajasthan. There is an increase in the incidence of surra in the post-monsoon months reaching the climax in October and November when the fly breeding is also expected to be at its highest. The incidence continues during the early part of winter and gradually declines towards summer and is the lowest during April and May when the water sources are dried up and fly breeding is completely stopped. The disease is more common in the moist regions, viz. eastern half of Rajasthan including eastern half of Jodhpur Division. Udaipur and Kota are the two Divi- sions affected most. Pali has the highest incidence of surra recorded so far. Since camels of the arid region of Jodhpur and Bikaner Divisions come in contact with the diseased ones, when taken for foraging, they get the infection during the fly season. Hence cases of surra are not uncommon in Jodhpur and Bikaner Divisions also. Surra cases are also reported from Ajmer but the majority of them are believed to be from camels brought from outside the State. A tabanid survey was conducted in the area with special emphasis on the breeding places and it was established that the transmission of surra took place in the area through the agency of the flies which were present, in all the Divisions of Rajasthan and Ajmer and which could breed and complete their life cycle under conditions prevailing there. Even " waterless " Bikaner with an average annual rainfall of 7. to 8 inches was not free of them. Large numbers of the different stages of these flies, viz. egg, larva, pupa and adult, were collected from different Divisions and four species of Tabanidæ, viz. Tabanus rubidus, T. striatus, T. macer and an undetermined species of Atylotus have been recorded. These are new records for the locality.
16 INCIDENCE OF SURRA IN RAJASTHAN [Vol. XXVII, Part I, Centrodora sp. (Hymenoptera: Encyrtidæ) is recorded for the first time as a parasite of the eggs of tabanid flies in India. It had been possible to breed these parasites into adults in the laboratory when the infected egg batches were kept in a moist chamber. The possibility of its utilisation in the control of Tabanus flies is suggested. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author expresses his thanks to the Director of Agriculture, Rajasthan and the Director of Animal Husbandry, Ajmer, for giving him all facilities during his tour of their States and providing him with surra incidence and livestock census figures. He also thanks Mr. N. S. Sankarnarayan, Disease Investigation Officer, Rajasthan and Ajmer, for all co-operation and help extended during these investigations. He is grateful to Dr H. D. Srivastava, Head of the Division of Parasitology, I.V.R.I., Izatnagar, for his keen interest and on whose suggestion this piece of work was undertaken. REFERENCES Basu, B. C. (1945). Distribution and seasonal incidence of surra in India. Indian J. vet. Sci. 15, 4, 277-279 SEMINO-VESICULITIS IN A BULL AT AN ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION CENTRE By MAHENDRA PRATAP JOHARI, College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Mathura (Received for publication on May 10, 1956) (With two Text-figs.) THE affections of the male sex organs in bulls which are quite common may be due to specific or unspecific causes. The inflammation of the part, e.g. orchitis, epididymitis, ampulitis, seminal vesiculitis may be there with or without the formation of abscess. In cattle, the specific causes have generally been attributed to Brucella abortus ; Streptococci; Bacillus pyogenes and Bacillus tubercu- losis. These affections often lead to sterility and become a source of infection to the cows served or artificially inseminated. Anamnesis The bull No. 80/P15 of Sahiwal breed aged about 4 years stationed at Jaisingh- pura in district Sultanpur was received at the Centre on April 6, 1955 from a Govern- ment Farm in Lucknow where preliminary training for making collections in the A. V. was given. At the Artificial Insemination Centre the bull was maintained under optimum conditions of food and management. Its daily ration consisted of 9 seers of bhusa, ¾ seer of crushed gram, ¾ seer of crushed barley, 1 seer of mustard cake and 1 chhatak of common salt. In addition, to the above, green fodder was also given. The bull was given 6 miles walking exercise in the morning and 3 miles in the evening. The bull had a good sex desire, generally took 5-10 minutes to serve, the seminal volume was 2-6 ml. and initial motility 3. The semen was seen to dete- riorate rapidly, was greenish in appearance and watery in consistency. After about two hours, it was not fit to be used for artificial insemination work. From April to September 1955, 27 semen collections were made. During this period 33 inseminations were carried out, 15 out of which were supposed to be pregnant at 90 days' non-return basis. The Veterinary Officer, incharge of the Artificial Insemination Centre, reported the matter to the Regional Sterility Officer, Uttar Pradesh. On receipt of the report, the author examined the bull on Decem- ber 13, 1955. General clinical investigation The bull looked healthy, in good condition and showed a lively temperament. Skin, palpable lymph glands and visible mucous membrane were found normal. Body temperature was not taken. 17 56 AR/56 3
18 SEMINO-VESICULITIS IN A BULL [Vol. XXVII, Part I, Special clinical investigation Circulatory, respiratory, digestive and nervous systems showed nothing of interest. Locomotion was normal. Urinary system. Percussion and rectal palpation of the kidneys revealed nothing but no laboratory investigation was carried out. Genital organs. Penis, prepuce, preputial ring were normal. Palpation and inspection of the testicle and epididymis gave a healthy appearance. The testicles were found to be soft, smooth, firm and free from any hardness or induration and were freely moveable in the scrotum. The head, body and tail of the epididymis did not show any abnormality. The function of the cremaster muscle was found normal as the testicles moved up when the animal was taken out from the shed. The accessory sex organs were palpated per rectum. The prostate as a circular band, was found normal. The seminal vesicle of the left side at its proximal end was found to be tense and slightly hard, had lost the lobulated structure and there was a swollen area of ping-pong ball size. It appeared that the condition had passed to a sub-acute, chronic stage. The seminal vesicle, the ampullae of the vasa deferens on the right side appeared to be normal. Sexual desire and serving ability were quite normal. It took good interest in the females and was above the average for sex desire and serving ability for the breed. Examination of semen The slides from the semen collected on January 3, 1956 and February 25, 1956 were examined. The former sample contained a lot of epithelial casts, free proto- plasmic drops and the abnormal spermatozoa were 10 per cent mostly tail abnor- malities. The latter sample showed improvement. There were less epithelial casts and free protoplasmic drops. No bacteria could be found in the films and cultural examination was not carried out for want of adequate facilities. Special sero-agglutination test Agglutination test was carried out by the Veterinary Investigation Officer, Livestock Research Station, Mathura on the serum from this bull against brucellosis. The test proved negative. DISCUSSION The report of the Artificial Insemination Veterinarian that "the semen could not be preserved even for two hours" led the author to suspect that there was some pathological condition in the genital organs. The investigation revealed such a condition in vesiculae seminalis. Careful examination during acute illness would have revealed specks of pus in semen, visible in ordinary day light. Microscopic examination of stained films would have shown leucocytes, epithelial debries and possibly pathogenic organisms as well. The semen was examined on January 3,
March, 1957] MAHENDRA PRATAP JOHARI 19 1956 and February 25, 1956 (after 10 months of sickness) when the animal had recovered and so nothing of interest was found in the specimen. Such disorders, are comparatively common in bulls in other countries and they are readily diagnosed. In our country, they have not been recorded so far. The seminal vesiculitis, accord- ing to various authors, does not cause any disturbance in the general condition unless the inflammatory process spreads to the peritoneum, in which case the animal would show symptoms of peritonitis. According to Lagerlof, Hedstrom and Hoflund [1942], the bull's capacity to copulate is not affected whereas the capacity to fertilise is reduced or completely suppressed. In such particular case, the percentage of conception will be much below the normal but the sex desire will not, in any way, be adversely affected. The diseases of the seminal vesicles in bulls have been studied by Gilman [1922], Williams and Savage [1925], Williams and Bushnell [1941], Lagerlof [1938, 1942] and Blom [1947]. They have observed that micro-organisms such as Streptococci, Bacillus pyogenes, Brucella abortus, Bacillus tuberculosis may be responsible. The role of the bull in the transmission of Brucella abortus infection has been extensively studied by Birch and Gilman [1926], Seagsvold [1927], Thomson [1936], Jepsen and Jorgensen [1938], and vesiculitis was shown to be of special importance in this respect. Lagerlof et al., [1942], consider that the diagnosis should be based or confirmed on palpation of the seminal vesicle and feel that owing to the emission of the infectious matter with the semen, bulls suffering from seminal vesiculitis may become dangerous transmitters of infection, within a herd or between different herds. DIAGNOSIS The clinical diagnosis made by examination of the Sahiwal bull No. 80/15 revealed seminal vesiculitis on the left side. The present findings explain the cause of the rapid deterioration of semen during preservation. A schematic picture of vesiculae seminalis of a healthy bull and a normal sample of semen is given in Fig. 1. In the Sahiwal bull the abnormality that was seen is depicted in Fig. 2 with corresponding change in the semen from the diseased bull. Prognosis The natural power of repair in the seminal vesicle is limited. The secretory activity of the affected part is lost depending on the severity of damage and fertility is likely to be affected. After a long rest, in exceptional cases, symptoms may improve, the semen quality may become normal but the area affected would become fibrosed and lose its func- tional activity. There is always a danger for the recurrence of the trouble. Treatment For preventing such diseases better sex-hygiene has to be followed at the artificial insemination centres and at training establishments for bulls. Bulls selected for artificial insemination work should not be allowed to have natural service on account of the risk of contracting infection by this practice.
20 SEMINO-VESICULITIS IN A BULL [Vol. XXVII, Part I, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 A schematic picture of the semi- nal vesicles in Sahiwal bull and the healthy semen [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 Diseased seminal vesicle as seen in the Sahiwal Bull No. 80/P15 and the semen during acute illness
March, 1957] MAHENDRA PRATAP JOHARI 21 If curative treatment has to be done and the disease is diagnosed very early, sulphanilamides may be tried in streptococcal infections. Antibiotics like peni- cillin or streptomycin may be used either singly or in combination. A daily sub- cutaneous injection of 5 mg. dihydrostreptomycin sulphate per Kg. body weight in 50 per cent solution in water for 3 days may be tried. According to Williams [1943], there is no known remedy for established diseases of the testicles, i.e., epididymis, ampullae of the vase differentia and the seminal vesicles. The only way of safety is to discard the defective sire. The Veterinary Officer reported on April 10, 1956 that the semen of the bull returned to normal, could be preserved for three days and that he did not find any difference, on palpation, between the right and the left seminal vesicle. It appears that the bull contacted the disease some time in March/April in the previous year as it was since then that it was giving abnormal semen. It took him one year to recover and return to normal. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The work was carried out as a part of the Sterility Scheme, Uttar Pradesh, financed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the State Government. The author thanks Shri C. V. G. Choudary, Principal, for his interest and Shri O. S. Srivastava,Veterinary Officer, for the technical assistance and reporting the case to the author for investigation. REFERENCE Blom, E. and Christensen, N. O. (1947). Skandinaviska Veterinartidskrift SI-43 Birch, R. R. and Gilman, H. L. (1926). Report of the New York State Veterinary College at Cornell University, 1924-25. Seen in Svensk Veterinartidskrift 1942, 602-630 Gilman, H. L. (1922). Report of the New York State Veterinary College, Cornell University (1921-22)' S. 68 Jepsen, A. and J. Jorgensen (1938). Untersuchungen uber Brucella infektion in den Geschlechtsorganen bei Stieren. Medl. f. Dyrl. 21, p. 49-60, 79-88 Lagerlof, N. (1938). XIIIth Int. Vety. Congress Zurich S. 24 Hedstrom., H. and Hoflund, S. (1942). Svensk Veterinartidskrift, 602-630 Slagsvold, L. (1927). Oksens rolle som smittebaerer og smittespreder ved storfaeets enzootiske abort. Norsk. vet. tidsskr. Bd. XXIX. S. 60 Thomsen, A. (1936). Bidrag til Belysning av Sporgsmaalet om Parringssmittens Forekomst ved Kvaegets smitsomme Kastning. Maanedssrr. f. Dyrl. Bd. 48. S. 225 Williams, W. W. and A. Savage (1925). Cornell Vet., 15, 353 FACTORS AFFECTING GESTATION LENGTH IN HARIANA CATTLE By M. L. KOHLI and K. R. SURI, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar, Punjab (Received for publication on July 30, 1956) THE knowledge of the length of gestation period is of importance to a cattle bree- der as it helps him to prepare the prospective dam for calving and subsequent lactation. It also aids in settling cases of disputed parentage where a cow may have been bred to two different bulls at different heat periods and the calving date does not correspond to either service date. Investigations carried out by different workers reveal the influence of some fac- tors responsible for the variations in the gestation period. Studies made by Jafar et al., [1950] in Wisconsin dairy herd, Ragab and Asker [1951] in Egyptian cattle, Jor- dao et al., [1951] in Brazil cattle, Brakel, Rife and Salisbury [1952] in Ohio dairy herd Arunachalam et al., [1952] in Bangalore dairy herd indicated that there was a positive correlation between gestation period and birth weight in cattle. Sex of the young was found to have an effect on gestation length in different breeds of cattle as reported by Jafar et al., [1950], Choudhry and Sinha [1951], Lambardt [1951], Jordao et al., [1951], Burris and Blum [1952] and Lazarus and Anantakrishnan [1952]. No effect of sex was observed in Egyptian cattle [Ragab and Asker, 1951] and in Murrah buffaloes [Arunachalam et al., 1952]. Studies on the dairy and the beef breed of cattle indicated that there was no effect of age of the cow on the gesta- tion period [Ragab and Asker, 1951; Lambardt, 1951; Burris and Blum, 1952; Lazarus and Anantakrishnan, 1952]; but Jafar et al., [1950] reported after studying gestation periods of 202 males and 102 females in Holstein Frisian cattle that the order of calving had a significant effect in the female calves but not in the males. Choudhry and Sinha [1951] observed that the gestation period appears to be slightly affected by the age of the cow at the time of calving. Jafar et al., [1950], Burris and Blum [1952], Arunachalam et al., [1952] found that the season of calving had no influence on the gestation period, whereas, Ragab and Askar [1951], Choudhry and Sinha [1951] and Brakel et al., [1952] reported to the contrary. Ragab and Asker [1951], Brakel et al., [1952], Wheat and Riggs, [1952] stated that the sire of the calf affects the duration of pregnancy but others [Burris and Blum, 1952; Arunachalam et al., 1952] could not establish this fact. Coefficient of correlation between the length of gestation and the length of dry period were not statistically significant [Lambardt, 1951; Anantakrishnan, 1952]. The correlation between the cow's body weight and the gestation period was positive but not significant statistically [Ananta- krishnan et al., 1952]. 23 56 AR/56 5
24 GESTATION LENGTH IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part I, MATERIAL AND METHODS The data for the study were collected from a herd of Hariana cattle, a ' dual purpose' breed (milk and draught) belonging to a scheme, financed jointly by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the Punjab State during a period of eight years (1946 to 1953) on 797 parturitions. The foundation stock was built up of 230 Hariana females which included 150 heifers of nearly the same age and 80 cows of different ages. All the animals were so selected that they con- formed to a certain standard of body conformation of the breed. Ten young bulls (with 4 in reserve) conforming to Hariana breed were selected with a similar criterion. With a view to have a sufficient variability in the stock, half of the number of these bulls was purchased from outside, while the others comprising other half was taken from the farm-bred stock. All the 230 cows and 10 bulls were randomized into ten groups. The herd depended on natural grazing for a considerable part of the year. They were stall fed when grazing was scanty. In the case of milch stock, the grazing was supplemented by the concentrates according to milk yield. The cattle, generally, for the most part of the year remained in the open thorny enclosure except during severe winter nights. Two vasectomised bulls were kept in the herd to detect the cows in heat and these were bred by their respective bulls. The gestation periods were calculated in days from the services resulting into calvings. All cases of abortions and still- births were excluded from this study. Doubtful cases were not taken into account. Statistical analysis were made according to the disproportionate class method of Snedecor [1948] for studying the effects of season, sire and the sequence of calving on the length of gestation period. RESULTS Length of the gestation periods In order to determine the effect of sex on the length of gestation period, the data were grouped (Table I) with a class interval of 10 days. It was observed that largest percentage (44.28) of males was born between an interval of 290-299 and females (50.00) between 280-289 days after conception. The mean gestation period of males and females was 291.78±0.87 and 289.68±0.94 days respectively with an overall average of 290.73±0.91 days (Table II).
March 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SUM 25 TABLE I Distribution of the length of gestation of Hariana cows Gestation period (days) Number of calves Distribution of gestation period Male Female Total Male per cent Female per cent Total per cent 23026 GESTATION LENGTH IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part I, Effect of sex and sequence of calving To compare the effects of the order of calving and the sex of the calves on duration of gestation period, the means were calculated for each calving (Table III). The analysis of variance (Table IV) was carried out on 793 cases. Records of the last three lactations, being few, were excluded. It showed that the differences for sequence of calving and sex were significant. The results are presented below in bar notation : Lactation number 9 6 3 5 2 8 7 1 4 11 10 Average gestation period (days) 308.5 293.7 293.3 293.3 290.7 289.8 289.3 289.1 288.5 288.0 283.0 TABLE III Influence of sex and sequence of calving Lactation Male Female Total No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean 1st 117 290.1±1.7 120 288.1±1.5 237 289.1±1.3 2nd 97 291.2±1.2 74 289.9±1.7 171 290.7±1.1 3rd 68 293.0±2.3 70 293.5±1.9 138 293.3±1.6 4th 53 288.8±1.6 60 288.3±2.6 113 288.5±1.5 5th 46 295.5±1.6 32 289.2±0.6 78 293.3±0.5 6th 18 299.3±3.9 16 287.5±2.2 34 293.3±1.9 7th 6 290.8±1.3 8 288.1±1.5 14 289.3±1.0 8th 4 290.3±1.4 4 289.2±1.6 8 289.8±1.3 9th 2 308.5±4.9 .. .. 2 308.5±4.9 10th .. .. 1 283.0±0.0 1 283.0± 11th .. .. 1 288.0±0.0 1 288.0± TOTAL 411 .. 386 .. 797 .. TABLE IV Analysis of variance of gestation periods for sex and calving sequence Sources of variation D.F. Sum of sq. Mean s. F. Between lactations 7 2930.5 418.6 2.46* Between sexes 1 855.0 855.0 5.03* Between sex and lactation interaction 7 1206.2 172.3 .. Within 777 132102.6 170.0 .. TOTAL 792 .. .. .. * Significant.
March, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. B. SUM 27 Effect of the month of calving The mean gestation periods of calves born according to the month of calving (Table V) worked out to be the longest for males and females during the month of October. The number of calvings was more during the months of February, March and April, thereby indicating that majority of cows conceived at the end of spring or early summer. Analysis of variance (Table VI) showed that variations between months and the sex were significant. The results are presented in bar notation were :28 GESTATION LENGTH IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part I, TABLE VI Analysis of variance of gestation period for month of calving Source of variation D.F. Sum of sq. Mean s. F. Between months 11 3863.3 351.1 2.04* Between sex 1 921.3 921.3 5.36* Between sex and month interaction 11 1155.8 105.1 0.6 Within 773 133642.2 172.8 .. TOTAL. 796 * Significant. Effect of sire of the calf The mean gestation period for calves as influenced by different sires (Table VII) varied from 277.8 to 294.3 days and the mean squares for sires were significant (Table VIII). Bull No. 210H2/46 was not included in the analysis, as it had only one case. TABLE VII Effect of sire of the calf on gestation period Sire No. Male Female Total No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean 274H 2/39 10 278.2±0.8 9 276.2±0.8 19 277.8±0.6 2HP/44 52 291.7±0.9 48 290.6±0.8 100 291.3±0.7 3HP/44 58 292.6±2.0 36 288.8±1.5 94 291.2±1.4 13HP/44 33 290.8±1.9 57 285.4±1.6 90 288.6±1.3 15HP/44 30 294.3±2.7 35 290.2±1.2 65 292.1±1.1 163H1/40 36 296.8±2.9 31 287.3±2.3 67 292.4±2.1 18HP/46 14 292.5±1.5 17 295.4±1.3 31 294.3±1.1
March, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 29 TABLE VII (contd.) Effect of sire of the calf on gestation period Sire No. Male Female Total No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean 2HP/42 10 291.9±1.9 17 290.7±1.4 27 291.1±1.2 190H1/42 34 291.0±0.9 35 290.9±1.0 69 291.0±0.8 512H4/41 50 285.9±2.3 38 293.1±1.5 88 291.4±1.4 395H2/42 37 293.9±1.2 31 289.5±1.1 68 291.9±1.0 203H1/42 26 288.4±2.8 17 286.7±2.0 43 287.8±1.8 210H2/46 1 292.0±0.0 .. .. 1 292.0±0.0 227H1/42 20 289.0±1.0 15 291.8±1.0 35 290.2±0.8 TOTAL 411 386 797 TABLE VIII Analysis of variance of gestation periods for sires Source of variations D.F. Sum of sq. Mean s. F. Between sires 12 4971.2 414.3 2.5930 GESTATION LENGTH IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part I, The dry period for each animal in different lactations and its corresponding gestation period was also studied but it did not show any definite trend. TABLE IX Length of gestation period, body weight and dry period Gestation period (days) No. of cases Av. body wt. (lb.) No. of records Average dry. period (days) 230March, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 31 DISCUSSION The results of these investigations revealed that Hariana cattle carried their calves for a mean period of 290.73 days, which was longer than that for European and Indian cattle except the Tharparkar cows which carried their calves for 290 days [Kumaran, 1947] which was almost the same as observed in this study. This indicated that the dual purpose breed carried their calves longer than dairy breeds. The sex of the calf was responsible for variation in the length of gestation period. Significant difference of two days was found between gestation periods for males and females which showed that the sex of the calf had an effect on it. This was in agreement with the observations of other workers [Jafar et al., 1950; Choudhry and Sinha, 1951; Jordao et al., 1951; Lazarus and Anantakrishnan, 1952]. Sequence of calving and the sex was observed to have a significant effect on the gestation period whereas Choudhry and Sinha [1951] observed that the age of the cow slightly affected the gestation period. The month of freshening was found to have influence on duration of pregnancy and this result agreed with the observations made by Ragab and Asker [1951], Choudhry and Sinha [1951] and Brakel et al., [1952]. The paternal influence in the gestation period was found to be statistically significant and this confirmed the findings of Ragab and Asker [1951], Brakel et al. [1952], Wheat and Riggs [1952]. The positive correlation between the birth weight of the calf and duration of pregnancy was in agreement with the findings of Jafar et al., [1950], Ragab and Asker [1951], Jordao et al.,[1951], Brakel et al., [1952] and Arunachalam et al.,[1952]. The body weight of the dams at the time of calving had also significant correlation with the gestation period. From that it could be postulated that the retention in the herd of animals with heavy body weights could increase the gestation period. SUMMARY 1. The average length of 797 gestation periods in Hariana cattle was 290.7 ± 0.9 days. Male calves were carried to a significantly longer period of time than females. 2. The sequence of calving, month of freshening, sire and sex had a significant effect on gestation period. 3. There were positive correlations between the body weight of the dams and the birth weight of the calf with the gestation period. No significant correlation was observed between the dry period of the cows and the gestation period. 56 AR/56 6
32 GESTATION LENGTH IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part ] REFERENCES Anantakrishnan, C. P., Lazarus, A. J. and Rangaswami, M. C. (1952). Some causes for the variation in the length of gestation. Indian J. Dairy Sci., 5 : 63-77 Arunachalam, T. V., Lazarus, A. J. and Anantakrishnan, C. P. (1952). Factors influencing the gestation period and birth weight of Murrah buffaloes. Indian J. Dairy Sci., 5 : 117-123 Brakel, W. J., Rife, D. C. and Salisbury, S. M. (1952). Factors associated with duration of gestation in dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci., 35 : 179-194 Burris, M. J. and Blum, C. T. (1952). Some factors affecting gestation length and birth weight of beef cattle. J. Anim. Sci., 2 : 34-41. An. Br. Abst. 2(03): 230 Choudhry, A. C. and Sinha, C. (1951). Studies on gestation periods in Tharparker cattle. Indian J. vet. Sci. 21: 69-79 Jafar, S. M., Chapman, A. B. and Casida, L. E. (1950). Causes of variation in length of gestation in dairy cattle. J. Anim. Sci., 9 : 593-601 Jordao, L. P. and De paula Assis, F. (1951). Reproductive efficiency, birth weight and growth in Meuse-Rhine-Yssel cattle. Bol. Industry, Ani., N. S., 12 : 45-61. An. Br. Abst., 20(4): 337 Kumaran, J.D.S. (1947) J. Dairy Sci., 30 : 353 Lambardt, A. (1951). Gestation period and service period of Black Pied Lowland cattle of the west phalian herd. Dissertation, Vet. Med. Fak. Justus-Liebig-Hochseh, Giessen : 19. An. Br. Abst., 21(2) : 146 Lazarus, A. J., Anantakrishnan, C. P. and Rangaswami, M. C. (1952). The period of gestation in cows. Indian J. Dairy Sci., 5 : 9-23 Lazarus, A. J. and Rangaswami, M. C. (1950). A study of the birth weights of calves of Indian breeds, Indian J. Dairy Sci., 23 : 46-51 Livesay, E. A. and Bea, U. O. (1945). A study of the gestation peroids of five breeds of cattle. J. Anim. Sci., 4 : 13-14 Lush, J. L. (1947). Animal Breeding Plans, Iowa State College, Ames. pp. 443 Ragab, M. T. and Asker, A. A. (1951). Factors influencing length of gestation period in Egyptian cattle and buffaloes. Indian J. Dairy Sci., 4 : 159-169 Snedecor, George W. (1948). Statistical methods. Iowa State College, Ames. pp. 485 Wheat, J. D. and Riggs, J. K. (1952). Length of gestation period in beef cattle. Hered., 43 : 99 An. Br. Abst., 20(4) : 342.
FACTORS AFFECTING BIRTH WEIGHT IN HARIANA CATTLE By M. L. KOHLI and K. R. SURI, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar, Punjab (Received for publication on July 30, 1956) THE study of the birth weight of the calves is of great importance to a breeder, for judging their general health and prospective growth. Different workers in- vestigated the effect of several factors on the birth weight of the calves. Arunach- alam et al., [1952] stated that the sex of the calf had no influence on the birth weight in Murrah buffaloes while Choudhuri and Sinha [1951] and Anantakrishnan and Lazarus [1953] found that the bull calves were carried heavier than the heifer calves in Tharparkar, Red Sindhi, Gir and cross-bred calves. A definite relationship existed between the age of dam and birth weight of calves as observed by Burris and Blum [1952] in beef cattle, Arunachalam et al., [1952] in Murrah buffaloe and Anantakrishnan and Lazarus [1953] in Indian dairy cattle but Jordao [1951] reported contrary in Brazil dairy cattle. No effect of season was observed in buffaloe [Arunachalam et al., 1952] and in cattle [Burris and Blum, 1952 and Anantakrishnan and Lazarus, 1953]. Arunachalam et al. [1952] and Anantakrishnan and Lazarus, [1953] stated that the sire of the calf affected the birth weight but Burris and Blum [1952] could not establish this fact. MATERIAL AND METHODS The data used in the study were taken from Hariana herd of cattle, bred and raised at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar (Punjab), from 1946 to 1953. In all 771 birth weights of calves were studied. The calves were dropped at all seasons of the year and were weighed within 24 hours after birth. The methods used for the study of analysis of variance were those described by Snedecor [1948] for the disproportionate class. RESULTS Effect of sex and sequence of calving The average birth weight of 771 calves was 50.8 lb., for 402 male calves the average was 51.8 lb. and for 369 females 49.8 lb. The smallest calf weighed 28 lb., while the largest weighed 80 lb. at birth. The birth weight of the calves in different lactations was studied (Table I). It did not indicate any definite pattern with the increase in number of lactation. The analysis of variance was carried out on 767 cases (Table II). Records of the last three lactations, being few, were excluded. It showed that the calving sequence had no significant effect on birth weight. The birth weight of the calves, however, varied significantly between sexes, male calves had higher birth weight than female calves. 33 56 AR/56
34 FACTORS AFFECTING BIRTH WEIGHT [Vol. XXVII, Part I, TABLE I Influence of calving sequence of the dam on birth weight of the calves Lactation No. Male Female Total No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean 1st 116 50.9±0.9 122 48.8±0.8 238 49.8±0.6 2nd 99 51.9±0.8 70 50.9±0.8 169 51.5±0.6 3rd 67 53.2±1.4 64 50.2±0.7 131 51.7±0.8 4th 48 50.5±0.7 54 50.0±1.2 102 50.3±0.7 5th 43 51.9±0.8 32 48.7±1.2 75 50.6±0.8 6th 16 53.3±1.2 14 51.0±2.3 30 52.2±1.3 7th 7 53.1±4.3 8 52.0±2.1 15 52.5±2.3 8th 4 54.7±4.2 3 49.7±3.5 7 52.6±2.9 9th 2 53.0±1.4 .. .. 2 53.0±1.4 10th .. .. 1 57.5±0.0 1 57.5±0.0 11th .. .. 1 60.0±0.0 1 60.0±0.0 Total 402 51.8 369 49.8 771 50.8 TABLE II Analysis of variance of birth weight between calving sequence and sex for birth weights of calves Sources of variation D.F. Sum of squares Mean S. F. Between calving sequences 7 509.4 72.8 0.96 Between sex 1 773.7 773.7 4.21* Between sex and calving sequences interac- tion 7 230.4 32.9 Error 751 139073.6 185.2 Total 766 *Significant.
March, 1957] M. L. KOHLI NAD K. R. SURI 35 Effect of month of calving Variations in birth weight of calves were observed for different months of the year (Table III). The influence of the month of freshening on the birth weight of calves was not found to be statistically significant (Table IV). TABLE III Influence of month of calving on birth weight Months Male Female Total No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean January 27 51.7±1.3 48 49.7±2.3 75 50.4±.1.5 February 41 52.6±2.0 43 50.7±1.7 84 51.7±1.4 March 55 53.6±1.7 51 51.1±1.5 106 52.3±1.1 April 47 52.7±0.8 37 52.7±1.0 84 52.7±0.6 May 35 50.3±1.3 17 46.7±1.4 52 49.0±0.9 June 39 50.0±1.6 32 48.7±1.8 71 49.4±1.2 July 33 49.0±0.9 34 46.3±0.8 67 47.6±0.6 August 22 50.2±1.4 23 49.9±2.0 45 50.0±1.2 September 32 51.3±1.3 21 49.2±1.5 53 50.5±0.9 October 18 54.8±2.9 17 49.1±1.7 35 52.1±1.7 November 23 50.3±0.9 20 50.1±1.0 43 50.2±0.7 December 30 54.1±2.4 26 50.7±1.5 56 52.5±1.5 Total 402 369 771
36 FACTORS AFFECTING BIRTH WEIGHT [Vol. XXVII, Part I. TABLE IV Analysis of variance of birth weights between months and sex Sources of variation D.F. Sum of squares Mean S. F. Between months 11 1660.3 150.9 0.82 Between sex 1 815.5 815.5 4.47* Between sex and months interaction 11 318.7 29.0 Error 747 137933.3 184.6 Total 770 *Significant Effect of sire of the calf The average birth weight of calves, progeny of different bulls, varied from 47.8 to 59.0 lb. (Table V). Statistical analysis (Table VI) carried out on 770 cases re- vealed that the influence of the sire on birth weight was not significant. Bull No. 210H2/46 was not included in the analysis as it had only one case. TABLE V Influence of sire on birth weight of calves Sire No. Male Female Total No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean No. of cases Mean 274H2/39 9 60.6±2.5 8 55.7±2.9 17 58.4±1.9 2HP/44 50 50.7±0.8 47 48.1±1.1 97 49.4±0.6 3HP/44 56 50.2±1.1 36 47.3±1.8 92 49.1±0.8 13HP/44 34 51.0+1.3 50 49.4±0.6 84 50.1±0.6
March, 1957] M. L. LOHLI AND K. B. SURI 37 TABLE V (contd.) Influence of sire on birth weight of calves Male Female Total Sire No. No. of Mean No. of Mean No. of Mean cases cases cases 15HP/44 30 53.7±1.0 35 49.5±1.4 65 51.5±0.9 163H1/40 38 53.5±1.3 31 50.3±0.8 69 51.9±0.8 18HP/46 13 61.6±1.8 14 50.2±1.9 27 51.0±1.3 2.HP/42 12 50.6±1.9 15 48.7±2.5 27 49.6±1.6 190H1/42 32 52.7±1.2 35 50.4±1.1 67 51.6±0.8 512H4/41 45 51.7±1.7 38 52.4±1.9 83 52.1±1.3 395H2/42 36 52.7±1.4 29 50.7±0.9 65 51.7±0.9 203H1/42 25 48.4±1.7 17 46.8±2.5 42 47.8±1.4 210H2/46 1 59.0±0.0 .. .. 1 59.0±0.0 227H1/42 21 52.1±1.3 14 52.0±1.2 35 52.1 ±0.9 Total 402 369 771 TABLE VI Analysis of variance of birth weight between sires Sources of variation D.F. Sum of squares Mean S. F. Between sires 12 3351.9 279.3 1.59 Between sex 1 711.1 711.1 40.7* Between sire and sex interaction 12 335.1 27.9 Error 744 131757.9 177.0 *Significant 56 AR/56 8
38 FACTORS AFFECTING BIRTH WEIGHT [Vol. XXVII, Part I, DISCUSSION The results in this study revealed that the sex of the calf influenced the birth weight and that the male calves, on an average, were heavier than the females which was in agreement with the observations of other workers [Choudhury and Sinha, 1951; Anantakrishnan and Lazarus, 1953]. The sequence of calving and the month of freshening did not affect significantly the birth weight of calves, the former disagreeing with, while the latter conforming to the findings of Burris and Blum [1952] and Arunachalam et al. [1952]. The sire of the calf was found to have no influence on birth weight of the calf and this result agreed with the observations of Burris and Blum [1952] whereas Arunachalam et al. [1952] and Anantakrishnan and Lazarus [1953] observed to the contrary. SUMMARY Bull calves, on an average, were significantly heavier than females. Calving sequence of the dam, the season of freshening and the sire had no signi- ficant effect on the birth weight of the calves. REFERENCES Anantakrishnan, C. P. and Lazarus, A. J. (1953). A study of the birth weight of calves. Indian J. Dairy Sci. 6 : 23 Arunachalam, T. V., Lazarus, A. J. and Anantakrishnan, C. P. (1952). Factors influencing the gestation period and birth weight of Murrah Buffaloes. Indian J. Dairy Sci. 5 : 117 Burris, M. J. and Blum, C. T. (1952). Some factors affecting gestation length and birth weight of beef cattle. J. Anim. Sci. 2 : 34. An. Br. Abst., 20(3): 23 Chaudhury, A. C. and Sinha, C. (1951). Studies on gestation period in Tharparker cattle. Indian J. vet. Sci. 21: 69 Jordao, L. P. and De Paula Assis, F. (1951). Reproductive efficiency, birth weight and growth in Meuse-Rhine-yssel cattle. Bol. Industr. Anim. N. S. 12, 45. An. Br. Abst., 20(4): 337.
ABSTRACTS The use of blood culture in the routine diagnosis of anthrax. THOMPSON, P. D. (1955). J. Comp. Path. 65, pp. 1-7 (Tables. 5 Refs. 5) THE author describes a blood-culture technique as an aid to diagnosis in cases of suspected anthrax in the field which could not be confirmed by microscopical examination of blood films and tried this technique along with guinea-pig and mouse inoculation for screening feeding stuffs and other material for the presence of B. anibracis. He recommends that swabs from such cases may be put into a test tube to which is added 2 ml. of fresh defibrinated bovine blood and the tube incubated at 37°C. Positive results are obtained within about 3½ hours, but it is recommended that as a matter of routine the tube containing the swab and defibrinated blood should be incubated overnight, although six hours incubation gives quite satisfactory results. Before incubation, the swab is used to inoculate a guinea-pig. In positive cases, the smears made from the contents of the tube after incubation showed organisms with well-marked capsule formation. Defibrinated blood of sheep and sera from cattle, horse, sheep, donkey and pig were also tried in a few cases with similar results. At the same time anthracoids were also used in a few trials, and these failed to exhibit any capsule formation. For examining the feeding stuffs the author adopted the following technique : 15 gm. of the material for examination was mixed with 150 c.c. of N. S. S. in a flask and kept overnight in the refrigerator. After this the flask was heated to a tempera- ture of 65°C for 5 minutes and then the contents were filtered through double layer of muslin cloth. The filtrate was spun for 10 minutes at 3000 r.p.m. The deposits so obtained were resuspended in N. S. S. and recentrifuged. The final deposit was mixed with 8 c.c. of N. S. S. and out of this material 1 ml. was inoculated into the blood, 1 ml. into one guinea-pig, 3 ml. into a second guinea-pig, and 0.2 to 0.5 ml. into each of six mice, all animal inoculations being done subcutaneously. Smears from the blood culture of the swab and from the site of inoculation, heart and spleen of the animals were examined and cultures were also attempted from the same organs. The author concludes that the blood culture method has the advantage of being cheap, simple and apparently more sensitive than the method of guinea-pig inocula- tion. In examining the feeding stuffs and other material the inoculation of six mice appeared to be superior to the inoculation of two guinea-pigs or one blood culture, but a combination of all three methods gave the best results. (S.L. 1.) 39 56 AR/56 9
40 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVII, Part I, Evaluations of some new insecticides against lice on livestock and poultry. CHARLES L. SMITH and ROWLAND RICHARDS. J. Econ. Ento. 48. (5): 566-568 SPOT-TREATMENT tests and field trails with some of the new insecticides against lice of cattle, goats and poultry were conducted at Kerrvile, Texas, U.S.A., during 1953 and 1954. A number of chemicals tested against the short-nosed cattle louse Haematopinus eurystenus (Nitz.) gave good initial kills at concentrations of 0.25 per cent or above. The chlorinated hydrocarbons used, i.e. DDT, toxaphene and strobane remained effective, giving 100 per cent control, for 3-4 weeks. Phos- phorus insecticides, such as parathion, malathion and diazinon, were effective even at concentrations lower than 0.25 per cent but lost their residual effectiveness earlier than the chlorinated hydrocarbons. In field trials on cattle lice, strobane 0.5 per cent) and heptachlor (0.05, 0.1 and 0.5 per cent) were tested as wettable powder against long-nosed cattle louse, Linognathus vituli (L.). One hundred per cent control was obtained with both the materials up to 4 weeks after treatment. DDT, strobane, endrin, isodrin, malathion, diazinon, chlorthion, Bayer L 13/59, Bayer 21/199 and EPN treatments in evaluation tests against goat lice, Bovicola caprae (Gurlt.) and B. limbatus (Gerv.), by dipping method at different concentra- tions, gave 100 per cent kill in 24 and 48 hours, and most of them remained effective for 4 weeks. EPN (0.03 per cent), malathion (0.5 per cent), strobane (0.5 per cent), and heptachlor (0.25 per cent) used as spray against goat lice in field trials gave complete control within 24 hours. No louse was seen on the flock treated with strobane for 6 months after treatment. In other cases there were moderate to light infestations during the same period. DDT, toxaphene, strobane, chlordane, methoxychlor, TDE (each 5 per cent) lindane, malathion and diazinon (each 1 per cent) were tested as dusts against the chicken body louse, Eomenacanthus stramineus (Nitz.). All the materials gave complete control of the original infestation and most of them showed residual effect till 4 weeks after treatment. (R.P.C.) Rectal temperature and respiratory responses of Jersey and Sindhi-Jersey (F1) crossbred females to a standard hot atmosphere. MCDOWELL, R.E., D.H.K. LEE, M. H. FOHRMAN, J. P. SYKES and R. A. ANDERSON (1955). J. Dairy Sci. 38 : 9 : 1037-45 YOUNG heifers, old heifers, dry cows and lactating cows of Jersey breed and Red Sindhi-Jersey (F1) crosses were exposed at regular intervals to a standard test atmosphere of 105°F with a vapour pressure of 34 mm. Hg. (wet bulb 92°F), and their rectal temperature and respiratory responses were observed. The mean temperature response of Jerseys was higher than that of crossbreds in all the groups and the difference was also observed in the cows of the two breeds with the same level of milk production. The initial rectal temperature, as also the subsequent rise, were higher in heifers, but the rise was similar in all ages. Dry cows behaved
March, 1957J ABSTRACTS 41 very much the same as old heifers. The level of milk production had considerable effect in increasing the temperature response up to certain limits but not so the stage of lactation. A marked seasonal variation in temperature response was observed. Jersey heifers exhibited a higher respiratory response to heat than crossbreds, but the reverse was true for lactating cows, and no difference was seen in dry cows, The author concluded that differences in respiratory rate are the results and not the cause of differences in heat tolerance. (S.G.) Urea as a protein extender for lactating cows. G. M. WARD, C. F. HUFFMAN, and C. W. DUNCAN (1955). J. Dairy Sci. 38, 298 TEN cows (nine Holstein and one Guernsey) were used to compare the effect on milk production of a urea and corn supplement with that of a soybean oil meal supplement. Each experimental period of nine days was preceded by 12 days preliminary period, during which the animals were fed on a low-protein ration; the animals were then assigned to four groups : two groups of two and two groups of three cows each. The low-protein roughage consisted of chopped seed-stage-timothy hay, molasses and ground corn. The concentrate mixture was fed either by inti- mately mixing in the roughage or by placing it on top of it. A Latin square design was used. The average daily milk production for each 9-day period was determined as fat-corrected milk based on 3-day composite butter-fat tests. During the initial protein-depletion period of 12 days the F.C.M. was reduced by about 20 per cent, but the milk production levelled off after 6 days. The loss in body weight suffered by the animals during the period was on an average 55 lb., after which it remained constant. The intake of total digestible nutrient and digestible crude protein by the animals were calculated on the basis of actual ingestion of feeds, assuming the digestibility coefficients. No significant difference in the body weight or milk yield of the animals was produced by the feeding of urea or soybean oil meal or by the difference in the method of feeding this supplement. (K.S.) The effect on conception rates of semen diluents containing citrate or phosphate buffer, with all combinations of sulphanilamide, streptomycin and penicillin. R. C. CAMPBELL and J. EDWARDS (1955). J. Agric. Sci. 46, Part I, pp. 44-45 BACTERIA in semen used for artificial insemination reduced the fertilizing capa- city of the semen. Many experiments have been carried out to show that concep- tion rate can be increased by the use of semen supplements, e.g. sulphonamides, peni- cillin, streptomycin, aureomycin, etc. In the present investigation, attempt has been
42 ABSTRACTS Vol. XXVII, Part I, made to find out the effects of adding sulphanilamide, streptomycin and penicillin (in various combinations) to semen diluents, and to determine the conception rates obtained when citrate or phosphate buffer was used to dilute the semen. The amounts of sulphanilamide and antibiotics added to 1 ml. of diluted semen were : Sulphanilamide .... 1.5 mg. Streptomycin (calcium chloride complex) 500 REVIEW A HAND BOOK OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING BY V. T. SUBBIAH MUDALIAR (Published by the Bangalore Printing and Publishing Co., Ltd., Post Box No. 507, Mysore Road, Bangalore-2HERBAGE ABSTRACTS AND FIELD CROP ABSTRACTS These two quarterly journals, prepared by the Commonwealth Bureau of Pastures and Field Crops, Hurley, England, are composed of abstracts from the world's current scientific literature. Herbage Abstracts deals with grass- lands, fodder crops and their management and Field Crop Abstracts with annual field crops, including rice. Both Journals include a review article with each number as well as abstracts dealing with crop husbandry, varieties, crop botany, control of diseases, pests and weeds, and a section devoted to book reviews and notices. For those engaged in agricultural research or in the giving of agricultural advice or information, the reading of these two journals offers a ready means of keeping abreast of current developments without recourse to the labour of scru- tinizing the mass of agricultural publications now appearing in many languages. The annual subject and author indexes, dating from 1930 and 1948, respectively, form a valuable source of reference to past work. The price of each Journal (with index) is 36/- per annum, post free, in the British Commonwealth and 45/- in other countries. Orders should be sent to Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux, Central Sales Branch, Farnham, Royal Bucks, England.
STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CREEPERS A NEW RAIN-FED, HIGH PROTEIN PHOSPHORUS-RICH PLANT By S. K. TALAPATRA AND C. S. BARSAUL, U. P. College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Mathura Received for publication on May 15, 1956 [Accepted for publication on December 18, 1956] IT is now generally agreed that an acute shortage of protein-rich feeds in the dietary is primarily responsible for the poor condition of our cattle. It has been estimated [Human nutrition vis-a-vis animal nutrition in India, 1953] that the country as a whole is short of protein-rich concentrates at least to the extent of about 75 per cent. Attempts have been made in the past [Dasgupta, 1943] to replace concentrates from the ration of milch and growing animals with leguminous roughages. The results of these investigations tend to show that when 75 per cent of the concentrates is replaced by legume hays, animals grow at a much slower rate than those receiving a full quota of concentrates. Now it appears most convincing [N. R. C. report on dairy cattle, 1950] that during early growth an exclusive feeding of low phosphorus/high calcium legume or the incorporation in the diet a large proportion of it creates conditions that are at least not very favourable for such animals to record their full size as dictated by heredity. It is obvious that 7-8 lb. of green legumes like berseem (Trifolium alexan- drinum) or similar feeds will be needed to supply one gram of phosphorus (P). To provide, therefore, enough of this element during the active period of growth, it may be necessary to feed about 80-100 lb. of these feeds, which obviously is beyond the capacity of such young calves to consume. Furthermore, an abnormally wide calcium to phosphorus ratio as 10 :1, nor- mally found in most of these legumes, specially when raised in highly alkaline soils rich in calcium, appears to be another limiting factor. In a preliminary study, it has been observed that when all concentrates are replaced by green legume or its equivalent hay and the whole ration made otherwise adequate for growth by introducing sufficient phosphorus deficient straws, growth is severely restricted and maturity very much delayed in cattle. While the control animals on a diet of concentrates, straws and a little green (5 lb.) registered their usual height and showed oestrus at the age of about 26 months; identical animals under legume and straw feeding, even at a higher plane of protein nutrition failed to show any sign of oestrus at the age of four years in seven out of eight instances. They also looked very much smaller than those fed with concentrates. The content 45 82AR/56 1
46 STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CREEPERS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, of copper in the blood of all these animals, however, showed normal values. Simi- larly, on a ration of this kind, although the milk yield during the entire lactation was not much affected, but in the majority of the cases, the animals failed to come into heat and appeared to have suffered from a sort of nutritional sterility [Tala- patra, 1955]. Information on the chemical composition and nutritive value of the indigenous or cultivated fodder plants so far available [Sen, 1937 ; Kehar, 1947 ; Talapatra 1949, 50] indicates that they may be poor in protein, calcium and phosphorus or in any two or one of these indispensable nutrients. An all-round fodder plant rich in protein, calcium and phosphorus for the purpose of growth and milk production is yet to be found. For the past several years we were searching for a number of indigenous fodder plants which should not only be rich in protein, calcium and phosphorus but should grow without irrigation during monsoon and be available for conservation in late October when weather conditions are, in general, most favourable for hay making in any part of the country. In this article an attempt has been made to present the chemical properties and nutritive value of one such indigenous plant which not only grows in desert-like conditions but appears to supply enough nutrients for growth, milk and wool production. Ipomoea pestigridis known locally as 'Ghiyabati' is a creeper like kudzu vines which grows aggressively in a wild state during the monsoon in the western tract of Uttar Pradesh and probably in other parts of the country. It is considered as a sort of weed in jowar fields and when cultivated can be successfully raised along with jowar. When grown singly, it produces a thick dense mass and abundant foliage for about three to four months and remains green and succulent even in late October when other green feeds are almost entirely absent in this part. Its immature seeds look like English peas, while the mature ones are black and resemble more or less sann-hemp seeds. Normally it appears to give two cuttings, but the yield in the second cut is comparatively much smaller than the first cut. I. CHEMICAL COMPOSITION AND PALATIBILITY The chemical composition of the new feed on dry matter basis under a variety of conditions is shown in Table I, while the detailed analysis has been shown at other relevant places. In mid-August when a large supply is available for feeding cattle, the protein content of the plant on dry matter is about 21 per cent; with progressive maturity it is lowered by almost half. It appears from the data shown above that even in late October it contains as much protein as can be found in some of the legumes at their later stage of growth. The data shown in column 3 indicate that for a period of about 45 days from 8th September to 22nd October, the plant showed a fairly constant level of protein with an average of about 13 per cent, regardless of the locality from which samples were collected for analysis. A leaf meal prepared out of the plant in September showed 19 per cent protein, while the second cut sample (shown in the last column) 17 per cent. As expected both the mature and immature seeds were fairly high in protein, viz. about 30 and 22 per cent respectively.
June, 1957] S. K. TALAPATRA AND C. S. BARSAUL 47 TABLE I The chemical composition of the creeper Nurtients Chemical composition of the plant with progressive maturity under controlled condi- tions in experimenta plots Chemical composition of the plant grow- ing in a wild state collected at random from different localities between 8th September and 22nd October 1955 Distribution of nutrients in leaf meal and stem on 25th Sept. 1955 from a plot manured with cow dung Composition of immature and mature seed Composition of the plant when new growth allow- ed after the first cut under controlled conditions in experi- mental plots First cut 17-8-55 Second cut 25-9-55 Third cut 22-10-55 Sample No. 1 8-9-55 Sample No. 2 25-9-55 Sample No. 3 29-9-55 Sample Nov 4 1-10-55 Sample No. 5 22-10-55 Leaf meal Stem Immatu- re seed Mature seed 28-9-55 Crude protein 20.7 13.7 12.1 12.3 13.7 11.2 13.0 12.1 19.0 5.2 21.69 30.19 17.6 Calcium 1.32 0.90 0.92 0.91 0.90 1.06 1.00 0.95 1.44 0.86 0.21 0.38 1.00 Phosphorus 0.32 0.37 0.48 0.48 0.37 0.42 0.45 0.43 0.56 0.65 0.70 1.03 0.43 Oil or other extract .. .. .. 3.00 .. 3.50 .. .. .. .. 9.90 11.10
48 STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CREEPERS [Vol. XXVII, Part II The important point which goes to make this plant be valuable is that unlike the legumes it is also rich in phosphorus with an ideal calcium to phosphorus ratio. The average content of phosphorus in berseem or similar feeds grown on alkaline soils, where they seem to thrive best, is about 0.2 per cent on dry matter, while under less favourable conditions this plant provides very nearly 2 to 2½ times more of this element than most of the protein-rich roughages (about 1 per cent P2O5). This ability of the plant to utilise phosphorus from a desert-like soil, highly alkaline and saline is definitely in favour of its introduction in Indian agriculture. It may be seen from the data given in Table I that most of the samples can very easily be compared with some grains and other concentrates in its content of phosphorus. During the early growth when seeds are not formed, the phosphorus content of the plant is slightly lower, because both the immature and mature seeds are high in this element. It is definitely rich in calcium (about 1 per cent) and shows almost a uniform level of this mineral during its entire life cycle. The per- centage of oil (about 10 per cent) present in the mature and immature seeds has been shown in column 5, while the same figure (about 3.5 per cent) for the plant itself in column 3. It has been estimated that 50 per cent of the whole plant (on dry matter) consists only of high protein leaves. A few estimations of the amide nitrogen are shown below: TABLE IA The amide content of the plant 1st cut sample in mid August (on dry matter) Last cut sample in October (on dry matter) Total N per cent) 3.31 1.79 Albuminoid N per cent 2.83 1.63 Amide N per cent 0.48 0.16 Amide N as per cent of total N 14.5 8.9 Woodman [loc. cit.] has recorded in various green feeds such as barley, oats and pasture grasses amide N as 11 to 15 per cent of the total N. Although amide N, according to the same author may constitute as much as 60 per cent of the total N in some root crops, in this particular instance the author's findings, as shown in Table IA, are in agreement with those obtained by Woodman in British pastures and other green feeds. It may be mentioned here that on an exclusive feeding of succulent green feeds, the digestible crude protein of the feed cannot possibly be relied upon as a safe guide, because of the fact that the conversion of non-protein nitrogenous compounds into protein bodies by microbial activity is extremely slow and is largely conditioned by the presence or absence of refractory carbohydrates in the diet. As is well known, the usual British practice here is to use what is termed as "protein equivalent". Thus the requirement of green feeds for growth, milk production and similar body functions should be considerably more than is normally recommended in this country. From this standpoint the low content of amides
June, 1957] S. K. TALAPATRA AND C. S. BARSAUL 49 in any green feed should, in general, be preferred to those high in amides. It is obvious from the data shown in TABLE IA that the content of amide N is definitely lower than usually found in most of the protein-rich feeding stuffs. It may further be seen that as usual the content of the amide decreased with maturity. The palatability of the new feed as measured by dry matter consumption per 100 lb. body weight with different species and categories of farm animals is shown in Table II. The average body-weight of the experimental animals was 830, 800, 1,000, 450 and 86 lb. respectively for bullocks, milch cows, milch buffaloes bull calves and sheep. TABLE II Dry matter consumption by different species and categories of farm animals Bullocks (sample fed at 16 per cent D.M. in September) (lb.) Milch cows (sample fed at 20 per cent D.M. in October) (lb.) Milch buffaloes (sample fed at 20 per cent D.M. in October) (lb.) Bull calves (sample fed at 16 per cent D.M. in September) (lb.) Sheep (sample fed at 16 per cent D. M. in September) (lb.) 2.3 1.8 2.1 2.0 2.3 2.0 1.8 2.2 1.9 2.7 2.0 1.9 2.2 2.0 2.7 .. .. .. 1.9 2.3 Average 2.1 1.8 2.2 2.0 2.5 The average dry matter consumption by different farm animals may be con- sidered very satisfactory. In the case of milch cows, the consumption is slightly less, because the sample fed to these animals was of a poor quality, mostly collected from jowar fields after the harvesting of the crop. It may be seen from the above data that at the comparatively early stage in September the bullocks consumed over 100 lb. ; while the calves and sheep about 56 and 13 lb. respectively of the green feed. During the course of these investigations, it was also noticed that 16 months old calves could easily clear up about 25 lb. of the green feed in less than 3 hours time. II. EVALUATION OF THE FEED AS A GREEN FODDER For the purpose of evaluation, two species namely, adult bullocks and sheep were taken as experimental subjects. After the usual preliminary feeding period urine and faeces were collected by the technique followed at the Animal Nutrition
50 STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CREEPERS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, Division of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute at Izatnagar. The chemical composition of the green feeds on dry matter basis fed to two groups of experimental animals is shown below : Sample fed to sheep Sample fed to bullocks Crude protein 12.27 11.15 Ether extract 3.00 3.50 Ash 10.29 10.23 Crude fibre 26.23 26.18 Nitrogen-free extract 48.21 48.94 Calcium 0.917 1.060 Phosphorus 0.479 0.422 Both the samples may be considered identical in chemical make-up. In the sample fed to sheep, both mature and immature seeds were found in the pods, which they specially picked up and relished. The trial with bullocks was conducted after the experiment with sheep was over, hence more mature seeds were found in the pods. Compared to most of the indigenous and cultivated fodder grasses, it appeared to be low in fibre and rich in two of the most vital mineral elements. In Table III are shown the digestibility co-efficients of the various nutrients. Both the species digested food nutrients almost equally well except the crude protein and nitrogen-free extract. Although the sample fed to sheep contained about 10 per cent more of protein than the one fed to bullocks, even then 11 per cent increase in protein digestibility in sheep of an apparently identical sample of feed was considered to be a bit too high. During the course of our metabolism ex- periments, it was observed that the hard seeds containing over 30 per cent of protein were not properly masticated by the bullocks, some of which were excreted in the faeces practically un-altered, while no such materials were found in the faeces of sheep. Thus the sheep utilised the seeds of the plant better than the bullocks. It may be mentioned here that in most of the Cambridge trials [Wood- man, 1948] sheep were used as experimental subjects. Obviously under certain con- ditions of feeding such a procedure may slightly overestimate the value of the feed specially with regard to proteins and probably nitrogen-free extract, as the seeds in general are high in these nutrients. For this reason, the digestibility of ether extract should have been more in the case of sheep, because the seeds are also rich in oil. It may be seen from the results of chemical analysis given above that the sample fed to bullocks contained about 17 per cent more of the ether extract than the one fed to sheep and thus there was a sort of compensatory effect.
June, 1957] S. K. TALAPATRA AND C. S. BARSAUL 51 TABLE III Digestibility coefficients of the feed Particulars Animal number Dry matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Total carbohydrates Sheep 1 68.0 73.6 61.6 52.7 80.0 70.6 2 66.0 71.7 57.5 51.0 77.8 68.4 3 68.0 72.7 57.0 53.0 79.2 71.4 4 65.0 71.6 57.8 50.0 76.3 67.2 Average 66.8 72.4 58.5 51.7 78.3 69.4 Bullocks 1 60.0 63.0 60.0 50.0 71.2 64.0 2 63.0 66.6 62.1 52.2 74.0 66.5 3 59.0 65.7 55.0 49.0 72.0 63.2 Average 60.7 65.1 59.0 50.4 72.4 64.6
52 STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CREEPERS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, The balance of nitrogen, calcium and phosphorus has been shown in Table IV, The heavy retention of nitrogen in the case of bullocks is purely of a temporary nature, which is usually to be found when adult animals are kept on a high plane of protein nutrition [Talapatra, loc. cit. ] TABLE IV The balance of nitrogen, calcium and phosphorus Particulars Animal number Intake (gm.) Excretion (gm.) (gm.) Faeces Urine Total Sheep Nitrogen 1 17.4 4.6 8.0 12.6 +4.8 2 20.0 5.7 10.0 15.7 +4.3 3 21.3 5.8 11.1 16.9 +4.4 4 17.2 4.9 9.2 14.1 +3.1 Calcium 1 8.12 6.66 0.45 7.11 + 1.01 2 9.35 8.45 0.52 8.97 + 0.38 3 10.00 8.74 0.60 9.34 +0.66 4 8.03 7.50 0.30 7.80 +0.23 Phosphorus 1 4.24 3.85 0.02 3.87 +0.37 2 4.89 4.19 0.02 4.21 +0.68 3 5.22 4.38 0.01 4.39 +0.83 4 4.20 4.12 0.03 4.15 +0.05
June, 1957] S. K. TALAPATRA AND C. S. BARSAUL 53 TABLE IV64 STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CREEPERS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, of the grass should be raised to at least 55 to 60 per cent before it could be safely stored over a tripod, but in this particular instance the dry matter of the plant at the time of storage was only about 32 per cent, as it was considered that in a dry climate it should be possible to prepare good quality hay by this method. Compared to 80 inches rainfall in Assam, the average in this part is only about 15 inches. Be- cause of this low humidity, it was expected that even a simple procedure like the one described above should give satisfactory results and retain sufficient green colour in the hay so as to supply enough of carotene during the scarcity period. Contrary to expectation, shortly after the transfer of the fodder to the shed, the weather turned unusually bad and then there was a heavy and widespread rainfall for the next three days. Thus the weather turned highly humid at least for a few days. From the climatological data, it appears, that this kind of weather was never been experienced in this part during the last 10 years. However, in spite of adverse weather conditions, the fodder dried up to 80 per cent dry matter in about 8 days time and retained considerable green colour even after 4 months of storage. The creeper when loosely packed and piled up in the form of a cone, allows suffi- cient aeration for quick drying. The hay thus prepared, (as will be shown later) was very much relished by both sheep and cattle ; whereas the same plant when turned into hay in the open by the usual method was not at all relished by the sheep, though the bull calves consumed about 7 lb. of the withered stuff. It will be of considerable interest to know the extent the nutritive value of the hay affected when a green fodder is stored at 32 per cent dry matter. It maybe mentioned here that the low humidity and dry climate of the region are, in general, favourable for green hay-making and it should be possible, with little modifications in the procedure, to prepare in these or similar areas hay which should be comparable with artificially dried grass. It is well-known that the high cost of drying the grass in machine definitely goes against its adoption in this country. For the purpose of evaluation four adult rams weighing on an average about 89 lb. were taken. After the usual preliminary feeding period, urine and faeces were collected by the technique previously described. The feed consumption, chemical composition, the digestibility coefficients and the balance of nitrogen, calcium and phosphorus are shown in Tables V, VI, VII and VIII. TABLE V Palatability of the hay as measured by dry matter consumption Animal number Body weight (lb.) Dry matter consumed (lb.) Dry matter consumed per 100 lb. body weight (1b.) Average consumption (lb.) 1 83 2.4 2.9 2.82 2 89 2.3 2.6 3 90 2.6 2.9 4 94 2.7 2.9
June, 1957] S. K. TALAPATRA AND C. S. BARSAUL 55 TABLE VI Chemical composition of the hay on dry matter basis (per cent) Crude protein 13.58 Ether extract 3.50 Ash 11.88 Crude fibre 27.02 N-free extract 44.02 Total carbohydrates 71.04 Calcium 1.480 Phosphorus 0.344 TABLE VII The digestibility coefficients of the hay Animal number Dry matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre N-free extract Total carbohy- drates 1 54 57.1 69.7 45.8 59.8 54.5 2 50 57.4 67.5 40.0 56.0 50.2 3 48 54.0 67.4 41.0 53.2 48.7 4 51 60.0 67.0 40.0 59.1 51.0 Average 51 57.1 67.9 41.7 57.0 51.1
56 STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CREEPERS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, TABLE VIII The balance of nitrogen, calcium and phosphorus Animal No. Intake (gm.) Excretion Balance. (gm.) Faeces (gm). Urine (gm.) Total (gm.) Nitrogen 1 24.0 10.3 11.9 22.2 + 1.8 2 23.5 10.0 13.3 23.4 +0.2 3 25.6 11.9 13.2 25.1 +0.5 4 26.6 10.7 14.1 24.8 + 1.8 Calcium 1 16.23 13.50 0.11 13.61 +2.62 2 15.91 13.64 0.09 13.73 +2.18 3 17.45 15.80 0.10 15.90 +1.55 4 18.20 14.93 0.09 15.02 +3.18 Phosphorus 1 3.92 3.42 0.01 3.43 +0.49 2 3.85 3.80 0.01 3.81 +0.04 3 4.17 4.10 0.02 4.12 +0.05 4 4.31 3.75 0.02 3.77 +0.54
June, 1957] S. K. TALAPATRA AND C. S. BARSAUL 57 From the perusal of the data set forth in Tables V, VI, VII and VIII it appears that the consumption of the hay by the sheep was very satisfactory. The percen- tage of phosphorus in the hay was slightly lower than previously observed. This was due to the fact that during the course of transfer of the hay to the metabolism shed and chaffing, there was some loss of seeds. It may be seen from the data given in Table VII that the crude protein diges tibility of the hay was affected and lowered by about 20 per cent. The crude protein digestibility of the green feed by the sheep was about 72 per cent, as had been ob- served earlier, while the same figure was now about 57 per cent. Obviously, the three-day continuous rainfall at the time of storage and the subsequent high humi- dity developed during this period was responsible for this loss in digestible protein. Even then, it may be mentioned here [Talapatra, loc. cit.] that such results are only obtained in the humid areas under a very specialised condition, viz. when the dry matter of the plant is raised to about 60 per cent, that too in good weather and over frames. In fact, in humid areas, even in good weather, when green fodder was stored over frames at 30 per cent dry matter the entire hay was found to be decomposed. [Talapatra, unpublished work.] The digestibility of the ether extract had gone high from 60 per cent in the green fodder to about 68 per cent in the hay. This might be due to the fact that the fully mature seeds in late October contained over 10 per cent of oil. The digestibility of the crude fibre had also been lowered by about 20 per cent, that is, from about 50 per cent in the green feed to about 40 per cent in the hay. Apparently, the plant is considerably lignified towards the end of October when the hay was made. The balance of nitrogen, calcium and phosphorus has been shown in Table VIII. The data are self-explanatory. IV. SOME PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS From the average digestibility coefficients shown in previous Tables, the digestible crude protein, starch equivalent and total digestible nutrients of the green fodder and hay with two species namely, bullocks and sheep were calculated and are shown in Table IX. TABLE IX Digestible nutrients per 100 lb. of raw material Name of the feed Experimental subjects Digesti- ble crude protein (lb.) Starch equiva- lent (lb.) Total digesti- ble nutri- ents (lb.) Calcium (per lb. of the material) (gm.) Phospho- rus (per lb. of the material) (gm.) Green Ghiyabati at 16 per cent dry matter Sheep 1.43 8.9 10.3 0.65 0.33 Bullocks 1.20 8.3 9.7 Ghiyabati hay at 90 per cent dry matter Sheep 7.0 30.0 45.0 3.7 1.8
58 STUDIES ON INDIGENOUS CEEEPERS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, From the data shown in the Table IX, it appears that 12 lb. of the green feed and 1 lb. of inferior quality hay or straw should suffice for 100 lb. ewes during the last 100 days of gestation as per N.R.C. standard, while in off season 2½ lb. of the hay and 1 lb. of straw should normally do for the same purpose. One hundred pounds of the green feed and 5 lb. of straw should support a 15 pounder cow (800 lb.), while 20 lb. of the hay and 2½ lb. straw for an average 10 pounder cow. Similarly, 50 lb. of the green feed and 1-2 lb. of straw, or 8-9 lb. of the hay in winter should be adequate during the active period of growth for dairy heifers. It may be mentioned here that some authorities believe that straws should be removed from the ration of our animals. By a judicious combination with the proper type of feeds it should, perhaps, be possible to utilize these straws. It may be seen that in all these instances, it has been possible to avoid the introduction of costly concentrates in the ration for different categories of animals. SUMMARY When all concentrates are replaced with high protein leguminous feeds and the whole ration made otherwise adequate by introducing sufficient phosphorus-defi- cient straws, it has been observed that the low phosphorus content of the 'all rough- age ration' affects growth and reproduction in dairy animals. It has been found that the indigenous creeper Ipomoea pestigrides is high in proteins and calcium like the legumes but unlike the latter is also rich in phosphorus. It is a rainfed fodder crop which grows profusely in August when it contains over 20 per cent of proteins on dry matter. In October and November when weather conditions are definitely favourable for hay making almost in every part of the country, it contains on an average about 12-13 per cent of proteins, 0.9 to 1.0 per cent of calcium and 0.4 to 0.45 per cent of phosphorus on dry matter. Adult bullocks weighing a little over 800 lb. consume about 100 lb., while growing heifers and sheep 56 and 13 lb. respectively of the green feed, which contains on an average about 16 per cent of dry matter. Of the 12-13 per cent proteins present in the creeper, bullocks digest about 65 per cent, while the sheep over 70 per cent, as the latter masticate the mature seeds (which contain over 30 per cent of proteins) of the plant more fully than the former. Drying the plant in the sun for 4 hours and subsequent storing at 32 per cent dry matter out of contact with the ground over a structure lowers the protein diges- tibility by about 20 per cent. The hay thus made retains considerable green colour and is highly palatable to all species of livestock. On an average sheep consumed over 3 lb. of the stuff per 100 lb. body-weight. The green feed contains about 1.5, 9.0 and 10.3 lb. of D.C.P., S. E. and T.D.N. respectively per 100 lb. of the material, while its hay 7.0, 30.0 and 45.0 lb. res- pectively of digestible crude proteins, starch equivalent and total digestible nutrients per 100 lb. of the air dry stuff.
June, 1957] S. K. TALAPATRA AND C. S. BARSAUL 59 It appears that an exclusive feeding of the plant either as a green fodder or as hay should provide enough nutrients including phosphorus for growth and average milk production. When fed in very large quantities it tends to be slightly laxative but the desired consistency of the faeces is very easily obtained by introducing some straws in the dietary. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful to Shri P. G. Pande, Director of Animal Husbandry, Uttar Pradesh and Shri C. V. G. Choudary, Principal, U. P. College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Mathura for their interest in this work. They also thank Shri S. B. Singh, Farm Manager, District Dairy Demonstration Farm, Mathura for his valuable assistance. REFERENCES Das Gupta, N. C. (1943). Indian J. vet. Sci. 13, 279 Human nutrition vis-à-vis animal nutrition in India (1953). A memorandum prepared by the Nutri- tion Advisory Committee of the Indian Council of Medical Research and the Animal Nutrition Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research Kehar, N. D. (1947). Proc. 35th Indian Sci. Congr. Sec. Physiol., 9 Recommended Nutrient allowances for dairy cattle (1950). A report of the committee on animal Nutri- tion, National Research Council, U. S. A. Sen, K. C. (1937). I.C.A.R. Bulletin No. 25 Talapatra, S. K. (1949). Indian J. vet. Sci. 19, 19 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF CONCENTRATES By SUMATI E. MUDAMBI, M.V. RAJAGOPAL and KAMALA SOHONIE, Institute of Science, Bombay [Received for publication on December 6, 1956 Accepted for publication on January 21, 1957] THE major source of cattle-feed are (i) grass, (ii) specially grown fodder crops, (iii) straws of food grain, (iv) cottonseed and oilcakes and (v) by-products such as bran. However, food required for producing extra milk such as concentrates must be fed because (a) the maintenance requirement of cows and buffaloes and the present supply of milk is mainly derived from bulky unadulterated food, (b) milk production necessiates a high proportion of protein, (c) the milk is required for heavily populated areas and if it is to be delivered there in the fluid state, it must be produced in or near these areas ; such areas have few grazing facilities and for the most part, the milch animals and specially young stocks must be stall-fed. All the animals housed in the Government Milk Colony Aarey are stall-fed and most of the feeds of the cattle are made up of concentrates. To understand how far the concentrates fed at the colony are nutritious and also as a step towards ulti- mately carrying out experiments for the study of the effect of different feeds on the quality of milk, a complete chemical analysis of all the concentrates, being used as feed at the Colony, was undertaken. The results of analyses of cottonseed, guar, gram chuni, tur chuni, wheat bran, long challa, copra cake, groundnut cake and til cake are presented in this article. MATERIAL AND METHODS Collection of samples Sample of each concentrate was selected at random from the stores of the Government Milk Colony, Aarey. Four such samples were collected at different times of the year. Method of determination All analyses were carried out by methods described in the Hand Book of the A. O. A. C. [1950] (1) in triplicate. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The results of analyses are presented in Table I. Table I shows that of all the concentrates groundnut cake contains the maximum protein with til cake coming next. Guar,tur-chuni and copra cake are also good sources of protein. Cotton- seed, gram chuni and wheat bran are medium sources of protein, and long challa is a poor source of protein. 61 82 AR 56 3
62 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF CONCENTRATES [Vol. XXVII, Part II, TABLE I Percentage composition of concentrates on dry matter basis Name of concentrate Crude protein per cent Ether extract per cent Ash soluble in HCl per cent P as P2O5 per cent Ca as CaO per cent Max. Min. Average Max. Min. Average Max. Min. Average Max. Min. Average Max. Min Average Gowar 40.83 29.30 33.19 6.54 3.13 4.78 3.68 3.10 3.46 1.08 0.29 0.71 0.63 0.12 0.40 Gram chuni 22.29 10.18 19.12 5.04 3.89 4.53 3.59 1.41 2.83 1.09 0.22 0.65 0.89 0.74 0.81 Tur chuni 30.52 21.40 25.52 2.92 1.15 2.23 4.59 3.57 4.32 1.62 0.19 0.83 0.93 0.35 0.53 Wheat bran 18.96 14.57 16.83 4.56 4.53 4.54 5.71 3.34 4.72 3.15 2.64 2.96 0.37 0.27 0.31 Groundnut cake 55.12 47.78 51.82 8.71 6.29 7.55 4.48 3.62 4.07 1.66 0.50 0.92 0.36 0.24 0.31 Cotton seed 21.51 19.13 21.13 22.43 20.07 21.02 4.13 3.45 3.91 1.69 0.41 0.88 0.57 0.42 0.49 Til cake 45.68 35.67 41.48 15.82 4.90 10.72 10.76 8.80 9.91 2.66 0.73 1.76 3.96 2.53 3.24 Copra cake 24.70 21.85 23.18 16.85 4.81 12.10 5.17 4.49 4.87 1.20 0.50 0.89 0.24 Long challa 8.57 0.58 2.78 0.37 066.
June, 1957] SUMATI R. MUDAMBI ET. AL. 63 TABLE II Average percentage composition of concentrates obtained by different workers in different parts of country (dry matter basis) Name Place of origin Total ash Ash sol. in HCL Ether extract Crude protein Carbohydrates Ca as CaO P as P2O5 Reference Fiber N2 free extract Ca as CaO Organic constituents Grains and seeds 1. Cottonseed Punjab 4.66 .. 20.60 18.02 25.76 30.98 .. .. Sen (2) 2. Cottonseed Desi Lyllapur 4.70 .. 17.60 14.40 21.70 34.80 0.44 1.20 Lander (3) 3. Cottonseed 259 P Amm. 64 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF CONCENTRATES [Vol. XXVII, Part II. TABLE IIJune, 1957] SUMATI R. MUDAMBI ET. AL. 65 Cottonseed contains maximum percentage of fat, with copra cake and til cake coming next. Groundnut cake also contains appreciable quantity of fat; the other concentrates are poor sources of this nutrient. Til cake contains the maximum percentage of ash soluble in HCl and calcium. However, wheat bran contains the maximum phosphorus. Table II gives the results obtained by other workers in different parts of the country on these items. It is seen from Table II that cottonseed available in Bombay is superior in ash content to those available in other parts of the country. The calcium content is also high. However, the phosphorus content is low. The protein content is also high, but only one sample from Lyallpur has higher percentage of protein. Among the oilcakes, groundnut cake and til cake are richer in mineral matter, but copra cake from Bombay contains less ash than its counterpart from Cochin. The protein of groundnut cake compares favourably with that from Bangalore. The calcium content in the Bombay sample of groundnut cake is the highest while results of calcium analysis of til cake is not available. Copra cake from Bombay has very little calcium as compared to that from Cochin. The phosphorus contents of both groundnut cake and copra cake from Bombay are low. Among the by-products, the second sample of guar from Bombay is rich in all the constituents. The contents of the first sample compare favourably with the sample from Lyallpur. The gram chuni from Bombay has less ash content than its counter- part66 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF CONCENTRATES [Vol. XXVII, Part II, ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are thankful to Shri Dinkarrao Desai, Minister-in-Charge, Education, Law and Aarey Milk Colony for sanctioning the scheme and his interest in it and to Shri D. N. Khurody for his interest and co-operation in conducting this investigation. Two of them (S.R.M. and M.V.R.) are thankful to the Bombay Government for personal grants. REFERENCES 1. Association of official Agricultural Chemists (1950). Official and Tentative Methods of Analysis. 2. Lander, P. E. (1949). The Feeding of Farm Animals in India, Macmillan and Co., Ltd. 3. Sen, K. C. (1952). The Nutritive Value of Indian Cattle Foods and Feeding of Animals, I.C.A.R. Bull. No: 25.
ON A COLLECTION OF PARAMPHISTOMES FROM DOME STICATED ANIMALS IN BIHAR By A. K. VARMA, Livestock Research Station, Bihar, Patna [Received for publication on December 20, 1956 Accepted for publication in February 11, 1957] (With Plate I) IN recent years, investigations have proved that the livestock industry suffers much due to fatal gastro-enteritis caused by immature forms of various amphistome parasites. There is still much to be learned about the incidence and distribution of these common amphistomes in India and their specific patho- genicity and therapeutic. Bhalerao's [1935] work is too meagre for such a big country and in fact such undertakings should be on regional basis. Pande's [1935] report that the acute amphistomiasis of cattle in Assam was caused by immature forms of Paramphistomum cervi was later amended. Pande is said to have expressed the opinion that the immature forms were probably Cotylophoron sp. [Mudaliar, 1945], Moghe [1945] observed that infection of cattle with C. cotylophorum and Gastrothylax crumenifer was high in Central Provinces and Berar (now Madhya Pradesh). Srivastava [1945] carried out a general survey of helminthic infections of domestic ruminants in the Punjab, North-west Frontier Province and Sind and found the amphistomes, C. cotylophorum, P. cervi, P. explanatum and G. crumenifer in varying degrees of incidence in different hosts. He found that the species P. cervi and G. crumenifer were very common and widespread. Mudaliar (loc. cit.) records having recovered a few adult and some immature forms of C. cotylophorum and a very few specimens of Fischoederius elongatus causing fatal enteritis in goats in Madras "Pinj- rapole goshala" and states that "there are more cases of amphistomiasis caused by immature forms of Cotylophoron species on record than by Paramphistomum cervi or any other amphistoma". He concludes with the following remarks : "In the course of the routine post-mortem examination of ruminants, the writer has found adults of Cotylophoron species more frequently than Paramphistomum species. Hence the writer is inclined to think that the incidence of the species Cotylophoron, at any rate in South India, may be much more than that of Param- phistomum, though further statistical evidence of this is necessary." Srivastava [1947] further reports in a subsequent communication that G. cru- menifer is the common amphistome parasite in sheep, goats, cattle and buffaloes and has experimentally indicated its pathogenicity. D'souza [1948] also supports that C. cotylophorum and G. crumenifer are more common and widespread than 67 82AR/56 5
68 PARAMPHISTOMES IN ANIMALS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, any other amphistome species in sheep and cattle in Hosur taluk of Salem district in Madras State. But, Ramkrishnan [1951] records having obtained from an out- break of acute amphistomiasis in cattle in Nellore district of Madras only specimens, of mature and immature forms of G. crumenifer and F. cobboldi and remarked total absence of C. cotylophorum, which was almost a constant finding in other places. Anantaraman's [1954 unpublished] preliminary observations on the occurrence of amphistomes in Madras State tend to show that P. cervi may not be present there at all. In the present paper a report is made on the occurrence of some members of this group, collected from domesticated animals in different geographical zones of the State of Bihar. This State lies over the Tropic of Cancer and certain parts of it possess ideal topographical features for the spread and propagation of trematode parasites, which have been discussed previously by the author [1954]. In the annual reports of the State Veterinary Department a few sporadic mentions have been made of the recovery of P. cervi, P. expalnatum, C. cotylophorum, F. elonga- tus and G. crumenifer here and there. Kuppuswamy [1946], while elucidating the etiology of ' Gillar ' and ' Pitto ' (called ' Chherrah ' in Bihar) in sheep and goats, records having constantly recovered a large number of P. cervi sometimes along with a few G. crumenifer from these animals and later claimed that immature forms of P. cervi were the causative agents of the disease. In this connection the Indian Council of Agricultural Research commented later that P. cervi should be substituted by C. cotylophorum. This indicates the difficulty of distinguishing these two amphis- tomes in their very immature stages. Later investigations in this direction carried out by the writer and some of his associates in this State have resulted in the recovery of immature amphistomes mostly belonging to Gastrothylax sp. in significantly large numbers in animals suffering from ' Chherrah ', while immature C. cotylophorum, Calicophoron calicophorum were found in comparatively smaller numbers. These data tend to show that it is perhaps not any particular amphis- tome species that is responsible for setting up the condition popularly known as ' Chherrah ', but that all these immature intestinal amphistomes produce gastro-enteritis. MATERIAL AND METHODS During the period February to May, 1952, the author had the opportunity of collecting a large number of paramphistomes from cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats, horses and pigs from different geographical zones in the State of Bihar. These collections were made during autopsies at veterinary institutions and abottoirs. The worms were all fixed in 10 per cent hot formol-saline while still alive. Further collections were made during 1953 and 1954. The material included several genera of the family Paramphistomidae Fischoeder, 1901, and a short account of them is given here. The identification rests on the examination of whole-mounts and hand-sections of some of the specimens. Wherever necessary, histological studies were also made on a few specimens. Tables I, II and III furnish the number of animals examined and found infected with various amphistomes in different localities of the State together with incidence of infection with each species.
June, 1957] A. K. VARMA 69 TABLE I Incidence in cattle and buffaloes Locality No. of animals examined No. found infected with C. cotylophorum No. found infected with C. calicophorum No. found infected with G. crumenifer No. found infected with Gigantocotyle explanatum C B C B C B C B C B Patna 48 4 26 1 6 .. 36 4 .. .. Arrah .. 4 .. 2 .. .. .. 4 .. 2 Biharsharif 3 1 1 1 1 .. 2 1 .. 1 Nawada 5 1 3 1 2 .. 3 1 .. 1 Bhagalpur 14 8 6 4 2 1 10 8 .. 6 Supaul 2 .. 2 .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. Pipra Bazar 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. Purnea 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 2 Kishanganj 20 .. 6 .. 1 .. 20 .. .. .. Araria 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 .. .. Total . 96 21 47 12 15 3 77 21 .. 12 C=Cattle ; B= Buffalose.
70 PARAMPHISTOMES IN ANIMALS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, TABLE II Incidence in sheep and goats Locality No. of animals examined No. found infected with C. cotylophorum No. found infected with C. calicophorum No. found infected with G. crumenifer S G S G S G S G Patna 16 22 10 14 4 6 10 12 Arrah .. 6 .. 3 .. 2 .. 5 Daltonganj 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. Supaul .. 10 .. 6 .. 1 .. 10 Bariahi .. 24 .. 14 .. 6 .. 22 Pipra Bazar .. 5 .. 3 .. 1 .. 5 Madhepura .. 7 .. 4 .. .. .. 6 Purnea .. 4 .. 3 .. .. .. 4 Kishanganj .. 24 .. 11 .. 2 .. 7 Katihar 3 35 1 8 1 2 1 2 Araria .. 17 .. 7 .. 3 .. 2 Total . 20 154 12 73 6 23 12 75 S=Sheep ; G=Goats.
June, 1957] A. K. VARMA 71 TABLE III Incidence of specific infections in different hosts Amphistome species Hosts and number of animals examined Cattle-96 Buffaloes-21 Sheep-20 Goats-154 Horse-7 Pigs-8 No. infected Inci- dence (Per cent) No. infected Inci- dence (Per cent) No. infected Inci- dence (Per cent) No. infected Inci- dence (Per cent) No. infected Inci- dence (Per cent) No. infected Inci- dence (Per cent) 1. Cotylophoron cotylovhorum 47 48.9 12 57.1 12 60 73 47.4 .. .. .. .. 2. Gastrothylax crumenifer 77 80.2 21 100 12 60 75 48.7 .. .. .. .. 3. Calicophoron calicophorum 15 15.6 3 14.2 × 6 30 23 14.9 .. .. .. .. 4. Gigantocotyle explanatum .. .. 12 57.1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5. Pseudodiscus collinsi .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7 100 .. .. 6. Gartsodiscus secundus .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 42.8 .. .. 7. Gartsodiscoides hominis var. suis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 12.5
72 PARAMPHISTOMES IN ANIMALS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, Although the number of animals examined in different localities was not large, the figures in Table I to III suggest that G. crumenifer is the commonest and most widespread amphistome in Bihar. In some animals it was found as the sole infec- tion and its immature forms were present in large numbers setting up severe fatal enteritis. C. cotylophorum is also quite common, particularly in sheep and goats ; but it is noteworthy that not a single example of P. cervi was found during this survey. G. explanatum was found to occur in buffaloes only in the bile ducts and it was never seen in cattle or sheep and goats. . calicophorum, which has been considered by many authors as a synonym of G. explanatum, was recovered many a time from the stomach of cattle, buffaloes, sheep and goats. This parasite is maintained in this paper as a separate species and its distinguishing features have been discussed. Pseudodiscus collinsi was found to be a common parasite of horses. OBSERVATIONS I. Genus COTYLPHORON Stiles & Goldberger, 1910 Species C. cotylophorum (Fischoeder, 1901) Host: Cattle (Bos indicus), buffaloes (Bos bubalus), sheep (Ovis aries) and goats (Capra hircus) Habitat: Rumen and reticulum. Immature forms were found in the abo- masum and duodenum Localities : Patna, Arrah, Bhagalpur, Supaul, Bariahi, Pipra Bazar, Madhe- pura, Purnea, Kishanganj, Katihar, Araria, Biharsharif, Nawada and Daltonganj This species was found frequently in all the localities visited during this investiga- tion, and was particularly frequent in sheep and goats. The total incidence of infection with this amphistome was found to be 49.4 per cent. From a few cases of ' Chherrah' in young calves, sheep and goats quite a large number of young forms identifiable as this species, were collected from the abomasum and duodenum, particularly the pyloric region, and these organs were highly congested, inflamed and oedematous and sometimes gelatinised. The worms were invariably found together with immature forms of Gastrothylax sp., which were also present in large numbers. This species (C. cotylophorum) in its living state is easily distinguishable from others by its purple colour. The characteristic genital sucker is also demonstrable even in very small young forms by flattening the living specimen between two slides and also by making histological preparations of well-preserved specimens. II. GENUS GASTROTHYLAX Poirier, 1883 Species G. crumenifer (Creplin, 1847) Host: Cattle, buffaloes, sheep and goats Habitat: Rumen and reticulum; young forms in abomasum and duodenum Localities: All the places visited as stated earlier
Indian J. of Vet. Sci., Vol. XXVII. PLATE I, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIGS. 1 and 2June, 1957] A. K. VARMA 73 This was found to be the commonest species throughout the State, its total incidence being 63.2 per cent. It was also observed that this species occurs in much greater numbers in buffaloes than in other hosts and in a few animals that died of parasitic enteritis (acute amphistomiasis) it was found to occur as the sole infection in a very large number. This is interesting and lends support to Srivas- tava's [1947] laboratory experimentations regarding the pathogenicity of this species. The ventral pouch, characteristic of this group of amphistomes, was not found developed in very small young forms and this might have misled early workers to identify these as P. cervi. In this study the identification was mostly inferential. Those undeveloped very small young forms were taken as belonging to this species, as in the same case a large number of amphistomes in different developmental stages showing characteristic features of G. crumenifer was found as sole infection. In cases where there was mixed infection with this parasite as well as C. cotylophorum C. calicophorum, the latter two were easily identified by their distinguishing features discussed in this paper. III. Genus GIGANTOCOTYLE Nasmark, 1937 Species G. explanatum (Creplin, 1847) (Figs. 1 and 2) Host: Buffaloes (Bos bubalus) Habitat: Bile ducts Localities: Arrah, Bhagalpur, Purnea, Biharsharif and Nawada Out of a total number of 21 buffaloes examined, 12 or 57.1 per cent were found infected with this species. It is interesting that this parasite was not found in any other host, although the infection was very heavy in most of the buffaloes found infected. This species was discovered by Creplin [1847] in the bile ducts and gall bladder of what he called Bovis tauri indict at Berlin (Germany). Fischoeder [1904] records having examined specimens of this species from the bile ducts of the zebu at Berlin and also Buffelus indicus of Saigon (Cochin-China). Dawes [1936] examined some specimens of this parasite from the bile ducts of Malayan cattle, buffalo and goats. In India, Bhalerao [1935] records the parasite from both cattle and buffaloes occurr- ing in their bile ducts, gall bladder, stomach and duodenum; but then he con- sidered Paramphistomum calicophorum under the synonymy of this species. Sri- vastava [1945] also records it from both these hosts, but it is not clear from his writ- ings whether he made any distinction between these two species, nor does he mention the locations of the parasites in the hosts. These amphistomes have large ventral suckers measuring 3.4 to 4.2 mm. in diameter and the body length measures from 9 to 10.5 mm. in preserved specimens (measurements were taken from 20 specimens), giving a ratio of the diameter of
74 PARAMPHISTOMES IN ANIMALS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, the ventral sucker to the length of the body as 1: 2.5-2.6. The testes are charac- teristically placed one behind the other, the anterior one inclined more ventrad. The parasites have a characteristic habitat, namely, in the bile ducts. These are the main characters on which the identification of the species is based. IV. Genus CALICOPHORON Nasmark, 1937 Species C. calicophorum (Fischoeder, 1901) (Figs. 3 and 4) Host: Cattle, buffaloes, sheep and goats Habitat: Rumen and reticulum Localities : Patna, Bhagalpur, Supaul, Bariahi, Madhepura, Pipra Bazar, Purnea Kishanganj, Katihar, Araria, Biharsharif, Nawada and Daltonganj This species was also occasionally met with, the total incidence being 16.1 per cent; but the degree of infection was never found to be heavy in any case. Un- like other intestinal amphistomes this parasite has a large ventral sucker measur- ing about 3 mm. in diameter. The body-length of the parasite measures about 8 mm. (average of 20 specimens). Thus, the ratio of the diameter of the ventral sucker to the body-length is 1 : 2.6. The testes are lobulated like a cauliflower and are situated side by side at the mid-level of the body. Owing to these distinc- tive morphological characters coupled with the characteristic habitat of the parasite, it was identified as C. calicophorum. Maplestone [1923], while reviewing the family Paramphistomidae, records having examined some material from the stomachs of bullocks of South Africa, Australia, Sudan and Nyasaland which he identified as Paramphistomum expla- natum. He further proposed a drastic synonymisation in this group and considered Fischoeder's Paramphistomum calicophorum under the synonymy of P. explanatum. Apart from overlooking the morphological differences between these two forms, it is apparent, Maplestone ignored altogether the specific habitat of the parasite in the host. The testes in Maplestone's specimens were always diagonally situated, one overlapping the other, both laterally and antero-posteriorly, in fully grown worms. Swart [1954], however, considers this African species as C. calicophorum. A few examples of these African amphistomes from the rumen of cattle were examin- ed by the author through the kind courtesy of Dr. P. L. LeRoux and Maplestone's observations in respect of the obliquely tandem disposition of the testes were con- firmed. In the Indian collection from Bihar the specimens of this parasite did not appear to be fully grown ones, although some of them were gravid judging by the presence of ova in their uteri. The testes in these are placed exactly side by side and it is quite probable that with the maturity of the parasite this arrange- ment is affected by voluminous development of the gravid uterus causing an obliquity in their disposition. This parasite, as far as the writer is aware, has not been recorded hitherto from sheep and goats in India, hence this is a new record. It is also noteworthy that very small young forms of this species may be mistaken for P. cervi. Durie [1951],
June, 1957] A. K. VARMA 75 while studying the texonomy of Paramphistomes in cattle in Australia has also shown that the species previously identified as Paramphistomum cervi is in reality two species, namely, Ceylonocotyle streptocoelium and Calicophoron calicophorum. V. Genus PSEUDODISCUS Sonsino, 1895 Species P. collinsi (Cobbold, 1875) Host: Horse (Equus caballus) Habitat: Colon Localities: Patna, Arrah and Nawada All the seven horses examined at the above localities were found infected, which suggests that it is a common parasite of horses in this State. Very little is known about the pathogenecity of this amphistome, but from one animal about 2,000 specimens were recovered and the host was anaemic and debilitated. VI. Genus GASTRODISCUS Leuckart, 1877 Species G. secundus Looss Host: Horse Habitat: Colon Localities: Patna Out of seven horses examined only 3 were found infected with this parasite. The infection was very light in all the infected animals. VII. Genus GASTRODISCOIDES Leiper, 1913 Species G. hominis var. suis (Varma, 1954) Host: Pig (Sus cristatus) Habitat: Large intestine Localities : Forbesganj (Purnea district) After administering soap-water enema to 8 pigs a single specimen of this parasite was obtained from one of these animals. This has been morphologically and epi- demiologically distinguished by the author [1954] from G. hominis and named G. hominis var. suis and in absence of any recorded evidence this represents the first record of the parasite in this host in the State of Bihar. SUMMARY Seven species of amphistomes, representing seven genera, are recorded from different localities from domesticated animals from the State of Bihar. Gastro- thylax crumenifer was found to be the commonest and most widespread species in the State. Calicophoron calicophorum, whose distinguishing features from Gigan- tocotyle explanatum are discussed, is recorded for the first time from Indian sheep and goats. The latter parasite (G. explanatum) was found to occur only in buffaloes in the bile ducts. Pseudodiscus collinsi is recorded as a common parasite of horses. 82 AR/56 6
76 PARAMPHISTOMES IN ANIMALS [Vol. XXVII, Part II, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author is grateful to Prof J. J. C. Buckley, Professor of Helminthology in the University of London for his valuable suggestions and criticism and to Dr. P. L. LeRoux of the Department of Parasitology of London School of Hygiene and Tro- pical Medicine for gift of some material utilised in this study. REFERENCES Anantaraman, M. (1954). Annual progress report of the Madras Helminthiasis Scheme for the year 1953-54 (unpublished) Bhalerao, G. D. (1935). Helminth parasites of the domesticated animals in India. Sci. Monogr. Coun. Agric. Res. India. No. 6, 365 pp. (W. L. 19982a) Creplin, F. C. H. (1847). Besohreibung zweier neuen Amphistomen-Arten aus dem Zebu-Ochsen. Arch. Naturgesch., Berlin. J. 13, vol. I, 30-35 (W. L. 1782) Dawes, B. (1936). On a collection of Paramphistomidae from Malaya, with revision of the genera Paramphistomum Fischoeder, 1901 and Gastrothylax Poirier, 1883. Parasitology, 28(3), 330- 354 (W. L. 16035) D souza, B. A. (1948). " Observations on the outbreak in 1946-47 of the so-called obscure sheep disease at the Livestock Research Station, Hosur." Indian vet. J., 25 (5), 321-330 (W. L. 9959) Durie, P. H. (1951). " The Paramphistomes (Trematoda) of Australian ruminants." Proc. of the Linnæ an Soc. of New South Wales. 76 (1-2), 41-48 Fischoeder, F. (1910). " Die Paramphistomiden der Saugethiero ". Zool. Anz Leipzig. 24, 367- 375 (W. L. 23833) REVIEW Veterinary Clinical Diagnosis by PROF. DAVID WIRTH, 1st English translation by ANNIE I. LITTLEJOHN. Published by Bailliere Tindall and Cox, London. Pages 232 with 213 illustrations. Price 25$. Books on clinical diagnosis of the diseases of domestic animals are scarce, at least in English language. The art of diagnosis is acquired largely by personal observation and experience through a number of years. Availability of an up-to- date, handy and well-illustrated book on the subject has greatly facilitated a sound preliminary training of the students in veterinary medicine. Those of us who have profitably used the Clinical Diagnostics by Malkmus in our student days would readily applaud the present attempt and welcome this valuable addition to the English veterinary literature. It should prove very useful to teachers as well as those engaged in the field investigation of animal diseases. This is the first English edition of Professor Wirth's book, " Introduction to the clinical diagnosis of the diseases of the internal organs and skin of the domestic animals ", the first Austrian edition of which was published in 1934 and the third in 1949. The English edition, however, is not merely a translation of the third Austrian edition, as it incorporates many additions and alterations with a view to improve the text to " meet the needs of British students mainly on account of differences in the incidence of certain diseases and in the relative importance of the various species ". In part or whole of certain chapters " this adaptation has amounted to complete rewriting". Similarly, 92 new illustrations have been added, " the majority of them being from photographs specially taken for this edi- tion, and relating mainly to the examination of food-producing animals ". About 30 illustrations included in the Austrian edition have been either ommitted or re- produced only in part. The book is divided into 36 chapters of different sizes, dealing with general exami- nation of the animals, signs of disturbances in the working of the various systems, examination of faeces and urine, radiography, exploratory puncture and biopsy, allergic tests, serological examination, and clinical methods of examination appli- cable to individual organs. It is written in very simple and lucid language, and the text is profusely supplemented by examples drawn from a large variety of disease conditions.ERRATA Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Vol. XXVI, Part III, September, 1956 Page Line For Read 111 11th from bottom absorption adsorption 113 Table I, Col. I, No. 35 p-amino-phenylpyridine p-amino-x- phenylpyridine
NOTE ON THE OCCURRENCE OF ATYPICAL STRAINS OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE VIRUS IN INDIA* By M. R. DHANDA, V. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN and H. S. DHILLON, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar80 ATYPICAL STRAINS OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE [Vol, XXVII, Part III, TABLE I Distribution of various types of foot-and-mouth disease virus in India Place of origin State Types 'O' 'O' variant 'A' 'A' variant 'C' 'C' variant Atypical Andhra Pradesh 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. Assam .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. Bengal .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. Bihar .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. Bombay 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. Himachal Pradesh 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. Jammu and Kashmir .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. Madhya Pradesh .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. Madras .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. Orissa 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. Punjab 1 .. .. 3 .. .. .. Uttar Pradesh 17 9 5 9 1 2 3 Areas now in Pakistan 2 1 .. .. .. 1 1 Total 24 16 5 16 2 5 4 Percentage 33.3 22.2 7.0 22.2 2.8 7.0 5.5 Two strains were obtained from natural outbreaks at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar in May, 1951. Izatnagar is about 1000 miles south-east of Rawalpindi area. Material was collected from fresh cases at the Izatnagar Dairy as well as from animals of the Animal Nutrition Division. These two strains were found atypical, breaking immunity against the standard types. However, they were immunologically identical. Again there was an outbreak of the disease among cattle of the Animal Nutrition Division, Izatnagar in April, 1952. Fresh material was collected and this strain also proved to be atypical and immunologically identical with the Izatnagar strain of 1951. These Izatnagar strains have each undergone more than a dozen guinea-pig passages. They maintain their immunological character.
September, 1957] M. R. DHANDA AND V. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN 81 A noteworthy observation in regard to the atypical strains in general is their easy and rapid adaptability to guinea pigs. From the second passage they are adap- ted to guinea pigs, showing the characteristic primary lesions followed by generaliza- tion. Cross-immunity test All the cross-immunity tests were carried out in guinea pigs. First, guinea pigs immune to standard type "O", " A " and " C " (Pirbright) and those against other atypical strains were tested with the Rawalpindi atypical strain (Table II). Then guinea pigs immune to Rawalpindi strain of virus were tested with standard types " O ", " A " and " C " (Table III). Again, Izatnagar Dairy atypical strain was given to immune guinea pigs of all the strains (Table IV). Similarly, the guinea pigs immune to all the strains under experiment were tested with Izatnagar Animal Nutrition Division atypical strain (TableV). The observation of the tests were : (1) Each atypical strain evidently had homologous immunity. (2) All the atypical strains broke immunity against the three standard types, each of which in turn broke immunity against the atypical strains. (3) The three Izatnagar atypical strains were immunologically identical. (4) Rawalpindi atypical strain was immunologically distinct from the Izatnagar atypical strain. DISCUSSION The occurrence of the three standard types and their variants causing outbreak of the disease has been observed in this country. Apparently atypical strains, immunologically distinct from one another caused repeated outbreaks of the disease at Izatnagar causing difficulties for the control of foot-and-mouth disease by vaccination. It has been shown that variants of the same type have different antigenic structures and the antigenic properties in turn vary from strain to strain [Ubertini, 1951]. A recent epizootic in Europe was characterised by the spontaneous appearance of variants of the virus [Ramon, 1952] and vaccines failed to control the spread of infection due to the presence of variants of type, antigenically different from one another [Lancet, 1952]. It is generally believed that variants and perhaps atypical strains are heterologous composites derived for the standard types. When the question of control by vaccination of the epizootic caused by variants of types is so unsatisfactory, the control of the disease caused by atypical strains would be more complicated. NOTE : Since this article was sent out for publication, the Rawalpindi strain, the Izatnagar 51 and 52 strains were sent to the Virus Research Institute, Pirbright (England) for confirmation of the findings. The atypical character of the Izatnagar strains has been confirmed by the workers at Pir- bright, whereas in respect of the Rawalpindi strain it was reported to correspond to classical type 'O' virus. On scrutiny of the record of the Rawalpindi strain, it was found that it was typed last at this Institute at guinea pig passage No. 58 and was atypical in character beyond any doubt. The material despatched to Pirbright was from guinea pig passage No. 74 . Since the chances for the cross contami- nation of the virus while being handled in the laboratory are considered very remote, it appears, that the virus changed in its antigenic character somewhere between passage No. 58 and 74 by shedding off its heterologous components and reverted to the type 'O' virus. The atypical Izatnagar strain has since been designated as Asia I.
82 ATYPICAL STRAINS OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, TABLE II Cross immunity test with Rawalpindi atypical strain of virus Guinea Pig No. Immune to type Interval between immuni- sation and test (days) Days: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Date: 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 120 Pirbright " A " 53 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 121 do. 53 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 102 Pirbright "O" 58 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 103 do. 58 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 126 Pirbrigh " C " 52 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 127 do. 52 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 153 I. S. Izat., A.N.S. 47 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 180 do. 38 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 146 I.S.Izat., Dairy 48 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 147 do. 48 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 160 I.S. 19 Rawalpindi 44 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 161 do. 44 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 Note : (1) The guinea pigs were tested on June 22, 1952 with I. S. 19 Rawalpindi strain collected from guinea pigs on June 9, 1952. (2) 00, + 0 and ++ represent " no reaction ", " local reaction " and " local reaction plus generalisation " res- pectively. TABLE III Cross immunity with standard type " O ", " A" and " C " virus of guinea pigs immu- nised against I.S. 19 Rawalpindi strain Guinea Pig No. Interval between immunisa- tion and test (days) Tested with strain Reaction after test. Date: 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 296 33 Pirbright "A" +0 +0 +0 +0 ++ ++ ++ ++ 302 38 do. +0 +0 +0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 304 35 Pirbright " O " +0 +0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 305 35 do. +0 +0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ 303 34 Pirbright " C " +0 +0 ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ Note : +0 and ++ represent " local reaction " and " local reaction plus generalisation, " respectively.
September, 1957] M. R. DHANDA AND V. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN 83 TABLE IV Cross immunity test with Izatnagar Dairy atypical strain of virus Guinea Pig No. Immune to type Interval between immuni- sation and test (days) Reaction after test. Days: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Date: 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 118 Pribright " A " 50 +0 + 0 ++ ++ 119 do. 50 +0 + 0 ++ ++ 100 Pirbright " O " 56 +0 + 0 ++ ++ 101 do. 56 +0 + 0 ++ ++ 124 Pirbright " C " 49 +0 + 0 ++ ++ 125 do. 49 +0 + 0 ++ ++ 158 I.S. 19 Rawalpindi 41 +0 + 0 ++ ++ 159 do. 41 +0 + 0 ++ ++ 151 I.S. Izat. A.N.S. 44 00 00 00 00 152 do. 44 00 00 00 00 144 I.S. Izat. Diary 45 00 00 00 00 145 do 45 00 00 00 00 Notes : (1) The guinea pigs were tested on June 19, 1952 with I.S. Izat. Dairy strain collected from guinea pigs on June 14, 1952 (2) 00, +0 and ++ represent "no reaction," "local reaction " and "local reaction plus generalisation", respectively. TABLE V Cross immunity test with I.S. Izatnagar A.N.S. atypical strain of virus Guinea pig No. Immune to type Interval between immuni- sation and test (days) Days: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Date: 10 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 116 Pirbright " A " 47 + 0 + 0 + 0 ++ ++ ++ 117 do. 47 + 0 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ 98 Pirbright "O" 53 + 0 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ 99 do. 53 + 0 +0 + 0 ++ ++ ++ 122 Pirbright "C" 46 + 0 + 0 + 0 ++ ++ ++ 123 do. 46 + 0 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ 150 I.S.19 Rawalpindi strain 38 + 0 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ 157 do. 38 + 0 + 0 ++ ++ ++ ++ 142 I.S. Izatnagar Diary strain 42 00 00 00 00 00 00 143 do. 42 00 00 00 00 00 00 148 I.S. Izatnagar A.N.S. strain 41 00 00 00 00 00 00 149 do. 41 00 00 00 00 00 0 Notes: (1) The guinea pigs were tested on June 16, 1952 with I.S Izatnagar A.N.S. strain collected from guinea pigs on June 15, 1952 (2) 00, +0 and ++ represent "no reaction" "local reaction" and "local reaction+ generalisation", respectively. 18 AR/57 3
84 ATYPICAL STRAINS OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXVII, Part III SUMMARY An analysis of the results of typing of 72 strains of foot and-mouth Disease virus isolated from different parts of India shows that the frequency distribution of the various types is as follows: Vallee " O " 24 " O " Variant 16 55.6 per cent Vallee "A" 5 "A" Variant 16 29.1 per cent Waldmann " C " 2 " C " Variant 5 9.7 per cent Atypical 4 SEX MATURITY IN DAIRY CATTLE AND THE PROBABLE CAUSES OF DELAYED PUBERTY By M. P. JOHARI and S. K. TALAPATRA, U. P. College of Veterinary, Mathura [Received for publication on October 27, 1956 Accepted for publication on June 11, 1957] (With 4 Text Figures) INFERTILITY and delayed maturity in dairy animals are important factors that limit the development of dairy industry in this country. Infertility in animals, whether temporary or permanent, is a great liability which tells severely on the economic resources of our farmers. Of late, organised attempts have been made to study the various factors res- ponsible for delayed maturity in dairy herds. The different factors of the infertility problem are also being actively persued. Little is known about the age at first calving amongst the various breeds of cattle in India, as also the influence of sire or the effect of better feeding on the onset of early maturity. The introduction of the recent legislation has complicated the issue and made the disposal of these unprofitable animals further difficult. The problem has thus assumed a serious proportion not only with private individuals but even in State managed farms where cattle are normally kept in a better condition. It has, therefore, been considered necessary to carry out some systematic work on the various aspects of infertility and late maturity in cattle. In this article an attempt has been made to give an account of these investigations in four parts as follows: (a) The determination of the age at first calving in various State managed farms (b) The influence of sire on the age at first calving (c) The percentage of abnormal animals in the age group in different herds (d) The effect of feeding on sex maturity in dairy animals (a) Age at first calving in different farms A. survey of the State farms in Uttar Pradesh was carried out at 6 centres and in all, records of 434 heifers of Hariana breed were analysed. All the heifers were farm-bred and had their first calving at the farm. A general idea regarding the method of feeding and the environment in which they live in these farms during early life may be obtained from the following: Feeding : The animals at these farms are fed a prescribed ration. If the article mentioned in the ration schedule is not available, some alternative feed having 85 18 AR/57 4
86 SEX MATURITY IN DAIRY CATTLE [ Vol. XXVII, Part III, almost the same nutritive value is included as an emergency measure. Although the ingredients of the ration may vary to some extent from centre to centre, the effect of the whole ration on the basis of digestible nutrients is more or less the same in all the centres. Management The environment in which cattle generally live in these farms may be considered satisfactory and is more or less uniform. There may, however, be some variation in the management. The animals are generally not tied and are fed in lots of 15 to 30 in a common feeding trough where the feed for the lot is distributed in a long feeding channel. The age at first calving in Hariana heifers is given in Table I. In calculating the age at first calving, only those neifers which calved between the age of 3-5 years have been considered. Heifers which calved later were thought to be abnormal cases. The number of heifers considered at each farm for calculating the average is shown in parenthesis. The average age at first calving at the different farms varied from 1262 days (approximately 42 months) at Babugarh to 1693 (approximately 56½ months) at Nilgaon. The minimum age at which the heifer had calved was 895 days (approximately 30 months) and the maximum 2659 days (approximately 7¼ years). TABLE I Comparative statement showing the age at first calving in the Hariana breed at the cattle farms in Uttar Pradesh Name of the Farm Age at first calving in days Remarks Average Range Minimum Maximum 1. Mechanised State Farm, Madhurikund 1546(95) 1013 2659 2. Mechanised State Farm, Bharari 1683(135) 1112 2337 3. Mechanised State Farm, Babugarh 1262(61) 895 1817 4. Mechanised State Farm, Hastinapur 1498(26) 995 1825 5. Mechanised State Farm, Nilgaon 1693(54) 1115 2262 6. District Dairy Demonstration Farm, Mathura 1544(63) 898 2264 Average age at 1st calving in the Hariana breed 1538±65 days (approximately 51 months) Among other Indian breeds of cattle, the age at first calving has been deter- mined as 1331.3±16.9 days in Sindhi and 1447±60.2 days in Kangyam [Rajgopalan 1952]. Sharma [1951] found the age at first calving in Hariana as 1618 ± 10.5 days which is not very much different from what we have seen in Uttar Pradesh.
September, 1957] M. P. JOHARI AND S. K. TALAPATRA 87 TABLE II Influence of the sire on the age at first calving Names of farms Madhurikund Bharari Nilgaon Brand No. of the bull Brand No. of the bull Brand No. of the bull 243 359/6 19/P6 14/104 800 243 154 270 737/19 379/PI Average age of the heifers at first calving from each bull 1478.5 1498.2 1447.0 1515.7 1517.4 1425.9 1592.4 1371.8 1464.4 1665.3 ±76.0 ±49.6 ±40.8 ±40.7 ±24.2 ±66.9 ±44.0 ±42.9 ±46.9 ±28.5 (8) (7) (7) (11) (41) (9) (8) (12) (10)
88 SEX MATURITY IN DAIRY CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, (b) Influence of the sire on the age at first calving In this study, the data on the age at first calving was tabulated according to the sires of these heifers. Sires which had at least 6 daughters were considered. The study was limited to 10 bulls at 3 places viz. Madhurikund, Bharari, Nilgaon; and the total number of animals under this study was 120 heifers. The average age at first calving with their standard error is given in Table II. The analysis of variance was made to find out the difference between bulls at Madhurikund. It was not significant. At Bharari Farm, the analysis of variance between bulls was significant at 5 per cent level. The bull No. 270 appeared to be different from the bull No. 154 in dropping heifers of varying age at first calving. The bull No. 270 dropped early calvers, while bull No. 154 dropped late calvers. The difference between the bulls used at the Farms was not very conspicuous re- garding this character, as the breeding bulls were not selected with this character in view. All the bulls used were of average merit and, therefore, did not influence appreciably the age of the heifers at first calving. The problem could be approached from another angle. If the age of the mothers (dams) at first calving was known then the age of the heifers could be compared over the dams, as is done in the case of progeny testing of bulls for milk yield. It appears that if bulls coming from early maturing families are selected, it would be possible to reduce the age at first calving. (c) Heifers which calve either late or early at different farms In every species there is a physiological age at which the reproductive organs become active, and simultaneously changes take place in the ovaries, uterus and mammary glands. The female becomes capable to carry the young. This is called the age of puberty or the age of maturity. Females, in which this occurs late, may be considered as pathological cases. In scientific terminology there are cases of infertility in young animals which cause heavy economic losses to the cattle breeders. TABLE III Incidence of infertility (late maturity) in heifers Name of the Farm Total No. of heifers considered No. of heifers calving before 3 years No. of heifers calving after 5 years Remarks Mechanised State Farm, Madhuri- kund 95 2 15 Mechanised State Farm, Bharari 135 .. 12 Mechanised State Farm, Babugarh 61 5 .. Mechanised State Farm, Hastina- pur 26 1 2 Mechanised State Farm, Nilgaon 54 .. 13 District Dairy Demonstration Farm, Mathura 63 6 12 TOTAL 434 14 54
September, 1957] M. P. JOHARI AND S. K. TALAPATRA 89 The percentage of early and late calvers works out to be 3.2 and 12.4 respec- tively. The early calvers indicate that we can possibly reduce the age at first calving in our farms. The late calvers are cases of infertility where either the maturity was too much delayed or the animals did not conceive. (d) The effect of feeding on sex maturity in dairy animal In these investigations an attempt was made to study the effect of feeding a cheaper, but otherwise adequate, roughage ration on the maturity in dairy animals as compared with a costlier ration consisting of wheat bhusa, concentrate mixture and a little green. Sixteen comparable female calves of about one-and-a half year old were select- ed and divided into two groups, eight in each. To start with, the roughage group was fed a ration consisting of 30 lb. green berseem and 5 lb. wheat bhusa (9.090 SEX MATURITY IN DAIRY CATTLE [VOL. XXVII, PART III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Heifer on the left was fed on a ration of wheat bhusa (5 lb.), concentrate mixture (3½ lb. and a little green berseem (5 lb.). Heifer on the right is of the same age but was fed a ration of green berseem (30 lb.) and wheat bhusa (5 lb.) and no concentrates [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Back view of the animals shown in Fig. 1 (compare the size)
September, 1957] M. P. JOHARI AND S. K. TALAPATRA 91 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. A group of heifers on a balanced diet of roughage and concentrates [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Heifers of the same age and breed on ' all roughage ' otherwise adequate ration (compare the size of these animals with those shown in Fig. 3)
92 SEX MATURITY IN DAIRY CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, In the ' roughage group ' most of the heifers did not come to oestrum at all even at the age of 5-6 years. Only 3 heifers out of 8 came to heat at the age of 3 years. Two became pregnant ; the other 6 animals were examined per rectum and it was found that the genital organs were under-developed. With a view to eliminate the genetical factors the heifers were grouped accord- ing to sires. It was found that the heifers from the same sire showed their first oestrum at a younger age in the concentrate group than those in the roughage group. DISCUSSION The longer the animal is unproductive, the greater is the liability of the farmer, and from this point of view early calvings are advantageous. Early calvers gave more calves than late calvers [Johansson 1950]. Hartmann [1953] found that fertility and lifetime production were highest in cows which had their first calving at an early age and that it did not affect the body size or growth of the animals. It is the lactation that taxes the heifer and not the burden of pregnancy. The wastage rate, calculated up to the 5th lactation by the Milk Marketing Board [1953] has not been affected by the age at first calving. Gethin [1950] thinks that the infor- mation about the influence of age at first calving on subsequent overall reproduc- tive efficiency is conflicting and on the whole insufficient. However, his observa- tions relate to calvings at the age of 27 months and earlier. How early can heifers be calved without any detriment to future life would depend on the environment where they are kept and on the individual heifer. This question has been con- sidered on the basis of the experience gained during these investigations. It appears that at the Farms all the Hariana heifers should show their first oestrum and con- ceive at the age between 2 years 6 months to 2 years 9 months. They would, there- fore, calve at the age of 3½ years. All heifers which do not come to heat at this age should be regarded as cases of sub-fertility and attention should be paid to them to avoid economic loss at the farms. SUMMARY In a fairly comprehensive survey of a large number of dairy farms in U. P., it has been observed that the age at first calving is 1538±65 days (approximately 51 months) in Hariana cattle. The earliest age at which the heifer had its first calving was 895 days (approximately 29½ months). Heifers calving beyond the age of 5 years have been considered as confirmed cases of sub-fertility. The percentage of such sub-fertile cases to the total population was 12.4 per cent. The breeding bulls used at the farms have not appreciably influenced this character. It is explained by assuming that as no selection for this trait was carried out, the sires studied were of average merit. The procedure to be adopted in selecting animals for this character, which can be done simultaneously with the progeny testing of bulls for milk yield, has been indicated. It has been observed that feeding of balanced ration in general, is favourable for early maturity. The animals which are fed with a balanced ration consisting of concentrates, a dry and a little of green roughage, mature much earlier than those kept in the same plane of nutrition on all roughage (green berseem and bhusa)
September, 1957] M. P. JOHART AND S. K. TALAPATRA 93 otherwise adequate ration. It appears that the deficiency of phosphorus in all roughage ration is the probable cause of delayed maturity in the roughage-fed group. In the usual village practice, concentrates are not incorporated in the dietary of cattle. This may be one of the causes of late calving seen in herds kept under rural conditions. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work was done under a scheme financed by the Indian Council of Agricul- tural Research to investigate the problem of infertility in cattle. The authors are grateful to Shri P. G. Pande, Director of Animal Husbandry, Uttar Pradesh for his interest in the work, and to Principal Shri C. V. G. Choudary for providing facilities. REFERENCES Gethin (1950). Review article. A. B. A. 18, 133-141 Hartmann, W. (1953). Citation. A. B. A. 22, No. 938 Johansson, I. (1950). Citation. A. B. A. 18, No. 2 Joubert, D. M. (1954). J. Agric. Sci. 44, 5-66 Report of the Milk Marketing Board, England and Wales (1953). Production Division No. 4 Citation A. B. A. 22, No. 887 Rajgopalan, V. R. (1952). Indian vet. J. 28, 293-306 Sharma, G. P., Vali, K. N. and Suri, K. R. (1951). Res. Bull, East Punjab Univ. Zoology No. 18, 57-68 Citation. A. B. A. 21 No. 1633 18 AR/57 5
THE RELATION OF SOME FACTORS TO THE OCCURRENCE OF POST-PARTUM OESTRUS IN HARIANA CATTLE By M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar, Punjab [Received for publication on November 3, 1954 Accepted for publication on April 9, 1957] A knowledge regarding the interval elapsing between parturition and the occurrence of first oestrus is of value not only for practical breeder but also for the artificial breeding centres as it helps in efficient and profitable breeding of cattle. This is important in view of the fact that generally a breeder is unaware of the average period when he can expect his cow to be in heat after calving. The present study was undertaken to investigate if the control over the factors like season, milk yield, age and lactation supposed to influence the period between parturition and first oestrus of cows could be of value in curtailing the interval which may prove of economic importance to a breeder. REVIEW OF LITERATURE The study of the literature showed that limited work had been conducted on this aspect of oestrus in cattle. Guilbert and Mcdonald [1933] reported that 30 per cent of the beef cows came into heat between 20 and 40 days ; 30 per cent between 40 to 60 days and 40 per cent between 60 and 100 days after calving. Chapman and Casida [1935] held, that the average interval between parturition and first oestrus in Holstein cattle was 59 days with a standard deviation of 30 days. They concluded that on an average, the period from parturition to first subsequent heat was too long for early conception ; 50 per cent of these periods were less than 61 days in length, 40 per cent were between 61-120 days and the remaining 10 per cent were over 120 days in length. Herman and Edmondson [1950] in a study of 968 normal parturitions in 347 dairy cows concluded that the average length of the interval from parturition to first oestrus was 57 days with a standard deviation of 28 days. They reported that there was no relationship between the season of the year, the average daily milk production for the entire lactation and the average daily milk production for the period extending from parturition to first subsequent oestrus. The age of the cow and the lactation number were found to be factors influencing the interval. MATERIAL AND METHODS The data used in the study were taken from Hariana herd of cattle a 'dual purpose' breed (milk and draught), bred and raised at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar from 1946 to 1953. In all 538 parturitions in 271 cows with normal gestation were studied. 95 18 AR/57. 6
96 POST-PARTUM OESTRUS IN CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, Teaser bulls were kept in the herd to detect cows in heat. Doubtful cases, however, were confirmed by rectal palpation and with the aid of vaginal speculum. The days from calving to the occurrence of first oestrus were calculated for each parturition from the properly maintained records. The daily average milk yield was calculated from weekly records for the actual days the cow was in milk. Calves were allowed to suckle their dams except on the recording days, when they were used only to 'let down' the milk. The age of the animal was worked out from the date of birth to date of her first oestrus after calving. The month during which the animal came in heat was considered for studying the seasonal influence. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Average interval from parturition to first oestrus: In the study of 538 normal parturitions extending over a period of about 8 years, it was found that the average interval from parturition to first oestrus was 228.0±3.9 days. There was 7.5 per cent of cows (Table 1) that came in heat within 89 days after calving ; 22.7 per cent between 90 to 179 days ; 31.2 per cent between 180 to 269 days ; 28.6 per cent between 270 to 359 days and 10 per cent over 360 days. The interval was higher in this herd as compared to the results achieved by other workers. This may be due to the fact that in the herd the calves were allowed to suckle their dams during the lactation as already reported by clapp [1933] who found that the frequency of suckling or handling of teats in milking was the main cause for the increase in the length of the interval from parturition to first heat. TABLE I Average interval between parturition and first oestrus Interval days No. of cases Percentage of parturition Below. 29 2 0.4 30September, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 97 The data was also analysed to find out if the interval following parturition differed from cow to cow. Five hundred observations of 165 cows having two or more lactations which were used for this purpose indicated that the difference was signincant (Table II). TABLE II The effect of the cow on the interval from parturition to first oestrus Source of variation D. F. Mean S. F. Between cows 164 14896.9 1.69** Within cows 335 8808.7 .. TOTAL 499 .. .. **Significant at 1 per cent level. Seasonal influence : The influence of the month of the year on the period following parturition and the occurrence of the first oestrus (Table III) indicated that the average number of days was more for the months of January to April and less for the month of June. The distribution of the cases indicated that the number of cows coming in heat were more during the months of March, April and May and less during the period from July to October. The effect of the month of the year on the interval was significant as determined by analysis of variance (Table IV). Months when combined into different seasons of the year were found to have a significant effect on the interval from parturition to first oestrus (Table V). The results presented in bar notation are as follows : Season Summer Autumn Winter Spring Average interval from parturition to 1st oestrus (days) 219.8 222.9 234.4 255.7
98 POST-PARTUM OESTRUS IN CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, TABLE III The effect of month on the length of time from parturition to first cestrus Months No. Observed Percentage of total Average interval from parturition to first oestrus (days) January 49 9.1 256.3±11.7 February 37 6.9 249.0±14.l March 65 12.1 266.8±11.4 April 65 12.1 248.4±13.0 May 66 12.3 236.0±12.5 June 49 9.1 196.2±13.6 July 29 5.4 222.4±17.1 August 29 5.4 230.6±17.3 September 33 6.1 2l4.6±14.4 October 27 5.0 222.9±17.2 November 39 7.2 211.2±13.1 December 50 9.3 231.1±12.9 TABLE IV The effect of month on the length of time from parturition to first oestrus Source of variation D. F. Mean S. F. Between months 11 20572.62 2.41** Within months 526 8532.89 .. TOTAL 537 .. .. **Significant at 1 per cent level.
September, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 99 TABLE V The effect of season of occurrence of first oestrus on the length of time from parturition to first oestrus after partioning the various components of variation Source of variation D. F. M. S. F. Between seasons 3 39904.79 4.68** Between months within seasons 8 13323.06 1.56 Within months within seasons 526 8532.89 .. TOTAL 537 .. .. **Significant at 1 per cent level. The effect of the season of calving on the interval (Table VI) indicated that the average number of days was higher for the months of April and May and less for the month of September. The effect of different months of calving (Table VII) and the seasons of the year (Table VIII) were found to have a significant effect on the interval from parturition to first oestrus. The results presented in bar notation are as follows : Season Winter Autumn Spring Summer Average length of period from parturition to first oestrus (days) 207.4 207.5 253.0 253.3 TABLE VI The effect of month of calving on the interval from parturition to first oestrus Months No. observed Percentage of total Average interval from parturition to first oestrus (days) January 56 10.4 202.9±12.4 February 56 10.4 247.1±13.4 March 69 12.8 240.9±11.8 April 62 11.5 271.8±11.6 May 38 7.1 263.1±14.l June 47 8.7 251.9±12.8 July 48 8.9 252.4±12.3 August 39 7.3 217.6±15.3 September 39 7.3 197.0±13.9 October 25 4.6 208.0±15.8 November 24 4.5 201.5±15.6 December 35 6.5 218.5±14.7
100 POST-PARTUM OESTRUS IN CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, TABLE VII The effect of month of calving on the length of time from parturition to first oestrus Source of variation D. F. Mean S. F. Between months 11 30296.52 3.64** Within months 526 8329.54 .. TOTAL 537 .. .. **Significant at 1 per cent level. TABLE VIII The effect of season of calving on the length of time from parturition to first oestrus after partioning the various components of variation Source of variation D. F. Mean S. F. Between seasons 3 93780.61 11.26** Between months within season 8 6489.98 0.78 Within months within seasons 526 8329.54 .. TOTAL 537 .. .. **Significant at 1 per cent level. The influence of milk yield The average daily milk production for the entire lactation was studied (Table IX) to see if high milk production had any effect in delaying the first oestrus period following calving. No definite trend was observed in the average milk yields for different intervals from parturition to first oestrus. It seemed that the periods from 30 to 59 and 300 to 329 days showing higher level of production than the other periods was due to chance. There appeared no correlation between the average daily milk yield and the appearance of the first oestrus and as such did not support the common belief that the first oestrus occurs later in high yielding-cows than in the poor producers. These findings were similar to the results obtained by Herman and Edmondson [1950].
September, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 101 TABLE IX Influence of average daily milk yield per lactation on the length of time from parturition to first oestrus Interval (days) No. of cases Percentage of total parturition Average daily milk yield (lb.) Below 3 2 0.4 2.6±2.20 30102 POST-PARTUM OESTRUS IN CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, TABLE X The influence of age on the interval from parturition to first oestrus Age (months) No. observed Percentage of total Average interval from parturition to first oestrus (days) Below 47 1 0.2 291.0 48September, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 103 lactation and then an increase was observed in the succeeding lactation. The sudden fall for the 7th lactation and particularly for the 8th lactation and above was found to be affected by a regular breeding cow which came in heat after 41, 114, 204 and 139 days during her 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th lactations respectively. TABLE XII The influence of lactation number on the length of time from parcuition to first vestrus Lactation No. No of cases Percentage of total cases Average interval from parturition to first oestrus (days) 1st 146 27.1 264.3± 7.6 2nd 135 25.1 236.7± 7.9 3rd 103 19.2 223.3± 9.1 4th 74 13.8 218.6± 10.7 5th 47 8.7 203.7±13.4 6th 17 3.2 231.9± 22.4 7th 11 2.0 204.8±27.8 8th and above 5 0.9 196.0±30.8 TOTAL 538 Analysis of variance (Table XIII) showed that there was significant difference for the intervals between the various lactations. Analysis was limited to the 7th lactation as there were five cases of the lactation ; No. 8 and above and three out of these belonged to a single cow. The results obtained followed almost a similar pattern to that observed by Hermon and Edmondson [1950]. These findings indicated that the number of the lactation in cattle was closely associated with her age and that both of these factors had a similar effect on the interval from parturition to first oestrus. It may be concluded that the reproductive efficiency of the cow is at the prime between the 3rd and 5th lactations and from 7 to 12 years of age. TABLE XIII The effect of lactation number on the interval from parturition to first oestrus Source of variation D. F. Mean 8. F. Between lactations 6 35967.98 4.23** Within lactations 526 8502.26 .. TOTAL 532 **Significant at 1 per cent level. 18 AR/57 7
104 POST-PARTUM OESTRUS IN CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III SUMMARY A study of 538 parturitions in 271 Hariana cows of the experimental herd at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar showed that: The average length of interval from parturition to the first oestrus was found to be 228.0±3.9 days. The months and season of the year seemed to affect the length of the post- partum interval to first oestrus. The season of calving also affected the interval. There appeared no relationship between the average daily milk yield and the interval between calving and first oestrus. The age of the cow and lactation number were observed to influence the interval from calving to first oestrus. REFERENCES Chapman, A.B. and Casida, L.E. (1935). Length of service period in relation to productivity and reproductive efficiency in dairy cows. Proc. Am. Soc. Animal Prod. 28th Annual Meeting P. 66 Clapp, H. (1937). A factor in breeding efficiency of dairy cattle. Proc. Am. Soc. Animal Prod. 30th Annual Meeting. P. 259 Guilbert, H. R. and Alox Mc.Donald (1933). Weight records on pure bred beef cattle during growth, gestation and lactations, together with data on reproduction, Proc. Am. Soc. Animal Prod. 26th Annual Meeting, P. 252 Hammond, J. and Sanders, H. G. (1923). Some factors affecting the milk yield : J. Agric. Sci. 13 : 74 Hermon, H.A. and Edmonson J.H. (1950). Factors affecting the interval between parturi- tion and first oestrus in dairy cattle. Res. Bull. 462.
LONGEVITY AND RE-PRODUCTIVITY IN HARIANA CATTLE By M. L. KOHLI and K. R. SURI, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar, Punjab [Received for publication on November 8, 1954 Accepted for publication on April 9, 1957] (With 1 Text Figure) INFORMATION in regard to the life span and fertility of different breeds of cattles is of importance to a breeder in the selection of the breed. It assists him in estimating the breeding efficiency of the herd and facilitates in rais- ing a profitable herd by treating heifers that have not bred at the average age of first conception and by culling the stock which is below the standard or has passed the useful breeding age. The present study was undertaken in the Hariana cattle, a famous general utility breed of the country, capable of providing first quality plough bullocks as well as fairly good milkers. REVIEW OF LITERATURE Smith and Robinson6 reported that the average age of the dams of the three beef breeds (Angus, Short-horn, and Hereford) was 6.02±0.05 years at the time of calving. Lacy3 found that the average age of dams of registered Hereford calves was 5.48±0.06. Only 19.7 per cent of the dams were less than 3 years of age at the time of first service while percentage of dams less than 3 years of age was observed to be higher in the dairy breeds (Holstein 33.5 per cent, Jersey 35.8 per cent, Guernsey 37.5 per cent and Brownswiss 34.6 per cent) than in Herefords. Plum and Lush4 studied the data of Iowa Cow Testing Associations and found that the mean age at first calving varied from about 25.5 months for Jersey and Guernsey cows to almost 35 months for Red Polled cows. Asdell1 stated that the average life span of cattle (Bos taurus) from conception was 225 months. Sharma, Vali and Suri5 on 182 cases found that the average age at first calving of the experimental Hariana herd at Hissar was 1618.18±10.53 days. Einsiedl2 observed the average age of Pinzgan herd book cows was approximately 9 years and the average number of calves was 5.92. Food and Agricultural Organisation publication7 revealed that the average age at first calving of the milch breeds, Red Sindhi and Sahiwal, was 41 and 33 months respectively while Tharparkar, Gir and Kangayan, the general utility breeds, had 47.2,2.5, 51.0 and 39.0 months respectively. The average number of calvings during life time varied from 5 to 8 in the different breeds. The active breeding life of bulls for the milch breeds was about 7 years whereas for general utility breeds it was about 10 years. 105 18 AR/56 8
106 LONGEVITY IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Distribution of the ages of Hariana heifers at first calving
September, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 107 MATERIAL AND METHODS The data used in the study were taken from Hariana herd of cattle, bred and reared under semi-ranch conditions at Government Livestock Farm, Hissar, from 1924 to 1938 for cows and from 1925 to 1942 for bulls. The study was based on 1917 normal records of cows and 28 stud bulls maintained at the Farm. The data was purposely confined to this period with a view to study the span of life and repro- ductive period of the animals that were born during this period and died after having had their normal life. The study beyond 1938 could not be included as most of the animals born were yet alive. The main herd, to a larger extent, depended on natural grazing for a considerable part of the year. Stall feeding was only resorted to, when grazing became scanty and the stock began to show signs of losing condition. In the case of milch stock the grazing was supplemented by the concentrates according to the milk yields. The cattle, generally, for the most part of the year remained in the open, thorny enclosures except during severe winter nights. Young bulls were given a grain ration for a month or 6 weeks when they were ready for nose-ringing and again for a month or more at the age of 2½ years when they were ready to be issued in the state for breeding. Systematic prophylactic measures were adopted to check the incidence of contagious diseases like rinderpest, haemorrhagic septicaemia and black-quarter. The reproductive period of the cows was worked out from the first calving date to the end of the last lactation. The life span was calculated from birth to the date of death of the animal. Period of 15 days and above was taken as a complete month while calculating the age. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS Age at first calving. The age distribution of Hariana cows freshening for the first time (Fig. 1) showed that it was extremely skew. The mode was at 50 months and the mean was 58.83±0.20. The higher value of the mean was due to positive skewness of the distribution. The age, before which half of the heifers freshened, was near about 55 months. Only 22 per cent of the dams were less than 4 years of age at the time of first calving which was almost similar to the results obtained by Lacy3 in Hereford cattle. The mean value differed from that of Sharma et. al.5 as their study was confined to a limited number of cases extending over a shorter period. Reproductive life. The average reproductive life of a cow in the herd was 76.88±0.92 months. It was observed (Table I) that the maximum percentage of cows remained fertile for 9 years, one month from the date of first calving.
108 LONGEVITY IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXVII, Part III, TABLE I Reproductive life in the Hariana herd Period after first calving (months) No. of cases Percentage of cows reproducing after first calving Age after first calving (months) No. of cases Percentage of cows reproducing after first calving Up to 19 265 13.82 95September, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 109 TABLE III Causes of mortality in different ages of Hariana cattle (Age in years) Causes for death 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 and above Total Mortality Tuberculosis 110 LONGEVITY IN HARIANA CATTLE [Vol. XXVII Part; III, The incidence of twinning was found to be 0.09 per cent which is in agreement with the findings of Bhattacharya et al.who studied 1,892 calvings of the Hariana herd as reported in the publication of Food and Agricultural Organisation7. Causes of mortality. The diseases responsible for the death of the cattle coul d only be ascertained for 1327 cases. It was seen (Table III) that the single disease responsible for the heaviest toll of life was tuberculosis. The mortality from this disease was fairly high from 6 years onward and was highest in the older stock. It may probably be due to the fact that no systematic testing of the herd against this disease was adopted before the year 1940 with the result that the diseased animals were allowed to live with the healthy stock which resulted in the spread of the infection. The lowering of vitality of the animals with the advancement in age might be a reason for a higher mortality amongst older stock. Traumatic percicarditis was another cause of high mortality. It affected largely the cattle of ages 7 to 10 years. Although no definite reason could be given for the high mortality of the cows for these ages it was obvious that careless feeding of the stock with the stacked hay containing pieces of loose wire, nails, etc. resulted in the death of the animals. Similar high mortality for these ages was also observed for other non- contagious diseases. The mortality from the contagious diseases was minimum due to the timely adopted prophylactic measures. SUMMARY A study of the ages of 1917 Hariana cows and 28 Hariana stud bulls, extending over a period of 15 years and 18 years respectively, showed that : 1. The mean age at which the cow first freshened was found to be 58.83±0.20 months. 2. The average reproductive life of a cow was 76.88±0.92 months. 3. The average number of calvings during the life time of a cow was 4.67±0.11 4. The average life of the cow was 136.30±0.95 months and that of the bull was 98.1±4.6. The maximum age recorded for the cow and the breeding bull was 18 years 9 months 7 days and 15 years 9 months 21 days res- pectively. 5. The highest mortality in the herd was due to tuberculosis and most of the cattle between the ages 7 to 10 years died of other non-contagious diseases. REFERENCES 1. Asdell, A. S. (1946). Comparative chronologic age in man and other mammals. J. Gerontology 1, 224-236 2. Einsiedl, A (1952). Fertility and duration of life in Pinzgan cattle. Vet. Dissertation, Munich. 3. Lacy, M. D. (1932). The ages of sires and dams of registered Hereford cattle. Am. Soc. Ari. Pord. 4. Plum, M. And Lush, J. L. (1934). Freshening ages of pure bred cows in Iowa cow testing associa- tions. J. Dairy Sci. 17, 625-638 5. Sharma, G. P., Vali, K. N. and Suri, K. R. (1951). Studies on the Hariana breed of cattle. Res. Bull. E. Pb. Univ. 18, 57-68 6. Smith, A. D. B. and Robinson, O. J. (1931). The average ages of cows and bulls in six breeds of cattle. J. Agr. Sci. 21, 136-149 7. A HIGH PROTEIN VERSUS A NORMAL PROTEIN RATION FOR EGG PRODUCTION IN POULTRY By ALEX REED1 and JOHN G. VELU2, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U.P. [Received for publication on April 3, 1957 Accepted for publication on May 16, 1957] IN most of the important egg producing countries, protein feeds are costlier than cereal grains. Much work has, therefore, been done in this direction with a view to developing economical rations for poultry which may have less amount of costly protein feed. However, same price relationship does not exist in many areas of India. In some areas the cost of protein concentrates such as groundnut cake is less than the cost of cereal grains. Jull [1938], Heuser [1946], Winter and Funk [1947], Bird [1948], and Romanoff and Romanoff [1949] have reported that when feeding an all mash ration to laying hens, it should contain approximately 16 per cent protein as the optimum amount. Vernon et al. [1942] found that from an economic standpoint the all mash ration for laying hens should contain not more than 16 per cent protein although an 18 to 20 per cent protein ration produced a few more eggs. This work was carried out in an area where protein feeds are more costly than cereal grains. Ewing [1951] reported that increasing the percentage of protein in the diet of laying hens within limits of 11.2 per cent and 23.6 per cent, increased egg production, egg weight and body weight. He also stated that when from 62 to 94 per cent of an all animal protein supplement was replaced with peanut meal (groundnut cake) there was no reduction in egg production, hatchability or livability. The economic relationship between groundnut cake and cereal grains favours the use of a higher percentage of groundnut cake and less grain in poultry rations. It was considered desirable to determine the effects upon egg production and feed consumption of a ration containing 30 per cent total protein with groundnut cake making up 54 per cent of the total ration, as compared with a normal ration. EXPERIMENTAL Fifty-eight White Leghorn pullets about five months of age, hatched at the same time and raised on the Agricultural Institute farm, were randomly divided into two groups. The groups were assigned by chance to one of the two adjacent 1. Professor, University of Illinois, College of Agriculture, assigned to the Allahabad Agricultural Institute for research in Animal Nutrition. 2. Member of Staff, Department of Animal Husbandry, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U.P. 111 18 AR/57 1.
112 RATION FOR EGG PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVII, Part III, pens of equal size and type in which no hens had been kept previously. The groups were assigned by chance to the high protein or normal ration (Table I). Both groups were fed ad libitum. A small amount of greens was given to each group daily. Weights of individual birds were recorded at the beginning and each month thereafter until the end of the experiment. The total amount of feed consumed by each group was recorded monthly. TABLE I Composition of rations used Ingredients No. I (High protein) No. II (Normal protein Ground yellow maize 10 per cent 38 per cent Wheat bran 15 per cent 15 per cent Groundnut cake (decorticated) 54 per cent 26 per cent Gram 10 per cent 10 per cent Pish meal 5 per cent 5 per cent Oyster shell 3 per cent 3 per cent Mineral mixture* 3 per cent 3 per cent Total protein (N × 6.25) 30.31 per cent 21.73 per cent Average cost per 100 pounds Rs. 8/11/6 Rs. 9/15/6 * Containing 50 per cent salt, 50 per cent sterilized bone meal plus 0.05 per cent potassium iodide. Daily production of eggs was recorded for each group. The experimental period was from September 10, 1955 to April 10, 1956. At Allahabad this is the cooler period of the year. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS The total numbers of eggs produced daily by each group from the date of first egg until completion of the project are shown in Table II. The group of pullets on the normal protein ration produced the first egg on October 13 and the group on the high protein ration produced the first egg on October 20. During the month of October ten hens on the normal protein ration produced at least one egg while only eight hens on the high protein ration produced at least one egg during the month.
September, 1957] ALEX REED AND JOHN G. VELU 113 TABLE II Total eggs produced daily by two groups of White Leghorn hens from October 13, 1955 to April 9, 1956 (Started with 29 birds in each group and ended with 26 birds in each group) Date Protein Date Protein Date Protein Date Protein Normal High Normal High Normal High Normal High Oct. 13 2 0 Nov 15 9 9 Dec. 18 4 14 Jan. 20 9 17 .. 14 1 0 .. 16 11 10 .. 19 5 9 .. 21 9 13 .. 15 0 0 .. 17 9 12 .. 20 6 9 .. 22 16 15 .. 16 1 0 .. 18 8 8 .. 21 5 12 .. 23 14 15 .. 17 0 0 .. 19 6 12 .. 22 3 4 .. 24 11 16 .. 18 2 0 .. 20 7 10 .. 23 2 8 .. 25 14 15 .. 19 3 0 .. 21 9 12 .. 24 0 7 .. 26 9 14 .. 20 2 1 .. 22 7 13 .. 25 1 10 .. 27 9 13 .. 21 3 0 .. 23 11 10 .. 26 0 11 .. 28 12 20 .. 22 4 1 .. 24 9 12 .. 27 2 7 .. 29 12 13 .. 23 3 1 .. 25 7 13 .. 28 0 12 .. 30 13 17 .. 24 2 2 .. 26 12 10 .. 29 1 13 .. 31 8 14 .. 25 5 3 .. 27 7 12 .. 30 0 10 Feb. 1 16 14 .. 26 4 3 .. 28 4 11 .. 31 2 11 .. 2 11 19 .. 27 5 4 .. 29 10 12 Jan. 1 4 15 .. 3 13 14 .. 28 4 8 .. 30 9 11 .. 2 6 12 .. 4 15 16 .. 29 4 3 Dec. 1 6 12 .. 3 6 11 .. 5 12 18 .. 30 5 7 .. 2 9 8 .. 4 9 17 .. 6 10 15 .. 31 7 2 .. 3 10 15 .. 5 13 15 .. 7 13 21 NOV. 1 5 4 .. 4 10 11 .. 6 8 10 .. 8 13 9 .. 2 9 7 .. 5 11 13 .. 7 11 14 .. 9 9 20 .. 3 7 7 .. 6 12 15 .. 8 13 17 .. 10 11 15 .. 4 8 7 .. 7 12 11 .. 9 6 18 .. 11 13 17 .. 5 10 6 .. 8 7 12 .. 10 13 13 .. 12 17 17 .. 6 7 9 .. 9 11 17 .. 11 S 17 .. 13 12 17 .. 7 7 10 .. 10 4 11 .. 12 11 10 .. 14 10 17 .. 8 11 8 .. 11 7 13 .. 13 6 8 .. 15 16 20 .. 9 5 10 .. 12 2 10 .. 14 8 11 .. 16 16 17 .. 10 9 10 .. 13 4 8 .. 15 6 10 .. 17 9 23 .. 11 7 12 .. 14 2 8 .. 16 11 10 .. 18 12 15 .. 12 8 7 .. 15 5 11 .. 17 8 15 .. 19 15 19 .. 13 9 13 .. 16 3 9 .. 18 6 10 .. 20 15 14 .. 14 11 11 .. 17 4 6 .. 19 13 12 .. 21 13 20
114 RATION FOE EGG PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVII, Part II TABLE IIISeptember, 1957] ALEX REED AND JOHN G. VELU 115 Because of a mild infestation with intestinal roundworms the hens in both groups were treated with carbon tetrachloride on December 20, 1955. There was no significant difference in body weight at each of the monthly weigh ings between the two groups of hens (Table III). TABLE III Average body weight of White Leghorn hens at monthly intervals from September 10,1955 to April 10, 1956 Weight on indicated dates (lb.) Ration Sept. 10 Oct. 10 Nov. 10 Dec. 10 Jan. 10 Feb. 10 Mch. 1.0 Apr. 10 High protein 2.42 2.78 3.45 3.63 3.70 3.93 3.94 3.80 Normal protein 2.45 2.88 3.33 3.50 3.82 3.98 3.68 3.53 There was no significant difference in the amount of feed consumed by the two groups of hens (Table IV). TABLE IV Total amount of feed consumed monthly from September 10, 1955 to April 10, 1956 by two groups of White Leghorn hens Date Ration High protein (lb.) Normal portein (lb.) September 10 to October 10 190.5 180.0 October 10 to November 10 207.0 180.0 November 10 to December 10 245.0 206.0 December 10 to January 10 225.0 248.0 January 10 to February 10 260.0 258.0 February 10 to March 10 230.0 228.0 March 10 to April 10 219.0 233.0 Total feed 1576.5 1533.0 The amount of feed consumed per dozen eggs produced during the seven months period of the experiment was 8.59 pounds on the high protein ration and 11.13 pounds on the normal protein ration. With the high protein ration costing Rs. 8/11/6 per hundred pounds and the normal protein ration costing Rs. 9/15/6 per hundred pounds 18AR/5 11
116 RATION FOR EGG PRODUCTION [Vol. XXVII, Part III the total feed cost per dozen eggs produced was twelve annas for the high protein and Rs. 1/1/9 per dozen for the normal protein rations, respectively. The mortality rate was the same in each group. Three hens died from each group. Two of the deaths, one in each group, were accidentally caused during the treatment with carbon tetrachloride. SUMMARY One group of twenty-nine White Leghorn pullets was fed on the commonly recommended all-mash ration containing approximately 21 per cent protein while a similar group of twenty-nine was fed on an all-mash ration containing approxi- mately 30 per cent protein for a period of seven months. There was a highly significant difference in daily egg production in favour of the high protein ration. The difference in the amount of feed consumed by the two groups was not statisti- cally significant. The hens on the normal protein ration consumed 11.1 pounds feed per dozen eggs produced and the hens on the high protein ration consumed 8.6 pounds feed per dozen eggs produced during the seven months of the experiment. The cost of feed per dozen eggs produced by the group on the normal protein ration was Rs. 1/1/9 while the group on the high protein ration produced eggs at a feed cost of twelve annas per dozen. There was no difference in mortality in the two groups. On the basis of this one trial it appears that under Allahabad conditions, laying hens will do as well and possibly somewhat better on a ration containing more groundnut cake and less maize than on a similarly compounded ration containing less groundnut cake and more maize. The difference in cost of the two rations at Allahabad favours the use of the high protein ration for laying hens. REFERENCES Bird, H. R. (1948). "Nutritive Requirements and Food Formulas for Chickens." U.S.D.A. Circular 788. Ewing, W. Ray (1951). Poultry Nutrition. W. Ray Ewing Publisher. South Pasadena, California. Heuser, Gustave F. (1946). Feeding Poultry. John Wiley Co., New York, N. Y. 1946 Jull, M. A. (1938). Poultry Husbandry. McGraw-Hill Co., New York, N. Y. 1938 Romanoff, A. L. and A. J. Romanoff (1949). The Avian Egg. John Wiley Co., New York, N. Y. Snedecor, George W. (1950). Statistical Methods, Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. Vernon, W. M., W. R. Whitfield and H. L. Wilcha (1942). "Feeding and Management of Hens." Iowa State College of Agriculture Ext. Cire. 200. Winter, A. R. and E. M. Funk. (1947). Poultry Science and Practice. J. B. Lippincott and Co., Chicago, Illinois.
THE LIFE HISTORY AND BIOLOGY OF THE REDUVID118 LIFE HISTORY AND BIOLOGY OF REDUVID [Vol. XXVII, Part III, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1.September, 1957 ] M. S. SUBBIAH AND V. MAHADEVAN 119 Eggs laid and kept in tubes under laboratory conditions did not hatch. Warmth and treatment with diluted hydrochloric acid failed to hatch them. Mois- ture is found to be essential for the hatching of these eggs as adults and nymphs were found in larger numbers during the wet seasons of October120 LIFE HISTORY AND BIOLOGY OF REDUVID [Vol. XXVII, Part III, TABLE I Seasonal occurrence of Acanthaspis siva in nature January February March April May June July August September October November December Year A N A N A N A N A N A N A N A N A. N A N A N A N 1953 2 8 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 2 9 2 1964 2 1 1 2 3 3 7 3 1 4 3 2 4 2 4 4 5 1 TOTAL 4 9 1 3 4 4 7 3 2 5 3 2 6 2 7 4 7 9 3 ASeptember, 1957] M. S. SUBBIAH AND V. MAHADEVAN 121 TABLE IV Nymphal period observed during different parts of the year Date of hatching Dale of emergence Nymphal period in days 2-12-1953 11-6-1954 186 24-2-1954 29-7-1954 155 11-4-1954 10-8-1954 121 11-4-1954 30-8-1954 141 11-4-1954 30-8-1954 141 17-4-1954 1-9-1954 137 18-4-1954 3-9-1954 138 20-5-1954 20-9-1954 123 20-5-1954 20-9-1951 123 26-5-1954 10-9-1954 107 26-5-1954 22-9-1954 199
122 LIFE HISTORY AND BIOLOGY OF REDUVID [Vol. XXVII, Part III The adult. The female is distinguished by its broad boat shaped abdomen with an obtuse tip divided by a longitudinal slit covered over with a few strong spiny hairs. In the case of the male the abdomen is comparatively slender, pointed and naked without the longitudinal division. The male lives longer than the female, their maximum longevity under laboratary conditions being 202 and 115 days respectively. The fact that the eggs require wet weather for their hatching and that the duration of the nymphal period is prolonged coupled with the occurrence of large number of young nymphs and adults during October-November in nature, indicates that there is only one brood in a year under natural conditions. The status of the bug as a bee enemy The first and second state nymphs require a worker bee a day for their maintenance and the later stage nymphs and the adults consume two workers a day on an average. At this rate a single bug can account for about 650 workers in the course of its life. This only indicates the enormous possibilities of havoc the bug is capable of doing. But it may be also noted that the extent of damage is considerably reduced because of the high mortality of the nympheal stages especially during the first instar stage and only about 7 per cent of the nymphs hatched reach the adult stage. Be sides, as the eggs hatch out only during moist conditions and as there are only very few wet days, in a year, a major proportion of the eggs laid by a female perish without hatching. Thus during normal years, the depletion of the hive population due to this predator is not much. Control The predator can however, be kept under check by frequent cleaning of the base- boards. Hive stands and the surroundings of the apiary may also be kept clean and tidy. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are thankful to Shri K. P. Anantanarayanan Iyer, Government Entomologist, for the guidance and criticism received in the preparation of the article. REFERENCES Distant, W. L. (1903).ABSTRACTS Immunisation against contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, with special reference to the use of a dried vaccine. F. W. PRIESTLEY (1955)124 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVII, Part III, vaccine is administered by spraying a fog over the head of baby chicks, confined in chick boxes, any time during the first five days of age if the chicks possess parental immunity, or between the second and fifteenth week if chicks are from non-immunized parents. The success of this method is due to the use of a sprayer which delivers uniform droplets of optimum size, i.e. 3September, 1957] ABSTRACTS 125 cattle reported by previous workers, and (ii) to explore the possibility of developing an adequate and durable acquired resistance to reinfection which might lead to feasible procedures of immunization against the lungworm disease, for which there is no satisfactory drug treatment. The authors have reported that recovery from an initial lungworm infection conferred a strong resistance to reinfection on nine out of eleven calves or yearlings. These animals were initially infected with 5,000 to 43,000 infective larvae and were subjected to reinfection after they had eliminated their initial infection. No clini- cal effects occurred in five animals challenged with single dose of 52,000 to 58,000 infective larvae which proved fatal to previously unexposed animals. But severe clinical effects occurred in most of the others whose resistance was challenged with over 200,000 infective larvae, and one animal failed to survive such a challenge infec- tion. Animals whose resistance was repeatedly challenged became highly immune. Administration of as many as 750,000 infective larvae to such animals did not result in the development of a patent infection and had little or no clinical effects. The resistance lasted for at least seven months after recovery from an initial infection. In case of an animal subjected to repeated re-exposures, the resistance lasted for at least eleven months. As regards factors responsible for this resistance, the authors have been unable to demonstrate directly whether or to what extent resistance prevents ingested larvae from penetrating the gut wall and reaching the circulation or destroys the larvae while in the lymphatic or circulatory system. They have opined that probably the percentage of the larvae administered that reaches the lungs is considerably less in resistant than in susceptible animals. They found that some of the larvae administered reached the lungs of resistant animals, but nearly all the young lungworms usually were eliminated in an immature state within three weeks. (H. C. M.) MGIPCADVERTISEMENT. HERBAGE ABSTRACTS AND FIELD CROP ABSTRACTS STUDIES ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE VACCINATION IN INDIA II-A CONCENTRATED CRYSTAL VIOLET VACCINE By M. R. DHANDA, V. R. GOPALAKRISHNAN and H. S. DHILLON, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaon, U.P. [Received for publication on July 22, 1955 Accepted for publication on July 3, 1957] IN an earlier paper [Dhanda et al., 1953] experimental trials on foot-and-mouth disease vaccination with crystal violet vaccine containing 2.5 per cent virus have been described. The dose of this vaccine was 30 to 50 cc. given subcutaneously. It was rather anunwieldy dose and difficult to administer in large numbers of animals, hence it was thought necessary to carry out further experimental work to modify the vaccine so as to facilitate its use in large-scale vaccination in the field. Attempts were, therefore, made to prepare a vaccine with a higher percentage of virus content and reduce the volume of vaccine per dose. Since the minimum dose of crystal violet vaccine is 30 cc., the modified concentrated vaccine has six times the virus content (15 per cent), while the dosage of the vaccine is reduced to one-sixth, i.e. 5 cc. for subcutaneous injection. MATERIAL AND METHOD Preparation of the vaccine The tongue epithelium with the vesicular fluid collected from hill bulls inoculated artificially in the tongue with the virus is well triturated and suspended in phosphate buffer pH 7.6 and filtered through Seitz filter. The filtrate is mixed with blood collected from virus donors at the height of thermal reaction. Sufficient quantity of buffer is added to bring the concentration of epithelium to 15 per cent. The addition of blood is so regulated that the liquid content of the vaccine consists of half blood and half buffer solution. Crystal violet is then added to give a final concentration of 0.03 per cent of the dye. The vaccine is incubated for 7 days at 37°C. It is tested in cattle before use. The percentage of virus in the vaccine is based on the quantity of the tongue epithelium that goes into the vaccine. This tissue is very rich in virus. By in- corporating blood collected from the virus donors into the vaccine, a certain amount of virus contained in the blood is also added to the vaccine by way of reinforcement. It is known that though its concentration may be variable, virus is present in the blood at the height of thermal reaction. Besides, addition of blood maintains the homogenity of the vaccine. 127 28 AR/57
128 STUDIES ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXVII, Part IV Experimental vaccination Small-scale laboratory experiments were conducted using various percentages of virus content to test the value of the vaccine, monovalent type 'O'. The dosage for all brews of vaccine was 5 cc. subcutaneously. Of the various experiments carried out in this connection, two are dealt with in detail; the first one in which the vaccine contained 15 per cent virus and the second with 10 per cent virus. These vaccines were tested in batches of hill bulls and careful observations were made on the reaction following vaccination. This consisted of a slight local swelling lasting for 3 to 4 days, a general rise in the body temperature of about a degree above the normal for a couple of days. Animals continued to feed normally during the period. The nature of reaction in the vaccinated animals was practically the same as seen with the usual dilute vaccine in spite of an increase in the concentration of the virus. Details of the experimental work were recorded in the annual report of the scheme [Gopalakrishnan, 1951]. Immunity test Immunity test of the two batches of animals was carried out by the administra- tion of live virulent virus type 'O' given intralingually in 4 tracks. The details of the tests are given in Table I. In the batch of 8 animals vaccinated with the con- centrated crystal violet vaccine containing 15 per cent virus only, 6 were available for the immunity test, the other two died earlier of other causes. All the six an mass were found immune when challenged with virus type 'O', 23 days after vaccination. Five control animals receiving the virus alone, reacted severely while one did not react, probably due to previous natural infection and consequent immunity. In the other batch of 10 animals vaccinated with the concentrated crystal violet vaccine containing 10 per cent virus content and challenged 27 days later, a breakdown of immunity was observed in 4 animals. It was thus concluded that the vaccine containing 10 per cent virus was not very satisfactory. It was, therefore, decided to use a vaccine containing not less than 15 per cent virus for further experi- mental trials. Field trial of the vaccine Since the laboratory tests with the vaccine containing 15 per cent virus were satisfactory, both as regards the post-vaccination reaction mild and transient and the, type of immunity which appeared to be adequate, arrangements were made to undertake large scale field trial in an organised farm where facilities were available for periodical observations and recording. The trial was carried out at the Govern- ment of India, Cattle-cum-Dairy Farm, Karnal. As a practical test under natural field conditions, half of the young stock of age-group between 9 months and 3 years, were taken up for vaccination and about an equal number of the same age-group was kept as unvaccinated healthy controls with the view that if there was a natural outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease it would be easy to assess the value of the vaccine. A total of 236 animals of the representative breeds on the Farm were vaccinated on February 11, 1953. Bivalent vaccine, type 'O' and 'A' was given to 189 animals and 47
December, 1957] M. R. Dhanda ET. AL. 129 TABLE I Concentration of epithelial tissue (foot-and-mouth-disease virus) in crystal violet vaccine for establishment of immunity at a flat dose of 5 cc. of the vaccine Series No. Concentration used Hill Bull No. Reaction to test inoculation Remarks I 15 per cent 91 Died of other causes not connected with foot- and-mouth disease be- fore test inoculation 71 130 STUDIES ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXVII, Part IV received polyvalent vaccine prepared from all the three standard strains of the foot- and-mouth-disease virus. The animals were kept under observation for one week following vaccination and the nature of reaction was studied. The reaction was practically of the type as was noted in the hill bulls in the laboratory tests. About a dozen animals showed local swelling that persisted for more than a week. All the animals were feeding normally and well during the period of observation. Natural outbreak A natural outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease occurred among the young stock on the Farm at the end of March, 1953. As the disease showed a tendency to spread among the young animals and calves, the Farm authorities aphthised all the young stock to lessen the duration of the outbreak. During the investigation in the latter half of April, 1953, it was observed that the infection was prevalent among the young stock only. The disease had not spread to adults, particularly the cows as they were housed in sheds away from the young stock. This outbreak afforded an opportunity to assess the value of the vaccination which had been carried out on February 11, 1953. During the course of the outbreak on the Farm, daily observations and careful examination of all the animals was made. It was noticed that of the vaccinated group comprising 236 animals only two calves contracted a mild form of the disease while as many as 210 out of the 400 unvaccinated animals suffered from the disease. Unfortunately, the type of virus responsible for this outbreak could not be determined, as intimation of the occurrence of the disease was received late and the material collected for the isolation of the virus proved non-viable. However, the efficiency of the vaccine in preventing the disease is proved beyond doubt on account of the occurrence of this natural outbreak of the disease only about 2½ months after vaccination. The second experimental trial of the concentrated crystal violet vaccine, biva- lent type 'O' and 'A' was made at the Tisco Farm, Jamshedpur, and animals ranging between the age-group of 9 months to 3 years were taken up for vaccination. Half the total number of the young stock was vaccinated and the other half was kept as healthy controls so that in the event of a natural outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease it would be easy to assess the value of the vaccine. A total number of 117 animals of the representative breeds of cattleDecember, 1957] M. R. Dhanda ET. AL. 131 TABLE II Duration of immunity following vaccination with concentrated crystal violet vaccin bivalent type 'O' and 'A' Immunity test No. Animal Number Type of virus used for test Reaction to test inoculation Remarks I Cow calf 443 'O' 132 STUDIES ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE [Vol. XXII, Part IV SUMMARY The article deals with the experimental work carried out with the object of modi- fying the crystal violet vaccine for use in large-scale vaccination in the field. Crystal violet vaccine (2.5 per cent virus content) is used in the dosage of 30 to 50 cc. which is found to be a rather unwieldy dose and difficult to administer in large number of animals. The method of preparation of the concentrated crystal violet vaccine is similar to that for the preparation of crystal violet vaccine described in an earlier paper, excepting that the concentration of the virus is increased to 15 per cent. Experimental trials were undertaken with the concentrated crystal violet vaccine with 15 and 10 per cent virus content in a dose of 5 cc. administered subcutaneously. Indications of adequate immunity were obtained from the test carried out on batches of vaccinated animals at the Institute by administration of live virulent virus. A large-scale field trial was undertaken with the vaccine at the Karnal Farm where 236 young stock between the ages of 9 months and 3 years were vaccinated and an adequate number of animals of the same age-group were left as unvaccinated controls. Assessment of the value of the vaccine was facilitated in the course of a natural outbreak of the disease which occurred on the Farm about 2½ months later. It was observed that of the 236 animals of the vaccinated group only 2 animals contracted a mild form of the disease while 210 out of the 400 unvaccinated animals suffered from the disease. The second large-scale field trial was undertaken at the Tisco Farm, Jamshedpur and the results, of the immunity tests indicate that the vaccinated animals had adequate immunity when exposed to artificial infection with live virulent virus after a period of 17 months and 25 days following vaccination. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work was carried out under a scheme of research financed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India. REFERENCES Dhanda, M. R., Gopalakrishnan, V. R., and Dhillon, H. S. (1953). Proc. In, Sc. Congress (1954), Part III, p. 226. Gopalakrishnan, V. R. (1951). Annual Progress Report of the Scheme for vaccination of cattle against foot' and-mouth disease, Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
STUDIES ON REPRODUCTIVE EFFICIENCY IN DONKEY MARES By M. L. KOHLI and K. R. SURI, Government Livestock Farm, Hissar [Received for Publication on March 22, 1956. Accepted for Publication on August 24, 1957.] FERTILITY of the mares bred during and after foal heat has been studied by various workers, but very limited information is available about the breeding of donkeys. The present study was undertaken to investigate the reproductive efficiency in donkey mares bred during different periods of the year at various inter- vals of post-partum oestrus. REVIEW OF LITERATURE Williams [1926] recorded the results of 120 ninth-day breedings in a famous thorough-bred stud of high repute for fertility. Thirty per cent conceived at the ninth- day breeding ; 40.8 per cent at later matings after having failed at first service and 29.2 per cent failed to settle. Those which conceived on ninth day showed 11.2 per cent of aborts and non-viable foals while the pregnancies from later breedings were followed by 4.1 per cent aborts and non-viables. Caslicks [1937] reported that of 533 mares bred on the ninth or tenth day, 36.6 per cent conceived ; while of those which failed when bred at first post-partum oestrus, 56.6 per cent conceived at second mating. Jennings [1941] stated the rate of conception of one service from ninth day breeding to be 43.7 per cent as compared with 67.3 per cent for those first bred at later dates. An abortion ratio of 12.8 per cent was detected which was four times as great as that followed from first breeding at later dates. The rate of death or diseased foals at birth was 7.3 per cent following ninth day breeding which was six times as great as that from later breedings. The rate of heavy or retained placenta occurred in 29.1 per cent of mares bred on ninth day and only 21.0 per cent in those bred at later periods. Stevenson [1945] noted no significant difference in the percentage of conception or in percentage of healthy foals born to a group of mares bred within 8 to 14 days after parturition and a similar group bred during non- foal heats. Wagenar [1948] concluded that the conception rate is highest in mares when service takes place in later spring (May to June) and that fertility is reduced in the first heat after foaling. Nishikawa and Yamasaki [1949] considered that the breeding season in she-ass to be from April to September; December and Janu- ary to be months of sexual rest, while the intervening months represent phases of transition into and from the breeding season. Korolikov [1952] observed the foaling period in mares from March to July; and that the majority foaled from March to May. Mares foaling from March to May required 2.2 to 2.4 services per conception and 6.4 for those in July. Jordao [1951] found the average conception rate in she-asses to be 57.1 per cent. 133 28 AR/57. 4
134 REPRODUCTIVE EFFICIENCY IN DONKEYS [Vol. XXVII, Part IV, MATERIAL The data of 128 donkey mares used in the study were collected from the donkey breeding stud at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar, for a period of about 38 years (December, 1916 to May, 1954). This stud was maintained at the Farm with the object of supplying donkey stallions to different parts of the Punjab State to promote mule breeding. In all, 694 pregnancies as confirmed by subsequent normal foalings, were studied. The animals were let out for grazing in the morning and returned to stables in the evening. In the days of scarcity, the grazing was supplemented by 40 lb. of green fodder and 2 lb. of concentrates per animal. Animals for heat were checked regularly, both morning and evening before they had moved out for grazing and after they had returned to the stables. Cases that were detected on heat were given natural service. Close in-breeding was avoided with the frequent introduction of fresh blood by the purchase and exchange of new donkey stallions from other studs in the State and by the imported American Jacks. RESULTS The study was based on 694 actual foalings recorded during a period of about 38 years. For the post-partum foalings it was observed that 2.2 services were required for a donkey mare to conceive. The percentage of mares that conceived on the first, second, third and fourth service was 46.9, 26.6, 11.4 and 6.9 respectively (Table I). The remaining 7 per cent of the pregnancies took 5 or more services with nearly 3 per cent of these requiring 7 or more services. The results showed a decrease in the efficiency of each subse- quent service as the highly fertile donkey mares seemed to have got pregnant with the first or second matings. The breeding efficiency for each of the first five services was 46.9 per cent conception in first service, 50.0 in second, 43.0 in third, 45.3 in fourth and 31.2 for the fifth time. TABLE I Per cent of total number of donkey mares conceiving at each consecutive service after the first foaling Service sequence 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 and above Number mated 614 310 135 64 32 16 9 5 3 4 Number of conception 288 155 58 29 10 4 2 1 1 1 Per cent conception 46.9 50.0 43.0 45.3 31.2 25.0 22.2 20.0 33.3 25.0 Percentage of mares receiving 'n' services for conception 46.9 26.6 11.4 6.9 2.6 1.4 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.4 n 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
December, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 135 The percentage of mares that conceived on the first, second, third and fourth service for the first foaling was 55.2, 21.4, 10.3, 8.9 respectively (Table II). The average number of services required per conception for the first foaling was 1.9 with the average fertility as 52.2 per cent. The average number of services and the fertility per cent for the post-partum foaling was 2.2 and 46.1 respectively. The difference between the services required and the fertility rate for the first foaling period and for the later foalers was not significant. TABLE II Per cent of total number of donkey mares conceiving at each consecutive service for the first foaling Service sequence 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Number mated 145 65 34 19 6 4 3 1 1 Number of conception 80 31 15 13 2 1 2 .. 1 Per cent conception 55.2 47.7 44.1 68.4 33.3 25.0 66.6 .. 100.0 Percentage of mares receiving 'n' services for conception 55.2 21.4 10.3 8.9 1.4 0.7 1.4 .. 0.7 n 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 The length of the post-partum breeding interval and its effects on the reproductive efficiency indicated (Table III) that, on an average, maximum number of donkey mares came in heat within 40 days of foaling and thereafter the number decreased with the increase in the post-partum interval. The shortest inter-foaling period of 494.6±11.6 days fell between the post-partum breeding interval of 40-79 days. The number of services per conception, although lower than 1.9 in a few post-partum breeding intervals did not compare favourably with 1.9 services of 40-79 days interval as the inter-foaling period corresponding to these services was significantly high. Further analysis of the data indicated that there were 198 cases which were mated within 16 days after foaling. Out of these 48.4 per cent were served below 11 days, 32.4 per cent between 11 to 13 days and 19.2 per cent between 14 to 16 days after foaling and the per cent of fertility was observed to be 27.1, 31.2 and 34.2 respectively. The rate of conception of first service during foal heat period of 10 days' breeding was 27.1 per cent as compared with 50.1 per cent for those bred during non-foal heat. The difference of fertility rate between the two was significant. The inter-foaling period for the additional post-partum days corresponding to each group is given in Table III.
136 REPRODUCTIVE EFFICIENCY IN DONKEYS [Vol. XXVII, Part IV, TABLE III Length of the post-partum breeding interval and its effect on the reproductive efficiency in donkey mares Post-partum breeding interval No. of first services No. of conceptions No. of total services Services per conception Inter-foaling period 0December, 1957] M. L. KOHLI AND K. R. SURI 137 TABLE IV Effect of the month of the year on fertility in the donkey mares Month No. of cases served No. of foalings Fertility percentage January 75 37 49.3 February 117 53 45.3 March 88 39 44.3 April 123 54 43.9 May 129 58 45.0 June 128 63 49.2 July 120 51 42.5 August 98 42 42.9 September 91 43 47.2 October 76 39 51.3 November 60 29 48.3 December 87 41 47.1 The maximum post-partum interval for the fertile service was 173.17±21.53 days at fourth foaling and minimum of 129.04±36.20 days at the seventh foaling (Table V). The intervals for the ninth foaling and above were not taken into con- sideration as the number of cases were few. The average period for fertile service was 162.49±6.67days. TABLE V Number of services and the post-partum interval for different foalings in the donkey mares Sequence of foaling No. of conception Service per conception Per cent services resulting in con- ception Average post-partum interval for fertile services (days) 1 122 1.8 55.2±0.03 173.91±12.82 2 115 1.9 56.0±0.03 168.79±14.65 3 90 2.1 48.7±0.04 160.51±17.25 4 97 1.9 5l.7±0.04 173.17±21.53 5 59 1.7 60.8±0.05 141.97±16.87 6 38 1.8 56.9±0.06 132.82±18 89 7 25 1.6 62.5±0.09 129.04±36.20 8 12 1.7 57.1 ±0.11 137.83±46.55 9 9 2.2 45.0±0.11 214.22±66.65 10 2 4.0 25.0±0.18 295.00±7.00 28 AR/57 5
138 REPRODUCTIVE EFFICIENCY IN DONKEYS [Vol. XXVII. Part IV DISCUSSION The results of this study indicated that the average fertility rate of 47.2 per cent differ from the results reported by Jordao [1951] who obtained the average concep- tion rate of 57.1 per cent in his study of 43 she-asses during the year 1939 to 1949. The average number of services required per conception was 2.1 which was lower when compared to the findings of Korolikov [1952] who got 2.2 to 2.4 and 6.4 ser- vices per conception for the majority of mares that foaled from March to May and for July respectively. The percentage of conception of donkey mares bred during foal-heat was lower than those bred during non-foal heats which is in agreement with the observations of Williams [1926], Caslicks [1937] and Jennings [1941]. This low fertility rate may possibly be due to the incomplete involution of the uterus during the foal heat period. No period for sexual rest was observed as reported by Nishi- kawa [1949]. SUMMARY A study of 694 foalings of 128 donkey mares during the period from 1916 to 1954 showed that: The services required per conception and the fertility rate for the first foaling did not differ significantly from the post-partum foalings. A mean of 2.1 services was required per conception and the average fertility rate of the stud was 47.2 per cent. The conception rate of foal heat was poorer than those bred at later dates. Fertility rate was highest for the period between 40-79 days after foaling. The foaling percentage did not vary from month to month. The average post-partum period for fertile service was 162.49±6.67 days. REFERENCES Caslicks, E. A. (1937). The sexual cycle and its relation to ovulation with breeding records of the thorough bred mare. Cornell Vet. 27 : 187-206 Jennings, W. F. (1941). Some common problems in horse breeding. Cornell Vet. 31: 197-216 Jordao, L. P., Xavier D Camargo, M., and Furtado Gonveia, P. (1951). The reproductive efficiency of Brazillian asses at the Sao Paulo Stud. Industr. Anim., N. S., 12 : 82-93 An. Br. Abst. 20(4), 312 Korolikov, A. G. (1952). Reproduction indices in relation to dates of foaling of mares under taboon conditions. Konevodstvo, 22 (6): 30-32. An. Br. Abst., 20(4): 312 Nishikawa, Y. and Yamasaki. Y. (1949). Studies on reproduction in asses. Jap. J. Zootech. Sci. 19 : 119-123. An. Br. Abst., 18(4): 368 Stevenson, W. G. (1945). The comparative fertility of mares bred at foal and non-foal heat. Canad. J. Comp. Med. 9: 126.130 Williams, W.L. (1950). The diseases of the genital organs of domestic animals. 3rd Ed. Ithaoa. N. Y. Wagenar. G. (1948). Fertility in horses. Tijdschr.. Diergeneesk. 73: 933-936. An. Br. Abst., 17(1): 17
COMPARATIVE EFFECT OF A NORMAL AND HIGH- PROTEIN RATION WITH AND WITHOUT "AUROFAC"1 UPON GROWTH RATE OF CHICKS By ALEX REED2 and JOHN, G. VELU3, Department of Animal Husbandry, Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U. P [Received for publication on June 11, 1957 Accepted for publication on August 3, 1957] IT is rather generally agreed that the addition of aureomycin and vitamin B12 to normal rations or rations with less than the normal amount of protein will increase the growth rate of chicks to eight weeks of age. Berg et al. [1950], Scott and Glista [1950], Biely and March [1951], Stockstadt and Jukes [1951], Heuser and Norris [1952] and Macklin et al. [1952] reported that aureomycin exerted a definite stimulating effect upon growth when fed to chicks with rations containing normal or below normal amounts of protein. These results were observed outside India. Bose et al. [1955] feeding vitamin B2 and bacitracin to chicks on a normal ration common in India, obtained increased growth to eight weeks of age. Reed and Velu [1955] feeding aureomycin and vitamin B12 with a ration containing 22 per cent total protein obtained a significant increase in growth rate of chicks to six weeks of age. Most of the work reported on the use of antibiotics and vitamin B12 was done with rations containing normal or below normal amounts of protein with the main objective to save costly protein supplement. With the relative prices of maize and groundnut cake in many areas of India favouring the increased use of groundnut cake for cheaper rations, evidence was needed as to the effects upon the growth rate of chicks of a high-protein ration con- taining a high proportion of groundnut cake. Ewing [1951] in reviewing numerous experiments on the determination of the optimum protein level for chicks, con- cluded that about 21 per cent is the best during the first twelve weeks but that there was evidence to indicate that higher levels of protein were not injurious and might be beneficial. Also in reportirg work of Milne [1932] it was stated that he obtained excellent growth with chicks fed diets containing 22.5 and 30.5 per cent protein during the first six weeks. Biely et al. [1952] and Scott et al. [1952] reported that aureomycin did not lower the dietary level of protein required by chicks but im- proved growth more at protein levels below the normal requirement. 1 Commercial product containing 1.8 grams aureomycin and 1.8 milligrams vitamin B12 per pound. 2 Professor, University of Illinois, College of Agriculture assigned to the Allahabad Agriculture Institute for Research in animal nutrition. 3 Member of staff Department of Animal Husbandry, Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U. P. 139 28 AR/57 6
140 EFFECT OP AUROFAC [Vol. XXVII, Part IV, With the present economic relationship between maize and groundnut cake favouring the use of ration containing higher proportions of groundnut cake than are normally used it was considered desirable to investigate the effects of such a ration upon chicks when fed with and without " Aurofac". EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE One-hundred-eighty Rhode Island Red day-old chicks, obtained from the Government Poultry Farm, Ganjeria, Lucknow, were randomly divided into 20 groups of nine ch cks each. The groups were randomly assigned to wire cages. Brooding heat was provided by sixty watt electric light lamps suspended in each cage. The groups were rotated in a systematic order from one cage to another each week in order to eliminate possible position advantage. Feed and water were supplied ad libitum. Feed remaining each day was weighed back and not offered again. Records of weekly weight, mortality and feed consumption were kept. Weight of individual chicks was recorded at the beginning and close of the project. Ten groups of chicks chosen randomly were given diet No. 1 and the other ten groups were given diet No. 2 as shown in Table I. Five groups on diet No. 1 and five groups on diet No. 2 chosen randomly, received the basal diets plus 9 grams aureomycin and 9 milligrams vitamin B12 per ton of ration (Aurofac at rate of 5 pounds per ton). TABLE I Composition of basal diets: Trial No. 1 Diet Ingredients No. 1 No. 2 Ground yellow maize 44 per cent 20 per cent Wheat bran 10 per cent 10 per cent Groundnut cake 36 per cent 60 per cent Fishmeal 5 per cent 5 per cent Sterilised bonemeal 2 per cent 2 per cent Lucerne leaf meal 1 per cent 1 per cent Limestone 1 per cent 1 per cent Salt 0.5 per cent 0.5 per cent Shark-liver oil 0.5 per cent 0.5 per cent Manganese sulfate 5 oz. per ton 5 oz. per ton Dried skim milk1 4 lb. per hundred 4 lb. per hundred Total protein (N.×6.25) 2 22.37 per cent 30.56 per cent Average cost per 100 pounds Rs.13/2/6 Rs.12/1/0 1 From the fourth to seventh week, dried skim milk was added to all diets at the rate of 4 pounds per 100 pounds of ration. 2 Determination made by Chemistry Department, Allahabad Agricultural Institute.
December. 1957] ALEX REED AND JOHN G. VELU 141 Early in the third week a few chicks began to show symptoms of curled toe paralysis. The first to be affected were in the groups receiving "high-protein" with Aurofac. Within two days some chicks in groups on rations without Aurofac showed similar symptoms. The most rapid growing chicks were the first to show signs of deficiency. Re-examination of our basic ration showed a possible deficiency of riboflavin. To correct the deficiency, dried skim milk was added to all diets at the rate of four pounds per hundred pounds of feed. Within a few days most of the affected chicks made a complete recovery. A small number did not recover com- pletely although they showed considerable improvement. These were apparently too seriously affected before the skim milk was added to the ration. This trial was conducted from January 24 to March 13, 1956. To test the effectiveness of a high-protein ration similar to the one used in trial No. 1, modified to correct apparent deficiencies, a second trial was conducted. Since the more serious difficulties in Trial No.1 were in the groups receiving high- protein with Aurofac, only two rations were used in Trial No. 2 both of which con- tained Aurofac. Trial No. 2. Eighty-day old White Leghorn chicks from one hatching at the Agricultural Institute were randomly divided into eight groups of ten chicks each. These groups were randomly assigned to wire cages. Four groups were randomly assigned to ration diet No. 1 and four groups to diet No. 2 (Table II). The groups were rotated in a systematic order from one cage to another each week to eliminate any possible position advantage. The experiment extended from March 21 to May 2, 1956. Feed and water were given ad libitum, to all groups and a small amount of greens was offered daily. TABLE II Composition of diets used (Trial No. 2) Ingredients Diet No.1 No. 2 Ground yellow maize 42 per cent 18 per cent Wheat bran 8 per cent 8 per cent Groundnut cake 34 per cent 58 per cent Fishmeal 5 per cent 5 per cent Dried skim milk 4 per cent 4 per cent Lucerne leaf meal 3 per cent 3 per cent Sterilized bonemeal 2 per cent 2 per cent Lime stone 1 per cent 1 per cent Salt 0.5 per cent 0.5 per cent Shark-liver oil 0.5 per cent 0.5 per cent Manganese sulfate 5 oz. per ton 5 oz. per ton2:02 PM 9/19/2010 Aurofac (aureomycin, vitamin B12) 4 oz. 4 oz. Total protein (N×6.25) 23.4 per cent 31.6 per cent *Determination made by Chemistry Department of Allahabad Agricultural Institute.
142 EFFECT OF AUROFAC [Vol. XXVII, Part IV, RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A summary of the data obtained on rate of growth and gain per pound feed fed in Trial No. 1 is shown in Table III. When fed with the 'normal-protein' ration Aurofac gave a highly significant increase in growth rate of chicks to six weeks of age and an increase which was significant at the .02 per cent level of probability at seven weeks. When fed with the 'high-protein' ration, Aurofac gave a highly signi- ficant increase in growth rate with chicks to four weeks of age. After four weeks, feeding Aurofac gave no significant growth stimulus with the 'high-protein' ration. TABLE III Effect of "normal" and "high-protein" rations with and without Aurofac upon rate of growth and feed efficiency of Rhode Island Red chicks up to seven weeks of age Protein Aurofac pp/cwt. Average weight at indicated period (g. m.) Feed per lb. gain Start 2 wks. 4 wks. 6 wks. 7 wks. (lb.) 22.37 0 38.9(45) 66.3 129.7 280.0 354.4(34) 5.00 22.37 0.25 39.0(45) 76.6a 165.3a 363.1a 449.2(41)b 4.15 30-56 0 38.2(45) 76.9 174.7 355.0 439.4(39) 4.05 30.56 0.25 38.7(45) 89.9a 207.3a 367.6 437.5(40) 22.37 0 38.9(45) 66.3 129.7 280.0 354.4 30.56 0 38.2(45) 76.9a 174.7a 355.0a 439.4b ( ) Indicates number of chicks. a-P .01 b-P .02 c-P .05 Significance determined by "t" test. (Snedecor 1946). The 'high-protein' ration without Aurofac gave a highly significant increase in growth rate over the 'norma-Iprotein' ration to six weeks of age. The difference in weight at seven weeks was significantly higher for the chicks receiving the high- protein ration. The 'high-protein' ration with Aurofac gave a highly significant increase in growth rate over the 'normal-protein' ration with Aurofac for the first four weeks of feeding. There was no significant difference in the sixth and seventh weeks. Analysis of variance of average weight of twenty pens of Rhode Island Red chicks at seven weeks of age Degrees Sum of Factor freedom squares Variance* Total 19 63,817.4 Treatment 3 27,933.4 9,311.1* Groups 4 5,979.1 1,494.8 Error 12 29,903.9 2,491.9 *F= 3.736 &lt; Sig. *05 level.
December, 1957] ALEX REED AND JOHN G. VELU 143 There was no significant difference in the number of pounds feed consumed per pound gain by the different groups of chicks [Table III]. Although the mortality rate for the total lot was approximately 15 per cent there was no significant difference in the mortality rate among groups. Four chicks on the 'high-protein' ration developed beak necrosis. It may have been caused by the high-protein ration sticking in the beak although the number of cases was too small to warrant that conclusion. The amount of lucerne leaf meal was increased to 3 per cent in the rations used in the Trial No. 2. This supplied addi- tional riboflavin and also tended to reduce the stickiness of the high-protein ration. The data on the average weekly weights of White Leghorn chicks fed on 'normal' and 'high-protein' rations with Aurofac in Trial No. 2 are summarised in Table IV. TABLE IV Average weight of White Leghorn chicks fed on normal and high-protein rations with Aurofac Protein per cent Aurofac pp/cwt. Start Average weight at indicated periods (gm) 2 wks. 3 wks. 4 wks. 5 wks. 6 wks. 23.4 0.25 44.0(40) 86.1 116.4 160.9 201.6 247.8(39) 31.6 0.25 44.3(40) 94.3 140.3a 211.1b 284.7b 364.3b(39) ( ) Indicates number of chicks. a-P .05 b-P .01 Significance determined by "t" test [Snedecor 1946]. Trial No. 2 was conducted primarily to test whether the improved ration used during the last four weeks of Trial No. 1 would prevent the curled toe paralysis when fed from the first day. Aurofac was used in both rations in order to get as rapid a growth as possible. The 'high-protein' ration with Aurofac gave a highly significant increase in growth rate over the 'normal-protein' ration with Aurofac when fed to White Leghorns up to six weeks of age. There was no evidence of a deficiency of riboflavin. One chick on the 'normal-protein' ration and one on the 'high-protein' ration died during the six weeks of the experiment. There were no cases of beak necrosis in the Trial No. 2. SUMMARY Ten pens of nine Rhode Island Red chicks each were fed on a 'normal-protein' ration and ten similar pens were fed on a 'high-protein' ration containing a higher than normal percentage of groundnut cake to seven weeks of age. Five pens on the normal protein ration and five pens on the high-protein ration received Aurofac at the rate of five pounds per ton of feed (aureomycin 9 grams and vitamin B12 9 milligrams). 28 AR/57. 7
144 EFFECT OF AUROFAC [Vol. XXVII, Part IV The 'high-protein' ration gave a highly significant increase in growth to six weeks of age and a significant increase to seven weeks of age over the 'normal- protein' ration. Aurofac added to the 'normal-protein' ration gave a highly significant increase in growth to six weeks and a significant increase to seven weeks over the same ration without Aurofac. Aurofac added to the 'high-protein' ration gave a highly significant increase in growth to four weeks over the same ration without Aurofac. Addition of Aurofac to the 'high-protein' ration gave no significant difference in growth to six and seven weeks of age. In a Trial No. 2 with 40 White Leghorn chicks on the 'normal-protein' ration and 40 on the 'high-protein' ration both containing Aurofac, there was a highly significant difference in growth to six weeks in favour of the high-protein ration There was no significant difference in feed efficiency or in mortality rate. On the basis of two trials with Rhode Island Red and White Leghorn chicks a 'high-protein' ration containing a higher than normal amount of groundnut cake and less maize gave significantly higher growth rates than a commonly recommended 'normal-protein' ration. Addition of Aurofac to 'normal' and 'high-protein' rations gave an increased growth stimulation. With the 'high-protein' ration costing less than the 'normal-protein' one, it was more economical to feed the 'high-protein' ration. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors acknowledge the kindness of Lederle Laboratories (India) Ltd., Bombay, in furnishing the Aurofac used in this experiment. REFERENCES Berg, L. R., Gordon E. Bearce, James McGinniss, J. and Miller, V. L. (1950). "The Effect of Removing Supplemental Aureomycin from the Ration on Subsequent Growth of Chicks." Archives Biochem. 29: 2 Biely, J., March, B. E. and Smith, D. F. (1952). "The Effect of Feeding Antibiotics on Carbohydrate and Protein Requirements of the Chick." Poult. Sci. 31: 863-870 Biely, J. and March, B. (1951). "The Effect of Aureomycin and Vitamins on the Growth Rate of Chicks." Science 114:330.331 Bose, S., Tandon, H. P. and Iyer, S. G. (1955). "Studies on the Utilization of Vitamin B12 and Anti- biotics in Poultry Feed." Indian Poultry Gaz. 39:3 Ewing, W. Ray (1951). Poultry Nutrition. W. Ray Ewing Publisher. South Pasadena, California Heuser, G. F. and Norris, L. C. "Some Results of Feeding Antibiotics to Chickens." Poult. Sci. 31:857-862 Machlin, L. J., Denton, C. A., Kellong, W. L. and Bird, H. R. (1952). Effect of Dietary Antibiotic Upon Feed Efficiency and Protein Requirement of Growing Chicks. Poult. Sci. 31:106-109 Reed, Alex and Velu, John G. (1956). The Effect of Aureomycin and Vitamin B12 on the Growth Rate of Chicks. Indian J. Vet. Sci. 26:135-138 Scott, H. M. and Glista, W. A. (1950). The Effect of Aureomycin and Arsonic Acid on Chick Growth. Poult. Sci. 39:921-923 Scott, H. M., Goffi, E. A. and Glista, W. A. (1952). The Protein Requirement of the Chick as In- fluenced by Aureomycin. Poult. Sci. 37:751-752 Stokstadt, E. L. R. and Jukes, T. H. (1951). Effect of Various Levels of Vitamin B12 Upon Growth Response Produced by Aureomycin in Chicks. Reprint from Proceedings of Society of Experi- mental Biology and Medicine. 76: 73-76.
CHICK FEEDING TESTS BY N. S. GAREWAL, YESH PAL NEB AND E. R. HALBROOK, Delhi State Model Poultry Farm, Delhi [Received for publication on August 5, 1957 Accepted for publication on August 22, 1957] (With 6 Text-Figs.) TWO chick-feeding tests were conducted during the period from May 9 to July 3, 1957 at the Delhi State Model Poultry Farm. The purpose of the two tests was (i) to determine the optimum level of fish- meal to use as a protein supplement in combination with groundnut cake, and (ii) to determine the maximum level of groundnut cake which can be used in a starting ration as a replacement for more expensive grains. The lowest prices quoted recently to the Delhi Poultry Farm, for grains and other ingredients which are used in poultry rations are as follows: Rs. Groundnut cake 7.25/maund Fishmeal 740/Long ton* Ground maize 12.69/maund Bajra (millet) 14.44/maund Wheat bran 6.37/maund Ground barley 11.25/maund Shark-liver oil 21.50/Gallon *Rs. 26.4/maund These prices indicate the cost advantage of using the maximum level of ground- nut cake and the minimum level of fishmeal. MATERIALS AND METHOD Each experimental comparison consisted of four lots of 45 chicks, each divided between an equal number of S. C. White Leghorns and Rhode Island Reds. The chicks were confined to brooders and wire-floored runways without access to yards throughout the test period of eight weeks. Both water and feed were kept before the chicks at all times. Limestone grit was fed from 4 weeks on and finely chopped green feed after two weeks. 145 28 AR/57 8
146 CHICK FEEDING TESTS [Vol. XXVII, Part IV, The complete ration for each lot is given in Table I. TABLE I Ration for test chicks Ration No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Pen No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Ingredients (Pounds) Fish meal 0 2½ 5 7½ 5 5 5 5 Groundnut cake 25 25 25 25 20 30 40 50 Bajra 20 20 20 20 30 20 10 0 Ground barley 20 20 20 20 12½ 12½ 12½ 12½ Ground maize 15 15 15 15 14½ 14½ 14½ 14½ Wheat bran 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 Dried skim milk 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 Skark-liver oil 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 ICI mineral mix 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 RESULTS The results secured from these tests are given in Table II. TABLE II Data from rationed chicks Ration No. Kind of ration Av. Wt. at 4 wks. (oz.) Av. Wt. at 8 wks. (oz.) No. died to 8 wks. Feed Cons. per lb. Wt. gain Remarks 1. No Fishmeal 3.8 7.3 6 8.00 }Most loss during first 10 days. No specific symptoms. 2. 2½ per cent 5.0 10.2 1 5.35 3. 5 per cent 4.7 9.7 5 6.21 4. 7½ per cent 4.2 10.6 7 5.90 5. Gr. nut cake 20 per cent 4.3 10.8 2 5.80 }Paralysis and riboflavin deficiency symp- toms in lot 8. 6. 30 per cent 5.1 10.9 2 5.69 7. 40 per cent 5.1 11.2 1 5.57 8. 50 per cent 5.4 12.9 9 5.67
December, 1957] N. S. GAREWAL ET AL. DISCUSSION It will be noted that up to 4 weeks of age the 2.5 per cent level of fishmeal gave a growth rate exceeding the 5 and 7½ per cent level and 32 per cent in excess of the no fishmeal lot. At 8 weeks of age there was no appreciable difference in weight between the three lots containing the different levels of fishmeal but the lot contain- ing 2½ per cent fishmeal now weighed 39 per cent more than the lot with no fish- meal. Since almost all of the mortality in these lots occurred during the first week or 10 days of the test, it is not believed that any significance should be attached to the mortality. It should be noted, however, that the lowest loss (only 1 chick) occurred in the 2½ per cent fishmeal-level lot. The fishmeal used came from the Director of Fisheries, Bombay. The groundnut cake replaced bajra (millet) in the ration with levels of 20, 30, 40 and 50 per cent. There was slight but consistant increase in growth rate with each increase in groundnut cake level. The average weight for the 50 per cent level lot was 25 per cent heavier at 4 weeks than for the 20 per cent level lot and almost 20 per cent heavier at 8 weeks of age. Curled-toed riboflavin-like deficiency symptoms showed up in the 50 per cent groundnut cake level lot at about 4 weeks and caused about half of the mortality. The mortality of only 1 and 2 chicks per lot, or approximately 2 and 4 per cent, in the other three lots was exceptionally good considering the weather conditions under which the tests were conducted. It is recognised that these chick weights are abnormally low in comparison with reported U. S. growth rates, but the difference may be explained by a lack of anti- biotics in the rations and the unfavourable weather conditions under which the tests were conducted. Temperature readings in the experimental house showed as high as 108°F at one time with a minimum of 81°F during the test period. Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 show the average weights of chicks on different diets. CONCLUSIONS 1. Fishmeal-level tests should be conducted on other lots of fishmeal but the results secured in these tests prove conclusively that at least 2½ per cent of fishmeal of the quality used will very markedly increase the growth rate of chicks when added to a ration containing 20 per cent groundnut cake and 5 per cent dried skimmed milk as the principal sources of protein. 2. An increase of the fishmeal level from 2½ per cent to 5 and 7½ per cent caused a slight decrease in growth to 4 weeks and an inconsistent influence at 8 weeks. 3. Mortality increased from 1 to 5 and 7 chicks out of the 45 started at the 2½, 5 and 7½ per cent levels of fishmeal respectively, but, since almost all of this mortality occurred during the first week or 10 days of growth, it was not believed that the mortality trend had any significance.
148 CHICK FEEDING TESTS [Vol. XXVII, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. General view of experimental facilities used [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Curled-toed paralysis which showed up in 50 per cent groundnut cake lot
December, 1957] N. S. GREWAL ET. AL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Average chick at 4 weeks from the 20 per cent groundnut-cake lot Average weight150 CHICK FEEDING TESTS [Vol. XXVII, Part IV, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5. An average chick from the O fishmeal lot at 4 weeks of age Average weightDecember 1957] N. S. GREWAL ET. AL. 151 4. Repiacing bajra with the less expensive feed ingredient, groundnut cake, at 20, 30, 40 and 50 per cent levels caused a slight consistent increase in growth rate, with the 40 per cent level lot weighing 25 per cent and 20 per cent respectively more than the 20 per cent groundnut-cake lot at 4 and 8 weeks of age. 5. A curled-toe riboflavin-like deficiency symptom showed up in the 50 per cent groundnut-cake lot, causing mortality of about 5 chicks. 6. It is concluded from these tests that at least 40 per cent groundnut cake can be added to chick rations with a saving in feed cost and an increase in growth rate. Higher levels than 40 per cent should be tested further before recommen- dations are made.
VESPA CINCTA FABR.December, 1957] M. S. SUBBIAH AND V. MAHADEVAN 154 Control The usual method of control is to spot out the nests in the vicinity where these wasps are prevalent and destroying them by smoking after dusk. According to Gouch [1919] the distance that Vespa will fly to attack a hive has been found to be 5 miles in a straight line and [3rd Ent. Meeting, Pusa, Vol. II, 781]. Parathion spray at 0.05 per cent directed towards the nest after sunset did not give quick relief. Wasps were seen coming out of such sprayed nests even after 3 or 4 days. Fumigation with calcium cyanide is found to be easier, efficient and causes instant and complete mortality of the wasps. It is not always easy to spot out the nests; in some instances they are located in inaccessible localities, not convenient for the fumigation. Here the best thing is. to net the adult wasps that fly around the apiary with hand nets and destroy them. This is, however, tedious and costly, and has to be carried out vigilently for over long periods. From the observations on the habits of these wasps, it is seen that they first alight on a convenient spot on the alighting board of the hive and wait for an opportunity to catch the worker at the hive entrance. Based on these observations, the body in a few hives were pushed to the very front of the base board, thereby not providing any space in front either for the bees or the wasps to alight on returning to the hives or before taking off for pasturage. It was observed that the wasps did not enter the hives where the hive bodies were pushed to the very front, while they continued to snatch off the bees from the hives having the usual space in front to serve as alighting board for the bees. Hence it is suggested that, in addition to the destruction of wasps in their nests wherever possible, the bee keepers will do well to protect their bee colonies from these wasps by pushing the hive bodies to the very front of the base boards. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors thank Shri K. P. Ananthanarayanan, Government Entomologist for having gone through the paper and for suggestions. They also thank Chief of the Division of Entomology, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi for having identified the newly recorded wasp collected at Burliar. REFERENCES Imms, A. D. (1946). A general text book of Entomology (6th Edition, 1946) Ramachandra Iyer, S. (1952). Bee-keeping in South India, Madras Dept., Bull. 37. 4th Edition (1952) Ramakrishna Iyer, T. V. (1923). Life history notes on Vespa civcta, Proc. fifth Ento. meetingA NOTE ON THE OCCURRENCE OF AN ARACHNID-EL- LINGSENIUS INDICUS CHAMBERLIN-INFESTING BEE HIVES IN SOUTH INDIA By M. S. SUBBIAH, V. MAHADEVAN and R. JANAKIRAMAN [Received for publication on May 3, 1956 Accepted for publication on June 21, 1957] (With 1 Text Figure) DURING the course of examination of bee colonies at Kotagiri and Burliar (at elevations of 6500 ft. and 2500 ft. respectively above mean sea level on the Nilgiris) a number of specimens of a certain species of a chelifer, otherwise known as pseudo-scorpions was observed lurking inside the hives. The full grown creature Fig 1. is about 8 mm. long and dark brown in colour. Younger ones are also found on the base boards amidst debris and dirty particles; these are pale white in colour. Both the adults and nymphs were found clinging on to the adult worker bees close to the neck. Specimens of the pest collected from Kotagiri were identified at the Indian Zoological Museum, Calcutta as belonging to the order, Chelonethi; family, Cheli- feridoe; species Ellingsenius indicus Chamberlin. Though the extent of the harm done by these creatures to the bees is not exactly known, it is certainly a hinderance to the foraging activities of bees as they are obli- ged to carry extra weight of the pseudo-scorpions clinging to them. Hence the general activities of such bees decrease and the affected colony dwindles in the course [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Ventral and dorsal view of Acanthasyis Siva 155 28 AR/57 11
156 ARACHNID INFESTING BEE HIVES [Vol. XXVII, Part IV of time. In a few instances the pest was so great that it brought about the total death of workers in certain hives at Kotagiri. When wild colonies are hived, there is no indication of their presence anywhere in the combs or on the bees, but in a few days a number of them are seen moving about inside the bee hive. How and from where they have got into the hive is not known. A number of them were brought to Coimbatore for purposes of rearing, but they failed to breed. In laboratory cages provided with debris and bees daily the chelifers were noted to live up to 2 to 6 days. Ten specimens were introduced into one of the working colonies at Coimbatore, but only two of them survived in it. They lived for 2 months 20 days and 3 months 6 days respectively. Those kept in empty tubes without debris or bees lived for 10 days only. Young caterpillars of the wax mothABSTRACTS The use of the Milk Ring Test in a survey of the incidence of bovide brucellosis in southern Scotland. Forguson, G. S. and Robertson, A. (1954) J. Hyg. CAMBRIDGE, 52(1). 24-36 THE authors have reported the results of the study on 'Milk Ring Test', under- taken with the object of (i) examining the relationship of ring-test reactors to blood-serum titres and to actual infectivity of milk, (ii) using the ring-test reaction as a criterion to investigate the extent of brucellosis in dairy herds in Southern Scotland and (iii) to studying the incidence of Br. abortus in raw milks supplied to the city of Edinburgh and country of Midlothian. The preliminary tests carried out in two herds free from Br. abortus infection showed that the ring test, when applied to milks of normal character was very accurate. The results of ring test of abnormal milk, due to mastitis or drying-off, showed it to be positive in three cases out of twelve doubtful reactors to blood- serum test. In another herd, four animals giving a doubtful reaction on blood-serum test proved negative to milk ring test, and it was assumed that the doubtful blood- serum reaction was due to vaccination. Taking the serum agglutination test as the criterion and considering only the samples which were negative or positive to the test, the ring test agreed with the blood test in 97.2 per cent of 281 cases. By adopting the other method where the doubtful reactors to either test were classified as positive, the results showed that the ring test disagreed with the blood test in 6.7 per cent of 297 cases. The authors were of the view that the majority of the doubtful reactors would have become negative on retesting. In testing bulk milk samples the authors found that positive milks continued to give positive reaction even when highly diluted with negative milk. In performing the test for the purpose of routine diagnosis the examination of bulk milks of about ten cows was considered to be safe procedure. Abnormal milk was recommended to be excluded from the routine test, although in bulk samples the milk of such animals had little or no effect on the results of the tests. In testing Brucella-infected milk, a high percentage of ring test positive milks showed negative reaction to guineapig serum agglutination test, but in no case was infection found in ring-test negative milk samples. The authors observed that ring test was correct in some 93 per cent positive cases and that it was a simple time-saving and accurate screening test for detecting herds possibly infected with Brucella. In view of the high incidence (at least 10.5 per cent) of Br. abortus infection in Edinburgh milk supplies in spite of the vaccination programme with Strain 19, the authors were of the view that there was a need to investigate more fully the efficacy of Strain 19 vaccination in reducing the incidence of Brucella infection in milk. (B.R.S.) 157 28 AR/57 12
158 ABSTRACTS The role of carbohydrates in urea utilisation, cellulose digestion and fatty acid formation. I. J. BLESCO. (1956). J. Anim. Sci., 15, 426-508 INVESTIGATIONS were carried out to explore the role of various carbo- hydrates on urea utilisation and the differences in production and distribution of the fatty acids produced from the fermentation of these energy sources. The usual artificial rumen technique was employed and the systems were maintained in an inert atmosphere at a constant temperature of 39°C and at a fermentation pH of 6.2 to 6.9 for a specified period. The samples were then analysed for their urea, ammonia and fatty acid contents after suitable intervals. It has been reported that utilisation of urea by micro-organisms in vitro was dependent on the amount and type of carbohydrates used as the energy source. Urea utilisation was slightly more with starch as compared to cellulose, xylan and pectin. It has been further reported that the formation of volatile fatty acids and. their distribution was also dependent on the amount and the type of carbohydrate employed. Starch gave the highest amount of fatty acid produced and was followed by dextrose and then by cellulose. Digestion of cellulose was markedly retarded when higher doses of dextrose were used. On the other hand, addition of starch up to 1 per cent of the medium in combination with 1 per cent cellulose enhanced the rate of digestion of cellulose and fatty acid formation. Starch, however, when used alone as carbo- hydrate source, resulted in marked increase in valeric acid concentration with a corresponding decrease in propionic acid formation. [P.C.S.]. Fluctuation within a day in the liver-fluke egg-count of the rectal contents of cattle. W. DORSMAN. (1956). Vet. Rec. Vol. 68, No. 34, 571-574 FAECAL egg-count is the usual criterion employed for the diagnosis of disease caused by helminths, the estimation of the degree of subclinical worm infestations and the determination of the efficacy of anthelmintics. However, the interpretation of the results of such counts is often found difficult owing to variations in the faecal egg-contents of the same animal at different times. The faecal egg-count of cattle suffering from severe trichestrongylidosis was found by Messerli to vary from several hundreds to zero within a few days. Spedding observed highly significant variations in the nematode egg-content of sheep faeces collected at two, three, or four-hourly intervals and also in those collected from day to day. The author studied during April and September, 1955, the variations from hour to hour in the number of eggs of Fasciola hepatica in the rectal contents of housed and grazing cattle at Rotterdam, Holland. The faecal samples were collected by manually induced defaecation. Whenever possible only the last few hundred grammes of the dung which passed out of the rectum were used for determining the eggs per gramme of faeces. The results obtained were highly remarkable and unexpected. There was a gradual rise in the egg-count during the morning which reached the peak near 1.30 p.m. and was followed by a gradual descent during the afternoon. During the night the egg-count was found to remain constant at the minimum value of 5 e.p.g. from 8-30 p.m. to 7-30 a.m. It is not yet understood whether the variations are the result of some physiological process of the host or a fluctuation in the egg-laying capacity of the flukes. (H.D.S.)
ABSTRACTS 159 New studies on comparative Brucella immunity with agglutinogenic and nonagglu- tinogenic vaccines. FRANCISCO SIEIRO. (1954). Am. J. Vet. Res. XV, pp. 417-424 THE author has attempted to evaluate the immunising values of nonagglu- tinogenic Brucella strain 'B' (Rosenbusch) and the strain 19 (B.A.I.). Clean heifers of 12 to 14 months of age were divided in three groups. Animals of group 'A' were administered vaccine prepared from the strain 19, those of group 'B' were given vaccine prepared from the nonagglutinogenic strain "B" and those of group 'C' were left as unvaccinated controls. Six months after vaccination the heifers were allowed to be covered by clean young bulls and only those heifers which became pregnant were used for further study. The pregnant animals of each of the 'A', 'B' and 'C' groups were divided into two sub-groups, A1 consisting of 6, and A2 of 9; B of 21, B2 of 21, and C of 11 and C2 of 8 heifers. Those of sub-groups A1, B1 and C1 were given an infective dose of virulent Brucella culture consisting of 5 million organisms, the mean pregnancy period of the groups being 162, 202 and 160 days respectively. Those of the sub- groups A2, B2 and C2 were given a higher infective dose consisting of 50 million organisms and the mean pregnancy periods being 172, 200 and 174 days respectively. Necessary bacteriological and serological tests were carried out to find out the infection due to the exposure, to the organism. The final criterion of infection was established by the isolation of the infective organism from the placenta or from the foetal organs or by the rising of the post-partum agglutinins to titres of 1: 100 or higher. Judged by the standard mentioned above, it was found that 50 per cent of the animals of the sub-group A, and 47.6 per cent of the animals of the sub-group B, were immune while 81.8 per cent of the control group C, aborted. The infective dose, in the sub-groups A2, B2 and C2 was rather very high, that only a small percentage of the vaccinated animals of either group was found to be immune and all the con- trol animals were infected. Even though the results achieved are somewhat more favourable to the use of strain 19 (B.A.I.) the author prefers the use of nonagglutinogenic strain "B" (Rosen- busch) for routine vaccination of animals so that reaction due to natural infection can be easily detected. He advocates the use of both the vaccines in heavily infected areas, strain 19 (B.A.I.) for calfhood vaccination and strain "B" for revaccination and for vaccination of adult females. (M.N.) Nitrogen utilisation by lambs fed purified rations containing urea, gelatin, casein- blood fibrin, and soybean protein. ELLIS, W. C., GARNER, G.B., MUHRER, M.E., AND PFANDER, W.H. (1956), J. Nutrition, 60, 413-425 LAMBS were fed purified nitrogen free rations consisting of cellulose, starch sugar, lard, minerals and vitamin A and D. Nitrogen was supplemented solely and in- dividually by urea, gelatin, casein, bovine blood fibrin, and a purified soybean protein. These rations contained approximately 7 per cent of crude protein and supplied 3.6 therms of calculated gross energy per day.
160 ABSTRACTS On nitrogen-free ration the mean endogenous nitrogen level was 31.9 mg. Nper kg. body weight and the mean metabolic nitrogen level was 2.39 mg. N per gram of dry matter intake or 7.17 mg.N per gram of dry matter excreted. Metabolic nitro- gen expressed on the basis of excreted dry matter was less variable than when ex- pressed on the basis of dry matter intake. There was no significant difference in the true digestibility of nitrogen from any of the nitrogen sources. It varied from 82.0 per cent in urea to 86.5 per cent in casein (metabolic nitrogen being expressed on excreted dry matter basis). Marked differences were obtained between the daily nitrogen balances for lamb- fed nitrogen from various sources. Lambs fed urea stored less nitrogen (P&lt;0.01) than those fed any of the true proteins. The biological values of bovine blood fibrin and soybean protein were signifi- cantly larger (P&lt;0.05) than that of casein, and the casein values were significantly larger (P&lt;0.01) than those of gelatin and urea. The mean biological values of the nitrogen sources were: bovine blood fibrin, 83.1; soybean protein, 82.4; casein, 72.7; gelatin, 57.4; and urea 53.7. In calculations metabolic nitrogen was based on excrete dry matter. Statistically, the ruminal ammonia concentrations varied only slightly with different nitrogen sources with the exception of urea. The ruminal ammonia con- centrations after feeding urea were significantly larger than ammonia concentrations associated with any other nitrogen source. (A.W.Z.) The effect of high levels of an antibiotic on laying chickens during hot weather. BURT W. HEYWANG. (1956). Poult Sci. Vol. 35(6) p. 1196ABSTRACTS 161 lower level of feeding was as affective as the higher level, could not, however, be proved for want of sufficient data. This increase in egg production was not account- able by increased diet consumption. In fact the quantity of diet consumed per dozen eggs was actually decreased by the supplement. There was practically no significant effect on hatchability of fertile eggs, maintenance of live weight or mor- tality. Further data, although insufficient, indicated a similar trend of results during cooler weather experiments. (A. K.). The effect on fertility of changes in the composition of the normal egg-yolk citrate semen diluent. D. R. MELROSE and D. L. STEWART (1956). Brit. Vet. Vol. 112, No. 12, 536-540 IN order to determine whether a reduced electrolyte concentration in the semen diluent or the addition to it of fructose, had, besides a beneficial effect on survival, any influence on the fertility of the spermatozoa preserved at 5°C, the undermen- tioned diluents were investigated into with the usual 3.6 per cent sodium citrate egg-yolk diluent as control: (1) Isotonic (2.9 per cent) sodium citrate egg-yolk buffer (2) Usual 3.6 per cent sodium citrate egg-yolk buffer with the addition of fructose (3) Bicarbonate-glucose buffer evolved by Kampschmidt Semen samples were collected every 3rd day and suitable ones were diluted at the rate of 1: 50 in the control and trial diluents on a split sample basis. After dilution, the semen was cooled to and stored at 5°C. First inseminations were carried out on the day of collection and during 2 days thereafter. (1) In 3792 inseminations with the isotonic semen diluent, a conception rate of 64.1 per cent was obtained compared to 63.5 per cent in 3831 inseminations with control diluents. There was no significant difference between diluents in the over- all conception rate but an improved conception rate was obtained with the isotonic diluent on the 2nd day of use at 5 per cent level of significance. (2) Addition of 0.05g. fructose per 100 ml. of diluent did not affect the conception rate. (3) Notwithstanding the better survival of spermatozoa in vitro, a lowered conception rate of 63.9 per cent was obtained in 34-09 inseminations with the bicar- bonate glucose egg-yolk diluent, as against 66.9 per cent conception rate in 3488 inseminations with the control diluent. The difference in fertility was significant at 1 per cent level. (P.R.V.N.) 28 AR/57 13
162 ABSTRACTS Prophylactic measures against Dicroc