Vol.XXVIII, Part I March, 1958 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the Authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 9 or 15sh. Rs. 2.25 nP. or 3sh. 9d. ICAR. 6. XXVIII.51 1,300
CONTENTS Vol. XXVIII, Part I (March, 1958) The Publications Committee of Indian Council of the Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinion expressed in this Journal. Original Articles PAGES. EFFICACY OF COMBINATION OF OXYTETRA- CYCLINE AND POLYMYXIN CONTENTS Vol. XXVIII, Part II (June, 1958) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal. Original Articles PAGE STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA OF INDIAN HERDS OF DAIRY CATTLECONTENTS Vol. XXVIII, Part III (September, 1958) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal. Original Articles Pages GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES ICONTENTS Vol. XXVIII, Part IV (December, 1958) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal. Original Articles Pages RUMEN DIGESTIONEFFICACY OF COMBINATION OF OXYTETRACYCLINE AND POLYMYXIN 2 MASTITIS ORGANISMS [Vol. XXVIII, Part I, Strain 21/2 and 21/4 were Streptococcus lactis isolated from healthy quarters. Strain 7F and 33/1 were non-haemolytic Staphylococci, coagulase negative and were isolated from milk, giving positive test for inflammatory conditions of the udder. One strain of Escherchia coli included in this experiment was from a clinical case of mastitis. Strain 5F was Streptococcus pyogenes, belonging to Lancefield group A. 20/1 and 17F were both Streptococcus agalactiae, 8F-A Streptococcus dysgalactiae and 42/1 Streptococcus uberis. Strain 4F, 20/1-A, 10/2, 30/3, 24/2 and 8F were haemolytic Staph. aureus, coagulase positive. Cultural examination of the milk a month after treatment with the combina- tion of oxytetracycline and polymyxin March, 1958] S. N. BAKSHI 3 TABLE I Bactericidal level of combination of oxytetracycline and polymyxin for the mastitis organisms in serum broth tubes and blood agar plates Organism Dilution I II III IV V VI VII VIII O P O P O P O P O P O P O P O P 0.15TABLE I-contd. 4 MASTITIS ORGANISMS [Vol. XXVIII Part 1 Bactericidal level of combination of oxytetracycline and polymyxin for the mastitis organisms in serum broth tubes and blood agar plates Organism Dilution I II III IV V VI VII VIII O P O P O P O P O P O P O P O P 9.15March, 1958] S. N. BAKSHI 5 Table I shows that the combination of oxytetracycline and polymyxin 6 MASTITIS ORGANISMS [Vol. XXVIII, Part I, oxytetracycline with 10 units of polymyxin EFFICACY OF THE COMBINATION OF OXYTETRACY- CLINE AND POLYMYXIN 8 MASTITIS ORGANISMS [Vol, XXVIII, Part II, the quarters were milked thoroughly. The tip of the teat was cleaned with rectified spirit, the adapter of the tube was gently inserted up the teat canal and entire contents of one tube pushed into the quarter. The adapter was then pulled out, the tip of the teat pressed between the fore-finger and the middle finger of the left hand and the quarter was massaged upward with the right hand to distribute the suspension equally and as far as possible into the glandular tissue. Three such courses of treatment were given to every quarter at an interval of 24 hours. The milk was collected 24 hours, one week and one month after the treatment for microscopic and cultural examination. The udders were examined for any palpable induration. The treatment was considered to be successful if there was an appreciable decrease in the leucocytic count per ml, of milk and the causative organism could not be isolated. OBSERVATIONS The total number of mastitic quarters treated was 20. One was infected with Streptococcus pyogenese, one with Streptococcus uberis, two were cases of mixed infec- tion with Str. agalactiae and Staph. aureus and Str. dysgalactiae and Staph. aureus respectively. Eight quarters were shedding coagulase positive, ? haemolytic Staph. aureus and from the other eight, coagulase negative, non-haemolytic Staph. albus was isolated. Three healthy quarters shedding non-pathogenic Str. lactis were also treated to study the in vivo effect of the antibiotics on these organisms. TABLE I Pretreatment and post-treatment results of examination of milk from experimental quarters Quarter No. Leucocyte count Cultural examination Before treatment After treatment Before treatment After treatment 5F 5,000,000 5,500,000 Str. pyogenese Str. uberis Str. pyogenese Str. uberis 42/1 1,040,000 75,000,000 20/1 320,000 30,000 Str. agalactiae and Staph. aureus. No growth 8F 5,000,000 Not done Str. dygalactiae and Staph. aureus. do. 10/2 340,000 20,000 Staph, aureus ? haemolytic coagulase posi- tive. do. 20/2 690,000 50,000 do. do. 20/3 430,000 20,000 do. do. 30/3 640,000 30,000 do. do. 2/2 930,000 20,000 do. do.
March, 1958] S. S. BAKSHI 9 TABLE I (contd.) Pretreatment and post-treatment results of examination of milk from experimental quarters Quarter No. Leucocyte count Cultural examination Before treatment After treatment Before treatment After treatment 2/4 450,000 20,000 Staph. aureus. 10 MASTITIS ORGANISMS [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, The milk samples collected 24 hours after the administration of treatment were bright yellow in colour and clotted. No apparent inflammatory changes or oedema was observed, nor any of the samples were bloody. The secretion returned to normal, generally after two to four days. To tudy the antibiotic levels in the post-treatment milk after 24 hours, the milk as such and its serial doubling dilutions were inoculated with organisms 5F, 8F and B. coil whose in vitro sensitivity to the antibiotic had been predetermined. It was observed that Str. pyogenes 5F and Staph. aureus 8F could grow in whole milk. B. coil did not grow in 50 per cent dilution but was resistant to 25 per cent concentration of the milk in serum broth. The results are suggestive that anti- biotic levels in 24 hours post-treatment milk are 0.015-5 and below. The milk samples collected 24 hours after the infusion of the first tube were generally found to be sterile except 5F which gave few March, 1958] S. N. BAKSHI 11 DISCUSSION Generally speaking, the response of mastitic quarters to a therapeutic agent depends on the species, the individual resistance of the responsible organism, the capacity of the udder and the stage of disease. Representative and comparable number of the diseased cases due to different aetiological organisms could not be available during the period of study. Although, all cases of Staphylococcal mastitis showed a very favourable res- ponse to the treatment, it would be difficult to say on the basis of these results that all types of cases due to this organism would give an equally good response. Deter- mination of in vitro sensitivity of these organisms revealed that only 8F showed comparatively enhanced resistance, but its in vivo response was quite satisfactory and the organism was successfully eliminated from the quarter. Barnes [1955] has reported that individual strains of Staph. aureus can resist a very wide range of terramycin concentrations and Huebner [1956] has given a similar report about their resistance to penicillin, bacitracin and erythromycin. Schalm [1950] observ- ed that recovery from mastitis is not only related to duration of infection, and with aureomycin he was able to cure a higher percentage of Staphylococcal mastitic quarters of 7 to 48 months duration group than of less than 6 months group. This further gives a support to the conception of individual variable resistance of Staphy- lococci to treatment with any one of the antibiotics or their combination. Highly resistant strains can always create a difficult position due to their refractivity to the treatment. In the light of results obtained in this experiment it appears that udders with an average milk yield of 10 to 15 lb. in the preclinical or clinical stage of disease, due to Staphylococci sensitive to 0.03 mg. of oxytetracycline and 10 units of poly- myxin or lesser concentrations per ml. of the combination of these antibiotics in vitro, will respond satisfactorily to this treatment. 5F and 42/1 two cases due to Str. pyogenes and Str. uberis respectively were in primary clinical stages with no palpable induration of the udders but they proved to be quite resistant. Strains 5F also exhibited highest in virto and in vivo resis- tance to the combination among the cases under report. Although 42/1 Str. uberis exhibited in vitro sensitivity to the combination which was at a level with the other strains of Streptococci yielding to the treatment, this organism proved to be more resistant in vivo. Two cases of mixed infection with Str. dysgalactiae and Staph. aureus, and Str. agalactiae and Staph. aureus were treated successfully. A special importance was attached to the leucocyte count in this study and it was observed that once the infective organism was successfully eliminated, the fall in the leucocyte count was a matter of course. Although, 4F showed a rise in the leucocyte count a week after the treatment, gradually the number decreased and about a month after the treatment it was within the normal range. The resistant cases 5F and 42/1 did not show any fall; on the other hand, their was an increase in the number which was significant in 42/1. Very few references are available about the pathogenicity of Staph. albus for the udder. Recently, Mukerji et al., [1956] have reported about their aetiological significance for mastitis. Eight quarters shedding this organism and manifesting inflammatory changes on chemical and microscopic examination were treated. The
12 MASTITIS ORGANISMS [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, elimination of organisms was followed by fall in the number of leucocytes per ml. of milk to the normal range. The results indicate that Staph. albus, under certain circumstances, is capable of setting up inflammatory changes in the infected quarter. SUMMARY Twenty quarters in preclinical stage of mastitis were treated with terramycin, animal formula for mastitis given 426 mg. of oxytetracycline and 142,000 units of polymyxin STUDIES ON THE MORPHOLOGY AND SEASONAL HISTOLOGICAL CHANGES IN THE PITUITARY GLAND OF THE FRESH WATER TELEOST CIRRHINA REBA (HAMILTON).1 By A. G. SATHYANESAN2, Zoology Research Laboratory, Annamalai University, Annamalai Nagar [Received for publication on August 8, 1957 Accepted for publication on September 12, 1957 ] (With 8 text Figures) THOMSON and Zuckerman [1955] opined that though the vital part played by the pituitary in the control of growth, reproduction and several other metabolic processes is well established, " the views about the way its various activities are integrated and controlled remain very elementary ". Potts [1942] observed that the presence of fewer target organs in the lower vertebrates, may render the problem of the physiological interrelationships of the pituitary less complex than that of the higher vertebrates. Charipper [1937] in his review suggests the possible importance of the study of the pituitary of the lower vertebrates in solving certain problems of the hypophysial complex of the higher vertebrates. Major part of the work done on the pituitary of teleosts is on its morphology and histology [Herring, 1908 ; Stendell, 1914 ; De Beer, 1926 ; Charipper, 1937 ; Evans, 1937 ; Woodman, 1939 ; Kerr, 1942 ; Lee, 1942 ; Potts, 1942 and Miller, 1944]. Earlier workers on the hypophysis gonad-interrelationship of teleosts based their inference on the results of pituitary extract injections [Houssay, 1930, 1931 ; Cardoso, 1934], extirpation and implantation experiments [Matthews, 1939 and 1940]. The seasonal changes in the pituitary of Gasterosteus aculeatus [Bock, 1928], Fundulus heteroclitus [Matthews, 1936], Rhodeus amarus [Bretschneider and Duyvene de Wit, 1947], Lebistes reticulatus [Stolk, 1950], Cyprinus carpio and Carassius auratus (Scruggs, 1951) have been worked out at some length. Kerr [1948] reported that the problem of pituitary gonad-interrelationship could be advanced a further stage if some particular cell type can be associated with the gonad changes in fishes. This investi- gation is an attempt to study the quantitative and qualitative seasonal variations in the pituitary of C. reba in correlation with the cyclic changes occurring in the gonads. MATERIAL AND METHODS Specimens were collected for this investigation from the Annamalai University reservoirs, all round each month for a complete year. They were killed by severing the head, and the pituitary was fixed along with the floor of the skull within 2 to 1. This work was carried out under the Indian Council of Agricultural Research Scheme and was totally financed by the I. C. A. R. 2. Present address14 STUDIES ON CIRRHINA REBA [Vol. XXVIII, Part I, 4 minutes. The presence of a connective tissue shelf between the floor of the brain and the gland renders it difficult to remove the pituitary intact with the brain. Bouin's picro-formol, zenker-formol, formol-sublimate were the fixatives used and Mallory's collagen, Heidenhain's Azan and Anderson's modification of Mallory's triple stain were the stains tried. Bouin's picro-formol and Anderson's modifica- tion of Mallory's triple stain gave good results and were used for routine work. Sections were cut at 5, 8 and 10 µ and differential counts of the cell types of the ubergangsteil were made from the median sagittal sections. Morphology of the pituitary gland The pituitary of C. reba is an ovoid body situated ventral to the brain attached to the infundibulum by a short pituitary stalk. The hypophysial recess is much reduced and it does not extend into the pars nervosa. The pituitary is divided into a nervous component, the pars nervosa and a glandular component, the pars glandularis. The pars glandularis is divisible into three parts ; the pars anterior, the ubergangsteil and the pars intermedia, which are arranged in a regular order along the dorso-ventral axis (fig. 1). The pituitary stalk is continued into the pars glandularis as pars nervosa. The smaller branches of the pars nervosa extend into the pars anterior and ubergangsteil, while the main trunk extensively arborises in the pars intermedia (fig. 1). Small blood vessels are seen more often entering the pituitary from the vascular meninges covering it. The pars nervosa is fibrocellular in its make-up. Among its loosely arranged fibres the nuclei of the neuroglia cells are scattered. Apart from these, often droplets and irregular patches of colloid-like material are present. Occasionally, few glandular cells are seen in the pars nervosa. Though there is no demarcating partition between the various glandular lobes, the tripartite arrangement of the pars glandularis is distinct by their cell variants. However, a mixing up of their constituent cell types is evident along their boundaries. Basophils, acidophils and chromophobes are the general cell types met with in the glandular pituitary. Correlative seasonal changes in the pituitary and the gonads During the annual sexual cycle, the gonads of C. reba exhibit distinct periods of growth, maturity, depletion and quiescence. This process may be broadly divided into three phases : (1) Pre-spawning phase This phase is characterised by growth and enlargement of the gonads and is commonly observed in specimens collected during April to June. (2) Spawning phase The gonads are fully swollen and ready for spawning ; such gonads are present in fishes obtained from July to October. Large number of specimens collected during the latter half of this period have partly spent gonads. (3) Post-spawning phase Specimens collected during late October and November show completely depleted gonads which are in a state of regression. From November to early April, they are in the resting stage. But the initiation of the growth activity is evident during the latter part of this period.
March, 1958] A. G. SATHYANESAN 15 Pre-spawning phase Pars anterior. It is the smallest component of the pars glandularis during this phase. Acidophils, chromophobes and lilac basophils are the cell types present. The acidophils may be irregularly round or angular and granulated (Plate I, Fig. 2). Occasionally deep staining acidophils are present in the pars nervosa ramifications of the pars anterior. The chromophobes resemble an assemblage of round nuclei due to their scanty non-granular cytoplasm and ill-defined cell, limit (Plate I, Fig.2) The lilac basophils are of the size of the acidophils and are generally restricted to the region of the pars nervosal branches and some of which show signs of degeneration. Sometimes few of these cells are also seen in the pars nervosa. The lilac basophils may be the amphiphils described by Bell [1938] and Levenstein [1939] in the gold- fish. But Scruggs [1951] reports that the amphiphils of the above authors [Bell, 1938, and Levenstein, 1939] are nothing but the acidophils. Apart from these cell types, often groups of basophils resembling those of the ubergangsteil are also present in the pars anterior (Plate I, Fig. 2). Ubergangsteil. This lobe contains acidophils, basophils and chromophobes. The acidophils are granulated and have round nuclei with prominent nucleoli (Plate I Fig. 4). These have an average diameter of 18.9µ. The basophils are granular and have an average diameter of 19.3µ. The basophils lack distinct cell limit. During the later part of the pre-spawning period, few basophils with bluish orange globular cytoplasmic inclusion are encountered. The term ' globular basophil ' as used by Copeland [1943] and Scruggs [1951] to describe such basophils is adopted in this work. Occasionally few globular cell inclusions are extruded and they are inter- cellular in occurrence. Chromophobes are few and show no departure from that of the pars anterior and have an average diameter of 10.2µ. The average percentages of the basophils, acidophils and chromophobes are 51.8, 34.7 and 13.5 respectively (Table I). Pars intermedia. It is the largest component of the pars glandularis during this phase. The main trunk of the pars nervosa arborises in its substance. The pars nervosa branches have a fair amount of blood vessels and colloid-like material. The acidophils, chromophobes and basophils are the types of cells present. The acidophils form the chief cell type and are globular or ovoidal with distinct granulated cytoplasm. The chromophobes look like naked nuclei due to their scanty non- staining cytoplasm. Basophils are few resembling to a large extent, those of the ubergangsteil and lie adjacent to it. Pars nervosa. The pars nervosa during this period lodges colloid-like bodies in the main trunk and in its branches ramifying the pars intermedia. These bodies may be acidophilic or basophilic or polychromatic to staining reaction (Plate I, Fig. 3). Generally they are granular, but homogeneous nature is also not uncommon. Spawning phase Pars anterior. The pars nervosa branches of the pars anterior are devoid of glandular cells. The lilac basophils are well defined. In other respects this component resembles that of the pre-spawning phase. Ubergangsteil. This lobe increases in its bulk at the expense of the other two glandular components lying on the dorsal and ventral sides. The average percent- age of the acidophils is reduced to 26.2 and they have an average diameter of 19.3µ ;
16 STUDIES ON CIRRHINA REBA [Vol. XXVIII, Part I, but do not show any recognisable secretory activity. An increase in size and percentage of the basophils is in evidence. They measure 20.9µ in their average diameter and their average percentage is 60.2 ( Table 1). The globular baso- phils show a numerical increase. The globular bodies vary in size and may reach 10µ across. In a large number of the basophils the cell wall is not distinct. In some cases the cytoplasm and the globular bodies are lightly stained. A group of such basophils look like a patch of granulated colloid-like matter with scattered nuclei in them (Plate I, Fig. 5). The chromophobes do not present any obvious change either in their size or in percentage. Pars intermedia. This component does not present any cognisable change from that of the preceding phase. Some blood sinuses present in the pars nervosa branches of the pars intermedia lying close to the ubergangsteil contain in them acidophilic bodies (Plate I, Fig. 8). These may be the extruded globular bodies of the basophils of the ubergangsteil. TABLE I Relative number, percentage and size of the typical cells of the middle glandular lobe of the pituitary of Cirrhina reba for the months, April 1952 to March 1953 Months Basophils Acidophils Chromophobes Average number Percent- age Average size (µ) Average number Percent- age Average size (µ) Average number Percent- age Average size (µ) 1953PLATE I [ Indian J. vet. Sci., Vol. XXVIII, Part I
EXPLANATION OF PLATE 1 FIG. 1. Photograph of the median sagittal section of the pituitary of C. reba, showing the pars glandularis and the distribution of the pars nervosa. X about 150 FIG. 2. Photograph showing a group of basophils resembling those of the ubergangsteil in the pars anterior, during the pre-spawning phase. Surrounding cellular components of the pars anterior may be noted. X about 500 FIG. 3 Photograph showing the colloid-like bodies occurring in the pars nervosa during the later part of the pre-spawning phase. X about 650 FIG. 4. Photograph showing a group of acidophils in the ubergangesteil during the pre-spawning phase X about 500 FIG. 5. Photograph showing the 'globular basophils' and intercellular globules in the uber- gangsteil during the spawning phase. X about 1000 FIG. 6. Photograph showing an acidophil of the ubergangsteil discharging its globular content into the pars nervosa during the regression period. X about 900 FIG. 7. Photograph showing the extruded acidophilic globules in the pars nervosa. The sieve- like appearance of the ubergangsteil during the regression period may be noted. X about 950 FIG. 8. Photograph showing the acidophilic bodies inside a blood sinus in the pars nervosa branch of the pars intermedia during the spawning phase. X about 1000 KEY TO LETTERING aclMarch, 1958] A. G. SATHYANESAN 17 Pars nervosa. Pars nervosa does not present any remarkable change from that of the pre-spawning phase. Post-spawning phase Pars anterior. The pars anterior does not show any marked change from that described in the preceding phase. Ubergangsteil. During the period of regression the ubergangsteil appears like a sieve due to the degranulation of the basophils and the disappearance of the globules in the 'globular basophils' (Plate I, Fig. 7). A greater proportion of the basophils approaches the chromophobic condition, but because of a few scattered lingering granules, their basophility can be recognised. A fall in the percentage of the basophils and a corresponding increase in the percentage of the acidophils is evident. Some of these acidophils have bright red globular bodies in their cytoplasm. The globules which are extruded (Plate I, Fig. 6) from the acidophils are seen scattered in the ubergangsteil and also they migrate into the pars nervosa (Plate I, Fig. 7). The larger globules may have an average diameter of 5-10µ. These acidophils may be comparable to the "sphere cells" of Perca fluviatalis reported by Kerr [1942], where he identified these bodies with the colloid-like matter found in the pars nervosa. Marked changes are noted in the ubergangsteil during the resting period. The sieve-like appearance of the ubergangsteil is totally lost. The basophils once again regain their affinity for stain due to the reappearance of the granules in their cyto- plasm. The average percentage of the basophils is 51 during this phase. The acidophils are devoid of their globular cytoplasmic inclusions, but they form 30.7 per cent of the cell types in this lobe. The average percentage of the chromophobes increases to 18.2 (Table I). Pars intermedia. This lobe does not show any notable variation from the pre- vious phase. The blood sinuses do not contain any colloid-like matter. Pars nervosa. During the period of regression the pars nervosa is almost free from the colloid-like material except for the migrated acidophilic globules extruded from the acidophils of the unbergangsteil. A number of small basophils are often present in the main trunk of the pars nervosa, but they are conspicuous by their absence in the resting period. However, during the resting stage some scattered droplets and patches of colloid-like bodies are present. DISCUSSION The pituitary of C. reba is attached to the brain by a distinct stalk and is made up of pars nervosa and pars glandularis. The pars glandularis is divided into three components, the pars anterior, the ubergangsteil and the pars intermedia. Though the main trunk of the pars nervosa ramifies extensively into the pars intermedia, the other two glandular components also receive a fair amount of its branches. 138 AR/57 4
18 STUDIES ON cirrhina reba [Vol. XXVIII, Part I, The arborisation of the pars nervosa in all the glandular components is reckoned as an advanced feature [Charipper, 1937] over the restriction of the same in the pars intermedia. The conspicuous empty vesicles described in the pars anterior of Chanos chanos [Tampi, 1951 and 1953] are totally absent in C. reba. The evidences of the secretory activity of the teleostean pituitary are put forward by several workers. As early as 1908, Herring pointed out the presence of colloid in the pituitary of cod. Stendell [1914] reported that the extrusion of colloid droplets from the cells of the pars intermedia, into the pars nervosa and the degenera- tion of the migrated cells of the pars intermedia in the pars nervosa as two modes of secretion. These two types of secretions are also reported in some Poeciliids [Potts, 1942]. Matthews [1936] states that the acidophilic colloid present in the pars nervosa has similarity to the cytoplasmic inclusions of the acidophils of the pars intermedia. It is also believed that in Perca fiuviatalis [Kerr, 1942] the spheres of the 'sphere cells' and in Carassius auratus [Scruggs, 1951], the globules of the globular basophils of the ubergangsteil are identical with the colloid-like substance of the pars nervosa. Such substance is reported generally in the pars nervosa of many teleosts [Scruggs, 1939 ; Potts, 1942 and Kerr, 1942]. The colloid-like bodies are also referred to as Herring material and hyalin body. In C. reba, colloid-like bodies are formed by the cytoplasmic extrusions of the chromophils or by the degeneration of the chromophils themselves. These bodies may be granular or homogeneous, or even be polychromatic in their reaction to stain. They appear more in quantity during the pre-spawning and spawning phases but much less in the post-spawing phase. Matthews [1936] records the preponderance of acidophils in the ubergangsteil of Fundulus heteroclitus which are transformed into shrunken chromophobes im- mediately after spawning. Lee [1942] reports that the ubergangsteil of Xiphias gladius collected during mid-summer appears net like due to the vacuolated baso- phils, whereas the vacuoles are totally absent in the basophils of specimens obtained in early July. The gonadotrophic function of the basophils of the ubergangsteil has been suggested in Leuciscus rutilus [Kerr, 1948], Rhodeus amarus [Bretschneider and Duyvene de Wit, 1947], Carassius auratus and Cyprinus carpio [Scruggs, 1951]. Of all the components of the pituitary, the ubergangsteil shows marked quantitative and qualitative seasonal variations in C. reba. The numerical increase of the basophils, a corresponding decrease in the number of acidophils and the appearance of globular basophils coincide with the pre-spawning phase. These features are more pronounced during the spawning period. In this respect C. reba has similarity to the reported conditions in Carassius auratus and Cyprinus carpio. The presence of colloid like bodies in the blood sinuses in the pituitary of C. reba described else- where in the text suggests the direct entry of the secretory bodies into the blood circulation. The regression period of the post-spawning phase in C. reba is marked out by the sieve like appearance of the ubergangsteil presented by the degranulated basophils. This phenomenon recalls the description of the ubergangsteil of Fundulus heteroclitus in the post-spawning period [Matthews, 1936] and Xiphias gladius collected during mid-summer [Lee, 1942]. The correlative secretory significance of the acidophils having globular bodies in the ubergangsteil and the migration of their extruded globules into the pars nervosa during the regression period is not clear. However, many of these acido- philic globules lose their shape after reaching the pars nervosa to form colloid like
March, 1958] A. G. SATHYANESAN 19 substance. Such secretory acidophils are absent during the resting phase. The presence of the secretory acidophils only in the regression period suggests the possi- bility of their having some role in the repair of the gonads taking place during this period. The probable significance of the presence of small basophils in the pars nervosa in specimens collected soon after depletion of the gonads is not known. The chromophobes in the ubergangsteil do not show any variation during the pre-spawning and spawning phases. But in the post-spawning phase an increase in the percentage is obvious. The variations in the pars anterior and pars intermedia are not regular and well defined. Hence these changes cannot be taken as seasonal with certainty. Charipper [1937], Bell [1938], Levenstein [1939] and Potts [1942] have homo- logized the ubergangsteil of teleosts to the pars anterior of higher vertebrates. The existence of some structural and functional similarities between the ubergangsteil of C. reba and the pars anterior of higher vertebrates is apparent. SUMMARY The morphology and seasonal changes occurring in the pituitary of C. reba are described. The ubergangsteil is the only glandular component exhibiting marked correlative seasonal changes. The variations in the basophils of this lobe are pronounced. The secretory activity of the acidophils is evident immediately after spawning. The changes in the chromophobes are much less to suggest any prominent role. The colloid like material in the pars nervosa presents apparent quantitative variations during the different phases. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author thanks Dr P. Govindan, Reader in Zoology, for his assistance throughout this investigation. He is also thankful to Professor R. V. Seshaiya for providing facilities and to Shri K. Ranga Rajan for his encouragement. The author expresses gratefulness to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research whose Piscicul- tural Research Scheme made this work possible. REFERENCES Bell, W. R. (1938). Morphology of the hypophysis of the common goldfish (Carassius auratus L.). Zoologica, 23, 219-34 Bock, F. (1928). Die Hypophyse des Sticklings (Gasterosteus aculeatus L.) unter besonderer Berucksi chtigung der Jehrescyklischen Veranderungen. Ztschr. wiss. Zool., 131, 643-710 Bretschneider, L. H. and Duyvene de Wit., J. J. (1947). Sexual endocrinology of non-mammalian vertebrates. Elsevier, Amsterdam Bullough, W. S. (1951). Vertebrate sexual cycles. Mathuen & Co., Ltd., London Cardoso, D. M. (1934). Relations entre l'hypophyse et les organes sexuels chez les poissons. C. R. Soc. Biol., 115, 1347-49 Charipper, H. A. (1937). The morphology of the hypophysis in lower vertebrates, particularly fish and amphibia, with some notes on the cytology of the pituitary of Carassius auratus (the goldfish) and Necturus maculosus (the mudpuppy). Cold Spring Harbor Sympos. Quantit. Biol., 5, 515-64 Copeland, E. D. (1943). Cytology of the pituitary gland in developing an adult Triturus viridescens. J. Morph. 72, 379-409 De Beer, G. R. 1926. The comparative anatomy, histology and development of the pituitary body. Oliver and Boyd., London Evans, H. M. (1937). A note on some seasonal changes in the pituitary gland of the eel, Anguilla vulgaris. Proc. Zool. Soc., Lond., Ser. A, 107, 483-85
20 STUDIES ON cirrhina reba [Vol. XXVIII, Part I Herring, P. T. (1908). A contribution to the comparative physiology of the pituitary body. Quart. J. Exp. Physiol., 1, 261-80 Houssay, B. A. (1931). Action sexuelle de Phyppohyse surles poissons et les reptiles. C.R. Soc. Biol., 106, 377-78 Kerr, T. (1940). The herring material in perch pituitary. Nature, 145, 591 HERITABILITY AND REPEATABILITY OF CALVING INTERVAL IN THARPARKAR CATTLE By O. N. SINGH, Livestock Research Station, Bihar, Patna [Received for publication on February 19, 1957 Accepted for publication on November 2, 1957] CALVING interval is directly related to lifetime milk production [Sanders, 1927 a and b], which is one of the two main objects of raising cattle. As phenotype of an economic quantitative character is the result of genetic and environmental influences, the relative contribution of the two is an information of significance. Such information is provided by the estimation of heritability and repeatability of the character. These estimates enable the breeders to predict the extent of improvement to be achieved by selective breeding and also provide the basis for formulating selection and breeding programme. This article includes the results of a study of the effects of certain environmental factors on the calving interval of Tharparkar cows and also the estimation of heritability and repeatability of the trait. MATERIAL AND METHODS The calving interval records numbering 1149 of Tharparkar cows, raised and bred at the Government Cattle Breeding Farm, Patna, were used in this study. The calving interval records of the herd were sorted in year and month of calving sequences. For the estimates of heritability and repeatability the records used were : first calving interval and first three calving intervals respectively obtained from the year 1938 to 1954. Records available on both dam and daughter, were for 59 pairs, sired by 10 bulls which were used to calculate the regression of daughter on dam. Analysis of variance, covariance, regression and correlation as described by Snedecor [1946] were used to handle the data. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Effect of various environmental factors on calving interval was studied on a random sample from the data under study. Only first three calving intervals were used instead of eight for convenience of handling. The period from 1938-1952 was divided into 5 groups, each group, comprising of a span of 3 years. Each year was further divided into six seasons of two months, e.g. January and February, March and April, etc. These data were composed of 180 calving intervals, with two calving intervals per season with three sequences and six seasons and five groups of years. 21 138 AR/57 5
22 CALVING INTERVAL IN THARPARKAR CATTLE [Vol. XXVIII, Part I, TABLE I Analysis of variance of calving intervals Sources of variation D.F. M.S. Total 179 Between years (Y) 4 2944.8 Between calving sequences (C.S.) 2 26804.7** Between seasons (S) 5 3677.6 Y × C. S. 8 7620.6 Y × S. 20 3781.3 S × C. S. 10 5691.7 Y × C. S. × S. 40 4847.5 Error 90 7985.0 **Statistically significant at 1 per cent level. Analysis of environmental variance of calving intervals is presented in Table I. Calving interval was only found to be significantly affected by sequences of calving. Years, seasons of breeding and their interactions did not show significant effect. Brown et al. [1954] reported significant effect of sequences of calving and years on the calving intervals. The obtained significant influence of calving sequences on the calving interval may be due to the age of cow in addition to several other factors. Calving interval depends considerably on the ability of animal to conceive. Lasley and Bogard [1943] reported that the number of services needed for conception was affected by the age of cow. Younger cows required more services for conception. But the results of the works by Baker and Quesenberry [1944] did not agree to it. The original data when analysed to study the influence of different years on the calving interval revealed a significant result. Hence, the contradictory result obtained previously in the study for the year effect based on 5 groups of years may be probably due to balancing the effect of one year by other year in each of the groups. Means of the first three calving sequences of the sampled records and eight calving sequences of all the records under study are shown in Table II. It also includes the per cent of animals retained in the farm up to different calving intervals in relation to first calving. TABLE II Means of calving interval at different sequences in original and sampled data and per cent of first calving Calving sequences Original data Sampled data No. Per cent of first calving Calving interval (days) No. Calving interval (days) 1 232 100 457.9±6.8 60 441.7±11.6 2 231 99.6 441.1±7.2 60 421.2±10.1 3 196 84.5 411.1±7.0 60 399.4±9.1 4 160 69.0 423.3±8.4 5 130 56.0 416.5±8.9 6 98 42.2 418.0±10.6 7 67 28.9 428.0±15.9 8 35 15.1 423.4±18.8
March, 1958] O. N. SINGH 23 Estimates of heritability Statistical analysis of data on the first calving interval was carried out to esti- mate the heritability of the character (Table III). Intra-sire regression of daughter on dam, and daughter-dam correlation methods were used to estimate the heritability co-efficient after correcting the data for year effect, and values obtained were24 CALVING INTERVAL IN THARPARKAR CATTLE [Vol. XXVIII, Part I, Repeatability of calving intervals can be calculated as the ratio of variance between cows to the total variance and was found in this study to be 0.226 ± 0.047 and 0.282 ± 0.046 for the uncorrected and corrected records of calving intervals respectively. The estimated repeatability for corrected data is higher than that for uncorrected data, which is an indicative of possibly not any considerable error in sampling the data for the study of environmental effect on calving intervals. The estimate of repeatability includes all differences due to permanent differences between cows and, therefore, measures the accuracy of the prediction of future performance from the past of the character under study of the same herd of cows. As some of the permanent differences between cows may not be transmissible, repeatability will probably be greater than heritability. The higher value obtained for repeatability than heritability in the present study agrees with this hypothesis. SUMMARY The effect of some environmental factors on the first three calving intervals of Tharparkar cattle at the Government Cattle Farm, Patna was studied. Years and calving sequences were found to have significant effect. The heritability of calving interval was estimated to be practically zero STUDIES ON FISH OF BAY OF BENGAL I-AMINO ACID COMPOSITION OF FLESH OF BOMBAY DAK, RIBBON AND SHARK By A. N. BOSE, S. K. DAS GUPTA and B. N. SRIMANI, Jadavpur University, Calcutta [Received for publication on July 8, 1957 Accepted for publication on September 13, 1957] TRAWLERS of West Bengal Government, operating in Bay of Bengal, catch a large quantity of Bombay Dak (Harpodon nehereus), Ribbon (Trichiurius Spp.) and Shark (Carcharinus gangeticus), which have very little value in wet-fish market. From Shark, only the liver is utilised for the extraction of liver oil and other parts of the body are mainly converted into manure. Sun-dried Bombay Dak has a limited market in South-East Asia. However, these fishes may provide valuable protein food in the fish meal or other products. The investigation reported here was taken up with a view to finding out the amino-acid composition of the flesh from these fishes. MATERIAL AND METHODS Lots of fish used in this investigation were obtained from trawlers where they were kept in ice for 3 to 7 days. In the laboratory, samples were kept in a freezer at 26 FISH OF BAY OF BENGAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part 1, per cent ethyl alcohol containing 0.2 mg. of CuSO4 5H2O. The colour intensity of the extracts was measured with a Klett-Summerson Photo-electric Colorimeter using 550 mµ filter. Evaluation of the amounts was made from standard curves obtained for individual amino acids using the identical methods for chromatographic separation and elution. For determination of leucine, isoleucine, histidine, methionine and cystine the same procedure was followed with the exception that an unbuffered paper was used for the chromatogram. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Average values of amino-acid estimations of five samples of each variety of fish are given on Table 1. TABLE I Amino acid content in gm. of N2 per 100 gm. of fat-free dried tissue Bombay Dak Ribbon Shark Aspartic acid 1.24 0.96 0.82 Glutamic acid 1.20 1.28 1.00 Serine 0.51 0.74 0.39 Glycine 0.69 0.60 1.00 Threonine 0.38 1.15 0.29 Alanine 0.60 0.47 0.43 Lysine, HCl 2.10 1.86 2.05 Arginine, HCl 1.11 0.43 0.94 Valine 0.53 0.60 0.65 Ph-alanine 0.34 0.56 0.43 Leucine 0.87 0.87 1.26 Isoleucine 0.58 0.61 0.74 Methionine sulphoxide .. 0.45 0.55 Histidine P P P Cystine P P P As tryptophane was destroyed during acid hydrolysis no figures for tryptophane are given. It will be observed that the muscle tissues of the three varieties of fish investi- gated contain all the essential amino acids, except methionine which is absent in the flesh of Bombay Dak. Hence, these varieties of fish may supply good protein provided they are otherwise edible. SUMMARY Amino acid compositions of the muscle tissues of three varieties of fish, i.e. Shark, Ribbon and Bombay Dak, from Bay of Bengal, are reported. All of them are found to be good sources of essential amino acids except methionine which is absent in Bombay Dak muscle. ACKNKOWLEDGMENT Authors are thankful to Indian Council of Agricultural Research for financing a scheme of which this investigation forms a part. REFERENCES Subramanian and Rao, (1955). J. Sci. Ind. Res. 14C, 56 Giri, Radhakrishnan and Baidynathan, (1952). Anal. Chem. 24, 1677
ABSTRACTS A comparison of regular intradermic johnin and a purified protein derivative of intra- dermic johnin on artificially and naturally sensitised ruminants. LARSEN, A.B., BAISDEN, L. A. and MERKAL, R.S. (1955). (16)58 : 35-37 THE authors have compared the potency and specificity of a purified protein derivative (PPD) of Johnin, prepared by trichloracetic acid precipitation of Johne's bacilli culture filtrate, with the synthetic medium johnin made by Dorset and Henley's procedure for tuberculin production. The comparative tests were carried out on artificially sensitised goats and cattle and on 1,134 cattle from Johne's Disease positive herds, by injecting both the products simultaneously on the opposite sides of the neck. In the artificially sensitised animals the PPD johnin was found superior in specificity to the regular johnin. In the tests on Johne's Disease positive herds 1,039 animals gave negative reactions to both the johnins. Out of the remain- ing 95 animals, 94 were positive to PPD johnin, whereas, the regular product showed 78 positive reactors, 6 suspicious and 11 negative. One animal which was negative to PPD johnin was positive to the regular johnin. It was also noticed that ' reaction size ' of positive reactors was 1½ times larger with PPD johnin than with the regular product. According to the authors the PPD johnin, at the strength used, appeared to be more specific and potent than the regular johnin. (N.P.B.) Effect of a naturally occurring outbreak of Newcastle disease on egg quality and production. J. P. QUINN, A. W. BRANT and C.H. THOMPSON. 1956. J. Poult. Sci. 35 (1) THE authors observations made during an outbreak of Newcastle disease which occurred at Beltsville (U.S.A.) in April 1949 in a flock of early hatched White Leghorn pullets. These pullets were found positive to serum neutralization test in October of the same year. Another lot of later hatched unaffected White Leghorn pullets of similar heredity, kept 600 to 700 yards away from the affected lot and found negative to the S. M. test, were used as the control group. Egg-quality studies revealed that the percentage thick white which was similar in the eggs of the 2 groups of pullets prior to the outbreak, increased signi- ficantly in the N. D. recovered group. Further when the eggs were stored at 100°F for 14 days the decrease in the percentage of thick white was about 5 times more in the N.D. recovered group than in the controls. The quality of eggs, as indicated by candling score and albumen score, was significantly lower in the recovered group as compared to the controls. 27 138 AR/57 7
28 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVIII, Part I, The affected lot of pullets, after recovery, laid eggs of smaller size than the unaffected ones, the difference being significant. The former, however, had better shell quality, as indicated by lesser loss in weight on incubation. Egg production in 149 affected pullets came down from 66.9 per cent to zero during the outbreak, but within about 3 weeks afterwards it went up to 51.6 per cent. The 62 pullets in the control group maintained the egg production at 70 per cent level throughout the period. Mortality in the recovered birds was 6 to 7 times more than in the control group during 16 weeks after the outbreak. (H. P. T.) The relationship between fertility and the number of spermatozoa inseminated. R. W. BRATTON, R. H. FOOTE and C. R. HENDERSON. (1954). J. Dairy Sci., 37(II) THE fertility of semen was previously compared to its different rates of dilution without regard to the variations in the number or the per cent of motile spermatozoa in the sample. There had been reports previously in which fertility was measured by the number of total, rather than the number of motile spermatozoa inseminated. The present experiment had been designed to estimate the relationship between fertility and the number of spermatozoa inseminated. Seventy-six semen samples from 20 Holstein and 16 Guernsey bulls were used. These samples were divided into three portions and extended to either 5 × 106, 10 × 106, or 15 × 106 motile spermatozoa per milliliter of extended semen. The extender was composed of equal parts of a 2.9 per cent sodium citrate dihydrate buffer containing 0.6 per cent sulfanilamide and fresh egg-yolk. Each milliliter of final extender contained 500 units each of penicillin and streptomycin. Three groups of approximately 4,100 first service dairy cows each were inseminated with three different concentrations of motile spermatozoa, estimated to be 14.3 × 106, 9.5 × 106, and 4.7 × 106, the 60 to 90 day per cent non-returns were 70.5, 70.9, and 66.7 respectively. It has been concluded that bovine semen may be extended to approximately 10 × 106 motile spermatozoa per milliliter of extended semen with the expectation of fertility levels. (G.N.M.) Metabolic responses of bovine spermatozoa to antibacterial agents. CECIL BRENTON and W. B. PRATHER (1954). J. Dairy Sci., 37(3). 228-234 Two experiments were conducted using ten ejaculates each of a specific standard. Samples were diluted with EYC in the ratio of 1:4. In one of the experiments sulphanilamide (300 mg./100 ml.), penicillin and streptomycin (500 units ml. each) were added to the diluents either singly or all combined together in one. In the second experiment combinations of streptomycin and penicillin alone were used in addition to the above. The samples were gradually cooled down to 4.5°C and stored at that temperature for 10 days. Examination for the livability of spermatozoa and their metabolic activity was made after 4 and 10 days of storage. It was observed that the addition of sulphanilamide either singly or in combination depressed the
March, 1958] ABSTRACTS 29 rate of fructolysis and the total reducing substances or glucose after 4 days of storage. This can be explained by the lowered livability of spermatozoa found in diluents containing sulphanilamide when compared with the control. The motility of spermatozoa was also lowered. Combination of penicillin and streptomycin together gave a better livability than either of the two used singly or the control. It has almost as much effect on spermatozoa metabolism as sulphanilamide. Fructose losses, assessed after 10 days of storage, however, revealed a highest metabolic rate in diluents containing streptomycin. The lactic acid production by spermatozoa followed the same pattern as fructose losses. (B.C.J.) Further studies on the anthelmintic action of Piperazine citrate. R. F. SHUMARD and D. F. EVELETH (1956). Vet. Medicine 51(II) : 515-517 In recent years many products containing piperazine have been tried as anthel- mintic mostly against roundworms in cattle, sheep, swine, horses, cats, dogs and poultry. Though the danger of toxic reactions from these products might be slight their individual anthelmintic efficiency in different host and parasite species has yet to be fully established. Piperazine is not effective to the same extent against all nematodes. For example, piperazine citrate in doses of 4,000 to 8,000 mg. per gallon of drinking water removes only 40 to 60 per cent H. gallinae from chickens. Piperazine adipate at a dose rate of 220 mg. per kg. body weight of horses has been found to remove nearly 100 per cent adult and immature Parascaris equorum and adult Trichonema spp., 80 per cent adult Oxyuris equi and about 50 per cent Tri- dontophorus and Strongylus vulgaris ; but against S. edentatus or S. equonua it has not been found to be effective. The authors had carried out last year laboratory and field trials with piperazine citrate in drinking water as an anthelmintic against Ascaridia galli and Heterakis gallinae of chickens. Their results were confirmed subsequently the same year by Bradley, who carried out field trials with large flocks. In this paper the authors report the results of their experimental and field trials and observations with piper- azine citrate in poultry and swine. In the trials carried out by them and Bradley in 1955 they had used dosages of 8,000 and 4,000 mg. per gallon of drinking water. In the present investigations, they found that the lowest effective dose of piperazine citrate was 2,000 and 4,000 mg. per gallon of drinking water offered to the birds for 24 hours. A level of 1,000 mg. of the drug per gallon of drinking water per day was found to be highly effective in preventing the establishment of A. galli in birds. In a small field trial 4,000 mg. of the drug per gallon of drinking water for 24 hours was found to be successful in removing the ascarid from turkeys. Single doses of 170,270, 430 and 730 mg. of piperazine citrate per kg. of body weight, given orally by means of a plastic tube attached to a syringe, were found to be effective in re- moving Ascaris lumbricoides. A dose of 8,000 mg. per gallon of drinking water in a slop mixture for a single feeding was also effective. (H.D.S.)
30 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVIII, Part I The progeny testing of dairy bulls at different levels of production. I. L. MASON and ALAM ROBERTSON Agric. Sci. (1956). 47(4.) ; 357-75 The authors have examined data pertaining to the Red Danish breed of cows bred through artificial insemination with a view to eliciting information as to the interplay of production level and heredity as it affected the evaluation of breeding work of A. I. bulls. First complete annual records pertaining to 13,000 cows in 1,500 herds between 1946 and 1951 constituted the material for study. The herds were divided into three equal groups on the basis of their average production (345, 392, 439 in 10 kg. units respectively). The variance of yield within herds increased as the average yield increased, but the coefficient of variation declined slightly (21.6, 20.2, and 19.0 per cent respectively). The heritablility for milk yield was estimated from the variance between progeny groups of the same 152 bulls at each production level and from the variance within herds. The heritability had values of 0.05, 0.15 and 0.22 respectively as estimated from low, medium and high level herds. The genetic variance was thus seen to be more than five times as large in the high-yielding herds as that in the low-yielding herd. The true ranking of bulls of breeding value was apparently the same at all levels as evidenced by the indication of absence of interaction between sires and production levels. Estimates of genetic correlation between performances at different levels turned out to be extremely high. The heritability of fat content in the three types of herds was 0.27, 0.47 and 0.49 respectively. Again no evidence of interaction between bulls and herds was detected. These results would appear to suggest that for choosing bulls for artificial insemination a test based on the performance of their daughters in high-yielding herds is the best. The study also confirmed that the contemporary comparison method of assessing A. I. bulls for yield had the accuracy expected in theory.
REVIEW VETERINARY TOXICOLOGY (FORMERLY RANDER'S VETERINARY TOXICOLOGY). By R. J. GARNER, Bailliere Tindall & Co. Ltd., Price Rs. 35, pages 415 Veterinary Toxicology has been introduced by the publishers to succeed the well known Lander's Veterinary Toxicology, the third edition of which had appeared in 1945. In this first edition of the new book the contents have been completely revised and the text has been largely rewritten. It contains much new material which has accumulated in recent years, especially through the introduction of a large variety of organic compounds used as herbicides, insecticides, molluscicides and rodenticides. There are also special chapters dealing with radio-active materials and toxicological analysis. For drugs the nomenclature adopted in the British Veterinary Code has been used. The poisonous plants have been arranged according to Engel and Diels, but botanical descriptions have been omitted. All sections of the various chapters are followed by alphabetically arranged lists of references to the literature cited in the text, mainly pertaining to observations made in recent years. There is a fairly exhaustive subject index, in which the principal page references are marked in bold type. In this book the subject of veterinary toxicology has been treated more as an independent subject than as a mere appendage of veterinary pharmacology. The students, the teachers, and those engaged in veterinary practice and research, es- pecially in the United Kingdom, should find it very valuable. Those in India will naturally have to supplement some materials from literature published locally especially on poisonous plants. The author has given us a very informative book on the subject in a handy volume, and the publishers have maintained their reputation for careful printing and excellent get-up. (R.N.M.) LIVESTOCK IMPROVEMENT IN RELATION TO HERIDITY AND ENVIRONMENT By J. E. NICHOLS, fourth edition 1957 ; Oliver and Boy 1 : Edinburgh & London, pp. 240 ; Price 16 sh. This well known book has been used ever since it was first published for study and reference by people interested in livestock improvement, whether as a student, research worker or a livestock raiser. The fact that a fourth edition of this book has been called for indicates that it has been in great demand. It treats the subject of livestock improvement with considerable clarity of expression and thought. 31 138 AR/57 8
32 REVIEW [Vol. XXVIII, Part I While formal genetic aspects have been considered in great detail, special stress has been placed on environmental complex as affecting livestock improvement. The publication is therefore somewhat different from the usual type of books dealing with livestock improvement based only on genetic consideration in that ecological factors have also been prominently discussed. The chapter on type and environment in this connection is particularly to be commended. The book contains 16 chapters dealing with general aspects, the mode of inheritance, genetic inter-actions, out- breeding, hybrid vigour, progeny testing, breed construction, and type and environ- ment. In addition, opportunity has been taken in this edition to incorporate some additional material to bring the book up to the level of modern thinking and research. This additional matter has been given in a supplementary chapter although minor amendments have been made in the text. This has been done especially as in view of the author "the earlier editions of this book provided at least part of a reasonable foundation on which newer information can be superimposed". There is no doubt that the book in this edition, as in the previous ones, will be found useful to all interested in livestock improvement, whether a research worker in the laboratory or a field worker in an active livestock breeding programme. The book contains a number of illustrations and printing is neat and clear. It is securely bound and is provided with an attractive cover jacket.STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA OF INDIAN HERDS OF DAIRY CATTLE I-RED SINDHI HERDS AT HOSUR AND BANGALORE By V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN and J. S. SRIVASTAVA, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi [ (Received for publication on January 31, 1958) (Accepted for publication on February 4, 1958) ] (With 1 Text-Figure.) FOR formulating breeding programmes for improvement of dairy cattle on scientific lines it is necessary to collect basic information such as the magni- tude of phenotypic variation, the coefficient of heritability and that of repeatability of important characteristics relating to milk production as well as the average rates of mortality, infertility, abortion, sex-ratio, etc. A critical statistical examina- tion of the data accumulated in the course of the breeding of sizeable herds under regulated management forms a useful basis for such information and the quantita- tive appraisal of the breeding policies followed in the past and their consequences is of great value as a guide for the planning of future programmes. The Statistical Wing of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research has been engaged in studies on some important herds maintained on livestock farms of the Central and the State Governments as well as private institutions. Breeding data pertaining to the herds of Red Sindhi and Gir cattle maintained by the National Dairy Research Institute at their Southern Regional Station in Bangalore, the Red Sindhi and the Kangayam herds at the Livestock Research Station at Hosur (Madras State), the Tharparkar herd at the Government Cattle Farm, Patna (Bihar State) and the Kankrej herd in the Agricultural Institute at Anand in Bombay State have been analysed. It is proposed to present the salient features of these studies in a series of papers. The present paper deals with the studies on the two Red Sindhi herds at Hosur and Bangalore respectively. The studies have been grouped in three parts. The first part gives information pertaining to the herd strength during different periods, the practices of feeding and management, mortality and culling, the breeding policy followed, the breeding per- formance of the herd, the comparison between generations in respect of milking performance and the results of progeny-testing and sire evaluation relating to the Sindhi herd at Hosur. The second part contains similar information relating to the Sindhi herd at Bangalore. The last part deals with such items of basic information as estimates of repeatability and heritability of various milking characteristics and the effects of such factors as the order of lactation, season of calving, preceding dry period, etc. on performance. 33 1 AR/58 1
34 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, 1 RED SINDHI HERD AT THE LIVESTOCK RESEARCH STATION HOSUR 1.1June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 35 The herd was served by as many as 52 Sindhi bulls. Of these, nine were brought from outside and four were the sons of foundation cows sired by outside bulls. The remaining 39 were farm-bred bulls. Fifteen out of the 52 bulls did not have any daughter with lactation records. Amongst the remaining 37 bulls only 16 had six or more daughters with records. The daughters of these bulls accounted for about 80 per cent of the total farm-bred cows with records. In all 1,450 calves were born in the herd, of which 724 were females. The sex ratio thus worked out to 1 : 1. Of the female calves born up to 1948 only 54 per cent completed their first lactation on the farm. Of the others one-fifth died and the rest were culled. 1.236 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, suffering from serious diseases were removed from the herd. Whenever the adult female stock which included all cows and heifers above one year in age according to the classification adopted in this farm, was considered surplus to requirements the animals rated to be inferior by the management were disposed of by sale. Reasons for disposal were not, generally speaking, explicitly recorded. Bulls and bull calves not required for farm use were supplied to other Government farms, public institutions and private breeders. The surplus stock of bulls not sold was castrated. The quantitative aspects of the selection practised are discussed in the following sections. 1.3.1June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 37 TABLE III Distribution of culled cows in the Sindhi herd at Hosur according to the number of lactations completed Number of lactations completed Number of cows culled Percentage Average age at culling Years38 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol, XXVIII, Part II, 1.3.2June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISENAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 39 compares favourably with those reported for other herds in the country [42.4 months for the Sindhi herd at Allahabad Agricultural Institute reported by Stonaker and others 1953, 58.8±0.2 months for Hariana cattle at Hissar Farm reported by Kohli and Suri 1957 and 47.4 months for Kankrej herd (I.C.A.R. unpublished report)] though it is high when compared to herds in temperate regions or which it varies from 27 to 30 months. [Turner 1932, Dickerson and Chapman 1940 and Johansson and Hansson 1941.] The interval between the first two calvings based on 261 cows varied from 317 days to 1,568 days with an average of 546±10 days. The average calving interval over 794 records based on the first seven calvings worked out to 521±6 days. This was of the same order for the Hariana cattle of Punjab, viz., 531 ±5 days reported by Sharma and others 1951 but much longer than that for the Kankrej herd at Anand which was 492 days. The average age of the parents when the progeny is born is termed the generation interval. The interval is obtained by first working out the average age of cows separately when daughters are born and when sons are born. The average ages of bulls for the progeny of the two sexes are worked out similarly and the mean of the four average ages gives the average generation interval for the herd. The four averages were of the same order and the mean generation interval worked out to six years and two months. The service conception ratio either for the cows or for the bulls could not be worked out in the absence of data on infertile services. For the same reason the number of services per year performed by the bulls also could not be worked out. The average number of successful services worked out to eleven per bull per year. This number is, however, likely to be an underestimate since these bulls were also used to some extent on the other herds in the farm and on outside cows, details of which are not available. 1.440 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE V Average first lactation performance of Sindhi cows at Hosur Lactation yield (lb). Yield/day of lactation (lb). Yield/day of calving interval (lb.) Lactation period (days) Calving interval (days) Age at first calving (months) Foundation stockJune, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 41 The average values for the different characteristics along with the standard errors and coefficient of variation for cows belonging to the foundation stock and the different farm-bred generations are given in Table V. The following conclusions may be drawn from the results : (i) Farm-bred cows were on the whole significantly superior to the foundation stock, exceeding them on an average by about 600 lb. of lactation yield, 1.8 lb. per day of lactation and 1.5 lb. per day of calving interval. There was, however, an increase in the calving interval of the farm-bred cows to about 18 months from about 15 months for the foundation cows. (ii) The first generation cows produced on an average about 300 lb. more milk in the first lactation than the foundation ones ; increases of about one lb. per day of lactation and 0.8 lb. per day of calving interval were also observed. None of these increases was, however, significant. The calving interval for the first-generation cows was significantly higher than that for the foundation cows by about two months. (iii) A comparison of the average lactation yield of the second-generation cows over that of the first-generation cows indicated a significant increase of about 630 lb. Increases of 1.2 lb. of milk per day of lactation, 1.1 lb. per day of calving interval, one month in lactation period and two months in calving interval were also observed, though these just failed to be significant. (iv) The age at first calving increased from 40.8 months in the second generation to 42.6 months in the third generation. Changes in respect of other characters were not substantial. (v) A fall of about 300 lb. in the average lactation yield was observed from the third to the fourth generation. This change was, however, not significant. (vi) There was no material change in respect of any of the characters from the fourth to the fifth generation. The observations were too few for the sixth generation to draw any conclusion. 1.4.242 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE VI Comparisons of cows belonging to different generations with their dams (Sindhi herd at Hosur) Generation Lactation yield (lb.) Yield./day of lactation (lb.) Yield/day of calving interval (lb.) No. of pairs M D-M S.E. No. of pairs M D-M S.E. No. of pairs M D-M S.E. F1 33 3334 562@ 289 33 11.17 1.77* 0.66 30 7.32 0.84 0.56 F2 70 3847 157 216 70 10.07 0.31 0.48 58 7.60 0.34 0.47 F3 77 4309 June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 43 The results of the comparisons of the cows belonging to different generations with their dams are given in Table VI for all the six characters mentioned earlier. The salient features of these comparisons are given below : (i) The yield per day of lactation for the cows belonging to the first farm-bred generation was higher by about 1.8 lb. over their dams. This increase was statisti- cally significant. For the same set of cows increases of about 560 lb., per lactation and 46 days in calving interval over their dams were observed, both of which only just failed to attain the conventional 5 per cent level of significance. (ii) No material change from the first-generation cows to the second-generation cows was observed in respect of any of the characters studied. The increase of 48 days in the calving interval was slightly smaller than the 5 per cent critical difference. (iii) The third-generation cows showed significant increases over their dams of 2.5 months in the age at first calving and 47 days in the calving interval. There were decreases of about 370 lb., 0.8 lb., and 0.9 lb. in the average lactation yield, the yield per day of lactation, and the yield per day of calving interval respectively but all the differences were less than the respective critical difference at 5 per cent level of significance. (iv) The average performance of the fourth-generation cows was not significantly different from that of their dams for any of the six characters examined. (v) There was a significant decrease of 43 days in the average lactation period of the cows in the fifth-generation compared with their dams. There was a consistent decrease in respect of all the other characters excepting age at first calving, though none of them was significant. The magnitude of the fall in the lactation yield was, however large, being of the order of 600 lb. 1.4.344 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, of these records over different generations it was considered that their omission would not introduce any bias but would on the other hand increase the precision of comparisons among generations. The results of the appropriate statistical analysis are presented in Table VII. TABLE VII Adjusted analysis of variance for periods and generations of Sindhi cows at Hosur (First lactation yield in units of 10 lb.) Source of variation D.F. H.S. V.R. Between periods (adjusted) 4 91,113 4.80* Between generations June, 1958] V. D. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 45 1.4.446 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE IX Progeny testing of Sindhi bulls at Hosur Serial No. Bull No. Daughter dam pairs Lactation yield (lb.) Yld./day of lactation (lb.) Yld./day of calving interval (lb.) Lactation period (days) Average for dams Daughter dam difference S.E. Average for dams Daughter dam difference S.E. Average for dams Daughter dam difference S.E. Average for dams Daughter dam difference S.E. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 56 9 4253 1312 811 13.48 2.68 1.98 9.88 2.56 1.85 317 18 23 2 129(0) 7 3877 602 785 12.47 0.46 1.16 8.30 June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 47 of the simple average of the mean difference over all daughter-dam pairs corres- ponding to the bull. In order to achieve a reasonable precision, it is common to confine progeny testing to bulls with at least six daughter-dam pairs with corres- ponding records. There were 16 such bulls out of the 52 used in the herd under study. Results of the progeny testing for the four characters, lactation yield, yideld per day of lactation, yield per day of calving interval and lactation period are given in Table IX. Two other characters examined earlier, viz., calving interval and age at first calving were omitted for the sire evaluation as the variations observed in respect of these characters were probably wholly due to non-heritable causes, as indicated by the heritability studies (vide Section 3.2). It may be observed from Table IX that sires Nos. 118 (0) and 43 (0) were the only two bulls whose daughters gave significantly higher lactation yield (by about 900 lb.) than their dams. Daughters of the bull No. 118 (0) also gave 3.5 lb. of milk per day of lactation period more than their dams (significant at 10 per cent level). The lactation periods for the daughters of sire No. 43 (0) were on an average 48 days longer than their dams the difference being significant at 10 per cent level. The two sires Nos. 56 and 136 (0) may also be considered as having contributed to the improvement, as the average yields of their daughters were higher than their dams in respect of all the three yield characters. These increases were, however, not significant at the conventional 5 per cent level owing to the large variation in the yields of their daughters. The daughters of sire No. 255 were substantially poorer than their dams, the average yield being lower by about 900 lb. per lactation, 1.6 lb. per day of lactation and 1.5 lb. per day of calving interval. The average lactation period for these daughters was also significantly lower than for their dams by 37 days. The progeny of sire No. 144 were also inferior to their dams by about 770 lb. per lactation, signi- ficant at 10 percent level, along with a shorter lactation period of two months, significant at 1 per cent level. Bull No. 139 had daughters having average values for yield per day of lactation and yield per day of calving interval significantly lower than their dams by about 2 lb. and 1.5 lb. respectively. The average yield per day of calving interval for the daughters of sire No. 38 was lower by about 1.5 lb. per day, significant at 1 per cent level, even though the fall in the lactation yield and that in the yield per day of lactation were negligible. The average lactation period of the daughters of sire No. 282 was lower than that of their dams by 53 days, significant at one per cent level. To sum up, sires Nos. 118 (0), 43 (0), 56 and 136 (0) might be considered as having contributed to the improvement of yield and the sires Nos. 255, 144, 38 and 139 as having depressed it. The other sires did not materially alter the level of performance. 1.5.248 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE X Sire indices of Sindhi bulls at Hosur Serial No. Bull No. Daughter dam pairs Lactation yield (lb.) Yield/day of lactation (lb.) Yield/day of calving interval (lb.) Lactation period (days) Average for dams Corrected daughter average Average for dams Corrected daughter average Average for dams Corrected daughter average Average for dams Corrected daughter average Index S. E. Index S. E Index S. E. Index S.E. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 56 9 4298 4976 841 12.87 14.07 1.03 7.90 8.93 1.00 334 345 24 2 129 (0) 7 3877 4448 532 12.47 12.83 1.23 8.30 7.77 1.14 311 346 28 3 8 25 3651 4372 258 10.99 12.67 0.65 7.58 8.30 0.65 325 344 15 4 118 (0) 6 3368 4346 575 11.05 14.64 1.33 7.83 7.92 1.23 303 301 31 5 238 7 4646 4301 451 13.15 12.72 1.17 9.36 5.95 1.13 343 321 27 6 136 (0) 6 2998 4288 317 9.17 11.95 1.35 6.32 8.45 1.34 330 354 31 7 139 11 4827 4060 303 14.15 11.54 1.02 10.12 7.20 1.06 339 360 23 8 38 17 3664 4029 212 10.48 11.74 0.75 7.29 6.69 0.75 348 342 18 9 43 (0) 10 2995 4002 449 11.32 12.74 1.03 6.92 8.33 0.95 260 309 24 10 236 18 3860 3895 477 11.01 12.30 0.80 7.24 8.20 0.75 346 300 19 11 98 10 4499 3670 310 12.78 11.67 0.94 9.32 7.96 1.05 351 323 23 12 124 (0) 11 3364 3343 481 10.83 10.26 1.10 6.70 8.22 1.06 306 351 25 13 65 12 4029 3203 282 11.22 9.37 1.04 6.69 6.39 1.03 359 346 24 14 282 11 4320 3167 490 11.46 11.30 0.87 7.01 6.62 0.87 357 280 21 15 144 23 4118 3117 323 12.13 10.31 0.68 7.37 5.25 0.69 337 296 16 16 255 27 4019 2917 236 12.28 10.57 0.63 8.22 6.24 0.63 326 273 15 Herd average to which indices correspond. 3700 11.5 7 300
June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 49 to either of the commonly used sire indices, viz. the intermediate index and the simple daughters' average index. The corrected indices based on the first lactation records were worked out corresponding to the average levels of production of dams of 3,700 lb. for lactation yield, 11.5 lb. for yield per day of lactation, 7 lb. for yield per day of calving interval and 300 days for lactation period based on the general level of performance of this herd [Table V]. These indices along with their standard errors are presented in Table X. If a superiority of 20 per cent over the herd average is taken as an index of merit, the bull No. 56 should be considered as highly meritorious since its indices in respect of all the three yield characters, viz. 4,976 lb. for lactation yield, 14.1 lb. per day of lactation period and 8.9 lb. per day of calving interval, were above this level. Sires Nos. 129(0), 188(0) and 136(0) should also be considered as having superior transmitting ability in respect of the lactation yield, the yield per day of lactation period and the yield per day of calving interval respectively. By a similar criterion sire Nos. 255 and 144 might be considered as having very poor transmitting ability in respect of the lactation yield and the yield per day of calving interval respectively. On the basis of the indices for lactation yield the 16 sires used can be grouped as follows :* (1) Highly meritorious (indices 20 per cent or more above the herd average). Sires Nos. 56 and 129(0). (2) Moderately good (indices between 10 per cent to 20 per cent above the herd average). Sires Nos. 8, 118(0), 238 and 136(0). (3) Of average calibre (indices within 10 per cent on either side of the herd average). Sires Nos. 139, 38, 43(0), 236, 98 and 124(0). (4) Poor (indices between 10 per cent to 20 per cent below the herd average). Sires Nos. 65, 282 and 144. (5) Very poor (indices 20 per cent or more below the herd average). Sire No. 255, 250 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [ Vol. XXVIII, Part II, 2.1June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 51 for analysis. The remaining foundation cows did not complete even one lactation on the farm before they were culled. The herd was served by as many as 36 Sindhi bulls. Of these 13 were purchased from outside, four were the sons of foundation cows sired by outside bulls and the remaining 19 were farm-bred bulls. Twelve of the 36 stud bulls did not leave any daughter with lactation records in the herd. Only 14 bulls had six or more daughters with records, the daughters of these bulls accounting for 70 per cent of the total farm-bred cows with records. Besides the Sindhi bulls a number of foreign bulls belonging to Ayrshire breed were also used on a number of cows of the herd belonging to the foundation stock or the first farm-bred generation. A number of Sindhi bulls were also used on the cross- bred herd when back-crossing was desired. The progeny resulting from the above matings was excluded from the present study. In all, 1,399 calves were born in the herd of which 674 were females, accounting for 48.2 per cent of the births. The deviation from the expected sex ratio of 50 per cent was not significant. Of the 602 female calves born in the farm upto 1948 only 40 per cent completed their first lactation on the farm up to April, 1952. Of the others, about one-third died and the rest were culled, except nine which had not yet calved even once or were in their first lactation. 2.252 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, purchased cows out of 172, 25 farm-bred cows out of 294, 14 heifers out of 412 and 4 bull calves above one year out of 157 died during the period of study. 2.3June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 53 TABLE XIII Distribution of culled cows in the Sindhi herd at Bangalore according to the number of lactations completed Number of lactations completed Number of cows culled Percentage Average age at culling years54 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, or more lactations in the farm while one in eight was retained for eight or more lactations. The average number of lactations completed on the farm by a cow was about four. The intensity of the selection of cows from lactation to lactation, as measured by the phenotypic selection differential was 304 lb. which was 12.3 per cent of the average lactation yield of 2,464 lb. The estimated value was higher than that for the Hosur herd. This could be attributed to at least two factors. Firstly, the culling practised in the Bangalore herd was heavier. Secondly, the average calving interval for this herd was shorter by about 100 days than those in the Hosur herd which made possible the retention of high yielders for a larger number of lactations. 2.3.2June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 55 2.3.456 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, performance, along with the standard error and the coefficient of variation for cows belonging to the foundation stock and the different farm-bred generations are given in Table XV. The main conclusions emerging from the results are as follows : (i) The average lactation period, the lactation yield, the yield per day of lactation and the yield per day of calving interval were of the same order for the farm-bred cows as a whole as for the foundation cows. The average calving interval for the farm-bred cows was, however, significantly longer by 36 days than that for the foundation cows which was 411 days. (ii) The first generation of farm-bred cows produced on an average about one pound less milk per day of lactation than the foundation cows which gave 9.9 lb. per day, the difference being significant. The average lactation yield and the yield per day of calving interval were also 2,451 lb. and 5.8 lb. for the first-generation cows as against 2,655 lb. and 6.4 lb. respectively for the parental stock. These decreases were, however, not significant. The calving interval was longer for the former group by 19 days ; this difference also was less than the critical difference at 5 per cent level of significance. (iii) The deterioration in the first generation appears to have been partly made up in the second generation as indicated by the consistent increase in respect of all the three yield characters, the lactation yield, the yield per day of lactation and the yield per day of calving interval. These increases, as also those observed in respect of the lactation period and the calving interval, were, however, not significant. The age at first calving alone showed marked change from 39.4 months in the first generation to 42.1 months in the second. (iv) The favourable trend in all the three yield characters continued from the second to the third generation, the averages being 2,952 lb. of lactation yield, 10.4 lb. per day of lactation and 6.8 lb. per day of calving interval in the third generation as against 2,570 lb., 9.2 lb. and 6.0 lb. respectively in the second generation. Of these the increase in the yield per day of lactation was significant at 5 per cent level. Increases in the lactation period and the calving interval were not significant but the increase in the age at first calving from 42.1 months in the second generation to 44.1 months in the third was significant. (v) The changes observed from the third to the fourth generation were not significant though the increase of 370 lb. in the average lactation yield was of the same order as that from the second to the third generation. The non-significance in the present case is to be ascribed to the relatively small number of cows in the fourth generation which inflated the standard error of their average yield.
June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 57 TABLE XV Average first lactation performance of Sindhi cows at Bangalore Lactation yield (lb.) Yld./day of lactation (lb.) Yld./day of calving interval (lb.) Lactation period (days) Calving interval (days) Age at first calving (months) Foundation stock58 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE XVI Comparisons of cows belonging to different generations with their dams (Sindhi herd at Bangalore) Generation Lactation yield (lb.) Yld /day of lactation (lb.) Yld./day of calving interval (lb.) No. of pairs M DJune, 1958 ] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 59 2.4.260 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE XVII Adjusted analysis of variance for periods and generations of Red Sindhi cows at Bangalore (First lactation yield in units of 10 lb.) Source of variation D.F. M.S. V.R. Between periods (eliminating generations) 4 47,464 2.33 Between generations (eliminating periods) 3 10,773 Not significant Residual between cells (Interaction of generation and period) 7 22,496 June, 1958 ] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 61 2.562 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE XIX Progeny testing of Sindhi bulls at Bangalore Serial No. Bull's name Daughter dam pairs Lactation yield (lb.) Yld./day of lactation (lb.). Yld./day of calving interval Lactation period (days) Average for dams Daughter- dam difference S.E. Average for dams Daughter- dam difference S.E. Average for dams Daughter- dam difference S.E. Average for dams Daughter- dam difference S.E. 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 Victory 6 3,010 1,241* 353 10.72 3.50** 0.37 7.82 2.42@ 1.05 270 42 31 2 Unique 19 2,901 582 480 9.68 1.69* 0.77 6.27 1.47 0.88 280 23 35 3 Warrior 7 3,717 17 680 12.70 0.36 1.24 9.33 June, 1958 ] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 63 2.5.264 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE XX Sire indices of Sindhi bulls at Bangalore Serial No. Bull's name Daughter- dam pairs Lactation yield (lb.) Yld./day of lact. (lb.) Yld. day of calling interval (lb.) Lactation period (days) Average for dams Corrected daughter average Average for dams Corrected daughter average Average for dams Corrected daughter average Average for dams Corrected daughter average Index S.E. Index S.E. Index S.E. Index S.E. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 Victory 6 2,679 3,823 236 9.67 13.14 1.28 5.56 9.17 1.39 257 297 8 2 Unique 18 2,541 3,312 324 8.52 11.88 0.71 5.33 8.20 0.30 258 296 18 3 Warrior 7 3,807 3,163 462 12.14 10.91 1.19 9.02 7.21 1.27 299 291 21 4 Tazman 10 2,898 3,160 242 10.51 10.51 0.99 6.79 7.84 1.10 269 302 21 5 Xavier 9 2,479 3,104 628 9.27 9.10 1.05 5.96 7.10 1.04 238 329 45 6 H. Gulam 12 2,131 2,798 362 8.23 9.75 0.91 4.93 6.48 0.94 226 282 25 7 Sulaiman 10 3,282 2,735 452 10.64 9.60 0.99 7.30 6.74 0.98 292 267 32 8 Ziman 19 2,930 2,587 279 10.59 8.97 0.70 7.04 5.79 0.76 255 277 21 9 Erab 19 3,363 2,577 302 11.17 9.13 0.71 7.70 6.05 0.71 295 276 16 10 Erio 13 4,117 2,519 424 13.10 8.57 0.87 9.29 6.10 0.90 304 258 30 11 Sikandar 9 2,542 2,425 492 10.19 8.72 1.05 6.62 6.20 1.10 217 242 30 12 H. Raj 7 2,773 1,797 525 9.27 7.50 1.19 5.65 5.12 1.27 281 203 53 Herd average to which indices correspond. 2,700 10 7 270
June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 65 3.66 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE XXI Repeatability estimates for milk characters for Red Sindhi herds at Hosur and Bangalore Character Sindhi herd at Hosur Sindhi herd at Bangalore Degrees of freedom Repeat- ability 95 per cent confidence limit Degrees of freedom Repeat- ability 95 per cent confidence limit Between animals Within animals Between animals Within animals Lactation yield 304 617 .61 .56 to .67 269 689 .54 .38 to .67 Yield/day of lactation 304 617 .60 .54 to .66 269 689 .43 .36 to .50 Yield/day of calving interval 274 517 .47 .39 to .54 243 609 .40 .33 to .47 Lactation period 304 617 .33 .26 to .40 269 689 .46 .30 to .61 Calving interval 274 517 .21 .13 to .28 243 609 .08 .00 to .22
June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 67 TABLE XXII Heritability estimates for milk characters for Red Sindhi herds at Hosur and Bangalore Character Sindhi herd at Hosur Sindhi herd at Bangalore Intrasire degree of freedom Heritability S.E. Intrasire degree of freedom Heritability S.E. Lactation yield 182 .34 .18 143 .37** .14 Yield/day of Lactation 182 .20 .20 143 .54** .14 Yield/day of calving interval 155 .20 .21 125 .38* .15 Lactation period 182 .04 .22 143 .33* .16 Calving interval 155 68 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, of health, etc. Besides these, climatic variation due to season may also have an influence. Studies made to evaluate the effects of these factors to the extent possible from the available data are discussed in the following sections. 3.3.1Plate I.] [Indian J. vet. Sci. HERD AT HOSUR [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] HERD AT BANGALORE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Performance of Red Sindhi cows in later lactations as percentage of the first.
June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 69 TABLE XXIII Lactation correction factors for Sindhi herds at Hosur and Bangalore Lactation order Sindhi herd at Hosur Sindhi herd at Bangalore Pairs of records Later record as per cent of the first Factors for converting to first lactation basis pairs of records Later records as per cent of the first Factors for converting to first lactation basis Lactation yield I .. 100.0 1.000 .. 100.0 1.000 II 206 105.5 0.948 214 107.0 0.935 III 141 107.6 0.930 179 110.7 0.903 IV 101 107.0 0.935 135 111.2 0.899 V 75 104.6 0.957 92 108.5 0.922 VI 55 101.0 0.990 61 102.6 0.975 VII 36 97.1 1.030 42 93.5 1.070 VIII 21 91.1 1.098 28 81.2 1.231 Yield/day of lactation I .. 100.0 1.000 .. 100.0 1.000 II 206 111.0 0.901 214 108.5 0.922 III 141 115.5 0.866 179 114.2 0.876 IV 101 115.1 0.868 135 117.2 0.853 V 75 111.7 0.895 92 117.5 0.851 VI 55 106.7 0.936 61 114.9 0.869 VII 36 102.0 1.020 42 109.8 0.911 VIII 21 99.1 1.009 28 101.8 0.982 Yield/day of calving interval I .. 100.0 1.000 .. 100.0 1.000 II 173 115.5 0.866 196 110.3 0.907 III 122 121.6 0.822 155 116.3 0.860 IV 85 120.9 0.828 119 118.2 0.846 V 61 115.7 0.864 82 115.8 0.863 VI 45 108.6 0.921 53 109.3 0.915 VII 28 02.1 0.980 35 98.5 1.015 VIII 15 98.6 1.015 28 83.5 1.197
70 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE XXIIIJune, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 71 The average lactation period for both herds continuously decreased from the first to the eighth lactation. The average lactation period for the eighth lactation was less than that in the first lactation by about 14 per cent and 15 per cent for the Hosur and the Bangalore herds respectively. The calving interval for the Hosur herd decreased by about 3 per cent from the first to the second lactation, remained almost stationary from the second to the third and then continuously increased up to the seventh lactation. The average calving interval for the seventh lactation was about 10 per cent longer than that for the first. The average calving interval for the eighth lactation was almost of the same order as for the seventh. The calving interval for the Bangalore herd showed very little variation from the first to the fifth lactation, the peak in the fourth lactation being only two per cent higher than that in the first. From the fourth lactation there was a steady decrease, the calving interval in the eighth lactation being about 5 per cent below the interval between the first and second calving. Lactation correction factors for converting later records up to the eighth to the first lactation basis were also worked out for all the characters and these are given in Table XXIII. The record for any later lactation may be converted to the first lac- tation basis on multiplying it by the correction factor corresponding to that lactation. Correction factors for ninth and later records could not be worked out as the number of such records was small. Conversion to the first lactation basis was preferred to any other since the number of first records is likely to be larger and such records are influenced to the least extent by selection. One shortcoming of the lactation correction factors worked out above is that a series of extrapolations are involved in their calculations. Hence the precision of the factors decreases with the advancing order of lactation because of the dependence of the later factors upon the earlier ones. The precision of the correction factors for the later records also decreases due to smaller numbers of successive records. It is, therefore, advisable to avoid the use of these correction factors as far as possible by making comparisons on like lactations, notwithstanding the small loss of informa tion involved. Two situations in which this may not be possible and lactation correction factors are of value are : (i) comparisons involving foundation cows whose early records are not available and (ii) estimation of repeatability of the different characters. Lactation correction factors were made use of in both these situations dealt with in earlier sections. Use of lactation correction factors is also necessary in cases where the exclusion of later records would introduce bias in the estimates, as for example the estimation of genetic advance.
72 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, 3.3.2June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 73 TABLE XXIV Distribution of second lactation yield and preceding dry period for Red Sindhi herds at Hosur and Bangalore Lactation yield (lb.) SINDHI HERD AT HOSUR SINDHI HERD AT BANGALORE Preceding dry period (months) Total Preceding dry period (months) Total Upto 1 Over Upto 1 74 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE XXV Distribution of first lactation yield and service period for Red Sindhi herd at Hosur and Bangalore Lactation yield (lb.) SINDHI HERD AT HOSUR SINDHI HERD AT BANGALORE Service period (months) Total Service period (months) Total Upto 1 Over Upto 1 June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 75 (X2=52.2 on 44 d.f for the Hosur herd and X2=21.0 on 33 d.f for the Bangalore herd.) Examination of the overall distributions for different months indicated that calvings were well distributed throughout the year but for a slight concentration in the months of September, October and November for the Hosur herd and in the months of January and February for the Bangalore herd. (X2=18.8 on 11 d.f for the Hosur herd and X2=30.5 on 11 d.f for the Bangalore herd.) TABLE XXVI Distribution of age at first calving with average first lactation yield in the Red Sindhi herds at Hosur and Bangalore Age in months SINDHI HERD AT HOSUR SINDHI HERD AT BANGALORE Frequency Average first lactation yield (lb.) Frequency Average first lactation yield (lb.) 2876 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE XXVIII Distribution of calvings in different months for Red Sindhi herds at Hosur and Bangalore Months SINDHI HERD AT HOSUR SINDHI HERD AT BANGALORE F1 F3 F3 F4 F5 & F6 Over all generations Per cent. F1 F2 F3 F4 Over all generations Per cent. January 17 18 20 19 2 76 5.9 33 41 21 10 105 10.9 February 19 19 34 24 10 106 8.2 44 42 19 3 108 11.2 March 20 22 28 23 8 101 7.8 30 27 20 6 83 8.6 April 17 24 26 28 7 102 7.9 21 19 15 4 59 6.2 May 20 34 27 27 11 119 9.2 27 30 16 7 80 8.3 June 15 30 32 19 4 100 7.7 25 19 20 4 68 7.1 July 24 32 32 14 10 112 8.7 26 30 12 2 70 7.3 August 17 19 24 31 17 108 8.3 30 26 6 4 66 6.9 September 33 27 27 22 9 118 9.1 29 32 18 6 85 8.8 October 24 27 40 24 11 126 9.7 36 25 23 3 87 9.1 November 35 29 30 23 7 124 9.6 41 22 14 1 78 8.1 December 28 27 28 19 10 102 7.9 24 23 18 7 72 7.5 TOTAL 259 308 348 273 106 1,294 366 336 202 57 961
June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 77 Analysis of first lactation records grouped according to calendar months of freshening did not reveal any marked influence of season on milk yield [Table XXIX]. This result is in agreement with those of Carneiro and Lush [1948], Berge [1949] and Ragab [1950] on dairy cattle and with that of Ragab et al., [1954] on Egyptian buffaloes. TABLE XXIX Analysis of first lactation yield according to the season of calving (10 lb. unit) Source of variation SINDHI HERD AT HOSUR SINDHI HERD AT BANGALORE D.F. M.S. V. R. D.F. M. S. V. R. Between months 11 30,096 1.40 11 33,706 1.70 Within months 278 21,545 244 19,843 DISCUSSION The overall success of past breeding policy in a dairy herd is indicated best by the comparison of the performance of cows belonging to different generations after making allowance for the variation due to environmental causes such as feeding and management. A complete elimination of such variation from the generation comparisons is not possible. Owing to the fact, however, that the period in which records of cows belonging to the same generation are made is spread over a number of years and the periods for the different generations overlap it is possible to make some adjustment in the generation comparisons for the period to period variations due to environmental causes by the use of appropriate analysis of variance. Detail- ed knowledge of the feeding schedules adopted in different years and full information on the changes introduced in the management practices from time to time would provide a basis for the grouping of the years under study into suitable periods such that the conditions of feeding and management can be considered as relatively uniform within each such period. In the absence of such detailed information for either herd the years under study had to be grouped arbitrarily into periods of five years for the purpose of such analysis. That the grouping was fairly effective could be concluded from the fact that the variation between periods in both the cases was large as compared with that within the periods. The results of the analysis indicated that while there was little overall improvement through breeding in the Hosur herd, a progressive improvement in lactation yield of about 170 lb. per generation was recorded in the Bangalore herd. The high heritability coefficients of 0.34 and 0.37 for lactation yield in the two herds indicated scope for genetic improvement in this character through selection. The repeatability estimates for lactation yield were also high (0.61 and 0.54). On the other hand, calving interval and age at first calving had low, non-significant values of heritability which showed that there was very little genetic variation in
78 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, respect of these characters in these two herds. Variation in calving interval and age at first calving in the two herds apparently depended largely on feeding, manage- ment and other non-heritable causes. A study of the Gir herd at Indian Dairy Research Institute and the Kangayam herd at Hosur (I.C.A.R. unpublished re- ports) indicated a similar situation. The superiority of the selected parents measured by the phenotypic selection differentials obtained in sections 1.3 and 2.3 will not be entirely reflected in their progeny since milk yield is affected by non-heritable causes also. The genetic component of the superiority of the selected parents can be estimated by making use of the coefficients of heritability and repeatability. The genetic selection differential for cows was worked out by using the formula June, 1958 V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 79 and 1.4 per cent. for the Bangalore herd. These values are substantially higher than 0.4 to 0.7 per cent. reported by Rendel and Robertson [1950] and Rendel et al. [1951] for several European herds. The higher rates of advance expected for the Sindhi herds were due partly to the higher heritability and repeatability estimates for these herds and partly to the larger variation in the lactation yield from cow to cow. The greater scope for genetic improvement through selection in these herds compared to foreign herds is not sur- prising in view of the fact that very little systematic selection directly for milk production had been practised on the Indian breeds in the past. An examination of the different components of the expected genetic advance in the two herds indicated that very little attention was paid to the breeding worth of the sires in selecting the progeny retained for further breeding. The rates of improvement of the milk potentiality of the herds could have been increased if the sires used were systematically progeny tested at the earliest and this information utilised in the selection of their sons for breeding. That the current procedure of sire selection on the basis of the yields of their dams is not very dependable, may be seen from Table XXX. TABLE XXX Comparison of the indices of bulls with their dams' performance RED SINDHI HERD AT HOSUR RED SINDHI HERD AT BANGALORE Bull Number Bull's index (lb.) Dam's per- formance (lb.) Bull's Name Bull's index (lb.) Dam's per- formance (lb) 255 2917(27) 9164(3) Xavier 3104(9) 5136(5) 236 3895(18) 8229(6) Ziman 2587(19) 3630(8) 282 3167(23) 8229(6) Warrior 3163(7) 3467(8) 56 4976(9) 6419(5) Tazman 3160(10) 3465(8) 129(0) 4448(7) 5645(3) Unique 3312(18) 3111(8) 139 4060(11) 5339(4) 65 3203(12) 4782(3) 38 4029(17) 4642(6) 118(0) 4346(6) 4215(4) 124(0) 3343(11) 4206(3) 144 3117(23) 4206(3) 238 4301(7) 4134(3) 136(0) 4288(6) 2998(3) NOTE.80 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, The index for bull No. 255 in the Hosur herd was as low as 2917 lb. even though its dam's performance, averaged over three lactations, was as high as 9164 lb. Again amongst the five bulls in the Bangalore herd for which the dams' records were available, the index for Ziman was the lowest and that for Unique was the highest even though the average yield of Ziman's dam was higher than that of the dam of the latter bull. The above results clearly indicate that selection of bulls from high yielding dams is not sufficient to ensure their good transmitting ability. Emphasis should also be laid on the breeding worth of the sires of these young bulls. In other words the selected bulls should not only be from high yielding dams but should also have high yielding paternal half or full sisters. A uniform policy of using each bull in service on a sufficient number of cows to obtain about 15 daughters and of maintaining all the daughters until they complete one lactation on the farm will be necessary to assess the prepotency of the different sires used. Exceptions could be made only in the cases of calves suffering from contagious diseases or sterility. Retention of all female calves born till the completion of one lactation and selection of the stock on their milking performance would naturally necessitate the culling of the bulk of the cows after three or four lactations in the herd except for a few very high yielders, if the herd strength is to remain nearly constant. This would incidentally bring down the generation interval between dam and daughter. It is recognised that the increase in the proportion of first calvers in the herd would result in the dimunition of the annual herd average initially. Such a temporary loss is likely to be more than compensated by the accelerated pace of genetic improve- ment through a sounder selection policy. In so far as the principal object for which these herds are maintained is the production of superior genetic stock and not solely economic supply of milk as in the case of commercial dairies, it is of utmost importance that a scientific breeding programme which ensures most rapid achievement of the aim is adhered to in spite of any additional outlay necessary for carrying out such a programme. It is necessary to point out that the present study, comprehensive as it was aimed to be, suffered from handicaps owing to gaps in information which it would be desirable to avoid. For a critical quantitative appraisal of the changes brought about in a herd in the course of a period of years to be really fruitful, it is not only necessary that records on various relevant items are maintained carefully but it is also equally essential to have periodic statements describing specifically and accurately the breeding policy followed (including criteria for selection and the system of mating) and also the changes in it and in the feeding schedules and practices of management as and when introduced. Without these it is difficult to assign con- cretely the changes observed to different sources of variation and draw conclusions of practical value for the future. The few gaps in the data such as the maintenance of records of all the services including infertile ones, the specific reason for culling of each individual, the separate recording of milk yield at each time in the case of three times milking, etc. have been already mentioned. Except for this, the data which were on the whole carefully recorded provided a satisfactory basis for the present study.
June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND J. S. SRIVASTAVA 81 SUMMARY The paper deals with the statistical study of the breeding data pertaining to the Red Sindhi herds maintained at Hosur in Madras State and at Bangalore in the Southern Regional Station of the National Dairy Research Institute. The records studied pertained to a period of about 30 years and consisted of about 1200 lactation records from 343 cows in the case of the Hosur herd and about 1450 lactation records from 404 cows in the case of the Bangalore herd. The number of bulls used on these herds were 52 and 36 respectively. After a brief review of the practices followed in respect of feeding, management and breeding of these herds breeding regularity was examined by studying the age at first calving and the inter-calving period. The average age at first calving for both the herds was 41.7 ± 4 months while the interval between first two calvings was 546 ± 10 days for the Hosur herd and 447±8 days for the Bangalore herd. Progressive changes in the levels of production of important milk characteristics were examined, both by making overall comparisons of the cows belonging to different generations and through daughter-dam comparisons. In order to obtain a better comparison of the genetic makeup of the cows in the different generations, genera- tionwise comparisons adjusting for the variation from period to period due to changes in feeding, management and other environmental factors were carried out. The results indicated that while there was little overall improvement through breeding in the Hosur herd, a progressive improvement in lactation yield of about 170 lb. per generation was secured in the Bangalore herd. Sixteen bulls used on the Hosur herd and twelve used on the Bangalore herd, accounting for about 80 and 63 per cent of the cows with records, could be progeny tested for important milk characteristics. The index based on the daughters' first lactation average, corrected for the variation in the dams' level of production by regression, was worked out for evaluating the sires. These indices for the bulls at the Hosur Farm corresponded to herd averages of 3700 lb. for lactation yield, 11½ lb. for yield per day of lactation, 7 lb. for yield per day of calving interval 300 days for lactation period. The corresponding averages for the Bangalore herd were 2700 lb. for lactation yield, 10 lb. for yield per day of lactation, 7 lb. for yield per day of calving interval and 210 days for lactation period. Two bulls, viz. No. 56 and 129(0) in the Hosur herd, and two bulls, Victory and Unique, in the Bangalore herd had sire indices for lactation yield exceeding the respective herd averages by 20 per cent. The value of early records as selection criteria for improved performance in later lactations was examined by working out repeatability coefficients. The estimates of repeatability for lactation yield was 0.61 and 0.54 respectively for the Hosur and the Bangalore herds. The heritable components of the variations observed in respect of the different characters were estimated by working out heritability coefficients by the intrasire regression method. The heritability coefficients for lactation yield was high being 0.34 and 0.37 for the two herds. On the other hand calving interval and age at first calving had very low, non-significant values of heritability. 1 AR/58 7
82 STATISTICAL STUDIES ON BREEDING DATA [Vol. XXVIII, Part II The influence of age at first calving on first lactation yield and the effects of the order of lactation on important milk characters were examined and lactation correc- tion factors to convert later records to the first record basis were worked out. Studies to evaluate the effects of different environmental factors such as the preceding dry period, the service period and the season of calving on lactation yield were also carried out. 6. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The analysis of the breeding data available for two important herds in the country was made possible by the Director of Animal Husbandry, Madras and the Director of Dairy Research kindly agreeing to the past data from their respective Institutes being used for this purpose, under a project of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. The authors are grateful to the two Directors for the facility and co-operation accorded in the extraction from their records of the extensive data required for the study. The authors feel greatly indebted to Dr V. G. Panse, Statistical Adviser, Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the encouragement given in the prepara tion of this paper. The computational assistance rendered by Messrs. P. N. Soni V. Narayana Iyer and B. B. Nayar of the Council are also acknowledged with thanks. REFERENCES Berge, S. (1949). Anim. Breeding Abstr., 18, 157 Carnciro, G. C. and Lush, J. L. (1948). J. Dairy Sci., 31, 203 Dickerson, G. E. and Chapman, A. B. (1940). Amer, Soc. Anim. Prod. Proc., 16 Johansson, I. and Hansson, A. (1941). Kgl. Lantbruksadad Tidskr Nr., 65, 9 Krishnan, K. S. (1956). Indian J. vet. Sci. and Anim. Hush., 26, 149 Kohli, M. L. and K. R. Suri (1957). Indian J. vet. Sci. and Anim. Husbandry, 27, 105 Ragab, M. T. (1950). Ph.D. Thesis, University of Edinburgh AGE AT FIRST CALVING AND CALVING INTERVAL FOR SOME INDIAN HERDS OF CATTLE By V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN and P.N. SONI, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi [ Received for publication on March 13, 1958 Accepted for publication on March 19, 1958 ] DELAYED maturity coupled with long calving interval is a major cause for the uneconomic nature of dairying in India. A reduction in the age at first calving, apart from making maintenance of cattle more economical, will be helpful both for early selection of female stock on the basis of their own performance and for early progeny testing of bulls. It is the object of this article to present information on these characters for some dairy herds maintained at the cattle farms belonging to State Governments or other research institutions, data for which were collected and studied in the past few years at the Statistical Wing of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. Information gathered on village cattle from a survey conducted by the Council is also given below. AGE AT FIRST CALVING Average for farm cows Information on the average age at first calving of six herds of farm cattle studied is given in Table I. TABLE I Average age at first calving of farm cows Herd Number of cows Average age at first ] calving (months) Standard error (months) Coefficient of variation Red Sindhi herd, Livestock Research Sta- tion, Hosur, Madras State 350 41.7 0.4 15 Red Sindhi herd, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore 289 41.7 0.4 13 Kangayam herd, Livestock Research Sta- tion, Hosur, Madras State 477 44.1 0.4 20 Gir herd, Indian Dairy Research Institute, Bangalore 88 47.0 0.8 15 Kankrej herd, Institute of Agriculture, Anand, Bombay State 98 47.4 0.8 16 Tharparkar herd, Government Cattle Farm, Patna, Bihar State 422 49.4 0.4 14 83 1 AR/58 8
84 AGE AT FIRST CALVING AND CALVING INTERVAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, It may be seen from Table I that the average age at first calving was about 42 months for both the Red Sindhi herds. The age at first calving was higher for all the other herds, being of the order of 44 months for the Kangayam breed of cattle at Hosur and 47 to 49 months for the other herds. The coefficient of variation for the age at first calving in the different herds varied from 13 to 20 per cent, Average age for village cattle Data relating to the age at first calving of village animals in the States of Punjab and PepsuJune, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND P. N. SONI 85 Heritability Scope for reduction in the age at first calving of farm cows through selection was examined by estimating the heritability of this character. Intrasire regression estimates of the coefficient of heritability for the different herds are given in Table III along with the standard errors. TABLE III Estimates of heritability of age at first calving of farm cattle Herd Degrees of freedom Heritability Standard error Red Sindhi herd, Hosur 192 86 AGE AT FIRST CALVING AND CALVING INTERVAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, TABLE IV Distribution of age at first calving with average first lactation yield Agei n months Red Sindhi herd at Hosur Red Sindhi herd at Bangalore Kangayam herd at Hosur Tharparkar herd at Patna Frequency Average first lactation yield (lb.) Frequency Average first lactation yield (lb.) Frequency Average first lactation yield (lb.) Frequency Average first lactation yield (lb.) 28June, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND P. N. SONI 87 Influence of age at first calving on milk production Influence of the age at first calving on first lactation yield was studied for four of the herds in the cattle farms mentioned earlier. The Gir and the Kankrej herds were omitted from this study as the data available for these two herds were inadequate. The average first lactation yield for cows having age at first calving in different intervals is given in Table IV. The results of analysis of variance (Table V) indicated that the average lactation yield for the groups of cows having different ages at first calving showed significant variation for the Red Sindhi and Kangayam herds at Hosur and for the Tharparkar herd at Patna. The trend in the lactation yield was, however, different for the three herds. Among the Red Sindhi cows at Hosur, those which calved prior to 33 months or later than 52 months of age were poor yielders. The average lactation yield for groups of cows having age at first calving within this range did not differ significantly from group to group. For the Kangayam cows at Hosur progressive decrease in average lactation yield for cows having longer age at first calving was noticed up to the age group 49 to 52 months. The trend for the Tharparkar herd at Patna was almost the reverse ; the average lactation yield for cows in the later age groups was generally higher than that for the earlier groups for this herd. The foregoing results indicate that the influence of age at first calving on milk yield differed from breed to breed and also from herd to herd for the same breed. CALVING INTERVAL Average for farm cows The average interval between first two calvings for the different herds of farm cattle is given in Table VI TABLE VI Average calving interval for farm cows Herd Number of cows Average calving interval (months) Standard error (months) Coefficient of variation Red Sindhi herd, Hosur 261 18.0 0.3 30 Red Sindhi herd, Bangalore 237 14.7 0.3 26 Kangayam herd, Hosur 317 16.7 0.3 28 Gir herd, Bangalore 69 15.7 0.5 27 Kankrej herd, Anand 73 16.2 0.4 21 Tharparkar herd, Patna 376 14.8 0.2 22
88 AGE AT FIRST CALVING AND CALVING INTERVAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, It may be seen from Table VI that the average calving interval for the different herds varied from 15 to 18 months. It is interesting to note that herds having the lowest and the highest average calving interval are both of the Red Sindhi breed. AVERAGE FOR VILLAGE CATTLE From the data pertaining to the survey on village animals conducted in the States of Punjab and Pepsu referred to earlier, the average age at second calving was estimated for the different breeds of cattle and buffaloes. By taking the difference between the ages at the two calvings, the interval between the first two calvings was estimated. The averages and the standard errors for the age at second calving and the calving interval are presented in Table VII. TABLE VII Average age at second calving and first calving interval for village animals Breed Age at second calving Calving interval Number of cows Average (months) Standard error (months) Coefficient of variation Average (months) Standard error (months) CowsJune, 1958] V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND P. N. SONI 89 is of the order of 17 months, The estimate for Sahiwal breed based as it is on an extremely small number of cows is of poor precision as shown by the high standard error attached to it, Heritability The extent to which variation in calving interval can be ascribed to heritable causes was examined by working out the heritability coefficient, The intrasire regression method was adopted for estimation. The estimates obtained for the different herds (Table VII) indicated that the variation observed in this character was wholly due to non-genetic causes. Out of the six herds for four the heritability estimates were negative, due obviously to sampling fluctuations. TABLE VIII Estimates of heritability of calving interval Herd Intrasire degrees of freedom Horitability Standard error Red Sindhi herd, Hosur 155 90 AGE AT FIRST CALVING AND CALVING INTERVAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part I the Gir and the Kankrej herds such correction factors could not be worked out owing to the inadequacy of the data. In the case of these two herds an alternative pro- cedure for the removal of the effect of the order of lactation was adopted by confining the analysis to the data on cows each having records for the first three calving intervals. Though this procedure sacrificed some information the resulting loss was not heavy as the number of cows with more than four lactation records was not big. It may be seen from Table IX that the repeatability estimates of calving interval were not significant for four of the six herds studied. Only for the Red Sindhi herd at Hosur and the Tharparkar herd at Patna the repeatability coefficients were significantly different from zero and the estimates for both the herds were of the order of 0.2. TABLE IX Estimates of repeatability of calving interval Herd Degrees of freedom Repeatability 95 per cent confidence interval Between animals Within animals Red Sindhi herd, Hosur 274 517 0.21 0.13 to 0.28 Red Sindhi herd, Bangalore 243 609 0.08 0.00 to 0.22 Kangayam herd, Hosur 331 681 0.08 0.01 to 0.14 Gir herd, Bangalore 43 86 0.17 0.00 to 0.37 Kankrej herd, Anand 33 66 0.17 0.00 to 0.39 Tharparkar herd, Patna 407 1174 0.19 0.14 to 0.24 DISCUSSION The results obtained for the average age at first calving for the different breed of cattle in the farms as well as in villages indicated that the age at first calving for Indian cattle is substantially higher than that for the herds in the temperate regions for which it varies from 27 to 30 months [Turner 1932, Dickerson and Chapman 1940 and Johansson and Hansson 1941]. Studies reported on other Indian herds
June, 1958J V. N. AMBLE, K. S. KRISHNAN AND P. N. SONI 91 also indicated similar results [42.4 months for the Red Sindhi herd at Allahabad Agricultural Institute reported by Stonaker et al. 1953 and 58.8±.2 months for the Hariana herd at Hissar reported by Kohli and Suri 1957]. The average calving interval for the different herds studied varied from about 15 months to 18 months. These results are in agreement with those reported for other Indian herds [16 months for the Red Sindhi herd at Allahabad Agricultural Institute reported by Stonaker et al. 1953 and 17.5±0.2 months for the Hariana herd at Hissar reported by Sharma and others 1951]. Heritability studies on the age at first calving and the calving interval indicated that the variation in respect of both these characters have to be ascribed largely to non-genetic causes such as feeding and management. It would, therefore, appear that selective breeding in respect of these characters with a view to getting more economic strains of cattle is not likely to be very successful. Exception should, however, be made for the Kankrej and the Tharparkar herds in respect of age at first calving. Scope for reduction in the age at first calving through selection is indicated in these two herds. It is of interest to note that the average age at first calving was higher for these two herds than for other herds. The poor breeding performance of Indian cattle has resulted generally in the longer generation interval for them compared to the foreign herds. The mean generation interval, i.e. the average age of parents when their offspring is born was of the order of about six years for the Red Sindhi herd at Hosur, seven years for the Red Sindhi herd at Bangalore and the Kangayam herd at Hosur and about eight years for the Tharparkar herd at Patna. These intervals were longer than those reported for the foreign herds of dairy cattle which ranged from about three and a half years to five and a half years [Lush et al., 1936, Johansson 1949 and Rendel and Robertson, 1950]. SUMMARY The average age at first calving for some Indian breeds of cattle were worked out both from farm and survey data. The average age at first calving varied from 42 to 49 months for the farm herds of cows and was about 47 months and over 50 months for village cows and buffaloes in the Punjab. Scope for reduction in the age at maturity through selection was examined by working out heritability esti- mates for age at first calving in the different herds. These estimates indicated that for two of the herds having a relatively higher age at first calving such scope for reduction existed. An examination of the influence of age at first calving on first lactation yield indicated divergent trends for the different breeds. The average calving interval between first two calvings for the different herds studied, varied from 15 to 18 months, calculation of heritability and repeatability coefficients indicated that there was little genetic variation present for exploitation through selection and that the early calving interval record of a cow is not correlated appreciably with the later calving intervals. 1 AR/58 9
92 AGE AT FIRST CALVING AND CALVING INTERVAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, REFERENCES Dickerson, G. E and Chapman, A. B. (1940). Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod. Proc., 16 Johansson, I and Hansson, A. (1941). Kgl. Lantbruksaded, Tidskr, No. 65 Johansson, I. (1949). Sartryck Ur. Kungl. Lanthruksakdemiens. Agr., 88 Kohli and Suri (1957). Indian J. vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb., 27, 105 Lush, J. L., J. C. Hulbert and O. S. Willham (1936). J. Heredity, 27, 61 Rendol, J. M. and Alan Robertson (1950). J. Genetics, 50, 1 Sanders, H. G. (1927). J. Agric. Sci., 17, 339 Sharma, G. P., Vali, K. N. and Suri, K. R. (1951). East Punjab University Res. Bull. No. 18 Stonaker, H. H., Agarwala, O. P. and Sundaresan, D. (1953). J. Dairy Sci., 36, 678 Turner, C. W. (1932). Missouri Agric. Exp. Sta. Res. Bull. No. 164
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS ON INTRA-UTERINE TREATMENT WITH ANTIBIOTICS IN REPEAT-BREEDERS By S. N. LUKTUKE, P. R. V. NAYUDU and P. BHATTACHARYA, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (U.P.) [Received for publication on September 19, 1957 Accepted for publication on December 28, 1957 ] DELAY in conception due to repeat breeding is a problem in several cattle breed- ing farms. Recently, attention has been focussed on the role the infectious venereal diseases play in it. Information concerning saprophytic and pathogenic bacterial flora in the bovine reproductive tract is not yet available in India. The investigations which are in progress at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar reveal that Streptococci, Staphylococci and Corynebacteria are of common occurrence in the reproductive tract of buffaloes. [Balprakasam, 1956.] Various work- ers from abroad have reported the isolation of non-haemolytic and haemolytic Strep- tococci, Staphylococci, Neisseria, Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and various diph- theroids including Corynebacterium renale and Corynebacterium pyogenes from the bovine reproductive tract [Hallman, 1921; Beaver et al., 1922 ; Fitch and Bishop, 1932 ; Hancock, 1942 ; Hatch et al, 1949 ; Easley et al., 1951; Lindley and Hatfield, 1952 ; Gunter et at., 1955.] Frank and Bryner [1952] isolated E. coli, Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus bovis, Corynebacterium bovis and Vibrio foetus from the uteri of cows. Infection of the reproductive tract is one of the major causes of sub- fertility in cattle. Ascending infection from vulva and vagina to the uterus invari- ably causes endometritis. Chambers [1948] first recorded successful use of intra-uterine treatment with penicillin in repeat breeders. Encouraging results with antibiotics in treating repeat breeders have also been reported by Herrick [1951] and Lindley [1954]. Intra-uterine treatment with antibiotics has been successfully attempted in vibrionic bovine infertility by Sjollema et al. [1949], Easterbrooks and Plastridge [1950] and Adler [1954]. The present investigation was taken up with a view to determining the efficacy of the intra-uterine treatment of repeat breeders with antibiotics. MATERIAL AND METHODS Thirty six cows and four heifers belonging to the Experimental Hariana Herd at Izatnagar were used in this investigation. Among the cows included in the experiment, four cows had calved last in 1953, thirteen in 1954, fifteen in 1955 and the remaining four early in 1956. In 11 cows, two services did not result in pregnancy and they were taken for treatment on returning to the third service. 93 1AR/58 10
94 INTRA-UTERINE TREATMENT [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, Twentyfive cows had received more than three services each and had not settled. The heifers were 4-5 years old and did not conceive after two services. In all these animals no reason for failure of conception could be detected. A proprietary preparation (Streptopenicillin-Dumex) containing : Penicillin G Procain 3,00,000 I.U. Penicillin G Sodium 1,00,000 I.U. Streptomycin 0.5 g. and Dihydrostreptomycin 0.5 g. was dissolved in 40 ml. of sterile distilled water. A sterilised glass catheter (com- monly used for artificial insemination) was introduced through the cervical canal by the usual technique and the solution was injected in both the horns of the uterus with the help of a 50 ml. record syringe. This intra-uterine infusion was given 24 hours after insemination. Twenty-four cows received one intra-uterine treatment while the remaining twelve received one more treatment at the subsequent oestrus. The heifers received only one treatment. All the treated animals were carefully watched for the recurrence of oestrum after insemination and treatment. Pregnancy was clinically diagnosed between 45 and 60 days after insemination. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The details of the results obtained are presented in Table I. TABLE I Intra-uterine treatment with antibiotics in 'repeat breeder' cows Cow No. No. of calvings Date of last calving No. of infertile services Results Remarks 338 6 26-3-55 10 N.P. 340 6 26-3-55 2 P. 346 7 4-3-56 2 P. Pregnant after 2 treatments 353 6 24-7-55 7 N.P. 2 treatments 434 8 21-11-55 2 N.P. 448 7 1-8-55 2 P. Pregnant with A. I. at heat subsequent to treatment 454 4 1-2-56 2 N.P. 457 2 12-2-53 11 P. Pregnant after treatments 465 4 11-5-55 4 P. 471 4 9-12-54 3 P. Pregnant with A. I. at heat subsequent to treatment
June, 1958] S. N. LUKTUKE ET AL. 95 TABLE I96 INTRA-UTERINE TREATMENT [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, It will be observed that out of 36 cows treated, 20 cows conceived after one treatment. Six of these cows did not settle to the service at treatment but conceived at the following service. Ten cows became pregnant after two treatments. Four of these cows conceived as a result of insemination at the oestrum following the second treatment. The results, presented in Table I appeared in pp. 94-95 are summarised below : No. of infertile services No. of cows treated No. of cows conceived after One treatment Two treatment 2 11 6 3 3 7 5 2 2 7 5 1 5 4 3 1 6 and above 7 1 3 TOTAL 36 20 10 The details of the results obtained in heifers are presented in Table II. TABLE II Intra-uterine treatment with antibiotics in 'repeat breeder' heifers Heifer No. Date of birth No. of A. I. Result Remarks 757 23-3-51 2 P. 823 29-2-52 2 P. Pregnant with A. I. at heat subsequent to treatment 835 10-2-52 2 P. 865 5-5-52 2 N.P. P : Pregnant N.P. : No Pregnant Tanabe and Casida [1949] observed that the initial fertilisation rate in 104 repeat breeding cows of Holstein and Guernsey breeds was as high as 66.1. per cent, three days after service. But at 34 days the percentage having normal embryos had dropped to 23.1 and there was an embryonic death rate of 65.11 per cent. They considered that embryonic mortality was one of the major causes of repeat breeding. Casida [1950] listed 'uterine infections' among others as a major cause of embryonic mortality leading to repeat breeding. Chambers [1948] gave intra-uterine treatment with 1 to 5 lakh units of penicillin to five clinically normal repeat breeder cows. All the treated cows were successfully bred at oestrus subsequent to the treatment. Herrick [1951] gave intra-uterine penicillin and streptomycin treatment to 78 repeat breeders, of which 67 per cent became pregnant at first service. Easterbrooks and Plastridge [1950] recommended the use of streptomycin and penicillin for vibrionic infertility in dairy cows. It will be observed from Tables I and II that 83.33 per cent cows and 75 per cent
June, 1958] S. N. LUKTUKE, ET AL. 97 heifirs settled as a result of intra-uterine treatment with antibiotic in the present inves- tigation. As the fertilized ovum reaches the uterus 3 to 4 days after servicee [winters et al., 1942], there is apparently no harm in giving intra-uterine treatmet one or two days immediately following the oestrum. This will not interfere with fertilisa- tion but will allow time for reaction of antibiotics on the bacterial flora of the uterus [Lindley 1954]. As the spermatozoa reach the fallopian tube within 2-5 minutes of service, Lindley attempted infusions of the uterus with antibiotics as early as 30 minutes after insemination without interferring with conception. He, however, recommends that this practice may be resorted to only where it is impractical to treat the cow one day after service. If the cows are treated during oestrum prior to breeding, there is every danger of interference with conception [Fincher, 1952]. Treatment with a combination of penicillin, streptomycin and sulphanilamide is reported to cover a wider spectrum of bacteria. Intra-uterine infusion with a solution having such a combination is expected to give quite encouraging results in repeat breeders. Lindley [1954] recommends the use of 2-5 lakh I.U. penicillin-sodium and 1 gm. of streptomycin dissolved in 50 ml. of 12 per cent sulfapyridine solution for intra-uterine infusions. These high initial dosages of antibiotics are considered necessary to eliminate the possibility of the offending organisms acquiring resistance [Molomut et al., 1956]. The incidence of various coital infections viz. trichomoniasis, vibriosis and epivag, etc., in India is not yet known. Trichomoniasis has been recently detected in Bengal and Bihar States [Basu 1956, Das 1956, Ishaque et al., 1957]. Mohan [1954] conducted investigations on vibriosis in three different herds comprising of 82 cows and 7 she-buffaloes. One buffalo-cow gave positive reaction to the vaginal mucus agglutination test conducted with vibrio antigen. The vaginal mucus agglutination test conducted by Luktuke et al. [1956] on Hariana cows and Murrah buffaloes at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar and the European cross-bred cows at the Military Dairy Farm, Bareilly with the Swedish vibrio antigen did not reveal the presence of vibriosis in these herds. Vibriosis has been recorded in many countries in Europe. During the past few years we have imported, especially into the southern part of India, many bulls from abroad. There is every likelihood of the disease existing in India. Brucellosis is also widespread in the country. The survey conducted by Polding [1947] indicated that brucellosis occurred in almost all farms and in many villages of India, in the form of low-grade enzootics causing 1-5 per cent abortions. During the countrywide survey on bovine infertility in India, Bhattacharya et al. [1953] observed the incidence of subfertility varying between 8 and 10 per cent in herds comprising over 25 animals. The most common causes of reduced fertility were either sub-functioning of the gonads or metritis. In over 1,000 animals observed to be sub-fertile, the incidence of repeat breeders was 11 per cent. In 1,020 buffalo genitalia obtained from the Municipal abattoir, Bareilly and examined by them [1954], the incidence of metritis was observed to be as high as 27 per cent. It is commonly noticed that the first post-partum oestrous discharge in cows and buffaloes under village conditions is often muco-purulent. The possible cause could be the unhygienic condition of the byres, where parturition occurs. Artificial breeding is being widely adopted for the rapid development of our cattle wealth, and the veterinarians engaged in artificial insemination work
98 INTRA-UTERINE TREATMENT [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, have to exercise great care against the spread of genital infections. Every effort must be made to observe strict hygienic precautions in the collection, dilution and preservation of semen, and in handling artificial insemination equipment. Without such precautions, there is every chance that the animals, instead of receiving artificial insemination, will get infected. The results with the antibiotics in the present investigations are encouraging. Their indiscriminate use for treating infectious venereal diseases is, however, not desirable. Random use of antibiotics in human medicine has already resulted in the development of some strains of Staphylococci resistant to penicillin. The use of antibiotics in animals is so far limited, and the veterinarians have to be cautious in handling this 'double-edged weapon'. SUMMARY The repeat breeders, (36 cows and 4 heifers,) were given intra-uterine treatment with an aqueous solution containing 4,00,000 I.U. of penicillin and 1 gram of streptomycin. The treatment was given 24 hours after insemination. Out of the treated animals, 20 cows [58.33 per cent] conceived after one treatment and 10 cows [27.7 per cent] became pregnant after two treatments. Out of the four heifers treated, three conceived as a result of a single treatment. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors express indebtedness to the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar for his interest in the work. REFERENCES Adler, H. C. (1954). Nordisk Vet. Med. 6 : 214 Balaprakasam, R. A. (1956). Personal communication Basu, B.K. (1956). Personal communication Beaver, D. C., Boyd, W. L. and Fitch, C. P. (1922). Minn. Agri. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bull. 5 Bhattacharya, P., Luktuke, S. N., Rao., A. S. P. and De, S. K. (1953). Ann. Report, IVRI., Izatna- gar, 1953-54 June, 1958] S. N. LUKTUKE, ET AL. 99 Herrick, J. B. (1951). Haver-Glover Messenger 31. 12. (Citation from Advances in Vet. Sci., Acad. Press. Inc.) Pub. N.Y. 214 Ishaque S. M. and Kuppuswamy, P. B. (1957). Indian vet. J. 34. 273 Lindley, D. C. (1954). J. Am. V. M. A. 124. 187 EFFECT OF HIGH AIR TEMPERATURE ON PREGNANCY IN CATTLE By G. C. TANEJA*, Department of Physiology, University of Queensland, Australia [ Received for publication on June 13, 1957 Accepted for publication on November 20, 1957 ] DELETERIOUS effects of temperature on the reproductive ability of bulls have been reported by several workers [Phillips and McKenzie, 1934 ; Bonsma, Scholtz and Badenhorst, 1940 ; Bonsma, 1949 ; Erb, Andrews and Hilton, 1942 ; Casady, Myers and Legates, 1953]. Similarly, loss of sexual function in rams due to hot environments has also been recorded [Phillips and McKenzie, 1934 ; McKenzie and Berliner, 1937 ; Grain, Sanders and Granger, 1942; Dutt, 1953 ; Dutt and Simpson, 1954]. Sundstroem [1927] found that male rats exposed to hot-room for eight months failed to impregnate the oestrus females. It is also apparent that seasonal temperature and number of services required per conception are correlated, at least where the temperature is very high [Hilder, Fohrman and Graves, 1944; Morgan and Davis, 1938 ; Trimberger and Davis, 1945]. However, our knowledge about the effects of heat on reproduction in the female is limited. Decline in the fertility of cows because of high environmental tempera- ture has been reported [Villegas, 1939 ; Hammond, 1949 ; Bonsma 1949 ; Bonsma- Marle and Hofmeyr, 1953]. Several workers [Steinach and Kammerer, 1920 ; Sundstroem, 1922 and Ogle, 1934] have recorded loss of sexual function in female mice exposed to hot environments. Ragsdale, Brody, Thompson and Worstell [1948] reported that two brucellosis-free dairy cows aborted 4½ and 6- month foetuses respectively two days following 27 hour exposure to a temperature of 100°F. Heitman, Hughes and Kelly [1951] who studied the effect of temperature on pregnant sows, reported that one sow out of 13 aborted on the 103rd day of gestation. Studies of Yeates [1953] showed an adverse effect of heat on pregnancy in the sheep. In his experiments using Romney Marsh sheep, only one out of six ewes exposed to high air temperature [105°F dry-bulb and 87°F wet-bulb] daily, throughout pregnancy, lambed. Thus it is apparent that pregnancy may be disturbed by high air temperature in some species at least. However, as there is no certain evidence of any adverse effect of heat on preg- nancy in cattle, the experiment described below was undertaken to ascertain the position in this species. *Present address: College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbadnry-cum-Livestock Research Institute, Mhow (M.P.). 101 1 AR/58 11
102 AIR TEMPERATURE AND PREGNANCY [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, NATURE AND SCOPE OF EXPERIMENT It was decided to investigate whether the normal course of pregnancy in cattle is impaired by high air temperature or not. This involved keeping two groups of cattle. One group acted as a control. The second, comprising the experimental animals, was subjected to high atmospheric temperature. By running both groups of cows with the bull twice a day, oestrus and services were noted. It was thought probable that early pregnancy, say the first two months, would be most susceptible to high air temperature, mainly, because implantation in the cow occurs at the 33rd day [Milton, Berry and Butler, 1951]. However, to test precise periods of the early stages, the experimental group was divided into 3 sub- groups containing animals which were heated for periods centring round the 10th, 30th and 50th days of pregnancy respectively. The duration of experimental heating decided upon was 7 or 8 days, after which close watch was kept for the possible return to oestrus. MATERIAL AND METHODS (a) Animals Twelve Australian Illawara Shorthorn [A.I.S.] heifers, each about two years of age, were used in this experiment. The animals were in good condition and came from a brucellosis-free herd. A healthy fertile bull from the experimental herd was used for mating and testing for oestrus. (b) Management The animals were kept on natural grazing at the Experimental Farm at Long Pocket (Brisbane). The animals were grazed on a white clover and Paspalum dominant pasture, including also couch and Rhodes grass. During the experimental period, the pasture conditions remained satisfactory and no extra feeding was required. The animals were drafted into the mating yard twice daily, where they were joined by the bull for indicating oestrus. For the rest of the day, the bull was kept away from the cows. The animals had access to water in the mating yard only. (c) Experimental groups After the animals were numberd from 1 to 12, they were divided randomly into 4 groups of 3 each. One of these groups served as a control for 3 experimental sub- groups. All the animals were mated with a fertile bull. Those in the control group were allowed to proceed with pregnancy but as the animals in each of the
June, 1958] G. C. TANEJA 103 three experimental groups completed 10, 30 and 50 days' pregnancy respectively, they were subjected to heat treatment. The groups of animals and their identi- fication numbers are given in Table I. TABLE I Constitution of experimental and control groups Group Number of animals Identification No. Control 3 1, 6, 9 10-days' pregnancy 3 5, 3, 11 30-days' pregnancy 3 4, 7, 10 50-days' pregnancy 3 2, 8, 12 (d) Hot-room An air-conditioned room in which both temperature and humidity could be controlled was used for this study and 105°F dry-bulb and 88°F wet-bulb provided the atmospheric conditions selected for preliminary heating of each animal. This was varied as necessary according to the "resistance" or otherwise of the animals to heat. The air movement in the hot room was 60 cu.ft./minute. Animals were provided with feed and water during their stay in the hot room. PROCEDURE Prior to using the bull it had been ascertained that all the twelve cows were com- ing into oestrus regularly. After completion of at least two oestrus cycles, each cow was mated. Non-return to the bull was considered an indication of pregnancy. Each heat-treated animal remained in the hot room for 7-8 days, room tempera- ture being varied as necessary from the basic level to raise the animal's rectal tem- perature each day to 106-107°F. At night, the heat was turned off and the doors of the room were left slightly open to provide a temperature which was "safe" while the animal was unattended, yet which preserved an elevated body temperature until the next morning. After each animal completed the hot room treatment, it was returned to the farm where it was kept in a stall for a week for observation. During this week and through the remainder of pregnancy, the heat treated animal along with others was brought to the bull twice a day to test for oestrus. During the course of heat treatment one of the cows (No. 2) died on the second day of the heat treatment. It was decided to sacrifice one animal (at 4 months' pregnancy) randomly selected from each of the three experimental groups to look for any abnormal effects. However, as the 50 days' pregnancy group was already
104 AIR TEMPERATURE AND PREGNANCY [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, left with only two animals (cow No. 2 having died) no animal from that group was slaughtered. Later on, one animal from each of the three experimental groups was again exposed to heat at 5 months' pregnancy for 7-8 days. Atmospheric conditions in the room were the same as before. These animals were also observed closely for a week following the heat treatment. RESULTS Morning and evening rectal tempratures of all the cows studied in the experi- mental and control groups are presented in Table II. It appears from Table II that during the entire heat exposure, the morning body temperature of the ex- perimental animals was higher than that of normal, while the evening body tem- perature reached to a critical level of 106-107 °F each day. TABLE II Rectal temperatures (°F) of cows from various heat treated and control groups Group Cow No. Rectal temperature* Morning Evening Control 1 101.20±0.32 102.18±0.48 6 101.12±0.38 102.37±0.42 9 101.00±0.39 102.20±0.40 10 days' pregnancy 3 102.94±1.11 106.27±0.61 5 103.30±1.33 105.84±0.66 11 102.69±0.83 106.31±0.66 30 days' pregnancy 4 103.07±0.83 106.00±1.05 7 103.06±0.95 106.33±0.86 10 102.87±0.96 106.17±0.40 50 days' pregnancy 2 103.30±0.00June, 1958] G. C. TANEJA 105 (a) Effect of heat at 10th, 30th, and 50th day of pregnancy Of the nine cows exposed to high air temperature at various stages of pregnancy only one (No. 10) returned to oestrus subsequent to heat exposure, and that about two months after the heat treatment. The exact date of the oestrus was not recorded. The same cow (No. 10) was again exposed to heat for 8 days about 2 months after the second mating. The morning and evening temperatures of this animal were 103.24±0.51 and 105.57±0.63, respectively, during the heat exposure. This time the pregnancy held. The animal was slaughtered at about 200 days of pregnancy and the foetus was found to be normal. It weighed 32 lb. Cows Nos. 4 and 5 were each slaughtered at approximately the fourth month of pregnancy. Both pregnancies were found to be normal. (b) Effect of heating at 5th month of pregnancy Cows Nos. 3 (Group I) and No. 12 (Group 3) were again exposed to high air tem- perature at about 5 months' pregnancy. Their morning and evening rectal tem- peratures reached to 102.42±0.51 and 106.40±0.04 °F, respectively for cow No 3 and 103.14±1.21 and 106.19±1.17 (respectively) for cow No. 12. (c) Effect of heat treatment on birth weight of the calves Birth weights of the calves from the various heat-treated and control groups are given in Table III. From this it would appear that the heat treatment used was without effect. TABLE III Birth weights of calves Control Exp. Group No. 1 Exp. Group No. 2 Exp. Group No. 3 Cow No. Wt. of calf Sex Cow No. Wt. of calf Sex Cow No. Wt. of calf Sex Cow No. Wt. of calf Sex lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. lb. oz. 1 66 0 M 3 78 0 M 7 57 8 F 8 62 8 F 6 65 8 M 11 56 0 F 106 AIR TEMPERATURE AND PREGNANCY [Vol. XXVIII, Part II, heated throughout the whole of pregnancy. Short periods of only 7-8 days' duration were used in this experiment mainly in the hope of defining precisely particular periods of gestation which might be specially vulnerable to heat. In our experiments, the body temperature of the pregnant cows exposed to heat always-remained higher than that of control. In the evening, however, the body temperature reached a critical level of about 106-107°F each day. Under such a heat-stress, pregnancy remained undisturbed suggesting that the animals were well adapted to heat. Whereas Ragsdale, Brody, Thompson and Worstell [1948] reported abortion of 4½ and 6- month foetuses respectively in two cows, two days following a 27-hour exposure to heat, no abortion occured in the present experiment. This difference possibly relates to differences in the adaptability of the two groups of animals used. It might be that the Australian Illawara Shorthorn has, through selection, become adapted to the warmer Australian environment and so show heat effects less readily than cattle in colder regions such as U.S.A. Although our experiments failed to show any effect of heat on birth weight of the calves, Bonsma [1948, 1949] reported that calves born after a summer gestation are small in the case of unadapted breeds of cattle. He, however, found no difference in the birth weight of calves born to cows of adapted breeds. This also supports the suggestion that the A.I.S. breed is well adapted to heat. SUMMARY Twelve Australian Illawara Shorthorn cows were divided into four groups of three cows each. One group acted as a control. Animals in the other three groups were heated for periods centring round the 10th, 30th and 50th days of pregnancy res- pectively. These animals were again heated at about 4 months' pregnancy. The heat exposure for experimental animals lasted for 7-8 days at an average room tempera- ture of 105°F dry-bulb and 86°F wet-bulb. During the entire heat exposure, the morning body temperature of the experi- mental animals was higher than that of control, while the evening body temperature reached a critical level of 106-107°F each day. Under these conditions of heat stress, the pregnancy in all the Australian Illa- wara Shorthorn cows proceeded normally with one exception when the pregnant animal after heat treatment returned to oestrus. Body weights of the calves born to heat-treated cows were the same as that of the control. It appears that this breed is relatively well adapted to hot environments. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author is grateful to Professor W. V. Macfarlane for his assistance, advice and encouragement and to the members of the staff of the Physiology Department, University of Queensland (Australia) for their kind co-operation. The author is also grateful to his supervisor Dr. N. T. M. Yeates for his guidance and particularly for his advice during preparation of the manuscript.
June, 1958] C. C. TANEJA 107 REFERENCES Bonsma, J. C. Scholtz, G.D.J., and Badenhorst, F.G.J. (1940).ABSTRACTS Some observations on bovine pasteurellosis in Kenya, Parts I and II. SHRILAW, J. F. (1951). Brit. Vet. J., 113, 35-46 and 71-87 SHIRLAW traced the history of incidence of haemorrhagic septicaemia in cattle in Kenya Colony as gleaned through the annual reports of the Veterinary Department, Kenya and outlined reliable methods for accurate and rapid bacteriolo- gical diagnosis of the disease, such as bone-marrow and blood culture and biological tests on white mice. The peculiar epizootiological features were that outbreaks occurred throughout the year, uninfluenced by climatic variations and persisted on a few stock farms with higher attack rate over a period of several months. No cases were encountered in sheep running with affected cattle. The author could not isolate any strain of Pasteurella septica from the nasophenynx of slaughtered cattle at Kabete, Kenya. The morphological and biochemical characters of 25 strains of P. septica isolated from field outbreaks of the disease were given. These were found to be fully capsulated and virulent only when grown in 0.1 per cent bovine or rabbit blood broth for a period of 7 days at 37.5°C and after 10 to 15 hours in 10 per cent serum agar of pH 7.6. Variations of pH temperature and period of incubation did not materially influence the capsule formation. Biochemically all the strains behaved as typical P. septica belonging to Robert's type 1, except four strains that fermented maltose. Strains of P. septica survived in artificially infected pond water for periods varying from 10 to 30 days and maintained their virulence when held in plain broth at laboratory temperature for periods ranging from 80 to 145 days. The author recorded his failure to maintain through successive subcultures the stability of a rough avirulent strain evolved as a vaccine strain, which was found to confer good protection in the early tests. Challenge strains employed in the work on immunity were maintained by weekly rabbit passage and culturing of heart blood on serum agar plates. The blue colonies were subcultured on blood agar. Though in vitro trials indicated that all strains were equally sensitive to aureo- mycin, streptomycin and penicillin, penicillin therapy proved a failure in experi- mental pasteurellosis in rabbits as well as in natural cases of the disease in cattle. In the hands of the author agglutination tests were of no value in determining the serological types within the species. Studies on immunological typing of field strains could not be carried out due to an outbreak of salmonellosis in stock mice. The author reported the successful evolution of a concentrated formalinised vaccine, prepared from strains of high virulence and capsular content, which was found to bestow a high degree of immunity in cattle up to a period of one year following vaccination. Field trials with the new vaccine confirmed its efficacy. Its keeping 109 1 AR/58 12
110 ABSTRACTS quality was found to be good even under adverse conditions of storage. For pro- duction of this new vaccine, seeded Roux flasks of bovine meat extract broth at pH 7.6 containing 0.1 per cent haemolysed bovine blood were incubated at 37.5°C for a period of 7 days. Further particulars of its method of preparation and biolo- gical standards prescribed for its use in the field were described. Earlier investiga- tions by the author on other methods of prophylaxis showed chick embryo vaccine and aggressin to be of limited value, while immune serum and saponin vaccine were of 'doubtful efficacy '. (P.) Spraying to control warble fly. D. STEWART MACLAGAN. (1957). Agriculture (Lond.) LXIII (12), 564-67 THE author reviews briefly the present methods adopted for the control and eradication of warble fly and gives the results of some of the experiments carried out on this problem in different parts of the world in recent years. He states that, though the practice of dressing warble fly affected cattle with derris wash has proved to be of considerable success in Great Britain, on the continent of Europe and in America the progress in reducing the infestation is still disappointingly slow. The latest approach to the problem is by way of internal medication using the organo-phosphate insecticides such as Diazinon, Chlorthion and ET-57, with the object of killing the migrating larvae before or as soon as they arrive in the subdermal tissues on the back of the affected animal. Some good results have been obtained in America by this method as regards the killing of the larvae inside the cattle is concerned, but a systemic insecticide of sufficiently low mammalian toxicity to allow an adequate margin of safety in general use by farmers has not yet been found and until such a chemical is found a supplementary method of hastening the eradica- tion of Hypoderma would be by preventive spraying. The author thinks that the diversity of opinion concerning the effectiveness of the sprays arises from differences in formulation, concentration and toxic ingredients of the various preparations used, and in a few instances from injudicious timing of the application. In a number of trials, good results have been achieved by spraying with DDT and BHC. The protective action of DDT is found to be superior to that of BHC. In a pilot trial with an emulsion of 3 per cent DDT the author got 66 per cent reduction in the number of animals infested with more than two warbles and a 70 per cent reduction in the average number of warbles per animal. Each treated animal received ? pint of fluid in the form of a mist-like spray on its flank, belly, legs and escutcheon. Application was made only once but the results show that two applications at half the concentration would do better. Modern sprays based on micro-crystalline ingredients and cationic wetters ensuring a heavy deposit of the toxicant on hair and the advent of highly persistent insecticides such as Dieldrin and Ciazinon, are heralding a new era in preventive spraying, and the possibility of other methods, particularly the preventive spraying supplementing or even replacing the existing method of treating cattle with rotenone-containing washes, has increased. (R.P.C.)
ABSTRACTS 111 Effect of progesterone therapy on embryo survival in cows of lowered fertility. J. N. WILTBAND, H. W. HAWK, H. E. KIDDER, W. G. BLACK, L. C. ULBERG and L. E. CASIDA. (1956). J. Dairy Sci. 36 : 456-461 WITH a view to study the effects of exogenous progesterone on embryonic survival in repeat-breeding cows, the authors conducted an experiment on 134 cows having history of impaired fertility without any detectable abnormality. Progesterone was injected subcutaneously in doses of 50 mg. and 200 mg. daily in groups of 36 and 31 cows respectively. An equal number of cows was kept as controls. The cows were bred about 12 hours after the onset of heat. The injec- tions were started 3 days after the beginning of heat and were continued until the cows were slaughtered 34 days after the commencement of oestrus, or earlier in case the corpus luteum started to regress. Sixteen cows out of 36 receiving 50 mg. of progesterone had normal embryos at 34 days (44.4 per cent) as compared to 12 (33.3 per cent) in the control cows. Of the 31 cows injected with 200 mg. of progesterone, 12 (38.7 per cent) had normal embryos as compared to 8 (25.8 per cent) in the control animals. The differences in the number of normal embryos between the treated and control cows in 50 mg. trial (11.1 per cent) as well as in 200 mg. trial (12.9 per cent) were not statistically significant. When the data of both the treated groups were combined and compared with the controls, the differences were also not found significant. The authors suggest that this study should be carried out on a large number of cows in order to draw a definite conclusion. They are of the opinion that pro- gesterone therapy may help in embryo survival in cows of lowered fertility. (S.N.C.) Cooling cattle by mechanically increasing air movement. F. R. ITTNER, C. F. KELLY and T. E. BOND. (1957). (University of California), J. Anim. Sci. 16 : 732-736 EARLIER work by the same authors had shown that animals kept in wire enclosures showed greater gains in body weight than those kept in wooden enclosures. It was suspected that this difference was due to cooling by increased air movement and hence the study was undertaken. Beef steers were divided into lots of seven each and kept in identical wooden enclosures, of which one was ventilated with a 42 in. barn-ventilating fan (17,000 c.f.m. capacity) during, 70-day periods in the summers of 1955 and 1956. The summer of 1955 was exceptionally hot and humid (mean temperature and humidity (80°F and 46 per cent respectively) while 1956 summer was particularly cool and dry (68°F and 36 per cent). The fan caused winds with velocity of 325 f.p.m. in the centre of the experimental per while the control pen recorded a velocity of 55 f.p.m. in 1955. Measurements of wind velocities were not taken in 1956.
112 ABSTRACTS It was observed that in 1955, the cattle gained 2.37 lb. per head per day in the fan pen as against 1.29 in the controls. In 1956, the gains were 2.40 and 1.87 respectively. These differences were significant at 1 per cent level. Four other more manageable animals were observed for the effect of air move- ment on skin and body temperatures. Body temperatures were reduced by 1.35 to 0.05°F while skin temperatures were reduced by 5.8°F to 1.5°F. The authors suggest that air movement causes convective cooling, possibly due to evaporation of moisture, up to about 106°F. At higher air temperatures wind causes convective heating. (P.G.N.) The development of calves reared on varying amounts of whole milk. JANET P. TIBBITS J. Agric. Sci. (1957). 49, 328-345 INVESTIGATIONS have been reported on the influence of feeding varying amounts of milk on the growth and development of body form of heifer calves. Following the randomized block layout, 75 Shorthorn calves were divided into three groups reared on 40, 65 and 90 gal. whole milk. Except for the milk allow- ance, calves in all the three groups were fed and managed alike. The first two groups received a gruel supplement to keep the total liquid allowance same in all groups. It was found that the calves on the 40 gal. milk allowance were significantly retarded, compared to both the other groups, from 2 months until one year. No significant difference was noticed between the calves reared on the 65 and 90 gal. milk allowances at any stage. A second experiment consisted of four groups of 28 Shorthorn and 28 Friesian calves reared on 35, 57, 79 and 100 gal. of milk. Instead of gruel, a dry meal was allowed at varying ages. With regard to live-weight, a significant difference between the treatments was found only between 13 and 23 weeks. Fifteen linear body measurements showed even lesser differences between the four groups. A breed effect was noticed between the groups, the Shorthorns showing greater differences both in live-weight and most of the body measurements. The results of both experiments indicated that increasing the milk allowance above 57-60 gal. would not produce appreciably greater gains in live-weight (I.K.) Effect of naturally occurring outbreak of New Castle disease on egg quality and production. JOSEPH P. QUINN, A. W. BRANT and CLARENCE H. THOMPSON. J. Poult. Sci. 35, No. 1-196, page 3-9 A flock of 149 early hatched White Leghorn pullets selected and bred for superior albumen quality was affected with New Castle disease, but a similar lot of 62 late hatched pullets which were sisters and half sisters of the infected pullets and
ABSTRACTS 113 housed 600-700 yards away were not affected by the disease and so served as con- trols. Serum-neutralization test of the affected birds proved positive and the test was negative in the control birds. The quality factors compared were weight, candling appearance, albumen score, shell quality and deterioration of percentage of thick white. A total of 3,817 eggs were examined. Eggs were also held at 100°F for 14 days to note the deterioration in the percentage of thick white, and the rate of deterioration was observed by keeping eggs at 100°F for 10 and 7 days and at 77°F for 7 days. Nine hundred and twenty five eggs were opened out to observe the amount of blood spots in the infected and in the control groups. Daily egg production and mortality were maintained in both the groups. After recovery, the difference in egg weight of pullets affected with New Castle disease was significant at 1 per cent level as compared to controls, throughout the months of June, July, September and October. The control birds laid better quality eggs as compared to New Castle disease-recovered pullets, as judged by candling. When the eggs were kept at 100°F for 14 days the loss in percentage of thick white was practically the same in both groups, before the onset of the disease. The thick albumen of the control group declined by about 27 per cent more in the summer than in the winter, whereas the thick albumen in the eggs of the experimental pullets declined by about 142.0 per cent. The summer eggs of control pullets registered a slightly higher percentage of thick white than the winter eggs but in the experi- mental birds the total weight of albumen decreased slightly but the total weight of percentage of thick white increased slightly or remained constant, resulting in a slightly higher percentage of the thick white. With respect to candling quality, albumen score and egg weight less, New Castle disease-recovered pullets laid inferior eggs as compared to the controls. Even though the percentage of thick white of the infected pullets was slightly higher than in the non-infected pullets, the albumen score of the former was lower than the latter indicating that the apparent viscosity of the thick white had been severely damaged. The weight of eggs of the New Castle disease-recovered pullets was less as com- pared to controls but when incubated the loss in weight of the experimental bird was lower in comparison to the controls, thus indicating better shells for the experi- mental birds. But this was an exception as infection of New Castle disease in cutbred, cross-bred and incross-bred pullets registered watery albumen, poor shape and texture of shell after recovery. Out of 459 eggs of the infected pullets examined, 15 registered blood sports as compared to 14 blood sports in 466 eggs of the normal pullets, thus indicating that the New Castle disease does not affect the incidence of blood sports. There was a sharp drop in egg production with the onset of the disease but returned to normal after registering " zero " production, which is characteristic of the disease. Mortality was higher in the group that recovered after the disease than in the controls due perhaps to the lowered vitality resulting from the outbreak of the New Castle disease. (T. D. M.)
REVIEWS MERCK VETERINARY MANUAL Published by Merck & Co., Inc. U. S. A., pp. 1347. Price $7.50 MERCK Veterinary Manual was first published in 1955, and was reprinted in 1957. Its publication is stated to have been stimulated by the firm's " exten- sive research and interest in veterinary science, as well as the wide and enthusiastic reception accorded to the Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy by the medical and allied professions" More than 200 contributors are said to have co-operated in the preparation of this volume, " ensuring accuracy and completeness of all basic physiologic, pathologic, and therapeutic information......Diagnosis and therapy are given primary emphasis but pathology and epizootiology have not been neglected. Surgical procedures are mentioned wherever indicated, but are not described". Though emphasis has been placed on conditions occurring in North America, the almost encyclopaedic information packed in this handy volume should prove very useful to students and practitioners of veterinary medicine in all countries. The book is divided into five main parts. Part I, which occupies the bulk of the volume, deals with diseases and abnormalities of the various body systems and tracts116 REVIEWS At the end of each section is given a list of selected prescriptions, numbered for convenience of reference in the text, covering standard pharmacopoeial drugs as well as modern proprietory preparations representing not the preferences of the editors but the recommendations of the various contributors. A brief fairly represen- tative list of alternative proprietory preparations, grouped into general therapeutic categories, is also provided in Part V. The book includes an exhaustive subject index, which provides the convenience of cross titling. The get-up is excellent and the publishers deserve to be congratulated on their admirable effort to present to the profession such valuable information in so well arranged and concise a volume. (R.N.M.) THE ALIMENTARY TRACTS OF RUMINANTS BY D. P. Benzie and A. T. Philipson. Published by Oliver and Boyed Price: 27s. 6d. THIS book which is in fact a radiological atlas of the alimentary tract of the rum- inants is probably the first of its kind ever to be published. It contains a large number of radiographic reproductions (54 plates) of the movements of the stomach of the small ruminants. Six kid goats, twelve lambs, six adult sheep and four calves were used for recording the observations. Six other adult sheep of small size were used for making cine-radiological film. These records illustrate the movements of the compound stomach of the ruminant and the manner in which the food is propelled through its various compartments. The object of using cine-radiography was to take serial exposures so as to clearly record the movements of the stomach. These records provide valuable information on the abdominal anatomy and physio- logy of the ruminants. The use and the value of radiographic technique in studying the movements of the alimentary tract of the ruminant has been fully illustrated. It also indicates the necessity and desirability of careful training of the experimental animals for radiological work in order to achieve successful results. The publication of this book at a time, when the study of ruminant physiology, is engaging the active attention of research workers the world over, seems rather appropriate. It would be of immense help for research workers as well as teachers interested in anatomy and physiology of the ruminants. MGIPCGASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES I118 GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, entertidis, were re-examined by Smith and Scot [1930] and found to be serologically identical with Salm. dublin of White. These authors concluded that this organism had a special association with cattle and that the cow's milk was the common vehicle of human infection. This conclusion has been amply confirmed by the findings of Bosworth and Lovell [1931], Bartel [1938], Lutje [1939], Henning [1939, 1953] and others. Henning [1953] in a comprehensive review of the literature on the subject has shown that the world-wide distribution of calf disease due to salmonella infection and that the infection with Salm. dublin is by far the most common. From the available information, infection with Salm. typhimurium appears to come second in the order of incidence, both as a cause of disease in calves [Baar and Gliesch, 1939 ; Hansen, 1947 ; Field, 1948 ; and Henning, 1939, 1953] and in adult bovines [Field, 1949]. In New Zealand, where according to Bishop [1950] and Josland [1950] Salm. dublin has not been recorded so far, all the 80 isolations made by the latter author from bovine sources were found to be Salm. typhimurium. Similarly in Australia, outbreaks of calf salmonellosis due to infection with Salm. typhimurium appear to be the commonest according to Simmons and Sutherland [1950]. Out of five outbreaks recorded by these authors four were due to this organism. In the earlier literature there has been no differentiation between Salm. dublin and Salm. enleritidis infections. As most of the outbreaks recorded as due to Gaert- ner's bacillus or Bact. enteritidis were probably due to Salm. dublin, it is difficult to make out the relative incidence of typical Salm. enteritidis alone. The later reports, however, show that the infection with this organism is much less commonly res- ponsible for outbreaks of disease in calves [Henning, 1953]. Occasionally outbreaks of calf salmonellosis from other organisms like Salm. bovismorbificans [Atkinson, Woodroofe and Culver, 1952 ; and Henning, 1953], Salm. bredeny [Howarth, Cordy and Brittle, 1954] and Salm. orientalis [Simmons and Sutherland, 1950] have also been recorded. In India, Shirlaw [1935] isolated a Salmonella-like organism from an outbreak of disease among young calves with heavy mortality. This organism was later identified as Salm. enteritidis-var-dublin by Rajagopalan [1938]. After that, though outbreaks of disease in calves were sometimes suspected to be due to Salmonella infection [Report, 1942-43] they were not confirmed by bacteriological diagnosis. Priestley and Artioli [1946] encountered heavy mortality among buffalo calves in military farms in Lahore area. Out of 282 calves born at various farms under their observation as many as 204 (72.1 per cent) died within 14 days of birth. Organisms resembling Salm. typhimurium were recoverd from 76 out of 124 calves examined. Salm. dublin was not recovered from any case in this group. From six cases over one month of age dying of scouring disease, organisms resembling Salm. dublin were isolated from mesenteric lymph nodes of five. Although Salmonella species such as Salm. dublin and Salm. enteritidis are patho- genic mainly for cattle, particularly calves, they are pathogenic for man also. In the literature cited by Henning [1953], it is quite apparent that in the past, these organisms have been very frequently responsible for widespread outbreaks of food poisoning in man. Recently McColl [1953] reported an outbreak of food poisoning
September, 1958] S. S. KHER AND M. R. DHANDA 119 caused by Salm. dublin affecting 610 cases. The cause of spread was raw milk from a tuberculin tested herd. Salm. dublin was isolated from the milk, udder and the faeces of an affected cow. It has been observed [Field, 1948] that the adult cattle, after a clinical recovery from salmonellosis, usually remain carriers and con- tinue to discharge the organisms for an indefinite period. Under Indian conditions where there is much closer association of livestock with human beings, both in rural and urban areas, this should form an important source of infection and a potential danger to human health more than anywhere else. It is quite likely that many cases of this nature occurring in rural areas go unrecorded. MATERIAL AND METHODS Source of material Seventyfour cases of Salmonella infection described in this article were out of a total of 191 examined at three places, namely, Government Milk Colony, Aarey, Bombay ; Government Dairy Farm, Chakganjaria, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh and the Experimental Dairy Herd of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar- Kumaon, Uttar Pradesh. The materials for bacteriological examination were collected at necropsy. Though calves up to the age of three months were included for study, the majority of the calves examined, i.e. 179 out of 191, were within one month of age. TABLE I Source of material Place Number of buffalo calves Number of cow calves Total Government Milk Colony, Aarey, Bombay 177 (71)* .. 177 (71) Government Dairy Farm, Chakganjaria, Lucknow, U.P. 5 (2) 3 (1) 8 (3) Experimental Dairy Herd of Indian Veterinary Re- search Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaon, U.P. .. 6 6 Total 182 (73) 9 (1) 191 (74) *The figures in parenthesis are of cases found positive for Salmonella infection.
120 GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, At the Government Milk Colony, Aarey, which provided the bulk of the material for this investigation, the cases examined were from Calf Rearing Farm and from widely separated component units of the colony. Female calves fit for rearing were selected from the units to be raised at the Calf Rearing Farm. At the Rearing Farm calves were housed in pens constructed on modern lines and sufficient accommo- dation was available for calves in various age groups to be housed separately. For the first few weeks the calves were fed on reconstituted milk supplemented with vitamins A and D in the form of shark-liver oil and the change to concentrates and roughages was made gradually. The general hygiene and management conditions were considered satisfactory. In the units, the stock belong to private owners. There are 26 units in all. Each unit houses 475-500 lactating buffaloes with their young stock. The standard of calf husbandry in the units varied from owner to owner and was, on the whole, not very satisfactory. Of the cases received from these units usually no ante-mortem history was available. At the Government Dairy Farm, Chakganjaria, Lucknow, the dairy stock consists of both cows and buffaloes. In January 1954, when the farm was first visited, it was observed that from the age of three days onward up to about six months, calves were kept in a large open compound with hardly any shelter to protect them from the rains and winds. Later, at our suggestion, the younger calves were separated from the older ones and when the Farm was visited next in October 1954, the young calves were being kept separately in small sheltered paddocks along with milking sheds. The calves at this farm are allowed to suckle their dams up to the age of two months when they get on to the concentrate diet. The Institute Experimental Dairy Herd at Mukteswar consists of a mixed stock of Holstein-Fresian-Aryshire-native cross, Hill and Afghan breeds of cattle. The calves are weaned at birth and kept together with other calves up to three months of age in calf pens made by partitioning the milking byre. Colostrum and milk September, 1958] S. S. KHERA AND M. R. DHANDA 121 were picked up and transferred to a suitable medium with a view to obtaining pure cultures for further study. In some cases where there were more than one type of colonies on the plate as judged by the naked eye and by means of a hand lens, a single colony of each type was picked up. Isolation of Salmonella cultures from faeces For most of the cases, the material from the stomach and the intestines was dealt with mainly for the isolation of organisms of the Salmonella group. Besides sowing a loopful of the contents directly on MacConkey's agar plate, about half to one gram of the material was transferred into tetrathionate broth or selenite broth and sometimes into both when available. After incubating at 37°C for 24 hours in the case of tetrathionate broth and for 30 hours in the case of selenite broth [Smith, 1952] the cultures were plated on desoxycholate citrate sucrose-salicin agar (according to Haines et al. [1947] modification of Leifson's [1935] medium). The plates were incubated for 48 hours. When non-lactose fermenting colonies appeared, 4 to 6 of them were picked up for testing for urease production in Maslen's [1952] modification of Chirstensen's [1946] urea medium. The cultures proving negative for urease production after incubation for 24 hours were collected for study. Identification of Salmonella cultures Preliminary differentiation was done on the basis of biochemical reactions accord- ing to Kauffman [1954]. Cultures showing typical reactions of Salmonella sp. were confirmed and identified by means of group and factor Salmonella antisera. Group and factor, somatic (0) and flageller (H), antisera were obtained from Stan- dards Laboratory, Collindale, London and a few more were received from the Patho- logy Department, Armed Forces Medical College, Poona (India). Fourteen cultures, which could not be typed with the help of available antisera were identified by Salmonella Reference Laboratory, Collindale, London. RESULTS Out of a total of 191 cases examined, Salmonella organisms were isolated from 74 cases ; 71 (out of 177) from Government Milk Colony, Aarey, Bombay and three (out of eight) from Government Dairy Farm, Chakganjaria, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. None of the six cases examined from the Institute Experimental Dairy Herd at Mukteswar was found positive for Salmonella infection. Table II shows the types of Salmonella involved in relation to the age at death Salm. dublin was isolated from 45 cases, Salm. typhimurium from 11 cases and Salm. enteritidis from four cases. Other species isolated from the remaining 14 cases have been recorded, apparently, for the first time in this country. Some species such as Salm. weltevreden, Salm. richmond and Salm. nchanga have been occasionally reported from cases of gastroenteritis in man. There appears to be no record of their isolation from animals. Salm. newport, which was isolated from two cases in this series and Salm. butantan and Salm. chester, which accounted for one case each have often been isolated from cases of infantile diarrhoea and gastroenteritis in man. Salm. newport is one of the most common types met with in outbreaks of food poison- ing in mam in Great Britain and the U.S.A. Birds, particularly chickens, turkeys and ducks and pigs appear to be the chief animal reservoirs of this Salmonella species
122 GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, Other species, i.e. Salm. pomona and Salm. hvittingfoss, which were isolated each from one case, have been recorded only occasionally from man and domestic animals in foreign countries and appear to be rather infrequent in occurrence. TABLE II Correlation of age with the type of Salmonella infection Salmonella type Number of cases. Death within Total 1st week of birth 2nd week of birth 3rd week of birth 4th week of birth 2nd month of birth 3rd month of birth Total examined 24 60 52 33 9 13 191 Salm. dublin 2 8 10 10 4 11 45 Salm. typhimurium 1 5 3 1 1 11 Salm. enteritidis 1 1 1 1 4 Salm. weltevreden 3 3 Salmonella sp. un- identified (pro- bably Salm. wel- tevreden). 2 2 Salm. newport 1 1 2 Salm. richmond 2 2 Salm. Chester 1 1 Salm. pomona 1 1 Salm. nchanga 1 1 Salm. hvittingfoss 1 1 Salm. butantan 1 1 Total 3 16 18 19 6 12 74 The nature of disease, observed on post-mortem examination, showed some case to case variation regarding acuteness and distribution of lesions. In general, the degree of acuteness was closely related to the age of calf at death rather than the type of Salmonella infection involved. Usually, in cases below two weeks of age and rarely in cases above three weeks, the infection was septicaemic in nature.
September, 1958] S. S. KHERA AND M. R. DHANDA 123 There was acute hyperaemia in internal organs and multiple haemorrhages in serous membranes and different organs, especially those of the digestive tract. In these cases usually the Salmonella organisms were isolated in pure culture from blood and various organs from which cultures were made. In older calves the morbid picture was less acute and frequently complicated with a pulmonary lesion. Thus, pul- monary lesion varying from one or more patches of consolidation in a lung to acute croupous pleuro-pneumonia affecting both lungs was present in 29 out of 55 cases above the age of two weeks, and five out of 19 below two weeks. In some cases the pulmonary disease appeared to predominate over the lesions in the digestive tract. A brief description of each case is given in Appendix I. The frequency with which ascending inflammatory lesions of umbilicus and umbilical vessels was involved attracted particular attention. This was usually accompanied with spreading exudative inflammatory condition of adjacent tissues. In all, the umbilical lesion was noticed in 23 cases and Salmonella cultures were isolated from the umbilical vessels in ten cases. It is difficult to point out the significance of this isolation from this location. It appears likely that in some cases the infection, leading to general disease, might have been contracted through the unhealed umbilical stump especially when the newborn calves were herded together in groups under unhygienic conditions. The number of cases showing the presence of pulmonary and umbilical lesions of varying degree in rela- tion to age at death are shown in Table III. TABLE III Occurrence of pulmonary and umbilical lesions in relation to age Age at death within Number of cases Number of cases positive for Umbilical culture positive for Salmonella pulmonary lesion of varying degree umbilical lesion one week 3 1 3 2 two weeks 16 4 10 5 three weeks 18 8 6 3 four weeks 19 9 4 0 two months 6 4 124 GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, In the bacteriological examination of material from different organs, the aggre- gate figures of positive Salmonella cultures obtained from various sites are given in Table IV. It was observed that organisms of the Salmonella group could be isolated with greater ease and almost in pure culture from mesenteric lymph nodes and spleen. Although enrichment media were employed for isolation from stomach and intestinal contents, only 51 positive cultures could be obtained. TABLE IV Isolation of Salmonella organisms from various organs in 74 cases Site Number positive Percentage Heart blood 30 40.5 Spleen 49 66.2 Mesenteric lymph nodes 53 71.6 Stomach and intestinal contents 51 68.9 Liver or bile 16/25* 64.0 Umbilical vessels 10/23 43.5 *The numerator denotes the number of samples positive and the denominator the number of samples examined. The occurrence of such a large variety of Salmonella types among calves at all places under study calls for a more extensive study to be carried out, especially in view of the public health importance of the disease. Since, after a clinical re- covery from salmonellosis adult cattle usually remain carriers and continue to discharge the organisms in their faeces, for an indefinite period, an attempt was made to see if these could be the source of infection for calves. With this object in view faecal samples from 100 buffaloes at Government Milk Colony, Aarey and 100 cows and 100 buffaloes at Government Dairy Farm, Chakganjaria, were examined once only for faecal excretors of Salmonella. None of the animals examined at Aarey yielded a positive culture while at Chakganjaria four cows and one buffalo were found to excrete Salmonella in their faeces (see Table V). All the three Salmonella types isolated from cows and buffaloes were earlier recovered from cases of calf disease that were investigated.
September, 1958] S. S. KHERA AND M. R. DHANDA 125 TABLE V Salmonella exeretors in cows and buffaloes Place Samonella type i olated Buffaloes Cows Number ex am ined Number positive Number examined Number positive Government Milk Colony, Aarey 100 Government Dairy Farm, Chakgan- jaria 100 1 100 4 Salm. richmond 1 Salm. hvittingfoss 1 Salm. pomona 1 2 DISCUSSION The primary object of this study was to survey the bacterial causes of digestive diseases of young calves in this country. Although the number of cases examined during the course of this investigation was small to allow of a correct estimate of the frequency with which the various types of infectious agents occurred, yet the study furnished an idea of the large variety of organisms that are associated with gastroenteritis in young calves at the places under study and possibly, also in other areas. The infection with various members of the Salmonella group accounted for the greatest number of cases in this investigation, i.e., 74 out of 191 (38.74 per cent). It was observed that Salmonella infection was responsible for mortality more fre- quently in calves above the age of two weeks. Thus, in the first two weeks of life, when the primary cause of disease can be ascribed to a variety of non-specific sub- sidiary factors, only ten out of 84 deaths recorded were due to Salmonella infection while among the older calves, out of 107 cases there were 55 deaths, dying between the ages of two to three weeks and 43 out of 55 cases (67.3 per cent) above the age of three weeks. It is interesting to note the isolation of as many as eleven different types of Salmonella. All except Salm. pomona were isolated from Bombay and three types namely, Salm. typhimurium, Salm. enteritidis and Salm. pomona were responsible for one case each at Lucknow. Salm. dublin which was responsible for 45 cases at Bombay was not recorded from Lucknow. None of the cases examined at Mukteswar was found positive for Salmonella infection. Salm. dublin, Salm. typhimurium and Salm. enteritidis, which accounted for a total of 60 cases are known to be frequently responsible for calf salmonellosis 15 AR/58 3
126 GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, and have a world-wide distribution. Salm. typhimurium is the most cosmopolitan of all types, which may infect any mammal or bird. It commonly causes septicaemia in young animals and birds and gastroenteritis in man. The other two species, particularly Salm. dublin, are pathogenic mainly for cattle and buffaloes [literature cited by Henning, 1953 and Kraneveld et al., 1950]. The other types are relatively uncommon in occurrence. All of these have been occasionally isolated from cases of gastroenteritis in man and the types Salm. newport, Salm. butantan, and Salm. Chester have also been isolated from cases of infantile diarrhoea by Hormaeche, Peluffo and Aleppo [1940] and Peluffo et al. [1946]. In the present work these Salmonella types were isolated from cases of septicaemia and acute gastroenteritis in young calves. It is difficult to define their exact role in the aetiology of disease in calves as it was not possible to undertake experiments to reproduce the disease in healthy calves. This record of isolation of such a variety of Salmonella types from calves tends to point out the importance of buffalo calves and cattle as animal reservoirs of Salmonella organisms in this country. All these types are infective to man. The countries in which statistics of outbreaks of food poisoning are available, Salm. typhimurium, Salm. enteritidis and Salm. newport are reported to account for more than 80 per cent of the total number of outbreaks. Salm. dublin and Salm. Chester have also been responsible for a small proportion of outbreaks [Wilson and Miles, 1955]. There is ample evidence to show that adult cattle after clinical recovery from salmonellosis remain carriers and continue to excrete Salmonella organisms in their faeces for indefinite periods. Although the real distribution of the types isolated in this investigation remains obscure, yet it would appear that adult cattle and buffaloes constitute important animal reservoirs in this country. In view of the importance of the members of the Salmonella group in human and veterinary pathology it is highly desirable to extend the investigation to other areas of this vast country so as to make the findings more representative in character. SUMMARY In 191 calves that died within three months of birth and showed gastro- enteritis as a gross lesion, infection with various members of the Salmonella group was encountered in 74 cases. The different types isolated were: Salm. dublin from 45 cases, Salm. typhimurium from 11 cases, Salm. enteritidis from 4, Salm. weltevreden from 5, Salm. newport from 2, Salm. richmond from 2 and Salm. chester, Salm. pomona, Salm. nchanga, Salm. butantan and Salm. hvittingfoss, from one case each. In an attempt to trace the source of infection for calves, faecal samples of 100 cows and 100 buffaloes at one farm and 100 buffaloes at another were examined for faecal excretors. At the first farm four cows and one buffalo were found to excrete three different types of Salmonella. All the three types i.e., Salm. pomona, Salm. richmond and Salm. hvittingfoss, have been recorded from cases in calves. The importance of isolation of such a variety of Salmonella types from calves is discussed from public health point of view,
September, 1958] S.S. KHERA AND M. R. DHANDA 127 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are grateful to Shri L. Sahai, Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar-Mukteswar, for providing the necessary laboratory facilities at the Institute and to Dr. Joan Taylor, Director, Salmonella Reference Laboratory, Colindale Avenue, London, for type identification of some of the Salmonella cultures. Their thanks are also due to Dr. R. L. Kaura, Director of Animal Husbandry, Uttar Pradesh, Shri D. N. Khurody, Milk Commissioner, Bombay and Shri M. R. Marathe, Chief Veterinary Officer, Government Milk Colony, Aarey, for their co-operation and help in carrying out work at the farms under them. The first author wishes to express his grateful thanks to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the grant of Research Fellowship and sanctioning extra funds for visiting farms in connection with the work. APPENDIX I A brief description of each case dealt with in this article Salmonella dublin (45 cases) Buff. 32, M, 3 weeks. Both lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and intestinal contents. Buff. 36, M, 4 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, both lungs hyperaemic with consolidation of anterior lobes. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and spleen. Buff. 45, F, 2 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, peritoneum and abdominal viscera congested, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 51, M, 1 week. Both lungs hyperaemic, gastroenteritis, peritoneum congested, omphalo and periom- phalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood, various organs and umbilical vein. Buff. 52, M, 3 weeks. Apical lobe of left lung pneumonic, gastroenteritis, haemorrhages in peritoneum, gall bladder distended with bile. Salmonella isolated from spleen and mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 62, F, 2 weeks. Enteritis with blood stained contents, spleen hyperaemic and enlarged. Salmo- nella isolated from heart blood, spleen and intestinal contents. Buff. 65, F, 4 weeks. Pneumonic patches in both lungs, acute gastroenteritis, haemorrhages in peri- toneum, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 68, M, 2 weeks. Both lungs hyperaemic with haemorrhagic foci, acute gastroenteritis, spleen con- gested and enlarged, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood, umbilical vein and various organs. Buff. 69, F, 2 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, umbilical abscess and omphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 70, M, 3 weeks. Both lungs hyperaemic with haemorrhagic foci, acute gastroenteritis, peritoneum and abdominal viscera congested. Salmonella isolated from spleen and mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 88, M, 1 week. Anterior lobe of left lung pneumonic, acute gastroenteritis, omphalo and periom- phalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 90, M, 3 weeks. Haemorrhagic pleuritis with acute congestion of both lungs, acute gastroenteritis, haemorrhages in peritoneum and necrotic foci in liver. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 96, F, 3 weeks. Left lung pneumonic, gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic, omphalo and periem- phalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from spleen and Bact. coli from mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 99, M, 4 weeks. Both lungs hyperaemic, gastroenteritis, extensive blood extravasations in peri- toneum. Salmonella isolated from spleen and liver.
128 GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, Buff. 100, F, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic, with ecchymosis in capsule, omphalo and perioniphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and liver. Buff. 440, F, 3 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, blood extravasations in peritoneum, spleen hyperaemic and swollen. Salmonella isolated from spleen, liver, and mesenteric lymph node. Buff. V55, F, 3 months. Lungs pneumonic, gastroenteritis, peritoneum and abdominal viscera highly congested. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and intestinal contents. Buff. 103, F, 4 weeks. Left lung pneumonic and acute gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from spleen. Buff. 104, F, 3 weeks. Lungs pneumonic, acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella iso- lated from heart blood and mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 106, F, 3 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with fibrinous pleuritis, acute gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood. Buff, 111, F, 2 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic and swollen. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 119, F, 4 weeks. Right lung pneumonic, enteritis, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 121, F, 6 weeks. Patches of hepatisation in both lungs, gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from spleen, mesenteric lymph node and bile. Buff. 122, F, 3 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella iso- lated from spleen and mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 127, F, 4 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic and swollen. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 128, F, 6 weeks. Fibrinous pleuritis and pneumonic patches in both lungs, enteritis, gall bladder distended with bile. Salmonella isolated from spleen. Buff. 132, F, 6 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, peritoneum and abdominal viscera highly congested. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 133, M, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic, gall bladder dis- tended with bile, omphalo and perioniphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from spleen and um- bilical vein. Buff. 134, F, 3 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, gastroenteritis, omphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 148, F, 3 months. Abscesses of varying size in both lungs and acute gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 149, M, 4 weeks. Lungs and abdominal viscera congested, gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from spleen. Buff. 150, F, 4 weeks. Lungs pneumonic, gastroenteritis, spleen and liver hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 158, M, 3 months. Patches of hepatisation in both lungs, acute gastritis and enteritis. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 171, M, 3 months. Lungs and abdominal viscera highly congested, gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 174, M, 3 months. Pneumonic patches in both lungs, acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from various organs. Buff. 177, M, 3 months. Lungs pneumonic and gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from spleen and mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 179, F, 4 weeks. Fibrinous pleuritis and pneumonia, enteritis, omphalo and periomphalophlebi- tis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 180, F, 3 months. Lungs hyperaemic, gastroenteritis with blood stained contents. Salmonella isolated from spleen and mesenteric lymph node. Buff. 181, F, 3 months. Lungs studded with small abscesses, gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and spleen. Buff. 189, F, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis, gall bladder distended with bile, spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs.
September, 1958] S.S. KHERA AND M.R. DHANDA 129 Buff. 190, M, 4 weeks. A large abscess in left lung, acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic with ecchy- mosis on capsule. Salmonella isolated from spleen. Buff. 195, M, 3 months. Lungs hyperaemic, gastroenteritis, round worms in intestines. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and spleen. Buff. 198, M, 2 months. Acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic and swollen. Salmonella isolated from spleen and intestinal contents. Buff. 200, M, 3 months. Both lungs pneumonic and acute gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from spleen and intestinal contents. Buff. 206, F, 3 months. Lungs hyperaemic and acute gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and spleen. Salmonella typhimurium (11 cases) Buff. 28, M, 3 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis with blood stained contents. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and intestinal contents. Buff. 73, M, 3 weeks. Gastroenteritis, haemorrhages in peritoneum, spleen hyperaemic, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from spleen and lymph node. Buff. 79, M, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with exudative pleuritis acute gastroenteritis, necrotic foci in liver, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from various organs. Buff. 84, M, 4 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with consolidation of anterior lobes, acute gastroenteritis, necrotic foci in liver. Salmonella isolated from spleen and liver. Buff. 86, F, 3 weeks. Fibrinous pleuritis and pneumonia, acute gastroenteritis, gall bladder distended with bile. Salmonella isolated from various organs. Buff. 98, F, 3 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, peritoneum and abdominal viscera highly congested. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node and bact. coli from heart blood and spleen. Buff. 107, F, 3 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic and enlarged, omphalo and periomphalo- phlebitis. Salmonella isolated from various organs. Buff. 155, M, 6 weeks. Lungs pneumonic and acute gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from mesen- teric lymph node and intestinal contents. Buff. 185, M, 3 months. Fibrinous pleuritis and pneumonia, gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node and intestinal contents. Buff. 193, F, 4 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic and enlarged. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 64L, F, 4 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic and acute gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from mesen- teric lymph node, bile and intestinal contents. Salmonella enteritidis (4 cases) Buff. 39, F, 4 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with ecchymosis in pleura, acute gastroenteritis, ecchymosis in peritoneum. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and spleen. Buff. 44, F, 1 week. Lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic and swollen, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 101, M, 3 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, blood extravasation in peritoneum, spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node, liver and intestinal contents. Buff. 174 L, M, 2 months. Pneumonic patches in lungs and acute gastroenteritis. Salmonella isolated from intestinal contents. Salmonella weltevreden (3 cases) Buff. 75, M, 4 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis haemorrhages in peritoneum, spleen hyperaemic; gall bladder distended with bile, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node. Proteus Sp. from spleen. Buff. 159, M, 4 weeks. Abscesses in lungs, fibrinous pleuritis, enteritis, haemorrhages in peritone um spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node and intestinal contents. Buff. 201, M, 4 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with ecchymosis in pleura, gastroenteritis, abdominal viscera highly congested. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node and intestinal contents.
130 GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES [Vol. XXVIII, Part III Salmonella sp. unidentified (Probably Salm. wellevreden) (2 cases) Buff. 53, F, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with ecchymosis in pleura, acute gastroenteritis, extensive haemorrhages in peritoneum. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff. 153, M, 2 weeks. Fibrinous pleuritis and pericarditis, lungs congested, acute gastroenteritis, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated in pure culture from bile, mixed with bact. coli from spleen and mesenteric lymph node. Salmonella newport (2 cases) Buff. 64, M, 3 weeks. Both lungs pneumonic, acute gastroenteritis, extensive haemorrhages in the peritoneum, omphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from heart blood and various organs. Buff, 439, F, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis, peritoneum and abdominal viscera highly congested, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from spleen. Salmonella richmond (2 cases) Buff. 80, M, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with haemorrhagic foci, acute gastroenteritis, spleen and liver hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from spleen, mesenteric lymph node and intestinal contents. Buff. 120, F, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with patches of hepatization, acute gastroenteritis, omphalo and periomphalophlebitis. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node and intestinal contents. Salmonella Chester (1 case) Buff. 77, F, 2 weeks. Acute gastroenteritis, spleen and liver hyperaemic and swollen, necrotic foci in liver, gall bladder distended with bile, umbilical abscess. Salmonella isolated from spleen and liver. Salmonella pomona (1 case) Cow 40 DL, M, 4 weeks. Abscesses in lungs, acute gastroenteritis, blood extravasations in peritoneum. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node. Salmonella nchanga (1 case) Buff. 81, M, 4 weeks. Fibrinous pleuritis and acute congestion of lungs, acute gastroenteritis, spleen hyperaemic. Salmonella isolated from lymph node mesenteric and intestinal contents. Salmonella hvittingfoss (1 case) Buff. 47, F, 2 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic, acute gastroenteritis, omphalo and periomphalphlebitis Salmonella isolated from heart blood and intestinal contents. Salmonella butantan (1 case) Buff. 117, M, 3 weeks. Lungs hyperaemic with patches of hepatization, gastroenteritis, spleen and liver congested. Salmonella isolated from mesenteric lymph node and bile. REFERENCES Atkinson, N., Woodroofe, G. M. and Culver, D.E. (1952). The occurrence of Salmonella types in Australia. Aust. J. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci. 30. 73 Baar, G. and Gliesch, R. (1939). Results of ten years of research on paratyphoid enteritis in animals in Pomerania. Tieraztl Rdsch. 45, 267, 289 Bartel, H. (1938). Die bei den Slachtbaren vorkorumenden Bakterientypen der Paratyphus-Enter- itisgruppe Tierarztl Rundschau, 44, 601, Cited by Henning (1953) Bishop, W. H. (1950). Salmonellosis in cattle. Aust. Vet. J. 26, 253 Bosworth, T. J. and Lovell, R. (1931). The dublin type of Salmonella as a cause of disease in calves 2nd Rep. Direct. Inst. Anim. Path. Uni. Cambridge, pp. 21 Christiansen, M. (1914). Ueber das Vorkommen von nichtgasproduzierende Paracoli-bacillen beim Kalbe. Zbl. Bakt. 74. 474-81 Christensen, W. B. (1946). Urea decomposition as a means of differentiating Proteus and Paracolon culture from each other and from Salmonella and Shigella types. J. Bact. 52, 461
September, 1958] S.S. KHERA AND M.R. DHANDA 131 Field, H. I. (1948). A survey of bovine salmonellosis in Mid and West Wales. Vet. J. 104, 251 132 GASTROENTERITIS IN YOUNG CALVES [Vol. XXVIII, Part III Smith , J. and Scot, W. M. (1930). Continued fever due to a Gaertner-like Salmonella of the type " Dublin ". J. Hyg. 30, 32 Thomassen , M. (1897). Une nouvelle septicemic des veaux, avec nephrite et urocysitite (Bacteriurie) causecutives. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 11, 523 White , P. Burce (1929). Notes on organisms serologically related to Salmonella enteritidis Gaertner. The dublin and tokyo types of Salmonella. J. Hyg. 29, 443 Wilson , G. S., and Miles, A. A. (1955). Topley and Wilsons' Principles of Bacteriology and Immunity, 4th Edition. Arnord, London
SOME FACTORS AFFECTING BLOOD CHOLESTEROL LEVEL IN THE BUFFALO, IN THE SUB-TROPICS E . S. E. HAFEZ1, M. H. MAGHRABI2 and A. ANWAR2 [Received for publication on January 7, 1958 Accepted for publication on April 8, 1958] (With 3 Text-Figures). CHOLESTEROL is a common constituent of most cells and fluids in the animal body ; it is, in fact, the characteristic sterol of higher animals. Body cholesterol may be exogenous, i.e., absorbed from the intestine or endogenous, i.e., biosynthesis- ed from compounds as simple as water and acetate [Bloch and Rittenberg, 1942]. In herbivorous animals, cholesterol is only synthesised in the body [Woods, 1950]. In carnivorous animals, although cholesterol may be exogenous, yet it is extremely difficult by dietary measures to alter its concentration in systemic or portal blood [Man and Gildea, 1932]. This is interpreted by the fact that absorption, synthesis and destruction are mutually attuned to keep the total amount of cholesterol in the blood unchanged. The level of blood cholesterol in farm animals in the absence of any definite pathological condition varies with the breed, age, ambient tempera- ture and period of lactation [Brody et al., 1949]. It was hoped in the present work to give an account of some environmental and physiological factors affecting the cholesterol level in the domestic buffalo Bos (Bubalus) bubalis, L. The major factors studied were season, direct solar radia- tion and pregnancy. MATERIAL AND METHODSSixteen healthy adult Egyptian buffalo-cows were available at the Animal Production Research Farm, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Cairo, Giza. Three experiments were carried out. The technique used for cholesterol deter- mination in the present experiment was that of Myers and Wardell and modified by Reinhold and Shields [1936]. Statistical analyses of the data were made according to Snedecor [1946]. 1. Three non-pregnant, non-lactating, two-year old buff alo-cows were always kept under semi-shade conditions. Oxalated blood samples were taken once monthly for a period of nine months from June, 1953 to February, 1954, to study the seasonal variation in blood cholesterol level. 1 Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University. 2 Ministry of Agriculture, Giza. 133 15 AR/58 4
134 BLOOD CHOLESTEROL LEVEL [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, 2. Three non-pregnant, non-lactating, two-year old buffalo-cows were subjected to direct solar radiation, to investigate its effect on blood cholesterol. On the 15th August, oxalated blood samples were taken at 4 p.m. under normal conditions of semi-shade. On the next day, the animals were subjected to direct solar radiation from the early morning until 4 p.m. when the blood samples were taken for choles- terol determination. 3. Ten lactating buffalo-cows at different phases of the lactation period were available. Five of them were pregnant while the other five controls were non- pregnant. To exclude the effect of stage of lactation, the animals were compared in pairs (experimental and control) ; each pair was of the same date of the previous calving. The stages of pregnancy studied were 5, 5.5, 6, 7 and 8 months. Oxalated blood samples were taken in June 1954 for cholesterol determination. RESULTS Seasonal variations In the non-pregnant, non-lactating buffalo-cows blood cholesterol ranged from 84 to 118 mg. per 100 ml. with an average of 100 mg. during the experimental period (June to February) (Table I) . The atmospheric temperature, all through the experimental period, at this location (Giza, Egypt, 30°N) ranged from 52° to 84°F with an average of 69°F. Fig. 1 shows that blood cholesterol reached a maxi- mum of 115 mg. per 100 ml. during January, and a minimum of 88 mg. per 100 ml. TABLE I Seasonal variation in blood cholesterol in non-pregnant, non-lactating buffalo-cows Months Cholesterol mg./100 ml. Mean atmospheric temperature °F. Range Mean June 85September, 1958] E. S. E. HAFEZ et. al. 135 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. The effect of seasonal variation on the blood cholesterol content in non-pregnant, non- lactating buffalo-cows.
136 BLOOD CHOLESTROL LEVEL [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, during June and July. Cholesterol content was reciprocally related to atmospheric temperature. In one case the buffalo-cow was a T. B. case and the blood choles- terol declined irrespectively to atmospheric temperature changes. Effect of solar radiation In the non-pregnant, non-lactating buffalo-cows kept under semi-shade, blood cholesterol ranged from 90 to 92 mg. per 100 ml. with an average of 91 mg. When the same animals were exposed to direct solar radiation, cholesterol decreased to a range of 79 to 81 mg. with an average of 80 mg. per 100 ml. (Fig. 2). Effect of pregnancy Blood cholesterol at 5, 5.5, 6, 7 and 8 months of pregnancy was 125, 130, 120, 139 and 125 respectively. The control animals (non-pregnant) with similar lactation period had significant lower levels. At the fifth month of pregnancy, blood choles- terol was slightly lower in pregnant than in the non-pregnant. During all the stages of pregnancy, blood cholesterol was slightly higher than during non-pregnancy. However, the stage of pregnancy did not seem to affect the cholesterol level (Fig. 3). DISCUSSION In the buffalo, the seasonal variation in blood cholesterol is not as marked as in European cattle. Environmental temperature does not affect appreciably the cholesterol level. In the buffalo, each 10°F rise in temperature corresponds to 8 mg. decline in blood cholesterol. In European cattle, cholesterol and fatty acids are the major blood constituents which are affected by environmental temperature as demonstrated in psychrometric rooms [Brody et al., 1949]. Each 10°F rise in the ambient temperature is relative to 42 mg. decline in blood cholesterol. These differences between the two species may be due to species differences in the respon- siveness to rising temperature, or to factors other than atmospheric temperature such as the nature of solar radiation. However, results obtained in psychrometric rooms do not represent seasonal changes, since the animals were under shade in the former case and were subjected to out-door conditions in the latter. The Egyptian buffalo possesses thick skin which is darkly coloured by cutaneous pigments [Hafez et. al., 1955]. The black colour protects the animals from high atmos- pheric temperature, but not from high solar radiation. Since absorption, synthesis and destruction of cholesterol are mutually attuned to keep its level unchanged, this seasonal variation in blood cholesterol level reveals that the final equilibrium is affected. It is possible that the destruction of cholesterol is carried out at a higher rate than that of its synthesis. The level of blood cholesterol decreases when the animals are subjected to direct solar radiation. This may be due to the fact that the physiological phenomena in the buffalo are sensitive to direct solar radiation. In this respect, Badreldin and Ghany [1954] have shown that body temperature, respiration rate and pulse rate are more affected by sunlight in the buffalo than in cattle. This is due to certain
September, 1958] E. S. E. HAFEZ et. at. 137 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. The effect of solar radiation on blood cholesterol content in the non-pregnant and non- lactating buffalo-cows [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. The effect of pregnancy on the blood cholesterol content of buffalo-cows 15 AR/58 5
138 BLOOD CHOLESTEROL LEVEL [Vol. XXVIII, Part III morphological and histological characteristics which render the buffalo unsuitable or arid areas exposed to intense solar radiation. Pregnancy seems to give rise to blood cholesterol, since it is a precursor of pro- gesterone. It is of great interest to note that although progesterone increases through- out pregnancy, blood cholesterol does not increase until the fifth month of pregnancy. In woman, there is a progressive rise in the blood free cholesterol up to the thirtieth week of pregnancy with corresponding decrease in the estercholesterol. The blood returns to normal condition after puerperium [Wright, 1952]. The exact relation- ship between blood cholesterol and the output of progesterone throughout pregnancy is not known. SUMMARY Sixteen healthy, adult Egyptian buffalo-cows were used in three experiments to determine the effect of season, direct solar radiation and pregnancy on blood choles- terol level. Atmospheric temperature ranged from 52° to 84°F. The level of blood cholesterol ranged from 88 to 115 mg. per 100 ml. Data obtained indicate a reciprocal association between blood cholesterol and the atmos- pheric temperature; a decrease in blood cholesterol after exposure to direct solar radiation; and a rise in blood cholesterol after the fifth month of pregnancy. In the buffalo, seasonal variation in blood cholesterol level is not as marked as in European cattle. The practical application of blood cholesterol in relation to heat tolerance is augmented. ACKNOLWLEDGEMENT The authors thank Prof. A. L. Badreldin, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Cairo, for providing facilities and help. REFERENCES Badreldin, A. L. and M.A. Ghany (1954). Species and breed differences in the thermal reaction mecha- nism. J. Agric. Sci. 44 : 160 Ploch, K. and A. Rittenberg (1942). On the utilisation of acetic acid for cholesterol formation. J. Biol. Chem. 145 : 625 Brody, S. et. al (1949). Influence of ambient temperature 50° to 100° F., on the blood composition of Jersey and Holstein cows. Univ. of Missori, Faculty of Agric. Res. Bull. No. 433 Hafez, E. S. E., A. L. Badreldin and M. M. Shafei (1955). Skin histology of Egyptian buffalo and cattle with special reference to sweat glands. J. Agric. Sci. 45 Man, A. B. and E. F. Gildea (1932). The effect of the ingestion of large amounts of fat and of a balanced meal on the blood lipoids of normal man. J. Biol. Chem. 99 : 61 Reinhold, J. G. and E. M. Shields (1936). The determination of blood cholesterol. Am. J. Clin. Path. 6 : 22 Snedecor, G. W. (1946). Statistical Methods. 4th Ed. Iowa State College Press., Ames, Iowa Woods, R. (1950). Cholesterol. Bord. Rev Nut. Res. 6 (7): 79
IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA SEPTICA II-FURTHER TRIALS ON ADJUVANT VACCINE By M. R. DHANDA, J. M. LALL and R. N. SETH, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar-Kumaon (U. P.) [Received for publication on August 27, 1957 Accepted for publication on February 4, 1958] DHANDA et al. [1956] described the development of an adjuvant vaccine against haemorrhagic septicaemia which, under experimental conditions, was found to be far superior in its protective properties to the commercial broth vaccine. The new vaccine was also tried as a prophylactic on a few organised farms having the history of annual recurrence of haemorrhagic septicaemia and it was satisfactory to find that, during the course of the year, none of the animals vacci- nated with the adjuvant vaccine died of pasteurellosis. In view of these highly encouraging results, it was decided to carry out large scale field trials in different parts of the country so as to properly assess the value of the adjuvant vaccine. Manufacture and standardization of the adjuvant vaccine Eleven experimental brews of the adjuvant vaccine totalling about 1,50,000 ml. were manufactured according to the procedure given in Appendix I and within 3-4 days of its preparation, each brew was tested for its safety in Swiss albino mice and hill-bulls. Later, all these mice and hill-bulls were challenged with a virulent culture of P. septica with a view to determine the potency of each brew and to co-relate the results of the tests in mice and hill-bulls. In addition to these studies, the immunizing property of one of the brews, selected at random, was tested in buffalo-bulls in order to study the immunogenic response in this species of animals. The results of the potency tests in the hill-bulls, buffalo-bulls and mice are presented in Tables I, II and III respectively. It will be seen that out of 33 vaccinated hill-bulls, 32 (96.6 per cent) survived the challenge with as high a dose as 1,000 million mouse M. I. D. of a virulent culture of P. septica whereas all the five un-vaccinated controls died of pasteurellosis within 48-72 hours of inoculation of the challenge dose. As for the buffalo-bulls, 17 out of the 18 vaccinated animals withstood the challenge while the only death in one of the 18 vaccinated animals after challenge was due to causes other than pasteurel- losis. Both the un-vaccinated buffalo-bulls receiving the virulent culture to serve as controls died of pasteurellosis within 40 hours. These results confirmed the earlier findings regarding the high protective properties of the newly developed adjuvant vaccine [Dhanda et al., 1956]. The results in mice were, however, very inconsistent as the percentage of sur- vival in them was found to vary considerably from brew to brew, whereas the tests carried out in hill-bulls indicated that practically all the brews were of uniform 139 15 AR/58
140 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III TABLE I The results of potency tests in hill-bulls Brew No. No. of animals Details of vaccination Interval between vacci- nation and challenge Challenge dose No. of animals survived Percentage survival Result of bacte- riological exami- nation on animals dying after challenge 1 3 2 ml. intra- muscularly 3½ months 1,000 million mouse M . I. D. 3 100.0 2 3 do. do. do. 3 100.0 3 do. 2 months and 23 days do. 3 100.0 4 3 do. 2 months and 21 days do. 3 100.0 5 3 do. 2 months and 14 days do. 3 100.0 6 3 do. 2 months and 8 days do. 3 100.0 7 3 do. 2 months and 4 days do. 3 100.0 8 3 do. 2 months do. 3 100.0 0 3 do. 1 month and 28 days do. 3 100.0 10 3 do. 1 month and 22 days do. 2 66.7 + 11 3 do. 1 month do. 3 100.0 33 32 96.97 or 97.0 Un-vaccinated healthy hill-bulls 5 do. 0 0.0 +++++ NotesSeptember, 1958] M. R. DHANDA et al. 141 TABLE II Results of potency tests in buffalo-bulls Brew No. No. of animals Details of vaccina ion Interval between vacci- nation and challenge Challenge dose No. of animals survived Percentage survival Result of bac- teriolo - gical exa- mination on animals dying after challenge REMARKS 11 2 3 ml. intra- muscularly 85 days 5 ml. of an 18 hour old broth cul- ture of viru- lent P. sep- tica 2 100.0 5 do. 67 days do. 5 100.0 4 do. 30 days do. 4 100.0 7 do. 19 days do. 6* 100.0 142 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, TABLE III The results of potency test in mice Brew No. No. of mice used Details of vaccination Interval between vaccination and challenge Challenge dose Result on the 7th day Percentage survival on the 7th day Result of bacteriological examination on mice dying after challenge 1 40 0.25 ml. intramus- cularly. 23 days 100 M.I.D. 8 18 44.4 + + + + + + + + + + 6 died before 1000 M.I.D. 0 16 0.0 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + challenge 2 40 do. do. 100 M.I.D. 7 17 41.2 + + + + + + + + + + 7 died challenge before 100 M.I.D. 0/16 0.0 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Un-vaccinated con- trols 10 100 M.I.D. 0/5 0.0 + + + + + 1000 M.I.D. 0/5 0.0 + + + + + 3 15 do. 21 days 100 M.I.D. 11/14 78.6 + + + 1 died challenge before 4 15 do. do. do. 9/12 75.0 + + + 3 died challenge before Un-vaccinated con- trols 6 do. 0/6 0.0 + + + + + + 5 15 do. do. do. 6/10 60.0 + + + + 5 died challenge before 6 15 do. do. do. 6/12 50.0 + + + + + + 3 died challenge before Un-vaccinated con- trols 5 do. 0/5 0.0 + + + + + 7 15 do. do. do. 4/11 36.4 + + + + + + + 4 died challenge before 8 15 do. do. do. 5/12 41.6 + + + + + + + 3 died challenge before Un-vaccinated con- trols 5 do. 0/5 0.0 + + + + +
September, 1958] M. R. DHANDA et al. 143 9 20 do. 26 days do. 4/15 26.7 + + + + + + + + + + + 5 died challenge before 10 20 do. do. do. 6/17 35.3 + + + + + + + + + + + + 3 died challenge before Un-vaccinated con- trols 6 __ do. 0/6 0.0 + + + + + + 11 20 0.25 ml. intramus- cularly 21 days 100 M.I.D. 9/19 47.4 + + + + + + + + + + + 1 died challenge before Un-vaccinated controls 6 Do. 0/6 0.0 + + + + + + Notes. 1. + = Positive for P. septica on bacteriological examination. 2. Numerators denote survivals. Denominators denote total number challenged. 3. An 18-hour old broth culture of virulent P. septica was determined to contain 10,000 million mouse M.I.D. Cre ml. of the required dilution was used for challenge purposes. 4. Swiss mice about 12 weeks of age were used for testing all the 11 brews. 5. The mice were inoculated with the different brews within three to four days of preparation of each brew.
144 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, TABLE IV The comparative results of potency tests carried out before and after storage of the adjuvant vaccine at room temperature Total no. of animals used Brew no. Details regarding vaccination Interval between vaccination and challenge Challenge dose Result Percentage survival in vaccinated animals Reaction in un-vacci- nated animals (controls) Percentage survival in controls Result of bacteriological examination of animals dying after challenge Vaccinated animals Controls 38 4 & 5/55 (Mixed) 2 ml. intremuscularly immediately after preparation . (No storage ) 21 days 50 million mouse M.I.D. 3/5 60.0 0/2 0.0 + + + + 2½ months do. 3/4 75.0 0/2 0.0 + + + 5 months do. 5/5 1000 0/3 0.0 + + + 6 months 1000 million mouse M.I.D. 3/4 75.0 0/2 0.0 + + + 14/1S 77.7 0/9 0.0 2 ml. intramuscularly after storage for 11 months at a tempera- ture range of mini- mum September, 1958] M.R.DHANDA et al. 145 Mixture of brews 4 and 5. The immunity tests on the vaccine, before it was stored, were carried out at intervals of 21 days, 2½ months, 5 months and 6 months following vaccination and the challenge dose was 50 million mouse M. I. D. in the first three tests and 1,000 million mouse M. I. D. in the last test. As compared to this, the potency tests on the vaccine, after it had remained at room temperature for a period of 11 months, were carried out at intervals of 1½ months and 6½ months following vaccination and the challenge dose in the first test was 500 million mouse M. I. D. and in the second test it was 1,000 million mouse M. I. D. Thus, the challenge dose in the first potency test on the stored vaccine was ten times that of the challenge dose in the first, second and third potency tests carried out on the vaccine before its storage at the room temperature. A comparison of the results of the first potency test (100 per cent survival) on the vaccine after storage with those of the first and second tests on the vaccine before storage (60 per cent and 75 per cent survival res- pectively) does not indicate the possibility of a loss in its immunogenic power con- sequent upon storage. However, in the tests carried out at an interval of six months on the unstored vaccine and at an interval of 6½ months on the stored vaccine, the survival rate was three out of four (75 per cent) hill-bulls and two out of three hill- bulls (66.7 per cent) respectively, i.e. one hill-bull died in each group. Judging the results collectively, it seems that there was little loss, if any, in the protective pro- perties of the vaccine after storage at room temperature at Mukteswar for as long a period as 11 months. The temperatures during the period varied from a minimum of -2.2°C to a maximum of 17.3°C for a period of two months and for the remaining period of nine months, the temperatures varied from a minimum of 2.3°C to a maximum of 27.8°C. The daily average maximum and minimum temperatures for the period of storage of the vaccine are given in Table V. Brew No. 8. The immunity test on the fresh vaccine was carried out at an interval of 3½ months following vaccination, and at an interval of 2½ months on the stored vaccine. The challenge dose in both the cases was 1,000 million mouse M. I. D. In the former group two out of three hill-bulls (66.7 per cent) and in the later Group five out of six hill-bulls (88.3 per cent) survived the challenge, i.e. one hill-bull died in each group due to pasteurellosis. It would be seen that under the condi- tions of the experiment, there was no loss in the immunogenic properties of the vaccine as a result of storage. The vaccine had remained at temperatures varying from a minimum of 146 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, TABLE V Month-wise average daily temperatures Month Maximum Minimum March, 1955 18.1°C 8.3°C April, 1955 18.8°C 9.1°C May, 1955 22.9°C 13.0°C June, 1955 23.9°C 15.1°C July, 1955 20.5°C 14.8°C August, 1955 19.4°C 14.2°C September, 1955 19.5°C 13.3°C October, 1955 16.6°C 9.5°C November, 1955 16.3°C 6.6°C December, 1955 11.7°C 2.8°C January, 1956 10.2°C 1.7°C February, 1956 13.9°C 4.0°C March, 1956 15.7°C 6.8°C April, 1956 21.1°C 11.6°C May, 1956 24.0°C 14.8°C June, 1956 21.9°C 14.6°C July, 1956 19.9°C 14.1°C August, 1956 20.2ºC 14.3°C Note. Mixture of brews 4 and 5 was stored at room temperature from March. 1955 to January, 1956, and brew No. 8 was stored at room temperature from September, 1955 to August, 1956. (b) Studies on the vaccine exposed to high temperatures This problem was taken up in two parts ; firstly, the effect of exposure to high temperatures in an electrically heated incubator was investigated and secondly the vaccine after being transported over long distances during the hot summer months was used for vaccination of animals in several endemic areas of haemorrhagic sep- ticaemia, and the potency of the vaccine was judged by the protection afforded to the vaccinated animals during outbreaks of the disease. The details of the investi- gation are given below : (i) Studies on the vaccine exposed to temperatures of 37°C and 40°C in an electrically heated incubator. The effect of storage of the vaccine at temperatures of 37°C and 40°C for a period of ten days was investigated (Table VI). It would be seen that exposure to temperatures of 37°C and 40°C for a period of ten days, the maximum period for which the tests were carried out, did not indicate any signs of deteriora- tion in its immunogenic properties.
September, 1958] M. R. DHANDA, et al. 147 TABLE VI The comparative results of potency test carried out before and after exposure of the adjuvant vaccine to temperatures of 40°C and 37°C Total no. of ani - mals used Brew No. Details regarding vaccination Interval between vaccination and challenge Challenge dose Result Percentage survival in vaccinated animals Reaction in un-vacainated animals (controls) Percentage survival in controls Result of bacteriological examination on animals dying after challenge Vaccinated animals Controls 49 11/56 2 ml. intramuscularly immediately after pre- paration One month 1,000 million mouse M .I.D. 3/3 100.0 0/5 0.0 + + + + + *2 ml. intramucularly after storage at ±4ºC for two months and ten days Two months do. 6/6 100.0 0/6 + + + + + + *2 ml. intramuscularly after storage for two months at ±4 C and for ten days at 40ºC do. do. 6/6 100.0 *2 ml. intramuscularly after storage for two months at ±4ºC and for ten days at 37°C do. do. 6/6 100.0 NOTE 1. + = Positive for P. septica on bacteriological examination. 2. Numerators denote survivals. Denominators denote total number challenged. 3. *= challenged simultaneously and so common controls were used. 4. An 18 hour old broth culture of virulent P. septica was used for challenge purposes. Of this 1 ml. of 10148 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, Judging from the results of this investigation it would appear safe to assume that the vaccine can withstand fairly high temperatures. In this experiment, the vaccine had been kept exposed continuously to temperatures of 37°C and 40°C for as long as ten days. In the normal course, transport of the vaccine is not likely to take more than ten days and it would hardly ever be subjected to more rigorous conditions than these. (ii) Studies on the vaccine exposed to atmospheric temperatures. An additional proof of the ability of the vaccine to withstand high temperatures during summer months without losing its potency was obtained when about 34,000 doses of the vaccine were despatched during the hot months of May, June and July from Muk- teswar to far-off places such as Bombay, Poona, Secunderabad, and places in the Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir in connection with field trials on the vaccine in these areas. The vaccine was filled in amber-coloured bottles and was packed in ordinary wooden boxes, which were transported from Mukteswar to the rail-head, Kathgodam, by bus and further by passenger train. It took about 5-10 days for the vaccine to reach its destination. As many as 1684- animals were vaccinated during 1955 with the adjuvant vaccine transported by bus and rail in the manner indicated above but not even a single vaccinated animal died of pasteurellosis although there were several deaths due to haemorrhagic septicaemia in the neighbouring villages where either the animals had not been protected at all or were vaccinated with the commercial broth vaccine. Similarly, during 1956, as many as 28,531 animals were inoculated with the adjuvant vaccine which was transported during the summer months of May, June and July, but only two animals died of pasteurellosis over an observation period of 5-7 months. The remaining animals remained quite well throughout the monsoon season while several deaths occurred amongst the unvaccinated animals as well as in the animals protected with the commercial broth vaccine, From the above studies, carried out under laboratory as well as field conditions, it would appear that the adjuvant vaccine can be safely transported over long dis- tances during the summer months without any appreciable deterioration of its potency. Duration of immunity In an earlier paper Dhanda et al. [1956] had reported that under laboratory conditions the adjuvant vaccine conferred adequate immunity in cattle for as long as eight months which was the maximum period for which tests had been carried out till then. Another immunity trial was carried out on five vaccinated hill-bulls at an interval of nine months and 21 days following vaccination. The vaccinated animals along with three healthy un-vaccinated hill-bulls were challenged with as severe a dose of virulent culture as 1,000 million mouse M. I. D. All the five vaccinated hill-bulls resisted the challenge whereas all the controls died of pasteurellosis. Fur- ther immunity tests will now be undertaken at longer intervals. Field trials With the idea of studying the efficacy of the vaccine under field conditions as many as 28,531 animals in four dairy farms and 38 villages having a history of annual recurrence of haemorrhagic septicaemia, were vaccinated with the adjuvant vaccine. The details of vaccination are given in Table VII.
September, 1958] M. R. DHANDA, et. al. 149 TABLE VII The results of field trials Serial No. Place Date of vaccination No. of animals vaccinated Description of animals Observation period No. of deaths due to pasteurellosis among the animals vaccinated with the adjuvant vaccine 1 Military Farm, Pimpri 30-5-56 and 31-5-56 929 Cattle and buffaloes, including young stock 30-5-56 to 31-12-56 No deaths reported due to pasteurellosis 2 Military Farm, Seeunderabad 5-6-56 769 do. 5-6-56 to 31-12-56 No deaths reported due to pasteurellosis 3 Aarey Milk Colony 8-6-56 to 30-6-56 16,687 do. 30-6-56 to 31-12-56 Only one death reported due to pasteu- rellosis in a buffalo calf which was about seven months old at the time of vaccination 4 Military Farm. Kirkee 20-6-56 948 Cattle and buffaloes, including European and European cross -bred animals 20-6-56 to 31-12-56 No deaths reported due to pasteurellosis 5 Six villages in tehsil Ranbirsin- ghpora, Jammu State 22-6-56 to 26-6-56 1,892 Cattle and buffaloes, including bulls and young stock 26-6-56 to 28-2-57 No deaths reported due to pasteurellosis 6 Ten villages in Ludhiana Dis- trict (Punjab) 23-6-56 to 12-7-56 1,743 Cattle and buffaloes, including young stock 12-7-56 to 31-12-56 No deaths reported due to pasteurellosis 7 Eight villages in Jullundur Dis- trict (Punjab) 5-7-56 to 11-7-56 1,893 do. 11-7-56 to 31-12-56 No deaths reported due to pasteurellosis 8 Eight villages in Hoshiarpur Dis- trict (Punjab) 7-7-56 to 11-7-56 1,931 do. 11-7-56 to 31-12-56 No deaths reported due to pasteurellosis 9 Six villages in Amritsar Dis- trict (Punjab) 17-7-56 to 20-7-56 1,739 do. 20-7-56 to 31-12-56 Only one death due to pasteurellosis was reported
150 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, In general, no untoward reaction following vaccination was observed in any animal excepting one buffalo which started sweating profusely soon after inocula- tion. This may be due to the animal being allergic to foreign proteins. Body temperature of 1,000 animals out of those vaccinated in different places was recorded for a period of two days before and seven days following vaccination. In general, the animals were reported to have maintained a normal temperature excepting on one farm with a strength of 769 animals where the vaccinated animals were reported to have recorded a rise of a degree or two in their body temperature for three to four days. The average milk yield at all the four dairy farms for a week before and a week following vaccination was compared and it was observed that there was no statistically significant difference. Slight swellings at the site of inoculation were seen in about 5 per cent of the cases but these generally disappeared in about four or five days excepting in one solitary case where a field worker reported that in the 929 animals inoculated by him slight swellings in about 5 per cent of cases had persisted for more than two months. However, no report of abscess formation or sloughing of the skin over the site of inoculation was received from any quarter. In this connection, it may also be pointed out that when the inocula- tions were carried out under the supervision of one or the other of the authors of the article, no untoward local reaction was observed in the animals either on the farms or under village conditions. Observations on the value of the adjuvant vaccine The value of the adjuvant vaccine was studied in four organised dairy farms and 38 villages having a history of annual recurrence of haemorrhagic septicaemia. In the case of the dairy farms, cattle and buffaloes totalling 19,333 heads were immunized with the adjuvant vaccine. No animals could be left un-vaccinated to serve as controls, as the owners were not prepared to take the risk of losing any animal due to haemorrhagic septicaemia. It was, also, not possible to vaccinate a proportion of the animals with the usual commercial broth vaccine in order to get a comparative idea of the efficacy of the two vaccines. The efficacy of the vaccine at the farms had, therefore, to be judged by comparing the mortality rate due to haemorrhagic septicaemia occurring during H. S. season following the use of the adjuvant vaccine with that in the previous years when the commercial broth vaccine had been employed. Besides, the number of outbreaks of haemorrhagic septicaemia in the neighbouring villages where the animals had either not been vaccinated or vaccinated with the commercial broth vaccine, also furnished some idea regarding the efficacy of the new adjuvant vaccine. At the dairy farms, a total of 19,333 animals including cows, buffaloes and young stock of each species were vaccinated with the new adjuvant vaccine. It is very encouraging to report that although during the monsoon season several outbreaks of haemorrhagic septicaemia were reported in the areas around the farms, not even a single death due to pasteurellosis occurred in three farms and in the fourth farm only one buffalo-heifer, which was about seven months old at the time of vaccination, died of pasteurellosis. During the previous year also, the adjuvant vaccine had been tried on these four organised farms and the results were reported
September, 1958] M.R.DHANDA, et. al. 151 to be very satisfactory. The comments of the Chief Veterinary Officer of one of the farms, where as many as 16,687 animals were vaccinated this year are reproduced below : " Last year also we were very lucky not to have any incidence of the disease but previous years were fraught with frequent appearance of haemorr- hagic septicaemia. I am inclined to believe that the use of adjuvant vaccine has yielded substantial dividend. So far as the Colony is con- cerned I wish to adopt this vaccine for routine use hereafter in pre- ference to the conventional broth vaccine. " Field trials under village conditions were carried out in the States of Jammu and Kashmir and the Punjab. In the State of Jammu a total of 1,892 animals (cattle, buffaloes and young stock) in six villages of tehsil Panbirsinghpora were vaccinated with the adjuvant vaccine and another group of 1,245 animals with the commercial broth vaccine. During an observation period of eight months, no deaths due to pasteurellosis were reported from either group. In the Punjab, 32 villages in the endemic areas of haemorrhagic septicaemia were selected and divided into two groups, group I consisting of villages where all the animals were vaccinated with the new adjuvant vaccine and group II consisting of villages where some animals were vaccinated with the new adjuvant vaccine and the remaining animals with the commercial broth vaccine prepared at Hissar. Incidently, two more groups also got formed viz. group III comprising animals in villages where some animals were vaccinated with the new adjuvant vaccine and the rest remained un-vaccinated as the owners were not willing to get their animal immunized and group IV consisting of animals in villages where all the animal remained un-vaccinated due to lack of cooperation on the part of the owners. In all, as many as 7,306 animals in 32 villages of the districts Ludhiana, Jullundur, Hoshiarpur and Amritsar were vaccinated with the new adjuvant vaccine (Table VII). The value of the new adjuvant vaccine was judged from the fortnightly reports received from the District Animal Husbandry Officers of the districts concerned regarding the number of deaths in the various groups due to pasteurellosis. The reports were examined by Dr. Tulsa Ram, Veterinary Investigation Officer, Punjab, who also personally investigated the efficacy of the new adjuvant vaccine. The observations made by him till the end of December, 1956 i.e. over a period of five months during which most outbreaks of haemorrhagic septicaemia usually occur, in these areas are reproduced below : (a) Veterinary Hospital, Phillaur. Four villages (Raipur Araian, Selkiana, Kot Palow, Jhugian Mansingh) remained free of haemorrhagic septicaemia out- breaks. In these villages almost all animals were vaccinated with the adjuvant vaccine. In the village Lassara, only 126 animals were vaccinated out of more than 2,000 animals. Four deaths due to haemorrhagic septicaemia occurred among un-vaccinat- ed animals during this period. Fourteen deaths due to haemorrhagic septicaemia
152 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, were reported from three villages out of five where vaccinations were not carried out. These were situated within a radius of two miles of above mentioned villages. In three villages within this radius where broth vaccine (Hissar) was used, three deaths were reported to have occurred in two villages among the un-vaccinated animals. (b) Veterinary Hospital, Shahkot. Three villages where adjuvant vaccine was used remained free of the disease. Out of 14 surrounding villages within a radius of two miles, in which no vaccination was carried out, deaths due to haemorrhagic septicaemia occurred in 11 villages. (c) Veterinary Hospital, Hoshiarpur. Villages Nasrala and Ghabawal. In these villages about half the number of animals were vaccinated and half were left out. In the former village two and in the latter four deaths occurred among the un- vaccinated stock. Deaths due to this disease were also reported from 14 out of 26 surrounding villages within a radius of two miles. In six other villages, where almost all cattle and buffaloes were vaccinated with the adjuvant vaccine no deaths due to the disease were reported. (d) Amritsar district. No deaths due to haemorrhagic septicaemia occurred in villages Wallah, Tungpain, Kot Khalsa, Tandel and Verka among the stock vaccinated with the new adjuvant vaccine, but six deaths occurred among un- vaccinated animals in village Wallah. In village Bhopa Rai, two deaths due to haemorrhagic septicaemia occurred after vaccination. One of these was an un- vaccinated animal left out due to owner's carelessness while the rest of his stock was immunised. Among the vaccinated stock also one death occurred within two months after vaccination. It was verified on the spot that this animal showed clinical symptoms of the disease and died within 12 hours after the onset of the disease. However, no laboratory confirmation was obtained. Judging from the above investigations carried out on animals on organised farms as well as under village conditions in areas where haemorrhagic septicaemia is known to be endemic, it would appear that the new adjuvant vaccine is quite satisfactory in affording protection to cattle and buffaloes against haemorrhagic septicaemia and that in this respect it is far superior to the commercial broth vaccine. The fact that only one injection of the new adjuvant vaccine is enough to protect animals for a full year as against two or three of the commercial broth vaccine as repeated inoculations of the latter vaccine are often recommended in order to get a more lasting immunity, coupled with the fact that the immunity conferred by the new adjuvant vaccine is much stronger, has stimulated investigations of its large- scale production to meet the country's demand of the product. Consequently, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research has sanctioned a scheme for this investi- gation to be undertaken at Izatnagar. SUMMARY 1. A procedure for the manufacture and standardisation of haemorrhagic septicaemia adjuvant vaccine has been laid down.
September, 1958] M.R.DHANDA, et. al. 153 2. Large scale field and laboratory trials have shown that the adjuvant vaccine is absolutely safe for cattle and buffaloes of all ages and that in its immunizing properties it is far superior to the broth vaccine. 3. The studies carried out on the keeping quality of the adjuvant vaccine indicate that it does not deteriorate in its protective properties for at least one year when stored at room temperatures ranging from 154 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, group I. Such slants serve as "Seed Bank". Stored in a refrigerator, the culture on blood agar or tryptose agar slants will remain viable for about two months while in a deep freeze cabinet, it will remain viable for upto six months. 2. Media. The following formula provides a medium which gives an abundant growth of the organism :September, 1958] M.R.DHANDA, et. al. 155 (vi) Inoculate four white mice each with the suspension in a dose of 0.5 ml. intra- peritoneally to ensure complete death of the organisms in the suspension. None of the inoculated mice should die of pasteurellosis during an observation period of 72 hours. 6. Mixing. (i) Mix with adjuvants in the following proportions : Bacterial suspension opacity 6-7 15 parts Liquid paraffin 10 parts Anhydrous lanolin (melted) 1 part NOTE. The adjuvants are previously sterilized in hot air oven at 160°C for on hour. (ii) Place in a waring blender and mix for 5 to 10 minutes until a homogenous suspension is obtained. In order to prevent the blender getting heated, the process may have to be carried out in two or three steps, with suitable intervals in-between each operation. (iii) Pool in suitable containers. 7. Sterility test. Transfer 1.0 ml. of the vaccine collected from the pooled lot after thorough mixing into each of two flasks containing 100 ml. of nutrient broth and another two flasks containing 100 ml. of sodium thioglycollate broth. Incubate for 48 hours and observe for signs of growth of micro-organisms as judged by increased turbidity, gas production, etc. From the nutrient broth flasks, transfer 1 ml. volumes on to three blood agar or tryptose agar slants ; incubate for seven days and observe daily for evidence of growth. 8. Safety test. Inoculate six mice in a dose of 0.5 ml. each intraperitoneally. No mouse should die of pasteurellosis during an observation period of seven days. 9. Potency test. Vaccine proving safe in mice should be subjected to the follow- ing potency test: (i) Inoculate intramuscularly, in the neck or in the gluteal region, three young bovines or buffaloes in good condition between the ages of nine months to about four years with 2 ml. of the vaccine in the case of animals weighing up to 300 lb. and 3 ml. for heavier animals. (ii) All animals should remain well except for a slight rise in body temperature up to a degree or two and a slight swelling at the site of inoculation during an obser- vation period of seven days. (iii) Four weeks after the date of vaccination, these animals along with two healthy animals of the same type should be challenged by the inoculation, subcuta- neously, of a virulent 18-hour old broth culture of P. septica stock strain 52, equi- valent to at least 50 million mouse minimum lethal doses. Both controls should die of pasteurellosis as revealed by the presence of large numbers of bipolar organisms in blood smears of the dead animals and at least two of the three vaccinated animals should survive the challenge during an observation period of seven days. 15 AR/58. 8
156 IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDIES ON PASTEURELLA [Vol. XXVIII, Part III 10. Bottling, sealing, labelling, etc. (i) Bottle in amber-coloured bottles and cork with skirt type rubber caps (ii) seal with molten paraffin (iii) label and store in cold storage. 11. Keeping quality. When stored in the cold at 5°C, the vaccine will retain its potency for a period of at least one year. However, where such ideal conditions of storage are not available, the product may be stored in a dark, cool place until use. Period of storage under such condi- tions should not exceed two months. 12. Dose. The vaccine is administered intramuscularly (i) for animals weighing up to 300 lb.FLEECE MEASUREMENT AND WOOL WEIGHT By HENRY FOSTER [Received for publication on January 14, 1957 Accepted for publication on May 14, 1958] (With 4 Text-Figures) CONVINCING evidence of the effectiveness of fleece measurement as an aid to the selection of Merino sheep has now been made available by the Common- wealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. Conceived as a result of sheep-breeding data obtained at the National Field Station, " Gilruth Plairs ", in Queensland, and by the New South Wales Department of Agriculture at Trangie, the new system has already gained widespread acceptance by studmasters and Merino breeders. The basic information on fleece measurement was obtained from experiments commenced at the Station in 1947. The critical figures concerned the extent to which important wool characters in the Merino flock are handed on to the offspring of the sheep possessing them. In other words, is a sheep with, say, a heavier-than-average fleece likely to produce offspring with fleece weights above the average for the flock ? It was found that Merino sheep do pass on to their offspring a high proport on of their superiority in many wool characters. Wool weight, for instance, was found to be strongly nherited, as were also mea- surable characteristics associated with wool production, such as staple length, fibre diameter, number of fibres per square inch of skin, number of crimps per inch, adult body size, degree of skin wrinkling and percentage yield of clean scoured wool. So Merino sheep selected because of their superiority in one or more of these highly heritable characters will pass on an effective proportion of that superiority to their offspring. Selection based on measured performance for any of these charac- teristics will, therefore, be reflected immediately in the performance of the next generation. The importance of measurement as distinct from visual appraisement, no matter how skilled, s brought home by some interesting tests done by Dr. G. R. Moule, of the Queensland Department of Agriculture and Stock. Thirty studmasters and sheep classers were asked to select, by visual appraisal alone, the best five sheep from a group of thirty. The average greasy fleece weight of the five sheep receiving the highest number of votes was 0.4 lb. above the average for the group as a whole. However, when selection was based on greasy wool weights as well as visual appraisal the top five fleeces averaged 1.0 lb. above the average. The experiments at Gilruth Plains have been continued and expanded, and some further interesting results are now available. In one experiment, rams and ewes in a Merino breeding flock are being selected on clean wool weight and wool 157 15 AR/58 9
158 FLEECE MEASUREMENT AND WOOL WEIGHT [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, quality is being controlled by culling animals with too strong a fibre as judged on measured diameter. Excessively wrinkly sheep are also culled. In a group of initially similar sheep run with them as controls, selection is entirely at random. At the commencement of this part of the experiment, in 1950, the average clean wool weights of the offspring from the two groups were similar. After four years, the offspring from the group selected by the fleece measurement method cut on average of 0.4 lb. of clean wool more than the offspring from the unselec- ted sheep running with them. The actual average clean wool weights for ewes 16 months old were 7.3 lb. and 6.9 lb. respectively. The increase over the four years was slightly more than 1.2 per cent per annum which would be predicted on the basis of the original heritability studies with the mating system used. There was no increase in body size in the selected group and there was no appreciable change in fibre diameter. There was, however, a very slight decrease in the number of crimps, the selected group averaging 11 crimps per inch compared with the 12 per inch of the controls. Both staple length and "density" number of fibres per square inch) increased in the selected group. In another experiment at Gilruth Plains, selection is being concentrated on one character at a time. Thus, there are contrasting groups for each of several characters, in one of which selection is aimed at increasing the character to a maximum while in the other the aim is to reduce it to a minimum. In contrast to the practice in the previous experiment, culling rates are much higher than those encountered commercially. This is to ensure that the characters will be pushed as quickly as possible to extreme values either way. The characters under selection are clean wool weight, staple length, fibre number, fibre diameter, body size, and degree of wrinkling. The aim is not only to see how far one character can be taken by selection, but also to see what happens to other characters during the process. A dramatic response has been obtained for every character and in most cases this response has been greater than that predicted. In the group selected for high clean wool weight, the mean clean weight for ewes was 7.6 lb. for the two-tooth ewe offspring in 1956, compared with 6.4 inches the low clean wool weight group. Staple length for ewes in the group selected for long staple averaged 4.5 inches compared to 2.9 inches in the short staple group. Ewes in the large body size group weighed 86 lb. as two-tooths (16 months old) while those selected for small size were only 64 lb. Responses in the other single character selection groups were of the same order. Of great interest are the recombinations of the various fleece characteristics that have taken place. Earlier findings, that dense fleeces tend to be finer, and more wrinkly sheep to have a shorter staple, have been confirmed. Sheep in the group selected for high density (fibre number) have a much finer fibre than those in the low density group. Also, animals selected for strength (high fibre diameter) have a much lower density than those selected for fineness (low diameter). Because of the negative association between the two characters, selection for short staple has produced some animals even more wrinkled than those selected deliberately for wrinkles. Moreover, some of those selected for high wrinkles have an even shorter staple than those selected for short staple.
September, 1958] HENRY FOSTER 159 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. These young stud ewes having been previously inspected and any primary (obvious fault) culls removed, the Flock Testing Officer is marking the mid-side area with a coloured raddle. This mark identifies an area of the fleece which has been found to be representative of the whole fleece for most Merino wool characteristics. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. The fleece and card is brought by the " picker up " and placed intact upon the tray of the weighing scales.
160 FLEECE MEASUREMENT AND WOOL WEIGHT [Vol. XXVIII, Part III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. The fleece is picked up from the weighing tray and thrown out on the skirting table. Here the Flock Testing Officer examines the quality of the fleece and takes the previously marked mid-side area for testing (scouring and appraisal). He notes any quality variations on the card. The skirters proceed with the skirting of the fleece, which is then rolled. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Distribution of 30 fine wool ewe greasy fleece weights (lb.) Average greasy fleece weight is 8.6 lb.
September, 1958] RENRY FOSTER 161 Confirmation of an earlier finding that there is not a strong association between staple length and fibre diameter is of great importance. A long wool does not neces- sarily mean a strong wool in terms of actual fibre diameter. The long staple group, for example, is in fact finer in diameter than the group selected for short staple, in spite of length. Also, the high wool-weight group has a longer staple and a finer diameter than the low wool-weight group. Crimp number and fibre diameter are not closely associated in these groups. The long staple group, for example, with a crimp number of 11 per inch has a finer diameter than the short staple group with a crimp of 15 per inch. It is interesting to observe the effect of positive and negative selection for the individual characters on clean wool weight. Mean clean wool weights were the same in both wrinkly and plain groups. This demonstrates once again the falsity of the belief that increased skin folding leads to higher clean wool production. There was also no difference in wool weights between the fine and strong fibre groups in spite of a difference of 22 per cent in fibre diameter. The large body size group gave only 9 per cent more clean wool than the small body size group although the weight difference was about 30 per cent. The high clean wool weight group cut 20 per cent more clean wool than the low group, the difference being accounted for chiefly by increased density (fibre number) and longer staple. The results are most encouraging. Not only do they show that predictions of advances through the adoption of fleece measurement methods of selection were correct, but the results provide a basis for the further refinement of the new method. 15 AR/58 10
STUDIES ON FISH OF THE BAY OF BENGAL II164 STUDIES ON FISH OF BAY OF BENGAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, TABLE I Effect of steaming on minced shark tissue Steaming (at 2 psig.) (time in minutes) mg/100 gm. of wet tissue UreaSeptember, 1958] A. N. BOSE, S. K. DAS GUPTA AND B. N. SRIMANI 165 TABLE IV Effect of sodium bicarbonate on minced shark tissue ; steeping for 45 minutes in 2 per cent NaHCO3 Steaming at (2 psig.) (time in minutes) mg/900 gm. of wet times Urea166 STUDIES ON FISH OF BAY OF BENGAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, Canning trials Canning trials were carried out after removal of urea by various methods mentioned before. For removing urea the minced tissue was steeped in solution for 45 minutes. The solution was then drained out and the meat was washed to remove any adhering chemicals and then steamed for 45 minutes. Chemicals used for the removal of urea were 2 per cent NaHCO3, 1 per cent NaNO2, 1 per cent NaH2PO4, 4 per cent NaH2PO4, 6 per cent NaH2PO4 all in aqueous solution or solution containing 1 per cent NaNO2 and 2 per cent NaHCO3. The processed tissue was canned without any liquid in the can. Processing time was 1½ hours under 10 psig., steam pressure for 301 X 306 tin cans. Cans were opened after one month (kept in an incubator at 37°C) and tested organoleptically. The results of the tests are given in Table VII. Following treatments were also tried : (i) Shark meat in pieces was canned with 2 per cent NaCl solution (ii) the pieces were steamed for ½ an hour and then canned in 2 per cent NaCl solution (iii) the pieces were fried in mustard oil and then canned in 2 per cent NaCl solution. The processing time in each case was 1 hour 15 minutes for 301×306 tin cans. Organoleptic tests of the canned products which were well preserved, were carried out with results as given in Table VIII. DISCUSSION In the removal of urea. NaHCO3 treatment gives the best results. About 50 per cent of the urea is removed when shark tissue is treated with 2 per cent NaHCO3 for 45 minutes followed by steaming at 2 psig. for 45 minutes but the fresh colour of the flesh is destroyed. Original colour of the tissue is maintained best by treatment with sodium nitrite. The reduction of urea with sodium nitrite is less than that with sodium bicarbonate treatment. Steaming with or without sodium chloride treatment does not have much influence in the reduction of urea. Dehydration above 70°C gives the product a brownish appearance. After steaming the minced tissue forms clumps and presents difficulty during dehydration. Of the three chemicals,-NaNO2, NaCl and NaHCO3-NaNO2 solution gave the canned product a good reddish appearance and the texture of the product was acceptable but the main difficulty with NaNO2 treatment was that the treated product gave a very low vacuum in the can when it was opened and the flavour of the product cannot be accepted though the urea removing property of NaNO2 is as good as that of the other two chemicals. Low vacuum is probably due to evolution of hydrogen at the uncovered iron on the tin plate. NaNO2 is known to enhance the rate of such evolution. NaHCO3 and NaH2PO4 treated products are better and found to be acceptable. During frying, the bad flavour is removed and the urea content is much reduced. The residual urea content does not cause any off flavour and the taste of the meat is good as judged organoleptically.
September, 1958] A. N. BOSE, S. K. DAS GUPTA AND B. N. SRIMANI 167 TABLE VII Results of tests on shark processed tissue canned under various conditions after removal of urea by various methods Chemical used Steeping time Steaming time Vacuum in the can Flavour Texture and colour T.V.N. mg/100 gm. wet tissue T.V.N. after urease d igestion mg/100 gm. wet tissue Urea-N mg./100 gm. wet tissue Remarks 2 per cent NaHCO3 45 min. 45 min. 17" in. Hg Fishy Soft, grey 148.7 361.3 212.6 1 per cent NaNO3 45 min. 45 min. 4" in. Hg Off flavour Soft, purple 168 STUDIES ON FISH OF BAY OF BENGAL [Vol. XXVIII, Part III, TABLE VIII Results of tests on shark tissue canned under various conditions Sample Steaming time Vacuum T.V.N. mg/100 gm. wet tissue T. V. N. after urease digestion mg/100 gm. wet tissue Urea-N mg/100 gm of wet tissue Remarks Shark tissue (in pieces) None 7 in. Hg September, 1958] A. N. BOSE, S. K. DAS GUPTA AND B. N. SRIMANI 169 SUMMARY Urea is the most objectionable constituent in the shark tissue. Few methods for removal of urea were tried. Steaming, dehydration and treatment with chemicals like NaNO2, NaHCO3 and NaCl were employed. NaHCO3 gave the best result. NaNO2 treatment gives the product a good appearance. Other chemicals are little effective in removing urea. Canning after removal of urea was attemped. NaHCO3 and NaH2PO4 treated products were found to be good while NaNO2 treated product gave a bad odour when the cans were opened. Canning in pieces in 2 per cent NaCl solution was tried. Shark meat in pieces, when canned after frying in mustard oil, was found to be acceptable. REFERENCES Chopra, B. N. (Ed) ((1951). Indian Fisheries, Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture publication Mohanty, G. B. and Roy, A. B. (1955). Science, 121, 41 Bose, A. N., Das Gupta, S. K., and Srimani, B. N. (Under Publication) Sohonie, Kamala and Ambe, K. S. (1954) Symposium on proteins in health and diseases, National Institute of Science, India Walasu Shunizu and Keichi Oishi (1950). Bull. Japan Soc. Science Fisheries, 16, 29
RUMEN DIGESTION A REVIEW* By O. P. AGARWALA, 172 RUMEN DIGESTION [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, protein, have been thoroughly reviewed by Marston [1939], Goss [1943], McAnally and Phillipson [1944], Owen [1947], Baker et al. [1947], Elsden and Phillipson [1948], Owen [1951], Reid [1953] and Gallup [1956]. Bohstedt [1949] has specially reviewed the importance of rare minerals in ruminant digestion. Alexander [1954] has recently reviewed the available knowledge about herbivorous digestion. The most recent discussion on the biochemistry and microbiology of rumen digestion is by Edwards [1955]. Prehension In the digestion of ruminants the first step is prehension. In cows the chief organ of prehension is the tongue. However, in goats and sheep the incisors and the tongue are the principal prehensile structures. Grazing habits of ruminants have been studied by Atkeson et al. [1942] Johnstone et al. [1944] and Tribe [1949]. According to Fuller [1928], Schalk and Amadon [1928], Bergman and Dukes [1925], Johnstone et al. [1944] and Hughes and Reid [1951] cattle spend equal amounts of time in grazing, ruminating and lying down. Tribe [1950] has recently reviewed the present knowledge of the behaviour of the grazing animals. Kick [1937] has studied the time spent by steers in mastication and Fuller [1928] has observed the number of jaw movements in cows while eating [10,530] and rumination [26,400] per day. Mastication Ruminants have no incisors in the upper jaw. Preliminary mastication therefore, is incomplete and food passes almost completely unchanged into the rumen [Schalk and Amadon, 1928]. The bolus, which is later regurgitated and returned to the mouth for chewing during rest, contains primarily roughage. Saliva a. Amount. In the mouth both during preliminary and final mastication the food gets mixed with saliva. According to Collin [1852] the amount of saliva secreted in 24 hours in cattle is 50 to 60 kg. He has also studied the factors affecting saliva secretion. According to him, with green and hay fodder, the amount of saliva secretion is one-half and four times the weight of fodder respectively. With cereals the amount of saliva secreted is equal to its weight. Smith [1890] has also studied the amount of saliva secretion in cattle. According to Scheunert and Traulman [1921] and Scheunert et al. [1930], in small ruminants the volume of saliva secreted from one parotid gland is 5 to 42 cc/10 mins. b. pH and composition. Ruminant saliva is alkaline. Schwarz and Hermann [1924] and McDougall [1949] have reported that in dairy cows the pH of saliva is 8.1 and 8.3 respectively. Weyers [1937] has reported that pH of saliva varies from 8.23 to 8.54 and that the alkalinity of saliva is due to the presence of sodium and potassium carbonates. Similar results were also reported by Collin in [1852]. Recent- ly, however, McDonald [1949] has reported that the alkalinity of saliva is due to its higher content of urea. The composition of saliva has been studied by different
December, 1958] O. P. AGARWALA 173 workers. Markoff [1913], Scheunert et al. [1930] and Trautmann and Albrecht [1931] have reported that saliva contains Na, K, carbonates, phosphates and chlorides. According to Scheunert et al. [1930] the ash from saliva contains 30 per cent Na, 2.4 per cent K, 9.2 per cent phosphate and 1.9 per cent chloride. Lenkeit [1933] has recently reviewed the chemical composition of saliva of different animals. c. Functions of saliva. The main function of saliva is to moisten the feed to facilitate easy fermentation, to neutralize the organic acids in the rumen and to prevent the frothing of the rumen contents. Koebner [1931] has reported lipolytic action by ruminant saliva. According to Scheunert and Trautmann [1921] and Dukes [1942], because of the mucin content of saliva the food particles are easily formed into bolus for swallowing and swallowing passages are lubricated. Almost all the investigators [Carlson and Crittenden, 1910 ; Markoff, 1913 ; Scheunert and Trautmann, 1921 ; Steintechner and Schwartz, 1925 ; Schwartz and Rasp, 1926 ; Trautmann and Albrecht, 1931 and Gall et al., 1947] have reported that ruminant saliva is free from the enzymes ptyalin and cellulose. Rumen a. Movement. In ruminants the act of deglutition of food and movement of stomachs during digestion and its control by vagi have been studied by Cannon and Moser [1898], Schalk and Amadon [1928], Czepa and Stigler [1929], Magee [1932], Krazywanek and Quast [1937], Quin and Vanderwath [1938], Clark [1938], Phillipson [1939], Duncan [1951] and Rushmer and Hendron [1951]. Recent studies by Dougherty et al. [1955] and Grau [1956] in this respect are also worth mentioning. These authors more or less agree that food in the rumen is kept in continuous motion by rhythmic contractions of this organ the frequency of which according to Schwartz, as quoted by Dukes [1955], runs as follows :174 RUMEN DIGESTION [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, In the new-born calf the rumen and reticulum together are about half as large as the abomasum. At four months of age, the rumen and reticulum together become four times as large as the omasum and abomasum taken together. At the age of about a year and a half, according to Sisson [1914],the four compartments reach their permanent relative size, the rumen accounting for about 80 per cent of the total stomach capacity, reticulum 5 per cent, the omasum 7 to 8 per cent and the abomasum 8 to 7 per cent. Conditions in the rumen are most suitable for bacterial fermentation. The rumen works at 39°C, with neutral pH and under anaerobic conditions. b. Temperature. The temperature of the rumen remains more or less constant except when a slight rise occurs during and after feeding and a slight drop during fasting and after drinking of water. However, variations do not exceed 39.3 to 40.7°C [Krazywanek, 1929 ; and Lampe, 1931]. Recently Dale et al. [1954] has found more or less similar results. c. Gases. Washburn and Brody [1937], Lugg [1938], Dougherty [1940, 1941] and Quin [1943] all have reported anaerobic condition, in rumen with the following gases: N, H2, H2S, CO2, and CO and O2. Quin [1943] reports that the presence of nitrogen and oxygen is due to air swallowed. Pilgrin [1948] has confirmed the finding of the above authors for hydrogen. d. pH. Cole et al. [1945] has reported a pH of 6.9 in the rumen. Electro- metric measurements of pH of rumen ingesta have been made by Monroe and Perkins [1939], Hale et al. [1940], Smith [1945] and Phillipson [1942]. Factors affecting pH in rumen have also been studied. Slight variations occur due to the kind of ingesta and lapse of time after feeding. According to Phillipson [1942] and Myburgh and Quin [1943] diets like lucerne hay, maize and starch have a tendency to make the pH more acidic (5.6) while fresh, green, flowering lucerne or matase veldt grass hay, which produces urea, create slightly alkaline reaction (7.7). According to Ammerman et al. [1955] blue grass creates 0.2 unit higher pH than alfalfa and lardino. According to Smith [1941], the pH of rumen ingesta becomes acidic after feeding and rises to the level of saliva pH when fasting. Phillipson [1942] and Myburgh and Quin [1943] have reported that the maximum fall of pH in the rumen occurs after four hours of feeding. Variations in pH from 6 to 7.14 have been reported by Olson [1941], Hunt et al. [1943] and Lardinois et al. [1944]. According to Lamphia [1956], the pH of rumen varies from the uppermost part, where it is highest, to the bottom part, where it is lowest. Products responsible for acid pH of rumen content have also been studied. According to Phillipson [1942], Elsden [1946] and Lamphia [1956] volatile fatty acids, the by-products of cellulose fermenation are responsible for maintaining acidic pH of rumen contents. According to Dukes [1955] CO2 also contributes to acidic pH of rumen contents. The stability of ingesta to pH is due to saliva [Collin, 1886 ; Scheunert and Traulmann, 1921 and Scheunert et al., 1930], due to neutralizing effect of NH3 produced by proteolysis [Schuphan, 1943 ; and Pearson and Smith, 1943] and due to permeability of the epithelium which lines the rumen [Danielli,
December, 1958] O. P. AGARWALA 175 1945]. According to Danielli [1945] when pH falls towards acid, the+ions are absorbed quicker than -ions and when pH rises, the176 RUMEN DIGESTION [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, Factors in cellulose digestion Cellulose digestion is also affected by different factors. According to Cline [1952], Hunt [1952] and Brooks et al. [1954a] sulphur in the diet increases cellulose digestion. Brooks et al. [1954a] has shown that 10 to 20 mgms of stilboesterol in diet per day increase the digestion coefficient of cellulose by 6 to 7 per cent. Brooks et al. [1954b] has also shown that fat reduces cellulose digestion. Zuntz [1913], Armsby and Fries [1918], Mertins [1933], Mitchell and Hamilton [1940], Hamilton [1942], Johnson et al. [1942] and Burroughs et al. [1950] have demonstrated that a readily available form of carbohydrates such as starch has the tendency to shift the field of bacteria activity and thereby decreasing cellulose digestion. Molas- ses, glucose and grain diet decrease the cellulose digestion as has been effectively demonstrated by Bortree et al. [1948] and Arias et al. [1951]. Burrough et al. [1949, 1950, 1951] has studied the effects of mineral requirements on cellulose diges- tion in cattle. He and his co-workers have effectively demonstrated that absence of Na, K, Ca, Mg, S, P, and Fe singly or in group decreases cellulose digestion. Chappel [1952], Teeri et al. [1953], Ray [1953], Tillman et al. [1954a, 1954b] and Charles et al. [1955] have confirmed the findings of Burroughs et al ; these investigators have demonstrated that poor roughage diet can be effectively utilized by cattle with mineral supplementsDecember, 1958] O. P. AGARWALA 177 Protein synthesis Rumen bacteria, in addition to breaking down complex cellulose, synthesize animal protein from vegetable protein and as well as from non-protein nitrogenous material; these bacteria are utilized by the host when they die. [Axelsson, 1943 and Pounden et al., 1948]. The whole question of disintegration of bacteria in the rumen has been discussed by Cuthbertson and Phillipson [1953]. 1. Substitutes.178 RUMEN DIGESTION [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, A number of investigators have studied the synthesis of different members of the vitamin B complex group in the rumen of cattle and ruminants in general, as summarized below: Vitamin Investigators Thiamin (B1) McElroy and Goss [1941a], Wegner et al. [1940] and Johnson el al. [1941] Riboflavin (B2) MoElroy and Goss [1939, 1940a], McElroy and Jukes [1940], Wegner et al. [1940] and Johnson et al. [1941] Nia. cin Wegner el al. [1940] Vitamin B6 McElroy and Goss [1939, 1940b], McElroy and Jukes [1940] and Wegner et al. [1940] Pantothenic acid McElroy and Goss [1939, 1941b], McElroy and Jukes [1940], and Wegner et al. [1940] Biotin McElroy and Jukes [1940], Wegner et al. [1940] Folic Acid Lardinois et al. [1944] Vitamin B12 Zucker and Zucker [1948], Lillie et al. [1948] Abelson and Darby [1949] and Hale et al. [1950] Nicotinic acid Wegner et al. [1940] In calves, the rumen does not function. Workers at Illinois showed that thiamin [Johnson et al., 1948 ; Draper and Johnson, 1951], riboflavin [Wiese et al., 1947], vitamin B6 and pantothenic acid [Johnson et al. 1950], biotin [Wiese et al., 1946], folic acid [Draper and Johnson, 1952b], B12 [Draper et al., 1952] and choline [Johnson et al., 1951] are essential vitamins and omission of any of these results in poor growth and continued deprivation can result in death. However, Brisson and Sutton [1951] and Kesler and Knodt [1952] have demonstrated that even in calves vitamin B1 and riboflavin are manufactured. Synthesis of vitamin K in the rumen has been demonstrated by McElroy and Goss [1940a, 1940b, 1941a, 1941b] and Owen [1947].
December, 1958] O. P. AGARWALA 179 Factors in vitamin synthesis Diet is responsible for changes in vitamin synthesis in rumen. Starch inclusion in diet increases synthesis of members of the vitamin B complex in rumen, as demon- strated by McElroy and Goss [1939], Lardinois et al. [1944] and Hunt et al. [1952]. Urea increases synthesis of vitamin B complex group members except B6 [Lardinois et al., 1944]. However, Wegner et al. [1940] think that synthesis of thiamin, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, B6 and biotin is not affected by changes in diet. Inclusion of cobalt in diet increases the synthesis of vitamin B12 as shown by Moinuddin et al. [1951, 1953], Hasper et al. [1951], Hoekstra et al. [1952], Collins et. al. [1953], Shrimpton and Duckworth [1953]. Role of antibiotics Recently the effect of antibiotics in diet on protein and vitamin synthesis and digestion of cellulose has been studied by different investigators. According to Hungate et al. [1955] aureomycin in diet changes the rumen flora and thus, according to Bell et al. [1951], Kester et al. [1952b], Murley et al. [1952], Horn et al. [1953] and Pritchard [1955], decreases cellulose digestion. Decrease in cellulose digestion due to streptomycin and Chloromycetin has been reported by Wassermann et al. [1952]. They are of the opinion that the amount of antibiotics in the diet is the factor that determines its effect and have demonstrated increase in cellulose digestion at low levels of penicillin and streptomycin. Antibiotics at higher levels of feeding decrease vitamin synthesis [Colby et al, 1950, Cunningham and Washermann, 1951 and Rusoff et al., 1954], However, Chance et al. [1953a and 1953b] have shown that synthesis of riboflavin, vitamin B6, biotin and vitamin B12 is not affected by feeding antibiotics. Smith and Allen [1953] are of the opinion that only thiamin, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, niacin are not affected by inclusion of antibiotics in diet. Rumen absorption Until recently it was usually categorically stated that no absorption occurs in the rumen. However, Trautmann [1933], Rankin [1941] and Phillipson and McAnally [1942] have shown absorption of atropine, glucose and volatile fatty acids respectively in rumen. Davey [1936] has shown that osmotic pressure of the fluid in the various parts of the rumen is equal to that of blood and he gives this as a proof that absorption results in rumen. Barcroft et al. [1944a] have shown that rumen epithelium is more favourable to absorption than skin epithelium. Barcroft et al [1944] have also demonstrated that absorption of lower fatty acids takes place in rumen. Danielli [1945] has followed the work of Barcroft et al. and found that absorption of fatty acids is influenced by pH of rumen ingesta. At lower pH, according to him, more fatty acids are absorbed than at higher pH. Mason and Phillipson [1951] and Kiddle et al. [1951] have further studied the absorption of acetic, propionic and butyric acids in rumen. Absorption of K, Na and chlorides in the rumen has been shown by Parthasarathy and Phillipson [1953]. 78 AR/58 3
180 RUMEN DIGESTION [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, SUMMARY 1. The ruminants differ from non-ruminants herbivores in that the stomach consists of four chambersDecember, 1958] O. P. AGARWALA 181 Barcroft, J., McAnally, R. A. and Phillipson, A. T. (1944a). J. Exp. Biol., 20, 132 182 RUMEN DIGESTION [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, Dukes, H. H. (1942 and 1955). The physiology of domestic animals. (Comstock Pub. Co., Ithaca, N. Y.) Duncan, D. L. (1951). J. Physiol., 115, 56 December, 1958] O. P. AGARWALA 183 Johnstone184 RUMEN DIGESTION [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, MoNaught, M. L. and Smith, J. A. B., (1947). Nutri. Abstr. Rev. 17, 18 Mc Neill, J. J., Doetsch, R. N. and Shew, J. C. (1954). J. Dairy Sci., 37, 81 Mertin, H. (1933). Cited in Boil. Rev. 1944, 19, 41-52 Mills, R. C., Booth, A. N., Bohstedt, G. and Hart, E. B. (1942). J. Dairy Sci., 24, 925 December, 1958] O. P. AGARWALA 185 Scisson, S. (1914). The Anatomy of Domestic Animals, Ed. 2., Philadelphia Smith, R. M. (1890). The Physiology of Domestic Animals, Philadelphia Smith, R. W. (1945). Proc. Nutri. Soc., 3, 203 Smith, Q. T. and Allen, R. S. (1953). J. Dairy Sci., 36, 593 Smith, J. A. B. and Baker, F. (1944). Biochem. J. 38, 496-505 Smith and Marais (1940). Onderstepoort J. Vet. Sci., 15, 187 Steintechner, H. and Schwartz, C. (1925). Biochem. Z., 156, 136 Swift, R. W., Thacker, E. J. and Black, A., Bratzter, J. W. and James, W. H. (1947). J. Anim. Sci., 6, 432 Sym, E. A., Stankiewicz, W. and Ziepinski, F. (1939). Enzymolozia, 6, 113 STUDIES IN DAY-OLD CHICK IMMUNIZATION AGAINST FOWL POX USING EGG-PROPAGATED FOWL POX AND PIGEON POX VIRUSES By S. B. V. RAO, B. M. THAKRAL and V. V. SRINIVASAN, Division of Poultry Research, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar [Received for publication on June 4, 1957 Accepted for publication on June 1, 1958] With 4 Text-Figures THE occurrence of fowl pox in India in the hot summer months causing severe morbidity [Figs. 1 and 2] and mortality in chicks even during the first few weeks of their life is a matter of common knowledge to all poultrymen. It has been the routine practice to vaccinate young chicks with pigeon pox scab vaccine, the use of a similar material from fowl pox skin lesions having proved hazardous owing to generalization and flare up of the disease in some of the flocks. However, the use of pigeon pox scab material for immunizing baby chicks of early age was not a success. The Disease Investigation Officers' Conference held in March, 1950, suggested that since the pigeon pox vaccine in use at present had a low degree and duration of immunity, it should be improved to avoid serious recurring losses to the poultry industry, and that experiments should also be conducted to immunize chicks of much lower age than eight weeks. LITERATURE Fowl pox virus immunization Dunn and Sherwood [1932] reported successful vaccination of day-old chicks with fowl pox skin lesion virus with no constitutional or systemic symptoms, and concluded that it was of practical value for protecting baby chicks, provided due care was exercised in the process. The first of a series of large-scale experiments, both in the laboratory and field, was carried out by Lubbehusen and Ehlers [1936]. They laid special stress on (i) the technique, (ii) the site of vaccination and (iii) the careful selection of a vaccine in suitable dilution which would give a high per- centage of takes without favouring secondary pox lesions or untoward sequelae. The criteria for the success of the vaccination were the data regarding the weight gains and mortality, as compared with the non-vaccinated controls, and the degree of immunity conferred. Their conclusions were that vaccination of day-old chicks with skin lesion virus of the fowl was accompanied by a systemic reaction which manifested itself by a temporary inhibition of normal weight gains and lowering of vitality, the degree of which was influenced by the local reaction which in the presence of unfavourable conditions and intercurrent infections, contributed to excessive mortality. 187 78 AR/58 4
188 STUDIES IN IMMUNIZATION AGAINST FOWL POX [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, A second trial in baby-chick vaccination was made by Lubbehusen and Beach [1937] in 15 groups comprising of several thousand chickens from day-old to 55 day-old. Their studies indicated that a satisfactory ' take ' in day-old chicks induced immunity against fowl pox for a period of at least 18 months. These findings were further supported by field observations. The results neverthe- less lent support to the previous view that the rate of growth and resistance to other diseases were adversely affected. Data indicated that a systemic reaction followed in chicks vaccinated at 1, 13, 28 and 42 days, but the reactions were progressively less severe as the age of the chicks increased. However, in general, the retardation of growth was more than excessive mortality. " The age limit of the bird at the time of vaccination (F. P. V.) is important. In certain areas day-old chicks are vaccinated, but the severe systemic reactions and high mortality rate following vaccination do not make birds of this age satis- factory subjects of vaccination. " The preferable age for vaccination of chickens is from 6 to 12 weeks according to Delaplane [1943] and from 8 to 10 weeks accord- ing to Beaudette [1941]. As a rule, the chicken should be one month old. Chickens should not be vaccinated within one month, and preferably two months before pro- duction. However, " with pigeon pox vaccine this upper age limit for vaccination is not important since the vaccine does not produce a systemic reaction following its application. In young chicks, the age limit depends upon the feathering of the bird since the vaccine is applied only by the feather follicle method. " [Charles H. Cunningham, 1952.] Preliminary studies were made in this Division in day-old chicks with an egg-adapted fowl pox virus isolated in India [Iyer, Rao, and Thakral, 1953]. In these studies, among the vaccinates, neither growth retardation nor lowering of resistance to intercurrent infection due to excessive reaction, was noticed as was previously reported by other workers who used the F. P. scab virus for the same purpose, while the immunity conferred was a durable one lasting for over a year. Subsequent studies are reported in this paper. Pigeon pox virus immunization Doyle and Minett [1927] adapted fowl pox virus to the pigeon. For a decade this strain of scab virus was incorporated in the Indian Veterinary Research Ins- titute scab vaccine for controlling fowl pox in India. Presently the pigeon pox scab virus is in use for this purpose, but the immunity is short-lived, breaking down in about three months under natural conditions [I. V. R. I., Poultry Research Divi- sion, 1950]. Glover [1939] observed that protection given by this virus was erratic. Similarly Haig [1951] found the immunity response to vary while using an egg- adapted P. P. V. strain. He reported that a moiety became refractory to challenge with F. P. V. while in the other moiety, the response varied from 100 to 0 per cent. The maximum antibody titer was reached in 10 days. In the Union of South Africa, an egg-adapted P. P. V. vaccine is in use to immunize chicks from day- old to four weeks old, while vaccination is carried out with F. P. V. in older chickens.
December, 1958] RAO et al. 189 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Pox infection in chicks within five weeks of age ; malignant form [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. A group of five-week old chicks in brooder affected with pox
190 STUDIES IN IMMUNIZATION AGAINST FOWL FOX [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, Experimental vaccinations were made by the authors in day-old chicks, using egg-propagated pigeon pox virus (P. P. V.) and fowl pox virus (F. P. V.) of similar origin, with a view to assess their respective antigenic values for protecting chicks of early age. The work was prompted by the success obtained in immuniz- ing older birds with egg-adapted F. P. V. [Rao et al., 1953] which forms the basis of this study. EXPERIMENTAL Vaccination with F.P.V. One group of 100 Rhode Island Red chicks and another group of 100 Barred Plymouth Rock chicks were vaccinated when day-old with a modified fowl pox virus which had undergone fifteen passages in the chorio-allantoic membrane (c.a.m.) of the embryonated chicken egg. Control groups of similar numbers were reared under the same conditions of feeding and management. A group of 25 healthy day- old chicks of Barred Plymouth Rock breed was placed in contact with the second group. The vaccine was prepared from fresh membranes finely disintegrated and sus- pended in buffered 25 per cent glycerine broth, pH 7.4, and used at 8 per cent and 4 per cent concentrations, for the first and second groups respectively. The chicks were wing-banded and individually weighed prior to vaccination. The stab method of inoculations, using the eye of a sewing needle with the bridge filed off, was used. The first group was inoculated with the fresh 8 per cent vaccine by one stab in the web of the wing. The second group was inoculated with the 4 per cent vaccine similarly. All chicks in the experiment were fed a balanced diet, with skim milk as protein supplement and adequate supply of greens and limestone grit. They had access to sunlight daily, after two weeks of age. Sawdust was used as litter and the chicks were brooded cold as is the practice during summer. Individual weights of the chicks (excepting those left in contact) were recorded on the first day when the chicks were wing-banded, and subsequently every fort- night till they were 8 weeks of age, when they were placed in the yards inoculated with a prophylactic dose of Newcastle disease vaccine. The 'takes' of fowl pox vaccination were checked at 7, 10, 14 and 21 days and their nature and secondary lesions, if any, were recorded. Post-mortems were scrutinised for any direct or indirect influence of vaccination on mortality like 'runting' or unthriftiness due to secondary lesions on mouth or eye-lid, and throat lesions due to pecking of unhealed scabs. OBSERVATIONS "Takes" and secondary lesions Good takes were noticed from the sixth day onwards, reaching a maximum of 100 per cent in the first group and 96 per cent in the second group on the tenth day respectively. The takes appeared like pale yellow pearls and later developed into plaques as big as split peas (Figs. 3 and 4). The scabs are shed generally by the third week, but in a few cases in the first group they persisted up to four weeks. Nine chicks out of 100 in the first group and 4 chicks out of the 100 vaccinated in the second group developed a secondary lesion on the beak. Seven out of the 25 in-contacts had secondary lesions distributed as follows : beakDecember 1958] RAO et at. 191 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Papule one week after day- old chick vaccination with F. P. V. virus [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Pustule two weeks after F. P. V. vaccination of day-old chick
192 STUDIES IN IMMUNIZATION AGAINST FOWL POX [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, Growth-rate The growth rate of group I did not show significant difference as compared with the control, but the 9 per cent of chicks which developed secondary lesions were visibly stunted in their growth as against a 4 per cent runts in the control due to other causes. The rate of mortality was 8 per cent in vaccinated ones and 6 per cent in the controls. (The average weight per chick in groups I and II, and mortality are shown in Tables I and II.) In the second group the secondary lesions were fewer in number (4 per cent). The growth-rate showed little deviation from the normal. The mortality was 8 and 9 per cent in the vaccinated groups I and II and 6 and 8 per cent in the control groups respectively. TABLE I Showing growth-rate of F. P. V. vaccinated and control chicks Serial No. Group No. of chicks Average body weight in grams Day-old 2 weeks 4 weeks 6 weeks 8 weeks A Vaccinated . . 100 37.8 92.9 174.2 305.0 439.0 Control. . . 100 38.3 84.6 181.0 300.0 443.3 B Vaccinated . . 100 38.5 75.6 130.7 211.4 302.5 Control . . 100 38.3 76.7 136.5 214.3 307.0 TABLE II Showing results of vaccination with egg.adapted F. P. V. in day-old chicks No. of chicks Vaccine per cent Takes per cent Secondary lesions per cent Runts per cent Mortality per cent Percentage refractory to challenge 8 weeks after vaccina- tion 12 months vaccina- tion Group I Rhode Island Red 100 8 100 9 9 8 100 100 100 (control) .. .. .. 4 6 0 0 Group II Barred Plymouth Rock 100 4 96 4 4 9 100 10 100 (control) .. .. .. 4 8 0 00 25 (in- contacts) .. .. 7 7 8 80 ..
December, 1958] RAO et al. 193 Immunity tests Five chicks were challenged each time from the first and second vaccinated groups, at 8, 10 and 12 weeks and later at monthly intervals by a stab in the comb or wing web, using the homologous strain of the egg-propagated virus in the same concen- tration as was used previously to vaccinate them. The vaccinated ones were re- fractory to the challenge up to 12 months, while the controls reacted every time. Among the 25 in-contacts in the second group, 2 died of causes other than pox, 7 developed visible lesions ; the rest were challenged at 8 weeks' age with the homo- logous vaccine by the stab method. Three developed a weak reaction, while the rest proved refractory (Table II). EXPERIMENTAL Vaccination with P.P.V. Commercial pigeon scab virus from the Biological Products Division of the I. V.K.I. was treated with anti-biotics to obtain a germ-free filtrate by the procedure previously described by Rao et al. (loc. cit.) for inoculating eleven day-old embryonating eggs. The virus grew readily on the chorio-allantoic membrane as evidenced by thick oedematous plaques at the site of inoculation and scattered ones ventral to the embryo. These were harvested on the fourth day of infection. Titration of the virus in embryos gave the end points between 10-6 and 10-7. In trial vaccinations, neither in fowl nor pigeon was there metastatic or generalized spread from the site of inoculation. Infected feather follicles were inflamed and distended with yellowish material forming plugs. The vaccine was prepared by suspending the membranes in 5 per cent proportion in 25 per cent buffered glycerine broth pH 74, as in the case of the F.P. Vaccine. Three groups, each of 100 wing-banded baby chicks two days old were raised in three adjacent brooder pens, under the same care and management as in the experiment with F.P.V. vaccination. All chicks under the experiment were weighed at birth and then every week up to eight weeks. The first group received a stab each in the web of the wing with the 5 per cent P.P.V. vaccine. The second lot was similarly treated but 25 unvaccinated chicks of the same age were added to this group to serve as in-contacts. The third lot of 100 served as controls. All chicks were daily observed for "takes", secondary lesions and mortality. The details are recorded in Tables III and IV. TABLE III Showing growth-rate of P. P. V. vaccinated and control chicks Serial No. Group No. of chicks Average body weight in grams Day-old 2 weeks 4 weeks 6 weeks 8 weeks A Vaccinated . . 100 31.8 72.4 170.4 280.5 425.2 Control. . . 50 32.3 75.6 168.2 285.4 420.4 B Vaccinated . . 100 30.4 76.8 174.2 290.2 426.4 Control . . . 50 28.2 84.2 176.5 288.4 425.8
194 STUDIES IN IMMUNIZATION AGAINST FOWL POX [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, TABLE IV Showing results of vaccination with egg-adapted P. P. V. in day-old chicks Group Breed No. of chicks Vaccine per cent Takes per cent Second- ary lesions per cent Runts per cent Morta- lity per cent Percentage refractory to 8 weeks after vaccina- tion with F. P. Virus 10 weeks after vaccina- tion with F. P. Virus 12 weeks after vaccina- tion W.L. (I) 100 5 100 .. .. 10 100 50 10 R. I. R. (II). 100 5 100 .. .. 11 100 50 20 R. I. R. 50 (control) .. .. .. .. 10 0 0 0 W. L. 50 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. W. L. 25 (in- contact with II) .. .. .. .. 0 36 OBSERVATIONS "Takes", secondary lesions and immunity In the two groups of baby chicks vaccinated with P.P.V. vaccine, there was 100 per cent pronounced takes by the fifth day, which persisted up to ten days, and no secondary lesions developed (Table IV). In the 25 in-contacts, there were no secondary lesions but 36 per cent were immune to challenge at eight weeks. The vaccination had no significant influence on the growth-rate (Table III) as compared with the controls. Ten vaccinated chicks were selected at random from each of the two groups, tested weekly up to eight weeks and were found refractory to the challenge. Subsequent to this period, the immunity level however, fell rapidly to an average of 55 per cent by ten weeks, and then to 15 per cent by the twelfth week. This virus being benign produced no visible lesions, but was invasive, though to a lesser extent, as it induced a silent immunity in 8 out of the 25 in-contacts which withstood the challenge at eight weeks. DISCUSSION In the present series of observations it is seen that when egg-propagated fowl pox virus was used for vaccination in day-olds, there was absence of abnormal mortality, systemic reaction and that growth-rate was not retarded. Brandly [1937] is of the opinion that the larger takes and active infection following the use of scab virus were due to the contaminants present in the scab. Apparently this leads one to conclude that the egg-propagated fowl pox virus would be a choice prophylactic, especially for ensuring a better grade of immunity lasting for over
December, 1958] RAO el al. 195 a year. Closer observation, however, necessitates consideration with regard to certain points, especially (a) secondary lesion in vaccinates and (b) spread of the active virus in the in-contacts leading to 'silent' immunity or secondary lesions in such groups. In the first group of baby chicks inoculated with 8 per cent vaccine, there was, persistence of lesions in 50 per cent of the cases, with 9 per cent secondary lesions while with the 4 per cent suspension of virus, 4 per cent of such chicks vaccinated developed secondary lesions. The latter concentration appears to be comparatively more suitable for satisfactory takes. Twenty-eight per cent of the in-contact chicks developed lesions on the face and beaks, which suggests the persistence of the virus on the vaccinated birds. This indicates the existence of two factors which have to be considered before selecting this particular strain of virus as an immunizing agent. In general (a) virus antigen used for prophylaxis should not spread the infection and (b) the vaccinated animals/birds should not be a source of infection or prove carriers to disseminate the virus to other susceptible birds/animals. Even though a virulent virus could be antigenic by inducing a reliable grade of immunity, the " invasiveness " of such a virus portion into healthy in-contacts by producing actual lesions, offsets this advantage, since its use in routine vaccina- tions could become hazardous due to a gradual exaltation of its virulence. This may ultimately lead to a large-scale infection of baby chicks, resulting in heavy losses, which has been the actual experience of some workers. In the present series of observations, it was noticed that the egg-propagated pigeon-pox virus was capable of conferring a short term immunity in day-old chicks for about eight weeks without producing secondary lesions in the in-contacts. This would suggest the safety of the pigeon pox virus as an immunizing agent. The threshold of immunity conferred by the P. P. V. however can be reinforced by a second dose of F. P. V. at about the eighth week. Further, some workers including Kamarov and Kligler [1936] consider the use of F. P. V. in late-hatched chicks unsafe even at the older age of six weeks, owing to severe post-vaccination reac- tions, and suggest the use of P. P. V. for the primary vaccination, followed two months later by F. P. V. Hence it follows, this would be a safe procedure to be adopted in early chick vaccination. In our experiments we have found the stab method of vaccination in the wing web as effective for P. P. V. as for F. P. V. in day-old chicks, as it helps best in controlling the extent of reactions in unfeathered baby chicks where the feather follicle method of vaccination is difficult of application. SUMMARY Two groups of day-old chicks were successfully vaccinated, using egg-propa- gated field strains of fowl and pigeon-pox viruses respectively. The F. P. vaccine was prepared from infected membranes in concentrations of 4 and 8 per cent in 25 per cent glycerine broth and pH 7.4 and used by the stab method on the web of the wing in two groups of chicks respectively. It produced 78 AR/58 5
196 STUDIES IN IMMUNIZATION AGAINST FOWL POX [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, uniformly good ' takes', followed by immunity beyond 12 months in both con- centrations of the virus. Other interesting observations were that neither significant systemic reaction nor retardation of growth rate were noticed, as was reported by previous workers who used the F. P. scab virus. However, there were secondary lesions in F. P. vaccinated chicks, being 9 and 4 per cent in the two groups respec- tively, nearly 90 per cent of the in-contacts developed immunity and were refractory to challenge with F. P. virus. Further, 28 per cent of these in-contacts developed lesions on the face and were mostly stunted in growth. The P. P. vaccine was used in 5 per cent concentration of the membranes. In this lot the systemic reactions and retardation of growth were absent, while the vaccinates and in-contacts developed no secondary pox lesions. The immunity in the vaccinates, however, broke down by ten weeks. It appears from these observations that though F. P. virus may appear fairly safe in healthy flocks of baby chicks, its use is not indicated where all the chicks held in a brooder house cannot be vaccinated simultaneously. Therefore, pigeon-pox vaccine is suggested for vaccination of day-old chicks with 100 per cent safety under all conditions, followed at eight weeks by a stab with F. P. V., just before placing the chicks in the open yards to continue the immunity at a higher level. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors thank Shri S. G. Iyer, Head of the Division of Poultry Research, for his interest, encouragement and advice. REFERENCES Brandly, C. A. (1937). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 90, 479-487 Cunningham, C. H. (1952). Diseases of Poultry. Biester and Sehwarte III Edition, p. 662 Dunn, R. C. and Sherwood, R. M. (1932). Poult. Sci., 12, 323 Doyle, T. M. and Minett, F. C. (1927). J. Comp. Path. and Therap., 40, 247 Glover, R. E. (1939). J. Comp. Path. & Therap., 52, 29-36 Haig, D. A. (1951). Onderstepoort J. 25, 17-29 Indian Veterinary Research Institute (Poultry Research Division) 1950. Unpublished work Iyer, S. G., Rao, S. B. V. and Thakral, B. M. (1953). Proc. 40th Indian Sci. Congr., Part III, 51 Kamarov, A. and Kligler, I. J. (1936). J. Comp. Path, and Therap., 49, 90-95 Lubbehusen, R. E. and Ehlers, D. P. (1936). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc, 80, 236-249 A PRELIMINARY NOTE ON THE OCCURRENCE OF CLO- STRIDIUM WELCHII TYPE D INFECTION IN SHEEP IN INDIA By P. R. NILAKANTAN and B. K. KATHRIA, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar [Received for publication on January 15, 1958 Accepted for publication on May 27, 1958] (With 5 Text Figures) INFECTIOUS enterotoxaemia of sheep is an acute toxaemic disease following rapid multiplication of Clostridium welchii type D within the contents of the small intestines. Even though this condition seems to have been in existence for long, Gill [1927] seems to have been the first to study the disease in lambs in New Zealand and give it the name of 'pulpy kidney disease '. Montgomerie and Rowlands [1934] described a similar disease in Wales. In Australia the disease appears to have been reported as early as 1915 when it was known as ' Beverley disease'. After carrying out extensive research work Bennets [1932] was able to establish the disease as caused by B. ovitoxicus. Though the prevalence of the disease in sheep in India was suspected a few years ago, attempts to investigate the disease were made only in recent years. Chatupale [1948] proved the existence of the disease in the Dwaraka area. A visit to a few of the organised sheep farms in the country by one of us (P. R. N.) and examination of the available postmortem records revealed that sudden deaths in well-conditioned sheep were not uncommon and often the only postmortem finding in a number of cases was gastro-enteritis. This led to a systematic investigation to ascertain the extent of prevalence of the disease in the various sheep-breeding tracts in different states. A record is made here of the isolation of Cl. welchii type D from a few outbreaks of the disease in some of the States of the Indian Union. EXPERIMENTAL In order to obtain material from a large number of cases of sheep suspected to have died of enterotoxaemia for laboratory examination, instructions were sent to the field veterinarians for collection and despatch of material to the laboratory from suspected cases. Field investigations were also carried out in some of the States, viz., Madras, Bombay and Bihar. Material for laboratory examination consisted of intestinal contents preserved in 0.5 per cent chloroform and pieces of intestines preserved in 50 per cent glycerine saline. Often, material received was either insufficient or without any preservative or it was collected from carcasses of sheep long after death, with the result that not all specimens received in the laboratory were fit for examination. 197 78 AR/58 6
198 CLOSTRIDIUM WELCHII TYPE D INFECTION IN SHEEP [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, Direct smear examination Direct smears were made from the intestinal contents as well as from the intes- tinal mucous membrane and stained by Gram's method. Smears from typical cases of infectious enterotoxaemia revealed large number of Gram-positive, short, stumpy, rod-shaped organisms. Examination of the intestinal contents for the presence of toxins Intestinal contents, when available in sufficient quantity, were first centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for 30 minutes and the supernatant tested for toxicity in mice and rabbits. Usually mice were inoculated with 0.3 ml. and 0.6 ml. doses intravenously and rabbits were given 0.2 ml. intradermally. Presence of toxins was revealed by death of the mice, often with convulsive and paralytic symptoms, in a few minutes to 12 to 15 hours after injection and by typical dermonecrotic lesions which deve- loped at the site of inoculation in rabbits. If the intestinal contents proved toxic, neutralization tests with antitoxic sera of different types of Cl. welchii were carried out to determine the type of toxic factors involved. Isolation of organism Attempts to isolate Cl. welchii were made from intestinal contents as well as washed pieces of intestines received for examination at the laboratory. Usually, cooked meat medium was inoculated with a small quantity of intestinal contents or a suspension of pieces of intestines in normal saline solution and incubated at 37°C. The cultures were periodically examined. When gas production was dis- cernible, subculture was made in another tube of cooked meat medium, which again was incubated till gas production was noticed. Culture from the second tube was plated on blood agar plates which were incubated in an anaerobic jar for 24 to 48 hours. Typical colonies resembling those of Cl. welchii were picked up and subcultured. Purification of the culture was effected by repeated plating and picking up of single colonies in cooked meat medium. Every time a transfer was made in this manner, smears of the culture were examined to check the morphology of the organism. In the initial stages, tubes of litmus milk were also inoculated with the first subculture to see if the organism produced the stormy fermentation, which is a characteristic of Cl. welchii and to see whether its development would furnish early evidence of the presence of the organism in the culture. Typing of the strain Each strain of Cl. welchii isolated from intestines or intestinal contents, after purification, was studied for its morphology, staining and cultural characters on blood agar plates and in shake cultures, biochemical reactions, viz., fermentation of carbohydrates like glucose, lactose, maltose, mannite, sucrose and salicin, and action on litmus milk and for the ability to liquefy gelatin. After establishing the identity of the cultures on the basis of the above tests, further typing was done by producing toxins and carrying out neutralization tests with antitoxic sera obtain- ed from Messrs Burroughs Wellcome and Company.
December, 1958] P. B. NILAKANTAN AND B. K. KATHURIA 199 Toxin production In the initial stages of the work the method adopted by Bennetts [1932] for the production of toxin by Cl. welchii isolated from cases of enterotoxaemia was used. Later, the one suggested by Dalling and Ross [1938] was adopted so that the different toxic components could be produced separately and tested. For the production of toxins, a pure culture of the organism was inoculated intramuscularly into the breast muscles of a pigeon in a dose of 0.25 ml. of a 24 hours' growth in cooked meat medium or brain medium along with 0.2 ml. of a 5 per cent solution of calcium chloride. Death of the pigeon invariably occurred in about 4 to 8 hours. Soon after death of the pigeon, muscles at the site of inocula- tion were collected and used for seeding the appropriate medium for toxin produc- tion. After incubating the culture flasks for the requisite period, which varied from 18 to 96 hours, they were examined for purity, filtered through muslin to remove gross particles of meat in the medium, centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for 30 minutes and filtered through Seitz filter or filter candles. The filtrate was tested for toxicity in rabbits and mice. If the filtrate proved toxic to rabbits and mice, 0.9 ml. of the filtrate was mixed with 0.3 ml. of the antitoxic sera of Cl. welchii types A, B, C and D, incubated at 37°C for 45 minutes and inoculated into rabbits intradermally and into mice intravenously. In the case of Cl. welchii type D, neutralization was noticed only in mixtures of the toxin with type B and type D antitoxic sera. RESULTS Eight strains of Cl. welchii type D were isolated from different outbreaks amongst sheep in different parts of the country and the detailed history of each case has been furnished (Table I). Morphology All the strains isolated were short and stumpy with parallel sides and some- what rounded ends. They were approximately 2 to 3 microns in length. The organisms were Gram-positive and were usually intensely stained. All were non- motile and did not sporulate when grown in ordinary media but sporulated well when grown in alkaline egg medium. Though in culture the organisms were non- capsulated, a well-defined and fairly large capsule could be demonstrated in smears made from lesions in guinea pigs and pigeons when stained by Moller's [1951] modi- fication of the Hiss method of capsule staining. Cultural characters On blood agar plates two types of colonies were observed, viz. (i) small round colonies, low convex, faintly greyish, almost translucent and approximately 1 to 2 mm. in diameter and (ii) fairly large, flat or umbonate colonies with somewhat lobate margin and greyish white in colour and 3 to 4 mm. in diameter. All the strains produced beta type of haemolysis on blood agar plates after 24 hours of incubation.
200 CLOSTRIDIUM WELCHII TYPE D INFECTION IN SHEEP [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, Biochemical reactions All the strains produced stormy fermentation in litmus milk. They liquefied gelatin in 24 hours and fermented glucose, lactose, maltose and sucrose but not mannite or salicin. For carrying out sugar fermentation tests the method des- cribed by Nilakantan [1954] was adopted. Pathogenicity All the strains produced typical gas gangrene and death when inoculated in- tramuscularly into guinea pigs, mice or pigeons. Toxic filtrate of the cultures on inoculation intradermally in rabbits produced necrosis within 24 to 48 hours at the site of inoculation. Mice, on inoculation intravenously died within a few minutes to 12 hours, showing convulsive symptoms and paralysis. The toxic property was neutralized by Cl. welchii type B and type D antitoxic sera. In Table I are given the details of the history and origin of the various strains of Cl. welchii type D which were isolated and studied. TABLE I Showing the history and origin of the various strains of Cl. welchii type D Serial No. Specimen No. Source Type of material received Date of isolation History 1 137a D. I. O. ( Sheep and Goats), Madras Intestinal contents October, 1952 From a case of sudden death of sheep in Govt, sheep farm, Ooty. A few deaths had been reported 2 217 D.I.O., Bihar Peritoneal fluid January, 1953 An outbreak of dysentery followed by deaths in about 12 sheep in a no- madic flock 3 266 D. I. O. (Sheep and Goats), Madras Intestinal contents and pieces of in- testines November, 1953 From a case of sheep sus- pected to have died of enterotoxaemia 4 321 A. D. I. O. (Sheep and Goats), U.P. Do. September, 1954 Do. 5 333 Do. Do. Do. Do. 6 355 A. R. O. (Anaerobes) I. V. R. I. Do. December, 1954 History of outbreak given in the text 7 356 Do. Do. Do. Do. 8 1/55-56 D.I.O. (Sheep and Goats), Madras Do. April, 1955 From a case of sheep suspected to have died of enterotoxaemia
December, 1958] P. B. NILAKANTAN AND B. K. KATHURIA 201 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5 FIG. 1. Peritoneal surface of diaphragm showing haemorrhagic patches from a natural case of enterotoxaemia in sheep. FIGS. 2, 3, 4, and 5. Sheep, after inoculation with filtrate of intestinal content from a case of enterotoxaemia, showing progressive symptoms of the disease, ending in death.
202 CLOSTRIDIUM WELCHII TYPE D INFECTION IN SHEEP [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, INVESTIGATION INTO AN OUTBREAK OF ENTEROTOXAEMIA (" CIRCLING DISEASE ") IN MADRAS STATE Field investigation into a disease condition known as ' circling disease ' in sheep in the Madras State was carried out by one of us (P. R. N.) in November and December, 1954. At the time of visit the disease was prevalent in one of the dis- tricts, namely, Tirunelvelli. The investigation was carried out in collaboration with Shri T. Ananthapadmanabhan, the then Disease Investigation Officer, Sheep and Goats, Madras State and Shri P. S. Narayana Iyer, the then District Veterinary Officer, Tirunelvelli. Outbreaks of the disease had been occurring in the district since 1950-51 and the disease was known locally as " Thullu Novu " (literally meaning jumping sickness, as the affected animals often jumped once or twice, fell down and died). Data as regards the incidence of the disease revealed the serious nature of the disease and the loss it caused to the shepherds is given in Table II. TABLE II Showing the incidence of " circling disease " in the district of Tirunelvelli in Madras State Period Number of attacks Number of deaths 1950-51 (Nov. to Jan.). . . . . . . . 776 774 1952-53 (Oct. to Jan.) . . . . . . . . 492 492 1954-55 (Nov. to Jan.) . . . . . . . . 500 500 Nearly 42 villages in the district were involved. The disease usually occurred soon after rains and the shepherds believed that the disease was due to sheep grazing the tender grass growing soon after rains. Chemical examination of the stomach contents from a number of cases proved negative for the presence of any vegetable poison. Enquiry made from sheep owners revealed the following facts :December, 1958] P. B. NILAKANTAN AND B. K. KATHURIA 203 Filtrate of intestinal contents from one of the cases proved toxic to rabbits. The toxicity of the filtrate was neutralized by Cl. welchii type B and type D anti- toxic sera. Cl. welchii type D was also isolated from this as well as from another case in the outbreak. Five ml. of filtrate of intestinal contents of the above-mentioned case was in- oculated intravenously into a young sheep of about 8 months of age. Within 15 minutes of inoculation the sheep had slight respiratory distress with uneasy movements of the head and limbs (Fig. 2). The respiratory distress increased progressively and within a few minutes the animal was standing with the front legs wide apart and breathing heavily with opened mouth (Fig. 3). Thick viscid saliva dribbled from the mouth. The animal was unable to move, but when forced to do so, showed inco-ordination of movement. Later, the animal became comatose and remained lying in this condition. However, heavy breathing with opened mouth continued (Fig. 4). The animal died within 35 minutes of the injection of the filtrate (Fig. 5). Postmortem showed general congestion of the internal organs and the lungs showed petechae on the surface. SUMMARY Isolation of eight strains of Cl. welchii type D from cases of sheep suspected to have died of enterotoxaemia is recorded. A detailed study has been made of Cl. welchii isolated from these cases. The toxins liberated by these cultures were identified by carrying out neutralization tests in rabbits and mice, using standard antitoxic sera obtained from Messrs Burroughs Wellcome and Company of England. Cl. welchii type D was found to be responsible for an outbreak reported as cir- cling disease in one of the districts of Madras State. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are grateful to the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for providing facilities to carry out the work ; to the Director, Animal Husbandry Department, Madras State, for permission to carry out field investigation in the State ; to Shri M. R. Dhanda, Head of Division of Pathology and Bacteriology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, for his guidance and encouragement in the work and for his help in the preparation of the paper. They are also thankful to Shri T. Ananthapadmanabhan, the then Disease Investigation Officer (Sheep and Goats), Madras State and Shri P. S. Narayana Iyer, District Veterinary Officer, Tirunelvelli District, for their help in the field investigation. The work was carried out under a scheme financed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. REFERENCES Bennetts, H. W. (1932). Bull. No. 57, Council of Sci. and industr. Res., Commonwealth of Australia Chatupale, W. V. (1948). Ann. Rep. A. D. I. O. (Sheep and Goats), Baroda State Dalling, T., and Ross, H. E. (1938). J. Comp. Path. Therap. 51, 235 Gill, D. A. (1927). Cited by Newsom I. E. (1952) Sheep diseases (The Williams and Wilkins Co., Baltimore) Montgomeric, R. P. and Rowlands, W. T. (1934). Vet. J., 90, 399 Moller, O. (1951). Acta Path. et. microbiol. Scand., 28, 127 Nilakantan, P. R. (1954). Studies on blackquarter (thesis submitted to the University of Madras)
CONTAGIOUS PUSTULAR DERMATITIS IN GOATS By RADHEY MOHAN SHARMA and HARI MOHAN BHATIA, Punjab College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Hissar [Received for publication on November 16, 1957 Accepted for publication on July 22, 1958] CONTAGIOUS pustular dermatitis or contagious ecthyma in sheep and goats has been reported by many workers from various parts of the world. The disease was first recorded by Glover in the year 1928 in Great Britain, who reported that it was caused by a filtrable virus. The filtrate of the scrapings from the lesions and dried crusts was rich in the virus. He further added that the virus was highly resistant and may be preserved in scabs for a very long period. Rottgardt and Pirazzi [1951] found that the scabs from infected animals, desiccated over sulphuric acid, retained their infective power for more than 14 years. The virus of contagious pustular dermatitis is related to the virus of goat-pox. Bennett et al. [1944] studied the immunological relationship of this virus with other pox viruses. They reported that there was no relationship between this virus and the virus of vaccinia. The goat-pox virus, on the other hand, conferred solid immunity against contagious pustular dermatitis, but the latter failed to confer immunity against goat-pox. Serologically, also, there appears to be no relationship between this virus and the vaccinia virus. Macdonald [1951] mentioned that with the complement fixation reaction, there was no evidence of serological relationship between the virus of C. P. D. and vaccinia. Horgan and Haseeb [1947] studied the immunological relationship of various strains of C. P. D. virus. They obtained from Cyprus material from two sheep and one goat affected with the disease. The scabs when applied to the scarified skin of Sudanese sheep produced typical vesiculopustular reaction. Cross immunity tests showed that the three strains were closely related. Reciprocal cross immunity experiments conducted with two strains received from England showed that all the viruses were immunologically identical. Sheep and goats under the age of four months are usually affected. Olah and Elek [1953] reported that in Hungary 74 per cent of the affected sheep were under the age of four months and 37 per cent under four weeks. Topley and Wilson [1955] mentioned that sheep of any age might be attacked, but the disease was commonest in weaned lambs up to one year old. They added that the recovered animals possessed a high degree of immunity which lasted for at least eight months. The disease may be communicated to human beings from sheep and goats. Carne et al. [1946] reported the occurrence of this disease of sheep in Australia as responsible for infection in human beings and described it as an industrial hazard to shearers. Lloyd et al., [1951] described a case of natural transmission of the virus of ovine contagious pustular dermatitis to man. They confirmed the diagnosis 205 78 AR/58 7
206 CONTAGIOUS PUSTULAR DERMATITIS IN GOATS [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, by infecting a sheep with the human material and by cross immunity tests. Pask et al. [1951] reported the successful transmission of contagious ecthyma from sheep to man, in 23 out of 46 attempts, to 18 human beings. The more severe lesions developed after an incubation period of four to six days, reached a maximum in 17 to 21 days and healed with the separation of scabs in 22 to 28 days. There was no constitutional disturbance. Clinically and histologically, the lesions were broadly similar to experimental lesions in sheep. Passage of virus back to sheep was success- ful in one out of seven mild infections tested. Marrone [1948] described an outbreak of contagious ecthyma in which about 60 goats were affected. He mentioned that the sheep housed in the same pens with goats remained healthy. He suggested that the two species might have different susceptibility and adaptation to the virus. He failed to transmit the disease to dogs but was able to set up the infection in rabbits. Bennett et al. [1944] and Selbie [1944] also reported the transmission of the disease to rabbits. In the present case, the senior author while working as Assistant Disease In- vestigation Officer, Punjab, recorded the disease at the Government Livestock Farm, Hissar. Two outbreaks of the disease were investigated : (i) in the months of July and August, 1953, amongst Betal female kids, from 4 to 6 months in age, kept at the Thaska block and (ii) amongst Betal goats and kids at the goat breeding section of the Farm. As a general routine, the kids at the Farm are weaned at the age of 3 months. The disease affected 16 animals out of 44 present at the Thaska block in the 1953 outbreak. In the 1956 outbreak, the disease affected eight adult goats, and 14 kids, age below four months, of the goat breeding section. Symptoms The symptoms observed were cutaneous eruptions on both the lips, particularly near the angles of mouth, eyelids and ears. Lesions were also observed on other parts of the body. In the case of goats, udder and teats exhi- bited eruptions. The lesions started as small red spots, raised in the centre, and were followed by the formation of vesicles and pustules. These ruptured later on and gave rise to thick wart-like brown crusts which fell off in about a fortnight. In some cases, the crusts fused together and a single thick-crusted lesion was formed on a comparatively extensive area. The kids were off food and dull for some days in the early stages during the course of the disease, which lasted for about three weeks. In the 1953 outbreak, the disease was of moderate severity and two animals out of 16 affected (12.5 per cent) died. The 1956 outbreak was severe and the disease proved fatal in eight kids. The infection was not noticed in attendants looking after the affected animals. Investigation (a) Transmission experiment: Two male kids, No. 26 and 664, two male lambs, No. 127 and 53, and two female calves, No. 38 and 137, obtained from the healthy blocks at the Farm were inoculated by the scarification method with the emulsion prepared from the scabs and swabs collected from the affected cases. The animals were kept under observation for 13 days following inoculation, and their temperature and condition was noted every morning. The eruptions started appearing from the fourth to the seventh day after inoculation. The disease was successfully transmitted in two kids, two lambs and one calf out of the two inoculated.
December, 1958] R. M. SHARMA AND H. M. BHATIA 207 TABLE I Observations on cross-immunity test on female kids vaccinated with goat-pox vaccine against contagious pustular dermatitis on September 4, 1953 Description of animal Injected with Temperature (in degrees Farenheit) 5-9-53 6-9-53 7-9-53 8-9-53 9-9-53 10-9-53 11-9-53 12-9-53 13-9-53 14-9-53 15-9-53 16-9-53 Remarks Female Kid No. 736 C. V. P. Der- matitis virus 101.2 101.8 102.0 102.8 101.8 101.9 101.7 101.9 101.9 101.4 101.4 101.5 No local or ther- mal reaction 208 CONTAGIOUS PUST ULAR DERMATITIS IN GOATS [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, TABLE III Observations on cross serum.virus neutralisation test between goat.pox and contagious pustular dermatitis Description of animal Inoculated with Temperature (in degrees Farenheit) 6-1-54 7-1-54 8-1-54 9-1-54 10-1-54 11-1-54 12-1-54 13-1-54 14-1-54 15-1-54 16-1-54 Local reaction observed Female Kid No. 14 Goat-pox virus 99.0 99.0 99.0 99.4 99.4 100.4 101.4 102.4 102.6 103.2 101.8 10-1++++ 10-2++++ 10-3+++ 10-4++ December, 1958] R. M. SHARMA AND H. M. BHATIA 209 Scabs and swabs collected from affected cases were also sent to the Head of the Division of Pathology and Bacteriology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar for cross immunity test against pock infection. Results received indicated that the material proved negative for pock infection when tested in goats. (b) Cross immunity test (i) Four kids (No. 736, 737, 755 and 756) out of those vaccinated with goat-pox vaccine were challenged with contagious pustular dermatitis virus about five weeks after vaccination. A healthy kid was similarly inoculated to act as a control. These animals were kept under observation for 12 days and their morning tempera- ture recorded daily. Observations recorded (Table I) showed that the vaccinated kids did not show any local or thermal reaction indicating thereby that they were immune. The control kid, however, developed local as well as thermal reaction. This experiment showed that the goat-pox vaccine conferred immunity against contagious pustular dermatitis. (ii) Four kids (No. 733, 734, 744 and 760) that suffered from natural attack of contagious pustular dermatitis were challenged with virulent goat-pox virus obtained from the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. A healthy kid was similarly inoculated by the scarification method to act as control. The animals were kept under observation for 15 days following inoculation. Observations recorded (Table. II) showed that all the kids developed local and thermal reaction. Local lesions were visible on the sixth day after goat-pox virus inoculation. This experiment, therefore, indicated that an attack of contagious pustular der- matitis did not confer any protection against goat-pox. (c) Serum-virus neutralisation test Serum-virus neutralisation tests were carried out in kids to determine the relationship between goat-pox virus and the virus of contagious pustular dermatitis. Observations recorded (Table III) showed that goat-pox serum served to neutralise the virus of contagious pustular dermatitis, while the dermatitis serum failed to neutralise the virus of goat-pox. The results recorded above show that goat-pox virus confers protection against contagious pustular dermatitis, but the virus of contagious pustular dermatitis does not seem to protect against goat-pox. These findings are in conformity with those recorded by Bennett and his co-workers (1944). Control of the disease and treatment The disease was controlled by segregating affected animals in a separate en closure away from the healthy animals. Separate attendants were provided to look after the affected kids. The healthy kids were vaccinated with goat-pox vaccine obtained from the Mysore Serum Institute, Bangalore. The lesions of the sick animals were dressed with carbolic oil followed by dusting powder consisting of equal parts of boric acid and zinc oxide. 78 AR/58 8
210 CONTAGIOUS PUSTULAR DERMATITIS IN GOATS [Vol. XXVIII,Pt. IV, SUMMARY Two outbreaks of contagious pustular dermatitis amongst Betal goats and kids are recorded. . The disease could be successfully transmitted to healthy kids, lambs and to one out of two calves used. . Serum-virus neutralisation tests showed that goat-pox serum neutralised the virus of contagious pustular dermatitis, but the dermatitis serum failed to neutralise goat-pox virus. These results were confirmed by cross-immunity tests in kids. . The disease was not noticed in human beings attending on affected animals. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are indebted to Shri P. N. Nanda, Principal, Punjab College of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Hissar, for valuable suggestions in the writing of this paper. Thanks are also due to Shri M. R. Dhanda, Head of the Pathology and Bacteriology Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for examination of material sent to him. REFERENCES. Bennett, Hagan and Haseeb. (1944). J. Comp. Path., 54, 131 Carne, H. R., Wickham, N., Whitten, W. K. and Lockley, R. P. (1946). Aust. J. Sci. 9, 73-74 Glover, R. E. (1928). J. Comp. Path., 41, 318 Horgan, E. S., and Haseeb, M. A. (1947). J. Comp. Path., 57, 1-7 Lloyd, G. M., Macdonald, A., and Glover, R. E. (1951). Lancet. 260, 720-721 Macdonald, A. (1951). J. Path. & Bact., 63, 758-761 Marrone, P. (1948). Abstr. vet. Bull., 20 (9), 586 Olah, P. and Elek, P. (1953). Abstr. vet. Bull, 23 (8), 366 Pask, V. M., Mackerras, I. M., Sutherland, A. K. and Simmons, G. C. (1951). Med. J. Aust., Nov. 10th, 628-632 Rottgardt, A. A. and Garcia Pirazzi, A. J. (1951). Abstr. vet. Bull., 23 (4), 147 Selbie, F. R. (1944). J. Comp. Path. (54), 161-167 Sharma, R. M. 1953-54 and 1955-56. Ann. rep. A. D. I. O. (S. and G.), Punjab Topley and Wilson (1955). Principles of Bacteriology and Immunity, 4th Ed. (2), 2126-27
GENETIC CORRELATIONS IN AUSTRALIAN MERINO SHEEP CORRELATIONS AMONGST BODY LENGTH, WIDTH, DEPTH, FORE CANNON LENGTH, MUTTON SCORE, SKIN FOLD SCORE AND BODY WEIGHTS AT 5 AND 11 MONTHS By G. C. TANEJA,* N. S.W. University of Technology, Sydney [Received for publication on January 25, 1958 Accepted for publication on June 18, 1958] THE Australian Merino is primarily a wool producing sheep. Investigation of factors affecting meat production in this breed seems desirable, because of the possibility of the development of artificial fibres lowering the relative importance of wool, and because the Merino, as a maintenance breed in the stratification of the Australian sheep industry, is an important contributor to the fat lamb industry [Nichols, 1945]. It was therefore decided to investigate certain aspects of mutton quality in Merinos, and as body weight and body dimensions are clearly important characters in this connection, they were also studied [Taneja, 1955c]. Attention was also given to skin folds as they may be undesirable from the point of view of both mutton and wool production [Belschner, 1937 ; Carter, 1941]. Causes of variation in body weights of Merino sheep have been recorded [Taneja, 1955 b]. The relative importance of heredity and environment in body weight increments at different ages in this breed has also been reported (Taneja, 1955 a). Mean values, variances and estimates of repeatability of measurements of body length, depth, width, fore cannon length, fold score and mutton score have been published [Taneja, 1955 c]. Recently the heritability of these characters has also been reported [Taneja, 1958]. In order to complete the study, the genetic cor- relations amongst the pairs of characters studied are presented in this paper. MATERIAL AND METHODS The flock of Peppin Merino sheep in which the observed animals were born has been previously described in detail [Taneja, 1955 a, b, c]. The flock consists of three main divisions; a registered herd, an experimental flock and others. It is closely controlled and the recorded flock maintained under the local pastoral conditions at Trangie, N. S. W., Australia. The measured animals comprised 284 *Present address : M. P. Veterinary College, Mhow. 211 78 AR/58 9
212 GENETIC CORRELATIONS IN AUSTRALIAN MERINO SHEEP [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, ewe lambs born in the spring of 1951 (group 'A') and 273 born in the autumn of 1952 (group 'W'). Each of these groups was further divided into "selection groups" containing animals selected for or against individual wool characteristics. (a) Characters observed (i) Body measurements. All measurements were made on live animals. Body length, depth and width, and fore cannon length were measured according to the procedure of Turner et al. [1953]. Fore cannon length was used as an index of mutton quality, while to assess conformation, body length, depth and width were measured. (ii) Mutton score. Scores for "mutton type" were based on the shape of the hind quarters of living animals viewed from the rear. Sheep with "good fill" in the hind quarters giving the impression of an inverted U were scored high, while those with "poor fill" looking more or less like an inverted V were scored low [McMahon, 1943]. Only three grades (2, 1 and 0 in the descending order of merit) were used. Assessments were made two or three days after crutching. Each sheep was graded by four observers, each recording his score independently. The score used in the final analysis was the sum of the scores of the four observers [Taneja, 1955 c]. (iii) Skin fold score. Photographic standards similar to those described by Carter [1943] were used for the Trangie sheep and the scoring was done at weaning. The total of individual scores for neck, trunk and breech region was used in the analysis. (iv) Body weights. Sheep were weighed at five and eleven months of age. The standard procedure for weighing the sheep has been to hold them over-night without food and water so that the differences due to the contents of the digestive tract are minimised. Sheep of all groups are mixed before weighing so that they are weighed in random order. (b) Analysis Hazel [1943] and Hazel et al., [1943] described several methods for estimating genetic correlations. These methods involve measuring the relationship between two different characters either of related individuals or of the same individual. In this study the correlations between various traits of the same individuals have been estimated. Sums of squares and sums of cross products were obtained separately for each group. The variances and co-variances between sires for the two groups were combined together and divided by (n1December, 1958] G. C. TANEJA 213 The expected composition of mean squares and cross products are given in Table I. TABLE I Expected composition of variances and co-variances Source d.f. M.S. (i) Cross product (i.j) M.S. (j) Between sires n214 GENETIC CORRELATIONS IN AUSTRALIAN MERINO SHEEP [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, DISCUSSION Where the correlations between various traits are calculated on related indi- viduals, the sampling errors decrease as the relationship between them increases. In this study the correlations between various characters measured on the same individual have been obtained, and these values involve relatively more sampling errors which are at present unknown. Nevertheless, the general picture presented does give some indication of the pattern of the relationship among the characters studied. Accepting the computed estimates of Table II, it seems that selection for one of the body measurements will produce correlated responses in the same direction as other body measurements, body weight and mutton type; while it will decrease the skin fold score. Similarly, selection for body weight will improve other correlated characters. Selection for long cannon bones will result in sheep which are longer, wider and slightly deeper in size, with a slight increase in mutton type and body weight; at the same time the fold score will decrease. The principal genetic antagonism found is that of fold score with all other characters studied. Fold score has a negative correlation with five months' body weight and no significant correlation with 11 months' body weight. The importance of genetic correlations among various traits has been long recognised, as evidenced by Darwin's statement: "Hence, if man goes on selecting, and thus augmenting any peculiarity, he will almost certainly modify uninten- tionally other parts of the structure owing to the mysterious laws of correlations". Probably the most important basic cause is the multiple effect of a gene or block of genes. A gene affecting one character may also affect other characters at the same time. Lush [1948] suggested that as far as truly pleiotropic effects are concerned it does not matter whether they are due to entirely different primary effects of each gene or whether the gene has a single primary effect which starts a chain of conse- quences that eventually affects two or more traits, perhaps in opposite directions. Various causes of genetic correlations have been suggested from time to time by various workers. Lush [1948] has suggested that if past selection has been effective it is likely to have caused a negative correlation. The frequencies of genes which have favourable effects on both characters, and of genes which affect one character favourably, but have no effect on the other, would have been raised to a high level so that they contribute little to the additive genetic variance. Genes with a beneficial effect on one character and deleterious effect on the other, would have had their frequencies brought to an intermediate level by continued selection for both characters. This class of genes will contribute more to the additive genetic variance so that characters will tend to be negatively correlated. Linkage between genes has also been suggested as a cause of genetic correlation. However, it will usually have only a minor effect because crossing over in a freely interbreeding population leads to 'coupling' and 'repulsion', heterozygotes becoming equally frequent. The effect of linkage causing genetic correlation can be detected in the first two generations after a cross between previously separate strains or varieties.
December, 1958] G. C. TANEJA 215 Mather [1949] found that continuous selection for chaeta number in Droso- phila resulted in correlated responses to selection. He found that higher chaeta number was associated with loss of fertility and under relaxed conditions, the fertility was regained. This he postulated as due to recombination of genes within chromo- somes by a suitable cross-over. Mather concluded that genes responsible for chaeta number are linked with fertility genes. He believes that pleiotropic effects of genes are not to be expected. Results obtained in Drosophila cannot be expected to be wholly applicable to the domestic animals, because Drosophila has few segregating units (chromosomes) compared with large animals. It is quite possible to achieve intense selection in Drosophila and the effect of linkage may then be important. In sheep, on the other hand, there are several times as large a number of segregating units and linkage cannot be expected to be important to the same extent. Moreover, in sheep and other livestock, selection for any linked combination must be weak, especially where a large number of genes influence the character in question. SUMMARY Measurements of body length, depth and width, fore cannon length, mutton score, skin fold score, and body weights at 5 and 11 months were recorded for Peppin Merino ewe lambs. Observations were made on two groups of lambs216 GENETIC CORRELATIONS IN AUSTRALIAN MERINO SHEEP [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, REFERENCES Belschner, H. G. (1937).ABSTRACTS Experiments and observations leading to development of the California Mastitis Test. SCHALM, O.W. and NOORLANDER, D.O. (1957).218 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, showed no evidence of having acquired the infection, and the remaining two calved at term but acquired infection as shown by the recovery of B. abortus. Of the four controls, three showed high and persistent blood reactions and aborted ; B. abortus was recovered from each of them. One control showed a slight post-exposure rise in blood titre, calved normally and did not become infected. According to the authors, the subcutaneous administration of the vaccine conferred a somewhat higher level of immunity than the intradermal method. The number of animals was small, and the exposure was relatively severe. [C.L.S.] A preliminary trial with three new drugs as prophylactics against Trypanosoma congo- lense in Zebu cattle. J.ROBSON and A. H. MILNE. (1957). Vet. Rec. 69, (22), 564-566. ENCOURAGED by the favourable report of Watkins and Woolfe [1956] on the prophylactic action of the compounds RD 2787, RD 2801 and RD 2902 (all com- bining in part structure of dimidium and antrycide) in mice against Trypanosoma congolense, the authors undertook trials with these compounds in the experimentally produced infection of cattle. In a preliminary experiment designed to judge the apparent toxicity, the three compounds were given subcutaneously, one to each of three healthy oxen respecti- vely, as 2 per cent solution at the rate of 3 mg./kg. body weight. All the drugs caused local swellings, which however disappeared within a month ; at the end of a week, a loss of 12 to 16 lb. in body weight was noticed, but it was regained in two weeks. However, the drugs given as 2 per cent solution by the intramuscular route in the main experiment caused neither lameness nor any local reaction. The drugs were given at the dose of 2 mg./kg. to 3 groups of 18 cattle each and at half this dose rate to another 3 groups of 8 cattle each, respectively. A seventh group of 12 cattle served as control. Experimentals with no histories of trypanosome infection were selected and maintained in fly-proof sheds to avoid extraneous infection. All the drugs at both the dosage levels gave complete protection against heavy challenges of T. congolense of proven virulence by needle to cattle (6 and 2 cattle from each of the first three and the next three groups respectively on each challenge) when tested at 2 and 4 months of dosing respectively, except that one of the 2 cattle injected with RD 2902 at 1 mg./kg. rate developed the infection 45 days after challenge. The 3 challenged controls developed infection in 7 to 12 days. The remainder were challenged six months after dosing. All the cattle given RD 2801 at 2 mg./kg. dose rate were still refractory to the infec- tion, though 2 of the 4 animals which had received the drug at the 1 mg./kg. rate dose showed trypanosomes in the blood. Similarly, trypanosomes broke through the protection in 2 each of the 6 and 4 animals of the groups protected with RD 2787 at the 2 and 1 mg./kg. dose levels respectively ; in 3 of the 6 cattle given RD 2902 at 2 mg./kg. rate and in all the 4 given the drug at the lower dosage levelDecember, 1958] ABSTRACTS 219 Seven months after dosing, half of the cattle challenged at 2 and 4 months were rechallenged. RD 2801 at the higher dose rate still protected 5 of the 6 cattle and one out of 2 cattle at the lower dose level ; RD 2787 protected 4 out of 6 cattle at the higher dose rate, and RD 2902 protected only 2 of the 6 and one out of 2 cattle at the higher and lower dosage levels respectively. Thus the authors conclude that one injection of the compound RD 2801 (now designated prothidium) appeared to protect the cattle against T. congolense for a period of six months, while the compounds RD 2787 and RD 2902 proved less effective, in the order written. Trypanosomes developed no resistance to any of these compounds, as cases where breakdown occurred were successfully treated with ethidium. [B.S.G.] An empirical test of part record selection for egg production. I.M. LERNER and E.R. DEMPSTER (1956). Poult. Sci. 35, (6), 1349220 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, The control of molds on shell-treated eggs. PATRICIA CLEMENTS and A.R. WINTER (1956). Poult. Sci. 35, (5), 1116-20. THE aim of the experiment was to find out the fungicidal and bactericidal properties of six chemical compounds. These compounds were tested at 0.25 per cent level in water, for dipping before shell-treatment and for use in Foamrex and oil dipping solutions. The oil used had a viscosity of 64 to 75 Saybolt points at 100°F, Pour point 25°F and specific gravity 0.845 to 0.858. Foamrex is an alkaline wettable wax solution containing small (1 to 2 micron) particles of wax dispersed in water by means of an emulsifying agent. The eggs for experiment, except the controls, were kept at 55°F for a day before testing, and after cleaning with warm water were dried before a fan. The eggs were then candled for 'A' grade. They were then dipped in the testing solutions, immediately removed and after drying before a fan, stored for 15 days at room temperature (65°F to 95°F) with a relative humidity of 95 to 100 per cent. At the end of the preservation period, these eggs were washed with a solu- tion containing 500 ml. of sterile water, and emulsifying agents, 0.1 percent between 80 and 0.15 per cent G-2800. These washings were used for mold and bacterial count by the dilution plate method. The fungicides tested were (1) Alkyl trimethyl ammonium chloride, (2) Di-duodecnyl dimethyl ammonium chloride, (3) Cetyl pyridinium chloride, (4) Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide, (5) Duomeen T mono acetate and (6) Salicylanilide. It was found that clean, soiled and washed eggs had about the same micro- bial growth at the end of 15 days at room temperature, due perhaps to the bio- logical saturation point being reached during the holding period. Also, mere dipping in oil or Foamrex had no effect on visible mold growth on the shells, mold and bacterial count of shell washings and rots. Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide was found to be an effective fungicide when used alone or with oil, having some germicidal value at 0.25 per cent level. It was not effective when used with Foamrex. Di-duodecnyl dimethyl ammonium chloride was an effective fungicide and had some bactericidal properties when used alone or in combination with oil or Foamrex at 0.25 per cent concentration. Duomeen T mono acetate reduced mold growth on shells by about 55 per cent and bacterial growth by about 27 per cent. Cetyl pyridinium chloride at 0.25 per cent concentration reduced both mold and bacterial growth when used alone or in combination with oil; but was ineffective as a fungicide and germicide when used with Foamrex. Alkyl trimethyl ammonium chloride reduced mold count by about 50 per cent and was more effective when used with oil than Foamrex. It had little bactericidal action.
December, 1958] ABSTRACTS 221 Salicylanilide was effective in most trials. Summarising, according to the authors, cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide, cetyl pyridinium chloride and salicylanilide were effective fungicides when used with oil for treating eggs shell. Di-duodecnyl dimethyl ammonium chloride on the other hand was an effective fungicide in oil as well as Foamrex. [T.D.M.] The value of faecal nitrogen and crude fibre in estimating intake of four sub- tropical grasses. R. MILFORD 1957. Aust. J. Agri. Res. 8, (4), 359 THIS paper examines the correlation between nitrogen and crude fibre composi- tion of the faeces, and the dry matter intake. All studies were conducted with mature Border Leicester Merino wethers by feeding four sub-tropical grasses viz. (1) Paspalum commersonii (2) Urochloa pullulans (3) Chloris gayana (4) Panicum maximum. Sheep were fed daily from pasture samples which were freshly cut and coarsely chaffed. It was found that correlation between the percentage of faecal crude fibre and digestibility of dry matter was not significant for P. commersonnii, U. pullulans, and C. gayana, but there was significant correlation in the case of P. maximum. The correlation between percentage faecal nitrogen and digestibility of day matter was also not significant for C. gayana and U. pullulans, but negatively signi- ficant in the case of P. maximum and positively in the case of P. commersonii. From the above observations, it is clear that relationship between per cent nitrogen and crude fibre in faeces and dry matter digestibility does not show much promise as a method of estimating pasture intake under sub-tropical conditions. In this respect, sub-tropical grass species differ from temperate grass species. However, a highly significant positive correlation between dry matter intake and total nitrogen in faeces was found for all the four species of grasses. The correla- tion between total faecal nitrogen and dry matter intake could be expressed by a common regression equation for three grasses, except P. maximum which had a different regression equation. Value for total nitrogen in faeces in grams per 100 gm. dry matter intake varied primarily because high intake of dry matter was associated with high protein grasses and low intake with low protein grasses. According to the author, the relationship between total faecal nitrogen and dry matter intake can be used to measure intake of free grazing animals on mono- specific swards or on mixed swards of species with similar relationship. [B. S. G.] 78 AR/58 12
222 ABSTRACTS [Vol. XXVIII, Pt. IV, Fertilization and embryonic mortality rates of bulls histories of either low or high fertility in artificial breeding. H. J. BEARDON, W.H. HANSEL and R.W. BRAT- ton. (1956). J. Dairy Sci. XXXIX, (3), 312-318 A COMPARATIVE study of the effect of high fertility and low fertility bulls used in artificial breeding has revealed that the rate of fertilization and the number of normal embryos are greater in the high fertility group of bulls than those of low fertility. The rate of fertilisation, based on three day post-oestrus slaughter, was 76.9 per cent for 26 heifers bred to bulls with histories of "low" fertility and 26.6 per cent for 29 heifers bred to bulls with histories of "high" fertility in artificial breeding. The percentages of normal embryos determined by slaughtering 33-days post-oestrus animals, in the above experiment, were 57.7 per cent and 86.1 per cent respectively. The percentage of heifers which did not conceive was 19.6 for those bred to low-fertility bulls and 10.5 for those of high fertility ones. The difference between the two groups of bulls is statistically non-significant. Further, the repeat breeding in cows bred to high fertility bulls is always due to embryonic mortality, whereas in animals bred to low fertility bulls both non- fertilisation and early embryonic mortality may be the cause. [G.C.B.] MGIPCVol. XXIX, Part I March, 1959 The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Issued under the Authority of The Indian Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 9 or 15 sh. Rs. 2.25 nP. or 3 sh. 9d. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ICAR. 6 XXIX.1. 1300
CONTENTS VOL. XXIX, PART I (March, 1959) The Publications Committee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, India, takes no responsibility for the opinions expressed in this Journal. Original Articles Page SEMI-FIELD TRIALS WITH SOME NEW ORGANIC INSECTICIDES FOR THE CONTROL OF LICE ON LIVESTOCK R. P. Chaudhari and Pavan Kumar 1 A NOTE ON HELMINTHS OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT-AMPHISTOMATOUS PARASITES (WITH 4 TEXT FIGURES) B. S. Malik, P. Rai and S. S. Ahluwalia 11 SEMEN CHARACTERISTICS OF FOREIGN AND NATIVE FOWLS UNDER EGYPTIAN CONDITIONS (WITH 2 TEXT FIGURES) Camal A. R. Kamar 19 SEASONAL CYCLE IN THE GONADS OF Cirrhina reba (HAMILTON) (WITH 2 PLATES) A. G. Sathyanesan 27 INVESTIGATIONS ON SUBSIDIARY FEEDS-RICE (Oryza sativa) HUSK AS CATTLE FEED N. D. Kehar, K. Chandra and P. N. Johri 35 INVESTIGATIONS ON SUBSIDIARY FEEDS-Mahua (Bassia latifolia) FLOWERS AS CATTLE FEED N. D. Kehar, K. Chandra and P. N. Johri 39 STUDIES ON ENSILING GREEN TREE LEAVES-Peepal LEAVES (Ficus religiosa) SILAGE N.D. Kehar and P.N. Johri 43 INVESTIGATION ON SILAGE MAKING-DIGESTIBILITY AND NUTRITIVE VALUE OF GREEN Guar (Cyamopsis psoraloides). AND WHEAT (Triticum vulgare) Bhoosa SILAGE N. D. Kehar and P. N. Johri 47 Abstracts 51 Review 53
SEMI-FIELD TRIALS WITH SOME NEW ORGANIC INSECTICIDES FOR THE CONTROL OF LICE ON LIVESTOCK R. P. CHAUDHARI and PAVAN KUMAR, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar Received on September 9, 1958 and accepted for publication on September 17, 1958 Lice are important ectoparasites of man as well as of animals. The human lice, apart from their blood-sucking habit disseminate certain important diseases, such as relapsing fever and epidemic typhus fever. Although so far no livestock disease is known to be disseminated by lice in nature, lousiness is a rather important ectoparasitic ailment of livestock all over the world and the monetary loss due to it is quite considerable. The annual loss to the U.S.A. due to lice infestation on all classes of livestock and poultry has been estimated to be approximately 52 million dollars [U. S.D.A. Res. Service, 1954, quoted by Smith and Richards, 1955]. According to Snipes [1948] lice-free cattle gained an average of 73 pounds more per head than the untreated cattle under identical conditions over a period of 51 days. In other countries like Great Britain [Craufurd-Benson, 1941] and Australia [Roberts, 1938] also, lice are considered as important pests of livestock. Buffaloes, cow calves, goats and sheeps are very often found to be infested with lice in this country. Different species of animals are infested with different species of lice. Young buffalo calves, cow calves, kids, and sometimes even adult goats, die as a result of heavy infestation with lice in this country. Simmols [1946] reported that 0.3 per cent DDT dips served to eradicate cattle lice Haema- topinus eurysternus and Damalinia bovis, but allowed light infestation of Linognathus vituli to persist; 0.28 per cent BHC (0.075 per cent gamma BHC) sprays freed the cattle of the above two species of sucking lice immediately after spraying and the treated animals remained louse-free for eight weeks. Similarly, Annand [1947] reported that 0.08 per cent was found to be the minimum concentration of DDT required in dips to kill all the motile forms of the cattle lice, H. eurysternus and D. bovis but 0.15 per cent was required to control all the motile forms of L. vituli and Soleno- potes capellatus. There was no evidence of eggs of these lice being killed by the treatment. The residual effect of the treatment remained for four or five days. A second treatment sixteen days after the first eliminated the infestation. Creighton and Dennis [1947] found that a thorough application of 2 per cent DDT (emulsion) spray applied to all animals in the herd would result in complete elimination of the cattle-tail louse, H. quadripertusus. However, the authors suggested that a follow-up application within 21 to 28 days would be economical. Sweetman [1947] found that sprays containing 0.2 per cent DDT and chlordane freed hogs of the louse H. suis in about 2 hours and the treated animals remained free for three weeks. When the hogs were sprayed in November no louse was seen on them during the following three months. How- ever, newly hatched larvae were observed about two weeks after a herd was sprayed with 0.2 per cent DDT in late October. Brown [1949], while testing the effect of a specially prepared DDT emulsion containing 0.25 per cent DDT, 2.5 per cent xylene and 0.6 per cent laundry soap against the goat louse D. limbatus found that when examined 24 hours after dips 32 per cent of the goats showed light surviving infestation, but after 48 hours of dips no louse was seen on any of the treated goats. When the treated goats were examined two weeks after the treat- ment all were free of lice but 15 weeks after the dips 7 per cent of the goats showed very light infestation. Wells and Barrett [1946] reported that the eggs of H. eurysternus were completely killed by treatments with even 0.1 per cent gamma BHC. Furman [1947] stated that eggs of this species of cattle lice thoroughly drenched with 0.06, 0.125, 0.25 and 0.5 per cent BHC failed to hatch but following a light spray of BHC at 0.1 and 0.125 per cent many eggs hatched. On the other hand, even thorough drenching with aqueous suspension of 0.125 and 0.5 per cent DDT failed to prevent hatching of many eggs. The same worker found that infestation of H. eurysternus and L. vituli was eradicated by a single dip in a 0.3 per cent suspension of BHC (equivalent to 0.036 per cent gamma isomer) and D. bovis was eradicated by a single dip in
2 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I 0.15 per cent BHC. Batte and Gaines [1948] working on the control of D. equi, found that chlor- dane wettable powder was more effective than DDT wettable powder at concentration above 0.075 per cent. LD50 of chlordane emulsion, chlordane wettable powder and DDT wet- table powder were found to be 0.043± 0.001, 0.06±0.001 and 0.099±0.001 respectively. Smith and Richards [1955] reported that 100 per cent initial control of H. eurysternus was ob- tained with 0.25 per cent DDT, 0.5 per cent toxaphene, 0.05 per cent malathion and 0.05 per cent diazinon and the treated cattle remained louse-free for 3, 4, 1 and 1 week respectively; 0.5 per cent DDT, 0.5 per cent malathion and 0.25 per cent diazinon treatments gave comp- lete protection to cattle for 4, 2 and 2 weeks respectively. Similarly, 0.25 per cent DDT, 0.025 per cent malathion and 0.005 per cent diazinon gave 100 per cent initial kill (in 24 hours) of goat lice D. caprae and D. limbatus and no louse was found on the goat, thus treated, at least for four weeks except in those treated with the diazinon treatment, in which light infestation was found when examined four weeks after treatment. Though some information is available on the efficacy of some chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides (mostly DDT and BHC) on the control of lice infesting livestock, records relating to the results of trials with organic phosphate insecticides in this connection are not many. Be- sides, no record is available on the subject relating to the conditions in this country. A series of semi-field trials were, therefore, conducted during 1956 at the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, to ascertain the efficacy of a number of modern insecticides, both chlori- nated hydrocarbons and organic phosphates, on the control of lice infestation on some of the livestock under the conditions obtaining in this country. It should be mentioned here that since these were pilot trials and sufficient numbers of animals could not be used in them, the results cannot necessarily be taken as conclusive. Nevertheless, these trials have given much valuable information, which are essential for carrying out the detailed trials on the problem. The results, therefore, are presented here in the hope that they will be taken as a basis for carry- ing" out more detailed trials for evaluating the insecticides against livestock lice in the field con- dition of this country. MATERIAL AND METHODS In the Izatnagar area where these trials were conducted, buffaloes and cow calves were found to be infested with lice Haematopinus tuberculatus Burn, and Linognathus vituli L. respec- tively ; goats were infested with two species of lice, namely L. stenopsis Burn, and Damalinia caprae Gum. In the case of buffalo calves and cow calves their neck and flank are more in- fested by these lice than other parts of their body. As regards the lice infesting goats, D. caprae (biting lice) are mostly found on the long haired regions of the hind legs and back of the goat whereas L. stenopsis (sucking lice) remains confined mostly to the neck and shoulder regions of the goat when the infestation is not heavy. When the infestation is heavy, lice are found more or less all over the body of the host. Lice infested buffalo calves, cow calves and goats were used as experimental animals in these trials against their respective louse parasites. DDT, lindane, toxaphene, rhothane, chlordane, aldrin, dieldrin, malathion and diazinon were the different modern insecticides that had been tested. However, as will be seen later, it was not possible to use all these insecticides against each species of the lice. Except malathion (emulsifiable liquid) all the insecticides used were wettable powders. Treatments were applied on the animals as wash daubing with the help of cotton wads so as to wet the body of the treated animals thoroughly with the liquid. Evaluation of the efficacy of the insecticides in controlling the lice has been done on the basis of the number of lice present on the body of the treated animals after different periods from the time of application. The lice population on each experimental animal 24 hours before treatment was also recorded. After the application of the treatments, in most cases, the animals were kept apart from other untreated animals for a few days and afterwards they were allowed to mix together with the latter. RESULTS Trials against buffalo louse (Haematopinus tuberculatus) For this trial nine buffalo calves infested with the louse H. tuberculatus were selected. Some
MARCH, 1959] CONTROL OF LICE 3 of these calves were rather badly affected and though a large number of adult lice was not found on their body, numerous nits and several patches of hairless raw skin were present, particularly in the region of the neck and tail. Each of the three treatments, namely 0.5 per cent DDT, 0.1 per cent lindane and plain water (as control) was applied on the body of a group of three calves. About a pint of fluid was used for treating each calf. Treatments were applied on January 12, 1956. The efficacy of the treatments in the control of lice was eva- luated on the basis of the number of lice found in a ten minute period on the neck region of each calf. The result is shown in Table I. TABLE I4 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL XXIX, PART I TABLE IIMARCH, 1959] CONTROL OF LICE 5 Table III shows that even at these low concentrations all the insecticides gave 100 per- cent initial control of the parasite and except the one treated with 0.05 per cent malathion all other calves remained louse-free for at least one week after the treatment. The effective pe- riod in all cases was much shorter than in the case of preceding trials when the insecticides were used at higher concentration. The effective periods of the treatments with lindane, dieldrin, and diazinon were respectively 1,2 and 1 weeks only; for the malathion treatment it was less than one week. Since the calf treated with DDT and chlordane had to be removed to another shed and kept away from other calves, the effective periods of these two treatments could not be de- termined although the calves remained free from lice till the end of the period of observation at the end of fifth week. In none of the treated calves was any ill effect of the insecticide treat- ments noticed. The calf treated with dieldrin died two weeks after the treatment, but this death could not be attributed to the insecticide, for the calf was in bad condition even, before the treatment was applied. Trial against goat lice (Linognathus stenopsis and Damalinia caprae) In a trial against goat lice L. stenopsis and D. caprae conducted during early summer 0.2 percent DDT, 0.01 per cent lindane, 0.2 per cent toxaphene, 0.05 per cent chlordane, 0.2 per cent rhothane, 0.1 per cent aldrin, 0.1 per cent dieldrin, 0.05 per cent diazinon and 0.05 per cent malathion were used. Two goats infested with lice were treated with each of the in- secticides. About one pint of fluid was used for treating each goat. Efficacy of the treatments was evaluated on the basis of the number of lice found on the right half of the body of each goat. The treatments were applied on April 27th, 1956. The results are shown in Table IV. TABLE IV6 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I either the higher concentration in which the insecticides were used or the season (summer) in which the trials were conducted, for during this season the population of goat lice parti- cularly of D. caprae decreased. The trials were repeated once again during the winter months and with reduced concentration of some of the insecticides. Treatments were applied on November 14th, 1956. Besides the two goats treated with plain water, another two goats were kept without any treatment as untreated control. The results are shown in Table V. TABLE VMARCH, 1959] CONTROL OF LICE 7 and the lice population developed on these goats more or less normally long before that on the goats treated with other insecticides. In none of the goats treated with insecticides in both these trials was any symptom of ill effect of insecticidal treatment observed. Goats which were badly infested with lice in the beginning showed improvement in their condition some time after treatments with insecticides. DISCUSSION Certain apparent inconsistencies in the results obtained at different occasions with the same insecticide require discussion. In Table I, it has been seen that buffalo calves treated with 0.1 per cent lindane re- mained free from lice longer (four weeks) than those treated with 0.5 per cent DDT (one week) though it is well known that the residual effect of DDT is longer than that of lindane. The longer effective period of lindane in this case is believed to be due to its lethal action on the eggs of the buffalo louse present on the body of the calves at the time of treatment. As can be seen from the literature cited, some investigators [Wells and Barrett, 1946; Furman, 1947] reported that BHC and not DDT killed eggs of lice. The month of January, when these treatments were applied, was the time when the eggs of this species of lice are found in large numbers on the body of the infested buffaloes. No information regarding the population fluctuation, breeding season, bionomics under the conditions obtaining here, etc., of any of the species of lice included in this study were known to us at the time of the trials. However, some of this information about goat lice L. stenopsis and D. caprae have since been obtained by us. It is quite likely that the picture in these respects of all the different species of sucking lice affecting livestock here will be more or less similar to that of L. stenopsis, the sucking louse of goats. If so, there is not much difficulty in explaining the results of the trials given here. In the case of trials with cattle louse L. vituli, the treatments were applied at a time (April and June) when the population of the lice was lowest and it was probably not the breeding time of the insect. As such there was no ovicidal action of the insecticides involved in the trials and all the insecticides acted only on a few motile lice present on the body of the treated animals. Again, if the activity of this species of sucking lice is like that of L. stenopsis (February to March is the period of its greatest activity) and had the treatments been applied either immediately before or during this period, the effective periods would have been found to be much shorter than what was found in these trials. Of the trials against goat lice L. stenopsis and D. caprae, in the case of the first application of treatments which were made in April, no ovicidal action was involved and the treatments were applied at a time when the population of both the species of lice was lowest8 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I Both the insecticides, namely 0.5 per cent DDT and 0.1 per cent lindane, that were tried against buffalo louse H. tuberculatus gave cent per cent control of the motile stages of the louse within a day of treatment and gave protection to the treated buffalo calves from re-infestation with the parasite for one and four weeks respectively. The longer effective period of lindane is believed to be due to its ovicidal action on the eggs of lice. Each of the treatments i.e., 0.25 per cent DDT, 0.1 per cent lindane, 0.2 per cent chlordane, 0.25 per cent dialdrin, 0.05 per cent diazinon and 0.25 per cent malathion gave cent per cent control of the motile stages of the cattle louse L. vituli within a day of treat- ment and kept the treated calves free from lice at least for a period of six weeks, but when the concentration of the insecticides was reduced (DDT 0.1 per cent. lindane 0.05 per cent, chlordane 0.05 per cent, dieldrin 0.1 per cent, diazinon 0.025 per cent and malathion 0.05 per cent) though the initial control was complete with each of the treatments, the effective period with each was very much shortened. In a trial against goat lice L. stenopsis and D. caprae carried out in summer months each of the treatments namely 0.2 per cent DDT, 0.1 per cent lindane, 0.2 per cent toxaphene, 0.05 per cent chlordane, 0.2 per cent rhothane, 0.1 per cent aldrin, 0.1 per cent dialdrin, 0.05 per cent diazinon and 0.05 per cent malathion gave 100 per cent control of the motile stages of both the species of lice in 24 hours and protected the goats from re-infestation with lice for 12 to 18 weeks. In another trial carried out against these lice, in winter and with the concentration reduced to half of that in the preceding trial in the case of DDT, lindane, toxaphene, and rhothane, the initial kill of the motile stages of the lice was still complete but the effective periods were reduced to seven to nine weeks. The reasons for the variation in protective periods obtained in different trials carried out at different times with the same insecticides against the same kinds of lice is briefly discussed. No adverse effect of any of the treatments used in these trials was observed on any of the treated animals. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors express their grateful thanks to Shri L. Sahai, former Director of the Institute (at present Animal Husbandry Commissioner with the Government of India), and to Dr. H. D. Srivastava, Head of the Parasitology Division, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar/Mukteswar for providing the necessary facility to carry out these trials. They also thank Dr. N. D. Kehar, former Head of the Animal Nutrition Division and the present Director of this Institute for kind permission to use the lice-infested buffalo calves of that Division in these trials. REFERENCES Annand, P. N. (1947), Report of the Chief of the Bureau of Entomology and Plant Quarantine, Agricultural Research Administration, USDA, 1944-45, 63 pp. (R.A.E.(B) 37 : 66, 1949). Original not seen. Batte, E. G. and Gaines, T. G. (1948). Chlordane vs. DDT for horse louse. J. econ. Ent. 41 : 830-31 Brown, A. W. A. (1947). DDT to control Bovicola limbata. J. econ. Ent. 40 : 605 Craufurd-Benson, H. J. (1941). The cattle lice of Great Britain. Part I. Biology with special reference to Haematopinus eurysternus. Parasit. 33 : 331-342 Creighton, J. T. and Dennis, N. M. (1947). The tail louse in Florida. J. econ. Ent. 40 : 911-912 Furman, D. P. (1947). Benzene hexachloride to control cattle lice. J. econ. Ent. 40 : 672-675 Roberts, F. H. S. (1938). Cattle lice : Their economic importance in Queensland. Aust. Vet. J. 14 : 55-58. Simms, B. T. (1946). Report of the Chief of the Bureau of Animal Industry. Agricultural Research Administration, USDA. 1945-46 (R.A.E(B) 37 : 89, 1949). Original not seen.
MARCH, 1959] CONTROL OF LICE 9 Smith, C. L. and Richards. R (1955). Evaluation of some new insecticides against lice on livestock and poultry J. econ. Ent. 48 : 566-568 Snips, B. Thomas (1948). One treatment control for cattle lice. Agri. Chem. 3 : 30A NOTE ON HELMINTHS OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT I12 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I Pfenderinae, Pseudodiscus (with Pseudodiscus colloisini only) under Pseudodiscinae, have been assigned to the family Cladorchidae [Southwell and Krishner, 1937], but the genus Hawkesius (with Hawkesius hawkesii) is included under sub-family Wastsoniinae [Nasmark, 1937] of the family Diplodiscidae [Skrajahin, 1949]. Nickel [1949] found two types of trematodes in the intestine of an Indian elephant autopsied after being 20 years in Europe and one of these he has described as a species of Hawkesius (this paper was not accessible). Mudaliar and Alwar [1947], in their check-list of parasites, have recorded from a elephant, Gastrodiscus aegyticus [Cobbold, 1876], Pseudodiscus hawkesii and Pfenderius papillatus. Ramanujachari and Alwar [1954] recorded Gastrodiscus secundus from large intestine of elephant. The above review would indicate that there is some amount of difference of opinion, not only, on the validity of some genera but also in the assignment of these under major groups of classification. Moreover, there still appears certain degree of discrepancy in the description and diagrams of the species. It is, therefore, proposed to describe briefly the salient features of the specimens collected which belong to Pfenderius papillatus (fig. 1), Pfenderius heterocaeca (fig.3) and Pseudodiscus hawkesii (fig. 4). These have mainly been studied for indicating the useful criteria in differentiating these and the inaccuracies that are discernable in the accounts and illustrations available in the literature. The question of validity of some of the species and genera would likewise be dealt with in the present note. PFENDERIUS PAPILLATUS [Cobbold, 1882; Stiles and Goldberger, 1910] Only one specimen of this species is among the entire collection. It had a slightly pinkish colour, an oval shape with the anterior part capable of much movement and a convex dorsal and slightly concave ventral surfaces. In the stained preparation, the length is 4.6 mm. and breadth is 2.9 mm. with the maximum breadth in the middle of the body length. The oral sucker is subterminal, 1.0 × 0.8 mm. in size, and provided anteriorly with frill of digitate papillae around the mouth, the central papillae being of bigger size. It has in its mass a pair of lateral pouches or diverticula (pharyngeal sacs) and leads into the oeso- phagus, 1.0 m.m. in length, with a thick wall and well-developed muscular posterior region before it branches into two intestinal caeca. The caeca are wavy in outline showing mainly externally a few sacculations or 'diverticula' and extend posteriorly to near the anterior limits of acetabulum, which is subterminal, 1.4 mm. in diameter and provided all over on its internal aspect with well developed and prominent papillae arranged uniformly and concentrically. The common genital pore (fig 2), with a prominent genital atrium, lies at the level of the intestinal bifurcation. The ovary, 0.3 mm. in size, is of oval shape with smooth margin and lies immediately in front of the acetabulum with Mehlis gland on its latero-posterior aspect and with the first coil of uterus inside its mass and between it and the ovary. The main mass of uterus then pursues a central course in closely packed coils, with only 2 eggs in the preparation, lying between the testes and leading into a prominent meteraterm which travels side by side with the terminal part of the cirrus sac to open into the genital atrium. The size of the eggs cannot be indicated as both the eggs had undergone distortion during staining and mounting. Testes, with a slightly lobed character, are preovarian and symmetrically situated, one on either side just in the middle of the body. The cirrus sac is muscular, pear-shaped with a similarly shaped seminal vesicle, which does not have a coiled character and leads into pars prostatica and a well-developed ejaculatory duct. Westhuysen's account of the species is according to Stiles and Goldberger and differs in a few points from the foregoing short description in respect of the oral papillae, the aceta- bulum, character of intestinal caeca and that of the seminal vesicle. The acetabulum has been described with its opening directed slightly ventrally, the intestinal caeca with a slight cephalic curvature before terminating and the seminal vesicle as a coiled duct. Further, the diagram of the whole mount, that is from Travassos after Stiles and Goldberger, does not give a clear picture of the position of the common genital pore, structure of cirrus sac and finally the course of the terminal parts of the reproductive ducts. The specimen at our dis- posal, however, on the general topography is assignable to the species, P. papillatus, and the
MARCH, 1959] HELMINTHS OF ELEPHANTS 13 description and the diagram given herein helps in getting a proper idea of the internal structure of the species. The apparent differences in the two accounts may either be due to omission [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Pfenderius papillatus Acet.14 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I oesophagus, in most of the species, a prominent and muscular enlargement is always observed and this has been found in all the three species of amphistomes studied by us from elephant and the terminal ducts of genitalia also, in continuation of the genital atrium, form a cone-like structure. PFENDERIUS HETEROCAECA [Fukui, 1926; Bhalerao, 1935] Syn. TEGUMAEA HETEROCAECA [Fukui, 1926] Eleven specimens belonging to this species were collected. At the time of collection these were without any sign of life and, consequently, in a greatly extended condition. The body was white and with an oval shape with dorsal side convex, ventral flat or slightly concave and anterior end attenuated. The stained preparations measured 5.1 to 5.9 × 2.2 to 2.9 mm. in size. The oral sucker is terminal and with the two diverticula (pharyngeal sacs) is 0.93 mm. × 0.42 to 0.5 mm. in size. The oesophagus, 1.4 mm. in length, has posteriorly a well-deve- loped and muscular enlargement which bifurcates into two intestinal caeca, each with a much swollen anterior and a slender posterior part which ends much in front of the acetabulum. Acetabulum is terminal and 1.2-1.4 × 1.0 mm. in size. The testes, lying immediately behind the intestinal caeca, measure 0.4MARCH, 1959] HELMINTHS OF ELEPHANTS 15 Skrajabin (after Fukui and Travassos), however, is somewhat at variance from the speci- mens at our disposal in the matter of size and position of acetabulum and the position of gonads in relation to the intestinal caeca. However, the specimens are assigned to this species. The authors follow Bhalerao and Westhuysen in retaining the genus Pfen- derius for all the three species, P. papillatus, P. heterocaeca and P. birmanicus which can be easily distinguished in accordance with the following key : 1. Acetabulum papillated and common genital pore at the level of intestinal bifurca- tion16 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I somewhat conical in shape with the pointed anterior end provided with prominent papillae, particularly around the margin of the mouth. The ventral surface is somewhat flattened while the dorsal is convex. Oral sucker is terminal and measures 0.7 × 0.5 mm. in size with two characteristic diverticulae or pouches (pharyngeal sacs). The oesophagus, 1.04MARCH, 1959] HELMINTHS OF ELEPHANTS 17 REFERENCES Bhalerao, G. D. (1931). A note on the occurrence of Pseudodiscus collinsi in Indian elephant. Proc. 18th Indian. Sci. Congr., 359-360. SEMEN CHARACTERISTICS OF FOREIGN AND NATIVE FOWLS UNDER EGYPTIAN CONDITIONS GAMAL A. R. KAMAR, Animal Production Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Giza, Egyp Received on July 7, 1958 and accepted for publication on September 18, 1958 (WITH 2 TEXT FIGURES). The general improvement programme of poultry industry in Egypt includes the importation of standard foreign breeds of fowls and crossing them with the indigenous fowls, besides the improvement of the native fowls. Trials are being carried out to study the behaviour and adaptation of these foreign breeds and their crosses under Egyptian condi- tions. These include studies on some characteristics of the birds. A great deal of variation in semen characteristics has been reported by various investiga- tors, depending upon the technique employed for semen collection, breed used, length of time between ejaculates, locality, management and nutrition. Breed differences in semen characteristics are observed [Raimo, 1943 ; Allen and Champion, 1955] when these different breeds are compared under the same locality and conditions (Table I). TABLE I20 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I tuberculine syringe graduated to 0.01 cc. Motility rating was scored, using as spermotherm adjusted to 39°C., according to arbitrary scheme of classification ranging from 0 to 10. Sperm concentration was measured with Thoma-Zeis haemocytometer by counting the sperms per cubic millimeter. A combined stain method was used to calculate live sperms per- centages [Kamar, 1958], where brom-phenol blue and nigrosin stains were dissolved in a buffer solution adjusted to pH 7.5. Semen films used to calculate live sperm percentages were also used to have the abnormal forms of spermatozoa. A portion of undiluted semen was inserted in a stoppered vial to study the effect of storing. Semen samples were cooled gradually in a double-wall glass beaker full of water to avoid low temperature shocks. These were kept in the refrigerator at 4° C. for 72 hours. Samples were examined after storage for live percentages. The cocks were weighed after semen collections. Total number of sperms, total number of live sperms and total number of abnormal sperms per ejaculate were calculated. Analysis of variance were calculated according to Snedecor [1950]. RESULTS Semen characteristics Breed differences for the studied semen characters are given in Table II and Fig. 1. White Leghorn cocks showed the highest sexual activity, Fayomi cocks medium, while the White Baladi one showed the least percentages of successful trials. Semen volume produced by White Leghorn was relatively larger than in White Baladi, while the smallest volume was produced by the Fayomi cocks. The differences in volumes between breeds were significant. The highest motility was scored for White Leghorns. The Fayomi cocks, in turn, showed higher motility than the Baladi ones. The differences in motility between breeds, however, were not significant. The lowest percentage of live sperms in fresh semen was for the White Baladi cocks, while the Leghorns gave the maximum and TABLE IIMARCH, 1959] SEMEN CHARACTERISTICS OF FOREIGN AND NATIVE FOWLS 21 F.L.G. I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Breed differences in semen characteristics, and body weight 4-4 I.C.A.R./59.
22 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I the Fayomi cocks were intermediate. Breed differences in this respect were highly significant. There were also significant differences between these breeds in the percen- age of live sperms in stored semen. Nevertheless, the Leghorns ranked first in this respect followed by the Fayomi, then the Baladi. Again, no marked differences were observed between the three breeds with regard to the percentage of sperm abnormalities, although the differences were statistically significant. The percentage of abnormalities was about the same for both the Leghorn and the Baladi cocks, while it was slightly higher for the Fayomi cocks. The maximum sperm concentration was produced by the White Baladi cocks, followed by the White Leghorns. The least concentration was produced by the Fayomi cocks. These differences are highly significant. As regards the total num- ber of sperms, number of live or abnormal sperms per ejaculate, the Leghorn cocks produced the largest numbers. The numbers for the Fayomi cocks were extremely low, while the Baladi cocks produced the intermediate numbers in this respect. Breed differences between the numbers were highly significant. The analysis of variance for the previous semen characteristics are shown in Table III. The Fayomi and Baladi cocks weighed about the same, while the Leghorns were markedly heavier. In general, it could be observed that the best semen characteristics were recorded for the White Leghorn cocks. TABLE IIIMARCH, 1959] SEMEN CHARACTERISTICS OF FOREIGN AND NATIVE FOWLS 23 TABLE III24 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I cocks showed a high frequency of ruptured and other head abnormalities than the Fayomi cocks, this trend was reversed in coiled heads. The three breeds were about the same in producing hooked sperms. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Breed differences in abnormal forms of sperms DISCUSSION The differences observed between various breeds at the same locality and conditions are to be attributed to the fact that they possess quite different genetical make-ups. The difference in the origin of each breed, with consequent differences in environment and physiology is also another factor involved. However, White Leghorn cocks gave almost the highest values in semen characteristics, as compared to the other two indigenous breeds. This is to be expected since the indigenous breeds are still lacking in homogenity in their genetic make-up. The selection which they have undergone is not enough to build up a standard breed. This condition retarded the progress in the physiological characteristics as well as the productive, reproductive and the morphological characters. However, while the indi- genous breeds had lower semen characteristics than the White Leghorn cocks, it was obser- ved that the differences between individuals within the two native breeds were very wide and that some of the Fayomi and Baladi cocks produced semen with higher semen characte- ristics than that of the White Leghorns. This provides a good opportunity for selection and improvement of these native breeds. In this experiment, the breeds were compared during spring in a restricted part of the year. When comparing them during the other parts of the year or for the whole year these results may not hold good. It is known that the indigenous breeds are resistant to the summer conditions prevailing in Egypt, and the Fayomi cocks were found to produce their highest semen qualities during this period [Kamar, 1958]. It is doubtful whether the foreign breeds like White Leghorn can resist the climatic conditions in summer; their semen characteristics may decrease greatly during this period. There are great differences in semen characteristics of White Leghorn cocks when the results obtained in this experiment are compared with those obtained by other investigators. This is mainly due to the differences in the technique employed in obtaining semen ejaculates as no milking for the copulatory organs was practised at all. There are also other factors involved, viz. differences in latitude, locality, management, nutrition and surroundings.
MARCH, 1959] SEMEN CHARACTERISTICS OF FOREIGN AND NATIVE FOWLS 25 Within the same breed, like Fayomi, wide individual differences were observed in semen characteristics. These wide individual differences may be due to the fact that the Fayomi birds represent six strains or groups as classified by their down feathers [Foud, 1954], where each group may have a quite different reproductive capacity than the others. Also wide individual differences have been observed in semen characteristics of White Baladi which are slight among White Leghorn cocks. Fayomi males produced the highest percentages of abnormal sperms which may explain the high embryonic mortality in Fayomi eggs [Hafez and Kamar, 1955]. This is supported by the highly significant correlation between sperm abnormalities and embryonic morta- lity [Allen and Champion, 1955]. SUMMARY Semen samples were collected from 12 White Leghorn cocks, 12 White Baladi cocks and 18 Fayomi cocks during the months of March, April and May. Two collections were obtained each month. The following results were obtained : The averages of successful trial percentages, semen volume, motility, percentage of live sperms in fresh or stored semen, total abnormalities, sperm concentration, total number of sperms per ejaculate, number of live sperms per ejaculate, number of abnormal sperms per ejaculate, and body weight were 73, 0.25 cc., 5.7, 77, 60, 23, 6.03 mils. c.mm., 2641 mils., 2127 mils., 568 mils. and 2245 gm. for White Leghorn cocks ; 63, 0.32 cc., 4.5, 66, 55, 24, 6.53 mils. c.mm., 2092 mils., 1411 mils., 496 mils. and 1586 gm. for White Baladi cocks ; and 68, 2.26 cc., 5.5, 68, 55, 27, 3.74 mils. c.mm., 1137 mils., 843 mils., 271 mils. and 1629 gm. for Fayomi cocks respectively. White Leghorn cocks yielded semen of the best quality value, showed the highest sexual activity and the heaviest body weights of the three breeds studied. REFERENCES Allen, C. J. and Champion L. R. (1955). Poult. Sci. 34: 1332 Foud, I. (1954). M.Sc. Thesis. Fac. Agric., Cairo University Hafez, E.S.E. and Kamar, G.A.R. (1955). Poult. Sci. 34: 524 Kamar, G.A.R. (1958). In press Raimo, H. F. (1943). Bol. Indust. Animal, N. S., 7: 61 Snedecor, G. W. (1950). Statistical Methods (The Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa, U. S. A.).
PLATE I [Indian J. vet. Sci. VOL. XXIX, PART I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ovary of Cirrhina reba Fig. 1 : Stage I oocytes and ovococl in the ovary of Cirrhina reba. X 100 Fig. 2 : A nest of small oocytes. X 550 Fig. 3 : A Stage I oocyte and yellow granular pigment mass. X 400 Fig. 4 : Stage II oocytes with vacuoles in the cytoplasm. X 120 Fig. 5 : A solitary Stage III oocyte showing initiation of yolk deposition. X 100 Fig. 6 : A few Stage IV oocytes where the yolk deposition is complete. X 60 Fig. 7 : A portion of the vitelline membrane of adjacent Stage IV oocytes. Thin follicular layer formed of elongated cells may be noted. X 350 Fig. 8 : Proliferating oocytes in the ovigerous lamella in the depleted ovary. H 650 Fig. 9 : Stages in the resorption of atretic oocytes. Follicular hypertrophy may be seen. X 110 Key to the lettering pig.PLATE II [Indian J. vet. Sci. vol. xxix, part [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Testis of Cirrhina reba Fig. 1 : Germ cells in active state of division in the Stage C testis of Cirrhina reba. Cysts of X 500 dividing spermatocytes and a spermatogonium situated in the middle may be seen. Fig. 2 : Stage C test is showing the sperm duct filled with sperm. X 60 Fig. 3 : 'Parachute-like' arrangement of the sperm mass. X 450 Fig. 4 : Sperm-filled lumina of the lobules in Stage D testis. The narrow lobular wall and the X 100 establishment of open connection between adjacent lobules are brought out. Fig. 5 : A portion of Stage F testis showing lumina of the lobules with few degenerating relict X 500 sperm. Abundance of stromal element and spermatogonia with round, nuclei also may be seen. Fig. 6 : Stage F testis with empty sperm duct and lobules. X 500 Fig. 7 : A few lobules of Stage A testis showing the arrangement of spermatogonia along the lobular wall. X 700 Fig. 8 : Amitosis of a spermatogonium by nuclear plate formation in Stage A testis. X1500 Fig. 9 : Polymorphic nuclei in the spermatogonia of Stage A testis. X1350 Key to the lettering spe SEASONAL CYCLE IN THE GONADS OF CIRRHINA REBA* (Hamilton) A. G. SATHYANESAN,** Annamalai University, Annamalainagar Received on December 23, 1957 and accepted for publication on February 6, 1958 (With Two Plates) Seasonal histological changes in the gonads of Fundulus heteroclitus [Mathews, 1938], Lepomis macrochirus and Huro salmoides, [James, 1946] have been studied in detail. Studies on the ovarian eggs of some teleosts were made by Ransom [1887], Schraff [1888], Calderwood [1892], Cunningham [1897] and Wheeler [1924]. Accounts on the history of germ cells in Cottus bairdii, [Hann, 1927], ovarian structure of Lucifuga and Stygicola [Lane, 1903], regeneration of the gonads in Placoglossus ativelis after spawning season [Kazuo Suzuki, 1939], seasonal changes in the immature ovary of Merluccinus merluccinus [Hickling, 1935], and reproductive cycle of minnow in relation to environment [Bullough, 1939] are also available. Some of the detailed studies on the reproductive cycle of ovo-viviparous fishes are those of Bailey [1933], Mendoza [1939, 1940, 1941, 1943], Stolk [1951] and Turner [1938]. The seasonal changes occurring in the testis of perch [Turner, 1919], and Gasterosteus aculeatus [Craig-Bennett, 1931] have been fully investigated. Histological studies of the testis in the sexual cycle of Oncorhynchus nerka, Xiphophorus helleri and Salmo salar were made by Weisel [1943], Van Oordt [1925] and Jones [1940] respectively. Related studies on Indian fishes are meagre. Ghosh and Kar [1952] have studied the seasonal changes occurring in the gonads of Heteropneustes fossilis. The maturity of Coilia dussumeri during different months of the year is recorded by Palekar and Karandikar [1953]. However, sufficient literature is available on the bionomics, breeding habits and in- teresting aspects in the development of Indian fishes [Jones, 1949, 1951]. MATERIAL AND METHODS Specimens used in this investigation were collected from the Annamalai University reservoirs. The total and the standard lengths of each fish were recorded to the nearest milli- meter. Bouin's fluid, alcoholic Bouin, Zenker's mercuro-formal were used as fixatives. Pereney's fixative was also used in the case of ovary. Serial sections were cut at 5, 8 and 10 µ thickness and stained in Delafield's Haematoxylin and Heidenhain's iron Haematoxylin. The weight of the gonad was recorded to the nearest milligram when it was transferred to 70 per cent alcohol. The condition factor indicating the state of the gonads during their growth was com- puted for each month by applying the formula: C = Weight of the gonad/L × 10-8 Where C is the condition factor and L is the standard length of the fish [Allison 1951]. General morphology of the ovary The ovaries of Cirrhina reba are paired elongated structures, lying postero-dorsally in the body cavity, ventral to the air bladder. They are continued posteriorly as the oviducts which unite together and open to the exterior. The ovary is covered with a thin tunica albuginea of connective tissue which in turn is surrounded by a layer of peritoneum. The maximum width of the ovary is at a place approximately one-third from the anterior end. In C. reba, the size variation of the ovary at different periods of the year has a definite relation with its histological changes. The description of the stages of growth of the ovary is based on Bennetts' field classi- fication as cited by James [1946]. *This work was part of the Piscicultural Research Scheme carried out at the Annamalai University, and sponsored and totally financed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. **Present Address : Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-5. 27
28 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I Stage I (immature condition) : The ovaries are flat transparent elongated bodies present- ing a granulated appearance after fixation. In many, remnants of the atretic follicles (corpora lutea) belonging to the previous crop of oocyte are seen as prominent yellow patches. Fishes with Stage I ovary are in abundance during the later part of November to January. Stage II (slightly enlarged condition) : The ovaries lose their transparency and an yellowish tint appears for the first time. Slight over-all enlargement is in evidence. Specimens with Stage II ovaries are collected during February to early part of April. Stage III (greatly enlarged condition) : The ovaries are yellowish and opaque with a granular surface. A pronounced enlargement of them is noticeable. Stage III ovary is present in fish collected during April to June. Stage IV (spawning condition) : The ovaries are bright yellow with a greenish tinge and are fully swollen with mature eggs. The ovary reaches this condition during July to September, when a little pressure on the abdomen releases the eggs. Stage V (partly spent condition) : The ovaries resemble those of Stage IV, but are devoid of turgidity and become flabby. These occur in specimens collected during September and occasionally in October. Stage VI (completely spent, regressive condition) : The ovaries present a transitional flabby nature, but soon they regain their compactness. This type of ovary is encountered in speci- mens collected during October and November. Seasonal histological changes in the ovary Stage I : In the ovary, the oocytes of varying size are arranged in the ovigerous lamellae which protrude into the ovocoel. The lamellae are closely arranged and the ovocoel is not extensive (Plate I, Fig. 1). The diameter of the oocytes ranges from 4 to 175 µ, but smallest recognizable oocytes are arranged as nests close to the lamellar wall (Plate I, Fig. 2). These oocytes have prominent round nucleus with a solitary, median and deep staining nucleolus. The cytoplasm is very little and completely lacks affinity for stain. These have a resemb- lance to the resting oocytes of the immature hake [Hickling 1935]. The larger oocytes are the Stage I oocytes; their cytoplasm is deeply stained and the nucleoli vary from one to many and generally occupy a position beneath the nuclear membrane as in Fundulus heteroclitus, [Matt- hews, 1938], Huro salmoides and Lepomis macrochirus [James, 1946]. Scattered distribution of nucleoli inside the nucleus is also not uncommon. In the cytoplasm of these growing oocytes deeply staining, solitary, round, yolk-nucleus of 12 to 16 µ diameter is observed frequently. These resemble those described in the teleostean oocytes by earlier workers [Cunningham, 1897; Wheeler, 1924 and Mendoza, 1943]. Among the oocytes the remnants of the atretic follicles (corpora lutea) are seen as granular yellow pigment masses (Plate I, Fig. 3). Such bodies of irregular shape and structure have been recorded by Cunningham [1897] as the most cons- picuous characteristic of the spent ovary. Stage II : During this stage, Stage II oocytes can be recognized. These are characterised by the appearance of cytoplasmic vacuoles (Plate I, Fig. 4). Initially these vacuoles are peri- pheral in their disposition. Some of them are filled with eosinophilic homogeneous substance which may be homologous to the intravesicular yolk of Fundulus heteroclitus [Marza et al. 1937]. Vacuoles are scattered in the cytoplasm, of which many lack their contents during the next stage in vacuolisation. A steady increase in the diameter of the oocytes is obvious. During March, the larger ones have an average diameter of 216 µ. The vitelline membrane can be easily made out. The follicular layer appears in the form of few spindle-shaped cells closely adhering to the vitelline membrane. Stage III : Stage III oocytes are identified by marked increase in diameter with yolk granules deposited in their cytoplasm. In the beginning the yolk deposition is restricted only to the periphery (Plate I, Fig. 5) but after the formation of a peripheral yolk ring, deposition towards the interior takes place. During this stage some oocytes abort and are found in the process of resorption,
MARCH, 1959] GONADS OF Cirrhina Reba 29 Stage IV : In the Stage IV oocytes, the yolk deposition is complete and the larger ones have an average diameter of 950 µ (Plate I, Fig. 6). The vitelline membrane is well formed, showing vertical striations. The follicular layer is formed of a single layer of spindle-shaped cells arranged end to end (Plate I, Fig. 7). Apart from these mature oocytes, a few Stage I and Stage II oocytes are also present. Such oocytes are considered to be the 'reserve supply' or 'stock', by Hann [1927] and Bullough [1939] in the case of Cottus bairdu and minnow res- pectively. Stage V : The partly spent ovary is readily marked out by the occurrence of empty follicles, and by the increase in number of smaller oocytes. The wide difference in size varia- tions between stages IV and V ovaries suggests that the extrusion of oocytes takes place in instalments. Stage VI : The atretia of the empty follicle and resorption of the residuary oocytes are the main features during this stage (Plate I, Fig. 9). In both the cases hypertrophy of the follicle takes place. In the case of atretic oocytes yolk globules are seen among the hypertrophying cells. These bear resemblance to the fat-like substance recorded in the follicle of Fundulus heteroclitus which Matthews [1938] reported to have dissolved during the preparation of the sections. Cysts of smaller oocytes of varying size appear in large numbers (Plate I, Fig. 8). General morphology of the testis The testes are paired elongated bodies situated in the postero-dorsal side of the body cavity, ventral to the air bladder to which they are attached by the mesorchia. Posteriorly the vas deferens of either side join and open to the exterior. The description of the growth stages of testis, is as that of the ovary, based on Bennetts' field classification, as adopted by James [1946]. Stage A (immature condition) : The testis is thread-like, elongated and transparent and not well defined from the vas deferens. Specimens with Stage A testes are available during December to February. Stage B (slightly enlarged condition) : This stage is marked by slight widening of the anterior half of the testis accompanied by general thickening. The testis loses its transparency. This is evident in late February to March. Stage C (greatly enlarged condition) : During this stage the testis shows all-round enlarge- ment. It attains a cream colour. Stage C testis is present in the April, May and June samples. Stage D (spawning condition) : The testis is swollen with wavy margin and white in its hue. With a gentle pressure of the abdomen the milk can be 'milked'. Such specimens abound during July to September. Stage E (partly spent condition) : The testis loses its turgidity and is reduced in size; but retains its colour. Specimens with this stage are encountered during the later part of September and October. Stage F (completely spent condition) : This greatly resembles that of Stage A and is present in fishes collected during November to December. Seasonal histological changes in the testis Stage A : The testis is covered with a tunica of connective tissue. Internally it is formed of lobules which are separated from one another by stromal elements, the nuclei of which are varied in shape and are scattered in them. Unlike Fundulus heteroclitus [Matthews, 1938] the testis of C. reba does not show distinct medulla and cortex. Also the deeply embedded core of connective tissue described in perch [Turner 1919] is wanting. The interstitial cells are small and are seen in between the lobules. During this stage the lumina of the lobules are small 530 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I and in some, even absent. The spermatogonia occur along the lobular wall. They are pro- minent, measuring 20-28 µ in their average diameter and possess distinct round nuclei. Sper- matogonia are the only germ cells present during this period (Plate II, Fig. 7). Some of them have polymorphic nuclei (Plate II, Fig. 7 and 9). The presence of polymorphic nuclei has been reported in the migratory germ cells of perch [Turner 1919] and Salmo salar [Jones 1940]. However the cord of germ cells outside the testis recorded in the perch [Turner, 1919] is not present in C. reba. Stage B : During this stage the spermatogonia with polymorphic nuclei become scarce. In Ichthyophis glutinosa, Seshachar [1936] observed that the spermatogonia with spherical nuclei are in an early stage of development and the polymorphic nuclei in these cells denote a con- dition of great metabolic activity. Further, the transformation of these polymorphic nuclei- into round ones prior to division is suggested. The rare occurrence of amitosis is also recorded in Ichthyophis glutinosa. By this auther in C. reba amitosis by nuclear plate formation is obser- vable in a few spermatogonia (Plate II, Fig. 8). Cysts of primary and secondary spermato- cytes are present. As in the case of Xiphophorus helleri, [Van Oordt, 1925] and perch, [Turner, 1919] the number of divisions undergone by the spermatogonia to give rise to the spermato- cytes could not be followed with clarity. The spermatocytes range from 8 to 12 µ in diameter. The difference between the primary and secondary spermatocytes appears to be only of size, the secondary spermatocytes being smaller. In some specimens cysts of spermatids are also encountered. Stage C : An all round expansion of the testis has resulted in stretching out of the tunica, and consequently, the latter appears very thin. Stromal elements inside the testis are greatly reduced and the lobular walls become narrow. The spermatogonia are remarkably reduced in number and are scattered along the wall of the lobules which are swollen with cysts of germ cells (Plate II, Fig. 1). The germ cells of an individual cyst are apparently of the same stage of maturation. The wall of the cysts is thin and membranous. Elongated nuclei as reported in the homologous cyst wall of Xipho- phorus hellari [Van Oordt 1925] could not be located in C. reba. During May and June the cysts of spermatids and sperms are in the increase, and a corresponding decrease of spermato- cytes and spermatogonia is obvious. The thin cyst wall bursts open in a number of cases to liberate their sperm contents. When several cysts of an individual lobule break open, the sperm-filled lumen of the lobule is formed. Sometimes the parachute like arrangement of the sperms (Plate II, Fig. 3), as reported in perch [Turner 1919] is met with. In a few instances, connection between the lumina of the neighbouring lobules is formed and the sperm masses get entry into the vas deferens (Plate II, Fig. 2). Stage D : The lobules and the vas deferens are filled with sperms. Open connection between contiguous lobules is extensively present (Plate II, Fig. 4). Secondary sperm ducts establish connection between the lumina of the lobules and the vas deferens as in the case of sockeye salmon [Weisel 1943]. Only a few spermatogonia are seen scattered in the lobular wall. Such germ cells are referred as the 'resting spermatogonia' in Plecoglossus ativelis [Kazuo suzuki 1939] and residual or persistant spermatogonia in Diemyctylus viridescens [Hargitt 1924]. Cysts of dividing germ cells are negligible. Stage E : The size variations in the gross structure of the testis denote that the ex- trusion of sperms takes place in instalments as in the case of ovary. This process is followed by a steady increase in the number of spermatogonia, which appear along the lobular wall, a feature in common with Fundulus heteroclitus [Matthews, 1938]. Stage F : The testis is completely spent and resembles Stage A to a large extent. The tunica once again becomes thick and an enormous increase of stromal elements is evident (Plate II, Fig. 5). The lumina of the lobules and vas deferens are empty (Plate II, Fig. 6) with scattered relict sperms in some, which often clump together prior to their disintegration. A further increase in the number of spermatogonia is noticeable, of which a large percentage has round nuclei (Plate II, Fig. 5).
MARCH, 1959] GONADS OF Cirrhina Reba 31 The sexual cycle of C. reba is broadly divided into post-spawning, pre-spawning and spawning phases, [Sathyanesan, 1957]. In this division, the post-spawning phase is consti- tuted, by stages VI, I and II of the female and stages F, A and B of the male. Stage III of the female and Stage C of the male represent the pre-spawning phase. Stages IV and V of the female and D and E of the male go to form the spawning phase. TABLE I : The monthly condition factor of the Gonads Month Condition factor (Female) Stage of ovary Condition factor (male) Stage of testis January 2.6 I 0.5 A February 4.1 II 0.7 B March 7.9 0.9 April 18.2 III 1.7 C May 61.6 3.2 June 110.3 4.2 July 138.1 IV 5.8 D August 139.0 5.9 September 175.2 V 2.7 E October 8.8 VI 3.9 November 3.7 I 2.6 F December 3.4 0.3 A The monthly condition factor of the gonads exhibits an increase which coincides with their growth and enlargement. This value reaches its peak during the spawning period when the gonads are fully ripe. Immediately after spawning a downward trend of this factor is in evidence. In the case of the female, the slope is sharp whereas in the male it appears gradual (Table I). DISCUSSION This minor carp C. reba is an annual breeder, spawning during July to September which coincides with the onset of the monsoon. The gross morphological variations of the gonads have definite relation with the changes in their histology. The variations in the condition factor (Table I) may also be taken as a safe guide to determine the condition of the gonads. Breeding of C. reba during June to September in River Cauvery was reported by Alikunhi and Nagaraja Rao [1951]. However, Chacko [1950] observed the spawning period of this minor carp in the same river during July to October. This small shift in the spawning period may be rightly attributed to the changes in the environmental conditions responsible for the induction of spawning. The factors influencing the breeding of carps, major carps in particular, have not yet been fully solved [Hora, 1945 and Mukerjee, 1945]. Since a dis- cussion on these factors has little relation in this study, it is not included here. However, C. reba being a minor carp, a description of the type of pond in which they breed is of im- portance. This tank is roughly 5 acres in its area, having mud bunds all around. The water is shallow towards the bank where the luxuriant grassy vegetation is seen even above the surface of the water. It is fed by an artificial channel from one of the tributaries of the river Cauvery. The fishes were prevented from escaping out of the tank by closing the feeding
32 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDARY [VOL. XXIX, PART I channel with wire netting. Even if the presence of the larvae of these fishes in this water is looked upon as having been brought by the infeeding channel from extraneous sources, the result of the periodical examination of the gonads is sufficient to suggest the breeding of these fishes in this tank. Hamidkhan [1924] in his studies on the breeding habits of some major carps states that even when 'brood fishes' are introduced into confined waters they fail to breed, and the mature eggs degenerate in the ovaries where the environmental con- ditions are not favourable for breeding. Total degeneration of oocytes is unknown in C. reba. The gonadial cycle is divided into six stages, based on the classification of Bennett, as cited by James [1946]. Preference is given to Bennett's classification over that of Jones [1940] in the case of male since in C. reba the growth stages are not so elaborate as those of Salmo salar [Jones, 1940]. The yellow pigment masses (remnants of corpora lutea) which are readily visible through the transparent ovary form the discriminating morphological feature of the depleted Stage I ('immature') ovary from the immature ovary of a juvenile fish. As in the case of C. reba, atretia of some growing oocytes has been reported in several fishes [Cunningham, 1897; Matthews, 1938; and James, 1946]. This has been studied in more detail by Bretschneider and Duyvene de Wit [1947] in Rhodeus amarus. These authors have given a new interpreta- tion of this process and named these oocytes as pre-ovulation corpora lutea. In Phoxinus laevis, Bullough [1940] observed that the primary oocytes belonging to the primary growth phase occur in the mature ovary form the stock for the fresh crop. Hickling and Rutenberg [1936] record that in some adult fishes there is a general stock of yolkless and transparent eggs which give rise to the new generation of oocytes after depletion of the ovary. In C. reba, the nests of transparent oocytes are so few in Stage IV ovary that it can only form a very small portion of the new crop. However, in the depleted ovary, new nests of small oocytes are proliferated from the ovigerous lamellae which seem to replenish the ovary. Spermatogonia with round and polymorphic nuclei are encountered in C. reba. But unlike Ichthyophis glutinosa [Seshachar, 1936] their ratio during defferent growth periods of the testis could not be arranged with regularity to give a difinite interpretation for this pheno- menon. The solitary spermatogonia which persist in the mature testis (Stage D) divide during stages E and F, and this strengthens the probability of these forming the resting mother germ cells for the new crop of spermatogonia, as in the case of Plecoglossus ativetis [Kazuo Suzuki, 1939 and Salamander Hargitt, 1924]. SUMMARY The morphological and seasonal histological changes occurring in the sexual cycle of C. reba are studied. This minor carp breeds during July to September in the Annamalai University re- servoir. This period coincides with the setting in of the monsoon. The condition factor computed reaches its maximum in both male and female during the spawning period. In the female, the fall in the condition factor is abrupt whereas in the male it is gradual. The replenishment of ovary after depletion is chiefly through the proliferating nest of germ cells which are seen in the ovigerous lamellae; however, the few resting nests present in the mature ovary may also contribute. The resting germ cells of the testis apparently form the parent cells of the new generation of germ cells in the spent testis. During certain stages of growth in the testis of C. reba, spermatogonia with round and polymorphic nuclei are present side by side. Rare occurrence of amitosis in the spermato- gonia is also noted.
MARCH, 1959] GONADS OF Cirrhina Reba 33 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The author thanks Dr. P. Govindan, Officer-in-charge of the Piscicultural Scheme for assistance throughout this investigation and Prof. R. V. Seshaiya, Head of the Department. of Zoology, for providing him all the facilities during this study. He is also gratelful to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the award of Research Scholarship. His thanks are also due to Mr. K. Rengarajan for his encouragement during the investigation. REFERENCES Alikunhi, K. H. and Nagaraja Rao, S. (1951). Notes on the early development, growth and maturity of Cirrhina reba ( Hamilton). J. Zool. Soc. India, 3: 88-98 Allison, L. N. (1951). Delay of spawning in eastern brook trout by means of artificially prolonged light interval. Prog. Fish. Cult., 13: 111-116 Bailey,R. J. (1933). The ovarian cycle in the viviparous telcost Xiphophorus helleri. Biol. Bull. 64: 206-225 Balfour, F. M. (1878). On the structure and development of the vertebrate ovary. Quart. J. Micro. Sci. 72: 383- 438 Bretschneider, L. H. and Duyvne de Wit, J. J. (1947). Sexual endocrinology of non-mammalian vertebrates. Elsevier. Amsterdam Bullough, W. S., (1939) A study of reproductive cycle in minnow in relation to environment. Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond. 109: (A) 79-102 34 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL XXIX, PART I Karandikar, K. R. and Palekar, V. C. (1950). Studies on the ovaries of Polynemus tetradactylus (Shaw) in relation to its spawning habits. J. Univ. Bombay, 19: 21-24 Kazuo Suzuki (1939). Regeneration of gonad in Plecoglossus alivelis after spawning season. Cytologia, 10: 113- 126 Lane, H. H. (1903). The ovarian structures of viviparous blind fishes Lucifuga and Stygicoia. Biol. Bull. 6: 38-54 Marza, V D., Marza, E. V. and Guthrie, M. J. (1937). Histo-chemistry of the ovary of Fundulus heteroclitus with special reference to the differentiating oocytes. Biol. Bull. 73: 67-92 Matthews, S. A. (1938). The seasonal cycle in the gonads of Fundulus. Biol. Bull. 75: 66-74 Mendoza, G. (1939). The reproductive cycle of the viviparous teleost, Neotoca bilineata, member of the family Goodeidae. I. The breeding cycle. Biol. Bull. 76: 359-370 Mendoza, G. (1940). The reproductive cycle of the viviparous teleost, Neotoca bilineata, a member of the family Goodeidae. II. The cyclic changes in the ovarian soma during gestation. Biol. Bull. 78: 349-365 INVESTIGATIONS ON SUBSIDIARY FEEDS RICE (ORYZA SATIVA) HUSK AS CATTLE FEED N. D. KEHAR, K. CHANDRA and P. N. JOHRI, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (U.P.) Received on June 17, 1958 and accepted for publication on August 8, 1958 India is one of the food-deficit countries. According to a recent estimate [Kehar, 1953] food requirement of the livestock is short by 77 per cent in digestible crude protein and 62 per cent in starch equivalent. Efforts have been made in these laboratories to meet this quanti- tative shortage by exploring, hitherto, unutilized sources of food. These investigations have shown that substances like ripe munj (Saccharum munja) and molasses [Kehar, 1944], mango (Mangifera Indica Linn.) seed kernel [Kehar and Chanda, 1945], entrails [Kehar and Chanda, 1947], jaman (Eugenia jambolana) seeds [Kehar and Sahai, 1949 a], maize (Zea mays) husk [Pandit- tesekere, Ray and Kehar, 1948], kans (Saccharum spontaneum) [Kehar, 1948] and tamarind- (Tamarindus indica) seed [Kehar and Sahai, 1949 b], which do not find economical use at present, can be successfully exploited as animal feed. The observations reported in this article relate to the use of rice husk as cattle feed. Rice is one of the most important food crops of India. While grains are used for human consumption and straw as cattle feed, the husk that is obtained as a by-product, during the preparation of the grain for human consumption, is not economically utilized. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Rice husk was analysed for some of the organic and inorganic constituents. These values, as compared with some of other husks, are given in Table I. TABLE I36 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I consumption of feed. The ration of the animals finally consisted of 1 lb. rape cake as con- centrate and 5.3 lb. roughage which comprised of rice husk and wheat (Triticum vulgare) bhoosa in the proportion of 1:1, for the animal weighing about 387 lb. In addition, the animals were provided with common salt at the rate of 1 oz. per head, daily, The experimental feeding was continued for a period of 40 days, during the last ten days of which, a metabolic trial was conducted on the animals, to determine the nutritive value of rice husk. DISCUSSION Food consumption and general condition of the animals The daily dry matter consumption of the animals during the metabolic period was on an average, 649.7 gm. of dry matter per 100 lb. body weight, per day. Throughout the feeding period, the animals maintained healthy appearance and showed, on an average, an increase of 10 lb. per head, in body weight at the end of the feeding period. Digestibility and nutritive value The digestibility coefficients of rice husk were determined by the process of elimination. The average digestibility coefficients for rice husk with respect to crude protein, ether extract, crude fibre, nitrogen-free extract and total carbohydrates were found to be, 38, 48, 26, 38, and 34 respectively. The digestible nutrients in rice husk, in lb. per 100 lb. dry matter, were found to be: digestible crude protein 2.31 lb. and total digestible nutrients 29.20 lb. A comparison of the nutritive value of rice husk per 100 lb. of dry matter, as com- pared with some other common feeds, has been shown in Table II. TABLE IIMARCH, 1959] RICE HUSK AS CATTLE FEED 37 TABLE IIIINVESTIGATIONS ON SUBSIDIARY FEEDS MAHUA (BASSIA LATIFOLIA) FLOWERS AS CATTLE FEED N. D. KEHAR, K. CHANDRA and P. N. JOHRI, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar Received on May 23, 1958 and accepted for publication on August 8, 1958 According to a recent estimate [Kehar, 1953] the food requirement of livestock in India is short by 77 per cent in digestible crude protein and by 62 per cent in starch equivalent. Investigations carried out on a number of substances, which do not find economic use at present, viz., ripe munj (Saccharum munja) and molasses [Kehar, 1944], mango (Mangifera indica Linn.) seed kernels [Kehar and Chanda, 1945], entrails [Kehar and Chanda, 1947], kans (Saccharum spontaneum) [Kehar, 1948], jaman (Eugenia jambolana) seed [Kehar and Sahai 1949], maize (Zea mays) husk [Pandittesekere et al., 1948] and groundnut (Arachis hypogea) husk [Kehar and Negi, 1950], etc., have revealed that they can be utilised as cattle feed after suitable processing. These studies have thus made available large quantities of hitherto un- exploited materials as useful animal feeds. In the present article observations have been pre- sented on the use of mahua flower as cattle feed. Mahua tree is found abundantly in the dry and stony regions of Bengal and over the greater part of Central India. It is highly appreciated by the poorer people for its edible flowers and its fermentation products. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Mahua flowers were chemically examined for some of the organic and inorganic consti- tuents. Their chemical composition along with some of the common grains is given in Table I. TABLE I40 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I bhoosa ad lib. In addition, the animals were provided with common salt at the rate of 1 oz. per head, per day. The animals began to relish the flowers after a couple of days and were consuming the entire quantity offered to them. The experimental feeding was extended over a period of 27 days. A metabolic trial was conducted on the animals to determine the nutritive value of mahua flowers during the last 10 days of the experimental feeding. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Food consumption and general condition of animals The average total dry matter consumption per 100 lb. body weight per day was 956.5 gm. Throughout the feeding period, the animals maintained healthy appearance and showed, on an average, an increase of 6 lb. per head in body weight. Digestibility and nutritive value The digestibility coefficients for mahua flowers were determined by a process of elimi- nation. The average digestibility coefficients for crude protein, ether extract, crude fibre, nitro- gen-free extract and total carbohydrates respectively, were found to be 46, 70, 74, 85 and 83. The digestible nutrients in mahua flowers per 100 lb. dry material as compared with some other feeds, have been shown in Table II. TABLE IIMARCH, 1959] MAHUA FLOWERS AS CATTLE FEED 41 TABLE IIISTUDIES ON ENSILING GREEN TREE LEAVES PEEPAL LEAVES (FICUS RELIGIOSA) SILAGE N. D.KEHAR and P. N. JOHRI, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar Received on June 7, 1958 and accepted for publication on August 8, 1958 The problem of adequate supply of nutritious fodder for livestock in India, during the dry periods of the year, is very baffling. After the cessation of rains, cattle have to depend, for the greater part of the year, on coarse fodders like cereal straws and mature hays which are nutrition- ally poor. During the monsoon months, however, there is ample green fodder available which, in certain places, is in excess of the livestock requirement of that area. Due to lack of suitable organisation, this surplus is not put to any profitable use. If means are devised for proper con- servation of this surplus green material, a partial solution of the fodder problem, during the dry periods, can be found. In view of the above, attempts have been made in these laboratories to ensile, under village conditions, green fodders like sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum) tops [Kehar and Sahai, 1949], bhurra (Saccharum munj) [Kehar and Sahai, 1949-50] and berseem (Trifolium alexandrinum) and shisham (Dalbergia sissoo) shed leaves [Kehar and Kumar, 1950-51]. Encouraged with the above results, an attempt was made to find out if peepal leaves could be successfully ensiled. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Peepal leaves were filled, layer by layer, in pits of 8 feet × 5 feet × 4 feet dimensions At the bottom, as well as on the sides, the pits were lined with 6-inch layer of coarse fodder. After each addition of about 8 md. of the material, the mass was trampled to exclude air. When the filled mass was about 2-3 feet above the ground level, it was covered with a six-inch layer of coarse hay, and finally, the pits were closed with earth and the top was later plastered with clay. The crevices observed, consequent on the shrinking of the material, were promptly repaired. After six months, one of the pits was opened and a sample was taken out for analysis and palatability test. The silage was found to be of greenish yellow colour with a characteristic pleasant smell. Peepal-leaf silage was chemically examined for some of the organic and inorganic con- stituents. Their chemical composition, along with some of the common silages, has been set out in Table I. It is seen that peepal-leaf silage has a higher content of crude protein as compared with other silages given in Table I. The ether extract content in peepal-leaf silage is higher than in jowar (Andropogon sorghum), bhurra (Saccharum munj) and guinea (Panicum maximum) grass silages but lower than in shisham (Dalbergia sissoo)-leaf silages. The total carbohydrate con- tent in peepal-leaf silage was somewhat lower as compared with the other silages. As regards the inorganic constituents, viz., calcium and phosphorus, it is seen that the amount of calcium in peepal-leaf silage is considerably higher than jowar and in bhurra silages. In its content of phosphorus, peepal-leaf silage is richer than jowar and bhurra silages. Feeding trials with peepal-leaf silage were conducted on four adult Kumauni bullocks. The experimental feeding, consisting of silage only, lasted for 32 days. During the last ten days of the feeding period, a metabolism trial was conducted. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Food consumption and general condition of the animals The silage was found to be highly palatable. The average daily dry matter consumption from the silage worked out to be 905.47 gm. per 100 lb. body weight. Throughout the feed- ing eriod, the animals maintained a healthy appearance and showed, on an average, an increase of 5 lb. per head in live-weight. 43
44 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I TABLE IMARCH, 1959] ENSILING OF PEEPAL LEAVES 45 TABLE IIIINVESTIGATIONS ON SILAGE MAKING DIGESTIBILITY AND NUTRITIVE VALUE OF GREEN GUAR (CYAMOPSIS PSORALOIDES) AND WHEAT-(TRITICUM VULGARE) BHOOSA SILAGE N. D. KEHAR and P. N. JOHRI, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (U.P.) Received on June 17, 1958 and accepted for publication on August 8, 1958 Except for the monsoon months and sometime thereafter, the roughage supply for live- stock, in India, mainly comprises coarse fodders like cereal straws which are nutritionally deficient in many respects. In order to effect an improvement in the palatability of these coarse roughages and also to provide nutritious and succulent fodder for the dry periods of the year, attempts have been made in these laboratories to ensile coarse roughages with green legumi- nous fodders. Kehar and Sahai [1949-50] showed that the ensilage of paddy (Oryza sativa) straw with berseem (Trifolium alexandrinum) yielded a succulent fodder of high nutritive value. Kehar, Sahai and Daniel [1954-55 a and b] further showed that ensilage of cowpeas (Vigna catjang) and pakar (Ficus infectoria) leaves and cowpeas and jaman (Eugenia jambolana)-shed leaves provided succulent and nutritious fodder. The present investigation is an attempt to ensile wheat-bhoosa with green guar. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Green guar was chaffed into 5 to 6 inches bits and was uniformly mixed with wheat-bhoosa in the proportion of 3 : 2, on dry matter basis, and ensiled in silo-pits of 8 feet X 5 feet X 4 feet dimensions layer by layer. At the bottom, as well as on the sides, the pits were lined with a 6-inch layer of some coarse fodder. After each addition of about 8-10 md. of the material, a dilute solution of molasses (at the rate of 2 per cent on the weight of the fresh crop) was sprinkled uniformly and the material was trampled to exclude all the air, as much as possible. When the filled material reached two feet above the ground level, the top was covered with a 6-inch layer of dried bhurra (Saccharum munj) and was finally cover- ed with earth, pressed and then plastered with clay. The crevices observed, consequent on the shrinking of the material, were promptly repaired. After a period of six months, one of the pits was opened. The silage was found to be of greenish yellow colour with pleasant fruity smell. The chemical composition of green guar and wheat-bhoosa silage, as compared with some other common silages, is given in Table I. It is clear from Table I that in crude protein content green guar and wheat-bhoosa silage is richer than jowar (Andropogon sorghum), maize (Zea mays,) bhurra (Saccharum munj) and guinea (Panicum maximum) grass silages enlisted in Table I. The total carbohydrate content in green guar and wheat-bhoosa silage is, however, lower as compared with other silages. Feeding experiments with green guar and wheat-bhoosa silage were conducted on five adult Kumauni bullocks. The animals, during the experimental feeding period, received silage ad lib and an ounce of common salt per head. The feeding period lasted for 30 days, and during the last ten days a metabolism trial was conducted. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS Food consumption and general condition of animals The silage was found to be quite palatable. The average dry matter consumption, per day, from this silage worked out to be 755 gm. per 100 lb. body weight. Throughout the ex- perimental feeding period, the animals maintained healthy appearance and exhibited an increase in body weight. The average gain over the initial body weight at the end of the feed- ing period, was found to be 9 lb. per head. 47
48 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART Digestibility and nutritive value The average digestibility co-efficients with respect to crude protein, ether extract, crude fibre, nitrogen-free extract and total carbohydrate were found to be 51, 38, 50, 41 and 46 respectively. The digestible nutrients in green guar and wheat-bhoosa silage, in lb. per 100 lb. of dry matter, were found to be, digestible crude protein 4.15 lb., total digestible nutrients 39.76 lb. and starch equivalent 19.67 lb. The digestible nutrients of the silage, as compared with some other common silages, have been shown in Table II. TABLE IMARCH, 1959] INVESTIGATION ON SILAGE MAKING 49 Nitrogen and mineral balances The average nitrogen and mineral balances of the animals on green guar and wheat-bhoosa silage, are shown in Table III. TABLE IIIABSTRACTS Bovine virus enteritis (Winter dysentery). MACPHERSON, L. W. (1957). Canadian J. Comp. Med. Vet. Sci., 21: 184-192. The author has described a disease condition, viz., winter dysentery in bovines in Canada, caused by a virus. Epidemiological observations revealed that the immunity was transient and that there was tendency to recurrent attacks particularly preceded by sudden drop in the atmospheric temperature. Animals between 9 months to 9 years of age were susceptible. However, the most severe symptoms occurred in animals of 1 to 3 years of age. The morbidity rate was high while the mortality rate was only 1 to 2 per cent. The infection was found to be persuit on the affected premises year after year. Symptoms observed in the affected animals were naso-lacrymal discharge, slight rise in body temperature, diarrhoea followed by dysentery, especially in young animals, and a severe drop in milk yield. The course of the disease varied from 3 to 14 days depending on the age of the animal. Secondary bacterial infection by Actinomyces necrophorus or Corynebacterium pyogenes resul- ting in buccal erosions, laminitis, bronchitis and peritonitis occurred in some young animals 4 to 8 weeks after the attack of the disease. Hyperaemia of the mucous membranes of the abomasum and intestines and pete- chiae on the mucous membranes of small and large intestines, enlargement of peyer's patches and mesenteric lymph nodes and charactestic "zebra" markings on the mucous membrane of the rectum were the common lesions observed on post mortem examination. Experimental infection in bovines was effected by administration of filtrate or diluted faecal matter from infected animals, sub-cutaneously or orally. Apart from the usual symptoms of the disease, diphasic rise in body temperature and marked leucopoenia were observed in the experimental animals. (P. S. B.). Studies on fishmeal and the hatching rates of hens' eggs. R. COLES (1957). J. Agri. Sci., 49: 95-99. Although fishmeal is widely used in poultry rations, instances have been recorded on depression in hatching rates when fishmeal is fed to breeding hens. In this experiment, samples of white fishmeal from widely separated points of origin, U. K., South Africa, Iceland and Canada, were employed. The birds in the four groups received a ration similar in every respect with the exception that the 10 per cent fishmeal in each group was from one of the four differing sources. The fertility and the rate of laying showed no substantial differences between the birds of the four groups. As regards the hatching rates of fertile eggs, two groups showed hatching rates of 85.2 and 83.8 per cent, which were little above the level normally recorded in the experimental flock. The third group was about 5 per cent below the figure of 80 previously experienced in the flock while the fourth group showed an extremely poor hatching rate of 60 per cent. Bacterial assays showed that only one sample contained aerobic spore-bearing bacteria capable of coagulating yolk but the birds fed this sample manifested the mild depression of 5 per cent in the hatching rate and this was the only group to show an appreciably above- normal early death rate in the chicks. The hatching rate in all groups was, however, inversely 51
52 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VOL. XXIX, PART I related to the depth of coloration in the fishmeal samples. It is concluded that as a result of over-heating during manufacture, degradation of the proteins occurred, giving rise to toxic products which in turn led to a high embryonic death-rate during the last four days of incu- bation. The egg production in all groups of birds was high and it therefore seemed improbable that over-heating had proceeded to the stage of materially damaging the essential amino-acid contents of the meal. (S.B.) Observations on the grazing habits of grade and zebu steers in a high altitude temperate climate. G. H. LAMPKIN, J.QUARTERMAN and M. KIDNER (1958). J. Agric. Sci., 50: 211-218. Although several studies have been made comparing grazing habits of zebu cattle and grades (indigenous cattle which have been graded up by several generations of crossing with Europeans) in the tropics, such studies have not been done in temperate climates. Mugugua, where the experiments were conducted is situated near the equator, at an altitude of 6,500 to 7,000 feet. The climate is very mild and the mean temperature for any month seldom fluctuates beyond 65 to 75°F. Six home-bred zebu steers with an average weight of 537 lb. were considered compara- ble to six purchased grade steers with an average weight of 680 lb. and slightly older in age. The appearance of the grades suggested that they were 'high grades.' The observations were carried out for 13 days in December 1955 and one week in June 1956, after the animals had been grazing for at least five weeks in each case. Animals were observed every five minutes, during the day alone in the first experiment and during day and night in the second. The various differences observed in grazing habits could be quantified in terms of the time taken for the different operations and the significances of the differences tested by analysis of variance. It was observed that the maximum temperatures were within the comfort limits of both kinds of cattle. The lower temperatures (below 55°F.), however, when accompanied by rain, caused discomfort to the zebus, which remained standing instead of lying down and resting. Both breeds tended to graze during day and rest and ruminate at night for about the same length of time, thereby suggesting similarity in physiology. The grades, however, drank about twice as much water as the zebus. The authors suggest that water consumption at lower environmental temperatures (below 70°F.) might give some indication of the heat-tolerance of the animals at higher temperatures. The abstracter is of opinion that this hypothesis on water consumption can be tested easily in India. [P.G.N.] A field-trial comparison of milk and egg-yolk citrate as semen dilutors. B. M. KERRUISH (1956). 3rd Congr. on Animal Reproduction, 1956. Section 3, p. 65. A comparison of milk and egg-yolk citrate as semen dilutors has been made on large scale under field conditions. The homogenised milk dilutor and the skimmed milk dilutor were prepared by heating them separately between 95 to 98°C. for 10 minutes inter- mittent stirring. The dilutors were then cooled and stored at 5°C. in sterile bottles. The egg- yolk citrate dilutor was prepared by adding one part fresh egg-yolk to two parts citrate solution containing 0.3 per cent sulphanilamide. Streptomycin and penicillin were mixed with the three dilutors as a routine (500 units of each per ml. dilutor). Sulphanilamide was not added to milk dilutors. Semen samples were divided into two parts, one diluted with heat-treated milk and the other with EYC. Calculation of conception rates was made on a 90 to 120 day 'non-return' basis on first insemination. The results showed that EYC dilutor (5051 inseminations) was 1.1 per cent superior to the homogenised milk dilutor (4637 inseminations). Whereas skimmed milk dilutor (6850 inseminations) was 1.6 per cent superior to the EYC dilutor (7978 inseminations). During long-term storage the semen viability was reduced in the homogenised milk dilutor but storage in skimmed milk produced best results of the three dilutors. [P. N. S.]
REVIEW VETERINARY PROTOZOOLOGY By U. F. RICHARDSON and S. P. KENDALL Second Enlarged Edition, 1957, Pages 1-260 illustrations and one colour frontispiece. Published by Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh. Price : 22sh. 6d. In this book the subject matter is dealt with in fifteen chapters. For clarity each protozoan disease is considered under the following heads: morphological characters of the parasite, distribution and mode of transmission, symptoms and pathogenicity diagnosis and treatment and control. The authors have handled the subject in a masterly way and have incorporated their considerable experience, both in the laboratory and the field in temperate as well as in tropical countries. The chapter on chemotherapy has been suitably enlarged and provides detailed information on the chemistry, pharmacology and the application of all important drugs of interest for the veterinary protozoologist. The authors have paid special attention to drugs developed in the recent years for the treatment of trypanosomiasis, piroplasmosis and coccidiosis. The last chapter on techniques and equipment deals with some of the diag- nostic techniques, which are of great importance to the worker in the field as well as in the laboratory. The book, on the whole, is a good guide for undergraduates in veterinary protozoology. [H. N. R.] 53 GIPN