ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1892-93.
NLS to Scan B&W and insert
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR. 1892-93. CONTENTS. SECTION I.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1892-93. SECTION IGOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1892-93. SECTION I.2 Received dur- ng the year. 2. The number received during the year is given below:3 During my long experience of the Bombay Arab horse market, I have only in one instance had to give as high a price as Rs. 3,000 for an Arab stallion, and this horse proved as a stock getter worth the money. The Government of India have not limited the price to be given for stud Arabs, and should I have the good fortune to find in the market an Arab horse worth more than Rs. 3,000, I would not hesitate to purchase the animal. No. 80, dated 7th June 1892. 6. I would here note that on account of so few pure bred and good boned Arabs now-a-days being obtainable in Bombay, I proposed that horses of this breed should be obtained from the Hungarian studs ; and I was deputed in July 1892 to proceed to Buda Pesth with the view of purchasing six from the Government of Hungary. The authori- ties are aware of the reason why these horses could not at the time be secured. The whole correspondence, together with a report on horse-breeding in Hungary by Major Douglas Dawson, Coldstream Guards, is given as Appendix I, (vide page 61), a perusal of which will be found most interesting. 7. It may be hoped that arrangements will yet be made by which some really good Arabs will be bought in Hungary. No, 47-M.D, dated 16th September 1892, to the Military Department. 8. With the view of using every endeavour to obtain pure bred Arabs of the stamp required, J. submitted sugges- tions that4 they being mostly on the leg without substance. This is not saying much for our horses, but the fact is breeding is such a hazard that good ones are excep- tions, and most breeders only breed for the turf.&quot; 10. The Director, Army Remount Department, in paragraph 48 of his Annual Administration Report for 1892-93 notes his opinion as to the stud horses required for India. The reasons why the classes of stallions sought for are not obtained in numbers sufficient for the demands of the Government of India I have above noted. 11. It has been stated that if more money were allowed by the Right Hon'ble the Secretary of State for stallions purchased in Great Britain and Ireland, that thorough-breds of the right stamp would be easily secured; but I believe General Thornhill has recorded that he was satisfied with the amount sanctioned, and would not obtain better thorough-breds than those purchased by him were he allowed more funds. The fact is that it is difficult to obtain thorough-breds in sufficient numbers of the class required, viz., deep in girth, broad in chest, with short, large jointed, and big boned limbs of a build of the hunter stamp. Doubtless thorough-breds are sold at prices rang- ing above the limit sanctioned by the Secretary of State (350 guineas) up to £20,000 to £30,000; but, though these high-priced animals with racing pedigrees are used for racing stud purposes, they would not be considered of the hunter type fit for Government stud purposes in India. Casualties. 12. The number of casualties and the diseases from which stallions died are given in Appendix III (vide page 82). The following table gives the abstract of casualties:5 Number of stallions pre- sent. 16. The stallions of various classes on the strength of the Bengal, Bombay, and Central India establishments on the 31st March 1893 were as follows:6 19. Maps will be found in the cover of this volume showing the breeding districts of Bengal, Central India, and Bombay respectively. Stands where horses are located are marked in red; where donkeys are stationed, in green. 20. Appendix V (vide page 86) gives the horse and donkey stands abolish- ed and established in 1892-93. A summary is given below:7 27. On this subject the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, remarks in his report: &quot;Of the compara- tive merits of stallions as sires of stock fit for remount purposes, my experi- ence during the past year has only still further confirmed my opinion that hackneys, particularly if pure bred, are far superior to other classes. Colonel Harvey, lately Commanding the 5th Royal Irish Lancers at Meerut, allowed me to inspect the troop horses of the regiment, which are almost all country- breds.........................I came to the conclusion that the majority of the horses, and in nearly every instance those pointed out by troop officers as being the best, were undoubtedly sired by hackneys. In the 7th Dragoon Guards a whole troop is horsed by country-breds, and I have been informed by the officers of the regiment that they did their work at least quite as well as Aus- tralians, and at the end of the Aligarh Camp of Exercise in December 1891 they compared most favorably in condition with the rest of the regiment.&quot; In another place he says: &quot;I have heard it stated confidently that, although the hackney stock make a fine show of bone and substance as colts and fillies at the fairs and shows, when they reach adult age and are put to work they prove slow and break down prematurely. This is not borne out by the experience of the British regiment mounted on them.&quot; The experience of the several classes of horses gained at the Aligarh Camp of Exercise shows that the country-breds compare favorably with Australians. The subject is alluded to below in para- graph 58. 28. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, states: &quot;I noticed at the twelve different horse shows I attended that the Norfolk Trotter produce as a rule were well grown, strong animals, and almost invariably good movers. Possibly on the whole they were slightly deficient in quality, and some gave me the idea of being rather short in the neck; but as British Cavalry is now being mounted on country-breds, the fact must never be lost sight of that in marching order a medium cavalry troop horse is expected to carry 18 stones. Of the half bred English I know nothing, except that in England he is looked upon with great suspicion. Judging of those lately sent out to India, they seem to me to lack the good points of the hackney without possess- ing any of the advantages of the thorough-bred; and as it is a popular belief amongst large horse breeders in England that young stock take after their grand sires and dams, it cannot but be anticipated that the stock of this class of sire will not be everything we may desire.&quot; 29. I have to reiterate the opinion which I have on former occasions recorded, that the hackney stallion (under which head are included Norfolk Trotters, Roadsters, &c.) of good pedigree should be continued at stud in India. This class of stallion, though condemned by many men in India considered to have some knowledge of horses, is the one preferred in England, Europe, Amer- ica, Australia, Africa, and Afghanistan for producing &quot;general utility&quot; horses. 30. The stock of Arabs out of mares sired by hackneys is well spoken of. 31. The country-bred sires are getting good stock. Endeavours are being made to obtain and employ more of this class of sire. Those having pedigrees on the side of both sire and dam only are purchased, and by careful selection of such stock the number of country-bred stallions will become in time a large one. Several of these sires are now being employed in lieu of the old class of mal- formed and hereditarily diseased animals itinerated by native stallion keepers. Cost of keep, &c., of horse stallions. 32. Appendix VI (vide page 87) gives the cost of feed, keep, attendants, transit, &c., of Imperial horse stallions during 1892-93, and the table entered below shows the average cost per annum during the preceding 15 years:8 33. The Bombay Presidency thus shows an increase of Rs. 9-7-6 over last year's average. This is mainly due to dearness of grain and fodder. The average has decreased by Rs. 11-13-1 in Bengal, and this is due to grain having been plentiful. Branded mares: Number of9 37. The table beneath gives the numbers removed from the registers for various reasons:10 41. The mares branded in the Punjab are said to be of exceptional quality and stamp. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, in his report states as follows:11 47. To facilitate reference, the average number of mares covered in 1891- 92 and 1892-93 are given. Details will be found in Appendix VIII (vide page 94):12 52. The Army Remount Department purchased a greater number than last year. The same remarks as those made last year with reference to the breeds of remounts purchased apply to this year as quoted below:13 &quot;Both classes were troublesome in the ranks. The stallions were exceedingly pugna- cious and noisy, and many of the mares were intemperate. We certainly did get wonderful work out of our cattle on service notwithstanding these disadvantages, but we rode lighter than troops do now. Certainly we mounted ourselves within the average 'chanda' of Rs. 200, but I regard the remounts of that day as dear in comparison with what we can now get at from Rs. 250 to 300. &quot;An experienced cavalry officer, while admitting the general correctness of my view, once said to me that he did not think remounts now-a-days have such good constitutions as those formerly procured. This may doubtless appear to be the case, because the cavalry is now worked so very much harder than of yore. The ranks of many Bengal Cavalry regiments in old days were filled with old horses which lasted on, because the work generally consisted of a daily parade and no more. In the Punjab Cavalry, where in early days outpost duty was heavy consequent on frequent raids, we got through our horses pretty fast. &quot;I have above stated facts as I have observed them. The conclusion which I draw from them is that there is an immense improvement in the quality of the stock bred in the country owing to three causesGOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICAL YEAR 1892-93 SECTION IGOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1892-93. SECTION I18 Increase dur- ing the year. 2. Those received since are shown in the following statement:19 Cost of keep, &c., of donkey stallions. 6. In Appendix XIII (vide page 100) may be found the cost of the feed and keep of donkeys during 1892-93. The averages for the last 14 years are given below:20 9. There can be no doubt that the number of pony mares covered during the year was greater than last year. Very many of the donkey stallions in Northern India had to be recalled to depôt to prevent their powers being overtaxed. The returns are given as received, but they will remain unreliable until the system of village registration by patwaris recently sanctioned is in working order. Demand for donkey stal- lions. 10. As noted in last year's report (paragraph 34), the demand for more donkey stallion power continues, and it is to be regretted that the indents on England for more jacks have not been fully complied with. Applications from district boards, &c., to be allowed to purchase donkeys could not be met owing to the paucity of Government jacks on the register. It was hoped that some would be imported from Northern Afghanistan and brought for sale to the Quetta Horse Fair, and it was recommended that Persian donkeys might be obtained through the agency of a Persian horse importer; but the Civil Veteri- nary Department were disappointed by not obtaining any from these sources. Unless more jack power be secured, mule-breeding cannot possibly be develop- ed. As recorded above, the demand by mule-breeders for more donkey stallions remains pressing. In this office letter No. 11-M.D., dated 15th February 1892, paragraph 4, I stated: &quot;I avail myself of this opportunity of reiterating my earnest sugges- tions to have the sanctioned strength of donkey stallions raised from 300 to 600 by annual increments of not less than 50 in and after the year 1893-94,&quot; and I still most earnestly advise that the number of jacks may be gradually increas- ed. In my letter No. 45-M.D., dated 9th September 1892, I wrote:21 may be requested to obtain twenty Persian donkey stallions according to the following standard measurements at the average price of Rs. 200 each:22 REMARKS. 1. This being the last annual report which I shall have the honor to submit to the Imperial Government, I beg to record my opinion that as the Indian bred horse can work and thrive in any country and climate, and that the British troop horse cannot stand hard work in a tropical climate, it is obvious that horse-breeding in India should be so fostered and supported by the authorities as to allow of all the troop horses required being bred and reared in India. Moreover, that there should be available a large number of horse stock outside the army, so that additional cavalry and artillery, if on an emergency sent out from England, could be mounted on Indian horses. 2. It is true that hitherto Australia and the Cape have supplied, and are still supplying, horses for India; but it is a well-known fact that they do not possess the hardiness and powers of endurance, nor can they bear the hardships and privations incident on war service, so well as the breeds of Arabia, Persia, and India. The advantage of having hardy Indian bred horses to meet the requirements for remounts to replace casualties on service in place of young and perhaps unacclimatised Australians must be evident. Surely, therefore, it is desirable that Government should adopt steadily and persist- ently measures by which India may in time yield not only all the horses required in time of peace, but also be prepared with a reserve in the breed- ing districts which would be available in case of war. 3. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, states that &quot;the stallions inspected at Sibi were in faultless condition.&quot; It is evident that the greatest care and attention has been paid to the welfare of these animals, and the best thanks of this department are tendered to the local officers for their cordial co-operation. 4. My best thanks have to be most gratefully recorded to those Veteri- nary officers who were my coadjutors in the Horse Breeding Department from 1876 to 1892, and to those officers of the Civil Veterinary Department since April 1892; and I would especially name Messrs. E. J. Batt, W. Lamb, and J. J. Meyrick; Veterinary Majors B. L. Glover, J. C. Dwyer, and G. J. R. Rayment; Veterinary Captain J. W. A. Morgan; and Veterinary Lieutenants H. T. Pease, F. B. Drage, and R. L. Cranford. Also I record my thanks to the Veterinary Overseers Messrs. J. Burke, E. Burke, and H. C. D'Silva, who have performed their duties in a most willing and satisfactory manner. As this is my last report, I deem it my duty to record my opinion on the Superintendent and several clerks of the Office of Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department. Mr. J. B. D'Silva was Head Clerk of the Office of the General Superin- tendent, Horse Breeding Operations, and on that Department merging into the Civil Veterinary Department, he became Superintendent of the Office. He has always conducted his duties in an earnest and most satisfactory manner, and I have to record my best thanks to him for the good work he has done during the last 18 years. Mr. E. B. Roderick has been 12 years in the Office of Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, and General Superintendent, Horse Breeding Operations, and has worked willingly and well, and is fit for promotion. Mr. A. R. D'Silva has likewise during the last 5 years served under me, and shown himself an able clerk and likely to prove worthy of promotion. Messrs. E. T. D'Silva and Joseph DeSilva are promising clerks. Rughbeer Singh. Munshi, performed his work satisfactorily, and has lately been transferred on promotion to the Office of Assistant to Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department. My best thanks are also due to all District Officers of the horse-breeding districts of the North-Western Provinces and the Punjab who, with their
23 multifarious duties, have most generously co-operated with the officers of the Horse Breeding and Civil Veterinary Departments in furthering and fostering the horse and mule breeding industry; without their help, so cordially given, the successful results attained could not have been reached. 5. It is believed that since the transfer of the Horse-Breeding Operations from the Military to the Revenue and Agricultural Department, the District Officers generally have shown a much greater interest in the oper- ations than formerly, and are convinced of the great importance of horse and mule breeding as agricultural industries, which it is necessary to support both on financial grounds and also with a view to providing the horse and mule stock required by the State and public, and thus to no longer allow of Indian money being sent to foreign countries for imported animals which can and should be spent at home. J. H. B. HALLEN, 31st December 1893. Veterinary Lieutenant- Colonel, Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1892-93. SECTION II.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1892-93. SECTION II.SECTION II.SECTION II.32 3. The money expended in prizes at the various shows in Bombay Presi- dency is shown below:33 being brought on the list of approved and branded mares for Imperial stallions, and thus the stock generally throughout breeding districts will be increased in number and value. 8. The demand for this class of sire is daily increasing, and so it may be hoped that by these means horse-breeding will gradually extend. Stamp of stal- lions employed, 9. The stamp of animal chiefly bought is a sound, strong Arab. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, remarks: &quot;All the animals purchased, as far as conformation and sound- ness are concerned, leave little to be desired considering the prices paid. Many, indeed, are of quite a superior class, and we may consider ourselves fortunate in having secured them. Of their capabilities as foal-getters I have had as yet hardly a chance of judging, as it will be observed that four horses only have been issued up till the end of the year. They were all tested in depôt before issue, and proved themselves, without exception, ready coverers34 Member of Council, Lieutenant-General H. Brackenbury, C.B.; inspected stallions, stables, and the Instruction farm at Babugarh; then proceeded to Simla, where he remained on duty with the Government of India until the 21st of May, on which date he availed himself of 60 days' privilege leave. On 7th July was ordered to proceed to Hungary on special duty for the purpose of purchasing stallions for the Government of India. Arrived in Bombay on 7th August, and received charge of his office on 8th idem. Then he visited Poona to inspect the Bacteriological Laboratory there, interviewed Colonel Biddulph at Gwalior on horse and mule-breeding matters, went to Ajmere to select a site for a veterinary school, and visited Babugarh to inspect the stallions, stables, and Instruction farm. In September he interviewed the Deputy Commissioner at Umballa on horse and mule-breeding matters, and inspected the Government stallions and stables, also those belonging to the District Board. Arrived in Simla on 5th, and remained there on duty with the Government of India until the end of the month. In October Quetta Horse Show and Pokhur Horse Fair were attended; horse stallions offered for sale at Jacobabad inspected, and Babugarh visited to inspect stallions and stables. During November Ahmednagar Horse Show was attended and Bombay and Indore were visited for the purpose of purchasing suitable stallions for the Government of India and District Boards, &c. In December he proceeded to Calcutta on duty with the Government of India, visited the grass farm at Allahabad, and was present at Babugarh for the winter class of technical instruction. In January the Jellalabad Horse Show was attended; he visited Babugarh to inspect stallions, stables, and Instruction farm, and went to Calcutta on duty with the Government of India. In February the Delhi and Aligarh Horse Shows were attended; he in- spected the stallions and stables at Babugarh; then proceeded to Bombay to buy Arab stallions. During March he attended the Sialkot, Jhelum, and Shahpur Horse Shows and Dinanagar Cattle Fair; inspected stallions and stables at Babugarh, and proceeded to Ajmere to select a site for the Veterinary School. 20. The Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, travelled 17,676 miles by rail, 685 miles by road; attended 11 horse fairs and shows, and spent 55 days under canvas. 21. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, after taking charge of his office on 20th May, remained at head-quarters until 9th of June, when he went to Poona to confer with Director of Land Records and Agriculture and purchase stallions. During July, August, and September he visited Ahmedabad, Kaira, and Bombay to inspect Veterinary Dispensaries, confer with the Collectors, and purchase stallions. In October the Quetta Horse show was attended, and Jacobabad and Shikarpur were visited for the purpose of branding mares. A tour was made in November and December in the Ahmednagar, Poona, and Sholapur districts; the Ahmednagar Horse Show attended; and Babugarh visited during the time of the winter technical class of instruc- tion. He inspected the Saharanpur Depôt, and visited Bombay to purchase stallions. During January and February the Jacobabad, Chinchli, Naushahro, and Ahmedabad Horse Shows were attended and the Kurnal Depôt inspected. March was spent in branding mares in the Ahmednagar and Poona districts.
35 22. During the year under report Veterinary Major G. J. E. Rayment, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, attended the Muzaffarnagar and Umballa Shows in April; those of Gur- mukhtesar, Batesar, Hansi, and Etawah in October and November, while the usual shows were attended in the spring. During the touring season he in- spected stands and branded mares in the Aligarh, Etawah, Agra, Kurnal, Mul- tan, Meerut, Rawalpindi, Hissar, Gurgaon, Delhi, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpu, and Bulandshahr Districts. In the absence on leave of Veterinary Colonel Hallen he officiated as Inspector-General, and performed the duties of Super- intendent, Punjab, Veterinary Major Kemp being away on medical certificate. In September he was ordered to Naini Tal, His Honor the Lieutenant-Gov- ernor wishing to consult him as to the future operations of the Department. He travelled 5,199 miles by rail, 1,605 miles by road, and was under canvas 135 days. 23. Veterinary Lieutenant F. B. Drage, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, assumed charge of his office on 15th August, and com- menced his tour, visiting the districts of Rawalpindi, Bannu, Lahore, Peshawar, Dera Ismail Khan, and Multan. A portion of the Gurdaspur district was also inspected. He attended the horse fairs and shows of Amritsar, Jhang, Dera Ghazi Khan, Bannu, Lahore, Rawalpindi, Dera Ismail Khan, Multan, Shahpur, and Gujrat. He travelled 6,504 miles by rail, 1,277 miles by road, and was 91 days under canvas. Cost of the Department. 24. The original statement received from the Comptroller of India Trea- suries showing the cost of the Department for the year under report, amount- ing to Rs. 2,66,852-10-7, is herewith attached. The following amounts should, however, be deducted from the above amount, as provision for these items was not made in the Civil Veterinary Department budget:36 27. The total cost of the Department in Bombay as compared with the year 1891-92 shows a decrease of Rs. 1,501-0.3. The outlay has been divided under the following sub-heads:SECTION II.SECTION II40 summer at Simla and to non-commisssoned officers, farriers, &c., during the winter at Umballa should be sanctioned by the authorities, and become duly- enforced. These classes have since been continued under the orders of His Excel- lency the Commander-in-Chief in India. Ajmere Vete- rinary Sohool. 6.About the year 1881 Mr. Hallen, Inspecting Veterinary Surgeon, &c., recommended to the Government of India that instruction in veterinary matters should be given to the young native chiefs of the Mayo College at Ajmere in order that they might have some knowledge regarding the management, breed- ing, and rearing of horse and cattle stock, so that when reigning in their several States they might take an interest in such matters, and induce their subjects and tenantry to adopt the industries of cattle and horse-breeding on scientific lines, and so render valuable help in developing the revenues of their country. 7.Again a proposal to establish a veterinary school at Ajmere to allow native chiefs of Rajputana to send men for sound instruction in veteri- nary matters was made by Colonel G. H. Trevor, c.s.i., Agent to the Gover- nor General in Rajputana, and was warmly supported by Mr. Hallen in his letter No. 37 R. & A., dated 1st February 1891, to the Secretary to the Govern- ment of India, Revenue and Agricultural Department; and in the scheme for the organization of a Civil Veterinary Department in India, provision was made for a Veterinary officer of that department to preside over the institution. 8.Colonel Trevor warmly interested himself in the scheme, and addressed the several Darbars of Rajputana through the Political officers by circular, and had the pleasure of receiving replies which justified his saying that annual subscriptions to the extent of Rs. 6,504 had been promised to meet the cost of the scheme sketched in Mr. Hallen's printed letter No. 37- R. & A. above quoted. Moreover, that there would be no difficulty in raising a sum of Rs. 10,000 for the construction of the college buildings at Ajmere if required. Colonel Trevor adds &quot; that the Commissioner of Ajmere, Colonel J. Biddulph, is strongly in favor of the proposed veterinary school. In fact, I have not heard a single dissentient voice.&quot; 9.The establishment of the veterinary school has accordingly been sanctioned by the Government of India. The necessary buildings are now being erected on a suitable site in a suburb of Ajmere; Veterinary Captain Hagger, C.V.D., has been appointed Principal, and a staff of lecturers will shortly be nominated. It is expected that the school will be formally opened by Colonel Trevor, Agent to the Governor-General of Rajputana, during the coming winter. Veterinary School, Luck- now. 10.It is contemplated by the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-Western Provinces, Sir Charles Crosthwaite, K.C.S.L, &c., on the recommendation of Veterinary Major G. J. R. Rayment, F.R.C.V.S., Civil Veterinary Department, &c., to establish a veterinary school at Lucknow, where the native chiefs are fully cognisant of the desirability of having such an institution to meet the demands for veterinary aid made by the agriculturists. This school will be available for the education of men of the several districts in Oudh and the North-Western Provinces. Calcutta Ve- terinary Institu- tion. 11.On the completion of their duties during 1869-71, the Cattle Plague Commissioners of India deemed it their duty to advise the Government of India to establish a veterinary college in Calcutta with a view to providing duly qualified native veterinarians for the cattle districts of Lower Bengal and Assam. As the ravages committed by contagious diseases common amongst cattle caused heavy loss to agriculturists and more or less marred the revenue interests, the President of the Commission, Inspecting Veterinary Surgeon J. H. B. Hallen, and his able coadjutor on the Commission, Dr. Kenneth McLeod, conjointly earnestly urged the necessity of the measure.
41 12. The Viceroy of India, Earl Mayo, possessed of much agricultural ex- perience, warmly accepted their recommendations for the college to be estab- lished, and Mr. Hallen was empowered by the Government of India to select suitable premises for the institution. After the lamented death of Earl Mayo the project was abandoned, as Mr. Hallen's services were at the time required for duty with the Special Stud Commission then appointed. 13. No further action was taken in the matter until 1885, when a com- mittee was assembled to report upon the proposal for a veterinary school. The members were42 great energy and zeal in the school until the 1st July 1890, and it is chiefly to his exertions that the institution developed from the few &quot;chappar huts&quot; to the present thoroughly equipped school. The number of patients for treat- ment gradually increased during his tenure of office from 107 in 1882-83 to 1,338 in 1890-91. 19. In July 1890 Veterinary Captain Nunn, F.R.C.V.S., D.S.O., succeeded as Principal, and the school has under this officer continued to improve. 20. The total number of students, civil and military, who have obtained the diploma of the school since its foundation is 371, and all of these have found employment. 21. The following is the list of officers who have been connected with the institution since 1882:43 Professor and Resident Veterinary Officer, acted as Principal from 6th December 1890 till 31st March 1891, when he was relieved by Veterinary Captain G. J. R. Rayment, who served up to 3rd August 1891. On the 12th August 1891 Veterinary Captain James Mills was appointed Principal, and still serves. Veterinary Surgeon T. Pottinger also officiated as Principal. Graduates.44 Order thereon by the Government of Madras. Communicated to the Commissioner of Revenue Settlements and Director of the De- partment of Land Records and Agriculture. A copy of these proceedings will be forwarded for the information of the Government of India, with reference to Sir E. Buck's letter No. 490-41, dated 3rd March 1893. 30. But I do most earnestly hope that despite the resolution above quoted, the necessity of establishing a Veterinary school in Madras may become acknowledged by the Madras Government.
SECTION II.47 SECTION II.SECTION II.-REVENUE. Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory. 13
51 SECTION II.SECTION II.-REVENUE. Babugarh Instruction Farm. 14
55 SECTION II.56 will no longer remain, but the lakhs of rupees now sent out of India to foreign countries for imported horse stock will be distributed amongst the horse, pony, and mule breeders of India. In several countries of Europe both bullocks and horse power are used in agricultural and cart work; but gradually mare power is becoming more generally employed for reasons above explained. In Hungary four horses and mares may be often seen treading out the corn in the same way that bullocks do in India. At first sight it may be thought that the natives of India will never give up using bullocks for farm and carting work; but it is well known that a native will, when convinced of a new line of action in any trade being profitable, accept and adopt it. The Instruction Farm is being worked with the view of showing and proving to native farmers and horse employers that by using mare power profit assuredly results. When a native sees that a horse mare or pony mare can do farm work as well as a bullock, and he likewise notes that the mares are either in foal or have foals at foot, and that the produce is saleable at good market prices, he will admit that the practice is sound. It is therefore urged that every inducement should be offered to allow of the satisfactory results of cultivating and carting by horse and mare power at the Civil Veterinary Department Babugarh Depôt Farm becoming generally known and spread throughout the horse-breeding districts of India. In other districts, where the indigenous horse and donkey does not exist, being without the horse-breeding zone57 North-Western Provinces portion of the land is briefly reviewed here. In- formation as to the balance sheets, &c., of the whole farm is given as appen- dices IX to XII (vide pages 131 to 138). 4. This being the first year of the farm's existence, it is scarcely fair to judge from it what the results will be in the future as regards the cost of the agricultural portion; for, as is always the case in such operations as this, a certain amount of capital must necessarily be sunk in order to enable profit to be made later on. In these circumstances it is gratifying to find that a balance on the credit side is shown in the balance sheet. N-W. P. land. 5. The establishment of the new Instruction Farm was sanctioned from the 1st August 1892, and the land, standing crops, sheds, implements, &c., belonging to the stallion depôt was transferred to the farm from that date. The total area taken over is 70 acres, of which 59½ acres are under cultivation and 10½ acres are occupied by buildings, or used as grazing land and paddocks for the farm animals. 6. The sanctioned grant for the working of the farm was Rs. 5,950. Of this amount, Rs. 3,300 were sanctioned for pukka wells, sheds, harness, carts, &c., Rs. 1,410 for the permanent establishment, and Rs. 1,240 for recurring expenses (vide Appendix XIII, page 139). The corresponding statement for the Punjab Instruction Farm will be found as Appendix XIV, page 140. 7. No provision was, however, made for the feed and keep of the animals, and this had therefore to be met from the savings under other heads, as the farm had not a large enough acreage to allow of sufficient grain crops being grown to fully meet the requirements of its animals. 8. The sinking of the three pukka wells at a cost of Rs. 1,800 was not carried out, as the land taken over from the stallion depôt already had four such wells, and it was not considered necessary to sink any more. Two or three wells will, however, be necessary when the additional land (250 acres) is sanc- tioned and taken over. Animals. The animals belonging to the farm are as shown below:58 Lucerne. 13. There are nearly four acres of land under lucerne cultivation, about two- thirds of which are under crops of from two to six years standing, and the re- maining one-third was sown in October last with seed imported from Quetta and Saharanpur. The old crops have given a good outturn, but those from seed re- ceived from Quetta and Saharanpur were unsatisfactory. The seeds germinated very well, but after growing for a couple of inches the plants became stunted until about the beginning of March, when they shot up. The total outturn was 1,038 maunds 22 seers, of. which the majority was given to the Imperial stallions. Guinea grass. 14. The area under guinea grass is about 1¾ acres. The whole was planted last year. This was a very satisfactory crop, yielding 1,486 maunds 9 seers. During the hot months, when lucerne does not thrive well, it grows luxuriantly with very little irrigation. In the winter, however, it becomes stunted, not standing the cold well. Impey. 15. The impey was sown at the end of February 1892, and yielded two cuttings before the land was transferred to the farm. A third crop was taken from it during August, and the fourth was allowed to run to seed, of which 123 pounds were saved. The yield of green impey was 410 maunds 14 seers, and it was supplied to the Imperial stallions. Dub. 16. When the land was taken over from the stallion depot, there were about 13 acres under dub grass cultivation, and in August 9 acres more were brought under. The total outturn of green dub was 4,950 maunds. The yield is very satisfactory considering that much of the grass was newly sown. Carrots. 17. The carrots were unsatisfactory. This was due to the fact that im- ported seed was used. The area under cultivation was three-fourths of an acre, and the yield only 24 maunds of carrots and 5 lbs. of seed. Oats. 18. Twelve and a half acres of land were under oats. The yield was goodSECTION I-MILITARY. APPENDICES.
61 SECTION I (MILITARY)62 country is undulating, affording good drainage. Some of the fields are at an altitude allowing of a view of the neighbouring country for 15 to 16 miles around. I observe in the report on Horse-Breeding in Hungary by Colonel Douglas Dawson that 10,000 acres is noted as the size of the farm, so I con- clude that it has recently been reduced to 4,000 acres, which number was given me last month. This stud has been found very suitable for breeding Arab stock on account of the nature of the soil, and is doubtless a most valu- able property. The stud has been in existence a hundred and three years. Originally, Hungarian, Transylvanian, and Bessarabian mares were employed. Since 1816 importations from Arabia of the highest caste of stallions and mares obtainable have from time to time been effected. During the last 25 years the greatest care has been exercised in the selection of the parent stock. Thus the pedigree of the stock raised in this stud clearly proves that the brood mares and stallions can be relied on for stud purposes. 7. The farming operations are cared for by scientific agriculturists, and judging by the crops of clover of several kinds, hay, &c., &c., and the cultivation generally, the farming is right well done. It was a great pleasure to see the young stock grazing on excellent grasses and clover, and to find that change of pasture is ensured by the area of land (4,000 acres) being liberal compared to the sanctioned number of stock, viz., 600 on the farm, which strength is not exceeded. 8. The numbers of different classes of stock on the farm on the date of my inspection were as follows:63 are kept in lots according to age and sex, and have frequent change of pastur- age. There are no fences around the fields. When the stock are grazing, mounted (Csikos) herdsmen are in charge to prevent their straying off their allotted portion of grazing. All this is done in a most methodical and quiet way. The stock are from their infancy well trained, and thus are as easily kept in order as sheep. 12. The forty yearling fillies are very promising. All in good condition and evidently doing well in every respect. The 50 two-year old and 44 three- year old fillies are of great bulk, proving that with liberty and liberal feeding, especially green diet, the pure bred and half-bred Arab will grow into large, well boned, and bulky stock. 13. The colts, 41 yearlings and 52 two-year olds, are likewise in the best of condition, and of large size in bone of limb. Colts not considered likely to prove fit for stud purposes are castrated early in life, generally when about 12 or 13 months of age. The reason why early castration is adopted is that a case occurred of a 14-month old colt having been found desirous of covering mares. 14. The number of stallions at stud in this depôt for the serving of 150 brood mares, also for private mares outside the stud, is at present 7 (seven). They are a very good lot, and are proving good stock-getters. One of the best Arab stallions that belonged to this stud was &quot;Yusuf.&quot; His stock is excellent, and it was only last year that on account of age he was disposed of and sent to Roumania. The most castey stallion at present here is &quot;O. Bajan&quot; (Obeyan), a dark brown nearly black Asil to look at, but rather light in joints and bone; still many of his stock are good in these particulars, and this result is doubt- less secured by mating him with large boned mares. This horse was imported from Arabia. I was informed that several Arabs have proved indifferent stock-getters, and have been discarded: moreover, that some of the very best looking Arabs have not proved the best stock-getters; but it has been found that a really good Arab64 Hungary, so that the purchasing officer may not have reason to hurry over his work. The difficulty experienced during recent years in obtaining really high class Arab stallions in. the Bombay market induces me to recommend that the opportunity afforded of securing some from Hungary should not be overlooked. 19. I owe Mr. Brüll, the British Consul at Buda Pesth, a debt of gratitude for having so kindly and heartily co-operated with me in my interview with the officiating head of the Hungarian Horse-breeding Department, and for having accompanied me to and from Babona, and most kindly acted as interpre- ter and made my interview pleasant and satisfactory with the Hungarian offi- cials. I also wish to record my sincere thanks to the Commandant of the Babona Stud for the very hearty manner in which he personally showed every head of stock, and was always genially ready to reply to all my questions and afford all information in his power. 20. A detailed account of the £60 advanced to me by the India Office, together with the two (first and seconds) unused forms of bill on the Right Hon'ble the Secretary of State for India, are submitted under cover of a separate communication. Dated 13th August 1892. Demi-official from65 information, copy of a despatch from the Government of India recommending that, on your way back to India from your present short leave, you should be permitted to visit some of the Hungarian Studs with a view to purchasing a few stallions for the Government of India if they appear suitable. This you are authorised to do, and the Foreign Office has been requested to afford you the necessary facilities. While on this duty you will be allowed your travelling expenses with subsistence allowance at £1-1 a day from the date of leaving London to that of embarking for India. An advance of £60 will be issued to you by the Accountant-General of this office to be accounted for by you to the authorities in India on your return to that country. The average price paid by you for such stallions as you may purchase should not exceed 2,000 florins. (2 firsts and seconds.) For any sums so expended you may draw bills on the Secretary of State for India in Council, forms of which are herewith enclosed. I am to request that you will report any arrangements you may make for the shipment of these stallions, which should not reach India before the cold weather. Possibly the Hungarian authorities will be able and willing to under- take their despatch from Trieste to Bombay, all expenses being adjusted by you in communication with the Consul-General at Bombay. No. 80, dated Simla, the 7th June 1892. From66 No. 2275, dated Simla, the 28th October 1891. From67 No. 93, dated Calcutta, the 19th January 1892. From68 from those for disposal would be priced &quot;from 3,000 to 4,000 florins,&quot; but that any selected by the Hungarian Stud officials are available from 1,000 to 2,000 florins. Under these circumstances of course, and my instructions not to give more than 2,000 per stallion, I could not purchase superior Arab or half-bred Arab stallions, and the smaller and lower priced ones would not be worth buying, as others equally good can be obtained at the same prices in the Bombay mar- ket. But as I was on the spot I asked permission to inspect at the Babona Stud (some five hours by rail and road from Buda Pesth) stallions for sale, also mares and produce, and there I was most courteously received and saw all the stock farming, &c., and I will after arrival in India submit a report to Govern- ment of India on my proceedings and suggestions for any future action that may be deemed necessary. I have arrived here in time to leave by this steamer Sutlej, so I expect to reach Bombay about 7th proximo, Report on Horse-Breeding in Hungary by Major Douglas Dawson, Coldstream Guards. To facilitate the industry of horse-breeding and to improve their breed of horses, the Government maintains a number of studs and stallion depôts. These establishments are under the control of the Ministry of Agriculture, but have a military organisation. The personnel forms an integral part of the standing army under the collective title of the &quot;Stud Branch,&quot; and is divided into a military inspectorate and a number of military divisions. A military division of the Stud Branch is attached to each of the studs and stallion depôts, and the Commander of the division is at the same time Com- mandant of the breeding establishment. The military inspectorate also, with a general officer at its head, forms the channel of communication between the military divisions and the Ministries of Agriculture and War, and the inspector is charged with the duties of general inspection and superintendence from a military point of view. The personnel consists of69 moment there is 13, and thorough-bred mares 28. I was not very much struck with the looks and condition of the stallions. Among the celebrated stallions of Kisber, past and present, may be men- tioned Buccaneer (sire of Kisber), Cambuscan (sire of Kincsem), Ostrager, Bois Roussel, Doncaster, Craig Millar, Galaor, Gunnersbury, and Sweet-bread. The five last-named are there now. Galaor was purchased in France last year, and I hear nothing but disapproval of the purchase in sporting circles. I cannot say I liked the horse myself. The price of service of Doncaster and Craig Millar is £40. The stallions of Kisber are in such constant demand by native breeders that but few applications from abroad can be entertained. The present and past list of mares of this farm includes the names of Mineral, Beeswing, Gratitude, Deception, Firefly, Honeybee, Empress, Altona, Cataclism, Leclaire, Gaydene, Risk, &c. The thorough-breds raised here are sold at auctions as yearlings to native breeders or owners of race-horses. Buyers are under obligation to keep all thorough-breds purchased in the country at the conclusion of their racing career. From 16 to 18 yearlings are sold every year at an average of about £240, but in some cases prices have reached £1,200. The Government buys back many thorough-bred stallions bred at Kisber when they have done racing, using them for breeding purposes in the farms and depôts. The half-bred stock of Kisber numbers 100 mares, most of whom have a strain of thorough-bred English blood for one or more generations. These produce fine harness horses, and they say turn out first-class hunters for officers, although for riding I have found most of these horses deficient in shoulder. The stallions bred at this farm are placed at the disposal of the breeders of five counties. The half-bred here averages from 16 hands to 16 hands 3 inches in height. During the past 10 years more than 221 thorough-bred yearlings have been sold from Kisber, and 264 thorough-bred stallions have been employed at the depôts during the covering season. The following averages have been realised by sale of yearlings in recent years:70 ployed in the counties of Pesth, Csongrad, Bekes, Aradszabolcs, &c., and in the valleys and plains of Transylvania. In the last 10 years Babona has placed 312 stallions at the disposal of civilian breeders. 3. Mezzohe- gyes. Mezzöhegyes is the largest stud farm in Hungary, comprising 40,000 acres with 2,190 horses. It was founded in 1785, and is the oldest of all the Royal Hungarian studs. In the other studs only horses of one race are bred; while here, on the contrary, for more than a century particular types have been formed by means of crossing, climatic conditions, food, and other considera- tions. These horses are described as Norman, English, or Arab merely to dis- tinguish the type and origin. The stud of Mezzöhegyes was originally formed from Transylvanian, Bes- sarabian, Polish, Mecklenburg, and other mares selected from the best animals found in the Austrian army which had gone through the Turkish campaign or the French campaign at the beginning of the century. In many cases mares captured in war were placed in this stud, where the blood was considered of less importance than powers of endurance shown on service. Thus mares of different breeds have been covered in the course of time by Arab, Spanish, Transylvanian, Moldavian, Hungarian, Mecklenburg, Holstein, and Norman stallions, and their selection is now, as formerly, less due to blood than to other considerations. Although the horses on this farm have been bred for a number of different objects, the idea has been to work so as to favour a certain race or type. In this manner four different types or cross-breds have been formed at Mezzöhegyes, i.e.71 In the four Royal studs there are altogether 754 brood mares. They are kept in separate stables according to race, and are provided with special pastures in herds of from 80 to 100. Mares with foal enjoy immunity from work and are only exercised; the barren mares are worked in harness and ridden. Foals, after they are weaned, are also separated into herds according to sex and age in special stables and pastures. Their education begins at three years, great care and kindness being insisted on. At four years their education being completed, they are definitely distributed: the stallions being sent to the depôts, and the most promising mares being retained in the studs. Surplus horses are sold by auction at Buda Pesth yearly in September and October, and sometimes useful animals are here to be picked up cheap. The number of four-year old stallions sent to the depôts averages 110 per annum, and about the same number are sold. Stallion depots. There are at present five Government stallion depôts, sub-divided into 22 sub-depôts, containing in all 2,626 stallions. Most of the stallions come from the Government studs, with the exception of from 30 to 40, which are purchased from special breeders and as an encouragement to private studs, as the Govern- ment raises a sufficient supply to satisfy the annual demands of the country. In course of time, when the progress of horse-breeding in the country has attained a certain limit, and the number of well-bred private stallions is suffi- cient to meet the requirements of the public, the necessity for the Government studs and depôts will disappear. This period is, however, still remote, and the existing establishments are necessary; but it is probable that their numbers may be gradually diminished in proportion as the horse-breeding in the country progresses. The maintenance of the Government establishments involves considerable expense, but still the cost of service for stallions is extremely low. The stud farms are not only self-supporting, partly from their own revenues and those of the farms upon which they are located, but have a considerable surplus annually. The stallion depôts, on the other hand, require a yearly grant of £20,000 in addition to their own revenue and the surplus revenue of the stud farms. The price of service in the depôts is absurdly moderate, varying from 3s. 6d. to 8s. for half-breds, and in case of a thorough-bred or particular stallion from 12s. to 24s. Private studs and societies can hire stallions for the season at from £16 to £48. The number of mares covered by the stallions thus hired out is limited to 40. Horse-breeders hire on the average from 60 to 100 stallions per year. The majority of the 2,626 Government stallions are only available for the public for four months of the year, i.e., March to July. During the season 600 stations are formed in the country, each with from two to eight stallions. Stallions of from five to six years of age may cover four times a week, and aged horses seven times. The number of mares covered annually is about 85,000. The price of service (paid down) entitles the breeder to four supplementary services, if necessary. It has been computed that on an average each Government stallion hired out covers from 30 to 35 mares annually. 1. Depot of Szek-es-fehe- war. There are 914 stallions here distributed during the season at four sub- depôts. The stallions are classified as follows:72 2. Depot of Nagy-Koros. There are 799 stallions in this depôt and its sub-depôts. They are classified as follows:73 ordinates, but to follow as much as he can the opinions of the breeders them- selves. To carry out this principle, the Ministry has organised a Superior Advisory Organ or Commission of 10 members, partly elected by the Society of Agriculture and the Jocky Club of Buda Pesth, and partly appointed by the Ministry. This Commission meets at least once a year, when the Chief of the division of Horse-Breeding in the Ministry reports upon the work accom- plished and experiments made during the year, and sketches out a programme for the ensuing year for the consideration of the Commission. This central Commission may be convoked at any time during the year. In every country there is also a provincial Commission of horse-breeding elected to act as advisers in the breeding districts of their country. These Councils send their own Presidents, and represent the breeding interests of their respective com- munities. The Presidents of the Commissions make recommendations every year as regards the employment of the Government stallions, distribution of prizes for encouragement of horse-breeding, &c. The Presidents and members of the Commissions meet in Congress every two years at Buda Pesth to discuss results. Through these Commissions the Ministry of Agriculture is kept in constant relations with the horse-breeders of the country. Horse-racing 74 The personnel of the military divisions consists of75 (e) The foremen and technical employés are recruited by transfer and pro- motion of suitable soldiers of the stud branch division or by transfer from the army. (f) The enlisted men of the stud branch are recruited throughout all Hungarian provinces. They serve three years, and are then transferred to the reserve of the military train. Men between 5 feet 2 inches and 5½ feet are selected for this service if they are accustomed to horses. The transfer of non- commissioned officers from the army to the stud branch can only be after three months' preliminary service. Military in- spections. The Military Inspector of the stud branch exercises a supernumerary com- mand over all the military divisions of the breeding establishments and their dependencies within the limits prescribed by regulation. He performs the functions of a brigadier in all purely military matters, in economy, adminis- tration, &c., such as muster and the inspection of central officers ordered by the Ministry of Agriculture. It is his duty to see that all orders of the Ministry of Agriculture pertaining to horse breeding are strictly carried out by the stud farms and stallion depôts. The economical administration of the breeding establishments is managed directly by the Minister of Agriculture; but the Inspector exercises a supervision over the same, and must report all irregular- ities to the Ministry. He makes military, technical, and economical inspections twice a year, and oftener when ordered by the Minister of Agriculture, and submits reports of his inspections to the two ministries. He regulates the daily programme of the military and technical instructions of the enlisted men of the military divisions, the technical instructions being in accordance with the orders of the Ministry of Agriculture. His special duties are76 (3) Must pass a satisfactory examination before a commission of officers under the presidency of the Military Inspector of the Military Veterinary Institute at Buda Pesth. (4) Must undergo six months' probation in a military division of the stud branch. Officers and cadets wishing to be transferred to the stud branch are given a year's leave in which to prepare for examinations. The technical examination for admission into the stud branch comprises the following subjects:77 regard to the obtaining next year of a few Arab and half-bred Arab stallions from the studs of the Hungarian Government. 2. It will be observed that Herr Stockinger in his letter, dated 13th ultimo, to my address states that the price of stallions selected for the Indian Government will be 2,000 florins each, and that a communication on the subject will be addressed to me from Buda Pesth, whither he was proceeding. This promised letter I will on receipt submit to the Government of India. 3. Taking it for granted that the price of stallions will be settled at 2,000 florins as above indicated, I would suggest that a selected officer be sent next April or May to Buda Pesth with instructions to wait upon the Minister of Agriculture, Count Bethlen, so that the necessary orders may be issued by the Government of Hungary for stallions available to be inspected by the British officer, and that he be allowed to select suitable stallions at 2,000 florins each. I believe Herr Stockinger had arranged with the late Councillor de Kozma, of the Hungarian Ministry, that a number up to six stallions might be selected by the officer deputed by the Indian Government. * Babona. Fogaras. Kisber. Mezzöhegyes. 4. I would advise the officer visiting all the studs marginally* noted, and in order that he may take due time in his inspections, and not be hurried in so important a duty, I beg to recommend that he may be allowed to remain at least two months in Hungary that he may have ample time to satisfactorily perform the duty. 5. Stallions purchased for the Indian Government may be sent from the studs viâ Buda Pesth by railway to Trieste, and there shipped on an Austrian Lloyd steamer to Bombay. The cost of transit will be, I believe, from £10 to £15 each horse, plus forage bill and wages of grooms and their fares to and from Bombay. I feel assured that the officer will be rendered all assistance with regard to obtaining the services of grooms to go in charge of the horses from the stud depôts to Bombay. 6. It will be for the Government of India to judge whether the officer deputed be ordered to proceed direct from India to Buda Pesth with letters from the Government of India to the British Consul at Buda Pesth explaining the duty given to him to perform, or whether it will be advisable for him to proceed to London, and there receive instructions from the India Office with the usual credentials from the Foreign Office to the British Consul at Buda Pesth. No 47-M. D., dated 16th September 1892. 7. With regard to the obtaining of superior Arab stallions direct from Arabia or Syria, I am submitting a separate communication on the subject. 20
78 SECTION I (MILITARY)79 2. About (2,000) two thousand so called Arab horses have been imported into Bombay this season; but most of them have been of common, very com- mon, Persian Gulf breeds, and a great many of them small, under 14 hands in height 3. In order to secure the horses I have purchased, it was necessary for me to make several visits to Bombay so as to inspect the horses, batch by batch, on arrival from the Persian Gulf, as the stable keepers had promised me the pre-emption of the horses; therefore I inspected each batch after arrival as soon as possible. 4. Adverting to previous reports submitted by me to the Government of India, I have to again express my regret at the unsatisfactory state of the Arab horse mart of Bombay. Year by year more horses of low quality and stamp are being imported. Indeed, they are generally of the most common type of Arab and cross bred Arab, and this fact rests upon the old dealers (I mean the dealers and their sons who have during the last 40 years been importers) not, with one or two exceptions, remaining in the trade. These men were Arab gentlemen of the &quot;Mahomed Bawker,&quot; &quot;Abdool Rahman Minnie,&quot; &quot;Jassim bin Feed,&quot; and &quot;Sulaiman bin Jassim&quot; class. They and their relatives were accustomed yearly to go to the interior of the deserts of Arabia and buy the best of real80 Bombay would be about Rs. 200, to which add another Rs. 200 as profit, equal to Rs. 1,500 landed in Bombay. Jassim states that there is no question of agreement or advance of money. He is willing to arrange for a batch of about 15 or 20 good Arabs to be import- ed to Bombay, and that Veterinary Lieutenant-Colonel Hallen can only purchase those that he may approve and consider suitable for Government stud purposes. Veterinary Lieutenant-Colonel Hallen promised to let Jassim bin Feed know from Calcutta on or about 14th December 1892. The horses to be between 4 and 5 years of age; of colors bay, chestnut and brown; not less than 8 inches under knee; 68 inches girth, and 14 hands 2 inches high ; grey and black colors are not desired. No. 699 D., dated Calcutta, 14th February 1893. From81 As I told you last month when in Bombay, any really good Arab stallions up to 15 in number, of the kind required and approved by the Civil Veterinary Department, will be purchased by the Government of India. Please reply by return of post, and address reply to Meerut. No. 229 M., dated 12th February 1894. From82 Section I (Military.)83 20 2121 Sir Francis ... ... Shikarpur ... ... T. B. E. ... Died ... ... 17th December 84 Section I (Military)85 10 2360 ...... Fakhta ... ... Persian ... 8th December 86 Section I (Military)87 Section I (Military)88 Statement showing cost of feed, keep, attendants, &c., of Government Horse Stallions in the Bengal and Bombay Presidencies during the official year 1892-93-Contd. Presidency, Province, and District. Number of Stallions or days. Total annual cost. Average per horse stallion per annum. General annual cost. REMARKS. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rajputana. Ajmere ... ... ... 272 190 1 7 255 1 6 255 1 6 Punjab. Hazara ... ... ... 549 468 0 10 311 2 10 ... Mardan ... ... ... 45 43 3 9 350 10 10 ... Rawalpindi ... ... 4,753 3,558 1 5 273 3 9 ... Jhelum ... ... ... 1,526 1,129 10 8 270 3 2 ... Gujrat ... ... ... 3,430 1,012 9 2 258 7 3 ... Gujranwala ... ... 1,034 622 4 9 219 10 8 ... Sialkot ... ... ... 1,337 642 9 9 175 6 10 ... Lahore 3,252 2,224 13 1 249 31 4 ... Amritsar ... ... ... 1,810 1,150 11 5 230 12 4 ... Gurdaspur ... ... 582 385 15 9 242 1 1 ... Hoshiarpur ... ... 487 326 13 7 244 15 6 ... Jullunder ... ... ... 142 97 8 6 250 11 1 ... Ludhiana ... ... ... 277 176 9 6 232 11 1 ... Ferozepore ... ... 1,702 1,252 15 10 263 13 3 ... Jhang ... ... ... 389 299 9 5 281 1 8 ... Shahpur ... ... ... 2,765 1,874 14 7 247 8 0 ... Bannu ... ... ... 822 574 2 2 254 15 0 ... Dera Ismail Khan ... ... 373 286 2 7 280 0 4 ... Probynabad ... ... 394 223 4 10 206 13 10 ... Multan ... ... ... 1,448 1,057 8 1 266 9 0 ... Muzaffargarh ... ... 517 360 14 8 254 12 10 ... Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... 4,461 4,135 0 1 338 5 2 ... Veterinary School, Lahore ... 91 62 2 3 249 3 11 ... Babugarh Depôt ... ... 7,808 5,816 4 11 271 14 3 ... Add charges for gear, &c., purchased ... 2,202 2 8 ... ... TOTAL ... 38,004 29,984 2 3 ... 287 15 7
89 Statement showing cost of feed, keep, attendants, &c., of Government Horse Stallions in the Bengal and Bombay Presidencies during the official year 1892-9390 ABSTRACT. Presidency. Province. Average in each Province. Average in each Presidency. REMARKS. Rs A. P. Rs. A. P. Bengal ... ... North-Western Provinces ... 271 1 11 278 2 5 Rajputana ... ... 255 1 6 Punjab ... ... ... 287 15 7 Bombay ... ... Deccan ... ... ... 369 0 6 395 3 8 Gazerat ... ... ... 339 7 3 Sind and Cutch ... ... 413 0 7 Baluchistan ... 470 14 2
SECTION I (MILITARY)92 Section I (Military)93 Appendix VII. 38, page 9.) BREEDING. Presidencies during the official year 1892-93. LIONS. BRANDED MARES, THE PROPERTY OF BREEDERS. Country-bred colts reserved for stallions. DEPOT FARM. INSTRUCTION FARM. BOMBAY. BENGAL BOMBAY. BENGAL. BENGAL. Arab. Bokhara. Italian. Persian. Khorasani. Cyprian. Total. For horse-breeding. For horse-breeding. For pony-breeding. For mule-breeding. Horse stallions. Pony mares. Pony and mule colls. Donkey mares. Donkey colts. Donkey fillies. Total. Horse stallions. Horse mares. Pony mares. Pony colts. Pony fillies. Mule colts. Mule fillies. Donkey mares. Donkey colts. Donkey fillies. Total. 4 1 11 4 1 2 23 12,402 5,699 7,428 817 21 1 5 3 12 6 4 31 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 ... 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 1 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,119 540 389 141 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 497 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 ... 3 ... 13 6 2 30 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 1 13 5 1 2 26 14,018 6,239 7,815 988 21 1 5 6 11 7 4 37 16 20 10 2 ... 3 ... 13 6 2 78 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 529 303 795 ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 490 275 826 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 5 13 6 2 30 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 1,065 678 1,031 ... 10 1 6 6 14 7 4 37 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 3 ... 13 5 1 2 24 12,033 5,661 6,194 93 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 20 16 2 ... 3 ... 13 6 2 71 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,566 ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 10 8 1 ... 2 ... 7 3 1 37 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,387 ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 10 8 1 ... 1 ... 6 3 1 34 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,167 22 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 ... 1,029 4,696 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1,019 1,111 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 9 5 1 2 20 ... 2,446 365 960 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 13 5 1 2 2 12,953 5,661 6,164 988 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 20 16 2 ... 3 ... 13 6 2 71 24
94 Section I (Military)95 Section I (Military)96 Section I (Military)97 Statement showing the number of colts, the property of zamindars, castrated by district salutris and castrators in the Bengal and Bombay Presidencies during the official year 1892-9398 Section I (Military)99 Section I (Military)100 Section I (Military)-Appendix XIII. (Referred to in paragraph 6, page 19.) MULE-BREEDING. Statement showing cost of feed, keep, and attendants, &c, of Government Donkey Stallions in the Bengal and Bombay Presidencies during the official year 1892-93. Presidency, Province, and District. Number of donkey stallions or days. Total annual cost. Average per donkey stallion per annum. General average in each Province. REMARKS. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. BENGAL PRESIDENCY. North-Western Provinces. Babugarh Depôt ... ... 8,673 3,439 9 5 144 12 0 ... Meerut ... ... ... 4,923 1,619 12 5 120 1 5 ... Bulandshahr ... ... 1,721 535 13 4 113 10 3 ... Saharanpur ... ... 3,933 1,302 4 6 120 13 8 ... Muzaffarnagar ... ... 3,208 1,069 9 7 121 11 1 ... Aligarh ... ... ... 2,333 741 11 3 116 0 7 ... Muttra ... ... 542 160 13 6 108 5 0 ... Agra ... ... ... 960 311 14 6 118 9 5 ... Etah ... ... ... 517 161 14 4 114 4 9 ... Shahjehanpur ... ... 1,073 349 6 6 118 13 8 ... Budaon ... ... ... 2,008 636 14 3 115 12 3 ... Bareilly ... ... ... 397 131 6 8 120 13 2 ... Moradabad ... ... 1,822 601 1 6 120 6 8 ... Bijnor ... ... ... 782 257 9 9 120 3 10 ... Gurgaon ... ... ... 746 237 4 6 116 1 6 ... Kurnal ... ... ... 602 194 15 3 118 3 2 ... Rohtak ... ... ... 546 258 11 4 172 15 1 ... Umballa ... ... ... ... 1,827 761 13 8 152 3 3 ... Hissar ... ... ... 1,242 425 8 10 125 0 11 ... Add charges for gear, &c., purchased ... 1,643 9 2 ... ... TOTAL ... 37,855 14,841 12 3 ... 143 1 8
101 Statement showing cost of feed, keep, and attendants, &c., of Government Donkey Stallions in the Bengal and Bombay Presidencies during the official year 1892-93102 Statement showing cost of feed, keep, and attendants, &c., of Government Donkey Stallions in the Bengal and Bombay Presidencies during the official year 1892-93103 Section I (Military)101 Section I (Military)105 5. I am further to suggest that district authorities should be invited to promote the measures above advocated by explaining to the people the profits and advantages of mule-breeding. On this subject I am to enclose for information a letter from the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, No. 35 R. & A., dated 14th May 1890, the circulation of which has been de- ferred pending the establishment of the Civil Veterinary Department. 6. I am finally to request that the action taken in pursuance of the wishes of the Government of India as communicated in this letter may be noticed in the Annual Veterinary and Agricultural Reports of the province, and to solicit the special consideration of all local Governments and Administrations to the subject as one which is held to be of very serious importance to military interests. 27
SECTION II.109 Section II (Revenue)110 Section II (Revenue)111 BENGAL ... Punjab ... Gurgaon ... 1,555 86 1,641 90 18 2 1,531 18 10 28 ... ... ... 28 Delhi ... 986 475 1,461 78 17 ... 1,366 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kurnal ... 1,323 200 1,523 50 25 30 1,418 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hissar ... ... 125 125 ... ... ... 125 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 931 106 1,037 91 23 3 920 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Umballa ... 3,699 344 4,043 238 47 13 3,745 1,574 48 1,622 179 17 3 1,423 Sialkot ... 2,596 377 2,973 144 76 20 2,733 ... 57 57 ... ... ... 57 Shahpur ... 78 34 112 1 ... ... 111 4 ... 4 ... ... ... 4 Jhang ... 983 95 1,078 62 51 5 960 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 450 80 530 2 2 ... 526 ... 50 50 4 3 1 42 Peshawar ... 85 39 124 12 7 ... 105 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Multan ... 1,200 40 1,240 ... 20 ... 1,160 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gujranwala ... 305 6 311 5 12 ... 294 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bannu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 172 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Montgomery ... 2,158 437 2,595 138 89 26 2,342 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 1,500 57 1,557 50 47 60 1,400 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... 450 30 480 40 10 5 425 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jullunder ... 1,130 122 1,252 203 19 15 1,015 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ludhiana ... 65 10 75 2 3 ... 70 145 ... 145 6 2 ... 137 Rawalpindi ... 2,758 362 3,120 223 137 8 2,752 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kohat ... 300 40 340 30 15 10 285 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... 184 ... 184 ... ... ... 184 ... 118 118 ... 1 ... 117 Muzaffargarh ... 400 ... 400 ... ... ... 400 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... 23,136 3,065 26,201 1,519 618 197 24,039 1,741 283 2,024 189 23 4 1,808
112 Section II (Revenue)113 Section II (Revenue)114 Section II (Revenue)115 admitted in the hospital during the year, I beg to suggest that if a veterinary school and hospital be established in Madras proper, a larger number of patients might be sent to and received in hospital, and thereby the practical teaching of the students would be conducted on a sounder basis. No student, whether medical or veterinary, can learn to be a sound practitioner unless he has the opportunity of duly walking the wards of a hospital well-filled with patients, and thus rendered able to see disease in its various phases, and to learn how to dis- criminate between the symptoms of one and another, and to acquire a thorough knowledge of practical medicine and surgery. 7. I trust I may be pardoned for noting my belief that the students issued from the Saidapet Agricultural College and Veterinary Hospital, with its paucity of patients, cannot have acquired that practical knowledge of cattle diseases which a Veterinary Assistant should possess. I would therefore earnestly sug- gest that His Excellency in Council may be pleased to have a veterinary school and hospital established in the Madras metropolis. 8. The following staff would suffice for the school:116 10. With regard to (c), viz., suppressing of cattle plagues, it is necessary to establish a duly organised Civil Veterinary Department; the head of that Department to be a selected Veterinary Surgeon of the Indian Civil Veterinary Department. This officer's duties will be to act as Veterinary Sanitary Adviser to the Government of Madras, and under his professional supervision and direction Veterinary Assistants educated at the veterinary school should be employed. These men will be under the orders of the district authorities, and their services available in all matters connected with cattle disease repression. The number of Veterinary Assistants required will depend on the area of a district and the number of cattle in that district. In the event of cattle plague of any kind breaking out in a district, the local authorities will direct the Veterinary Assistant to enquire and report as to the nature of the plague to the nearest district official. Should the disease be reported of a contagious type, e.g., rinderpest or anthrax, the district official will cause the affected cattle to be isolated pending instructions from the district authorities, and will forward particulars to the head district officer, who will communicate with the head Civil Veterinary Surgeon of the Government; such local measures with regard to quarantine and other directions recommended by the latter officer will then be put in force; and, should it be necessary, the aid of more Veterinary Assist- ants from other unaffected districts might be obtained, so as to concentrate a strong veterinary staff where repressive measures are in operation. 11. I am aware of the manifold duties the district officers have to per- form; but I would, with all deference and earnestness, submit that not the least of the most important duties devolving upon district officers is the adopting of any measures whereby the cattle117 objections of Hindus, if the measure of slaughter be once carried out among their cattle, all difficulties, obstructions, and obstacles in the way of concealing the existence of plagues would be most persistently adopted, and thus the wishes of Government would be very practically thwarted. 14. As I have above noted, the Act itself118 Section II (Revenue)119 Horse-breeding.120 by ordinary treatment, and which in themselves afford a large and important field for the operations of the civil veterinary establishments. It is necessary, therefore, that a careful investigation should be made as to the character of all diseases, whether of an epidemic character or not, which occur or are prevalent in each district of the province, as to the method of treating them usually adopted, as to the results obtained from the treatment, and, generally, as to ail circumstances connected with the occurrence and present treatment of animal disease. One of the principal duties of the civil veterinary officers of the province will accordingly be to conduct an investigation of the nature described, and to communicate to the Assistant to the Inspector-General such information as that officer may require for the purposes indicated in clauses (i) and (ii) of para- graph 5. 9. In other respects the main duties of veterinary officers in connection with animal-disease will be, under such orders as may be issued by the local Governments, to organize and inspect the subordinate staff; to issue instructions as to the treatment of ordinary diseases; to advise as to the precautions to be taken in the case of contagious diseases; and to submit reports on all matters connected with the treatment of animal-disease. 10. The civil veterinary officers will also be required121 A separate circular will be issued on the subject of the grading and qualifying tests recommended for subordinate establishments. 12. The civil veterinary officers should, in the opinion of the Govern- ment of India, be made responsible for inspecting and reporting on the work of all veterinary subordinates. In some provinces a plan has been adopted of employing veterinary assistants under the Court of Wards, Municipali- ties, and District Boards, their salaries being provided from the Wards' estates or from municipal or local funds. His Excellency the Governor-General in Council considers that this system has many advantages; but that, it should not be allowed to preclude the provincial veterinary officers from inspecting and reporting on the work of subordinates so employed. 13. Instruction.122 Section II (Revenue)123 4. A provisional list of animal diseases understood to occur in India is appended to this Circular. Suggestions for its amendment or modification should be sent by provincial veterinary officers direct to the Assistant to the Inspector-General, who will himself communicate to them the names of those &quot;ordinary&quot; diseases regarding which information under the 6th head is re- quired. The location of diseases and their classification under the sub-heads (a) (b), (c), and (d) of head 6 will be most conveniently shown by colours on district skeleton maps. As soon as colouring of each district map is completed, two copies should be furnished to the Assistant to the Inspector- General. 5. The information called for in paragraph 3 will probably take some time to collect, and can only be submitted by instalments; but action should be taken under paragraph 4 with the least possible delay. 6. The Government of India do not require any reply to this Circular, but desire that the progress made, both in the enquiry and in the supply of in- formation to the Inspector-General's office, may be noticed in the annual report of the Department of Land Records and Agriculture. For all further purposes of the enquiry details should, with the permission of , be arranged in direct correspondence between the Assistant to the Inspector- General and the provincial officers. LIST OF ANIMAL DISEASES OCCURRING IN INDIA. The following provisional list of animal diseases believed to occur in India has been drawn up in the office of the Assistant to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department. The term 'diseases' includes ailments and the results of accidents, &c., requiring medical treatment. A list of surgical opera- tions is appended:124. (b) Affecting Alimentary System. Aphtha. Stomach staggers. Stomatitis. Fardel bound. Glossitis. Inflammation of 4th stomach. Parotitis. Constipation. Ptyalism and salivation. Diarrh125 (h) Affecting Eye. Conjunctivitis. Worm in eye. Ophthalmia. Rupture of eye. Amaurosis. Foreign bodies in eye. Glaucoma. Cancer. Staphyloma. Opacity of Cornea. Cataract. Tumors, &c. (i) Affecting Skin. Eczema. Pityriasis. Erythema. Maggots. Urticaria. Ringworm. Warts. Tumors. Ecthyma. Lupus. Scabies. Erysipelas. Ulcers, &c. (j) Parasitical. Fluke in sheep and cattle. Spiroptera megastoma. Intestinal worms. Sclerostomiasis. Bronchial filaria of cattle and sheep. Pediculi. Filaria papillosa. Acari. îstrus, equi and ovis. Verminous aneurisms. Other parasites. (k) Affecting Generative Apparatus. Vaginitis. Parturition. Metritis. Dystokia, &c. Retention of foetal membranes. Mammitis. Injuries. Leucorrh126 (o) Miscellaneous. Rheumatism. Scrofula. Hæmo-albuminuria. Anasarca. Anæmia. Azoturia. Influenza. Bursati. Purpura hæmorrhagica. Pyæmia. Cancer. Septicæmia. Poisoning. Lymphangitis. SURGICAL OPERATIONS. Castration. Tracheotomy. Reduction of Hernia. Paracentesis Thoracis. Lithotomy. Operations on fractures. Lithotvity. Operations for sandcrack. Removal of tumors. Operations for quittor. Removal of horns. Operations for corn. Neurotomy. Passing catheter. Tenotomy. Passing probang. Cautery. Rumenotomy. Setoning. Puncture of Rumen. Rowelling. 127 2. The report to be divided into two parts, viz:128 V.129 VI.130 Instructions regarding the Map which should accompany the annual Report. A map should accompany the annual report of the Civil Veterinary Depart- ment showing the names and situation of stallions' stands. Under the name of each stand should be noted the number of Government horse, pony, and donkey stallions present at that stand at the end of the year131 Section II (Revenue)132 Outturn. COST PRICE. MARKET PRICE. Rate per rupee. Amount. Rate per rupee. Amount. To Repairs, additions, &c.133 To other Charges134 Section II (Revenue)135 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Articles. Outturn. ACTUAL PRICE. MARKET PRICE. To Repairs and additions, &c.136 Punjab Instruction Farm. Balance Sheet of the cultivation operations of the Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, for the year 1892-93137 Section II (Revenue)138 Section II (Revenue)139 Section II (Revenue)140 Section II (Revenue)141 Section II (Revenue)142 Section II (Revenue)143 Section II (Revenue)144 Section II (Revenue)145 Section II (Revenue)146 Section II (Revenue)147 Section II (Revenue)