ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR. 1893-94.
ON HER MAJESTY'S SERVICE . C. V. D. No. 17. To
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
NLS to Scan B&W and insert
No. 251 R. & A. FROM VETERINARY LIEUTENANT-COLONEL A. E. QUERIPEL, INSPECTOR-GENERAL, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE AND AGRICULTURE, SIMLA. Simla, dated 12th September 1894. SIR, In submitting the Annual Administration Report of the Civil Veterinary Department for the year 1893-94, I have the honor to state that its compilation has been effected with some difficulty owing to the fact that I only assumed charge of the office of Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, on 28th May 1894. Not having been connected with the Department for any portion of the year under review, I trust that any omissions or imper- fections will be overlooked. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, A. E. QUERIPEL, Veterinary Lieutenant-Colonel, Inspector- General, Civil Veterinary Department.
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1893-94. CONTENTS. PART I.ii PAGES. III.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1893-94. PART I.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1893-94. PART I2 extend the importation of a superior class of Arab stallions fit for stud purposes. This class of horse is much required in many districts ; but, unless of superior quality, the Arab sire had better be left out of our calculation altogether, as the produce by inferior Arabs is weedy and totally unfit for military purposes. We must remember that we have to cope with competition on the part of various European Governments, who are always prepared to pay high prices ; still, re- quiring as we do this class of horse, it would be advisable to increase the price paid to Rs. 2,500, provided we were furnished with Arabs with good bone and of high caste. This amount, at the present rate of exchange, equals only about £130, which for stallions landed in Bombay must be looked upon as very moderate. Stallions from Hungary. 9. The proposal to obtain Arabs from Hungary has not yet been effected, but I trust that our purchasing officer in England, General Sir J. Watson, will be able to devote some time to visit the Hungarian studs, and that he will be allowed to select a few which the Hungarian Government has kindly sanc- tioned to be supplied. In expressing this hope I would, however, note that I trust none but pure Arabs will be selected, as I observe from correspondence which has passed on this subject that the Hungarian Government possesses such a large number of half-bred stallions of this class. Stallions from Australia. 10. The question regarding the advisability of deputing an officer to Australia for the purpose of purchasing stallions is one which still remains in abeyance. We should, I think, obtain more information on the subject, especially as to the class of horse obtainable and also as to the prices at which horses suitable for our purposes can be procured. We have already five Australians at work ; I purpose as opportunity offers to inspect their stock. I further purpose adding to this number by occasionally purchasing a few thoroughbred Australians as well as roadsters imported into this country and when the fact as to whether this class of horse will nick with the indigenous mare of this country is established, I shall then be in a better position to advise the Government of India as to the advisability of further exertions being made to obtain a larger supply. Number of stallions at stud work. 11. The number of stallions at stud work would, at first sight, appear to be small. From Table IV, page vii, it will be seen that3 The progress made in Baluchistan augurs well for this Province; but Bombay with an average of only 34.45 must be considered the most unsatis- factory of all. I trust that the sanction which has been accorded for unbrand- ed mares to be allowed the use of Government stallions when selected by Dis- trict Officers will have the effect of increasing the average considerably. Demand for stallions. 14. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Pro- vinces and Oudh, reports as follows:4 class of stallion is required, and that it will only be by the most careful allot- ment of stallions to different districts that success will be obtained. Stallions which produce the most suitable stock for the Army. 19.Table V (vide page xiii).PART I.PART I.8 Demand for donkey stal- lions. 36.The Superintendent, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, reports as follows :9 42.That much more donkey power could be used in the Punjab and Derajat is self-evident, and I purpose addressing the Government of India shortly with a view of obtaining sanction to an increase from 330, which is the present strength, to 350 for the Provinces comprised in the Bengal Presidency, increasing annually by 20 until the total number reaches 400. 43.The efficiency of the donkeys on the registers of these Provinces is far from satisfactory, there being 79 of 16 years of age and upwards out of a total of 300. To replace this large number, there are only 25 unallotted donkeys at the depôt, and 64 are expected to be imported or purchased this year: but this 64 includes an increase of 30 on the sanctioned strength of 300. A large number of old donkeys will therefore have to be retained, and our establish- ment in this respect must be looked upon as most unsatisfactory. Number of mules purchas- ed by Govern- ment. 44.The number of mules purchased by the Remount Department and Batteries, Royal Artillery, (vide Table X, page xxviii), is satisfactory, amounting as it does, to 314. 45.The number purchased by the Commissariat and Transport Depart- ments amounted to 1,798. Of these 139 were bought at Jalapahar and Sikkim. Many of these I inspected when at Darjeeling and found them to be sturdy, well-built mules likely to make excellent transport animals. We have lately sent an Italian donkey to Sikkim with a view of extending mule- breeding in those parts, but I maintain that to breed such excellent mules, excellent Jacks must exist. I am, therefore, making enquiries as to the possi- bility of obtaining a few for work in the Punjab, as the sources from which our supply of donkey stallions is obtainable are very limited. I might mention that I have also addressed the British Consul at Zanzibar on that subject.
PART I.PART I.14 49.The averages shown in North and South Punjab are somewhat mis- leading, as owing to no provision having been made for clothing or stable gear required for horses in South Punjab and the Derajat, the whole cost was de- bited to North Punjab. 50.With reference to the high averages existing in Bombay, the Superin- tendent states:15 Number of mares covered by Government horse stallions. 56.The number of mares covered by Government horse stallions during the past two years is as follows (vide Table IV, page vii) :16 Castration. 66.The number of colts castrated during 1893-94 (vide Table XIII, page xxxv) was as follows :PART I.PART I.20 Number of mule stock foaled. 74.The average of mule produce per stallion employed as shown in Table IX, is far from satisfactory, it being as follows:PART I.PART I.24 89.The number of remounts purchased was 77 by the Remount Agent 84 for Native Cavalry and Imperial Service Troops and 39 for Police. 90.The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, in his report states:25 99. I gather from the report of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, that there is some hope of this district on a small scale. He says:26 111. Generally speaking, the show must be looked upon as having been a great success. 112. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, reports as follows:27 assembled. They report the following classes being &quot;very good&quot;:28 Veterinary-Lieutenant Cranford, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Dapartment, South Punjab, supervised and controlled the large staff of veterinary assist- ants placed at his disposal. Bannu Horse Show. 132. This show was held from 26th to 28th February 1894. 133. Some years since I formed a very favourable opinion of this as a horse-breeding district, and am glad to find that it is now coming to the front. 134. One thousand three hundred and twenty-four horses were present against 1,150 last year, whilst 799 competed for prizes against 485 in 1893. 135. The Deputy Commissioner (Mr. H. A. Anderson), to whose exertions we may greatly attribute the success obtained, reports as follows in the 3rd annual show held at Bannu:29 141. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, however, reports that there was a better class of animals attending and greater interest was evinced by every one in the proceedings. 142. Thirty mares and fillies, mostly by Imperial stallions, were branded: this I look upon as one of the most healthy signs connected with this show. Had it not been for this, I would have been inclined to recommend its dis- continuance. 143. The District Board have interested themselves greatly in horse-breed- ing and have purchased 3 stallions for themselves. By these stallions only 59 mares have been covered during the year under review, which is most dis- couraging. 144. Mule-breeding makes no headway in this district, although District Boards have also provided two donkeys. Only two mules were exhibited. This is to be greatly regretted. 145. No remounts were purchased. On this point the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, reports as follows:30 (spring and autumn). This should be the return breeders make for the concession of free service by breeders. 154. With reference to this the Deputy Commissioner remarks as fol- lows:31 since last year. The Deputy Commissioner and the Superintendent, Civil Veter- inary Department, Derajat and Baluchistan, attribute this to the fact that it is very difficult to get really good salutris to take service in Dera Ismail Khan. The services of one of the veterinary assistants will shortly be dispen- sed with and his place will be taken by a native of the district who has lately passed the Lahore College examination. I trust that this will have the effect of extending the practice of gelding in this district. 164. Ten remounts for Native Cavalry and one for Police were purchased, besides 3 mules bought by the 1st Punjab Cavalry. On this subject the De- puty Commissioner reports as follows:32 175. With such facts before me, I consider that it would have been a very retrograde movement to have agreed to the proposal to allow this show to he held alternately at Jhelum and Gujrat. 176. A small show will be held at Jhelum as well as Gujrat. Hansi Horse Show. 177. This show was held from 13th to 15th October 1893, and, being only the second occasion on which it was held, it must be looked upon as satis- factory. 178. Seven hundred and ninety animals attended the fair as compared with 414 last year, showing an increase of 376. 179. Thirty-three horses were purchased as remounts, whilst only 15 were obtained last year. 180. The Deputy Commissioner reports as follows:33 186. From the report I gather that in this district zemindars only exhibit such animals that they consider likely to obtain prizes or commenda- tion. The Extra-Assistant Commissioner proceeds to state34 get them. Now that the salutries are promised by the District Board a reward of 8 annas per horse that is castrated by them individually, it is to be hoped that more geldings may be seen at the next horse fair. 191. Nine head of stock were purchased by the Remount Agent and one was bought for Native Cavalry. One mule was obtained for Government and 37 were bought by dealers. The Remount Agent states with reference to this show:35 199. Taking the above facts into consideration, I sincerely trust that with the aid of the Deputy Commissioner, who appears to be greatly interested in the matter, and by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, devoting as much time as possible to the district, we may next year be able to show a much better result. 200. The officer who purchased for Native Cavalry at this show reports as follows:36 wait for the show; but to do this we must be able to ensure the presence of the Remount Agent. 212. The brood mares are thus reported on by the Deputy Commissioner and the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab:37 224. The supply of thoroughbred English and Arab stallions to all dis- tricts where a large strain of Norfolk Trotter blood is proved to have existed will be enjoined on all the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department. This will, however, have to take place gradually, owing to the few thorough- breds at my disposal. 225. Three remounts were bought by the Remount Agent and 6 were pur- chased for Native Cavalry. This is a poor result. 226. Rupees 100 had been allotted to this district as prizes for horse runs, but only Rs. 50 were awarded. The reasons given by the Deputy Commissioner were as follows:38 be altered so as to admit of either owner or purchaser receiving the prize. Even if the owner does not himself receive the prize he will indirectly benefit, as buyers would probably offer more for a likely prize-winner. 234. With this I cannot agree. It is not the intention of Government to award prizes with a view of lowering the price of remounts bought at shows, which would be the case if the prizes were awarded to the purchaser. There is no necessity for the horse to be present at the distribution of prizes, although it is desirable that he should be. Still, if present at the time the class for re- mounts is judged, the owner should be allowed to compete and thus be enabled to derive the full benefit of having produced a good remount for sale. 235. There was both an increase in the number attending, viz., from 1,898 in 1893 to 2,228 on this occasion; as well as in the number which competed for prizes, 406 having been exhibited against 27l last year. 236. The general remarks of the Committee on the various classes proves the quality to have been quite up to the average. 237. Forty remounts were purchased by the Remount officer, and 22 were bought for Native Cavalry. 238. Taken as a whole, the remounts purchased at this fair were not well reported upon. 239. The purchasing officer, 3rd Punjab Cavalry, reports as follows:39 248. This officer concludes his report by saying:40 263. I regret to find that on the subject of District Board stallions the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, reports that several of them had been allowed to cover 120 to 140 mares; this must lead to the deterioration of the stallion and to disappointment on the part of the breeders, as one stallion cannot fill this large number of mares. 264. Six head of young stock were purchased by the Remount officer, 16 mares were branded at the show, and 4 bridles were given to deserving zemindars. RAJPUTANA. Pokhur Horse Fair. 265. This fair was held from 19th to 23rd November 1893, and, compared with other years, proved a success so far as numbers are concerned; thus, 1,152 horses, etc., attended against 672 in 1893. Seven hundred and ten were sold as against 516 last year. Of the total that attended, 505 were mares and fillies, and again of these, 473 came from the Meywar District; but the Principal, Ajmere Veterinary School, reports them as very disappointing both as regards quality and utility, there being few amongst them that could be considered suitable for either Native or British Cavalry. Still, at the same time, with such a large number of mares available, I think something might be done to foster horse-breeding in this district. 266. At present there is one Imperial stallion at Deoli in Rajputana, and it is contemplated sending another to Ajmere. I purpose addressing Government on this subject under a separate letter. TIRHOOT. Sonepore Horse Fair. 267. This fair was held in November 1893 and elicits but slight mention as far as horse-breeding is concerned. 268. The Chairman of the District Board says that the Police report the total number of horses present at 6,625, all under 14 hands, and that of this number 6,425 belonged to dealers and 200 to breeders. These figures are, however, not to be relied upon. 269. Of this large number, only 247 competed for prizes, of which 90 were selected for examination. 270. Sixty-eight remounts were purchased by Native Cavalry and Police, but no report showing the quality of the stock bought has been received. There can, however, be but little doubt that the majority came from our breed- ing centres in the North-Western Provinces and Punjab. BENGAL. Kalimpong Fair. 271. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, reports as follows:41 All these mules are probably bred in China, and are brought through Tibet into the Darjeeling District with merchandise, and if the purchase-money is paid down to the indivi- dual owners in hard cash, and without the trouble of having to cash cheques, a ready and good supply will meet the ordinary demand for this animal. 272. Having, when on inspection duty at Jalapahar, had an opportunity of inspecting these mules, I can endorse Veterinary-Captain Gunn's opinion; these mules are of a particularly sturdy stamp, well suited for tranport purposes. BALUCHISTAN. Quetta Horse Show. 273. This is the fifth show that has been held at Quetta, and this year it took place on 3rd and 4th October 1893. 274. As being the centre at which northern horses are assembled, it must be looked upon as one of the greatest importance. 275. In addition to this, I am pleased to find 323 brood-mares and fillies competed for prizes, showing that Baluchistan will develop under proper care into one of our best breeding grounds. 276. The Political Agent and Deputy Commissioner, Quetta-Pishin, reports on both these classes as follows:42 The result of this must be that if this procedure on the part of the dealers and such Remount officers as forestalled the fair continues, the future of the fair will be doomed. This matter has been thoroughly discussed with the importers. They clearly see the danger ahead of them, and have themselves suggested that an order should be issued prohibit- ing the sale of imported horses until ten days before the fair is advertised to commence. He concludes by saying:43 289. The Political Agent and Deputy Commissioner, Thal Chotiali, reports the brood-mares as &quot;a very good class, the mares increasing in size and sub- stance yearly. The class averaged 15 hands in height;&quot; and with reference to the young stock, he says:44 307. Mules.45 318. The great increase of over 1,400 in the Punjab is a noticeable feature, showing the interest taken in the shows. If we further consider the number of stock, the property of breeders, we find the following were present:46 and Native Cavalry, still the question is one which is deserving of most serious consideration, affecting as it does the interests of the breeders to whom we must look for the supply of remounts. The principles that must guide us in future are47 Arabs average 3.12 per sire. Considering that only 63 thoroughbred English stallions were employed against 144 half-bred English, I consider their average most satisfactory. 331. The sum of Rs. 300 was allotted and distributed to owners of runs. Of this amount, Rs. 250 were awarded to nine zemindars in the Rawalpindi Dis- trict, the average of the runs varying from 5 to 80 acres. In Multan only two runs exist. I regret to find that this system, which is the only one which will ensure the liberty of young stock, has not been extended in other districts. 332. The following summary will show at a glance any improvement or otherwise that has taken place in the shows during the year under review, and to this has been added the prospects of the various districts from a horse- breeding point of view. Such districts as are marked &quot;doubtful&quot; will require careful fostering and the help of the District Officers will be solicited in the matter; for without the latter, horse or mule-breeding is always a matter of difficulty. Show. Show of 1803 compared with previous shows. Horse-breeding prospects of district. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCE. Aligarh ... ... Equal ... ... Good. Batesar ... ... Poor ... ... Not a breeding centre. Bulandshahr ... ... Improving ... ... Excellent. Etawah ... ... Slight improvement ... ... Hopeful on a small scale. Hardwar ... ... Poor ... ... Poor. Meerut ... ... Improving ... ... Very good. Muzafarnagar ... ... Improving ... ... Satisfactory. PUNJAB. Amritsar ... ... Improving ... ... Good. Bannu... ... ... Improving ... ... Excellent. Delhi ... No improvement Doubtful. Dera Ghazi Khan ... Improving ... ... Very good. Dera Ismail Khan ... Great improvement ... Encouraging. Gujrat ... ... Equal ... ... Good. Hansi ... ... Improving... ... ... Very fair. Jellalabad ... ... Great improvement ... Excellent. Jhang ... ... No improvement... Doubtful. Karnal ... ... Improving ... ... Good. Lahore ... ... Equal ... ... Encouraging. Multan ... ... Improving ... ... Doubtful. Rawalpindi ... ... Equal ... ... Fair. Shahpur ... ... Improving ... Very good. Sialkot ... ... Equal ... ... Doubtful. Umballa ... ... Falling off ... ... Doubtful.
48 Show. Show of 1893, compared with previous shows. Horse-breeding prospects of districts. RAJPUNA. Pokhur ... ... Slight improvement ... Prospects at present nil. BENGAL. Sonepore ... ... Equal ... ... Nil. BALUCHISTAN. Quetta ... ... Improving ... ... Excellent. Sibi ...... ... Improving ... ... Good. 333. During 1892-93 the Civil Veterinary Department owe their thanks to many District Officers for the warm interest they have taken in the matter and for their hearty co-operation with its officers. Summary of Horse Fairs and shows held in the Bombay Presidency. 334. Most satisfactory progress has been made in nearly every show held in Bombay and Sind. 335. The main points to be noticed in the review of the shows held in this presidency arePART IPART I.52 and Provincial horses, ponies, donkeys, farm and young stock53 General. I endeavoured during the year to obtain some seeds of the Tagasasti fodder plant from Australia for trial, but failed. I hope, however, to do so next year. From all accounts it should prove invaluable during the dry hot months. The mud walls used as fences prove a constant source of trouble and outlay, needing continual watching and repairs. We have tried for years past to substitute hedges for them without success. Aloes, bhir, koorkapilly, etc., have all failed. During next rains I intend to try the common wild rose. I have arranged to get cuttings from Dehra, and if I succeed, we should have in a few years an impenetrable fence requiring little attention round No 11 Paddock. The farming operations for 1893-94 have proved successful. Losing as we did the services of Mr. Burke as overseer during the year, and having in his place an inexperienced young man, there were certain difficulties to contend with. I have, however, much pleasure in reporting that Mr. Vaz, the new Overseer, carried out his duties efficiently, making up for want of experience by his zeal and industry. Table XVIII shows the number of horses and mares belonging to the farm, giving the increase by purchase, etc., and the decrease by sales, etc. The stallions, although we have not lost on them, have not been of much use to us on the farm, as by the time we had got them into condition and broken them in for the pumps, plough, etc., they were sold; so we got little work out of them. Both the horse and pony mares have more than earned their keep, as they have practically done all the labour on the farm. They have been very un- fortunate in their foaling. When covered they were in full season, and those who subsequent- ly showed any symptoms of 54 foaled in March and the remainder during the current year, which of course will be dealt with in next year's report. (d) Pony Mares.PART I.PART I.58 ever, that no case of surra occurs in which the infusorian is absent; that blood containing it will invariably induce surra; that after passing it through the blood of various animals and again inoculating it to the horse, surra results; that surra blood, deprived of its formed elements by filtration, will not cause the disease on inoculation; and lastly, that the presence or absence of the infusorian in the blood influences the course of the disease to a very marked degree, dividing it into its various stages, viz., paroxysms and intermissions. Contagion.59 point to death from arsenical poisoning, neither in their symptoms nor in their post mortem lesions. The decision of this point will best be arrived at by the experimental inoculation of small animals susceptible to the disease, at different times, during the absence of the infu- sorian from the blood of the animal under treatment. The effect of doses of arsenic similar to those used in treatment will be easily determined by experiments on healthy animals. The number of animals treated with arsenic is at present too few to allow of the question being properly decided, but there is no doubt that the results achieved in treatment with the drug are more hopeful than any which have been obtained previously. The subcutaneous inoculation of blood and its derivatives in its different forms, obtained from animals suffering from, or which had lately succumbed to, surra, was also tried to ascertain whether there was any substance capable of conferring immunity against the disease, but the results were negative. The efficacy of arsenic as a prophylactic has not yet been demonstrated, and it will be necessary to do this before its recommendation can be safely made. Probably the best method would be to subject animals to a course of arsenic, and then to experimental inocula- tion with small quantities of the infusorian. The other recommendations as to prevention are in the majority of cases not practicable. Further experiments in treatment and on the debateable questions are therefore desir- able, but the facts noted in the report with regard to the nature of the disease are most valuable. 319. Since that date Dr. Lingard has continued his experiments with reference to this disease. The following is an extract from a summary of these further investigations:60 walking exercise daily. As it did not thrive on gram, barley (boiled) was given in its place with the most satisfactory results, the animal rapidly putting on flesh. An experiment was made with the alkaloid of Adhatoda Vasica (vasicine), which was observed microscopically to have a certain effect upon the surra hæmatozoon. Twenty-two grains of the freshly-prepared alkaloid, in distilled water, were injected directly into the blood-stream of a horse during the presence (numerous) of the hæmatozoon in the circulation. But although numerous examinations of the blood were made for some hours after the in- jection, the organism was apparently not affected. Observations have been made to determine the efficacy of subjecting healthy animals to drugs sufficient to cause the full physiological effects, previous to submitting them to experimental inoculation with surra61 Although the latent period of rat-surra was so prolonged in the first instance when inoculated from rat to horse (average 40.7 days), it immediately returned to the normal period (average 7 to 8 days), when a second horse was inoculated with the blood of the first affected. The latent period, however, becomes still more reduced (5 days) when a third animal is inoculated with the blood of the second. Horses unsuccessfully inoculated and re-inoculated subcutaneously with the rat hæmatozoon, when subsequently inoculated with horse-surra blood, show no protection from the former, but acquire the disease after an incubation period of 6 to 10 days. Animals other than horses which contracted the disease were bovines, monkeys and field rats; while the rabbit, guinea-pig, fowl, cat, dog and donkey proved refractory to the rat hæmatozoon; but all the above animals, with the exception of the fowl, were very susceptible to the rat-hæmatozoon, when it had first been passed through the horse. Experiments on the gastric ingestion of rat's excrement. The above experiments raised the question as to how rats could cause the disease in horses; for the food would rarely, if ever, be soiled with the blood of these animals. It therefore only remained to be tried whether the excreta of rats, in whose blood the infu- sorian was present at the time of its collection, could cause the disease when mixed with grain. In 1892 experiments were undertaken at Poona, on the Deccan plateau, where the disease is not enzootic, and where the difficulty of producing it was fully recognized owing to the dryness of the situation at that period of the year (December to February). These experiments, as expected, proved negative. At a later date, during the latter half of the hot season and the rains of 189362 promote the dissication of the corn and the consequent destruction of the organism or spores should be adopted. This would perhaps seem the most rational preventive measure, as the prolonged drought during the hot season appears to produce the same effect. The following table bears out the above remarks and was drawn up from particulars obtained from the Bombay Tramway Company:PART I.PART I.66 363.In March the Bhavnagar Horse Show was attended and Bombay visited to purchase stallions for the Government of India, as well as for those District Boards, etc., requiring Arabs. 364.My predecessor travelled 10,386 miles by rail, 656 by road and 1,592 by steamer; attended five horse fairs and shows, and spent eight days under canvas. 365.The Imperial Bacteriologist, Dr. Lingard, in April visited Poona to interview the Meteorological Reporter and to investigate an outbreak of surra. 366.During May he proceeded to Simla with the view of selecting a site for the Bacteriological Laboratory at Kotgarh, returning to Poona on the 6th of July. 367.August and September were spent at Naini Tal on duty in connection with the building of a Bacteriological Laboratory, Mukhtesar. 368.October, November and December were spent at head-quarters. 369.In January he visited Naini Tal again about the Laboratory and then proceeded to Calcutta and Burma to interview the Superintendent, Civil Ve- terinary Department, Burma, regarding experiments in surra. 370.He was at head-quarters in February. 371.During March he proceeded to Bombay to interview my predecessor on matters concerning the Department. 372.He travelled 9,654 miles by rail, 316 by road, and 1,592 by steamer. 373.The Assistant to Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, during April and May and up to 20th of June, remained with my predecessor at Simla; during this period he proceeded to Kotgarh to select a site for the Bacteriological Laboratory in company with Dr. Lingard and Veterinary Lieu- tenant-Colonel Hallen. 374.In July he went to Almorah to interview the Deputy Commissioner of Naini Tal about a site for the Bacteriological Laboratory, and saw the pro- posed site in company with Sir E. C. Buck, Kt., C.S.I., and Mr. Holderness. He also inspected some Brittany cattle at Doonagiri. 375.Up till the middle of August he remained at Naini Tal and had several interviews with the North-Western Provinces Government concerning the site for a Laboratory; then proceeded to Bombay and Poona to Dr. Lingard on the same subject. 376.Most part of September he spent in Poona at the Laboratory, collect- ing office records, books, etc., and attending to current office work. He re- turned to Simla on 20th September. 377.During October he remained at Simla and Babugarh with my pre- decessor. 378.He attended the Batesar Fair with the view of inspecting the breeds of cattle in November, and then proceeded to Bombay to join Veterinary Lieutenant-Colonel Hallen. 379.In December he visited the Laboratory at Poona and inspected the Remount Depôt and Farm at Ahmednagar; saw some Arab stables in Bombay and then returned with my predecessor, inspecting the Ajmere Veterinary School en route to Babugarh to attend the Instructional Farm class. 380.In January he went to Moradabad to interview the Deputy Commis- sioner of Naini Tal regarding the new Laboratory at Mukhtesar; then proceeded to Naini Tal to see the Engineers about the construction and site, etc., of the same. A voyage was made to Burma with my predecessor to consult the Superinten- dent, Civil Veterinary Department, regarding experiments in surra and to inspect the breeds of cattle in that country. 381.February was spent in returning from Burma, and with Veterinary Lieutenant-Colonel Hallen at Babugarh. 382.During March he visited the Poona Bacteriological Laboratory and remained on duty at the Bombay Veterinary College.
67 383.He travelled 11,043 miles by rail, 919 by road and 1,592 by steamer, and spent ten days under canvas. 384.The officers employed on duty connected with Imperial stallions (vide Table XXII, page lx) were as follows:68 At Rawalpindi the Judging Committee recommends sires other than Norfolk Trotters, and the purchasing officer, 3rd Punjab Cavalry, reports on remounts purchased at that fair as follows:69 Breeding in Native States. 395.I feel that the time has arrived when Rulers of Native States might be asked to co-operate with the Government of India in the extension of horse and mule-breeding. A number of Native Chiefs possess home studs; amongst others might specially be noted the States of Patiala, Ulwar, Jeypore, Jodhpore, Gwa- lior, Bhavnagar and numerous others in Katkiawar; but home studs do but little to foster horse-breeding. What we require to do is to so far interest the Native Chiefs that they will extend it in the districts of their States. 396.All the more important has this subject become since the mainte- nance by these States of Imperial Service Cavalry. Roughly speaking, 8,000 horses and 1,700 mules are maintained. Of these, the Kashmir and Punjab States Cavalry obtain their remounts mainly from fairs in the Punjab, whilst other States are mainly mounted on Arabs and Australians. 397.We have evidence, during the year under review, that 102 remounts were bought at shows and fairs; this, however, cannot in any way represent the number actually purchased in our various breeding districts. The highest price paid for remounts for Imperial Service Troops was Rs. 300, and the lowest Rs. 200, whilst the highest for Native Cavalry was Rs. 500 and Rs. 190 re- spectively; the averages being Rs. 242 for Native Cavalry and Rs. 229 for Imperial Service Troops. 398.It will be seen that these two branches of the service purchase identically the same class of remount, and the institution of the Imperial Ser- vice Troops Cavalry adds another difficulty experienced by Native Cavalry in obtaining remounts, the former now entering into competition in our fairs and shows. 399.We should, I consider, make the Imperial Service Troops Cavalry self-supporting, or, in other words, the States now possessing such should, in years to come, be able to remount their own cavalry and transport, and with this view I purpose addressing the Government of India, asking that I may be permitted to visit various Native States, as opportunities offer, with a view of endeavouring to interest the Native Chiefs in the matter. Much can, I feel, be done in this way; I would point out specially to the Mamdot Estate. This commenced in a small way under the late Nawab and has gradually grown to be one of our best shows. I would specially draw attention to the report of the Remount Agent quoted below, referring to the remount stock purchased by him at the Jellalabad Horse Show:70 Demand for donkey stal- lions 403.I cannot help alluding to the great demand for donkey stallions and the difficulties which this Department experiences in obtaining them. This subject will, however, have again to be alluded to when referring to the demand for these for District Boards, etc. 404.Every endeavour must be made to search for countries able to supply us. Already one jack has been purchased at Quetta, and I am endeavouring to obtain more through Colonel Gaisford, the Deputy Commissioner; the Consul of Zanzibar has been addressed on the subject and has been asked to kindly in- form us whether such are available as they are reported to be; and if so, at what price. 405.Whilst at Jalapahar on inspection duty, I was much struck with some mules that had been brought into Jalapahar for sale. They were sturdy animals with good bone; to produce mules of that stamp the country must be supplied with a good class of donkey. I therefore purpose asking Brigadier-General Lance, Commanding Presidency District, whether he thinks a few could be obtained from that source. This officer has always taken such a lively interest in horse and mule-breeding that I feel certain he will help us if it lies in his power. 406.In the body of this report I have already remarked so fully on the want of reliability of the statistics available, that I feel but little more need be said. 407.Improvement is required in the following directions:GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1893-94. PART II.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1893-94. PART II.74 420. In addition to the abovementioned 100 horse and pony stallions maintained by District Boards, there arePART II.PART II.PART II.PART II.82 Considering the Civil Veterinary Department has been established now over one year, it is greatly to be regretted that so little has been done towards the prevention of cattle-dis- ease in the Punjab; but so long as the Superintendents, North and South Punjab, have to devote their attention to horse and mule-breeding, and only any spare time they may have, to cattle, I cannot see that more can be done under this head. Speaking personally, horse and mule-breeding takes up the whole of my time; and I am certain that if I was ordered to visit and investigate any outbreak, say, of rinderpest, horse-breeding would suffer. To ex- emplify what I mean: I am, say, in the Lahore District visiting the various tehsils and stallion stands, with a view to branding mares; a report is sent to me that rinderpest has broken out in the Pindigheb tehsil of Rawalpindi District. To investigate that outbreak I must break up my camp and probably, if I am to do any good, remain in or near Pindigheb for one month. Now during the whole of that month no horse-breeding work would be done, no mares branded, no stands inspected; the notices that had prior to the outbreak of rinderpest been sent to zemindars, etc., of the Lahore, and probably one other district of my intended visit to brand their mares, would now have to be cancelled, causing great inconveni- ence to all such zemindars that had promising young mares for branding. These mares they would now have to keep for one more year before they could get them branded and so breed from them. Under these circumstances I cannot see how the two works can be carried on by one officer; the only remedy I can suggest is to appoint another Veterinary Surgeon whose sole work is cattle-breeding and cattle-disease. Any further remarks on this subject from me would be out of place in the report. 442. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, has devot- ed much attention to cattle, and has submitted most interesting notes, not only under the beading of &quot;Cattle-disease,&quot; but also under that of &quot;Cattle-breeding.&quot; 443. His investigations, however, only commenced in September 1893; they therefore embrace only six months of the year under review. 444. He carefully remarks on anthrax, rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease, pleuro-pneumonia and charbon symptomatique, and has also noted on the native methods of treating some of the abovenamed diseases, all of which information will prove of great use when tabulating particulars that may be received from various sources. 445. Much useful information was collected in both Upper and Lower Burma. The following is a summary of cattle-disease in that country. It will be noticed that Burma is far in advance of other Provinces of India, and I can- not but bring to notice the good work done by Veterinary Lieutenant Evans, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department:83 Burmans are also at times most careless. A case in point is that lately when investigat- ing an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease, imagine my astonishment at finding any num- ber of animals with very sore feet standing up to their knees in slush and water, when some high ground was available. Under such circumstances, it is easy to understand that when ninety per cent. of the cattle of a village are attacked, a great many of them suffer the loss of their hoofs, etc., and die. Generally speaking, I am glad to say that the people are most careful of their livestock. During the rains in certain districts of Lower Burma it is not always an easy matter to obtain high and dry ground. While cattle are in the hands of the owners, they usually graze on the owner's lands ; in such cases if any disease does break out, it has little opportunity of spreading. It is to be hoped that this year timely information may be afforded this office regard ing outbreaks of contagious diseases : a few more details submitted with reports will be most acceptable. In the past, through having a small staff, I have not always been able to meet all the demands for assistance. However, I trust that in a short time I will be able to afford help in most cases. With few exceptions, which were brought to the notice of Deputy Commissioners con&quot; cerned, I have noticed that the cattle death registers have been well kept. Mr. Batlivala' who also inspected several districts, also found this to be the case. I should feel much obliged if Deputy Commissioners and other District Officers would kindly initial and affix the date of their inspections of these registers. Each form has printed, on the back, a short summary of the symptoms of rinderpest, anthrax, and foot-and-mouth disease. Veterinary assistants are ordered to inspect these registers. I would strongly urge that some system of registration be extended to Upper Burma as soon as it can conveniently be done ; though we are aware that the mortality is very heavy, we have no means of arriving at even an approximate idea of the number of animals that perish annually. For the benefit of cultivators during large outbreaks of contagious diseases it is intended to have printed slips, giving easy directions and simple prescriptions, the ingredients of which may be obtained almost anywhere. These slips will be sent to every Deputy Commissioner to distribute among township officers, who will no doubt arrange for their circulation in every village. By this means the lives of many valuable cattle may be spared. Veterinary assistants have always been in the habit of in- structing the cattle owners of each village they visited regarding the precautions to be taken on the outbreak of contagious diseases. Taking the small staff of Veterinary assistants, I think they have accomplished a good deal in the manner of suppressing disease, especially so when it is considered, that before they can show good results, they have to obtain the con- fidence and the good will of the cattle owners. When the Bill is passed, they will then, of course, be in a better position to see orders carried out. In thinking over the enormous loss of cattle in this country and of revenue to the State, I hope I may be pardoned for suggest- ing the following : That each large district should have at least four Veterinary assistants, the medium-sized, three, and the smaller ones two. Take the average cost of a Veterinary assistant at about Rs. 800 per annum, and the average cost of a good pair of working oxen at anything between Rs. 160 to Rs. 200, if each Assistant only saves the small number of fifty head of cattle, he renders remunerative service to the cultivators and also to the State ; fur- ther the more men about the district, the easier for them to hear about outbreaks; and culti- vators will have the advantage of knowing that assistance is near at hand, and will no doubt very readily avail themselves of it. Another point in favour of this plan is that the assist- ants of a district could, in an exceedingly short time, be concentrated at the scene of any outbreak and thus perhaps save many animals. As matters now stand, it is at times most difficult to spare an assistant from any district. Granting one or two can be spared, much time is lost and heavy losses incurred, before they can arrive at the place where their services are required, 446. Very little information has been obtained from the Central Provinces and Berar on the subject of cattle-disease investigation and prevention. 447. Veterinary Lieutenant Maxwell having only joined Baluchistan in February 1894, but little information has been obtained. Out breaks during the year. 448. From Table L, page lxxv, it will be seen that the only Provinces which have afforded any information under this head are the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, Central Provinces and Berar, Bombay and Burma. No such information was obtained from the South Punjab, North Punjab, Balu- chistan and Derajat, Rajputana, Bengal and Madras. 449. The North-Western Provinces and Oudh report only deals with three diseases, viz , rinderpest, anthrax, and foot-and-mouth disease. It will be seen that the seizures are said to have amounted to 9,106 and the deaths to 2,846. 450. The Central Provinces report deals slightly with pleuro-pneumonia in addition to the three diseases named above. The seizures are 11,434, and the deaths amount to 7,292, from contagious diseases only. In Berar the number of cattle affected with contagious diseases was 12,004, of which 5,434 died
84 451. In Bombay the report deals with charbon symptomatique in. addi- tion to the diseases above named. The number of cattle affected was 3,927 of which 1,703 died. 452. Burma simply reports the number of deaths, which is deplorably large, amounting as it does to 57,582 head of cattle. 453. This gives the following totals :85 460. Rabies.PART II.PART II.90 472. The Superintendent, South Punjab, attended the cattle fairs of Amritsar (Dewali), Sirsa and Hissar, on which he reports as follows :PART II.PART II.94 487. The summer session commenced on 1st May 1893. Forty-nine new students entered the college, of whom 19 were military, 11 were scholarship- holders from District Boards, and 19 were free. 488. The winter session commenced on 21st October 1893. The senior class then numbered 35 and the junior 49, making a total of 84. Of the 35, 26 passed as Veterinary assistants at the examination held in April. Of these 7 belonged to Native Cavalry, one to the Remount Department, and 3 to Native States. The latter I look upon as most important, as when the time arrives at which we shall be ready with our organized staff of Veterinary assistants, we shall require Native States to co-operate with us; otherwise our endeavours to suppress contagious diseases will be greatly hampered by hav- ing in our midst centres from which these diseases, so ruinous to the country, will be disseminated. I would like to see the training of Veterinary assist- ants for Native States carried on simultaneously with that which we are now effecting for India. 489. With reference to the number of failures, viz., nine, the Principal, Veterinary Captain Nunn, reports as follows :95 492. The death-rate was very small. In class (1) it amounted to 2.8; all the cases having been admitted in a hopeless condition. In class (2) it was only 3. In class (3) it was 12.9, due to the fact that this includes 9 dogs des- troyed for rabies out of a total number of 11 deaths. In class (4) it was 1.2. 493. The falling off in the number of horses examined for soundness was due to the fact that the Principal was alone for a portion of the year and could not attend to this branch. 494. The total number of patients, indoor and outdoor, rose from 3,193 in 1892-93 to 3,897 during the year under review. 495. The total cost of this establishment was Rs, 17,935 from Imperial Revenues against Rs. 16,006 and Rs. 15,759 from Provincial Funds against Rs. 16,965 last year, showing a decrease of Rs. 1,206 under Provincial Revenues and an increase of Rs. 1,929 under Imperial; the latter being due to compensation allowance paid to the European staff. 496. The Principal again brings to notice the necessity of some standard text-books being decided upon. This question will be considered in consulta- tion with Principals of other Colleges. 497. The only suggestion which I can possibly make for the improvement of the teaching at this College is that, as is done in Burma, a certain number of the senior students be occasionally sent out into districts in which contagious diseases exist, in order to become acquainted with the symptoms exhibited in the different forms of such diseases, as well as to be instructed in the best methods to be adopted to prevent their extension. This question will be referred to the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab. 498. Our best thanks are due to Veterinary Captain Nunn, D. S. O., for his indefatigable zeal shown under trying circumstances ; for, as has already been stated, this officer had to work single-handed for nine months. Bengal Veteri- nary Institu- tion. 499. This institution which had for a long time been considered necessary for the purpose of providing duly qualified Veterinary assistants for the cattle districts in Lower Bengal and Assam, was opened at the early part of the year; and although it has already made some progress, still it cannot be considered as in full working order. 500. The staff of the institution is as follows :96 known, all the stalls will be occupied by patients. Since the buildings have been completed, several further improvements have been made, the most important of which has been filling in of the tank near the post-mortem room. This was very insanitary and a serious source of danger to the students and servants. It has been proposed that this new plot of ground will be utilized as a garden for growing lucerne, guinea grass, and botanical plants. 504. Only 35 students have attended the classes as yet, but the institution must be looked upon as in its infancy. Of the 35, one is a Christain, one a Mahomedan and 33 are Hindus. I trust that the difficulty, which has frequently been experienced with Hindus, viz., that they object to operate on bovines, will not be experienced in Bengal, as if they do, they will pro use- less as Veterinary assistants. It is to be regretted that more Mahomedans are not forthcoming. 505. The Principal in his report states :97 Rajputana Veterinary School at Aj- mere. 509. The building of this institution commenced in April 1893, and the Principal, Veterinary School, Ajmere, joined on 23rd idem; the school, how- ever, was not opened until the 12th of March 1894. 510. It consists of a lecture-room, pharmacy, offices and museum in the main building; dissecting-room, Assistant Superintendent's quarters, six quarters for resident pupils, a forge and shoeing shed, ten loose boxes and ten stalls for horses and ten stalls for cattle. 511. The fees charged are as follows:98 patients. It is at this establishment that the Stock Inspectors are trained, and their professional training must be of but little value. 519. The result of this delay in founding a College will be that when the system is perfected, and when Veterinary assistants are available in other Provinces for the establishment of a subordinate Veterinary staff, Madras will be the only Presidency found wanting. 520. At present the 14 Stock Inspectors cannot be said to be connected with the Civil Veterinary Department, as from a return submitted by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, to the Board of Revenue, it would appear that these men were employed at an average of only 12 days during the year on veterinary work. 521. I cannot help stating that I have been most forcibly struck with the statistics shown by my predecessor as representing the number of deaths reported in this Presidency from rinderpest and anthrax, viz.99 I should like to make a few remarks concerning Veterinary assistants. These men no doubt, if property looked after, by of course, professional men, such as Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, would be of very great assistance to Deputy Commissioners; but without this professional supervision I doubt if the majority of these men earn their pay. When they first leave the Lahore College they know quite sufficient for all purposes re- quired of them, but when, year after year, they find that no professional officer is put in charge, and so no awkward questions can be put to them, they naturally soon forget all the useful knowledge they learned at the Lahore College. To remedy this state of things every Veterinary assistant should be personally inspected by a Superintendent at least once a year ; his books should be checked, his monthly diaries and reports examined and verified, and he himself should be examined as to his fitness to remain in the post he holds. If all this were carried out, I am convinced that these men would see the advisability of keeping up their knowledge in veterinary matters ; they would also have to be keener about their work; thus instead of being really of little use in a district, they would soon be recognized as some of the most useful servants. Now comes the question who, viz., what Superintendent, Civil Veter- inary Department, can give these men the supervision required ? Certainly not the Superin- tendent, North or South Punjab, whose sole work would be Imperial and Provincial horse- breeding. The whole matter therefore rests with the Punjab Government. Another Su- perintendent is most certainly required for the cattle portion of the work ; this Superintendent, like the late Veterinary Surgeon to Punjab Government, could supervise the District Board Veterinary assistants. 532. The Superintendent, South Punjab, also reports as follows :100 534. In Berar the work done is shown in the following extract from Veter- inary Captain Short's report:PART II.PART II.PART II.PART II.108 (c). District Boards should, I consider, maintain only such a number of stallions as the funds at their disposal will permit them to do without having to charge covering fees. This system, if general- ly adopted, will lead to extortion and to the result that the stallions will not be patronized. On this subject I purpose ad- dressing the Director of Land Records and Agriculture of the Provinces in which the system is carried out. (d). The same rules which exist for the care of Government stallions might, with advantage, be adopted for District Board stallions, except that I would increase the number of mares to be covered by them from 50 to 70. This number has in many instances, been exceeded, some stallions having covered as many as 120 mares during the year; this will lead to premature decay of the stallions and will result in disappointment to the zemindars. (e). I am informed that the want of syces well trained in the manage- ment of stallions and mares at the time of covering is much felt. This may account for many of the mares not holding. I shall endeavour, in communication with the Directors, Land Records and Agriculture, North-Western Provinces and Oudh and Punjab, to arrange for the training of these men at the depôt. Mule-breed- ing (Provincial). 545. But little progress has been made in this direction. Provincial bodies maintained few donkey stallions, and it will not be possible to induce them to keep more until our supply is better. As before noted, we cannot furnish a sufficient number of satisfactory Jacks for Imperial work. Cattle-disease, cattle-breeding, fairs and shows, etc. 546. A start, but only a start, has been made in this direction. Informa- tion as to the prevalence of diseases of a contagious nature has in some Provin- ces been carefully collected; but the majority of Superintendents have not paid sufficient attention to this important subject. I, however, trust that much more will be done during the coming winter. Local Governments will be asked to cause the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, of their various Provinces to attend as many cattle fairs as possible, with a view of obtaining full information of the different breeds of cattle, in order to enable us hereafter to frame some definite proposals for the improvement of such breeds that are capable of improvement by the transfer of bulls from one district to another. Without precise information on this point, we cannot attempt anything in this direction. 547. I would, however, draw attention to the remarks of the Superinten- dent, North Punjab (page 81), on the subject of the difficulty he experiences in attending to the cattle fairs, and the general work connected with cattle- disease. I am fully of opinion, that in horse-breeding centres, such as the Punjab and North-Western Provinces, it will be necessary to employ a separate Veterinary Officer in each Province, whose duties will be solely those having reference to cattle disease and breeding. 548. In the Punjab there are 73 Veterinary assistants and salutris em- ployed, and the remarks of both Superintendents in that Province are worthy of consideration (vide page 99). The strictest supervision must be exercised over the professional work of these men, and to effect this an extra Veterinary officer will be required as soon as funds are available. Veterinary In- struction. 549. During the year under review good work appears to have been done in the old-established institutions of Bombay and Lahore. Two new schools were opened109 551. We now have one in Bengal which, when in working order, should be able to furnish Veterinary assistants for Bengal and portions of Oudh; whilst the Lahore School will undoubtedly be able to supply men not only for the Punjab, but also for the North-Western Provinces. Last year this school passed out 26 men, 8 of whom were military, leaving 18 for whom employ- ment will be necessary. This, for a few years, will not perhaps prove a matter of any difficulty, but when each district is supplied with its Veterinary assistants, vacancies will be few; and by that time we shall have Rajputana and Bengal schools in full working order, and I feel assured that the supply would, within the next five years, be in excess of the demand. 552. Burma is supplied with its own school, which will be sufficient for its requirements, except perhaps that it may have occasionally to indent on Bombay for a Veterinary graduate. 553. Bombay is fully supplied, and Madras is now the only Presidency which is so far behind others in the matter of veterinary education. I have already remarked on the want of a school in that Presidency, and I sincerely trust that the Madras Government will shortly be induced to start one on the lines of that recently opened in Bengal. Dispensaries. 554. Good work has been done by these institutions; and as they appear to have afforded great benefit to the zemindars, I would much like to see them extended. Conclusion. 555. In conclusion, although no section of this report is allotted to con- tagious diseases of horses, I feel compelled to allude to that fatal malady, glanders and farcy, fatal not only to equines but also to mankind. 556. But little notice has been paid to it in the reports of the various Superintendents. Although when Inspecting Veterinary officer of the Eastern Circle, I found it to exist largely in military stations in that Circle, it existed in three corps at Lucknow, also at Fyzabad, Bareilly, Saugor, Allahabad, as well as in His Excellency the Viceroy's Body-Guard at Dehra Dun. Some of these cases appear to have had a local origin, but others appeared in batches of remounts railed from Amritsar and other centres, showing that the disease is widespread. To endeavour to prevent its dissemination all remount officers were directed to have their batches examined by the Veterinary officer on duty at the fair at which they were bought, and they were further directed to cause them to be strictly isolated for 30 days on joining their respective corps. 557. That glanders and farcy exist to a great extent in the large cities and towns throughout India cannot be denied. In order to protect our large military centres, especially our remount depôts, it is of the greatest impor- tance that Act No. XX of 1879 should be extended to the whole of India. This necessary measure I shall be prepared to submit for the consideration of Government. 558. In February 1894 two acute cases of glanders were discovered at Amritsar; and, in accordance with a recommendation received from the Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, intimation was fur- nished to all officers Commanding Native Cavalry regiments, to the Director, Army Remount Department, and to the Commissary-General-in-Chief, with a view of their segregating all remounts purchased at the Bysakhi Fair. 559. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, brings forcibly to notice the hardship to owners, who, having their animals destroyed under the Act, are compelled in this Province to make the necessary arrange- ments for the cremation of the carcasses. I quite agree with him that the expense should be met by the local authorities, and shall make the necessary recommendation to the Director of Land Records and Agriculture of that Province, as the regulations on this point are left to the discretion of the Local Governments. SIMLA ; A. E. QUERIPEL, Vety. Lieuk-Colonel, The 12th September 1894. Inspector-General, Civil Vety. Department,
PART Iiii Table I (Referred to in paragraphs 1 and 28, pages 1 and 7). IMPERIAL REPORTiv Table II.v Casualty Roll of Government Horse and Pony Stallions, 1893-94. Brand No. Name. Class. Horse or Pony. Description of casualty. Nature of casualty. REMARKS. 2285 Bela ... Arab ... Horse ... Died ... Hydrophobia. 2066 Primate ... Arab ... Do. ... Destroyed ... Prematurely worn out. 1 Young Freedom ... N. T. ... Do. ... Do. ... Fever and congested liver. 2 Mavmion ... Arab ... Do. ... Died ... Fever. 3 Orator ... Arab ... Do. ... Destroyed ... Uncertain foal getter, and worn out. 4 Cyclone ... Arab ... Pony ... Died ... Abscess in the lungs and liver. ABSTRACT. PROVINCE. NUMBER DIED. NUMBER DESTROYED. TOTAL. PERCENTAGE OF DEATHS. PERCENTAGE OF DESTROYED. GENERAL PERCENTAGE. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. In North-Western Provinces and Oudh. *7 ... 10 ... 17 ... 5.34 ... 7.63 ... 12.97 ... In Rajputana... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... In North Punjab 5 ... 1 ... 6 ... 5.26 ... 1.05 ... 6.31 ... In South Punjab ... 2 ... 2 ... 4 ... 3 27 ... 3.27 ... 6.55 ... In Derajat ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 5.00 ... ... ... 5.00 ... In Baluchistan... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... In Central India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... In Deccan...... 1 1 2 ... 3 1 2.27 3.33 4.54 ... 6.81 3.33 In Guzerat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... In Sind and Cutch ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... * Of these seven deaths, three died at sea, leaving four deaths actually in North-Western Provinces.
vi Table III.vii Table IV.viii Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallion during 1893-94ix Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallion, during 1893-94x Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallion during 1893-94xi Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallion during 1893-94xii Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallion during 1893-94xiii Table Vxiv Table VI.xv Table VII.xvi Table VIII.xvii Table IX.xviii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94xix Service and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallion during 1893-94xx Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94.xxi Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94xxii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94xxiii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94xxiv Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94xxv Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94xxvi Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94xxvii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1893-94xxviii Table X.PART I.xxxi Table XI.xxxii Cost of feed, keep, attendants, &c., &c., of Government Horse and Pony Stallions during 1893-94 xxxiii Cost of feed, keep, attendants, &c., &c., of Government Horse and Pony Stallions during 1893-94 xxxiv Table XII.xxxv Table XIIIxxxvi Breeders' and other colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Imperial Funds in 1893-94xxxvii Table XIV. xxxviii Cost of feed, keep, attendants, &c., of Government Donkey Stallions in 1893-94xxxix ABSTRACT. Province. AVERAGE PER DONKEY STALLION. Year under report. Previous year. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. North-Western Provinces and Oudh ... ... ... 143 4 0 143 1 8 Rajputana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Panjab ... ... ... ... ... 159 13 5 149 6 6 South Punjab ... ... ... ... ... 125 9 5 Derajat ... ... ... ... ... 174 5 9 Baluchistan ... ... ... ... ... 575 2 8 256 5 1 Central India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Deccan ... ... ... ... ... 255 3 7 330 2 11 Guzerat ... ... ... ... ... 219 13 0 ... Sindh and Cutch ... ... ... ... ... 285 11 10 288 13 3 Burma (Upper) ... ... ... ... ... 348 0 0 ...
xl Table XV.xli Referred to in paragraph 316, page 44). REVENUE SECTION. Provinces, Punjab, Rajputana, Tirhoot, and Baluchistan during the year 1893-94. PRICES PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR MULES. TOTAL NUMBER OF SALES EFFECTED. PRIZES AWARDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's Fair or Show. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. ... Lowest price. ... Average price. ... Total number sold. ... Highest price. Lowest price. ... Average price. ... From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local and District Funds. ... From private subscrip- tions. ... Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of bridles given away. 377 58 217 ... ... ... 1,000 500 1,500 1,500 5 1,000 475 175 325 ... ... ... ... ... ... 138 475 175 325 300 300 ... ... 600 600 3 150 445 170 245 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,250 1,000 ... ... 2,250 2,250 5 1,250 350 190 263 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 350 190 263 200 325 ... ... 525 525 3 200 440 225 298 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 400 ... ... ... 400 400 3 300 400 160 210 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,600 800 ... ... 2,400 2,400 5 1,600 340 195 289 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 900 100 ... ... 1,000 1,000 5 900 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 142 ... ... ... 5,650 3,025 ... ... 8,675 8,675 29 5,400 500 100 170 120 355 475 350 14 65 3,775 800 3 57 500 500 500 3 480 240 153 214 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 240 153 206 400 600 ... ... 1,000 1,104 3 500 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 350 68 181 250 ... 1,025 ... 1,275 951 3 200 345 50 198 7 9 16 135 117 126 250 257 91 138 1,709 ... ... ... 1,700 1,700 5 1,800 275 230 252 ... 6 6 200 53 126 48 275 27 122 250 380 ... ... 630 630 3 500 325 117 215 3 7 10 165 94 114 115 325 94 114 1,050 ... 175 ... 1,225 1,050 5 1,000 300 160 228 ... ... ... ... ... ... 84 300 12 136 400 ... 1,209 1,609 1,609 ... 400 355 150 235 1 37 38 145 30 07 48 355 30 107 900 ... ... 414 1,314 1,314 4 1,000 325 260 296 ... 2 2 80 68 74 24 325 23 133 250 ... 177 ... 427 427 2 250 330 330 330 ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 185 60 130 450 ... 756 ... 1,203 1,129 3 400 280 185 250 ... 3 3 100 60 75 56 500 10 475 950 ... ... ... 930 854 5 900 300 227 254 ... 13 13 100 25 09 113 300 12 116 1,500 ... 150 ... 1,650 1,650 4 1,500 625 150 387 32 725 757 390 115 252 1,872 625 2 313 1,800 ... 250 ... 2,050 2,050 5 1,800 400 75 236 9 9 18 350 50 150 69 450 30 175 1,500 ... 456 ... 1,956 1,913 5 1,200 310 250 281 ... 1 1 89 89 so 39 310 4 104 350 500 ... 850 738 3 350 300 250 277 ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 300 110 232 400 ... 1,000 ... 1,400 1,380 4 350 ... ... ... 172 1,167 1,339 ... ... ... 6,528 ... ... ... 12,650 980 5,095 414 19,739 18,999 57 12,550 425 190 ... ... ... ... ... 710 900 3 109 150 ... 60 200 150 2 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 710 ... ... ... 150 ... ... 50 200 150 2 100
xlii Abstract of particulars regarding each Horse Fair and Show held in the North-Western FAIR OF SHOW. DATE WHEN FAIR OR SHOW WAS HELD. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOCK NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. From To Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Depart- ment. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Tirhoot. Sonepore Fair ... ... 21st November 1893 24th November 1893 6,625 12,113 247 245 200 6,425 ... 38 30 68 TOTAL... ........ ........ 6,625 12,113 247 245 200 6,425 ... 38 30 68 Baluchistan. Quotta Show ... ... 3rd October 1893 ... 4th October 1893 ... 858 626 350 210 594 244 18 160 4 182 Sibi Show ... ... 9th February 1894 14th February 1894 1,196 1,332 1,196 1,332 ... ... 47 74 ... 121 TOTAL ... ...... ...... 2,054 1,958 1,546 1,542 594 244 65 234 4 303 Bombay Presidency. Poona Show ... ... 27th September 1893 20th September 1893 320 255 320 255 272 ... 13 ... ... 13 Rajkot Show ... ... 24th November 1893 25th November 1893 374 1,190 374 1,190 258 ... ... ... ... ... Shikarpur Show ... ... 8th January 1894... 10th January 1894 962 870 962 870 667 ... 16 133 38 187 Naushchro Show ... ... 29th January 1894 30th January 1894 806 564 806 564 567 ... ... ... ... ... Ontch Show ... ... 6th February 1894 7th February 1894 1,082 471 1,082 471 337 ... 3 ... ... 3 TOTAL ... ........ ........ 3,544 3,350 3,544 3,350 2,101 32 133 38 203 Horse Runs. Rawalpindi district ... ...... ........ ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Multan district ... ... ........ ........ ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... ........ ........ ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Abstract. North-Western Provinces ... ........ ........ 27,636 21,374 1,734 1,246 3,024 2,659 139 151 39 329 Punjab ... ... ... ........ ........ 26,200 20,059 4,941 3,506 12,343 7,569 166 242 9 417 Bajputana ... ... ........ ........ 1,152 672 12 ... ... ... ... 7 ... 7 Tirhoot ... ... ... ........ ........ 6,625 12,113 247 245 200 6,425 ... 38 30 68 Baluchistan ... ... ........ ........ 2,054 1,958 1,546 1,542 594 244 65 234 4 303 Bombay Presidency... ... ........ ........ 3,541 3,350 3,544 3,350 2,101 ... 32 133 38 203 Horse Runs ... ........ ........ ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... ........ ...... 67,271 60,426 12,024 9,889 18,262 10,897 402 805 120 1,327
xliii Provinces, Punjab, Rajputana, Tirhoot, and Baluchistan during the year 1893-94xliv Table XVI.xlv Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1893-94xlvi Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1893-94xlvii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1893-94xlviii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Faris and Shows of 1893-94xlix Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1893-94l Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1893-94li Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1893-94lii Table XVII.liii paragraph 337, page 51). REVENUE SECTION. Western Provinces Depôt for the official year 1893-94. DR. No. By stock. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 29 Value of lands ... ... ... 1,076 4 0 1,076 4 0 30 liv Table XVII (A).lv (Referred to in paragraph 337, page 51). REVENUE SECTION. North Punjab Depôt for the official year 1893-94. CR. No. By stock. Its. A. P. Rs. A. P. 29 Value of lands ... ... ... ... ... 868 11 0 ...... 30 lvi Table XVIIIlvii Table XIX.lviii Table XX.lix Table XXI.lx Table XXII.PART II.lxiii Table A.lxiv Table B.lxv Table C.lxvi Table D.lxvii Services and produce of each class of district horse and pony stallions during 1893-94. Horse or Pony. Class. SOUTH PUNJAB. DERAJAT. Stallions on Register. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Stallions on Register. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not hold. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse ... ... Arab ... ... 43 43 18 1,411 828 32.81 46.00 486 342 ... 27.00 19.00 ... 2 2½ ... 100 ... 40.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Porsian ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Northern ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Country-bred ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 43 43 18 1,411 828 32.81 46-00 486 342 ... 27.00 19.00 ... 2 2½ ... 100 ... 40.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pony ... ... Arab ... ... 7 8 ... 103 ... 12.87 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... 93 ... 46.50 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Persian ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 7 8 ... 103 ... 12.87 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... 93 ... 46.50 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL ... 50 51 18 1,514 828 2970 46.00 486 342 ... 27.00 19.00 ... 4 4½ ... 193 ... 42.88 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
lxviii Horse or Pony. Class. TOTAL. Stallions on Register. STALLIONS ACTUAL- LY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARKS COVERED PER STAL- LION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STAL- LION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average not held. Average not known. Horse ... ... Arab ... ... ... ... 56 51½ 18 1,579 828 30.66 46.00 4S6 342 ... 2700 19.00 ... Persian ... ... ... ... 6 4 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Northern ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Country-bed ... ... ... 2 2 2 74 71 37.00 35.50 27 20 24 13.50 10.00 12.00 Total ... 65 58½ 22 1,653 S99 28.25 40.86 513 362 24 23.31 16.45 1.09 Pony ... Arab ... ... ... ... 34 28 5 454 71 16.21 14.20 20 21 30 4.00 4.20 6.00 Persian ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 35 29 6 454 71 16.21 14.20 20 21 30 4.00 4.20 6.00 Add Totals of North-Western Provinces and Oudh ... ... ... ... 945 101 ... ... 4 66 31 ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL ... 100 87½ 28 3,052 1,071 34.88 38.25 537 449 85 19.17 16.03 3.03
lxix Table E.lxx Table F.lxxi Table G.lxxii Table H.lxxiii Table J.lxxiv Table K.lxxv TABLE L.lxxvi Showing districts where outbreaks of cattle disease occurred during 1893-94lxxvii Bombay ... ... Ahmedabad ... ... ... ... ... 106 95 89.62 ... ... ... ... ... ... 204 202 99.01 No information furnished. Kolaba ... ... 500 227 45.40 ... ... ... 1,068 111 10.39 1,215 800 65.84 ... ... ... Nasik ... ... 122 51 41.80 ... ... ... 55 ... ... ... ... ... 28 21 78.57 Poona ... ... 122 72 59.01 ... ... ... 53 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Belgaon ... ... 20 4 20.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kanara ... ... 288 120 41.66 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ahmednagar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 146 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... 1,052 474 45 05 106 95 89.62 1,322 111 10.39 1,215 800 65.84 232 223 96.12 Burma (Lower) ... Arakan ... ... Not given. 986 ... Not given. 5,162 ... Not given. 809 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Not given. 11,754 ... Not given. 18,711 ... Pegu ... ... 2,679 ... 3,102 ... 582 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,327 ... 14,690 ... Irrawaddy ... ... 4,871 ... 3,187 ... 1,020 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,206 ... 15,284 ... Tonnasserim ... 569 ... 2,582 ... 1,149 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,597 ... 8,897 ... TOTAL ... ... 9,105 ... ... 14,033 ... ... 3.560 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30,884 ... ... 57,582 ...
lxxviii TABLE M.lxxix Table N.lxxx Table O.lxxxi Veterinary Captain F. J. Short, Super- intendent, Central Provinces and Berar. Central Provin- ces. Saugor, Damoh and Narsingpur ... Nil ... ... ... ... 1,033 9,508 ... 10,541 ... Berar ... Akola, Wun, Basim and Buldana ... Nil ... ... ... ... 347 ... ... 347 ... Veterinary Captain J. W. A. Morgan, Superin- tendent, Bombay. Sholapur, Ahmednagar, Poona, Belgaon, Dharwar, Bijapur, Khandeish, Nasik, Ahmedabad, Jacobabad, Karachi, Hyderabad, Shikarpur, Bhavnagar, Palitana, Morvi, Wankaner and Wadh- wan. Quetta, Bajkot, Shikarpur and Sibi... ... 681 12,268 1,002 13,951 ... Veterinary Lieutenant G. H. Evans, Superin- tendent, Burma. Hanthawaddy, Prome, Shwegyin, Pyin- mana, Mandalay, Henzada, Myaung- mya, Tharrawaddy, Pegu, Tounghoo, Yamethin, Thayetmyo, Thongwa, Bassin. Nil ... ... ... ... 202 2,772 2,617 5,591 ... Veterinary Lieutenant H. P. Turnbull,Superin- tendent, Madras. Particulars not furnished ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Veterinary Captain W. D. Gunn, Superintendent, Bengal. Mymensingh and Sodpur ... ... Sonepore and Kalimpong ... ... 629 5,440 560 6,629 ...
lxxxii Table P.