ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1899-1900.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
NLS to Scan B&W and insert
NLS to Scan colour and insert
No. 222ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1899-1900.
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1899-1900. CONTENTS. PART I.ii II.iii PAGES. III.iv PAGES, III.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1899-1900. PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1899-1900. PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. I.-HORSE-BREEDING. Introductory. Before remarking on the various points connected with horse and mule- breeding which call for mention in this Report, I deem it advisable to allude to the great scarcity which has existed in some parts, amounting in others to absolute fodder famine. The Punjab has suffered severely, as also has the whole of Baluchistan, including the Gorani country, which is our best horse- breeding district in that Province. In Sind, the Lower Divisions of Hyderabad and all Thar and Parkar have been famine stricken. Having carefully watched our operations in these parts during the past year, I can safely say that whilst worse grain famines have been known, such a total absence of fodder has never been brought to my notice. I never remember stallions having to be removed from stands; a little extra expenditure has always obtained for them the neces- sary fodder, but on this occasion it was impossible to procure a blade of grass, the consequence being that stallions had to be removed to head-quarters from some of our best breeding districts. 2. The effects on horse-breeding must be long felt, and the forecast made by the various Superintendents in December was most gloomy; mares had to be removed to tracts where fodder was obtainable and in which stallions were not located; they also were in such low condition that in all probability, such as were covered, will not hold; foals have suffered greatly, many have died from starvation or from diseases arising from indigestible fodder, but almost the worst feature has been the fact that breeders have been compelled in many instances to sell their fillies, which on ordinary occasions no money would have bought. 3. Financially also the year under review has been one of anxiety, for not only has the price of grain been high, but the grass, brought in by grass-cutters has had to be supplemented by purchase at exorbitant rates. 4. I cannot but record the exertions made by all the officers of this Depart- ment connected with horse and mule-breeding in the affected Provinces, in order to minimize the effects of this terrible famine, and I trust the Govern- ment of India will agree with me in thinking, after a perusal of the horse and mule-breeding sections of this Report, that one and all have done their best. 5. I have deemed it advisable to make the foregoing preliminary remarks, as they will account for any differences between the results of the year under review when compared with former years. B
2 Number of stallions on the register. 6. Table I will show that 390 stallions were present on 1st April 1899, that 52 were added to the register and that 69 were removed, leaving a balance on 31st March 1900 of 373 stallions. 7. Seventeen ponies were on the strength of the Bombay Presidency, against 18 on 1st April 1899. 8. Table II will show that of 344 horses employed in Northern India, 191 were up to 10 years of age, 129 over 10 and up to 15 years, 24 over 15 years. Number of stallions at work. 9. Table V will show that of 373 horses on the register, 293 were actually at work, the balance of 80 is accounted for as follows:3 imported during the past five years by that Firm have been noted for. They included stallions by the following well-known sires:4 The hackneys include Norfolk trotters, half and three-quarter breds. The other breeds existing in 1893-94 included Persians, Turkomans and country- breds. 27. By the above it will be seen that the number of thorough-breds and Arabs have increased by 67, whilst the hackneys, etc., have decreased by 48 and other breeds by 8. The 5 now remaining of this class are country-breds, which by various crosses of thorough-bred blood may almost be reckoned as such. 28. With this vast collection of different classes of stallions it is next to impossible to breed to type, especially in a country where so much has to be entrusted to native agency, but by restricting our operations to thorough-breds and Arabs this can be done, and, with this end in view, I solicited the sanction of the Government of India, before the receipt of the Resolution above referred to, to be allowed to introduce a system in Baluchistan whereby every mare branded would be allotted to Arab or thorough-bred sires. It was possible to do this in Baluchistan, as the change only involved the transfer of 5 horses of other breeds. As each mare is branded she is allotted and is branded either V.I./A. or V.I./T. according to the class of sire with which it is thought she will mate well. Sanction having been accorded to my proposal, this system is now in force in Baluchistan, and I anticipate the most favourable results from its adoption. 29. It will be understood that it can only be introduced gradually in other Provinces, as otherwise it would mean the sale of all hackney and other stallions, which I am not prepared to advocate, as I calculate that this would involve an expenditure of 4 ½ lakhs of rupees. As, however, none but thorough- breds and Arabs have been obtained for the past five years, the change will gradually be effected, and during the year 1900-1901 it will also be possible to introduce this system in the whole of Sind, in about eight districts of the Punjab, and I am now in communication with the Superintendent, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, with a view of its introduction in districts of those Prov- inces where it is found to be possible. Castration. 30, During the year under report the following colts were castrated:5 35. The Collector of Shahabad also gives the following interesting details:6 43. The Lahore dealers are shown as having purchased 450, whilst Amritsar dealers purchased 133; these were purchased in the Punjab and Baluchistan, but the figures are in no way complete, as no returns giving this information were received from either of the Amritsar Fairs, but they are sufficient to show how many horses fall into their hands: these may be said to have been all remounts as, owing to the great demand, the dealers devoted their attention almost entirely to horses of this class, knowing that they would ensure profit and quick returns. 44. Other interesting facts brought to light are that the Bhojpuri dealers purchased 850 head of stock from four of the best fairs in the Punjab, viz., Shahpur, Gujrat, Jellalabad and Dera Ghazi Khan, and that Trans-frontier people removed 903 animals from the Rawalpindi Fair alone; these were mainly young mules. Removal of Punjab Depôt. 45. During the year under review sanction has been accorded to the erection of the necessary buildings at Abbottabad for the accommodation of the stallions of the Punjab. The depôt establishment has already been moved up, and the stallions returning for rest and conditioning in July will be taken up to that station. Owing to favourable climate and good grass, I anticipate most favourable results from this change. Number of branded mares. 46. Table X will show that whilst 24,907 were on the registers at the begin- ning of the year, 23,235 were present at its close. The reduction, viz., 1,672, is mainly due to the fact that the mares are not traceable, they having been removed to other districts in search of fodder; some may return, but I fear that it will be found that many have died. 47. Two thousand and fifty-seven were branded, against 2,679. Considering the year through which we have just passed, I am surprised that so many were branded, for it frequently happened that when the Superintendent visited a stand, not a single mare was presented to him. Number of mares covered by stallions. 48. Table V will show that 14,100 mares were covered, against 15,077 last year, showing a reduction of 977 mares when compared with 1898-99, but as we find that only 14,000 were covered in 1897-98, the number shown this year as having been served must be looked upon as a fair average, and in fact a high one for a famine year. Average coverings per stallion employed. 49. The average number of mares covered per stallion employed was 48.09, against 49.71 last year. To enable me to draw any comparison on this point between this year and last year's working, it is necessary to repeat some figures contained in Table V7 Demand for stallions. 53. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states8 at the horse shows, the quality of the horses obtained this year was better than I have previously seen in any show ring. 67. The following regiments may be said not to have bought country- breds:9 This must go to prove that owners can find a more profitable market than that offered by Government. 75. Imperial Service Cavalry.10 Reports from Com- manding Officers on the class of stallions that pro- duce the best stock for cavalry re- mounts. 85. Reports have been received during the year from the following regi- ments:11 1st Madras LancersPART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.-MILITARY SECTION. II.15 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. II.16 MISCELLANEOUS MATTER REGARDING DONKEY STALLIONS. Supply of donkey stallions. 103. I have already shown what the demand for Jacks is; it may be well to consider the supply which, under the existing arrangements, is totally inadequate. 104. The supply from the Continent has this year only resulted in 18 being obtained and, as I have shown when remarking on the Catalans, many inferior ones had to be sent to make up the number. 105. Not a single Arab or Persian donkey was offered for sale in the Bombay market although sanction has been accorded to the price being raised to R400. 106. Cyprus has been our only standby and had it not been for these Jacks, I fail to see how mule-breeding in India could have been carried on. Thirty-two were obtained from this Island. 107. The agreement entered into between the Government of India and Cyprus, to take between 25 and 30 Jacks annually and not to discontinue such purchases except on three years' notice being given, will have the effect of more attention being paid to donkey-breeding in the Island. 108. Many of the suggestions which I was able to make to the Governor on my visit to Cyprus in 1898, for the improvement of donkey-breeding having been given effect to, good Jacks and well selected ones are stationed in some of the districts; their services are allowed free and the Government of Cyprus offer prizes paid from Agricultural Funds for the best donkeys. 109. A perusal of the above short remarks will show that our donkey-supply is in a precarious state, in fact I have made similar remarks for years past. Especially is it so at present when many old donkeys require to be replaced and when it is necessary for the next two years to find 25 extra Jacks to meet the increase sanctioned by the Government of India under the scheme whereby these are handed over to Lambardars and others with a view of extending mule- breeding in outlying centres at which no stands exist. 110. Feeling that something must be done to improve our supply, I have suggested for the consideration of Government that endeavours should be made to open a market in Syria. I have been led to make this suggestion owing to the fact that during the past three or four years a few so-called Arab Jacks have been landed in Bombay annually. These were not the typical class of Arabs, they were of good dark colours, many being black; they were bigger than the ordinary Arab donkey and possessed more bone and were of deeper girth. On enquiry I found that they had been purchased in the districts around Damascus. If we can successfully open out a market in Syria, combined with the one now started in Cyprus, we shall have done much to alleviate the want of Jacks in India, which is being so much felt at the present time. Improvement in the breed of donkeys. 111. Intimately connected with the supply of donkey stallions is that of the improvement of the breed in India. Not only is this question of interest to us, but the Transport Department is also greatly interested in the matter. Statistics previously given will show to what extent this Department has been able to assist; with the paucity of Jacks at our disposal we can only relegate such that will not cover pony mares, to donkey-breeding. 112. I have been in communication with the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab, and a Circular has been sent to all Deputy Commissioners in that Province, asking them for certain information which, when received, will enable me, in communication with the Director, to draw up a workable scheme with a view of generally improving the breed of donkeys. Mule supply. 113. During the current year various measures have been discussed with a view of endeavouring to obtain more mules for all branches of the service. This has been rendered necessary owing to the enormous demand for these animals for use in Native States, for private purposes, for Imperial Service Transport Corps and for Native Cavalry Transport. Some years ago carriage of grain in the hills was mainly carried on by means of ponies, to-day nearly the whole of such transport is done by mules. Again, the transport of Native Cavalry was always supplied by ponies, now every regiment is exchanging these for mules as they find them to be more serviceable. During the current year the Bharatpur State has been raising a Transport Corps and have bought
17 largely in the mule market; then again, the export of young mules beyond the Frontier is, in my opinion, becoming a serious one amounting as it did at the Rawalpindi Fair alone to about 800. 114. That mules will have to be purchased young and will have to be reared is self evident and a commencement has been sanctioned which came into operation on 1st April 1900. Two hundred young mules are to be bought by this Department annually: they are to be sent to Hissar when purchased and then to be fed as inexpensively as possible. The calculation is based on their cost of R70 per head between the ages of 6 and 12 months and it is cal- culated that if 40 per cent. turn out fit for Ordnance, 30 per cent. for 1st class Baggage and 25 per cent. for Transport purposes, allowing 5 per cent. for casu- alties, the scheme will prove a financial success. 115. I feel assured that with so many purchasers in the field, especially when it is considered that young stock is being exported across the border in large numbers, some such scheme is required. The one mentioned above is of course on a small scale but its success or otherwise will prove whether it would not be advisable to enlarge it greatly. I fully favour this proposal, in fact I would go so far as to say that all young stock that can be purchased should be bought and when of an age fit for issue it should be sorted out for the different branches of the service. Government need have no fear of any loss even on those that are not considered fit for Transport purposes for such is the demand for mules that every one of these would have a marketable value. 116. It is mainly with reference to the supply of Transport mules that this country is concerned, for I am fully of opinion that the requirements of Ordnance mules can be met if care is taken not to allow Native States to forestall the purchasers. This was done this year by a Native Officer of the Hyderabad State who was buying 14-hand mules for carriage work. 117. The Government of the North-Western Provinces, in order to assist in the mule breeding industry, has sanctioned the sum of R1,000 annually towards the road expenses of cast mares all of which not being over 14 years of age, are now handed over by British Mounted Corps to the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, for issue to breeders. All mares are covered before issue and if it proved that enough are forthcoming, this scheme should result in many good Ordnance mules being obtained. The progeny are to be bought at six months of age if well grown and in good condition. So great is the competition for these mares that already 400 applications have been received. 118. Connected with this scheme is the branding of selected mares for mule-breeding, the condition being that Government will supply a selected Jack for their service. Up to date, however, this has not met with any success, owners refusing the brand. 119. The Superintendents of this Department have assisted the Army Re- mount Department in their purchases during the year by buying any suitable mules when a Remount Agent was not present; this has resulted in 34 Ordnance and 25 1st Class Baggage mules being obtained. 120. The Superintendents have also assisted the Officers specially selected to purchase Transport mules, and in this connection I pointed out to the Govern- ment of India that as mules were worked by private individuals at two and a half years of age and further that as they were bought by Native Cavalry and Imperial Service Troops at three years of age, the Commissariat and Transport Department could only expect to get the dregs of the market, purchasing only, as they did, at four years of age; this was all the more evident owing to the fact that only R150 was given. This was altered by the age being reduced to three years and the price being raised to R175. Another point which I brought forward was that of girth measurement, as I found that an average of 2 inches more was considered necessary for Commissariat-Transport mules, the price of which was only R150 than for 1st Class Baggage mules (Artillery) for which R200 is paid. 121. An alteration on this point connected with a reduction in age and an increase in price, as above noted, should result in many more being obtained. D
18 Number of mares covered by donkey stallions. 122. Table VII will show that 19,444 pony mares were covered by donkey stallions against 18,151 in 1898-99. The increase is very satisfactory. 123. The increase in Sind is encouraging, as we find that 1,055 were covered against 791 last year. This Province is likely to develop into a good breeding centre. 124. One thousand four hundred and eighty-nine donkey mares were covered against 1,379 last year. Average coverings per stallion employed. 125. The average number of pony mares covered per stallion employed was 60.64 against 63.31 last year, and of donkey mares 57.26 against 53.03. 126. The average is quite high enough and is excessive in North Punjab where it is 72.58. Demand for donkey stallions. 127. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:19 138. The relative average results of the previous year's coverings per stallion employed was mules 13.13 donkeys 11.69. These percentages show much better working than last year. This naturally does not show actual results as over three thousand mares could not be traced. Mules purchased for Mountain Batteries. 139. The Army Remount Department (Table viii) obtained 258 Ordnance and 119 Baggage mules, making a total of 377. Of this number, 305 were purchased by that Department, 59 by Officers of the Civil Veterinary Department and 13 by Mountain Battery Officers. These figures compare favorably with last year when 290 were bought. 140. The number of Ordnance mules obtained fell short of the requirements by 82, but I am of opinion that had the Army Remount Department been in a position to devote more time to the purchase of mules, the full number would have been forthcoming. As before stated, I am of opinion that this country is quite able to furnish Ordnance mules to meet all casualties during the year and that foreign countries need only be indented on in case of new Batteries being raised. 141. One thousand two hundred and fifty-six (1,256) mules were purchased for Transport purposes against 1,281 last year, the difference is but trifling.
PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. III.23 PART I-IMPERIAL REPORT. III-HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS. Horse Fairs and Shows. 142. During the year under review the terrible fodder famine which has prevailed in most parts of India has been responsible for the abandonment of no less than 11 Horse Shows. These were situated in the following Provinces:24 150. This was an excellent Show. Ninety-six remounts for Native Cavalry regiments were purchased. Rolls showing the average price paid were submitted by some officers only25 156. Two hundred and fifty-one mules were purchased by Native Cavalry and Native States, as follows:26 165. Lahore and other dealers took away at least 100 from this fair. Their attention this year was entirely devoted to remounts as they knew they would command a ready sale owing to the demand caused by the transfer of horses to South Africa, but what surprised me was the high price paid by them. Rupees 400 was readily given for a good remount and by a return received from the Deputy Commissioner, I find that one dealer bought 31 at an average price of R270. 166. The Army Remount Department only obtained three head of young stock. On this point the Remount Agent states:27 absence of some of the best breeders with regret, still I can safely say that during the many years I have known this Fair I have never seen a better collec- tion of mares and young stock; the latter especially were noticeable for their quality. The owner of a filly two years of age28 General remarks on Punjab Horse Shows abovemen- tioned. 187. Thirteen mules were purchased:29 It is pleasing to find the Australians furnishing such a large proportion of British Cavalry stock, as it proves that they are giving bone. 195. Remarking on the young stock purchased, Captain Turner states:30 "(b) Objection to Government stallions.31. 215. The number of remounts purchased by Native Cavalry, even though the number of Fairs decreased, shows a great increase except in the North-Western Provinces. The figures are given below in order to facilitate comparison:32 that the results can be compared with the best managed districts in British territory. 224. Two hundred and eighteen mares were covered by horse stallions against 285 in 1898-99, and 351 by donkeys against 310 last year. One hundred and twelve horses and 83 mule foals were dropped during the year under review. 225. A most successful Horse Show is held annually in this State. Remark- ing on this Show, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, states:33 21 remounts were obtained for the Alwar Imperial Service Lancers. 231. I have but one recommendation to make with reference to this most excellently managed stud, it is that more Rissala mares might perhaps have been covered by the 9 donkeys. I note that 178 mares belonging to Rissalas were covered by horse stallions, and they are not likely to produce stock that will prove fit for remounts. Bharatpur. 232. The coverings in this State have improved. One hundred and fifty-five mares were covered by horse stallions and 121 by donkeys as compared with 88 and 50 respectively, for the previous year. 233. I am pleased to find that mule-breeding has made a start in this State, as during the past year 198 mules were purchased for the Imperial Service Transport Corps, and the drain from our Fairs to supply these is great. Two new donkeys were purchased. Jaipur. 234. This State is supplied with four Arab stallions which are kept at Jaipur, Sambhar, Hindown and Malpura: they have covered 80 mares between them, exactly the same number covered last year. The stallion kept at Jaipur has covered his full number, the falling off being in the outlying districts. Owing to the great famine existing in this part of the country this was to be ex- pected, but when matters improve I hope to see better results. 235. The stallions kept in the districts are in charge of two Veterinary Assistants and it is pleasing to note that they treated 290 cases when on tour. This is a small beginning but it is nevertheless satisfactory. BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. Kathiawar. 236. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, enters fully into the question of horse-breeding in Native States and as bearing on the question of the value of the indigenous horse as an animal capable of carrying the weight now expected of a troop horse, I deem it advisable to give his remarks in extenso. They also go to prove what I have urged as a system worthy of adoption in other parts of India, viz., that the first crosses with the indigenous mare should be the Arab after which that Thoroughbred blood can be infused: 34 single exception, been bought from private studs, the property of Chiefs, and are the produce of Arabs and Thoroughbreds. Not a single pure Kathi has been bought nor has a single head of young stock been purchased from a Garasia. "These simple facts are difficult to explain but there can be no doubt that Kathiawar as a horse-breeding country has completely changed within the last 60 years and the same causes have affected this country and brought about this change as they have in other parts of India. "This Department, since 1894, has purchased 4 Arab, 1 Thoroughbred and 3 donkey stallions for this Province and completed an arrangement with the then following studs to maintain a Government stallion free of cost with certain restrictions as to their produce. "Mule-breeding is making steady progress and I trust when more donkey stallions are procurable to supply each stud with one if not two stallions." " It is very satisfactory to notice that the system established amongst these studs six years ago has been successful and that they can now be depended upon to produce a certain number of young stock annually that are fully up to our requirements, and this without any outlay or risk on the part of Government except the initial cost of the three stallions lent to Rajkot, Wankaner and Palitana. "Kathiawar has suffered very severely from famine this year and it will take many seasons of prosperity to replace the stock which have either died or been sold." CENTRAL INDIA. 237. Three stallions purchased by this Department are at work PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. IV.37 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. IV.38 "The following machines taken over as unserviceable were put into working order :39 Bhir has been taken over by the District Board of Hissar for the use of cattle owners of the Hissar City. This portion has been wired off from the Government Bhir. Disease. "During the year, I regret to say Foot and Mouth desease, Black Quarter and Rinderpest broke out among the Farm cattle. Although Foot and Mouth disease attacked nearly all the animals, they were only incapaci- tated for a short time and no deaths occurred. "Black Quarter broke out among the young male stook at the Chowni Farm. After careful enquiries the disease was located in a Jhowl near the Farm stables. Precautions were taken to keep the cattle from grazing in the neighbourhood and the spread of the disease was stopped after 6 deaths only had taken place. "With Rinderpest, however, we were not so fortunate. The disease occurred at Hansi among the young female produce and had been probably introduced by stray cattle from the neighbouring villages where the disease had been very virulent for some time previously. Every precaution had been taken to prevent the disease from spreading but without effect. The disease persisted for a considerable time and only died out after claiming many hundred victims. "Veterinary Major Hagger, Assistant to the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, carried out a series of inoculations with Riderpest serum. " While these inoculations at Hansi were being carried out, four young females escaped and found their way back to their old lines at Chowni whither the males had been removed. A few days afterwards Rinderpest was discovered among the animals at Chowni. Veterinary Major Hagger continued his inoculations at Chowni also with much more favourable results. It is estimated that the loss amounted to about 100 bead of stock. This statement may not be considered quite definite, but it must be explained that while many of the post-mortem examinations proved conclusively that the animals had died of Rinderpest, still there were many in which appear- ances were not clearly proved. "It was feared that the disease might spread to the Home Farm and Stables where all the most valuable stock were kept, but by using extraordinary precautions, the scourge was warded off and no cases occurred among the breeding cows or herd bulls. Cultivation. "Much importance has been attached to this branch. As much laud as possible has been taken up and worked by the Farm. "Hitherto it had been the custom only to cultivate a few hundred bighas and to let out the land to culti- vators partly on rent and partly on batai. During the Rabi of 1898-99, 169 bighas 18 biswansis were cultivated by the Farm and 1,291 bighas by cultivators: during 1899-1900, the Farm cultivated for the Kharif 1,155 bighas, but 284 bighas were lost on account of the drought, leaving an affective balance of 871 bighas which came to maturity. For the Rabi of 1899-1900, the Farm cultivation was 1,026 bighas and 849 let out on rental and batai. "In addition to the increased cultivation, the following will show the improvement which has been realised in the rent revenue :PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. V.41 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. V.PART I.45 PART I46 362. The Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, shows the following as the number of importations during the year:47 369. During the year under review the Lieutenant-Governor was pleased to apply the Glanders and Farcy Act, with effect from 1st January 1899, to the whole of the territories of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Rules under the Act were framed and Inspectors and Veterinary Practitioners were appointed. 370. By Notification No. 731-1-889 C. of 1900, powers were conferred on Veterinary Practitioners to enable them to test any suspected horse with Mallein, and as being the first Province in which this most useful measure has been introduced, I deem it advisable to give the rules in extenso :48 thirdly, by lime-washing in the proportion of one maund of good fresh lime to 20 gallons of water. "(d) It is useless to apply the phenyle solution or lime-wash until after thoroughly cleansing. "(e) After horse-boxes have been cleaned and lime-washed, the lime-wash should be allowed to dry, and should then be carefully brushed off, as, if this precaution is not observed, the eyes and nostrils of animals subsequently occupying the vehicle are liable to suffer. "3. At principal stations where a train halts for any time, station masters should see that horse-boxes on the train containing horses are cleaned out through the trap doors in front and rear before an engine is attached to the train, and that the roof tanks are supplied with clean water. "4. On application to the station master of any station, Civil Veterinary Officers should forthwith be allowed to inspect any or all vehicles used for the conveyance of live-stock which may at the time be standing at their station. "5. The administrations of the several railways should forward to the Inspector-General of the Civil Veterinary Department a list of their stations at which the cleansing of vehicles, under these rules, will ordi- narily be carried out. 375. I have deemed it advisable to reproduce these rules in the Annual Administration Report of this Department in order that it may be widely known that cleanliness of boxes may now be expected, and I think that if Remount Officers would only see that these rules are strictly adhered to before they place their horses in the trucks provided by the various Railway Admin- istrations, many cases of contagious disease might be avoided. 376. It will be noticed that by rule 4 the inspection of these vehicles has been placed in the hands of the officers of this Department, and already, during the past quarter, inspections have been held on the following Railways :PART I.51 PART I.52 Rawalpindi, to institute such measures as were likely to eradicate the disease and to prevent its extension to British territory until it abated. I then returned to Simla to attend the Railway Conference at which the method of cleansing horse-boxes and cattle trucks was discussed. The advisability of delegating the inspection to officers of this Department was also brought before the Con- ference. Decisions on both these points were arrived at, and I feel that the result must tend to the diminution of contagious diseases in India. 384. On 20th September I proceeded to Quetta and attended the Horse Show. I also inspected the arrangements which had been made for the preven- tion of horses affected with glanders and farcy leaving the Show: these being necessary owing to the prevalence of glanders at Quetta. I discussed the question of the Northern Horse Trade with the Agent to the Governor-General. 385. I visited the Bahawalpore State and inspected the Stud and en route to Hissar I inspected the dispensary at Ferozepore. At Hissar, I went very carefully into the question of fodder which owing to the drought had become one of much importance. I came to the conclusion that with the amount of cultivation which had been undertaken we would be able to maintain the cattle until the monsoon of 1900. 386. I then visited the Alwar State and inspected the Stud and paddocks. I was able then to draw the attention of the Political Agent to the fact that mule-breeding had not extended as much as it might. 387. I then proceeded to Ajmer and inspected the Veterinary School. My visit enabled me to lay before the Agent to the Governor-General in Rajputana certain points connected with the financial position of this Institution. 388. At Kapurthala, which State I next visited, I held an inspection of mares and young stock which was most encouraging. I then proceeded to Rawalpindi to inspect the stallions before leaving for the districts. 389. I attended the Horse Show at Hansi and the Amritsar Horse Fair. I then proceeded to Bombay and en route I visited Poona to discuss with the Director of Land Records and Agriculture the subject of the system of preventive inoculation for rinderpest; this subject was of much importance at that time owing to large numbers of cattle being collected at the various Cattle Camps in Guzerat. I then visited Bombay and interviewed the various Arab dealers, but finding that the best horses had not arrived, I deferred my pur- chases for a week. 390. I then proceeded to Madras, at the direction of the Government of India, to confer with the Commissioner of Revenue Settlement and Director of the Department of Land Records and Agriculture; at this interview the following points were discussed :53 392. Early in January I attended the following committees:54 destroying locusts. Subsequently he visited the Saharunpore and Bijnor dis- tricts and inoculated cattle. He also visited the Remount Depôts at Kurnal and Hapur to investigate outbreaks of glanders and lymphangitis epizootica. Assistant Bacte- riologist. 403. This officer visited the districts of Bulandshahr and Bareilly (North- Western Provinces). He also visited the district of Simla (Punjab). All these visits were connected with virulent outbreaks of rinderpest. Personnel of the Department. 404. During the year under review certain changes have occurred in the appointments held by the Officers of the Department, but no resignations or appointments have been made. Appointments, 1st April 1899. 31st March 1900. Remarks. Inapector-General, Civil Veter- inary Department. Veterinary Colonel A. E. Queripel. Veterinary Colonel A. E. Queripel. Assistant to Inspector-Gene- ral, Civil Veterinary De- partment. Veterinary Lieutenant Holmes (officiating). Veterinary Major Hagger. Appointed 7th July 1899. Imperial Bacteriologist . . Captain Rogers, I. M.S. (officiating). Dr. Lingard . . Returned from furlough (m. c). 7th January 1900. Assistant Bacteriologist . Veterinary Lieutenant Walker. Veterinary Lieutenant Walker. Superintendent, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar. Veterinary Major Gunn. Veterinary Major Gunn. Superintendent, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Veterinary Major Binge. Veterinary Major Ringe. Ditto, North Punjab . Veterinary Lieutenant Trydell. Veterinary Lieutenant Trydell. Ditto, South Punjab . Veterinary Lieutenant Smith. Veterinary Lieutenant Smith. Ditto Baluchistan and Sind. Veterinary Captain Maxwell. Veterinary Captain Maxwell. Principal, Lahore Veterinary College. Veterinary Captain Joslen (officiating). Veterinary Captain Pease. Returned from furlough, 2nd January 1900. Professor, Ditto . . Veterinary Licutenant Dawson. Veterinary Lieutenant Dawson. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. Veterinary Major Brodie Mills. Veterinary Major Brodie Mills. Assistant Principal, Veterinary College. Veterinary Lieutenant Farmer (officiating). Veterinary Lieutenant Baldrey. Reverted to substantive appointment, 8th November 1899. Superintendent, C. V. D., Rnj- putana. Veterinary Major Hagger, Veterinary Captain Joslen. Appointed 8th November 1899, Ditto Bengal . . Veterinary Major Raymond. Veterinary Major Raymond. Ditto Bombay . . Veterinary Lieutenant Baldrey. Veterinary Major Morgan. Returned from furlough, 7th November 1899. Ditto Madras . . Vacaut . . . Veterinary Lieutenant Holmes. Appointed 10th February 1899. Ditto Burma . . Veterinary Captaiu Evans. Veterinary Captain Evans. 1st Furlough officer . . Veterinary Lieutenant Farmer. Veterinary Lieutenant Farmer. Posted to Hissar to learn work of Government Cattle Farm. 2nd Furlough officer . . Veterinary Lieutenant Smith. Vacant. No changes have occurred in the horse-breeding circles. 405. I last year noted that this Department was undermanned. During the year under review the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for India has been pleased to sanction an increase of three officers, viz. : 55 When these officers are appointed, this Department will be enabled to do much for the preservation of cattle than it has hitherto done. 406. The question of the appointment of an officer for Kashmir is still in abeyance owing to the recruitment question not having been settled. In the meanwhile, Mr. Clemence has been appointed Veterinary Inspector, working under the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, to guard against the introduction of contagious diseases into India. 407. There remains to be still considered the advisability of appointing an officer to each of the following Provinces whose duties will be those solely connected with cattle:GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1899-1900. PART II.59 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1899-1900. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PART II.60 where I think a pony would be useful. Hazara district, I am glad to be able to record, has done very well with the one they purchased during the year under report, and that the Imperial horse lent to them to serve un- branded mares have covered no less than 61 and 62 mares, respectively. This could not be more encouraging. "The good the District Board pony does cannot be overestimated, as he is, so to speak, the first stepping stone towards the improvement and keepiug up of stock. His mare progeny is frequently branded, and the smaller is often put to a Jack the result of which is the production of a well bred mule. Another point in their favour is, they produce an animal which does not cost the poorer breeder much to feed." 420. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, states :PART II.63 PART II.PART II67 PART II68 Whenever reports of serious cattle disease reach me, an Imperial Salutri is sent to investigate and report, and necessary precautions are carried out". Bengal. 440. The large number of 215,891 cases of disease were reported in this Province, of which 69,021 died, giving a percentage of 31.67. By far the greatest number of cases were those of rinderpest, of which there were 60,044. The death rate from this disease in 46 districts averaged 49.06 per cent.: this is of interest, showing as it does the average mortality amongst plains cattle in this disease. 441. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, makes the following report on the subject of the method of reporting cattle disease in Bengal :69 448. Charbon Symptomatique was reported from five districts. The total number attacked amounted to 158, of which 93 per cent. proved fatal. 449. As bearing on the excessive fodder famine which has existed in the Deccan and Guzerat and as showing the mortality which has arisen therefrom, I deem it advisable to give, in extenso, certain extracts from Veterinary Major Morgan's able report. Remarking on the mortality arising from famine, he states:70 disease would most probably have spread rapidly and the mortality would have been great. The disease was of the most virulent type as the majority of deaths occurred within five days. Our unsuccessful efforts to reproduce the disease, the small number actually attacked in proportion to the number unavoidably exposed to contagion can only be accounted for in the two following ways. That the great heat and desiccating effects of the sun are antagonistic to the disease or that a very large percentage of the Guzerat cattle are immune. The great mortality from debility (famine) in Nos. 2 and 6 Camps was due to the fact that many animals were admitted in the beginning that should have been rejected. It is well known that cattle starved to a certain point never recover. When in this state, even if placed under the most favourable conditions, they linger on for weeks and eventually die. Mr. Mollison and I endeavoured to some extent to rectify this and sent many animals that had already been accepted, to the Pinjrapol. Should the misfortune ever arise again to form similar camps, no efforts should be spared to procure men with sufficient knowledge of famine cattle to be able to tell at a glance whether animals ought to be accepted or rejected, as I feel sure that on this first careful selection the success or otherwise of a famine cattle camp mainly depends. Those camps, where animals were at first carefully selected, have shown a very slight mortality and scarcely above what was to be expected under normal conditions; but those on the contrary where all animals were taken regardless of condition, show a very high mortality, entirely due to the above cause. Cattle sent by rail to forest lands.71 show that prompt reports of outbreaks, segregation of the sick, and general careful supervision has yielded excellent results. Not only has the extension of disease been checked, but in many instances it has been stamped out. A great advance has also been made in setting apart certain areas (on which in many places sheds have been erected) for the accommodation of animals suffering from contagious disease. Copies of the rules have been freely distributed, and I would recommend that this means of acquainting the villagers with the rules be continued as in this manner only can the people learn the good intentions of Government. Deputy Commissioners, Sub- divisional Officers, and Township Officers have, when on tour, done everything to point out the advantages of segregation, etc., and frequently take the Veterinary Assistants with them. Veterinary Assistants have received standing orders to explain to the headmen and villagers the benefits likely to accrue from a close observance of the rules. "Until the villagers on their own initiative take immediate precautions on the outbreak of disease, we must be prepared to hear of losses of cattle in the remoter parts of many districts and on distant grazing- grounds, as it is only during the open season that rapid communication is possible; consequently reports of outbreaks are frequently not received till most of the mischief is done, and when the Veterinary Assistants and others arrive at the scene of outbreak they are too late to be of any service." 453. Cattle disease and mortality does not appear to be as carefully reported in Upper as in Lower Burma, but from various reports received there can be no doubt that cattle disease was much more prevalent than during the preceding year. At the same time none of the outbreaks assumed the alarming proportion they occasionally do in Lower Burma. 454. Reporting on the returns of mortality, the Superintendent states :72 "The dissemination of veterinary knowledge among the people is still progressing very slowly. There are now 8 dispensaries open in the province, and Veterinary Assistants make short tours in the interior of the districts; but the owners who bring cattle for treatment are as yet few, chiefly residents of towns or villages in the close vicinity of the towns. Several thousand copies of leaflets by Veterinary Lieutenant Trydell on the prevention of the spread of contagious and infectious diseases of cattle, and by Veterinary Captain Gunn on the treatment of the four more deadly forms of cattle diseases have been distributed among the people, but these will only appeal to the most educated among the agricultural classes. Yet the results are not altogether dis- couraging. From Chanda, Bhandara, Balaghat and Chindwara come reports that the advantages of segregation are gradually being recognized, while in the first-named district it is stated that some persons have tried the treatment indicated in the pamphlet with good results. Elsewhere, and most notably in Chhattisgarh, the people cling to their traditional methods with hide-bound steadfastness." 460. These figures were not inserted in the statistical table (Table M) as the report reached me after mine had gone to press. 461. The Director of Land Records and Agriculture submits a most interest- ing report on cattle disease and the results of the famine which I would have liked to have inserted in extenso, but under the orders of the Government of India, bearing on the preparation of this report, I shall only give the following précis:73 PREVENTIVE INOCULATION AGAINST RINDERPEST IN THE FIELD. 466. This is the first occasion on which I am able to report that this Department has been in a position to deal with the various outbreaks of rinderpest, and I trust to be able to note its extension in future. 467. The work has been entrusted to the Assistant to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, who has worked indefatigably. He has tried the three systems, each of which have their advocates in South Africa, viz. :74 469. The above will show that the three systems are eminently successful in dealing with outbreaks, but that owing to the fact that immunity is not acquired by the Bile methods until 10 days after inoculation, the percentage of attacks is greater during that period than it is by the simultaneous method. Bombay. 470. Preventive inoculation has been carried in certain of the cattle camps in Bombay. Two hundred and eighteen head of cattle were inoculated by the simultaneous method by Veterinary Major Hagger, Assistant to the Inspector- General, Civil Veterinary Department, at Ahmedabad. Remarking on this subject, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states :75 nary Inspector who is a member of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, England. Before the horses reach the port of shipment, they are examined by the District (inland) Inspectors and travel to the port on the Inspector's permit. If they come from a district in which cattle ticks have been known to exist they are, before being moved, thoroughly dipped or disinfected and on arrival at the port of shipment are twice disinfected by the Government Veterinary Inspector at that place. That officer then issues his certificate that the horses are free from disease or infection. 477. A copy of the form of certificate has been received and the precautions taken, as noted above, have been deemed sufficient guarantee against the introduction of the disease into India. 478. The various Maritime Governments have been asked to take such steps as will ensure the agreement come to between the Queensland and Indian Governments being given effect to, and all firms interested in the horse trade have been informed that if Queensland horses are introduced into India in infraction of the agreement come to or if ticks are actually found on any shipment, the Government of India will be obliged to put the Live-stock Importation Act, IX of 1898, into force. 479. The precautions taken by the Queensland Government, if properly carried out, will guard this country against the introduction of the disease and will not interfere in any way with the horse trade. Introductory. VETERINARY DISPENSARIES. 480. Table L will show that the total number of cattle treated at dispen- saries was as follows :76 Sind. 486. The four dispensaries in Sind continue to do good work. The follow- ing number of cases was treated;77 VETERINARY ASSISTANTS. 496. During the year under review, material progress has been made to- wards the completion of the scheme whereby each province will be equipped with a Subordinate Veterinary Establishment; this will enable the Civil Veteri- nary Department to deal with all questions connected with the welfare of the cattle of this country. During the past few years, whilst I have held administrative charge of this Department, I have striven to effect this, feel- ing as I do that our first duties should be those which embrace all questions involving the improvement in the various breeds and the health of cattle in this country. As will be seen under the section of 'Cattle disease,' we have made great strides during the past year in the introduction of the preventive system of inoculation against rinderpest, but without a properly trained subordinate establishment, we are unable to make that progress which I would like to see effected. Punjab. 497. The scheme adopted by the Punjab is about the most complete and is one well worthy of consideration. A Provincial graded service will be formed and in it will be amalgamated all Veterinary Assistants employed by the various Local Bodies as well as those now paid from Imperial funds. This Provincial service will, I am certain, work well as it will enable promotions to be made for good work, which under the present system is impossible. Pro- vision is made in the Punjab for 104 Veterinary Assistants and 6 Inspectors; coupled with this scheme is the employment of a third Veterinary officer whose duties will be those solely connected with cattle. This appointment has received the sanction of the Secretary of State, and when the officer is appointed, the Punjab will be in a position to take up all questions con- nected with cattle. N.-W. Provinces. 498. This important subject has always met with attention at the hands of the Government of the North-Western Provinces. In these Provinces it is intended to employ 96 Veterinary Assistants under various Local Bodies and 6 Inspectors under the Provincial Government. Already 33 Veterinary Assistants and 2 Inspectors have been appointed. As in the Punjab, an extra officer for duties connected with cattle is much needed. Bombay. 499. In Bombay it is proposed to employ 24 Veterinary Assistants of whom 19 have been appointed. This number is independent of the Inspectors who may hereafter be found necessary. Madras. 500. Madras alone remains with no provision to combat the great mortality which now exists amongst the cattle in that Presidency, and at the request of the Government of India, I conferred with the Board of Revenue in December last, and as a result of the Conference I was enabled to draw up a comprehensive scheme which, if adopted by the Government of Madras, would enable a Veterinary College to be started for the training of Veteri- nary Assistants, who afterwards would find employment in the districts. It also provided for the employment of a certain number of reliable graduates who would assist the Superintendent, thus enabling him to be of some value, for single handed as he is at present (the Stock Inspectors now employed being next to useless), he is totally unable to cope with the work. 501. The scheme, as drawn up by me, throws but little expense on the Pro- vincial Revenues, as it is thought that, as in Bombay and Calcutta, Native gentlemen will contribute towards the erection of the College, and in fact already a sum of Rs. 10,000 has been offered by one gentleman who is inter- ested in the matter. 502. The Director of Land Records and Agriculture states :78 WORK DONE BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS. Introductory. 504. Table N will show that 218 Veterinary Assistants were employed during the year under review, that they visited 32,827 villages and treated 181,536 head of cattle; if to this number is added those treated at Dispensaries, we find that 236,000 animals were treated. No comparison can be drawn with last year's working as no abstract has hitherto been submitted. The mortality amounting as it did to only 11.5 per cent. must be considered satisfactory. N.-W. Provinces, 505. The Veterinary Assistants treated the large number of about 48,000 head of cattle and other animals. Amongst this number were 11,317 cases of foot-and-mouth disease. It is in the treatment of such diseases, which are amen- able to medical aid, that the services of Veterinary Assistants are of great value rather than in the treatment of cases of rinderpest in which disease but little can be done until preventive inoculation is introduced. 506. The work done by the Veterinary Assistants in these Provinces is very satisfactory, especially when it is borne in mind that only 32 out of 48 dis- tricts have employed them up to date. Punjab. 507. Seventy-three Veterinary Assistants were employed: they visited 13,817 villages and treated 56,998 head of cattle. 508. Much good work is done by these men, and I am glad to find that they are gaining the confidence of the zemindars and that complaints regarding them are very few. Their work will be better still when they are under more super- vision than they are at present. Sind. 509. Four Veterinary Assistants are employed: they visited 102 villages and treated 4,699 cases. The mortality among such cases as were treated amoun- ting as it did to only 1.5 per cent., must be looked upon as very satisfactory. Bombay. 510. The present establishment of Veterinary Assistants is 18, but in the near future it is contemplated to add 9 itinerating men and to appoint a senior Veterinary Assistant. When the establishment is complete, it will consist of:79 Burma 515. Each Veterinary Assistant has a dispensary at his head-quarters, Burma When on tour attending outbreaks, he takes a chest containing drugs likely to be required. Table N shows the following results:PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. IV.83 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. IV.84 532. This question requires to be most carefully considered as the deterio- ration in the breeds of cattle must continue unless careful selection of bulls is made: I, however, fear that this Department can do nothing in this important matter until these provinces have an extra officer to deal with all questions relating to the welfare of cattle. Punjab. 533. No information is available on this point from this province. The deterioration of cattle is only too visible at the large fairs held in various centres, and the whole question will have to be very carefully considered on the appointment of a third Superintendent. Then, I think, a comprehensive scheme should be drawn up. Bombay. 534. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, goes carefully into this subject. The Collectors of 18 districts have been consulted, but with the exception of Dharwar and Surat, who simply say they will consider the matter, and Sholapur and Poona, who are willing to assist, the remaining 14 are either unable or unwilling to assist in any measures to improve the breed of cattle. 535. The Superintendent divides his remarks into two parts, viz., the cattle belonging to owners in the Krishna Valley, Northern Guzerat, the Gir hills of Kathiawar. Amongst these he points out that the breeds being of value, the owners are quite alive to the necessity of keeping their breeds pure. Referring to these breeds he states:85 "The proposed Hathwa Farm.PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. V.89 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. V.90 546.The various points raised in the above recommendations have been referred to the various Local Governments, and if adopted, must lead to the increased practical utility of the Veterinary Assistants. 547.The conference also considered the officers who should be appointed examiners and the method in which the examinations should be conducted: they also laid down the percentage of marks which would be necessary to ensure a 'Pass.' 548.These points have also been referred to the Local Governments con- cerned, and if adopted, will result in uniformity in the standard of men turned out from the various Colleges. VETERINARY COLLEGES AND SCHOOLS. 549.By the revised rules for the preparation of the Annual Administration Report of this Department, the review of the work done at the various Veteri- nary Educational establishments in India should be compressed as much as possible. To be concise, I purpose reviewing the whole of the Colleges under separate headings, as I am opinion that this will render it more clear. Examinations. 550.The points which call for notice are the numbers which passed. Only the results in the examination of the final year's students can be compared, as the first year's students at Ajmer and Lahore are examined by the teaching staff. I hope to see more uniformity in this respect, when the recommendations of the Umballa Conference are accepted by the various Local Governments. No. passed. No. failed. Percentage of passes. (1) Bengal . . . . . 15 1 93.7 (2) Lahore . . . . . 47 7 87.0 (3) Ajmer . . . . . 16 8 66.6 (4) Bombay . . . . 9 10 47.3 Bengal heads the list, and it is satisfactory to learn that in the important subject of Operative Surgery, the students showed scientific skill. Lahore comes next, which reflects great credit on the teaching staff, but I regret to note that the students were wanting in the practical portions of Pharmacy, viz., prescribing and the recognition of drugs. At Ajmer, the percentage of passes is very fair. This school has suffered during the year from frequent changes in the teaching staff; three officers having held the appointment of Principal. Bombay comes last with a very low percentage of passes, and again the Board of Examiners remarked on the want of practical knowledge of the students. They also noted on the physical unfitness of some of the men, which is a most important point considering the hard work which Veterinary Assist- ants are at times called upon to perform. Practice. 551. The following will show the number of indoor and outdoor patients admitted during the year:91 application was received by the Principal of the Lahore Veterinary College for 100 Nalbunds for South Africa. 553. At Lahore, 11 men were under training, 7 of whom passed the examination. On this subject, the Principal states:92 566.Ajmer.PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. VI.95 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. VI.PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. VII.99 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. VII.-GENERAL. Conclusion. 574.I feel that I cannot close this report without placing on record the good work which has been done by all the officers of this Department: their hearty co-operation in carrying out the various measures tending to the development of horse and mule breeding and connected with the welfare of the cattle in this country has led to the favorable results recorded in this Report. The Department is small, and the work expected of the various Superintendents is most onerous, entailing as it does great exertion and exposure, still one and all have always responded cheerfully to any suggestions which I have made, although they may have entailed extra work on already overworked men. 575.I had almost decided to omit the mention of any particular officers as it appears invidious to do so where all have worked so well, still I feel compelled to bring to the notice of the Government of India the following:PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. TABLES.
iii TABLE I. IMPERIAL. Return of Government Horse, Pony and Donkey stallions for the official year 1899-1900. DETAILS. GOVERNMENT HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS. GOVERNMENT DONKEY STALLIONS. HORSES PONIES Thorough-bred English. Three-quarter bred. Half-bred English, and Norfolk Trotters. Hackney. Roadster. Australian. Arab. Persian. Turkoman. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Country-bred. Total. Total horses and ponies. Spanish (Catalonian). Arab. Home-bred. Country-bred. Poitou-Catalan. Punjabi. Italian. French. Persian. Cyprian. Guzerati. Meshod. Ghazni. Zanzibar. Total. Balance on 1st April 1899 . . . 98 5 58 44 2 47 131 ... ... 5 390 17 1 18 408 25 13 7 13 1 38 173 3 27 99 ... 2 1 4 406 Increase Received by importation . 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... 8 ... ... ... 8 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 ... ... ... ... 51 Purchased in India . . ... ... ... ... ... 10 30 ... ... ... 40 2 ... 2 42 ... ... 1 8 ... 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 Received from Instruction ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Farm. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Errors in last year's Return . . . ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 1 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 6 TOTAL 106 6 58 46 2 57 162 ... ... 5 442 19 1 20 462 44 13 8 27 1 51 173 3 27 132 1 2 1 4 487 Decrease Died . . . . . 6 ... 2 2 ... 1 3 ... ... ... 14 1 ... 1 15 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 2 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 6 Destroyed . . . . 5 ... 8 4 ... 2 10 ... ... ... 29 2 ... 2 31 2 ... ... ... ... ... 15 2 ... 7 ... ... ... 1 27 Sold . . . . . 6 2 4 7 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 21 ... ... 21 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 5 ... ... ... ... 8 Errors in last year's Return . . . ... ... 4 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... 5 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 TOTAL 17 2 18 13 1 4 14 ... ... ... 69 3 ... 3 72 2 ... 1 6 1 3 18 2 2 12 ... ... ... 1 48 Balance on 31st March 1900 . . . 89 4 40 33 1 53 148 ... ... 5 373 16 1 17 390 42 13 7 21 ... 48 155 1 25 120 1 2 1 3 439 In North-Western Provinces and Oudh. (allotted) 17 2 11 10 ... 13 26 ... ... 3 82 ... ... ... 82 10 3 4 9 ... 4 40 9 19 ... 1 99 In North-Western Provinces and Oudh (unallotted). ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... In Rajputana . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... In North Punjab . . . . . 27 ... 21 12 ... 16 32 ... ... 1 109 ... ... 109 11 3 2 12 ... 25 66 1 8 49 1 ... ... 2 180 In South Punjab (allotted) . . . 23 2 8 9 1 12 31 ... ... 1 87 ... ... ... 87 14 5 1 ... ... 19 34 ... 7 44 ... ... ... ... 124 Ditto (unallotted) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... In Baluchistan . . . . . 7 ... ... ... 10 25 ... ... ... 42 ... ... ... 42 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 3 In Sind . . . . . . . 5 ... ... ... ... 1 17 ... ... ... 23 ... ... ... 23 6 2 ... ... ... ... 14 ... 1 6 ... 1 1 ... 31 In Central India . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 In Bengal. . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 In Deccan. . . . . . 6 ... ... 2 ... 1 12 ... ... ... 21 14 1 15 36 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... In Guzerat and Kathiawar . . . 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 8 2 ... 2 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL 89 4 40 33 1 53 148 ... ... 5 373 16 1 17 390 42 13 7 21 ... 48 155 1 25 120 1 2 1 3 439
iv TABLE II. IMPERIAL. Statement showing the Ages of stallions on the Register at the close of the year under report, viz., 1899-1900. PROVINCES. HORSES. DONKEYS. REMARKS. Up to 10 years. Over 10 and upto 15 years. Over 15 years. Total. Up to 10 years. Over 10 and up to 15 years. Over 15 years. Total. North-Western Provinces and Oudh (allotted). . . . . . . 49 28 5 82 59 27 13 99 North-Western Provinces and Oudh (unallotted) . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rajputana . . . . . 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... North Punjab . . . . 56 42 11 109 109 35 36 180 South Punjab (allotted) . . . 47 33 7 87 87 28 9 124 Ditto (unallotted) . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Baluchistan . . . . 23 18 1 42 1 1 1 3 Sind . . . . . . 15 8 ... 23 23 6 2 31 Central India . . . . ... ... ... ... Not furnished. Bengal . . . . . . ... ... ... ... Deccan . . . . . Not furnished. Guzerat . . . . . TOTAL . . 191 129 24 344 279 97 61 437
V TABLE III. IMPERIAL Abstract of Casualties of Government Horse, Pony and Donkey, stallions during the year 1899-1900. PROVINCE. NUMBER DIED NUMBER DESTROYED. TOTAL. PERCENTAGE OF DEATHS PERCENTAGE DESTROYED GENERAL PERCENTAGE REMARKS. Horse. Pony. Donkey. Horse. Pony. Donkey. Horse. Pony. Donkey. Horse. Pony. Donkey. Horse. Pony. Donkey. Horse. Pony. Donkey. North-Western Provinces and Oudh . . . 2 ... 2 10 ... 13 12 ... 15 1.98 ... 1.61 9 90 ... 10.48 11.88 ... 12.09 Rajputana . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Punjab . . . . . . . 7 ... 3 4. ... 6 11 ... 9 7.21 ... 225 4.12 ... 4.51 11.34 ... 6.76 South Punjab . . . . . . . 3 ... 1 10 ... 7 13 ... 8 277 ... 0.86 9.25 ... 6 03 12.03 ... 6.89 Baluchistan . . . . . . . 1 ... ... 3 ... ... 4 ... ... 250 ... ... 7.50 ... ... 10.00 ... ... Sind . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 1 1 1 1 1 1 ... ... ... 6.66 10000 3.84 6.66 100.00 3.84 Central India . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bengal . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Deccan . . . . . . . . 1 1 ... 1 1 ... 2 2 ... 3.57 5.88 ... 3.57 5.88 ... 7.14 11.76 ... Guzerat . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . . 14 1 6 29 2 27 43 3 33 3.66 5.88 1.49 7.59 11.76 6.71 11.25 17.64 8.20 NOTE.vi TABLE IV. IMPERIAL. Sale Roll of Government Horse, Pony and Donkey stallions during 1899-1900. Brand No. Name. Class. Age. Horse, Pony or Donkey. Name of purchaser. Amount sold for. Cause of rejection. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. Years. R 134 Bob Gould . T. B. E. . 7 Horse . Rajah Balwant Singh 1,000 Unfit for stud work. 105 Cæsar . . ¾ bred. 4 Do. . Colonel A. M. Crofts 1,100 Do. 2317 Big Heart . H. B. E. 11 Do. . Babu K. P. Bose . 85 Do. 2526 Spinning Shot . Hackney 10 Do. . Babu Kedarnath . 410 Do. 2363 White Star . H. B. E. 10 Do. . Colonel A. M. Crofts 620 Do. 2471 Wallace . . Hackney 10 Do. . Radha Mohan . . 375 Do. 2378 Clarence . . ¾ bred . 11 Do. . Lieut. Heywood . 210 Do. SOUTH PUNJAB. Years. R 11 Lord Wesley . Hackney . 7 Horse . Colonel A. M. Crofts 1,250 Incurable Bursati. 10 Jesuit . . Do. . 6 Do. . Do. 470 Bad stock getter. 2369 Kimarbaz . Arab 10 Do. . Do. 500 Very bad fore legs and bad stock getter. 137 Cormorant . T. B. E. . 6 Do. . Do. 1,200 Unfit for stud work. 138 Carradale . . Do. . 5 Do. . Do. 1,500 Do. 2660 Agapo . . Do. . 7 Do. . J. C, Smith, Esq. . S05 Misshapen and a bad stock getter. 141 Wet Blanket . Do. . 6 Do. . H. H. Maharajah of Patiala. 600 Unfit for stud work. 135 Trollop . . Do. . 4 Do. . Do. 4,400 Do. 77 Falmouth . T. B. Aus. 6 Do. . Colonel P. K. Doyne 1,100 Refusing to cover mares. 212 Kharna . . Cyprian . 4 Donkey Maler Kotla State . Equivalent of £21-14-10 each. For stud purposes. 213 Sidh . . Do. . 6 Do. . Jodhpur State . Do. 202 Jogia . . Do. . 7 Do. . Wadwhan State . Do. 140 Kasauli . . Do. . 6 Do. . Bharatpur State . Do. 17 Fitna . . Do. . 8 Do. . Do. Do. 461 Rajshahi . . Persian . 11 Do. . Jasram . . . 10 Refused to cover mares. 105 Bandia . . Punjabi . 4 Do. . Do. 29 Do. NORTH PUNJAB Years. R 9 Newbiggin Rufus Hackney . 8 Horse . Diwan Dowlat Ram . 185 Bad stock getter. 181 Pura . . C. B. . 6 Donkey Kalian Singh . 22 Unfit for stud work. BALUCHISTAN. Years. R 2333 Valour N. T. . 11 Horse . Dist. Superintendent, Police. 150 Do. 2383 The Pilot . H. B. E. . 11 Do. . Secretary, Cantonment Committee, Quetta. 125 Do. 2573 Augustus . . Hackney 8 Do. . Dist. Superintendent, Police. 150 Do. BOMBAY. Years. R 1 Model N. T. . ... Horse . Mr. J. Kendall 61 Unsuitable for mares in the Presidency.
vii TABLE V. IMPERIAL. Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1899-1900. Horse or Pony. CLASS. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. RAJPUTANA. REMARKS. Stallions on register. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD NUMBER OF MARES COVERED AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT RESULTS OF PRE- VIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not hold. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Stallions on register. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse. Thorough-bred English. 17 16 13 883 670 55.18 51.53 145 431 94 11.15 33.15 7.23 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Three-quarter bred 2 2 2 100 111 50.00 5550 31 69 11 1550 34.50 5.50 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Half-bred and Norfolk Trotters. 31 10 13 543 599 54.30 46.07 137 419 43 10.53 3223 3.30 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hackney 10 10 12 575 685 57.50 57.08 169 445 71 14.08 37.08 5.91 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Roadster . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 9 8 499 426 55.40 53.25 116 268 42 14.50 33.50 5.25 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Arab 26 19 17 817 723 43.00 42 50 196 453 74 11.52 26 64 4.35 1 1 1 13 47 13.00 47.00 Not known. Persian ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ...... ... Country-bred . . 3 2 2 108 76 54.00 38.00 27 40 9 13.50 20.00 4.50 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL 82 68 67 3,525 3,290 51.80 49.10 821 2,125 341 12.25 31.71 5.13 1 1 1 13 47 13.00 47.00 ... ... ... ... ... Pony . Arab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pegu . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. .. ... TOTAL ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL . 82 68 67 3,525 3,290 51.80 49.10 821 2,125 344 12.25 31.71 5.13 1 1 1 13 47 13.00 47.00 Not known.
viii Servíces and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1899-1900ix Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1899-1900x Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1899-1900xi Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1899-1900xii Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1899-1900xiii TABLE VI. IMPERIAL. Abstract showing the total number and pedigrees of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1899-1900. By whom purchased. Total number purchased. PEDIGREES. PERCENTAGE OF PEDIGREES. Farnished. Not furnished. Furnished. Not furnished. Army Remount Department . . 122 109 13 89.34 1066 Native Cavalry Regiments . . 1,613 358 1,259 22.19 78.04 Police . North-Western Provinces . 57 5 52 8.77 91.22 Punjab . 39 ... 39 ... 100.00 Bombay . . . 17 5 12 294 70.58 Sind . . . . 4 4 ... 100 00 ... Imperial Service Troops . . . 185 13 172 7.02 92.97 TOTAL. 2,037 494 1,547 24.20 75 94
xiv TABLE VII. IMPERIAL. Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900. Glass of Donkey Stallions. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION. EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OR PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEARS COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule breeding. For donkey breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony marcs. Donkey marcs. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey marcs. Stallions on register. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule produce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Catalonians . . 10 2 3 ... ... 98 206 ... ... 49.00 68.66 ... .... 54 116 36 ... ... ... 18.00 3860 12 00 ... .. ... Arab . . 3 3 3 ... ... 179 152 ... ... 59 60 50.66 ... ... 42 79 31 ... ... ... 14.00 26 30 10 30 ... ... ... Home-berd . . 4 3 3 2 2 147 141 79 73 49.00 47'00 39.50 36.50 58 71 12 22 44 7 19.30 23.60 400 11.00 22.00 3 50 Punjabi . . 4 3 3 1 1 135 108 36 20 45.00 3600 36.00 20 00 38 52 18 4 16 ... 12.60 17.30 6.00 4.00 1600 ... Italian . . 40 40 45 1 1 2,057 2,092 30 34 51.42 46.48 30 00 34 00 542 1,229 321 15 14 5 12.04 27.30 7.10 15.00 1400 5.00 French . . ... 1 2 ... 37 60 ... ... 3700 30.00 ... ... 13 37 .10 ... ... ... 6 50 18.50 5.00 ... ... ... Persian . . 9 6 6 2 2 330 324 56 52 55.00 54 00 28.00 26.00 111 166 47 17 30 5 18.50 27.60 7.80 8.50 15.00 2 50 Cyprian . . 19 14 13 ... ... 730 589 ... ... 52.14 45.30 ... ... 163 325 101 ... ... ... 12.50 25.00 7.70 ... ... ... Zanzibari . . 1 ... ... 2 2 ... ... 95 92 ... ... 47.50 46.00 ... ... ... 29 49 14 ... ... ... 14.50 24.50 7.00 Country bred . . 9 8 7 ... ... 370 366 ... ... 46.25 52.28 ... ... 122 193 51 ... ... ... 17.40 27.50 7.20 ... ... ... TOTAL 99 80 85 8 8 4,083 4,038 296 271 51.03 47.50 37.00 33.87 1,143 2,268 627 87 153 31 13.40 26.60 7.30 10.80 19.10 3.80
xv Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900xvi Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900xvii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900xviii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900xix Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey staions during 1899-1900xx Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900xxi Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900xxii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900xxiii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1899-1900-continued. Class of Donkey Stallions. GUZERAT. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For male- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Stallions on register. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. rear under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Nil.
xxiv Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1899-1900xxv TABLE VIII. IMPERIAL. Statement of Mules purchased by Government during 1899-1900. Mules purchased for Total number purchased. REMARKS. Remount Department Ordnance . 258 305 purchased by Army Remount Department Officers. 59 purchased by Civil Veterinary Department Officers. 18 purchased by Mountain Artil- lery Officers. Baggage . . 119 Transport . . *1,256 TOTAL . . 1,633 PURCHASED AT Fairs and shows. Elsewhere. Total. In Madr as . . . . . ... 172 172 In Bombayxxvi TABLE X. IMPERIAL. Return of branded or certificated Mares and their Produce for the official year 1899-1900. DETAILS. BRANDED OR CERTIFICATED MARES. PRODUCE. TOTAL. For horse-breeding. For pony-breeding. TOTAL. Horse stock. Pony stock. Mule stock. Donkey stock. Balance on 1st April 1899 . . . . . . . . 24,907 5,140 30.047 Information not available. Increase Branded during the year . . . . . . 2,057 130 2,187 ... ... ... ... ... Certificated mares . . . . . . . 67 ... 67 ... ... ... ... ... Received by transfer from other districts . . . 687 ... 687 ... ... ... ... Foaled during the year . . . . . . ... ... ... 3,619 185 3,398 290 7,492 TOTAL 27,718 5,270 32,988 3,619 185 3,398 290 7,492 Decrease Died . . . . . . 1,281 94 1,375 48 28 76 Sold . . . . . . . . 1,413 ... 1,413 340 143 ... 483 Stolen . . . . . . 124 73 197 1 ... 2 ... 3 Transferred to other districts . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Struck off the register . . . . . . 342 ... 342 ... ... ... ... Not traceable . . . . . . . 1,323 600 1,923 ... ... ... ... TOTAL 4,483 767 5,250 389 ... 173 ... 562 Balance on 31st March 1900 . . . . . . 23,235 4,503 27,738 Information not available. In North-W estern Provinces and Oudh . . . . . . 3,971 3,971 Information not available. In North P unjab . . . . . . . . . 6,684 ... 6,684 Ditto. In South P unjab . . . . . . . . . 6,541 6,541 Ditto. In Baluchi stan . . . . . . . . . . 2,654 ... 2,654 Ditto. In Sind . . . . . . . 1,959 ... 1,959 Ditto. In Deccan . . . . . . . . . . . 803 3,084 3,8S7 Ditto. In Guzerat . . . . . . . . . . 623 1,419 2,042 Ditto. In Cutch . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... Ditto. TOTAL 23,235 4,503 27,738
xxvii DETAILS. MAKES Horse- breeding. Pony- breeding. PRODUCE. Horse stock. Pony stock. Male stock. Donkey | stock. Branded during. the year. N.-W. Provinces. 410 ... Foaled during the year. N.-W. Provinces. 745 ... 775 73 North Punjab 499 ... North Punjab 1,063 ... 1,499 190 South Punjab . 789 ... South Punjab . 1,046 ... 1,012 27 Baluchistan . 140 Baluchistan . 406 ... 9 ... Sind . . 166 ... Sind . . 83 ... 103 ... Bombay . . 53 130 Bombay . . 276 185 ... ... 2,057 130 3,619 185 3,398 290 Received from other districts. N.-W. Provinces . 175 ... North Punjab 264 ... South Punjab . 236 ... Died . . Baluchistan . 40 3 ... Baluchistan 12 ... 687 ... Sind . . 8 ... 25 ... 48 28 Certificated North Punjab 67 ... Died N.-W. Provinces . 150 ... North Punjab 247 ... Sold . . Baluchistan . 281 22 ... South Punjab 584 ... I Baluchistan 35 ... Sind . . 59 ... 121 ... 340 143 Sind . . 209 ... Bombay . . 56 94 1,281 94 Stolen Baluchistan . 1 ... ... ... Sold N.-W. Provinces. 219 ... Sind . . ... ... 2 ... North Punjab . 189 ... 1 2 ... South Punjab . 811 ... Baluchistan . 17 ... Sind . . . 177 ... 1,413 ... Stolen . . N.-W. Provinces. 13 ... North Punjab 34 ... South Punjab . 36 ... Baluchistan i ... Sind . . 7 ... Bombay . . 33 73 124 73 Struck off the Register. N.-W. Provinces . 9 ... North Punjab . 98 ... South Punjab . 235 ... 342 ...
xxviii TABLE XI. IMPERIAL Abstract showing number of Colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Imperial funds, during 1899-1900. PROVINCE. HORSE STOCK. MULE STOCK. OTHER ANIMALS. TOTAL. NUMBER OF DEATHS RESULT- ING FROM EFFECTS OP CASTRATION. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. N.-W. Provinces and Oudh . 431 448 54 76 ... ... 485 524 ... ... Rajputana . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Punjab . . . 202 218 25 28 ... ... 227 246 ... ... South Punjab . . . 406 482 40 41 ... ... 446 523 ... 2 Baluchistan . . . 174 303 2 2 ... ... 176 305 ... ... Sind . . . . . 42 ... ... ... ... ... 42 ... ... ... Deccan . . . . 21 13 ... ... ... ... 21 13 ... ... Karnatak . . . . 8 0 ... ... ... ... 8 9 ... ... Guzerat . . . . 10 7 ... ... ... ... 10 7 ... 1 TOTAL 1,294 1,480 121 147 .. ... 1,415 1,627 ... 3 TABLE XII. IMPERIAL. Abstract showing average Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of Government donkey stallions during 1899-1900. PROVINCE. AVERAGE COST PER DONKEY STALLION PER ANNUM. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. R a. p. R a. p. IMPERIAL CHARGES. North-Western Provinces and Oudh . . . 147 12 7 130 1 0 Rajputana . . . . . . . 219 13 4 212 15 5 North Punjab...... 190 0 9 180 1 11 South Punjab...... 169 15 5 157 2 8 Baluchistan . . . . . . 336 0 3 315 4 6 Sind . . . . . . . 263 8 4 219 0 2 Central India....... Not furnished. ... Bengal ..... 223 3 6 199 4 7 General average Imperial charges . . . 179 13 0 163 13 11 PROVINCIAL CHARGES. Deccan . . . . . . . ...... 295 0 0 Guzerat . . . . . . . ...... 335 0 0 Cutch . . . . . . . . ...... ...... General average Provincial charges . . . ...... 314 5 8
xxix TABLE XIII. IMPERIAL. Abstract of particulars regarding Horse Fairs and Shows held during the year 1S99~1900. PROVINCE Number of Fairs or Shows held. TOTAL . NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES TOTAL NUMBER OF SALES EFFECTED. PRIZES AWARDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's Fair or Show. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. Total number sold. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local and District Funds. From private subscription. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of Medals awarded. North-Western Provinces and Oudh 6 58,736 80,185 1,694 1,720 1,359 6,223 10 * 276 35 * 321 500 60 254 27 ... 27 148 130 136 3,648 500 60 192 4,660 2,660 ... 7,300 6,818 4 5,350 Rajputana . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Punjab . . . . 6 7,312 7,394 1,615 1,966 2,596 375 14 100 7 121 800 20 ... 134 1,184 1,318 400 1 ... 2,813 800 1 ... 5,600 ... 1,873 ... 7,4,73 6,542 6 6,100 South Punjab . . . . 10 19,044 19,057 1,933 2,796 9,634 5,644 15 449 11 475 ... ... ... 192 1,230 1,422 ... ... ... 10,852 ... ... ... 5,367 ... 2,478 617 8,462 8,197 7 6,060 Baluchistan . . . . 2 1,186 1,390 1,186 1,315 879 271 21 132 52 205 825 275 422 3 ... 3 100 80 88 359 425 60 131 2,600 1,642 ... ... 4,242 4,226 2 2,600 Sind . . . . . . 2 1,366 2,150 1,356 2,150 1,073 ... 7 35 54 96 540 200 377 15 ... 15 152 120 135 169 220 100 162 2,700 ... ... ... 2,700 2,700 2 3,200 Bengal . . . . . . Partculars not furnished. Bombay Presidency . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 500 TOTAL . 25 67,634 110,176 7,784 9,947 15,541 12,513 67 992 159 1,218 825 20 ... 371 2,411 2,785 400 1 ... 17,841 800 1 ... 20,917 4,292 4,351 617 30,177 28,483 20 23,80 * Includes 5 ponies.
XXX TABLE XIV. IMPERIAL. Abstract showing the produce of Government stallions that won prizes at Horse Fairs and Shows, during 1899-1900. CLASS OF SIRES. Number of sires of each class. NUMBER OF PRIZES AWARDED. PROPORTION OF PRIZE TO EACH SIRE 1st prize. 2nd prize. 3rd prize. Other prizes. Total. 1st prize. 2nd prize. 3rd prize. Other prizes. Total. Thorough-bred English . 107 105 86 62 292 545 098 0.80 0.57 2.72 5.09 Half and Three-quarter bred English, Hackney and Nor- folk Trotter. 150 53 61 67 305 486 0.35 0.40 0.44 2.03 3.24 Australians . . . 31 33 28 22 116 199 1.06 0.90 0.70 3.74 6.40 Arabs . . . . 129 32 37 32 238 339 0.24 0.28 0.24 1.84 2.62 Stud-breds . . . 7 2 3 7 27 39 0.28 0.42 1.00 3.85 5.56 Persians . . . . 1 1 ... 1 ... 2 1.00 ... 1.00 ... 2.00
TABLE XV. IMPERIAL. BALANCE SHEET OF CULTIVATION OPERATIONS OF THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES DEPÔT FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1899-1900.
xxxii TABLE Dr. IMPE Balance sheet of Cultivation operations of the North-Western No. R a. p. R a. p. 1 Value of lands . . . . . . . . . 1,076 4 0 2 xxxiii XV. RIAL. Provinces Depôt for the official year 1899-1900. No. By stock. R a. p. R a. p. 29 Value of lands. . . . 1,076 4 0 30 xxxiv TABLE IMPE Balance sheet of Cultivation operations of the No. To stock. R a. p. R a. p. 1 Value of land . . . . . . . . 868 11 0 2 XXXV XVI. RIAL. South Punjab Dep6t for the official year 1899-1900. No. By stock. R a. p . R a. p . 29 Value of land . . . . . . . . . 868 11 0 30 xxxvi TABLE XVII. IMPERIAL. Return of Instruction Farm animals for the official year 1899-1900. DETAILS. FARM STALLIONS. FARM MARES. FARM PRODUCE. HORSE. DONKEY. Total Horse and Don- key Stallions. FARM MARES. PONY MARES. DONKEY MARES. Total Farm MarEs. HORSE STOCK. MULE STOCK. DONKEY STOCK. Total Produce. Arab. Half-bred and Hackney. Gelding. Total. Persian. Home-bred. Total. Country-bred. Australian. Total. Country-bred. Total. Home-bred. Total. Colts. Fillies. Total. Colts, Fillies. Total. Colts. Fillies. Total. Balance on 1st April 1899 . . . . . . 6 ... 1 7 ... ... ... 7 22 5 27 2 ... 2 ... ... .. 29 10 6 16 1 2 3 7 ... 7 26 Increase Purchased in India . . . . . 11 ... ... 11 ... ... ... 11 6 ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 3 Received from Imperial list . . . . ... 2 ... 2 ... ... ...... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Foaled during the year . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 2 9 ... 2 2 ... ... ... 11 Received from "Horse Stock" ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... .. . . . ... ... ... ... ... Received from Punjab Depôt by purchase ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 4 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 5 Received from Kirkee Royal Horse Artillery ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 17 2 1 20 ... ... ... 20 29 6 35 2 ... 2 ... ... ... 37 21 8 29 1 5 6 20 ... 10 45 Decrease Died . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Destroyed . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sold . . . . . . . . 11 ... ... 11 ... ... ... 11 7 ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 10 3 13 ... 1 1 2 ... 2 16 Transferred to "Farm Mares" . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Transferred to Imperial list . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... 7 7 TOTAL . 11 ... ... 11 ... ... ... 11 7 2 9 2 ... 2 ... ... ... 11 10 5 15 ... 1 1 10 ... 10 26 Balance on 31st March 1900 . . . . . . . 6 2 1 9 ... ... ... 9 22 4 26 .... ... ... ... ... ... 26 11 3 14 1 4 5 ... ... ... 19 In North-Western Provinces Depôt . . . . 2 2 1 5 ... ... ... 5 9 3 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 10 3 13 1 4 5 ... ... ... 18 In South Punjab Depôt . . . . . . 4 ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 13 1 14 ... ... ... ... ... 14 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
xxxvii TABLE XVIII. IMPERIAL. Abstract of Casualties of Instruction Farm animals, during 1899-1900. PROVINCE. NUMBER DIED. NUMBER DESTROYED. Total. PERCENTAGE DEATHS. PERCENTAGE DESTROYED. GENERAL PERCENTAGE. Stallions. Marcs. Produce. Stallions. Mares. Produce. Stallions. Mares. Produce. Stallions. Mares. Produce. Stallions. Mares. Produce. Stallions. Mares. Produce. North-W estern Provinces. ... ... 2 ... 1 ... ... 1 2 ... ... 10.52 ... 5.88 ... ... 5.88 10.52 South Punjab . ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 3 ... ... 16.66 ... ... 8.33 ... ... 25.00 ... TOTAL . ... 2 2 ... 2 ... ... 4 2 ... 6.89 7.69 ... 6.89 ... ... 17.79 7.69 TABLE XIX. IMPERIAL. Abstract of Sales of Instruction farm animals, during 1899-1900. DETAILS. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. SOUTH PUNJAB. TOTAL. REMARKS. Num- ber sold. Average price realized per animal. Num- ber sold. Average price realized per animal. Num- ber sold. General average price realized per animal. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. Stallions sold to District Boards, etc. 5 609 6 4 6 677 12 5 11 646 11 1 Mares unfit for breeding . 5 67 8 0 2 130 8 0 7 85 8 0 Horse stock sold as Remounts . 1 425 0 0 3 333 5 4 4 356 4 0 Mule stock sold as Remounts . ... ... ... ... ... ... Horse stock not likely to be fit for Remounts. 4 84 12 0 1 250 0 0 5 117 12 9 Mule stock not likely to be fit for Ordnance or Baggage purposes. ... ... ... ... ... ... Donkey stock not likely to be fit for stallion purposes. 1 22 0 0 ... ... 1 22 0 0 Donkey colts sold as stallion . 1 200 0 0 ... ... 1 200 0 0 Horse stock sold to North- Western Provinces Instruc- tion Farm. ... ... 4 52 8 0 4 52 8 0 Mule stock sold to North- Western Provinces Instruc- tion Farm. ... ... 1 70 0 0 1 70 0 0 TOTAL . 17 257 0 4 17 344 9 1 34 300 13 3
xxxviii TABLE XX. IMPERIAL. Statement showing charges debited to Indian Estimates during 1899-1900 in connection with the Civil Veterinary Department. MAJOR HEAD. Inspector- General. Imperial Bacteriologist. Assistant to Inspector- General. Superintend- ent, North- Western Pro- vinces and Oudh. Superintend- ent, North Punjab. Superintend- ent. South Punjab. Superintend- ent, Balu- chistan and Sind. Superintend- ent, Bombay. Commandant, Central India Horse, Indore Superintend- ent, Civil Veterinary Department, Rajputana. Superintend- ent, Bengal. Superintend- ent, Madras. Superintend- ent, Burma. TOTAL. Civil Veterinary Department. ft a. p. I. Prizes at Horse Fairs and Shows . . 416 12 0 ... ... 1,744 0 0 5,475 0 0 5,273 8 3 2,600 0 0 ... ... ... 500 0 0 ... ... 16,009 4 3 II. Establishment, officers . . . . 24,210 6 0 18,254 10 6 13,011 7 10 ... ... ... 12,833 6 5 ... ... 12,081 3 11 ... ... ... 80,391 2 7 Ditto subordinates . . . 13,290 8 0 8,018 14 0 1,860 0 0 10,755 5 6 5,715 5 4 8,903 8 2 11,290 2 1 ... ... 477 6 8 ... ... ... 60,311 1 9 III. Travelling allowances, officers . . 5,651 2 0 1,596 14 0 2,985 0 0 ... ... ... 2,004 10 0 ... ... 605 2 0 ... ... ... 12,842 12 0 Ditto subordinates . . 3,793 12 9 716 6 0 535 13 6 916 5 0 109 0 3 295 0 0 875 10 3 ... ... 10 1 0 ... ... ... 7,252 0 9 Grain compensation allowance . . ... ... ... ... 26 1 0 9 3 0 0 10 8 0 ... ... 15 0 0 ... ... ... 55 2 9 IV. Contingencies . . . . . 7,490 15 10 14,775 12 11 1,191 15 0 1,280 6 4 ... 0 1 0 2,607 12 0 ... ... 147 14 8 ... ... ... 27,494 12 9 V. Purchase of Stallions . . . . 1,18,789 8 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,18,789 8 2 VI. Stable feed and keep . . . . 13,877 14 0 ... ... 40,872 6 5 61,932 2 8 49,544 1 5 3 24,602 13 4 11,053 1 4 237 6 11 614 9 2 ... ... ... 2,02,665 6 1 VII. Road expenses . . . . . 1,042 12 0 ... ... 3,172 1 6 518 1 2 5 1,871 5 4 631 1 0 698 8 0 ... ... ... ... ... 7,834 8 3 Instruction Farm. VIII. Establishment. . . . . . . ... ... ... 1,505 1 5 3 ... 1,617 4 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,123 3 3 IX. Contingencies . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 4,386 9 0 ... 2,141 1 3 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,528 6 2 X. Purchase of farm animals . . . 1,000 0 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,000 0 0 XI. Stable feed and keep . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 1,89,563 10 9 43,362 9 4 19,584 4 4 64,633 0 0 73,776 5 69,650 7 2 67,455 15 1 11,651 9 4 237 6 11 13,881 5 5 500 0 0 ... ... 5,44,297 3 9
xxxix TABLE XXI. IMPERIAL. Abstract of Tours of Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, during 1899-1900 RANK, NAME, AND DESIGNATION OF TOURING OFFICER. NUMBER OF MARES INSPECTED. NUMBER OF MARES BRANDED FOR TOTAL MARES BRANDED. HORSE. PONY. MULE. DONKEY. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. SUMMARY OF OTHER DUTIES PERFORMED. Veterinary Major R. H. Ringe, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 1,897 2 642 410 488 ... ... 26 ... ... ... 436 488 Inspected Shaharanpur-Rajpur Dâk line in June, July, August and October 1899. Ditto Kathgodam-Naini Tal Dâk line in September 1899. Ditto Cast mares for mule breeding at Umballa in August 1899. Ditto Equine stock at Benares to detect cases of glanders in October 1899 and February 1900. Visited Haldwani to examine suspected glandered case in August 1899. Examined a glandered case at Sardhana in March 1900. Purchased stallions at Bombay for Provincial Government in February 1900. Attended, as a Member, Board of Examination, Ajmer Veterinary School, in April 1900, Purchased mares for mule-breeding for Partabgarh. Inspected Veterinary Dispensary, Mazaffarnagar, and the Bardast-Khana at Hapur for a Veterinary Dispensary. Veterinary Captain F. Joslen, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab. ... 61 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 Veterinary Lieutenant A. Smith, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab. 3,081 2,566 835 777 ... ... ... ... ... ... 835 777 Acted Member, Board of Examination, Lahore Veterinary College. Inspected stallions at various stands, also Veterinary Dispensaries. Ditto Simla, Dalhousie, and Dharmsala Dâk lines under Glanders and Farcy Act. Attended horse shows and Amritsar, Rewari, and Sirsa Cattle Fairs. Acted, Member Board of Examination, Nalbund class, Lahore Veterinary College. Purchased mules for Army Remount Department. Investigated outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease on Kalka-Simla line. Inspected horsePART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. TABLES.
xliii TABLE A. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Return of District Horse, Pony and Donkey Stallions, for the year 1899-1900. DETAILS. DISTRICT HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS. DISTRICT DONKEY STALLIONS. HORSES. PONIES. Total Horses and Ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Punjabi. Home-Bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Northern. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Shan. Deli. Total. Balance on 1st April 1899 . 67 5 1 1 ... ... 74 102 2 1 1 2 ... 108 182 2 ... 4 5 1 3 ... ... 15 Increase Purchased in India Received on loan from Civil Veterinary De- partment. 15 ... ... ... ... ... 15 7 1 ... 1 ... ... 9 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ...... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 83 0 1 1 ... ... 90 109 3 1 2 2 ... 117 207 2 ... 4 5 1 3 ... ... 15 Decrease Died . . . 2 1 ... 1 ... ... 4 2 ... ... ... ... ... ...2... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sold . . . 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Destroyed . . 2 1 ... ... ... ... 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 6 2 ... 1 ... ... 9 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 12 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Balance on 31st March 1900. 77 3 1 ... ... ... 81 106 3 1 2 2 ... 114 195 2 ... 4 4 1 2 ... ... 13 In North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 44 3 ... ... ... ... 47 24 1 ... ... ... ... 25 72 ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 xliv TABLE B. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract of casualties of District Horse and Pony stallions, during 1899-1900. PROVINCE. NUMBER DIED. NUMBER DESTROYED. TOTAL. PERCENTAGE OF DEATH. PERCENTAGE DEBTROYED. GENERAL PERCENTAGE. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. North-Western Prov- inces and Oudh. 3 1 2 ... 5 1 8.10 4.16 5.40 ... 13.51 4.16 North Punjab . ... ... ...... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 3.33 ... 3.33 South Punjab . 1 1 1 ... 2 1 3.70 2.85 3.70 ... 7.40 2.85 Baluchistan . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sind . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Central Provinces . ... ...... ... ... Not furnished. ... ... ... ... Burma . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madras . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bengal . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 4 2 3 1 7 3 6.25 3.38 4.68 3.33 10.93 3.37 TABLE C. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract of Sales of District Horse and Pony stallions, during 1899-1900. PROVINCE. NUMBER SOLD. AVERAGE PRICE REALIZED. REMARKS. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. R a. p. R a. p. North-Western Provinces and Oudh . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Punjab . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... South Punjab . . . . . . 2 ... 30 ... ... ... ... ... Baluchistan . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sind . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Central Provinces . . . . . Not furnished Burma . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madras . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 2 ... 30 ... ... ... ... ...
xlv TABLE D. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Services and produce of each class of District Horse and Pony stallions, during 1899-1900. Horse or pony. CLASS. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. NORTH PUNJAB. REMARKS. Stallions on register. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVI- OUS YEAR'S COVER- INGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STAL- LION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Stallions on register. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EM- PLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVER- INGS PER STALLION EM- PLOYED AT STUD. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known, Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse . Arab . . . 44 36 26 1,809 1,371 50.2 53.0 450 725 196 17.3 27.88 7.53 6 6 4 397 328 66.16 82.00 84 170 74 21.00 42.50 18.50 Persian . . 3 3 4 258 287 86.0 72.0 84 168 35 21.0 42.0 8.75 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Northern . . ... ... 1 11 72 11.0 72.0 14 48 10 14.0 480 10.0 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Country-bred . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 48 47 48.00 47.00 12 25 10 12.00 25.00 10.00 Total . 47 39 31 2,078 1,730 53.28 55.8 548 941 241 17.67 30.61 7.77 7 7 5 445 375 63.57 75.00 96 195 84 19.20 69.00 16.80 Pony . Arab . . . 24 22 24 1,122 1,256 51.0 52.3 388 711 157 16.16 29.62 6.54 31 31 28 1,969 1,921 63.51 68.60 554 1,055 .312 19.78 37.67 11.14 Persian . . 1 1 1 20 61 20.0 61.0 17 36 8 17.0 36.0 8.0 2 2 1 95 72 47.50 72.00 7 47 18 7.00 47.00 18.00 Country-bred . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shan . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total . 25 23 25 1,142 1,317 49.65 52.68 405 747 165 16.20 29.88 6.6 33 33 29 2,064 1,993 62.54 68.72 561 1,102 330 19.34 38.00 11.37 GRAND TOTAL . 72 62 56 3,220 3,047 51.93 54.41 953 1,688 406 17 .01 30.28 7.25 40 40 34 2,509 2,368 62.72 69.64 657 1,297 414 19.32 38.14 12.17
xlvi Services and produce of each class of District Horse and, Pony stallions, during 1899-1900xlvii Services and produce of each class of District Horse and Pony stallions, during 1899-1900xlviii Services and produce of each class of District Horse and Pony stallions, during 1899-1900xlix Services and produce of each class of District Horse and Pony stallions, during 1899-1900. Horse or pony. CLASS. Stallions on register. TOTAL. Remarks. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse . Arab . . . . . . 74 65 56 3,642 3,308 56.03 59.07 951 1,573 784 16.98 28.08 14.00 Persian . . . . . 3 3 4 258 287 86.00 71.75 84 168 35 21.00 42.00 8.75 Northern . . . . . ... ... 1 11 72 ... 72.00 14 48 10 14.00 48.00 10.00 Country-bred . . . . 1 1 1 48 47 48.00 47.00 12 25 10 12.00 25.00 10.00 TOTAL . 78 69 62 3,959 3,714 57.37 59.90 1,061 1,814 839 17.11 29.25 13.53 Pony . Arab . . . . . . 106 102 99 5,402 5,414 52.96 54.68 1,380 2,475 1,559 13.93 25.20 15.74 Persian . . . . . 3 4 3 195 202 48.75 67.33 24 83 95 8.00 27.66 31.66 Country-bred . . . . 1 Shan . . . . . . 2 2 1 71 29 35.50 29.00 1 23 5 1 00 23.00 5.00 Deli . . . . . . 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL 114 110 103 5,668 5,645 51.52 54 80 1,405 2,581 1,659 13.64 25.05 1610 GRAND TOTAL 192 179 165 9,627 9,359 53.78 56.72 2,466 4,395 2,498 14 94 26.63 15.13 X
l TABLE E. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract showing average Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of District Horse and Pony Stallions, during 1899-1900. PROVINCE. AVERAGE COST, PER STALLION PER ANNUM. REMARKS. HORSE. PONY. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 230 10 10 219 10 0 225 14 10 198 10 1 North Punjab . . . 259 2 1 238 0 7 276 5 10 227 1 3 South li TABLE H. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Services and produce of each class of District Donkey stallions, during 1899-1900. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAE'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule produce. Number not hold. Number not known. Number of donkey produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Punjabi . . . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... 16 ... ... ... 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Country-bred . . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 2 2 2 ... ... 16 4 ... ... 16 4 ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Particulars incomplete. Information not received. Services and produce of each class of District Donkey stallions, during 1899-1900lii Services and produce of each class of District Donkey stallions, during 1899-1900liii Services and produce of each class of District Donkey stallions, during 1899-1900liv Services and produce of each class of District Donkey stallions, during 1899-1900lv Services and produce of each class of District Donkey stallions, during 1899-1900. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. TOTAL. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule produce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Punjabi . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... 16 ... ... ... 16.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Country-bred . . . 4 4 3 ... ... 91 71 ... ... 22.75 23.66 ... ... 9 44 18 ... ... ... 3.00 14.66 6.00 ... ... ... Home-bred . . . . 2 2 3 ... ... 120 109 ... ... 60.00 36.38 ... ... 16 79 14 ... ... ... 5.33 26.33 4.66 ... ... ... Italian . . . . 2 2 2 ... ... 36 99 ... ... 18.00 49.50 ... ... 6 12 81 ... ... ... 3.00 6.00 40.50 ... ... ... Persian . . . . 3 4 4 ... ... 93 143 ... ... 23.25 35.75 ... ... 58 48 37 ... ... ... 14.50 12.00 9.25 ... ... ... Cyprian . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... 10.00 ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... 10.00 ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 13 14 14 ... ... 356 432 ... ... 25.42 30.85 ... ... 89 193 150 ... ... ... 6.35 13.78 10.71 ... ... ...
lvi TABLE J. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract showing average Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of District donkey stallions, during 1899-1900. PROVINCE. AVERAGE COST PER PER DONKEY STALLION ANNUM. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. R a. p. R a. p. North-Western Provinces and Oudh . . Information not furnished. 30 9 1 North Punjab. . . . . . . . . 167 2 8 137 0 0 South Punjab . . . . . . . . 195 13 4 154 14 11 Sind. . . . . . . 165 7 2 149 1 9 Madras. . . . . . 307 0 0 344 0 0 Bengal . . . . . . . 223 3 6 Not noted. GENERAL AVERAGE . 211 8 4 201 2 0 TABLE K. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract showing number of Colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Local Funds, during 1899-1900. PROVINCE. HORSE STOCK MULE STOCK OTHER ANIMALS. TOTAL. NUMBER OF DEATHS RESULT- ING FROM EFFECTS OF CASTRATION. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 251 227 8 3 57 87 316 317 ... ... North Punjab . . 365 404 63 35 ... ... 428 439 2 1 South Punjab . . 311 379 46 42 ... ... 357 421 ... 1 Central Provinces . . Not furnished. ... ... ... Madras . . . . 177 287 ... ... ... ... 177 287 ... 1 Baluchistan . . . 27 40 ... 4 ... ... 27 44 ... ... Sind . . . . 21 24 ... ... ... ... 21 24 ... ... TOTAL . 1,152 1,361 117 84 57 87 1,326 1,532 2 3
lvii TABLE L. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract showing number of Animals treated by Veterinary Assistants at Dispensaries, during 1899viii TABLE M. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract showing Provinces where Outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during, 1899-1900. PROVINCE. RINDERPEST. ANTHRAX. FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE. PLEURO- PNEUMONIA. CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE OTHER DISEASES. TOTAL. REMARKS. Number attackod. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. North-Western Provinces and Oudh 67,443 35,361 52.43 3,221 2,219 68.89 40,801 2,844 6.97 ... ... ... ... ... 154 68 44.15 111,619 40,492 36.27 North Punjab . . . . . . . 6,816 4,229 62.05 2,208 1,398 63.31 5,147 135 2.62 534 267 50*00 2S2 239 84.75 14,686 1,109 7.55 29,672 7,377 24.86 South Punjab . . . . . 14,512 7,494 51.64 796 6C9 76.50 4,6S0 70 1.50 31 8 25.87 ... ... ... 14,758 952 6.45 34,777 9,133 26.26 Central Provinces . . . . Not furnished. Bombay Presidency . . 2,371 1,338 56.43 271 249 91.88 2,577 151 5.86 54 20 37.04 158 147 93.04 35 29 82.86 5,466 1,934 35.40 Bengal . . . . . . 122,367 60,044 49.06 2,473 1,674 67.69 87,320 4,929 5.64 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,731 2,374 63.06 215,891 69,021 81.67 Burma . . . . . . . . ... 10,626 ... ... 10,017 ... ... 4,731 ... ... ... ... ... 3* ... ... 69,855 ... ... 95,232 ... * Most of the figures for this disease are in- eluded under Anthrax. Sind . . . . . . ... ... ... 38 33 100.00 286 6 2.09 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.590 56 1.56 3,914 100 2.55 Rajputana . . . . 2 2 100.00 2,471 950 38.44 661 36 5.44 1 1 100 ... ... ... 1,174 358 30.49 4,209 1,347 32.00 Madras . . . . . .. . ... 19,623 ... ... 16,480 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 65,426 ... ... 101,529 ... Berar . . . . . . . 10,823 5,968 55.13 40 33 82.50 1,626 984 60.52 SS2 794 90.02 186 172 92.47 10,244 9,790 95.57 23,803 17,741 74.53 In addition 25,984 died from scar- city of fodder and water. Total . 224,335 184,685 ... 11,518 33,667 ... 143,098 13,886 ... 1,502 1,090 ... 626 561 ... 48,372 150,017 ... 429,351 343,906 ... * Deduct deaths in Burma and Madras ... 30,249 ... ... 26,497 ... ... 4,731 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 135,281 ... ... 1,96,761 ... TOTAL . 224,335 104,436 46.55 11,518 7,170 62.25 143,099 9,155 6.89 1,502 1,090 72.56 626 558 89.13 48,372 14,736 30.40 429,351 147,145 84.27 *To arrive at the correct percentage of deaths, the numbers died in Burma and Madras have been excluded, as the total number attacked have not been furnished by the respective Superintendents.
lix TABLE N. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract showing the number of animals treated by Veterinary Assistants, during the year 1899-1900. PROVINCE. RINDERPEST. ANTHRAX. FOOT-ANB-MOUTH DISEASE. PLEURO-PNEUMONIA. CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE OTHER DISEASES. TOTAL TREATED. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured, Total. Died. Relieved. Cured, Total. North-Western Provin- ces and Oudh. 10,691 3,208 8,632 22,531 1,070 127 632 2,429 451 2,130 8,727 11,317 39 25 ... 63 ... ... ... ... 397 3,726 8,421 12,644 13,247 9,225 26,412 48,884 6,451 36 North Punjab . . 3,228 181 2,283 6,692 881 37 269 1,187 160 365 3,733 4,258 62 7 141 210 61 ... 33 94 473 2,749 10,559 13,781 4,865 3,339 17,018 25,222 6,540 29 South Punjab . . 6,728 1,082 4,706 12,616 686 ... 1S6 771 68 330 3,988 4,386 8 14 8 80 ... ... ... ... 368 3,641 10,064 14,073 7,757 5,067 18,952 31,776 7,277 44 Central Provinces . Not furni shed. Bengal . . . . 1,392 661 1,673 4,017 145 131 6 281 29 94 797 920 1 3 ... 4 ... ... ... ... 649 275 1,188 2,012 2,116 1,064 4,663 8,234 637 21 Bombay . . 272 3 207 482 30 ... 48 78 6 11 912 929 ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... 604 1,260 13,078 14,942 912 1,274 14,245 16,431 359 15 Burma . . . . 632 268* 1,631 2,431 267 17* 270 554 10 3,347* 13,167 16,524 ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 6 167 2,018* 19,243 21,428 1,079 6,650* 34,214 40,943 12,077 65 Sind . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93 93 ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... 74 151 4,381 4,606 74 151 4,474 4,699 102 4 Rajputana . . . ... ... ... ... 20 ... 10 80 29 233 1,277 1,639 3 2 6 10 ... ... ... ... 26 7 153 186 78 242 1,416 1,765 435 1 Madras . . . Not furnished. Berar . . . . 833 4 1,038 1,877 ... ... ... ... ... 62 119 181 ... ...... ...... ... 1 ... ... 1 59 100 1,365 1,524 893 168 2,521 3,682 49 3 TOTAL . 23,776 6,307 20,070 49,646 3,598 312 1,420 6,330 753 6,581 32,813 40,147 112 61 154 317 65 ... 36 101 2,717 13,927 68,452 85,096 31,021 26,180 123,944 181,636 32,827 218 * Result unknown.
lx TABLE O. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Abstract showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries, during 1899-1900. Province. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Balance. Last year's Balance. By Local Fund Grant. By Govern- meut Grant. By Municipal contribution. By other sources. Total. Pay. Travelling Allowance. Medicines Instruments, etc., etc. Furniture, land, etc., etc. Contingencies, stabling, house- rent, etc. Transferred to Indian Veterinary Dispensary Fund. Total. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a . p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p . North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 2,626 12 8 539 13 6 ... 120 0 0 1,168 14 6 4,455 8 8 972 12 3 218 13 0 329 13 6 150 1 9 79 8 0 ... 1,751 0 6 2,704 8 2 North Punjab . . . 201 6 2 5,566 12 6 ... ... 88 14 6 5,857 1 2 3,341 11 0 1,097 9 6 774 7 6 ... 226 5 0 88 14 6 5,528 15 6 328 1 8 South Punjab . . . ... 5,608 14 8 ... 774 0 0 132 10 9 6,515 9 5 3,292 12 3 543 3 6 1,188 8 9 43 0 3 1,448 0 8 ... 6,515 9 5 ... Central Provinces . Not furnished Not furnished Bengal . . . 1,329 8 10 9,911 13 9 100 0 0 1,050 0 0 1,980 0 6 13,371 7 1 5,380 5 11 1,028 9 6 1,442 4 6 2,739 12 7 1,892 6 1 0 ... 12,483 7 4 1,933 1 10 Burma . . . . Not furnished 31,888 0 8 12,013 7 10 1,164 1 2 10 ... 10,801 6 0 ... 56,687 5 10 ... Bombay . . . 18,602 6 6 10,884 12 11 8,842 2 8 2,114 0 0 2,483 4 3 43,926 1 0 4 16,085 4 4 762 13 9 4,391 9 5 1,628 3 5 4,380 1 0 6 ... 27,243 7 5 16,678 2 11 Sind . . . 16,151 14 3 8,000 0 0 3,610 2 0 2,170 0 0 1,124 2 1 0 31,056 3 1 9,446 14 1 592 4 6 4,513* 12 4 131 6 0 5,931 6 9 ... 20,615 11 8 10,440 7 4 Rajputana . . ... 120 0 0 ... 400 0 0 31 2 1 0 551 2 10 360 0 0 ... ... 25 0 0 126 1 1 6 ... 511 11 6 39 7 4 Madras . . . . Not furnished Not furnished Berar . . . . Nil Nil TOTAL . 38,912 0 5 40,632 3 4 12,552 4 8 6,628 0 0 7,009 2 2 105,733 10 7 70,767 12 6 16,256 1 3 7 13,805 4 10 4,717 8 0 24,886 7 3 88 14 6 131,342 5 2 32,123 13 * Includes contingencies.
lxi TABLE P. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing Tours of Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, during 1899-1900. Rank, name, and designation of Officer. Distriots visited. Fairs and Shows attended. NUMBER OF MILES TRAVELLED. By Road. By Rail. By Boat or Stonmer. TOTAL. Veterinary Major R. H. Ringe, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Meerut, Saharanpur, Dehra Dun, Fatehpur, Moradabad, Muzafarnagar, Umballa, Naini Tal, Benares, Buland- shahr, Agra, Etab, Aligarb, Muttra, Bijnor, Budaon, Bareilly, Shahjehanpur, Cawnpore and Bombay. Garhmuktesar, Batesar, Makanpur, Bulandshahr, Muzafurnagar and Nau- chandi. 2,327 7,900 ... 10,227 Veterinary Lieutenant A. S. Trydell, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North- Punjab. Hazara, Rawal Pindi, Jhelum, Kohat, Bannu, Dera Ismail Khan, Shahpur, Gujrat, Gujranwala, J hang, Lahore, Sialkot and Peshawar. Jhang, Shahpur, Lahore, Gujrat, Rawal Pindi, Amritsar, Eminabad and Dera Ghazi Khan. 5,626 7,067 ... 12,693 Veterinary Lieutenant A. Smith, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab. Amritsar, Ludhiana, Feroze- pur, Gurdaspur, Jullunder, Hissar, Umballa, Kurnal, Delhi, Gurgaon, Dera Ghazi Khan, Rohtak, Montgo- mery, Hoshiarpur, Multan and Muzafargarh. Amritsar, Rewari, Sirsa, Hansi, Jalalabad, Kapur- thala, Multan, Dera Ghazi Khan, Umballa and Rawal Pindi. 5,145 10,327 ... 15,472 Veterinary Captain H. M. Maxwell, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Baluchistan and Sind. Quetta, Pishin, Thal Chotiali' Kalat and Zhob. Quetta and Sibi 721 2,415 ... 3,136 Upper Sind Frontier, Hyder- abad (Sind), Shikar pur and Karachi. Jacobabad and Moro 546 5,846 ... 6,392 Veterinary Major F. Raymond, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal. Aligarh, Allahabad, Dar- bhanga, Tippera, Chitta- gong, Dacca, Rangpur, Saran, Darjeeling, Balasore, Cuttack, Puri, Umballa, Babugarh, Hissar, Gya, Patna, Shahabad, Birbhum, Sontal Parganas and Muzafarpur. Sonepore, Kalimpong and Barahpur. 448 9,470 671 10,589 Veterinary Major J. W. A. Morgan, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay Presidency. Satara, Bombay, Poona, Ahmednagar, Khandesh, Dharwar, Belgaum, Thana, Nasik, Ahmedabad, Palan- pur, Kaira, Surat, Sholapur and Kathiawar. Nil. 1,352 13,701 ... 15,053 Veterinary Captain G. H. Evans, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Burma. Hanthawaddy, Pegu, Tharra- waddy, Prome, Bassein, Myaungmya, Thongwa, Heuzada, Toungoo, Thaton, Amherst, Thayetmyo, Pokokku, Mandalay, Bhamo Katha, Showbo, Sagaing, Kyankse, Meiktila, Yame- thin and Myingyan. Nil. 150 5,275 2,332 7,690
lxii TABLE Q. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing Provincial cost of the Civil Veterinary Department, during the official year 1899-1900. MAJOR HEADS. Superintendent, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Superintendent, North Punjab. Superintendent, South Punjab. Superin- t ndent Baluchis- tan and Sind. Superintendent, Bengal. Superin- tendent, Madras. Superin- ndent ut ana. Superin- tendent, Central Provinces. SUPERINTENDENT, BOMBAY. SUPERINTENDENT, BURMA. REMARKS. Local Fund Charges. P rovincial Charges. Local District Cess Fund. Provincial Charges. R a. p. R a. p R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a . p. R a. p. R a. p. I.