ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR. 1898-99.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
NLS to Scan B&W and insert
No. 198ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR. 1898-99.
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1898-99. CONTENTS. PART I.ii PAGES. II.iii IV.iv PAGES. PART II.V PAGES IV.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR, THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1898-99. PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1898-99. PART I-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.2 English stallions. 7. During the year under review, 13 horses have been received from England, all of which have been sent to Northern India. During my short stay at home I had an interview with Sir John Watson, who explained to me the difficulties he experienced in obtaining suitable horses for this country. His difficulties are increased by the amount of unsoundness which is to be found amongst the Thoroughbreds in England. Sir John Watson mentioned to me two horses in every way suitable for India that were found to be un- sound on veterinary examination, one having slight Ringbones, the other being unsound in the wind. As cases of both these diseases developed in "Fandango" and "Matabele" after their arrival in this country, I am pleased to find that he is particular in his examination. 8. That the English Thoroughbred has degenerated cannot be denied, that this is in a measure due to the number of sprinting races among two-year olds is now fully recognised; this leads to forcing of the foals unduly. I am there- fore pleased to see that the English Jockey Club has taken the matter up, and has ruled that not more than two such races should be run at any one meeting. They have further ruled that no two-year olds shall run in any race with more than £200 added, before 1st June. Other such rules, tending to encourage the breeding of horses with staying powers, have been passed. 9. I mention these facts in order to show the difficulties with which Sir John Watson has to contend, and to enable me to make certain remarks on the horses imported, which I would otherwise not like to make. 10. Of the thirteen horses imported, "Aureus", "Hebron", and "Poldo", are really nice horses and are likely to get troop horses, but the remainder are wanting in substance for the purpose for which they are intended. Another great point to be considered is, their fault in having twisted fore-legs. This fault was noticed in the Thoroughbred stallion "Agappo" imported to Bombay about four years ago. The Bombay people would not have him, so I tried him in Upper India, but have been compelled to order him to be castrated and sold in consequence of getting bad-limbed stock like himself. This remark holds good with "Cæsar" whose off fore is very crooked, and with "Westburton Junior" who is "pigeon-toed." The faults to be found with the English Thoroughbreds are:3 asked wherein lies their superiority over the Thoroughbred English stallion. They do not, in many instances, show the breeding that the English horses do, certainly not as much as "Royal Corrie", "Aureus", "Beviren", and "Hebron", Thoroughbred English stallions imported this year, do; but they have good rein and shoulders, good straight legs with plenty of bone, good back and loins, and good feet. These are the points which go to make a good Cavalry horse, and these are exactly the points, with the exception of the rein and shoulders, which the Thoroughbred English stallions are deficient of. 13. I am glad to be able to report that Messrs. Krcrouse and Madden landed the whole of the stallions without a casualty, and that they were handed over to me in splendid condition. The following is a description of the horses imported:4 "Ascot Vale"5 21. The average measurements were as follows: 6 districts of Meerut, Bulandshahr, Aligarh and Muzaffarnagar, not a single Hackney should be employed. 28. The wishes of the breeders have also to be considered, and when the coverings of the Thoroughbreds are compared with those of the Hackneys, it will be readily seen that the latter are neglected in favor of the former. Experts such as Army Remount Agents, Native Cavalry Officers, District Officers and Breeders, all agree that the continuance of the Hackney strain in this country would be a mistake. Transit of horses from England and of donkeys from the Continent. 29. During the year under review, we have been particularly fortunate in not having a single casualty amongst the 13 Thoroughbred English horses imported from England, or the 62 donkeys imported from Cyprus and Genoa. 30. Owing to representations made by Veterinary Major Brodie-Mills, who receives the horses on landing at Bombay, an extra supply of carrots was ordered to be put on boardship; this will allow of their getting 5 lbs. per diem for the whole voyage. The grain ration will be reduced, and I feel con- vinced that the cases of laminitis will be less frequent than they have hitherto been. 31. Certain alterations in the fittings of the stalls in the Government Transports were recommended, and on this point Veterinary-Major Brodie- Mills states:7 who will devote themselves to castration, the necessity for which is clearly shown in Veterinary-Captain Maxwell's remarks on this subject. 37. The number of mares covered by horse stallions during the year under review shows a decrease of 29 when compared with last year, but Veterinary- Captain Maxwell's remarks on the subject of village tats having hitherto received the services of Thoroughbred English stallions will show how necessary it was to prevent any but branded mares being covered, even at the cost of reducing the coverings. Little improvement can be expected until our stallions can be made more attractive, for I feel that as they are at present, they do not meet with the approbation of the breeders. Badly groomed and badly cared for, they in many cases look worse than the country-breds owned by the Zemindars, but all this is receiving Veterinary-Captain Maxwell's attention and as soon as proper stable accommodation is provided, I feel that a change will be effected. 38. The Superintendent spent about five months of the year in Sind; this is what was required. In this way he will soon become well known to the breeders and consequently development is sure to take place. 39. As giving an insight into the capabilities of Sind, especially as a mule-breeding centre, I give the following extract from Veterinary-Captain Maxwell's report:8 "The Nausbahro and Tando Divisions of Hyderabad are the next most promising centres, but here I consider that at present there is practically little to work on beyond the indigenous stock of the country, as testified to by the very large percentage of skewbalds, piebalds and every possible odd color, by the weedy appearance, lightness of bone, bent hind legs and narrow chest of the great majority of all the horse stock. Shikarpur promises well for mules, but a very large portion of Sind contains practically no mares, and is absolutely unsuited for either horse or mule-breeding. THAR AND PARKAR. "This district, so far as I have seen and been able to learn at present, is, I think, valueless for both horse and mule breeding. There has been no horse stallion in the district, but one donkey was there last year which, however, I removed as he only covered 22 mares during the year. CHARGE OF STALLIONS. "Previous to this year many of the Imperial stallions have been in charge of Zemindars, and this arrange- ment has, I think, proved most unsatisfactory. The stabling used for them has been bad and insufficient; many of the stallions have been kept tied up with head and heel ropes and not properly exercised. The syces appear to be the veriest coolies, probably due to the insufficient pay allowed to them. The horses have been badly done, ill-groomed and supplied with very indifferent gear, and altogether there was wanting about nearly every stand that element of smartness which goes so far to popularise Government stallions in the eyes of the Zemindars. I quite agree with the Collector of Hyderabad that it is hardly advisable to remove all horses from Zemindars at once, but what I do recommend is that as Government stables are built they should always be placed where there is a Government official who can be made responsible, and then by degrees the stallions can be moved into them. "In spite of orders having been issued that no unbranded mare was to be covered by an Imperial stallion, the covering certificates which came into my hands at Talhar Show, proved that Government stallions had been allowed to cover any and all sorts of unbranded mares and ponies that were brought. The Thoroughbred English horse 'Spero' has been put to a tato under 13 hands, to a mare branded D., and in one case to a pony mare with mule foal at foot. All this, of course, depreciates the value of a stallion in the eyes of the owners of good mares, and tends very materially to make them unpopular. Under more immediate official supervision, and with the appointment of Zilladars in thearious districts, all these matters should, however, soon be rectified. STABLING. "The stabling in Sind requires a good deal doing to it to meet requirements:9 42. On this subject the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, states:10 "To express my opinion as to the sire to use now, I unhesitatingly say the Thoroughbred who has been truly bred for generations, but he should only be the very best of his class which cannot be purchased with the money paid for him in England11 55. Considering that only six Australian sires are employed in Baluchistan and that these have been there but a short time, it speaks well for this class of sire, which I have no hesitation in saying is likely to do more good than any other. Veterinary-Captain Maxwell also brings to notice the fact that the Arab is undoubtedly required. With reference to Sind, Veterinary- Captain Maxwell states:12 By the above it will be seen that 196 less were purchased this year than in 1897-98. 64. The Army Remount Department purchased 129 head of young stock as against 141 last year. The falling off is but trifling, especially when it is considered that the standard has been very greatly raised. 65. The Bengal Cavalry purchased 845 against 821, and the Punjab Cavalry 277 against 284 last year. 66. These figures are very satisfactory considering that two Regiments bought no country-breds at all and one Regiment bought only one. These Regiments were 4th Bengal Cavalry, 8th Bengal Cavalry and 14th Bengal Lancers. This must mean that they are remounting themselves entirely on Australian horses. 67. One point connected with the purchase of these remounts is, however, not quite satisfactory. I allude to the number purchased at Lahore and Amritsar. From both these places, 838 or about 50 per cent. were obtained; this points to the fact that the trade with dealers is increasing, and I cannot but help saying that I regret it, for it is neither to the interest of the Regi- ments nor of the breeders. I carefully watch the class of horse purchased by the dealers and often wonder where they intend to place them. I afterwards see them in their yards fattened up, with their tails banged, and then I understand that they are intended for Native Cavalry. They look fairly well in the yards, but they are a bad stamp, bought at a cheap price, and will never do good work. The number of remounts bought whose pedigree is known is very satisfactory. 68. In the Remount Department, the greatest percentage of failures is amongst those whose pedigree is not known, and I am glad to see that pedigrees were obtained in 107 cases of the 129 purchased. 69. In the Punjab Cavalry, 27 per cent. of known pedigree horses were obtained, but in Bengal Cavalry only 9.5. This is in a great measure due to the fact that so many are purchased from dealers. These men, as a rule, cannot produce the Produce Certificates, or, if they do, they are not reliable. 70. The Senior Military Member of the Judging Committee remarked last year that it seemed rather the exception than the rule to find Native Cavalry Remount Officers at Shows, and I feel compelled to endorse this remark again this year. I know full well that the time of British Officers in Native Cavalry Regiments is now fully occupied, but bearing on the question of the supply of Remounts for this branch of the service, I feel compelled to bring it to notice. Their absence drives the trade into the dealers' hands. On this subject, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:13 "(a) The decrease in the total number of remounts purchased was due to the diminished supply of Trans-frontier horses, as 32 district bred remounts competed for prizes as against 40 last year, omitting the 11 young stock purchased for Babugarh. "(b) Of the 11 young stock purchased by Captain Gough, nine were known to be by Government sires and probably the other two were. Captain Gough records his opinion of the stock as follows:14 rise to disappointment to the breeders. I also regret it, still it must be borne in mind that the greater part of the produce of these districts is by Norfolk Trotter stallions, and Remount Agents are well aware that these do not improve by age; and again, the standard at which they are now bought is very high. I have discussed this with the Director, Army Remount Depart- ment, and he considers that it is advisable to purchase less, and to avoid failures. With this, I fully agree; still I hope that when the better arrange- ments, which now exist for the rearing of young stock, have been fully tried and the results are known, it will be found possible to somewhat lower the standard without in any way producing bad results. 75. During the Rawalpindi tour, four head of young stock were bought. Many reasons are attributed for the small number purchased; amongst others, being those of unsuitable time, as the zemindars were busy either harvesting the kharif or preparing for the rabi. This must be avoided in future. 76. Shahpur only produced one head of stock whilst, as I expected, Lahore produced none. This was what I feared, as this district is so thoroughly scoured by dealers. 77. The visit to the Amritsar District procured four Ordnance mules, three baggage mules and one head of young stock. On this subject, the Superintend- ent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:15 Purchase of young stock by Officers of the Civil Veteri- nary Department. 82. With a view of endeavouring to avoid the constant references made by Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, to the fact that more stock might have been purchased by Officers of the Army Remount Department at Horse Shows, it was decided, on the recommendation of the Director of the latter Department, that officers of this Department should purchase one head of stock that had been rejected at any Fair, this one to act as a sample of what might have been obtained. I feared from the onset that this scheme would not work; however, as the Director was anxious to give it a trial, I issued the necessary orders, but failure has resulted, and only one head of stock was so bought. The reason of the failure is that, although the Superintendents can select suitable stock, still, with the multifarious duties which they have to perform at Fairs, they have not the time to spare to effect a bargain; and again, as represented to me by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Baluchistan and Sind, they must wait until the Remount Officer has concluded his purchases, otherwise they would be enter- ing into competition with him, and by this time the young stock has been removed from the Fair.
PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.19 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.20 progress made in our three large mule-breeding centres of Northern India. The number of mares covered during the past two years are as follows:21 97. Veterinary Lieutenant Trydell is wrong about the price of donkeys; the relative price of Italians and Cyprians in Italy and Cyprus is about £60 and £12 respectively. Supply of donkey stallions. 98. Whilst in England on leave, I had an interview with General Sir Oliver Newmarch, at which the question of the supply of Jacks was discussed. The matter was referred to me officially by the India Office, and, finding that the matter was one of urgency, I had frequent interviews with Mr. Suther- land. I laid before him the necessity of obtaining a bigger class of donkey stallion. I regretted to find that all he could do for us this year was to pur- chase 10 Catalans by deputy, and to supply one22 in my opinion it does not do so. They are lighter than those obtained in other districts, and gave me the impression of being in and in bred; my opinion was further confirmed by the measurements of Famagusta donkeys purchased for shipment to India. By the following list of measurements:23 "I feel that some explanation is due from me as to why I did not comply with my instructions to personally select the extra number required, the reason being that I found it would necessitate a lengthened stay of from six weeks to two months in the island, and this I was not justified in doing under existing orders. Besides which I feel that we can fully rely on Dr. Heidenstam's selection. I have given him the standard required, and have carefully explained to him the faults which are to be guarded against in donkeys required for India, and I am fully convinced that he will supply us with the best that the island can furnish. "From Nicosia I proceeded to Limasol, and thence to Troodos to stay with His Excellency the High Commissioner, when the following points came under discussion:24 "The object I had in view in making the above recommendations, and in dealing generally with the improvement of stock on the island, was as much in our interests in India as in the interests of the island itself. "I cannot conclude my report without recording my best thanks to His Excellency the High Commis- sioner of the island, to the Chief Secretary to Government, and to Dr. Heidenstam, for their great kindness during my stay in Cyprus. I was assisted in every way, and it was due to their assistance that I was able to make myself as fully acquainted as I have done with the resources of the island during my short visit." 101. In April 1898 I showed the Government of India how inadequately supplied this Department was with Jacks. I pointed out that, although our sanc- tioned strength was 375, still, after deducting animals under acclimatization, and therefore unfit for work, we had hut 332 at our disposal. But, in addition to this, 94 were 16 years of age and over. I showed that although many of these were almost worthless, still they had to be used owing to the difficulties experienced in obtaining more Jacks. I pointed out that many of our donkeys were overworked, this being shown by the high average of coverings in the Punjab. To obviate this great strain in that Province, I suggested that from our strength 25 country-breds should be eliminated annually, and that these should be placed in the hands of Lumbardars. As will be shown later on, this has been done, and 24 have been handed over and have been replaced by a similar number obtained from Cyprus (two batches). 102. I then pointed out that to put our establishment of donkeys on a satisfactory basis, 131 would be required, but matters have certainly not improved since then. All we can expect this year, and that only if our indents are supplied in full, are:25 104. It is therefore to be considered whether any source remains from which we could obtain a further supply; the only one that I can suggest is Syria. At Aleppo and Damascus, and in fact in the whole of the district of Lebanon, I am informed that an excellent stamp of donkey exists. I have therefore suggested to the Government of India that it might be advisable to depute an officer to Syria; if he were successful in purchasing 50 at about the same price at. which the Cyprians are obtained, it would pay well. I have been led to make this recommendation owing to the information I gained in Cyprus referring to the exportation of young donkeys from that island with a view of rearing them, besides which the donkeys said to be Arabs, which I have bought this year and of which a description will be found below, are said to come from Syria, and they are undoubtedly very useful Jacks. 105. During the year under review, the following donkey stallions have been obtained:26 be sanctioned. This has been done, and the following distribution has been made:27 116. I feel convinced that if these proposals are accepted, they will be the means of adding to the supply of Ordnance mules in the future; but few will be forthcoming for the first few years; in fact I have only stipulated for 40 per annum, but the scheme will spread, and ultimately a much larger number will be found to be available. 117. In submitting the above scheme for the consideration of the Gov- ernment of India, I went still further and recommended the purchase of any good mules of six months of age that were likely to turn into Ordnance animals. I did so for the reason that we know that the great majority of those dropped are disposed of by their owners at that age. This Department is in a position to prove that 26 per cent. of the mares that have been covered, and which can be traced, have dropped a foal. This number yielded 3,637 last year, and if we take the same percentage of cases in which the mares could not be traced28 adds so materially to the cost of stock29 Punjab, was able to procure two mules from each of the States of Patiala and Kapurthala, thus showing the advantage to be derived by inducing these States to interest themselves in the development of mule breeding. I hope that the time is not far distant when other States, such as Ulwar, Bahawalpore, and Faridkot, will be able to follow the example. 127. As I notice from a statement received from the Director, Army Re- mount Department, that the year requirements from 1899-1900 to 1902-1903 will average 325 per annum, I trust that this number will be obtainable. The great difficulty experienced is in obtaining the necessary girth measure- ments30 Capabilities of Cyprus as a mule- supplying centre. 135. Feeling that at any time when there would be a sudden and unex- pected demand for mules, it might be necessary to send abroad to purchase a certain number, I deemed it advisable to acquaint the Government of India with the information which I was able to obtain with reference to the mule- supply of the island of Cyprus. The following extracts from my report on the subject being of interest are reproduced:PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.-REVENUE SECTION. I.33 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.34 Two thousand six hundred and seventy-nine were branded against 2,571 last year, showing an increase of 108. This represents the number branded for horse breeding only. Branding for pony breeding only exists in Bombay. 143. The cause of the reduction in the number of mares branded in Baluchistan is stated as follows by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department:35 147. I think the time has now arrived when the system might well be abolished. Elimination of old and useless mares from the Registers. 148. I have been led to remark on this subject owing to a note made by the Remount Agent on his roll of purchases at Bulandshahr. This question had previously been referred to me by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, who recommended:36 handed over to this Department. On the other hand, mares that were too old, beyond the age laid down in G. O. C. C., were sent from Campbellpore and Rawalpindi; these were destroyed in accordance with the provision made in the order that any mare not approved of by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, would, under his orders, be destroyed. I took the opportunity, being at Rawalpindi at the time, to draw the attention of the General Officer Commanding to the fact that the limit of age had been exceeded in these cases. 154. From the fact that no mares were received from the 4th or 5th Dragoon Guards, 11th Hussars, or 16th Lancers, it will be seen that full effect was not given to the scheme this year; this was scarcely to be expected as the order was only issued on 23rd January 1899. I, however, trust better results will be obtained during 1899-1900. 155. On this subject, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, states:37 Number of produce foaled, showing averages to mares covered and stallions employed. 159. Table IV will give results obtained, but to facilitate reference, the following abstract is given as usual:38 pleased to say that, during the year it was not found necessary to dismiss a single one. The following are the cases in which neglect has been proved:PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.41 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.46 185. The following remounts were purchased:47 193. That large numbers of young stock in the Bulandshahr district are not unsound I can positively assert, and as to Captain Newnham's remarks about their being undersized and the necessity for weeding out of brood mares, I can only attribute them to the fact that he is young at the work, this being, I believe, the first year during which he has purchased young stock. He is, further, not aware of the orders of Government which limit the powers of this Department to remove the brand when once given48 the great horse markets of the North-Western Provinces. It is therefore very disappointing to find that only one Native Cavalry Regiment49 209. According to Remount Rolls received, the number of remounts purchased was as follows: R By the Remount Agent . . 9 at an average price of . 200 For Native Cavalry . . . 80 50 larger numbers than we have any knowledge of. I have watched this care- fully when going through the dealers' yards, and I have been struck by the number of branded mares in their possession; did they not receive encourage- ment from Remount Officers, they certainly would not buy them. It will be for the decision of the Government of India whether the prohibition of purchase is entirely removed or whether Native Cavalry should be told that branded mares are not to be bought from dealers unless they are furnished with a certificate of barrenness. As the matter stands at present, I agree with Colonel O'Malley that it is absurd; but, as I before stated, by purchas- ing such mares from dealers Remount Officers have evaded51 I felt sure that this would be the result when it was urged upon me to allot money to this class. 222. Captain Gough, Army Remount Department, remarks:52 Dera Ghazi Khan Horse Show. 232. This Show was held from 9th to 11th March 1899 and must be regarded as having been a great success. This is in a great measure due to the interest taken in horse-breeding matters by Captain Powney Thompson, the Deputy Commissioner of the District, and I feel that the thanks of this Depart- ment are due to him for the success obtained, as well as to Mr. Broadway, Punjab Police, for the general arrangements of the Fair. 233. Great rivalry exists between Dera Ghazi Khan and Thal Chotiali (Sibi) Districts in matters of horse-breeding, and the spirit of emulation serves a most valuable purpose. It is always a question whether the young stock of the one or of the other is the best; from a remount point of view as possessing more substance, I prefer the Sibi-bred youngsters: those of Dera Ghazi Khan, however, show more quality, taken as a whole. Both, however, are excep- tionally good. 234. This district has suffered greatly from drought, and it was at one time feared that this Show would not maintain its high reputation; but, although there was a falling off of 725 in actual numbers, still 92 more competed for prizes: this speaks for itself as to the standard of quality. This increase was mainly seen in the number of young stock exhibited, which is a pleasing feature in a Show; especially was the increase most marked in the two and three-year old filly classes. This shows the interest taken by breeders, who, as far as lies in their power, keep their fillies for breeding purposes. 235. The following report on the class of stallion most suited for the district, by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, will be of interest:53 239. The exodus of young stock in this district still continues to be great. There is evidence to prove that between 300 and 400 are yearly purchased by Bhojpuri dealers. This is to be regretted, but I can suggest no remedy; time alone will prove to breeders the suicidal policy it is to sell their stock at such an early age. 240. Although the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, had toured in the district, still 70 mares were branded at this Show, showing the interest taken in horse-breeding by the Zemindars. Dera Ismail Khan Horse Show. 241. This Show was held on 14th and 15th March 1899 and was in every way disappointing. Turning from a district where horse-breeding is in such a flourishing condition, it is disheartening to find such a poor show as was that held at Dera Ismail Khan. 242. I was unfortunately prevented from attending, as this Show clashed with that held at Muzaffarnagar, and I felt it my duty, as adviser to the Sup- reme as well as to the various Local Governments, to make myself acquainted as far as possible with what is being done in the various Provinces. 243. The reports received from the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, and the Special Judging Committee coincide, but are at variance with that received from the Deputy Commissioner, who, I fear, takes an optimistic view of the matter; for, in the concluding paragraph of his report, he says that there is sufficient evidence to show that the district possesses undeveloped capabilities, and that by steady work and liberal encouragement he hopes to suc- ceed in extending the usefulness of the Show both to Government and the people. This is exactly the opinion I formed of the district when Superintend- ent, Horse Breeding Operations, Punjab, now 18 years ago; but, although Government stallions appear to have stood in the district since then, its resour- ces still remain undeveloped. I feel that I must be guided by our professional adviser rather than follow the opinion expressed by the Deputy Commissioner who is new to the district. Mr. Grant has taken a keen interest in the matter, and I have no doubt that if he remained in Dera Ismail Khan for some years much progress would be made, but I fear, with the constant change of District Officers, this cannot be expected. 244. The reports show that 755 attended against 1,038; this is satisfac- torily accounted for by the scarcity of fodder in the district; 584 are shown as having competed for prizes against 415 last year, but the majority must have been unbranded mares and their progeny by country-bred sires, for, on the Imperial side, we find only the following:54 247. No remounts were available for purchase. It will be my duty to recommend to the Local Government that this Show be either discontinued or that the prizes be strictly confined to mares covered by either Imperial or District Board stallions and their progeny. This, by being able to increase the value of the prizes, might possibly have the desired effect. Gujranwalla Horse Show. 248. This is quite a local gathering; no Imperial money is awarded in prizes. It is, however, pleasing to note that the Deputy Commissioner, and through him the District Board, take the lively interest in the development of horse and mule breeding that they do. This local Show has been held in abeyance for the last three years, and little was expected on this occasion. 249. There appears to be a great possibility of improvement and develop- ment in the Khangah Tehsil, the new colonization area, from which centre 100 mares were presented for branding. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, reports that they were not good, but that he took a liberal view of the matter and branded below the standard. In all, 49 mares were branded. It is frequently necessary to lower the standard in a new area; by placing a good Arab to mate with these mares, it is astonishing even in the first genera- tion how the stock improves. 250. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, reports the stock got by the District Board ponies as very good, but I regret to see that mule- breeding is not much appreciated. This matter will receive the attention of Veterinary-Lieutenant Trydell. Gujrat Horse Show. 251. This Show was held on 27th and 28th March 1899, and although when judged by actual numbers there was a certain falling off, still the Show was a success. Seven hundred and thirty attended against 878 last year, and 200 competed for prizes against 218. 252. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, again brings to notice the preponderance of Norfolk Trotter blood in the mares, but adds:55 259. Last year, 3 remounts were purchased; this year 10 were obtained, viz.:56 Ferozepore and Ludhiana a week after the Show, he passed a batch of nearly 400 between the ages of 6 months and 2 years. 270. He further brings to notice the fact that dealers have an advantage over the Army Remount Officers, as their purchases are generally finished before the Fair commences. At this Show the Lahore dealers bought largely, and no doubt many would have made British Cavalry remounts. It must be remembered that the Lahore dealers are a powerful body and quite able to form a ring which will absolutely defeat the Remount Department with its paucity of Officers and its inability to spare more than two or three days for its Officer to attend each Fair. The dealer or his agent will spend a fortnight in a district before a Show is to be held. 271. The Jeypore and Gwalior State Transport were large purchasers. Two Baggage mules were obtained by the Remount Agent. 272. Eighteen remounts were purchased by the Native Cavalry. This makes 21 animals bought for Military purposes at a cost of R5,336; but we find that 2,037 animals changed hands at an average of R68 each, thus showing 2,016 bought by private individuals at a cost of R1,37,088. 273. The District Board stallions continue to do good work. Four had covered, between the 1st April and the middle of January, 92, 77, 86 and 55 mares, respectively. 274. The thanks of this Department are due to Rai Maya Dass Bahadur, Extra Assistant Commissioner of the Ferozepore District and Manager of the Mamdot Estate, for the manner in which he fosters horse and mule breeding in this district. Jhang Horse Show. 275. This Show was held on the 1st and 2nd March 1899, and was disap- pointing as it so frequently is. Many more animals attended, 1,468 against 984 last year, and 356 competed for prizes against 294; but notwithstanding this, there were not more than a dozen fit for Native Cavalry. This is most disap- pointing, and is attributed by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, to the fact that the breeders still prefer their own country stallions; in fact, he states that they go so far as to have their mares covered by Government stallions when not in season, in order to enable them to compete for prizes, and then have them covered again when in season by their country stallions. A palpable case of this sort was proved in the ring, the owner's certificate was cancelled and he was removed from the judging enclosure. 276. There is one hope for the Jhang district, and this lies in the Lyallpur Tehsil; and it is to be hoped that the settlers who have come into the Colony from other districts will bring with them more enlightened ideas than are possessed by the Jhang people. Special prizes were reserved for settlers in the new Colony, and already a large number of mares have been branded. The mares, as might be expected, are not of the best as yet, but, mated with a good Arab sire, they should get good stock. Jhelum Horse Show. 277. This Show was held on 24th and 25th February 1899, and being one held in a good horse-breeding district, should be a success, but this is far from being the case. The excuse hitherto has been that the date57 Jhelum, as the breeders of the district prefer to attend the Shows held at Rawalpindi and Gujrat to attending their own. Kurnal Horse Show. 279. This Show was held on 22nd and 23rd February 1892. No district shows the effect of the famine on its horse stock more plainly than Kurnal. It had a very good sprinkling of fine mares at one time and a large proportion of smaller mares which, if crossed with good Arabs, would at least have given Native Cavalry remounts. Owing, however, to the scarcity of fodder which has prevailed, the owners have either had to sell them or have sent them to other districts to graze. This will account for the falling off in numbers58 Multan Horse Show. 287. Held on 6th and 7th March 1899. The interest in this Show was more than fully maintained this year as is shown by the fact that 1,302 attended against 853 last year. Some excellent mares were exhibited in Class 1 (branded mares covered by Imperial stallions), but the best class to my mind was that of the branded fillies; nearly all were by Government sires and the majority were decidedly good, in fact I quite agree with the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, in saying that in all the filly classes of various ages from foals upwards, the competition was both numer- ous and of a marked quality. 288. The class of stallion producing the greatest number of prize winners was the Arab, credited with thirty-two, whilst the Hackney class took fifteen. The thoroughbred and stud-bred classes took ten each. 289. Eleven remounts were purchased as compared with seven last year. Two were bought by the Remount Agent, another would have been bought had the owner not held out for too long a price. The Native Cavalry remounts are reported by the Superintendent as a good level lot, most of them by Government sires and quite up to the usual standard required. The average price paid was R244. 290. Fifty-seven mules competed for prizes as compared with forty last year. The increase in the produce of mules in this district is most encourag- ing, and I believe I am correct in saying that this is the first occasion on which an Ordnance mule has been purchased in the Multan district. 291. Some excellent stock by District Board stallions was exhibited. The main features in this Show were:59 their produce, competed for prizes. These ponies are doing much to improve the general run of ponies in the country, but, in addition, many of the fillies produced by them are fit for branding and therefore are covered by the Imperial stallions. 297. From the report received from the Deputy Commissioner just before going to Press, I find that the following sales were effected:60 306. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, makes the follow- ing remarks:61 Class. 1898-99. 1897-98. 1896-97. Gelding, one year old . . . . . . 15 18 65 Mules . . . . . . . . 3 1 5 Pony mares . . . . . . . . 1 ... ... Donkeys . . . . . . . . 15 9 10 Miscellaneous . . . . . . . 75 55 8 TOTAL . 506 399 373 311. Veterinary Captain Maxwell states:62 in this way they scored, for undoubtedly the young stock drifted into their hands, but Captain Gough will be on the alert next year, and as he becomes known to the breeders I trust to see a large number purchased. 314. The various opinions of Remount Officers on their purchases are as follows:63 1898-99. 1897-98. Mares fit for mule breeding . . . . 56 2 Donkey stallions . . . . . . 7 17 64 Moro65 The above will show the value of the Arab as a sire. 333. In addition to the above 13, the following were purchased:66 It is instructive to learn from what parts, especially of Sind, these exhibits came from. We find they stand as follows:67 better than to give the following copious extracts from the most interesting report received from the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department:68 coolies get eight and ten annas a day. The horses have been badly done, ill-groomed, and supplied with very indifferent gear, and altogether there is wanting about every stand that element of smartness which goes so far to popularise Government stallions in the eyes of the zemindars. I quite agree with Mr. Steele, the Collector of Hyderabad, that it is hardly advisable to remove all horses from the zemindars at once, but what I do recommend is that good stables, I do not mean expensive ones, but large airy loose boxes, should gradually be built where there is a Government official that can be made responsible, and then by degrees it may be found advisable to place the stallions at such places. The covering certificates that came into my hands at the Talhar Show proved that Government stallions had been allowed to cover any and all sorts of unbranded mares and ponies that were brought. The Thoroughbred English horse 'Spero' having been put to tatoos under thirteen hands high, and even to pony mares branded for mule breeding. All this of course depreciates the value of a sire in the eyes of the owner of good mares and tends to make them unpopular. Under more immediate supervision and with the appointment of zilladars to the various districts, all these matters will, however, soon be rectified, and I see no reason why good horses and mules should not be bred in this Division. "The Collector is anxious that the Imperial grant to this Show should be increased from R400 to R600, the same as is given for Moro. "I shall be glad if you can see your way to providing the extra two hundred rupees." 343. I would now offer a few remarks on Veterinary Captain Maxwell's report. It will be seen that whilst 111 mares competed in the class for such as had been covered by Government stallions, 485 competed in that class, viz., "all mares four years old fit for breeding purposes." As, however, 91 of the latter were branded, a good beginning has been made towards selection of mares. The majority of these 485 were simply fit for mule breeding, but amongst them there were many that, if mated with good Jacks, would throw good Ordnance mules. 344. Another important point brought to notice in the tabular statement is that no castration has been attempted in this district. Two hundred and ninety-nine entries competed against six geldings shown. 345. No reliable information could be obtained owing to the total absence of covering certificates, and it will be noticed that of 111 mares said to have been covered by Government stallions, only 20 were in possession of covering certificates. 346. I am able to confirm Veterinary Captain Maxwell's opinion with regard to the class of mares to be found in the district, but it is evident that although this is the 5th Annual Horse Show during which time something should have been done, we have to commence from the very beginning. For this reason, I considered it advisable to remove the Thoroughbred English stallion "Spero," and to direct that none but good Arabs should be used in future. Nicking so well as they do with the indigenous breeds they should, in a few years, leave a decided impression on the mares of this part of Sind. 347. I agree with Veterinary Captain Maxwell in his remarks regarding the prospectus of prizes; numerous alterations are required to bring about the desired end. I have therefore directed him to settle the Jacobabad prospectus first in consultation with the Deputy Commissioner, and then to endeavour to introduce the same prospectus at Moro and Talhar in the Hyderabad district. 348. I would draw special attention to the condition of the Government stallions. Had I not seen them myself I would scarcely have imagined that horses could have been kept so badly. I was really not surprised that the natives preferred their own stallions, for, in many cases, they were better done and better turned out than ours were. All this will, however, be changed, but it will necessitate an extra allotment to Sind to allow Veteri- nary Captain Maxwell to equip them with proper gear and clothing, and to employ better syces. Stabling is urgently required, but by the new arrange- ment come to between the Imperial and Bombay Governments, local funds will in future provide these, in lieu of contributing, as they have hitherto done, towards the feed and keep of the stallions. 349. Seeing what had been done in this district, mere tats under 13 hands in height having been covered by Thoroughbred English horses, I deemed it advisable to issue strict orders that none but branded mares were to be covered by the Government stallions. 350. I agree with the Collector that it would be advisable to increase the allotment for prizes, and I shall endeavour to do so.
69 351. In conclusion of my remarks on the Horse Shows in Sind, I would beg to convey to Mr. Steele, the Collector of Hyderabad, and to Mr. Mackenzie, the Deputy Commissioner, Upper Sind Frontier, my most hearty thanks for their hearty co-operation in all that affects the welfare of horse and mule breed- ing in the Province. RAJPUTANA. 352. The Fair usually held at Pushkar in Ajmere-Merwara, and also those usually held at Ulwar and Jeypore, were abolished during the year under review, either owing to the great scarcity of fodder or to the fact that plague was on the increase in Bombay. Tezaji Mule Fair. 353. The Tezaji Fair was held, but calls for no comments. It does not appear to serve any useful purpose. TIRHOOT. Sonepore Horse Fair. 354. This Fair was held at the end of November 1898 and is more of a cattle than a Horse Fair. For, although 3,000 horses are said to have been present, still the majority of these were doubtless country tats, for the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, reports that, although a few Native Cavalry remounts might have been procured, still he does not consider that the visit of a Remount Officer would have proved remunerative; as it happened, no Remount Officer visited the Show. Against this, there were about 42,000 bullocks and other animals. 355. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, reports favourably of the stamp of ponies available at Sonepore; they were of course sent there for sale as polo ponies; they were unmade, and the price is said to have ruled high. For a batch of five ponies, R265 per head was refused. BENGAL. Kalimpong Mule Fair. 356. I regret that owing to the fact that this Fair clashed with that held at Sonepore, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, was unable to be present. I have requested him to kindly see whether this cannot be avoided in future, as I consider it advisable that he should be present. 357. From a report submitted to him by the Deputy Commissioner, Darjeeling, I find that a considerable number of Bhutia ponies were purchased by planters and others, one fetching the high price of R350. 358. Eighty-three mules were purchased by the Commissariat Department at an average price of R145. No mules suitable for Ordnance purposes were brought in, although a special notice was circulated throughout Thibet offering R400 for suitable animals. I therefore doubt if many of this class are to be found there. 359. The sum of R500 granted from Imperial Funds was distributed in the mule class, and R1,800 was given by Local Funds to cattle, agricultural produce, etc. BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. Ahmednagar Horse Show. 360. This Show was held on 31st October 1898. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, remarks as follows:70 Kathiawar Horse Show. 362. Remarking on this Show, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, states as follows:71 position to make the necessary recommendations to the Government of India for the ensuing year. 373. During the past year, a question which for some time had been under discussion was decided. It was one that would have had a far-reach- ing influence on horse breeding, and therefore it was one to which I attri- buted great importance. The question arose on certain recommendations made by Mr. Robertson when Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab, and resolved itself into whether unbranded mares and their progeny either by Government stallions or not should be allowed to compete for the prizes offered by Government. On being consulted, I gave it as my opinion that if this were allowed, I considered it would be a very retrograde movement, as although I had no fear of the stock got by Gov- ernment stallions being defeated by stock got by country stallions, still, that it would be an inducement for breeders to use their country stallions. I am therefore pleased to say that the Government of India have decided that no alteration in the existing rules is to be made. Special Judging Committees. 374. As usual, two Special Judging Committees were assembled, one for the Punjab72 382. One hundred and eight head of stock were purchased by the Army Remount Department, against 91 last year. The number of remounts bought by Native Cavalry and Police was 770 and 100 respectively, against 1,013 and 69 last year. The reduction in the number bought by Native Cavalry is due to the small number of Officers that attended the Fairs. 383. The number of mules bought by Government was 238, whilst 2,384 were purchased by others. This proves, as I have before shown, the great trade which exists in mules in India. 384. Taken altogether, the Horse Shows of 1898-99 must be looked upon as having been successful. 385. One point which forces itself very strongly on one's mind, after reviewing the various Horse Fair and Show reports, is the enormous demand which exists in this country for horse and mule stock. I have frequently pointed out the exodus of young stock to Bengal; these are purchased by the Bhujpuri dealers who rear them and sell them in the autumn, mainly to the large Commission and Job establishments of Calcutta. I have shown that from the Dera Ghazi Khan district alone at least 327 head of young stock are exported annually, and we have Veterinary Lieutenant Smith's evidence that he saw a drove of between 300 and 400 proceeding between Ferozepore and Ludhiana. No doubt a large number are purchased by the dealers of Lahore and Amritsar, and many of these find their way ultimately into the ranks of our Native Cavalry. 386. I have before shown that there is a great exodus of young mule stock into the Trans-frontier districts, especially into Swat; this was more than ever noticeable this year at the Rawalpindi Horse Show. On this occasion, the Deputy Commissioner informed me that at least 500 had been so exported, and that high prices were paid. 387. I feel that at some Shows sufficient attention is not paid to the records from which accurate information as to sales can be obtained. I, however, purpose issuing a Circular to all Superintendents on this subject and also to address the Punjab and North-Western Provinces Governments' and the Agent to the Governor General in Baluchistan, and the Commissioner in Sind, asking them not only to endeavour to obtain reliable information on this point, but also to ascertain, as far as possible, the destination of the greater portion of the animals that are sold to others than Remount Officers. 388. To give some idea of the great demand which exists, I give the fol- lowing statistics which have been submitted by the various District Officers:73 Value. R MultanPART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.77 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.78 Sundia Jowari. Sundia Jowari.79 "Below is a statement showing the areas which were placed under cultivation during the year 1898-99, with the names of the crops and the yield of each:80 Donkey colts. "Two colts were received during the year by purchase from Rawalpindi and three were transferred from the Imperial list, making a total of twenty-four. Of these, ten were sold by public auction, being undersized and unfit for breeding purposes. One was sold to the Madhopur Court of Wards Estate for Rs. 200 and six were transferred to the Imperial list, leaving seven at the close of the year. Total number of animals on the Farm. "This gives us a total of thirty-nine animals remaining on the Farm on the 31st March 1899. Percentage of foal- ing. "Out of 17 mares (practically 15) five have already foaled, giving a percentage of 29.40. Five other mares are heavy in foal and will drop their foals in AprilPART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.83 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.84 The Imperial Bacteriologist reports as follows:85 "Glycerinated bile.86 hand, it was taken after the reaction had begun and up to the time it attained its height, the disease was always produced, but if the temperature was on the decline, it was uncertain whether the disease would be produced or not. The blood of salted animals, then, during the period of the reaction contains the virus in an active state. With regard to the question as to whether any modification of the virus was brought about, it was found that the disease produced was always severe, and never in any degree modified. On the contrary, an analysis of the figures show that the incubation period, and to a less marked degree the duration of the disease before death ensued, were shorter in the case of animals which were injected with blood from salted animals while reacting than in the case of controls injected with the blood of ordinary inoculated rinderpest animals. "In some of these cases, the blood was injected directly into a vein, and in these the incubation period was a day shorter than when the same blood was inoculated suboutaneously into another animal, and the duration of the disease was also shortened by one day. This point is of some practical importance, as, when a quantity of virulent blood is wanted urgently for the serum producing inoculations, it can be obtained a day sooner by inoculating the control animal intravenously instead of subcutaneously. "The preparation of the protective serum.87 final conclusion as to the value and practicability of this method in India. With further experience it is expected that still more powerful serum than the above will be made here. "Inoculation in affected villages.PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.91 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.92 time being administered by the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-Western Provinces and Chief Commissioner of Oudh. 416. By a Notification, bearing the same date, His Honour appointed certain persons, by virtue of their office and others appointed by name on the recommendation of the District Magistrates, to be Inspectors under the Act. 417. By a further Notification, bearing the same date, the following officers were appointed Veterinary Practitioners under the Act for the purpose of conducting examinations under section 7, and of granting certifi- cates under section 8, in regard to horses seized within the areas hereinbelow specified against them:93 as I shall hereafter show, a most beneficial effect. I would be glad to see the same regulations put in force at Calcutta. This formed one of the subjects discussed at my interview with the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Bengal, in December last. Glanders and Farcy in North- Western Provinces. 420. During the year under review one case of glanders was found at Mohund on the Saharunpur-Rajpur line, and one at Rajpur. Another case was discovered in a mule belonging to the 7th Bengal Cavalry at Fyzabad. A case also occurred at Meerut in a pony belonging to Mr. L. B. Goad. Outbreaks were also reported from the districts of Cawnpore, Jaunpur, Agra and Bulandshahr, but on the animals being inspected it was found that they were not affected with glanders. Glanders and Faroy in the Punjab. 421. The disease has been very prevalent in this Province. Cases have been reported from the following centres:94 issued that rules be drafted for its working there. Subsequently, however, steps in this direction were post- poned, as it was considered that no separate action in regard to these districts was necessary, it having been decided to extend the Act to the whole of the Presidency and to issue rules generally applicable to all the districts." 431. On the working of Act XX of 1879 (Glanders and Farcy) Veterinary Major Brodie-Mills states:95 and the number and length of the stages for which they are driven, and giving the District Magistrate full power to reject any ponies unsuitable for use. 439. I trust that this will have the desired effect of preventing the many acts of cruelty which I witnessed on this line. Kathgodam and Naini Tal Dak Line. 440. This line was inspected by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, and found to be in excellent order. This line, notwithstanding the precautions adopted, such as boiling of water, etc., suffers periodically from most severe outbreaks of Surra. I am therefore pleased to find that only one case occurred during the year under report. Simla-Kalka Dak Line. 441. This line was inspected by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, and found to be, as usual, in a most efficient state. The ponies are well selected and well fed. No disease of any kind existed during the year. Rawalpindi, Murree and Kashmir Lines. 442. This line is fairly efficient were it not for the continued appearance of glanders amongst the ponies. This subject has been fully dealt with under the head of "Equine Disease". The line is constantly inspected by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab. Pathankot. Dharm- sala and Dunera Lines. 443. These lines were inspected by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, who reports them to be efficient. He, however, brings to notice the necessity for the employment of a Veterinary Assistant in order to prevent horses being worked when unfit. He brings to notice the fact of having seen an animal at work with high fever and to have found two horses with broken legs, one of which had been kept alive in great pain for eight days. This matter was referred to the Deputy Commissioner, Kangra, with a recom- mendation that a Veterinary Assistant should be appointed. Piparia and Pach- mari Line. 444. I regret to find that this line is without any professional supervision. During the year it was found necessary to remove the Veterinary Officer from the Central Provinces to fill a furlough vacancy in Bombay, still I think that a Veterinary Assistant should be appointed to perform this duty. The District Superintendent of Police, Hoshangabad, has been appointed an Inspector under the Glanders and Farcy Act, but professional aid is required.
PART I-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.19 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.100 I gave such orders as are likely to lead to a good supply of Bhoosa and Jowar Kirby. I then proceeded to Naini Tal and discussed the subject of the buildings still remaining to be completed, as well as the order in which they should be carried out. Inspection of Saharunpur Raj- pur Dak Line. I then visited the Saharunpur-Rajpur Dâk Line, being accompanied by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Prov- inces and Oudh. My object in visiting this line was connected with the constant appearance of surra and the less frequent appearance of glanders, also to consider the new Hackney License Act with a view of ascertaining whether it would enable the authorities to cope with the disgraceful condition of the ponies employed on the line. I returned to my head-quarters (Simla) on 29th April 1898. Veterinary Assist- ants for Uganda. In May, I proceeded to Umballa in connection with the despatch of four Veterinary Assistants for Uganda. Four excellent men were selected, and I trust that they are doing good work in that province. Visit to Kangra in connection with Mule-breeding Rinderpest and Dispensaries. In July, I went on my usual tour of inspection of the depôts, and en route to Rawalpindi I visited the Kangra district to discuss with the Deputy Commissioner the following subjects, in which, I think, the district could develop:101 (ii) Plans were drawn up and tours arranged for Remount Agents to accompany the officers of the Civil Veterinary Department for the purpose of purchasing young horse stock from the dealers. Interview with Darindahs, North- Western Provinces. On my visit to Babugarh, I assembled as many of the Darindahs of the North-Western Provinces as could possibly attend; 38, being more than half, were present. This enables me to address them on points which, if attended to, would lead to the more efficient working of the Department. The points brought forward were:102 nothing in consequence of being under no supervision. Frequently, however, employment is not found for them, and at the same time objections are raised to their seeking employment elsewhere. To guard against the bad working of Veterinary Assistants when employed in the States, I suggested that, as was agreed to by the Jeypur Durbar, all Veterinary Assistants employed should send in a fortnightly diary, in duplicate, one copy being sent to the Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department. This would enable that officer to scrutinize the working of these men, which would prevent their idling, as they do at present, as he would be in a position to advise the various Durbars on the subject. Dispensaries in Rajputana. I further pointed out that, until some proper organization could be decided upon, it might be possible to employ them with much advantage in dispen- saries. On all these points I have, at the express desire of the Agent to the Gov- ernor General, addressed all the Residents and Political Agents, and I trust that the day is not far distant when some efficient and profitable work is organized in the Native States of Rajputana. This would be a decided advantage to British territory, for whilst no organization exists, the States must be a menace to us as far as the extension of contagious diseases is con- cerned. Mule-breeding in Rajputana. I was able to report fairly successful development in the direction of mule-breeding103 I also had an interview with the Member of the Board of Revenue, when questions connected with the investigation of cattle disease on a better deferred system were discussed. Calcutta:Inter- views with His Honour the Lieute- nant-Governor and others. I then proceeded to Calcutta, where I had interviews with His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, the Hon'ble Member (Revenue), and the Director of Land Records and Agriculture. The main points discussed were:104 I feel convinced that, if these alterations are made, improvement may confidently be expected. Inspection of stal- lions, Bahawalpur State. I halted at Bahawalpur on my way in order to inspect the horse and donkey stallions that were collected from the various Tehsils. I found that at least three of the five horses should be replaced, and that five excellent donkeys were employed. I trust to see the three horses replaced shortly. Jellalabad Horse Show. I then proceeded to Jellalabad (Ferozpore district) to attend the Horse Show held in the Mamdot Estate. Hyderabad (Sind). I next visited Hyderabad (Sind), where I inspected the new dispensary being built, and found that, with accommodation for dispensaries, 6 bullocks and 5 horses, the cost was to be Rs. 13,500. It is said that this is the standard plan, but, having seen this one, I shall be in a position to advise the Chief Com- missioner in that Province when others are proposed to be built. Talhar Horse Show. I then proceeded to Talhar, distant 46 miles from Hyderabad, in order to attend a Horse Show that was held there. This being the first year during which the horse and mule breeding operations in Sind have been handed over to this Department, it was essential that I should make myself as well ac- quainted with the Province as I could. I was able to discuss the re-allotment and location of the stallions with Mr. Steele, the Collector, to whom my best thanks are due for the ready assistance he gave me. The general management of the horses was a subject that occupied much of my attention, for although district orders had been issued that none but branded mares were to be covered by the Government stallions, still miserable tats, not more than 13 hands in height, had been covered and were supplied with covering certificates. The care of the stallions left much to be desired, and I trust that the result of my visit will be that they will be better looked after in future. The various questions which arose on the management of the Talhar Show will be found detailed under that head. Bombay:Reasons adduced for falling off of Arab Horse Market. From Talhar I proceeded to Bombay in order to complete my purchases for the year. I fully discussed the decline of the Arab market with Mr. Oomer Jamal Vuyani, when he informed me that he attributed it to the following causes:105 Punjab and North- Western Provinces Horse Fairs and Shows. The remainder of the year was mainly spent in visiting the Horse Shows held at Sibi, Jhelum, Aligarh, Multan, Dera Ghazi Khan, Muzaffarnagar, Gujrat, Rawalpindi, and Amritsar. Visit to Hissar district. During the intervals of these Shows, I visited the Hissar district in order to make arrangements for the purchase of 250 cows required for the Hissar Farm. Bacteriological Laboratory. I concluded my tour with a visit to the Bacteriological Laboratory at Muktesar in order to make myself acquainted with what was being done. Assistant to the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department. 448. In April, Veterinary Captain Gunn attended as a member of the Examination Board held at Lahore Veterinary College. Also accompanied the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, to Naini Tal and Mussoorie to inspect the dak lines. 449. From 15th May to 21st June he worked in the office of the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, collating information referring to cattle disease and breeding. In July, he visited Dharmsala, discussed inoculation for rinderpest and establishment of dispensaries with the Deputy Commissioner. Also accompanied the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, to Rawalpindi to inspect the stables and the proposed Farm. He then proceeded to Babugarh to investigate into Ticks, then to Allahabad for the investigation at Farm. 450. On the 30th of July he assumed charge of the office of Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, which he held till 28th October 1898. In August, he proceeded to Kapurthala to inspect a mule colt. In September, he proceeded to Babugarh to inspect stallions, also attended the Cattle Fair at Jahazgarh, and thence proceeded to Hissar. In October, he proceeded to Babugarh to inspect District Board stallions. 451. Veterinary Captain Gunn started on tour on the 30th October 1898 and broke his camp up on the 6th of March 1899, during this time he was employed on the bacteriological survey of the Punjab; he visited the districts of Jhelum, Rawalpindi, and Hazara. In December, he attended as member of the Board of Examination held at the Bombay Veterinary College. 452. On the 29th January 1899, he left Hasanabdal to meet the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, at Hissar. From 2nd to 13th March 1899, he visited the towns of Hissar, Hansi, Bhiwani, Sampla, and Rohtak, in order to purchase cows for the Government Cattle Farm at Hissar. On the 14th of March 1899, he proceeded to Calcutta to attend as member of the Examination Board, and thence to Ajmere to conduct the examination of the Veterinary School. 453. Veterinary Captain Gunn was 269 days in camp, travelled 13,290 miles by rail and 1,980 by road. 454. The Imperial Bacteriologist reports as follows:106 for five days, and again in March for three days on duties connected with the Plague Commission at Agra and the investigation of Sunjar or Mahamari. Personnel of the Department. 456. During the year under review, certain changes have taken place again in the personnel of this Department. The following will show the resigna- tions and appointments which have occurred:107 and that three appointments were made to the Department, viz.:108 Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, owing to his unwonted energy, does much to meet the requirements of his Province in the way of cattle breeding and investigation of diseases, but with this exception, the only officers who can interest themselves in the matter are the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, Madras and Burma. I trust therefore that the day is not far distant when the appointments which I have shown to be neces- sary are sanctioned. 464. Already a scheme has been carefully worked out whereby we shall be in a position to solicit the sanction of the Secretary of State for a 3rd officer for the Punjab without throwing much extra expense on Imperial Funds. 465. The necessity for a 2nd officer for Burma is also recognized, and sanction will soon be asked for his employment. 466. The Kashmir Durbar has consented to defray the cost of a Veterinary Officer. This will have the effect of his being able to guard British territory against the invasion of disease which so frequently happens at present. 467. There then remains, for future consideration, an officer for North- Western Provinces, one for Central Provinces and one for Assam, and as I shall show, when dealing with the question of cattle disease, the pay of these officers would be more than covered if they only saved one per cent. of the deaths which occur annually in some Provinces. I am led to make this remark by considering the excessive mortality in Assam, where 259,570 head of cattle died in 1897-98, the estimated value of these being Rs. 22,26,478. Horse and Mule breeding in Ajmere. 468. As I remarked in my last Annual Administration Report, it was decided to only keep one stallion at Ajmere; this horse has covered 47 mares against 40 last year. All mares covered were branded. 469. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states that owing to the abolition of the Pushkar Fair, he was unable to see the young stock. I would much like to see this officer move more about Ajmere-Merwara than he does, whenever his duties at the school will allow him to do so; he would then become known to the breeders and to the ryots generally, and would be the means of doing much good, not only in the development of horse breeding, but also in the suppression of cattle disease. 470. Mule breeding has been started in Ajmere-Merwara; a donkey was sent there last January; he had, however, only covered two mares up to 31st March. The Government of India have sanctioned the payment of a bonus of R3 to the owner of each mare covered. I trust that this venture will prove a success. Pony and Mule breeding in Central Provinces. 471. As I have before said, the attention of this Department will be re- quired mainly to guard the interests of cattle owners of these Provinces: neither pony nor mule breeding make any advance. 472. The number of mares covered by the three stallions employed is decreasing year by year. In 1896-97, 138 mares were covered and last year 110, whereas during the year under review, we find that only 85 have been served. Again, the donkey covered 62 mares in 1896.97, 39 last year, but only 20 in 1898-99. 473. This is disappointing, and although I am of opinion that nothing more can be effected as far as the pony stallions are concerned, I think that some- thing more might be done in mule breeding. For example, the Deputy Com- missioner, Damoh, states that there are 2,187 mares in his district; most of these are of a poor class, still the majority of these, if crossed with donkey stallions, would throw useful small transport mules. 474. This question, however, cannot be dealt with until a Veterinary Officer is sanctioned for permanent duty in these Provinces. Horse and Mule breeding in Central India. 475. Horse breeding has never been successful in Central India, and in my Administration Report I stated that one stallion only was employed, and that unless an improvement in the number of coverings could be anticipated, I purposed removing him. On referring the question to the Officer Commanding 1st Regiment, Central India Horse, he agreed with me in saying that it was useless to try to develop this industry in Central India.
109 476. Our operations are therefore confined to mule breeding, there being one donkey with each regiment. Although as many mares as I would like to see covered have not been so covered during the year, still a good beginning has been made:110 484. A duplicate set was obtained and was forwarded to the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, London, for incorporation in their Museum. PUBLICATIONS. Translation of Wil- liams' Medicine and Surgery into Urdu. 485. This most useful work, which, being one of the standard text books of the English schools, is one of incalculable value to the Veterinary Assistants of the Department, has been fairly well patronized, and I am glad to say that about 200 copies have been supplied to men employed by the Imperial and Local Governments and by District Boards. The great point gained is that it enables these men to keep up their knowledge, which soon vanishes when sent out into the districts if they do not keep up the education received by them at the Colleges. Lectures in Urdu delivered by Veteri- nary Captain Pease at the Lahore Veterinary College. 486. This is a most useful publication and one that will prove of immense value to the Veterinary Assistants. This book will help them considerably in bringing back to their memory what they were taught at College, and will prove a valuable guide in correctly diagnosing and properly treating sick horses and cattle. It has been strongly brought to the notice of the Directors of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab and North-Western Provinces and Oudh, in order that they might induce the various District Boards to supply the Veterinary Assistants employed under them with a copy. Veterinary Quarter- ly Journal in Urdu by Veterinary Cap- tain Pease. 487. This journal continues to maintain its popularity. In it, Veterinary Assistants are encouraged to record any cases of interest which come under their observation, and in this way Veterinary Assistants are stimulated to main- tain a higher standard of medical and surgical knowledge. Manual of Cattle diseases by Syud Sardar Shah Gilani. 488. This book has been translated into Hindi and negotiations are now proceeding to cause it to be translated into Mahrathi for use of people in the Hyderabad Assigned Districts. The translation into both Hindi and Mahrathi will prove its value. Pamphlet in Sindhi by Asudamal, Veterinary Assist- ant, Hyderabad. 489. This may be described as a translation into Sindhi of Veterinary Colonel Hallen's Primer and Veterinary Captain Pease's Manual on Horse breeding; it also contains the standing rules of this Department for the care of Government stallions, and to this has been added simple hints regarding the symptoms and treatment of the more commonly met with forms of con- tagious diseases. The pamphlet has been most favourably reviewed by the different District Officers in Sind who have brought it to the notice of the various Local Boards with a view of its being freely circulated. Special Veterinary Series of the Agricultural Ledger. 490. The following special Veterinary Series were issued during the year:111 have valuable material which they are unable to publish owing to the fact that their multifarious duties will not allow them to do so. I have, however, issued a circular and have begged of them to assist as much as possible in this direction. HORSE AND MULE BREEDING IN NATIVE STATES. 493. This is the fifth year during which I have been able to report progress made by certain Native States in both these industries. I shall of course only allude to such States that have taken the matter up under the auspices of this Department, but I shall be able to prove that they take a most intelligent interest in the matter, and that the results of their operations are already beginning to be felt. 494. Mules fit for Ordnance purposes have been purchased both from the Patiala and Faridkot States, whilst three of the remounts which took prizes at the Jellalabad Horse Show were by one of the Faridkot State stallions. This is most encouraging, especially when it is taken into consideration that the present system has been in vogue for but such a short space of time. 495. I would take this opportunity of expressing my gratitude to the various Chiefs for the great courtesy which I have met with during my visits to their States, and for their hearty co-operation and the ready manner in which they have adopted my recommendations for the improvement of horse or mule stock. NATIVE STATES IN THE PUNJAB. Bahawalpur 496. This State continues to do good work. As before mentioned, it maintains a small stud and this under its more efficient management, will undoubtedly produce some remounts for the Imperial service Cavalry of the State, but it should produce more mules for the Transport. When I visited Bahawalpur I found that young stock of two years of age were being removed this has been stopped. 497. I am, however, more interested in the extension of horse and mule breeding in the Tehsils, and here is to be noticed a marked improvement. Five Tehsils are equipped with a horse and donkey each, and during the past year the following number of mares has been covered:112 with mule foals at foot were also present. Twenty-five head of young stock were also inspected, 13 of these were by "Rishan" Arab and were excellent; he stamps his stock in a most marked manner exactly as does the Arab stallion "Etah" in the Kapurthala State. I regret that the coverings of horse stallions have somewhat fallen off this year113 512. Of 250 mares covered by the donkey stallions whose progeny can be traced, 69 foals were dropped. 27.5 of the coverings were successful, which is about the average. This would have been higher, but the results obtained by the donkey, which has been got rid of, were decidedly bad. 513. Horse Show.114 have a ready sale at their own homes, will, I trust, be induced to take up mule breeding con amore. Jeypore. 522. Slight improvement is noticeable in the covering of the four Arab stallions maintained by the State at Jeypore, Sambhar, Hindown and Malpura, 80 mares having been covered against 68 last year. 523. The horse-breeding area is divided into two and placed under the two Veterinary Assistants educated at the cost of the State at the Ajmere Veterinary School. 524. For a new departure as this is, the coverings at Jeypore and Sambhar may be said to be good, but those at Hindown and Malpura are decidedly poor. I intend addressing the Resident asking him whether he can suggest any- thing that will improve matters. Ulwar. 525. This State still takes the lead of all others in its stud arrangements. During the year under review, 9 stallions were cast as unfit or died, leaving still 16 on the register; these are young serviceable horses, and the number is equal to the requirements of the State. 526. During the year, 594 mares were covered by the horse stallions; this number corresponds exactly with that of last year. 527. Nine donkey stallions worked during the year and covered 138 pony mares, against 63 last year; this increase augurs well for mule breeding in the State, especially as I find that 18 jagirdari and zemindari mares are included in this number. 528. The number of mares employed at the Stud is 126. I am glad to say that during the year 32 were weeded out and were replaced by serviceable and well-bred mares. 529. During the year, 78 head of young stock left the paddocks. Of these:115 534. There is one point of great interest in the report submitted by Major Jones, Military Assistant; it is the want of fertility in English and Australian mares in this country. On this point Major Jones states :116 539. In order to give some idea of the good work done by Native States, I give the following summary which will show the number of mares covered by horse and donkey stallions:GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1898-99. PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. I.119 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1898-99. PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. I.120 "With regard to the young stock, it is very evident that a considerable improvement has taken place, and the owners are quite aware of this, and quite realize the fact that youngsters by the Provincial stallions are superior in height, make and shape to those got by the small country-breds or grasscutters' tats. In connection with this it is worthy of notice that 18 youngsters, the progeny of Provincial stallions, gained prizes at the different Fairs and Shows in these Provinces during the year. Also during my tour I branded 10 fillies (against 5 last year) by Provincial stallions as fit to mate with Imperial stallions. At Nasirpur, a Provincial colt 2½ years of age measured 14 hands, and also at Pahasu, one of 18 months of age measured 14-1." 551. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, concludes his report on the work done by the Provincial stallions in the following terms :121 557. The average covered per stallion employed was as follows :122 mares, submits the following interesting history of the Sumatran and other ponies:123 during the year, against 62 by four Jacks in 1897-98. In Kolegal, the Collector of Coimbatore considers that the number of coverings would have been still larger had it not been for the inexperience of the syce, and the lameness of the stallion in December owing to an injury to the coronet in the near hind. One new donkey stallion arrived in December 1898, but did no work up to the end of the official year." 567. The results obtained, calculated on the coverings of the previous year, are very disappointing. Of 362 mares covered in Coimbatore, the results are known in only 271 cases, and the results in Salem are not yet reported. 568. The Deputy Director, Land Records and Agriculture, referring to this subject, states:PART II.127 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. II.-MULE BREEDING. PART II.PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. III.131 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. III.132 POST-MORTEM. Lips, tongue, dental pad and pharynx133 580. In addition to the above described series of experiments, Veterinary- Major Raymond has conducted some tests with what is known as the "serum treatment." But as this is fully explained in his report it is thought advisable to produce this interesting note in extenso:134 'Possibly observations on a larger scale might give more favourable results, but I cannot say that those I submit, if they could not be improved upon, would warrant an attempt to introduce a general application of this system, nor would those results overcome the probable repugnance of people to have virulent blood taken from one of their oxen to inject into another. If the inoculation was precise in its results, some large cattle owners might be disposed to try the method in order to run the disease through their herds, and thus feel safe for a comparatively long time, but even in S. D. series the results in animals of similar size and age have varied. "Second group.135 "It is evident then that under most favourable circumstances it is scarcely possible for the infection of rinderpest to be carried by means of skins of animals that have died of the disease for more than a very short period, and that it is quite impossible that Indian hides, treated in any of the usual ways which are adopted in any of the various parts of the country, to convey the infection of the disease to any country outside India, through the exportation of raw, untanned hides, and much more would it be impossible for those which had been passed through the lengthy and arduous process of tanning to carry such infection." 588. As there is a considerable traffic in bones from this country, Dr. Rogers conducted some experiments to test whether they might serve to carry the contagium. Six animals were employed in these tests, and the following are the conclusions which he has drawn:136 of hide emulsion into a healthy animal causes a re-action which appears to be sufficient to confer a weak immunity. (iii) That hides do not convey rinderpest 13 days after removal and treatment by a native skinner; but if a hide emulsion be pre- pared and used as described, it appears to exercise a modifying influence upon a subsequent attack of rinderpest which follows an injection of large quantities of virulent blood. 595. In addition to the experiments conducted with rinderpest hides, Veterinary-Major Raymond was able to carry out certain tests with hides of animals which had died of malignant sore-throat. The hides were cured in the usual manner, and portions of them were inserted under the skin of healthy animals. In several cases, there was a distinct temperature re-action, but no outward sign of ill-health. There was, moreover, no 137 Salmon, the Chief of the Bureau of Animal Industry, Washington, leave no doubt that the species are identical. It would therefore seem that we un- doubtedly have the tick, but so far as our investigations go we certainly have not got the tick fever plague in India. Fortunately for India, the power to control the disease is within our own hands. All animals may be put through a thorough inspection before embarkation, and a long sea voyage intervenes before they arrive at this country, and if requisite measures are taken both at the ports of embarkation and debarkation, there seems to be no reason why the pest should not be rigidly excluded. 601. One thing is very certain, that is that we should most firmly prevent horned cattle from being carried on any ships on which horses intended for India are carried. It is a well recognised fact that the disease germ of Tick Fever, Pyrosoma bigminam, remains in the blood of a "recovered" animal for years, and is known to be infective. Dr. Tidswell of the Board of Health, Sydney, has conducted some extremely interesting experiments, and to show the danger of importing homed cattle into India the following précis may be of interest. 602. On 21st July 1898, two cows, Nos. 2 and 3, received under the skin a preventive inoculation of 10 c. c. of " recovered " blood. In both fever ap- peared on July 29th and lasted five days. Nine weeks after the subsidence of the fever, the cows were injected with virulent blood and neither animal showed any reaction after the second injection. In cow No. 2, with which we propose to deal specially, it is estimated that in the course of fourteen days the blood corpuscles were reduced from 6½ to 4½ millions per cubic millimetre. 603. It will be seen that cow No. 2 was a mild case, and had become "salted", that is, protected from a further attack of the disease. Her fever lasted but five days, and the temperature was above 103° for only 36 hours. Blood from this cow was injected into cow No. 7. Fever developed in eight days, and lasted nine during seven of which the fever was over 103° F. and the symptoms more marked. From cow No. 7 blood was injected into cow No. 9. Fever developed in six days and lasted nine during seven of which fever was over 103° F. and the red corpuscles were reduced from 5½ to 3½ millions per millimetre. The animal rapidly wasted away and had to be destroyed. It will be seen that infected blood carried through two removes from No. 2, a mild case, clearly showed that at each remove the disease became proportionately more virulent. 604. The lesson that these experiments teaches us is this, that if cows are imported with horses, and they have recovered from the disease, the micro- organism is still to be found in their systems. We know that the country round our big ports abounds with ticks, and if these get on the imported cows, they will, by sucking the blood, become the hosts of the Pyrosoma, and thus start Tick Fever in this country, the disastrous results of which it would be impossible to calculate. 605. Early information of the departure of horse ships from Australia is obtained by this Department, and this is communicated to the various Super intendents so that they may be on the watch, and have ample time to arrange and carry out their inspections. It would, however, seem more efficacious if all horses, previous to being shipped to this country, were passed through a dip twice within fourteen days before being walked on board. This would get rid of at least nearly all the ticks. Dr. Salmon of Washington issued a note in which it was stated that the Bureau of Animal Industry had had a remarkable success in perfecting a dip that takes the ticks from cattle, and made it practi- cal to move their herds about freely. In order to test the dip thoroughly, about 1,000 head of cattle were dipped at Fort Worth, Tex., and thence shipped to Northern Illinois and placed with susceptible cattle. The ticks were all killed, and the disease was not communicated to the susceptible cattle. This information was very important, and the Bureau of Animal Industry was communicated with in order to ascertain the nature of this new dip, as it was thought that if this proved to be as successful as was claimed for it, the Queensland Authorities might be asked to issue orders to the effect that all horses intended for exportation to India should be effectively dipped within S
138 ten days of embarkation. The last intimation from Washington, however, leaves the perfection of the dip in doubt, so that we must wait for further developments of this new medicament before further communication with the Queensland Government is advisable. 606. The prevention of the introduction of this virulent disease calls for urgent methods of treatment, and it is therefore strongly urged that the necessary legislative aid may be no longer delayed. It requires little foresight to estimate the extent of the calamity which would occur if once the pest obtained a foothold among our herds. The present staff of the Civil Veteri- nary Department would be totally inadequate to cope with the disaster, and the result would be ruination to many cultivators and the introduction of a disease which would carry off hundreds of thousands of cattle annually. Rabies. 607. This fell disease has occupied the attention of this Department for several years. In 1891, when the Bacteriological Laboratory was established in Poona, it was named the Pasteur Institute by His Excellency Lord Reay, Governor of Bombay, and it was suggested that M. Pasteur's system of inocu- lation for Hydrophobia should be then carried out. In order to ascertain whether the treatment had been entirely successful, Mr. Hallen, then General Superintendent, Horse Breeding Operations, addressed a letter to M. Pasteur. This was in consequence of a demur by the Indian Medical Department, who maintained that sufficient time had not elapsed to enable medical men to give a decided opinion as to the merits of the new inoculation. It was stated that the disease might remain dormant in the system for 2½ years, and as this time had not elapsed since the introduction of the new system of treatment, the demur was quite reasonable. However, the inoculative treatment has now been carried on regularly since 1885, and there is now little doubt in the minds of the majority of professional men as to the efficacy of M. Pasteur's notable discovery. 608. The mortality has steadily decreased year by year from 0.94 in 1886 to 0.03 in 1896, while the total mortality among old cases from the beginning, now amounting to over 20,000, was only 0.46. In 1897, no less than 128 per- sons from India were treated in the Pasteur Laboratory, which is sufficient proof of the efficacy of the treatment and the popularity of the institution. 609. At the time of the establishment of the Laboratory in 1891, Dr. Lingard was prepared to have this treatment carried out, provided a Medical Officer having some knowledge and a bent for bacteriological study be appoint- ed to conduct the operations under his supervision. During these years, however, nothing has been done, and all Europeans who have been bitten by mad dogs are at once sent to Paris where they undergo the treatment at the Pasteur Laboratory. 610. There can be little doubt that Rabies, according to accounts receiv- ed, is on the increase, and certainly calls for some repressive measures. On looking over some old files of newspapers, I found many cases of persons, bitten by rabid dogs, having gone to Paris for treatment. The following extracts show what happened during October 1898 alone, and it may safely be claimed that this number represents but a small percentage of persons actually bitten by rabid dogs and jackals:139 611. One of the principal factors in disseminating rabic virus is the jackal. Many of the village dogs (pariahs) have a strong cross of the jackal. It is impossible to accurately assert, but there can be little doubt that a very large number of persons are annually bitten by rabid jackals. In one village containing only a few houses, it is reported that two mad jackals were killed, but not before they had attacked and bitten several people, and it is further stated that Hydrophobia is not an uncommon disease in many neighbouring villages. 612. This dreaded disease is much more prevalent than many suppose, and this will be seen by a few extracts from reports which are here given. 613. The Principal of the Lahore Veterinary College reports that no less than 42 cases of rabies were admitted into the canine hospital during the year ending 31st January 1899. This for one town seems a very large number, but it is impossible to state how many others may have been bitten and will be an ever present source of danger. 614. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, states:140 were seriously affected by the ravages of an insect pest known as "Warbles." The question was considered to be one of importance, both to the Army Boot and Ordnance Saddlery Factory, as well as to the large export trade in raw hides. It was therefore asked that the services of Dr. Lingard, the Imperial Bacteriologist, might be lent for the purpose of making an enquiry into the whole matter, but with particular reference to finding a remedy, the applica- tion of which would prevent the fly from attacking the animals. 622. Dr. Lingard's services for this investigation could not be spared from his more important laboratory work, but he extracted some important information bearing on the life history from the standard works on the subject, and this was submitted to the Government of India with this Office letter No. 286-227 R. & A., dated the 5th October 1898. As some of these extracts are considered important as detailing the life history of this pest it has been deemed advisable to give some of them later. 623. That this subject is an important one will be at once evident from the fact that the annual export of hides is something like ten millions, but whether with our limited staff we shall be able to cope with the ravages of this pest to any great extent is another question. However, it was certainly a matter with which the Civil Veterinary Department was intimately connect- ed, and with the object of obtaining all available information on the subject, the several officers of the Civil Veterinary Department had their special atten- tion drawn to the pest, and they were desired to make careful investigations as to the habits of the Gad fly in each Province, and to ascertain whether the people were acquainted with the cause of the "Warbles", and whether they employed any medicaments to prevent it. In addition to the Veterinary Superintendents, other officers connected with Agriculture were asked to kindly use their best efforts in gaining information on the subject, and my best thanks are due to them for their contributions. In their notes there seemed to have been some confusion, however, between the Gad fly (Hypoderma bovis) and the large fly (Lucilia C141 volume, but seldom equal the size of a walnut; they have the characteristics of a "cold" abscess, and are not hot nor abnormally painful. They rarely, if ever, give rise to inconvenience, nor does the health seem to be in any way interfered with. The top of these little tumours are pierced by an opening which is at first but little apparent, but as the larvæ are about to escape, the openings are much larger and are plainly visible. From this opening pus flows, which dries and agglutinates the adjacent hairs; this comes from a subcutaneous abscess in which the larva is lodged. The opening results from a process of ulceration. The larva almost exactly fills the sac, the shape of which is reproduced externally. The parasite is so placed in it as to present to the opening its oval-anal extremity, while the cephalic end is turned towards the bottom. It is nourished not only by the pus which it has caused the production of, but also by the blood of its host, as an abundance of that fluid may be found in its digestive apparatus. 627. When the development of the tumours is somewhat advanced, methodical pressure at the base will readily cause the expulsion of the larva. A few days before leaving its abode, the creature enlarges the hole in the tumour by pushing at intervals the last segments of its body into it, until, finally, it emerges in a state of complete maturity. The larvæ which do not perish by being trodden on or eaten by birds creep along by means of the hooklets on their bodies until they find a convenient place for their transform- ation into nymphæ; they then penetrate the ground to a depth of two or three inches or conceal themselves under grass or rotten leaves. 628. After the larvæ has left the cyst, the formation of pus gradually ceases and the wound cicatrizes. Nevertheless, when the hide comes to be tanned, there is a small hole in every place where there has been a warble, and this greatly diminishes the value of the hide for many purposes. It is difficult to estimate the loss by damage to hides in this country, but there can be little doubt that it represents a very large figure. In England, it is estimated that the loss averages one penny per pound weight or nearly six shillings a hide. It is said that of the hides exported from Karachi, an average of one-fourth of them is damaged to the extent of about 70 per cent. of their value, while those from Calcutta, Madras and Bombay are depreciated to the extent of 50 per cent. on 10 per cent. of the skins. 629. As has above been stated, the Officers of this Department were addressed on this subject, and from the answers received the following inform- ation has been extracted:142 (v) The sheds occupied by cattle are fumigated with cow dung. (vi) Gur, bach, or Raskapur, is given diluted with water. (vii) Mud is applied to the whole surface of body. 635. North Punjab.143 Occasionally "Tara Mira" oil is given internally which is said to act on the tumours, making them soft, and therefore the contents are easily squeezed out. The cattle owners are quite ignorant of the Gad fly which lays the eggs, and were quite surprised when the life history of this pest was explained to them. 642. The following information was received from the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Assam:144 still until lately it has not been recognised. This has been brought forcibly to my mind by reading an account of a meeting held at Marlborough House in December last to further the objects of the Association for the Prevention of Consumption and other forms of Tuberculosis. At this meeting, His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales stated that Her Majesty the Queen had sanctioned the destruction of 36 out of 50 dairy cows at her Home Farm because they had, on being tested with Tuberculin, been found to be tuberculous. Of these 36, thirty-four were classed as decidedly tuberculous and two were shown as doubt- ful; in 35 cases tuberculous lesions were discovered on post-mortem examin- ations, and I can therefore say nothing more in advocating the use of Tuber- culin as a test; its efficacy is undeniable. In the 36th case, although no tuber- culous lesions were discovered, still other disease was found which no doubt gave rise to the reaction. This case demonstrates one of the possible sources of error against which we have to guard, and for this reason I urge the necessity of the appointment of more Veterinary officers for the investigation of cattle disease, a subject which will be found dealt with elsewhere in this report. 647. If further evidence is required as to the importance of the subject, I would quote the following evidence of the Royal Commission on the subject:145 "Other diseases.146 "It is in these outbreaks that an organized subordinate Veterinary staff is needed so that any time a call can be made for the temporary service of Veterinary Assistants from other districts, the whole working under a Superintendent who could devote his whole time to the suppression of each outbreak as it occurs. "In the whole of my Circle there has been 3,915 cases reported as against 5,125 a decrease of 1,210 cases. I have no reason to doubt these figures which certainly point to some favourable influence having been at work this year, but with my short experience of the Punjab I could not commit myself to an explanation. Anthrax. "This disease was reported by the Deputy Commissioners from every district but Rohtak, Gurgaon, Delhi, Dera Ghazi Khan, Muzafargarh and Montgomery. The greatest number of cases occurred, respectively, in the Kurnal, Amritsar, Kangra, Jullunder and Umballa districts. "There was a greater number of cases this year than last, but fewer than the year before that. "As usual, the percentage of deaths was very high. The only hope of combating this disease is by educating the owners of cattle as to its contagious nature, when they should see the advantage to themselves of adopting precautionary measures against its spread. Foot and Mouth disease. " This disease has been very prevalent, no district having escaped free. In all, 35,958 cases have been reported ; in Kangra alone 20,902 cases occurred, next comes Ludhiana with 3,135, Ferozepore with 2,266, Muzafargarh with 1,906, Amritsar 1,501. Hoshiarpur 1,190, Umballa 1,127 and Kurnal with 1,065 cases. "It has apparently taken a very mild form; although so contagious, the percentage of deaths given is 1.10. Pleuro-Pneumonia. " Only 46 cases reported as compared with 62 during the previous year. Most of the cases occurred in the Kurnal and Hissar districts. Although reported as pleuro-pneumonia I very much doubt if it was the contagious form of this disease, otherwise more cases would have occurred considering its very contagious nature. Charbon Symptomatique. " 12 cases of this disease (each resulting in death) was reported, of these, 9 cases occurred in the Ludhiana district and 3 in the Kurnal district. Other diseases. " The total number of cases under this head show a decrease of 2,463 on the previous year, with the low percentage of 3.37 of deaths. Total number attacked. " The total number attacked, including all diseases, is reported to have been 54,802 with 4,596 deaths, a percentage of deaths from all causes of 8.36. Treatment. " Treatment was carried out by itinerant Veterinary Assistants and Salutris and in Veteri- nary Dispensaries in charge of Veterinary Assistants." 653. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Baluchistan and Sind, states:147 Veterinary Department, that officer stated that no such report had reached him. This led me to enquire what orders on the subject were in existence for the pro- per reporting of cattle disease in Balucbistan. Finding that no system was in force, I requested that the matter might be referred to the Agent to the Govern- or General, and I am pleased to be able to state that District Officers have now received orders that on the appearance of any contagious or infectious disease among cattle in their jurisdiction, they should lose no time in placing them- selves in direct communication with the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Baluchistan and Sind, with a view to the adoption of such preven- tive measures as may be considered advisable. 658. Veterinary Captain Maxwell who is Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, of both Baluchistan and Sind, is mainly occupied with the develop- ment of horse and mule breeding in these Provinces, but on the transfer of Sind, which took place on 1st April 1898, the Bombay Government considered that it would be advisable that he should assume charge of all Civil duties in this Province. He has therefore done so under the orders of the Commissioner in Sind, and the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Bombay. 659. I found on enquiry that all that had hitherto been done with refer- ence to cattle, their diseases, etc., by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, whilst in charge of the Civil Veterinary Department duties in Sind, was to inspect the various Dispensaries when on tour. 660. I have therefore addressed Veterinary Captain Maxwell on the subject pointing out to him that the Veterinary Officer in charge of a Province should be the professional adviser of District Officers in all matters connected with the improvement of cattle, and with the suppression of disease. I have laid down for him special lines showing in what way he might best advance the interests of the agriculturists. They are:148 "Except for comparative purposes, these statistics are, I fear, of no great value ; but from a careful analysis and study of the figures for a series of years, much might be learnt of the greatest value for the purpose of the bacteriological survey. The statistics will, I believe, show clearly that in the Carnatic Binder- pest is most fatal during the later months of the year, whilst in the Deccan it is during the hotter months that outbreaks chiefly occur. "During the year under report Rinderpest was much less fatal than in the two previous years. South Arcot, Kistna and Ganjam reported the largest number of deaths from this disease, but, if the deaths attributed to Diarrh149 663. Surely this statement calls for some action on the part of the Govern- ment of India. That the known mortality should have reached the high figure of 2,59,570 representing a loss of Rs. 22,26,478 points to the fact that some steps should be taken to reduce the mortality. 664. The proposal made to entertain a Veterinary officer is one that merits attention, but an officer sent to a province in which the mortality is so high would be entirely lost without a well trained subordinate staff. 665. It will be noticed that the highest mortality is from Rinderpest, and bearing in mind the steps we are now taking to obtain a preventive system of inoculation, it behoves us to be in a position to take advantage of the advance made by science, otherwise all our work in this direction will be lost. Burma. 666. As usual, Veterinary Captain Evans submits a very full report show- ing disease as it has existed during the past year in each district. It has been customary to publish this information in extenso to serve as a guide to other Veterinary Officers dealing with cattle disease, but owing to the many import- ant subjects which I have felt compelled to deal with in this year's Adminis- tration Report, I feel I must confine myself to general remarks, showing the diseases which have been most prevalent in this Province. LOWER BURMA. 667. Veterinary Captain Evans states:150 disease, which from general neglect they were very prone to contract. He also remarked that in his part of the district a great many outbreaks could be traced to such cattle. In this instance, I believe, ten or twelve good pairs of oxen ould have performed all the work that these people mightrequire. An instance of disregard of the rules by some natives of India has recently been brought to the notice of the Deputy Commissioner of Myitkyina. This was at Thagaya. It appears that a herd of some sixteen buffaloes, owned by some natives of India living in Myitkyina, were sent by them for grazing purposes to the Shan village above named. Contagious disease soon broke out amongst these animals, which fact was reported. The rules were enforced without delay and the diseased animals segregated; but in spite of this the owners removed them actually bringing them across the river to Myitkyina. So far, fortunately, the disease has not spread. The matter is at present under enquiry. The Deputy Commissioner, Katha, in a letter notes that " There is much good rice land lying fallow in every township simply from want of plough cattle, the supply of which is not equal to the demand. Any outbreak of cattle disease has therefore a most serious effect on the extent of land under cultivation. In the over populated dry belt, on the other hand (where there are already Veterinary Assistants) the people have more cattle than they really want and at best the only use they can put them to is to plough up the desert like soil, and raise precarious crops of maize, sesamum and the like." I have no doubt that the Katha district could well do with two Assistants, but I would point out that Veterinary Assistants are also most necessary and useful in the districts of the dry zone, as it is in this part of the country that a large number of cattle are bred, and I know the people do make up to some extent for the bad crops they raise, by the sale of their surplus cattle, large numbers of which find their way to Lower Burma for agricultural work. An instance of the importation of disease by strange cattle brought to the district for sale is recorded by the Deputy Commissioner, Henzada. Foot-and-mouth disease was introduced by some herds brought down from Upper Burma. The matter was taken in hand, cattle inspected, and if found diseased the herd was detained and segregated; by these measures the disease was brought under control and prevented from spreading. With reference to this subject the Deputy Commissioner remarks that "it would be of much benefit in checking disease if Veterinary Assistants were directed to examine all herds passing through their headquarters whenever possible. At present as a matter of form the drovers generally report their destination at the police station when passing through a town or village where a police guard is stationed to allow their animals to be checked. Advantage might be taken of this to have the animals examined for disease at the same time." I certainly think that when herds of cattle are being driven through a district a Veterinary Assistant might be told off to watch them. When cattle are free of disease the herdsmen might be granted certificates by the Veterinary Assistant. Anthrax and Carton symptomatique.151 In another district, however, namely, Pegu, the Deputy Commissioner writes that " there is a great deal of prejudice against European medicines still to be overcome. The people see the value of segregation and are willing to co-operate in making it thorough and effective." It is sincerely hoped that the people of Pegu will continue to use every endeavour to make the rules effect- ive; by so doing there will be less necessity to employ European or other drugs in the treatment of their cattle. The Deputy Commissioner of Bhamo, who gives an excellent report of the Veterinary Assistant, remarks that the treatment prescribed for rinderpest was almost valueless. In an outbreak in which the Veterinary Assistant treated a number of animals the mortality was high; whereas, in another outbreak where he was not present to treat the sick, a large number of animals recovered. I regret to state that the Veterinary Assistant is by no means singular with regard to his treatment of rinderpest not being very successful. The disease in the first outbreak attended by the Veterinary Assistant was evidently of a most virulent type ; of 88 animals attacked 63 died. In the second outbreak I am of opinion that the large percentage of recoveries was undoubtedly due to the fact that the disease was of a benign type. Such outbreaks occur occasionally. 668. I am glad to see that a commencement has been made to watch the trade routes from China to prevent the introduction of cattle disease into Burma from beyond the border. On this subject the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Burma, states:152 Veterinary Dispensaries. Bengal. 671. No province has made as rapid strides in one year in the matter of dispensaries as Bengal has done. In last year's report the only three dispen- saries mentioned as having started work were those of Sitamarhi, Howrah and Patna. No mention is made this year of the Howrah dispensary and it is not known if it still exists, but the following have been opened:153 of each Dispensary, but to economize space, I give below the following abstract showing the work done at each, from which it will be seen that not including Sind, which is dealt with separately, 19,151 cases were treated against 16,082 last year, showing an increase of 3,069 when compared with last year:__ No. of cases treated. 1898-99. 1897-98. Nasik . . . . . . . . 1,295 1,024 Nasik-Itinerant . . . . . . . 581 533 Dhulia . . . . . . . . 1,945 1,841 Jalgaon . . . . . . . . 919 1,030 Khandesli-Itinerant . . . . . . 507 854 Poona . . . . . . . . 773 718 Belgaum . . . . . . . . 1,586 1,607 Belgaum-Itinerant . . . . . . 1,068 401 Dharwar . . . . . . . . 1,568 2,041 Kolaba . . . . . . . . 1,478 1,424 Ahmedabad . . . . . . . 2,473 2,035 Nadiad . . . . . . . . 2,030 1,849 Kaira-Itinerant . . . . . . . 534 795 Surat . . . . . . . . 1,149 930 Ratnagm . . . . . . . . 1,335 ... TOTAL . 19,151 16,082 674 The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, in a summary on the work done at dispensaries, states:154 Berar. 678. The two dispensaries which were open last year still continue to do good work. 679. Akola Dispensary. 155 685. I would indeed be sorry to see any dispensary started on these lines. If enquiry is made, I believe it will be found that Veterinary Assistants are only supplied with a pocket case of instruments, and even these are not always furnished; they are also inadequately supplied with medicines. To start, there- fore, on such a basis would be suicidal to the success of these institutions. The remark referring to the accommodation for animals would show how utterly unworkable this scheme is, for, unless the zemindars feel that their cattle will receive at least that comfort and care which they themselves are able to give them, they are not likely to resort to the dispensary when their cattle require treatment. Punjab. 686. The dispensaries in the Punjab are doing most excellent work. I greatly regret that the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, makes but little allusion to these very important institutions, nor does he even give any statistics which show the number of cases treated. The Superintendent, South Punjab, however, enters fully into the question and shows that 11,547 cases were treated against 10,100 last year ; the increase is satisfactory. 687. I cannot close this section referring to dispensaries without remark- ing on the good work done by these institutions ; they are only in existence in Bombay, Bengal, Punjab, Berar and Central Provinces, and in these Provinces (including North Punjab from which returns are not received) we find that 48,428 cases were treated. The value of these institutions to the ryots and the suffering which is saved to our patients by humane treatment cannot be over- estimated. VETERINARY ASSISTANTS. 688. The scheme for the formation of a Subordinate Veterinary Establish- ment which has engaged the attention of the Government of India for a long time has not as yet been promulgated, but I am pleased to hear that there is every chance of its being issued shortly. 689. Local Governments not knowing the wishes of Government on the subject have naturally delayed in giving this important subject their attention, and in this way development has in some instances been retarded. 690. I have frequently brought to notice the necessity for some organiz- ation and supervision of the Veterinary Assistants especially in provinces like the Punjab and the North-West, where a number are employed. Remarking on this subject, the Principal, Lahore Veterinary College, states:156 Burma. 693. As stated in previous reports, the organization of the Subordinate Veterinary Establishment in Burma is as perfect as it can be. The whole of it is under the control of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, who has full power over the men employed. On this subject that officer states:157 Berar. 694. The Director of Land Records and Agriculture states with reference to the Veterinary Assistants employed :158 (b) More supervision. As I have showed, more officers are required, and in those provinces in which officers do not exist or in such which employ a large number of Veterinary Assistants, a supervising native staff of a superior grade is urgently called for, 700. Table N will show that during the year the various Veterinary As- sistants visited 32,124 villages and treated 165,844 animals. Year by year, as will be seen from statistics given below, the subordinate staff is doing better work. Number of cases treated by Veterinary Assistants. 1895-96 . . . . . . . . . 11,723 1896-97 . . . . . . . . . 118,517 1897-98 . . . . . . . . . 157,214 1898-99 . . . . . . . . . 165,844
PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. IV.161 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. IV.162 breeding of bulls for outlying districts will be one of the principal features under the new regime. The bulls will not be necessarily all large animals, as I have already shown this would be a mistake, but all bulls must have two characteristics, viz., wide deep chests, and powerful limbs irrespective of their height, and if cattle-breeding at Hissar is carried on with this object ever present, bulls will be bred which will be suitable for very nearly every part of Northern India and the requirements will prove far greater than the capabilities of the Farm. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. 707. I regret to note that but little is done in these Provinces to maintain the various breeds of cattle. On this subject, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:163 712. The words italicised have been italicised by me. That the Imperial Government having, as it has at stake, such large interests in both horse and mule-breeding in the Punjab would ever sanction their interests being neglected I very much doubt, but with the statement that the provincial interests must be safeguarded I quite agree, still there is but one way out of the difficulty and that it is the appointment of a third officer. Bombay. 713. On this subject, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, remarks:164 "Bihari Brahmini bulls (Sitamarhi and Darbhanga), for which requisitions were made, were procured and supplied to the following persons :165 CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS. 719. Quetta Show.166 722. Hissar Fair.167 724. Barahpur Fair.PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. V.171 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. V.172 whereby we shall be able to treat the cases earlier I look forward to a smaller death-rate in future. Two municipal ponies suffering from glanders were also admitted into the hospital. The students have also been to the Municipal Gowkhana to take temperatures of the cattle with the view of early detection of disease in con- nection with the recent outbreak of rinderpest among the municipal cattle. The increase in the number of cases treated at the college173 part of India that at this present moment is able to turn out men educated in this country capable of taking charge of animals for the purpose of curing their diseases in an intelligent manner. I am aware, of course, that there are throughout India plenty of empirics, men who have a fair knowledge of what to do in ordinary cases, and who can deal skillfully, no doubt, with routine cases. But if India were to depend upon herself for the intelligent treatment of animal diseases, it must have something more than that class of men to depend upon ; and at present it is only to this college that it can turn for men capable of bestowing that intelligent treatment which is as necessary in the case of animals as in the case of human beings.' "These utterances are the true enunciations of the principles which guide the nature of the teaching at the college and go far to delineate the utility of our graduates. Many of our men now hold important and responsible positions in the subordinate veterinary service in India and elsewhere, and are giving, I have reason to believe, every satisfaction. I may point out, too, that it has never been the case that the demand for, and the supply of, graduates did not coincide. If ever the college was not able to supply men it was solely due to the fact that the emoluments and general conditions offered were such that no graduates could possibly accept them." 739. The fact brought forward by the Principal that the graduates are not, in the majority of instances, recruited from the class of people who are brought up amongst animals and that therefore the task of turning out prac- tical men is an extremely hard one, scarcely coincides with what he endeavours to prove, that the graduates of this college are better than the men turned out from other institutions. This is far from being the case; the men selected for service in Uganda and other places are all recruited from Lahore and Bengal and compare most favourably with any that Bombay can produce, and these men will accept appointments at about half the pay required by Bombay graduates. 740. Referring to the practice, Veterinary Major Brodie-Mills states :174 uniformly weak in all sections, particularly in practical Pharmacy. This is to be regretted, and more attention will have to be paid to this most important subject. 747. The Principal reports that at the commencement of the winter session, the senior class numbered 46, this subsequently was reduced afterwards to 44, and that the junior class numbered 63 reduced afterwards to 55, making a total of 99. These classes are in my opinion too large to allow of practical instruction being successfully given. 748. The competition for entrance to this school continues to be very great showing that the career is one that is appreciated. 116 candidates competed for 23 vacancies. 749. The following patients were treated during the year. The number treated during 1897-98 is also given to enable a comparison to be drawn :175 I find that Khan Sahib Mehtab Shah has published a work entitled " How to tell the age of the domestic animals ", and that Syud Sardar Shah has a work in the Press on the accidents and diseases to which the camel is liable. Both these books, but especially the latter, should prove of great value to students of all schools in which the teaching is carried out in Urdu. 754. The Principal informs me that since writing his report on the work- ing of this institution, the Punjab Government has extended the course of instruction from two to three years. Rajputana Veteri- nary School. 755. The examinations at this school were held on 21st, 22nd and 23rd March 1899. The examiners were:176 762. As I have so frequently observed the want of training in that most im- portant of all subjects, viz., the infective diseases of animals, has been greatly felt. I was therefore glad to find when I inspected this school in November last that a Contagious Ward had been added to the buildings of this institu- tion. This should enable the Principal to admit cases of contagious disease for treatment, and will also be of value to him for purposes of research work; all of which will be of value to the students. 763. I am glad to find that the shoeing class which was suspended last year has been re-started; two men attended177 employed in the districts; to do this requires a thorough knowledge of the Burman character. For this reason I am particularly anxious to see another officer employed in order that should we unfortunately lose Veterinary Captain Evans' services either through sickness or by his proceeding on furlough, the good work which he has so successfully started may be continued. Remarks. 766. The educational institutions are doing good work by not only supply- ing Veterinary Assistants for India but they are also furnishing trained men for Imperial Service. During the year under review, 4 extra men (making 8 in all) have been sent to Uganda. 767. An Assistant Veterinary Assistant has been sent to Port Blair, where already one is at work and as reported by the Superintendent, is giving satis- faction to the villagers as well as to the District authorities. 768. At the present time, negotiations are proceeding respecting the employment of a Veterinary Assistant in Somali land.
PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. VI.181 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. VI.PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. VII.185 PART II.186 Horse Fairs and Shows. 786. The total number of animals present may be said to have been about what it was last year, whilst 2,000 more animals competed for prizes. Horse and mule- breeding in Native States. 787. The good work done in the Native States is worthy of mention. One thousand seven hundred and sixteen mares were covered by horse stallions and 789 by donkeys against 1,680 and 595 respectively during 1897-98. PROVINCIAL. Colleges and Schools. 788. The results obtained at the final examinations show the following results:and energy, and his invariable willingness to carry out any work which might prove of interest made him most valuable to me when dealing with the Cattle Section of this Department, still I felt that when the re-organization of the Hissar Cattle Farm was confided to this Department, it was necessary to ensure the services of the best officer available, and I look with confidence to the results which Veterinary Captain Gunn is likely to bring about. 798. It may seem invidious to mention any particular officers in a small Department where all have done their best, but I feel compelled to bring to the notice of the Government of India the names of Veterinary Major Raymond and of Veterinary Captain Evans. 799. The former may be said to have done the work of three officers, for not only has he carried on the duties of the Bengal Veterinary College with marked success, but he has most efficiently supervised the general working of the Department in the Province, and in addition to this he has done a vast amount of original research work connected with Rinderpest and with the hides of animals that have died of that disease. 800. In Veterinary Captain Evans, the Department possesses an officer with great powers of organization and unlimited zeal and energy. The success obtained in Burma, in which Province the organization of the subordinate staff and the work done by it are far in advance of that in any other Province, is entirely due to this officer. 801. My best thanks are due to all Local Governments and Administrations, and to the many District Officers for the ready help which they have afforded me, and I would beg to express my warmest thanks to Mr. Giles, C.I.E., Officiating Commissioner in Sind, for the assistance he has given me in placing horse and mule-breeding in that Province on a satisfactory basis. 802. To the Chiefs of the many Native States which I have visited I would tender my warmest thanks for the hearty manner in which they have co-opera- ted with me in the extension of horse and mule-breeding in their territories. SIMLA ; A. E. QUERIPEL, Vety. Colonel, Inspector General, The 9th August 1899. Civil Veterinary Department.
PART I.iii TABLE I. IMPERIAL REPORTiv TABLE II. IMPERIAL REPORTv ABSTRACT. Province. NUMBER DIED. NUMBER DESTROYED. TOTAL. PERCENTAGE OF DEATHS. PERCENTAGE DESTROYED. GENERAL PERCENTAGE. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse, Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. North-Western Prov- inces and Oudh. 1 ... 6 ... 7 ... 1.05 ... 6.31 ... 7.36 ... Rajputana . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Punjab . . 2 ... 8 ... 10 ... 2.00 ... 8.00 ... 10.00 ... South Punjab . . 4 ... 4 ... 8 ... 3.88 ... 3.88 ... 7.76 ... Sindh . . ... ... 2 ... 2 ... ... ... 11.76 ... 11.76 ... Baluchistan . . 1 ... 1 ... 2 ... 29.50 ... 2.50 ... 5.00 ... Central India . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Deccan . . ... ... ... 4 ... 4 ... ... ... 26.66 ... 26.66 Guzerat . . 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 12.50 ... ... ... 12.50 ... TABLE III. IMPERIAL REPORTvi TABLE IV. IMPERIAL REPORTServices and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1898-99viii Service and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1898-99ix Service and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1898-99X Service and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1898-99xi Service and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony stallion during 1898-99xii TABLE V. IMPERIAL REPORTxiii TABLE VI. IMPERIAL REPORTxiv TABLE VI-(a). Abstract showing the total number and pedigrees of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1898-99. BY WHOM PURCHASED. Total number purchased. PEDIGREES. PERCENTAGE OF PEDIGREES. Furnished. Not furnished. Furnished. Not furnished. Army Remount Department . . 129 107 22 82.95 17.05 Native Cavalry Regiments . . 1,419 326 1,093 00.23 00.77 Police, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 14 2 12 00.16 00.84 Police, Punjab . . . . 34 3 31 00.88 09.12 Police, Bombay . . . . 6 3 3 00.50 00.50 Imperial Service Troops . . . 245 33 212 01.35 08.65 Police, Sind . . . . 45 10 35 00.22 00.78
xv TABLE VI-(b). Statement showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regi- ments, etc., during the official year 1898-99. Native Cavalry Regiments. NUMBER OF COUNTRY-BRED REMOUNTS PURCHASED. Where purchased. PEDIGREES. Horses. Mares. Geldings. TOTAL. Furnished. Not furnished. TOTAL. 1st Bengal Lancers . Lucknow . 33 23 7 63 Lahore . . ... 63 63 ... ... 1 1 Aligunge . . ... 1 1 ... 1 ... 1 Lucknow . . ... 1 1 TOTAL. 33 24 8 65 TOTAL . ... 65 65 2nd Bengal Lancers . Meerut . . ... 9 13 22 Meerut . . ... 22 22 ... 9 4 13 Guriani . . ... 13 13 ... 1 ... 1 Khanaki Sarai . ... 1 1 ... 6 11 17 Amritsar . . ... 17 17 TOTAL. ... 25 28 53 TOTAL . ... 53 53 3rd Bengal Cavalry . 5 14 6 25 Amritsar . . ... 25 25 17 7 10 34 Lahore . . ... 34 34 1 1 ... 2 Guriani . . ... 2 2 ... ... 1 1 Kohat . . ... 1 1 ... 3 3 Meerut . . ... 3 3 TOTAL. 23 22 20 65 TOTAL . ... 65 65 4tb Bengal Cavalry . Saugar .. ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... 5th Bengal Cavalry . Cawnpore . ... 7 9 16 Lahore . . ... 16 16 6th Bengal Cavalry . Nowgong . ... 1 1 2 Nowgong . . ... 2 2 ... 2 20 22 Amritsar . . ... 22 22 ... 1 1 2 Meerut . . ... 2 2 ... 4 2 6 Batesar .. ... 6 6 TOTAL. ... 8 24 32 TOTAL. ... 32 32 7th Bengal Cavalry . Fyzabad . 5 42 45 92 Lahore . ... 92 92 ... 1 ... 1 Fyzabad . . ... 1 1 TOTAL. 5 43 45 93 TOTAL. .. 93 93 8th Bengal Cavalry . Bareilly .. ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... 9th Bengal Lancers . Mooltan . 3 2 5 10 Lahore .. ... 10 10 19 11 7 37 Amritsar . . ... 37 37 TOTAL. 22 13 12 47 TOTAL. ... 47 47 10th Bengal Lancers . Nowshera . ... 27 16 43 Lahore . ... 43 43 1 3 1 5 Rawalpindi ... 5 5 TOTAL. 1 30 17 48 TOTAL. ... 48 48 11th Bengal Lancers . Jhelum .. ... ... 1 1 Rawalpindi . 1 ... 1 12th Bengal Lancers . Peshawar 12 30 14 56 Lahore . . ... 56 56 1 2 ... 3 Rawalpindi ... 3 3 TOTAL. 13 32 14 59 TOTAL. ... 59 59
xvi Statement showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regi- ments, etc., during the official year 1898-99xvii Statement showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regi- ments, etc., during the official year 1898-99xviii Statement showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regi- ments, etc., during the official year 1898-99xix TABLE VIxx Abstract showing the number of Country-bred Remounts purchased in the different districts by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1898-99xxi TABLE VII. IMPERIAL REPORTxxii Casualty Roll of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxiii TABLE VIII. IMPERIAL REPORTxxiv TABLE IX. IMPERIAL REPORTXXV Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxvi Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxvii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxviii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxix Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxx Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxxi Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxxii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxxiii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99xxxiv Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1898-99-concluded. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. TOTAL. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule breeding. For donkey breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony marcs. Donkey mares. Stallion on register. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previeus year. Number of mule produce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Italian . . . 173 153.41 161.87 9 8.75 10,521 9,893 524 406 68.58 61.11 58.22 46.40 1,968 6,002 1,919 60 294 52 12.15 37.07 11.85 6.85 33.60 5.94 Spanish (Catalonian). 25 12.16 11 ... ... 906 525 ... ... 74.50 47.72 ... ... 123 267 81 ... ... ... 11.18 24.27 7.36 ... ... ... French . . . 3 4 5 1 1 103 254 69 65 25.75 50.80 69.00 65.00 45 149 60 16 39 10 9.00 29.80 12.00 16.00 39.00 10.00 Arab . . . 13 11.75 14.87 ... 1 831 788 ... 41 70.72 52.99 ... 41.00 133 465 190 2 35 4 8.94 31.27 12.77 2.00 35.00 4.00 Punjabi . . . 40 29 25 5 5 1,763 1,490 271 266 60.79 59.60 54.20 53.20 198 1,033 259 27 181 58 7.92 41.32 10.36 5.40 36.20 11.60 Home-bred . . 7 4 7 3 2 206 280 119 57 51.50 40.00 39.66 28.50 99 135 46 18 34 5 14.14 19.28 6.57 9.00 17.00 2.50 Country-bred . . 10 8 5 ... ... 460 326 ... ... 57.50 65.20 ... ... 102 180 44 ... ... ... 20.40 36.00 8.80 ... ... ... Persian . . . 27 22.66 27.99 4 3 1,404 1,592 200 149 61.95 56.87 50.00 49.66 306 948 338 21 100 28 10.93 35.29 12.07 7.00 33.33 9.33 Cyprian . . 98 38.75 30.61 1 ... 2,368 1,865 41 ... 61.10 60.92 41.00 ... 371 1,130 364 ... ... ... 12.12 36.91 11.89 ... ... ... Zanzibar . . 4 1 1 3 3 64 70 155 164 64.00 70.00 51.66 54.66 11 45 14 35 93 36 11.00 45.00 14.00 11.66 31.00 12.00 Bokhara . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Meshed . . . 2 1.99 2.00 ... ... 52 47 ... ... 26.13 23.50 ... ... 20 27 ... ... ... ... 10.00 13.50 ... ... ... ... Khorasani . . ... 0.75 1.00 ... ... 27 28 ... ... 36.00 28.00 ... ... 5 12 11 ... ... ... 5.00 12.00 11.00 ... ... ... Ghazni . . . 1 0.99 0.25 ... ... 34 1 ... ... 31.34 4.00 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 4.00 ... ... ... ... ... Guzerati. 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Poitou-Catalonian . 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 405 288.46 292.59 26 23.75 18,739 17,159 1,379 1,148 64.60 58.84 53.03 48.33 3,382 10,393 3,326 179 776 193 11.55 35.52 11.36 7.53 32.67 8.12
XXXV TABLE X. IMPERIAL REPORTPART-I. IMPERIAL REPORT. TABLES. B.xxxix TABLE XI. IMPERIAL REPORTxl Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., etc., of Government Horse and Pony stallions during 1898-99-continued. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. NUMBER OF STAL- LIONS OR DAYS. TOTAL ANNUAL COST. AVERAGE COST PER STALLION. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. R a. p. R a. p. North Punjab. Abbottabad . . . 2,129 ... 1,587 8 11 ..... 272 2 9 ... Peshawar . . . 365 ... 235 13 9 ..... 235 13 9 ... Mardan . . . . 567 ... 452 6 8 ..... 291 3 9 ... Kohat . . . . 792 ... 532 9 11 ..... 245 7 5 ... Rawalpindi . . . 11,976 ... 8,904 5 7 ..... 271 6 1 ... Jhelum . . . . 2,281 ... 1,618 7 4 ..... 258 15 8 ... Guirat . . . . 2,860 ... 2,007 11 1 ..... 277 3 3 ... Gujranwala . . . 1,003 ... 611 15 3 ..... 222 11 1 ... Sialkot . . . . 1,460 ... 886 9 9 ..... 221 10 5 ... Shahpur . . . 2,886 ... 1,758 1 4 ..... 222 5 7 ... Lahore . . . . 5,068 ... 3,717 11 8 ..... 267 12 0 ... Jhang . . . . 1,062 ... 777 9 1 ..... 267 3 10 ... Bannu . . . . 3,283 ... 2,158 10 6 ..... 239 15 11 ... Dera Ismail Khan . . 1,608 ... 1,225 6 4 ..... 278 2 5 ... Babugarh Depôt . . 1,797 ... 1,384 11 9 ..... 281 4 2 ... Add charges for gear and clothing, and construction and repairs of stables. } ... ... 5,913 8 5 ..... ... ... TOTAL . 39,137 ... 33,773 3 4 ..... 314 15 7 ... PROVINCE. DISTRICT. NUMBER OF STAL- LIONS OF DAYS. TOTAL ANNUAL COST. AVERAGE COST PER STALLION. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Feed. Transit. Feed. Transit. Feed. Transit. Feed. Transit. Deccan. Bombay Presidency. R R R R R R R R Poona . . . 2,785 1,345 3,001 ... 1,323 ... 393 ... 359 ... Ahmednagar . . 3,126 2,258 4,113 186 2,531 39 480 22 409 6 Sholapur . . . 337 284 267 ... 289 4 289 ... 371 5 Satara . . . 365 365 335 ... 373 ... 335 ... 373 ... Nasik . . . ... 730 ... ... 753 ... ... ... 377 ... Khandesh . . ... 607 ... ... 437 ... ... ... 263 ... TOTAL . 6,613 5,589 7,716 186 5,706 43 426 10 373 3 Guzerat. Kaira . . . 1,010 394 791 ... 304 ... 286 ... 282 ... Ahmedabad . . . 786 365 838 ... 320 ... 389 ... 320 ... Deesa . . . . 680 ... 625 18 ... ... 335 10 ... ... TOTAL . 2,476 759 2,254 18 624 ... 332 3 300 ... ABSTRACT. PROVONCES. AVERAGE COST PER STALLION . HORSE. PONY. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. North-Western Provinces and Oudh 285 12 4 364 6 1 ... ... Rajputana . . . . . . 331 12 4 288 13 0 ... ... North Punjab . . . . . 314 15 7 357 13 1 ... ... South Punjab . . . . . 312 3 8 358 12 3 ... ... Baluchistan . . . . . . 413 6 3 500 2 10 ... ... Sindh . . . . . . . 299 10 6 488 0 0 251 12 3 468 0 0 Deccan . . . . . . 436 0 0 662 0 0 376 0 0 535 0 0 Guzerat . . . . . . 335 0 0 397 0 0 300 0 0 387 0 0
xli TABLE XII. IMPERIAL REPORTxlii DETAILS. MARES. PRODUCE. Horse breeding. Pony breeding. Mule breeding. Horse stock. Pony stock. Mule stock. Donkey stock. Branded during the year. { N.-W. Provinces . 488 ... ... Foaled du- ring the year. { N.W. Provin- ces . . 704 ... 714 44 North Punjab . 621 ... ... North Punjab 1,042 ... 1,221 98 South Punjab . 827 ... ... South Punjab . 925 ... 910 25 Baluchistan . 166 ... ... Baluchistan . 818 ... 35 ... Sind . . . 374 ... ... Sindh . . 88 8 112 ... Bombay . . 203 410 ... Bombay . 241 145 2 ... 2,679 410 ... 3,818 153 2,994 167 Received from other districts. N.-W. Provinces . 255 ... ... North Punjab . 225 ... ... Died . Baluchistan . 39 ... 3 ... South Punjab . 289 ... ... Baluchistan . . 43 ... ... 812 ... ... Sold . Baluchistan . 106 ... 13 ... Certificated . North Punjab . 86 ... ... Died . . { N.-W. Provinces . 186 ... ... Stolen . Baluchistan . 1 ... ... ... North Punjab . 293 ... ... South Punjab . 274 ... ... Baluchistan . 36 ... ... Bombay . . 42 161 ... 831 161 ... Sold . . { N.-W. Provinces . 226 ... ... North Punjab . 259 ... ... South Punjab . 392 ... ... Baluchistan . . 59 ... ... 936 ... ... Stolen. { N. W. Provinces . 14 ... ... North Punjab . 25 ... ... South Punjab . 16 ... ... Baluchistan . 2 ... ... 57 ... ... Struck off the register. . { N.-W. Provinces . 3 ... ... North Punjab . 33 ... ... South Punjab . 56 ... ... Baluchistan . . 10 ... ... Bombay . . ... ... 63 102 ... 63 Not traceable . Bombay . . 9 154 ... Certificated mares rejected } North Punjab. . 41 ... ... Certificates can- celled . North Punjab . 161 ... ...
xliii TABLE XIII. IMPERIAL REPORTxliv Breeders' and other colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Imperial Funds in 1898-99xlv TABLE XIV. IMPERIAL REPORTxlvi Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of Government Donkey stallions in 1898-99xlvii ABSTRACT. Province. AVERAGE PER DONKEY STALLION. Year under report. Previous year. R a. p. R a. p. North-Western Provinces and Oudh . . . . . . . 130 1 0 165 11 11 Rajputana . . . . . . . . . . . . 212 15 5 ... North Punjab . . . . . . . . . . . . 180 1 11 196 14 5 South Punjab . . . . . . . . . . . . 157 2 8 189 8 6 Baluchistan . . . . . . . . . . . . 315 4 6 268 15 0 Sindh . . . . . . . . . . . . 219 0 2 289 0 0 Deccan . . . . . . . . . . . . 295 0 0 490 0 0 Guzerat . . . . . . . . . . . . 335 0 0 363 0 0 Bengal . . . . . . . . . . . . 199 4 7 226 5 3
xlviii TABLE IMPERIAL REPORTxlix XV. REVENUE SECTION. Provinces, Punjab, Rajputana, Tirhoot and Baluchistan during the year 1898-99. REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR MULES. TOTAL NUMBER OF SALES EFFECTED. PRIZES AWARDED. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Govern- ment. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. Total number sold. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. From Provin- cial Funds. From Local and District Funds. From private subscription. Total. Amount actu- ally awarded. Number of Medals award- ed. R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R 250 250 250 50 42 92 195 100 144 93 250 100 144 700 250 ... ... 950 910 1 310 105 244 ... ... ... ... ... ... 116 310 105 244 ... 200 ... ... 200 115 ... 255 50 132 ... ... ... ... ... ... 43 255 50 132 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 300 85 208 ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 300 85 208 950 ... ... ... 950 47 1 450 57 215 ... ... ... ... ... ... 65 450 57 215 1,200 1,000 ... ... 2,200 1,675 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 950 300 ... ... 1,250 924 1 400 50 161 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,600 900 ... ... 2,500 2,033 1 450 50 210 50 42 92 195 100 144 341 450 50 189 5,400 2,650 ... ... 8,050 6,133 5 620 60 64 44 448 492 300 16 76 4,140 620 5 58 ... ... 456 ... 456 456 ... 375 170 272 ... 3 3 115 100 107 219 375 15 73 400 ... 800 ... 1,200 460 ... 400 105 247 24 726 750 345 9 95 3,879 500 9 73 300 ... 315 ... 615 555 ... 400 185 252 2 49 51 150 34 58 2,037 400 3 68 900 ... ... ||532 1,432 1,432 1 ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 260 40 163 350 ... 1,000 ... 1,350 945 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 325 37 174 500 ... 700 ... 1,200 864 ... 325 160 244 5 11 16 360 7 105 189 360 7 95 1,200 ... 300 ... 1,500 1,500 1 400 140 269 4 21 25 160 27 80 374 435 9 140 1,967 ... 438 ... 2,405 2,405 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 60 60 60 7 210 45 103 400 ... 800 ... 1,200 1,140 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 212 165 187 ... ... 350 ... 350 350 ... 620 60 224 79 1,259 1,338 360 7 ... 10,865 620 3 114 6,017 ... 5,159 532 11,708 10,107 5 370 150 254 ... ... ... ... ... ... 98 ... ... ... 1,400 1,120 ... ... 2,520 2,520 1 430 72 238 ... ... ... ... ... ... 196 475 55 237 1,000 980 ... ... 1,980 1,910 1 430 72 221 ... ... ... ... ... ... 294 475 55 237 2,400 2,100 ... ... 4,500 4,430 2 400 150 253 20 ... 20 131 67 90 115 400 67 253 2,000 3,700 ... ... 5,700 4,455 1 250 140 206 ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 250 140 206 600 3,000 ... ... 3,600 3,245 1 250 125 180 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 250 125 180 400 2,900 ... ... 3,300 2,575 ... 400 125 213 20 ... 20 131 67 90 134 400 67 213 3,000 9,600 ... ... 12,600 10,275 2 ... ... ... 3 ... 3 180 135 155 30 300 12 133 550 ... 168 ... 718 634 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 500 ... 1,597 ... 2,097 1,769 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 500 ... 500 ... 1,000 970 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 500 ... 800 ... 1,300 1,252 1 600 85 268 3 6 9 400 40 133 136 600 12 0 139 1,350 ... 363 ... 1,713 1,685 21 ... ... ... ... 2 2 200 50 125 45 360 13 8 133 900 ... 30 ... 930 775 1 460 60 260 4 18 22 150 24 87 274 460 60 0 260 1,100 ... 100 ... 1,200 1,165 1 360 120 240 78 1,057 1,136 400 20 210 2,531 500 1 0 250 1,950 ... 400 ... 2,350 2,130 1 600 60 256 89 1,083 1,172 400 20 142 3,016 600 1 0 183 7,350 ... 3,958 ... 11,308 10,380 9 450 150 270 ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 450 150 0 270 ... 2,005 1,000 3,537 6,542 2,205 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,868 4,868 2,510 ... 450 150 270 ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 450 150 0 270 ... 3,005 1,000 8,405 11,410 4,715 ... 450 50 210 50 42 92 195 100 144 341 450 50 0 189 5,400 2,650 ... ... 8,050 6,133 5 620 60 ... 168 2,342 2,510 400 7 ... 13,881 620 1 0 ... 13,367 ... 9,117 532 23,016 20,487 14 430 72 221 ... ... ... ... ... ... 294 475 55 0 237 2,400 2,100 ... ... 4,500 4,430 2 400 125 213 20 ... 20 131 67 90 134 400 67 0 213 3,000 9,600 ... ... 12,600 10,275 2 450 150 270 ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 450 150 0 270 ... 2,005 1,000 8,405 11,410 4,715 ... 620 50 228 238 2,384 2,622 400 7 117 14,770 620 1 0 227 24,167 16,355 10,171 8,937 59,576 46,040 23 || Includes R389 given for cattle. | ¶ One by Imperial Government and 1 by Malik Umar Hayat Khan of Kalra.
1 TABLE XVI. IMPERIAL REPORTli Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99lii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99liii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99liv Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99lv Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce soon prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99lvi Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99lvii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99lviii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99lix Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99lx Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1898-99lxi ABSTRACT. Class of Sires. Number of sires of each class. NUMBER OF PRIZES AWARDED. PROPRTION OF PRIZES TO EACH SIRE. 1st prizes. 2nd prizes. 3rd prizes. Other prizes. Total. 1st prizes. 2nd prizes. 3rd prizes. Other prizes. Total. Thorough-bred English . 81 125 90 68 299 582 1.55 1.12 0.84 3.70 7.18 Half and three-quarter bred English, Norfolk Trotters, &c. 146 83 82 81 295 541 0.56 0.56 0.55 2.02 3.70 Arabs . . . . . . . . 95 40 54 40 167 301 0.42 0.57 0.42 1.75 3.16 Australians . . . 23 17 18 17 77 129 0.74 0.78 0.74 3.34 5.60 Stud-breds . . . 3 5 4 3 13 25 1.66 1.33 1.00 4.33 8.33 Country-breds . . . 3 ... 2 ... 1 3 ... 0.66 ... 0.33 1.00 Persian . . . . 1 1 ... ... ... 1 1.00 ... ... ... 1.00 2 M 2
lxii TABLE IMPERIAL REPORTlxiii XVII. REVENUE SECTION. North-Western Provinces Depôt for the official year 1898-99. No. By stock. R a. p. R a. p. 29 Value of lands . . . . . . . . 1,076 4 0 30 lxiv TABLE IMPERIAL REPORTlxv XVII (A). REVENUE SECTION. South Punjab Depôt for the official year 1898-99. By stock. R a. p. R a. p. 29 Value of land . . . . . . . . . 868 11 0 30 lxvi TABLE XVIII. IMPERIAL REPORTlxvii TABLE XIX. IMPERIAL REPORTlxviii TABLE XXI. IMPERIAL REPORTlxix TABLE XXII. IMPERIAL REPORTPART II-PROVINCIAL REPORT. TABLES.
lxxiii TABLE A. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Return of Horse, Pony and Donkey stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99. DETAILS. HORSE AND PONT STALLIONS. DONKEY STALLIONS. HORSES. PONIES. PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT. DISTRICE BOARDS. COURTS OF WARD. PRIVATE PERSONS. Provincial Government. District Boards. Courts of Ward. Private persons. Povincial Government. District Boards. Courts of Ward. Private persons. Country-bred. Persian. Punjabi. Total. Italian. Persian. Home-bred. Total. Cyprian Persian. Punjabi. Home-bred. Country-bred. Total. Persian. Total. Arab. Persian. Northern. Total. Arab. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Total. Arab. Total. Arab. Persian. Total. Arab. Country-bred. Shan. Deli. Persian. Total. Arab. Total. Arab. Total. Balance on 1st April 1893 . . . 30 5 1 36 33 2 35 6 6 7 7 25 1 26 54 1 1 ... 1 57. 2 2 2 2 1 2 1 4 2 2 3 7 2 2 3 1 ... 8 ... ... Increase Purchased in India . . . 5 ... ... 5 3 ... 3 ... ... 2 2 2 ... 2 9 ... ... 2 ... 11 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 1 1 ... ... Received from Cawnpore Experi- mental Farm. 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Received by transfer from the head "Horses." ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Received by Balance in Sindh . ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 lxxiv TABLE B. PROVICIAL REPORT. Casualty Roll of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward and private persons shown under separate heads during 1898-99. Brand No. Name. Class. Horse or Pony. Description of Casualty. Nature of Casualty. ReMARKS. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Provincial Government Stallions. 2594 The Czar . . Arab Horse Destroyed Acute paralysis. 2 Hamdani . . lxxv TABLE D PROVICIAL REPORT. Service, and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of Provincial Government, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99. Horse or Pony. CLASS. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT. DISTRIOT BOARDS. COURTS OF WARD. PRIVATE PERSONS. Stallions on register. Stallions actually employed at stud, No. of mares- covered. Average of mares covered per stal- lion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions actually employed at stud. No. of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stal- lion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions actually employed at stud. No. of mares covered. Average of mares lion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions actually employed at stud. No. of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stal- lion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previus year's coverings per stal- lion employed at stud. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. No. of produce. No, not held. No, not known. Average of produce. Average not held. Average not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. No. of produce. No. not held. No. not known. Average of produce. Average not held. Average not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. No. of produce. No. not held. No. not known. Average of produce. Average not held. Average not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year, under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. No. of produce. No. not held. No. not known. Average of produce. Average not held. Average not known. Horse. Arab . . . . 3 26 26 1,371 1,186 53.0 45.6 385 607 194 15.0 23.0 7.5 ... ... 1 ... 40 ... 40 2 16 22 2.0 16.0 22.0 3 2 4 17 48 8.5 12.0 ... 7 41 ... 1.75 10.25 7 6 5* 83 73* 14.0 14.0 40 30 3 8.0 6.0 0.6 Persian . . . 5 4 6 287 346 72.0 69.0 135 169 52 27.0 32.0 10.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 17 ... 17.0 ... ... 17 ... ... 17.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Northern, Country bred or Marwari. 1 1 1 72 70 72.0 70.0 24 34 12 24.0 84.0 12.0 ... 1 1 7 15 7 15 4 7 4 4.0 7.0 4.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 37 31 32 1,730 1,602 56.0 50.0 544 800 258 17.0 25.0 8.0 ... 1 2 7 55 7 27.5 6 23 26 3.0 11.5 13.0 3 2 6 17 65 8.5 13.0 ... 7 58 ... 1.4 11.6 7 6 6 83 73 14.0 14.0 40 30 3 8.0 6.0 0.6 Pony. Arab . . . . 23 24 24 1,256 1,103 52.3 46.0 373 573 157 15.5 24.0 6.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 2 7 10 7.0 5.0 2 1 7 1.0 0.5 3.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Persian . . . 1 1 1 61 68 610 68.0 16 44 8 16.0 44.0 8.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 24 25 26 1,317 1,171 52.68 47.0 389 617 165 15.6 24.7 6.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 2 7 10 7.0 5.0 2 1 7 10 05 3.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL . 61 56 57 3,017 2,773 54.41 49.0 933 1,417 423 16.4 25.0 7.4 ... 1 2 7 55 7 27.5 6 23 26 3.0 11.5 13 0 5 3 7 24 75 8.0 11.0 2 8 65 0.28 1.14 9.28 7 6 5 83 73 14.0 14.0 40 30 3 8.0 6.0 0.6 * Information of 37 coverings of 3 horses with their results, have not been received this year.
lxxvi Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99lxxvii Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99-contd.. Horse or Pony. CLASS. SOUTH PUNJAB. DISTRICT BOARDS. COURTS OF WARD. PRIVATE PERSONS. Salmons on register. Stallions actually em- ployed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of pre- vious year's coverings per-stallion employed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions actually em- ployed at 6tud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares cover- ed per stallion employ- ed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previ- ous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions-actually em- ployed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previ- ous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not known. Average of not held. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not hold. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse . Arab . . . . 27 25 27 1,566 1,661 62.64 61.51 467 611 583 1729 22.62 21.59 1 ... 1 ... 113 ... ... ... ... 113 ... ... 113.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 27 25 27 1,566 1,661 62.64 61.51 467 611 583 1729 22.62 21.59 1 ... 1 ... 113 ... ... ... ... 113 ... ... 113.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pony . Arab . . . . 34 33 25 1,677 1,146 50.81 45.84 253 405 488 10.12 16.20 19.52 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Country-bred . . 1 1 1 69 79 69.00 79.00 ... ... 79 ... ... 79.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 35 34 26 1,746 1,225 51.35 47.11 253 405 567 9.73 15.57 21.80 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL . 62 59 53 3,312 2,886 56.13 54.45 720 1,016 1,150 13.58 19.10 1 69 1 ... 1 ... 113 ... ... ... ... 113 ... ... 113.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
lxxviii Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons during 1898-99lxxix Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony stallion, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward and private persons, during 1898-99-contd. Horse or Pony. CLASS. MADRAS. PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT. DISTRICT BOARDS. PRIVATE PERSONS. Stallions on register. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares cover- ed per stal- lion employ- ed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stal- lion employed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions actually employ- ed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of marcs co- vered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average or mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of provions year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not hold. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not hold. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not hold. Average of not known. Horse . Pony . ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Nil. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Arab . . 15 13 15 503 547 39 36 115 289 143 8.0 19.0 9.0 .. ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL 15 13 15 503 547 39 36 115 289 143 8.0 19.0 9.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony stallions, the property of District Board, Courts of Ward and private persons during l898-99-contd. Horse or Pony. CLASS. BURMA. DISTRICT BOARDS. COURT OF WARD. PRIVATE PERSONS. Stallions on register Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares cover- ed per stal- iou employ- ed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions actually employ- ed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares co- vered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion cm ployed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Year under report. Previous year. Year under Report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Stallions on register. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse Pony .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Nil.... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shan . . 1 1 2 29 56 29.0 28.0 28 4 24 14.0 2.0 12.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 1 1 2 29 56 29.0 28.0 28 4 24 14.0 2.0 12.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2P
lxxx Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99lxxxi Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99-concld. Horse or Pony. CLASS. TOTALS. PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENTS. DISTRICT BOARDS. COURTS OF WARD. PRIVATE PERSONS. Stallions on register. Stallions actually em- ployed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of pre- vious year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions actually em- ployed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of provious year's coverings. Average result of pre- vious year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions actually em- ployed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of marcs covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of pre- vious year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on register. Stallions actually em- ployed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of pre- vious year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Stallions on register. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous ye»r. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Stallions on register. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not hold. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known, Horse. Arab . . . 34 29 29 1,458 1,296 50.20 44.68 385 607 194 13.27 20.93 6.67 33 30 33 1,937 2,004 64.56 60.72 553 813 638 16.75 24.63 19.33 4 2 5 17 161 18.5 32.2 ... 7 154 ... 1.4 30.8 8 7 5 101 73 14.42 14.6 40 30 3 8.00 6.00 .60 Persian . . 6 4 5 287 346 71.75 69.2 136 169 62 27.00 31.8 10.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 17 ... 17.00 ... ... 17 ... ... 17.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Northern Country- bred, or Marwari 1 1 1 72 70 72.00 70.00 24 34 12 24.00 34.00 12.00 1 2 3 54 147 27.00 49.00 50 82 15 16.66 27.33 5.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 40 34 35 1,816 1,712 53.38 48.91 544 800 258 15.54 22.71 7.37 34 32 36 1,991 2,161 62.21 59.75 603 805 653 16.75 24.86 18.13 4 2 6 17 178 8.5 29.66 ... 7 171 ... 1.16 28.5 8 7 5 101 73 14.42 14.6 40 30 3 8.00 6 00 .60 Pony. Arab . . . 38 37 30 1,769 1,650 47.54 42.30 488 862 300 12.51 22.10 7.69 64 61 53 3,655 2,891 59.91 54.54 732 1,216 838 13.81 22.92 1676 2 1 2 7 10 7.00 5.00 2 1 7 1.00 0.50 3.5 2 2 2 148 179 74.60 89.5 86 68 25 43.00 34.00 12.5 Persian . . 1 1 1 61 68 61.00 68.00 16 44 8 16.00 44.00 8.00 1 1 1 72 76 72.00 76.00 13 38 25 13.00 38.00 25.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Country-bred . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 69 79 69.00 79.00 ... ... 79 ... ... 79.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shan . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 29 66 29.00 28.00 28 4 24 14.00 2.00 12.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 39 38 40 1,820 1,718 47.88 43.95 504 906 308 12.6 22.65 7.7 67 64 57 3,825 3,102 59.76 54.42 773 1,257 1,016 13.56 22.05 17.82 2 1 2 7 10 7 00 5.00 2 1 7 1.00 0.50 3.5 2 2 2 148 179 74.00 89.6 86 68 25 43.00 34.00 12.5 GRAND TOTAL. 79 72 75 3,635 3,480 50.48 45.73 1,048 1,706 566 13.97 22.74 7.54 101 96 93 5,816 5,253 60.58 56.48 1,376 2,152 1,669 14.79 23.13 17.94 6 3 8 24 188 8.00 24.6 2 8 178 0.25 1.00 22.25 10 9 7 249 252 27.66 36.00 126 98 28 18.00 14.00 4.00 2 P 2
lxxxii TABLE E. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of Horse and Pony stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, shown under separate heads during 1898-99. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. NUMBER OF STALLIONS OR DAYS. TOTAL ANNUAL COST. AVERAGE COST PER STALLION. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. PROVINCIAL Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. GOVERNMENT. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Babugarh Depôt . ... 873 ... 239 4 8 ... 100 0 9 Agra . . . ... 393 ... 220 2 7 ... 204 7 7 Aligarh . . . ... 838 ... 451 4 11 ... 196 9 1 Budaon . . . 310 336 182 8 1 0 177 8 3 214 15 0 192 13 4 Bulaudshahr . . 1,394 1,467 823 8 9 823 4 3 215 10 2 204 13 4 Bijnor . . . 337 ... 201 8 2 ... 218 4 1 ... Debra Dun . . 365 ... 230 4 9 ... 230 4 9 ... Etah . . . 365 ... 204 1 4 8 ... 204 14 8 ... Etawah . . . 109 ... 67 1 2 2 ... 226 14 6 ... Fatehpur . . 212 153 98 8 2 77 1 1 9 169 9 8 185 7 1 Hardoi . . . 306 ... 152 1 4 0 ... 182 5 7 ... Meerut . . . 1,451 1,963 883 1 0 3 1,126 8 1 222 4 5 209 7 4 Muttra . . . 300 203 181 3 8 114 1 1 8 220 7 11 206 4 7 Moradabad . . 1,491 35 903 1 5 3 20 1 2 7 221 4 7 216 12 4 Muzafarnagar . . 1,102 897 742 7 1 591 1 1 5 245 14 6 240 12 4 Shahjehanpur . . 461 365 245 1 3 0 203 8 0 194 9 11 203 8 0 RaeBareli . 305 ... 187 2 1 0 ... 223 15 11 ... Sultanpur . ... 232 ... 145 10 9 ... 229 2 1 0 Saharanpur . 1,344 1,270 821 15 2 719 3 6 223 3 6 206 11 3 TOTAL . 9,852 9,025 5,928 2 9 4,911 6 5 219 10 0 198 10 1 COURTS OF WARD. Bareilly . . . 365 ... 90 4 6 ... 90 4 6 ... Pertabgarh . . 365 ... 228 7 0 ... 228 7 0 ... TOTAL . 730 ... 318 11 6 ... 159 5 9 ... DISTRICT BOARDS. North Punjab. Peshawar . . ... 779 ... 505 7 0 ... 936 13 1 Kohat . . . 365 ... 313 9 3 ... 313 9 3 ... Rawalpindi . . ... 2,555 ... 1,645 6 2 ... 235 0 10 Jhelnm . . . 365 Not re corded 198 15 1 75 0 6 198 15 1 ... Gujrat . . . ... 1,095 ... 716 15 11 ... 239 0 0 Gujranwala . . 365 1,095 237 10 9 653 8 4 237 10 9 217 13 5 Carried over . 1,095 5,524 750 3 1 3,596 5 11 ... ...
Ixxxiii Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of Horse and Pony stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, shown under separate heads during 1898-99lxxxiv TABLE F. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Return of Mares considered suitable for Horse, Pony, Mule, or Donkey breeding for the official year 1898-99. DETAILS. NUMBER OF Maris CONSIDERED SUITABLE. For Horse breeding. For Pony breeding. For Mule breeding. For Donkey breeding, TOTAL. Balance on 1st April 1898 .. .. . . . Increase By purchase . . . . . . . By transfers, etc. . . . . . . TOTAL . Decrease Died . .. .. . . . Nil. Sold . . .. . . . Transferred . .. . . . ETC. ETC. TOTAL . Balance on 31st March 1899. .. . . . N.B.lxxxv TABLE J. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT. Stallions on register DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERIGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For Mule breeding. For Donkey breeding. Pony Mares. Donkey Marcs. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule produce. Number not hold. Number not known. Number of donkey produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Country-bred . . . 1 1 1 ... ... 4 4 ... ... 4 4 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... Persian . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Punjabi . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Home-bred . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cyprian . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL 2 2 2 ... ... 4 4 ... ... 4 4 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... COURTS OF WARD. Country-bred . . . 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Persian . . . 2 ... 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Punjabi . . . . 1 1 3 ... ... 40 56 ... ... 45 19 ... ... 16 10 30 ... ... ... 5 3 10 ... ... ... Home-bred . . . 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cyprian . . . . 2 1 2 ... ... 11 4 ... ... 11 2 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... TOTAL 7 3 8 ... ... 51 62 ... ... 17 8 ... ... 16 10 36 ... ... ... 2 1.25 4.5 ... ... ... PRIVATE PERSONS. Country-bred . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Persian . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Punjabi . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Home-bred . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cyprian . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
lxxxvi Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99lxxxvii Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99lxxxviii Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1898-99lxxxix TABLE K. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of Donkey stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, shown under separate heads during 1898-99. Province. District. Number of Donkey stal- lions or days. Total annual cost. Average per donkey stallion. REMARKS. PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT. R a. p. R a. p. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Babugarh Depôt . . 276 23 1 10 30 9 1 TOTAL . 276 23 1 10 30 9 1 COURTS OF WARD. Gorakhpur . . . 365 205 3 0 205 3 0 Bareilly . . . . 730 205 13 10 102 13 11 Pertabgarh . . . 365 123 3 0 123 3 0 TOTAL . 1,460 534 3 10 133 8 11 DISTRICT BOARD. North Punjab . . . Dera Ismail Khan . . 365 137 0 0 137 0 0 South Punjab . . . Gurgaon . . . 730 280 10 3 140 5 1 Multan . . . . 365 162 0 0 162 0 0 Delhi . . . . 730 310 4 3 155 2 1 Hissar . . . . 365 176 11 1 176 11 1 TOTAL . 2,190 929 9 7 154 14 11 DISTRICT BOARDS. Sindh . . . . Naushabro (Hyderabad District). 365 149 1 9 149 1 9 PRIVATE PERSONS. Naushahro (Hyderabad District). 365 264 11 5 264 11 5 Madras . . . . Coimbatore . . . 456 549 1 3 412 0 0 Salem . . . . 787 657 15 8 312 0 0 TOTAL . 1,243 1,207 0 11 344 0 0 TABLE L. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Breeders' and other Colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Local Funds, in 1898-99. PROVINCE. DISTRICT NUMBER OF COLTS CASTRATED. Number of deaths resulting from effects of castra- tion. REMARKS. Horse stock. Mule stock. Total. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Agra . . ... 15 ... 15 ... Aligarh . ... 8 ... 8 ... Banda . . ... 10 ... 10 ... Bareilly . ... 7 ... 7 ... Benares . . 5 ... 5 ... Also 8 Bulls. Bijnor . ... 6 6 Bara Banki . ... 6 ... 6 ... xc Breeders' and other Colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Local Funds, in 1898-99xci TABLE M. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Showing Districts where outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1898-99. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. RINDERPEST. ANTHRAX. FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE PLEURO-PNEUMONIA. CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE. OTHER DISEASES. TOTAL. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Aligarh . . . 592 339 57.26 ... ... ... 111 39 35.13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 703 378 53.76 Agra . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Allahabad . . . 100 58 58 9 9 9 50 12 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 159 79 49.68 Azamgarh . . . 68 41 65.07 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 41 65.07 Almorah . . . 1,394 327 23.45 ... ... ... 1,603 64 3.99 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,997 391 13.04 Bulandshahr . . . 3,193 1,279 40.05 37 21 57 769 29 3.77 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,999 1,329 33.23 Bareilly . . . 513 380 4.07 40 37 92.5 312 60 19.23 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 7 100 872 484 55.50 Bijnour . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Budaun . . . 2,079 1,363 65.56 ... ... ... 308 43 13.96 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,387 1,406 58.90 Banda . . . . 4,845 2,554 52.71 ... ... ... 2,087 280 9.07 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7,932 2,834 35.72 Benares . . . . 2,619 1,297 49.52 ... ... ... 677 64 9.45 ... ... ... ... ... ... 72 30 41.66 3,368 1,391 41.30 Ballia . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Basti . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Baraich . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 348 45 12.93 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 348 45 12.93 2 R 2
xcii Showing Districts where outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1898-99xciii Lucknow . . . 80 58 72.5 48 48 100 346 37 10.69 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 474 143 30.16 Muzaffarnagar . . 29 29 100 112 98 87.5 1,558 82 5.26 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 100 1,703 213 12.50 Meerut . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Muttra . . . . 792 337 42.55 ... ... ... 495 65 13.13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,287 402 31.23 Moradabad . . . 1,057 662 62.63 175 125 71.42 140 16 11.42 ... ... ... ... ... ... 76 41 53.94 1,448 814 58.28 Mirzapur . . . 59 48 81.35 ... ... ... 36 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 95 48 50.52 Mainpuri . . . 200 88 44 226 136 60.17 49 22 44.89 ... ... ... ... ... ... 175 100 57.14 650 346 53.23 Naini Tal . . . 1,631 1,081 66.27 ... ... ... 470 53 11.27 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,101 1,134 53.97 Pilibhit . . . 33 17 51.51 ... ... ... 528 19 359 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 561 36 6.41 Partabgarh . . . 277 134 48.37 21 9 42.85 1,188 104 8.75 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,486 247 16.62 Rae Bareilly . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shaharanpur . . . 33 32 100 ... ... ... 2,529 45 1.77 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,562 77 3.00 Shahjehanpur . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sitapui . . . 342 254 74.26 390 261 66.92 181 108 59.66 ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 21 91.3 936 644 68.8 Sultanpur . . . 112 55 49.10 22 18 81.81 461 83 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 5 83.33 601 161 26.78 Unao . . . . 543 289 53.22 196 116 59.18 496 51 10.28 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,235 456 36.92 Hardoi . . . . 642 374 58.25 549 256 46.63 81 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,272 630 49.52 TOTAL 31,564 16,752 53.07 3,084 1,977 64.1 34,808 2,336 6.71 ... ... ... ... ... ... 651 356 54.68 70,107 21,421 30.05 North Punjab . Peshawar . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 345 6 1.73 373 6 1.60 Kohat . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,307 221 9.57 173 67 38.72 ... ... ... 729 263 36.07 3,209 551 17.17 Hazara . . . . 524 350 66.79 598 550 91.97 302 190 62.91 ... ... ... ... ... ... 100 100 100 1,524 1,190 78.08 Rawalpindi 10 10 100 ... ... ... 424 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 295 ... ... 729 10 1.37 Jhelum . . . . 474 231 48.73 354 327 92.09 412 35 8.49 3 2 66.66 44 35 79.54 523 80 15.29 1,810 710 39.22
xciv Showing Districts where outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1898-99xcv Dera Ghazi Khan . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,739 ... ... 1,750 ... ... Delhi . . . . 918 748 81.48 ... ... ... 148 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 517 19 8.67 1,583 767 48.45 Ladhiana . . . 56 33 58.92 36 34 94.44 3,135 12 0.38 ... ... ... 9 9 100 703 9 1.28 3,939 97 2.46 Muzaffargarh . . 120 35 29.16 ... .... ... 1,906 62 3.25 2 ... ... ... ... ... 82 2 2.43 2,110 99 4.69 Amritsar . . . ... ... 280 258 92.14 1,501 9 0.59 1 1 100 ... ... ... 523 89 7.45 2,305 307 13.31 Montgomery . . . 107 38 35.51 ... ... ... 66 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 295 3 1.01 458 41 8.95 Ferozepur . . . 136 63 46.32 2 ... ... 2,266 5 0.22 4 ... ... ... ... ... 2,143 129 6.01 4,551 197 4.32 Gurdaspar . . . 96 72 75.00 82 76 92.68 1,006 23 2.28 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,333 20 1.50 2,517 191 7.58 Hissar . . . . ... ... ... 14 18 92.85 447 12 2.68 17 10 58.82 ... ... ... 1,340 4 0.29 1,818 39 2.14 Jullunder . . . 165 83 50.30 169 154 91.12 418 28 6.69 ... ... ... ... ... ... 582 17 2.92 1,334 282 21.13 TOTAL . 3,915 2,287 58.41 1,551 1,419 91.48 35,958 397 1.10 46 31 67.39 12 12 100 13,320 450 3.37 54,802 4,596 8.36 Sind . . Karachi . . . . 78 38 48.72 ... ... ... 37 1 2.70 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,192 11 0.54 2,307 50 2.16 Shikarpur . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hyderabad . . . 250 112 44.8 19 19 100 78 1 1.28 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,359 202 14.86 1,706 334 19.57 Thar and Parkar . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Upper Sind Frontier (Jacobabad). ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 328 150 45.73 19 19 100 115 2 1.74 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,551 213 5.99 4,013 384 9.56 Rajputana . . Ajmere . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 127 12 9.44 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 127 12 9.44 Merwara . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,665 250 6.82 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,665 250 6.82 TOTAL . ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,792 262 6.90 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,792 262 6.90
xcvi Showing Districts where outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1898-99xcvii Madura . . . ... 42 ... ... 692 ... ... 108 ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... 788 ... ... 1,903 ... Tinnevelly . . . ... 1,232 ... ... 1,005 ... ... 309 ... ... 235 ... ... 11 ... ... 1,904 ... ... 7,040 ... Nilgiris . . . ... 359 ... ... ... ... ... 21 ... ... 31 ... ... 22 ... ... 1 ... ... 654 ... Malabar . . . ... 69 ... ... 18 ... ... 55 ... ... 80 ... ... 18 ... ... 377 ... ... 1,094 ... South Canara . . ... 98 ... ... 82 ... ... 56 ... ... 56 ... ... 21 ... ... 140 ... ... 658 ... TOTAL ... 21,739 ... ... 17,318 ... ... 3,725 ... ... 3,873 ... ... 1,179 ... ... 38,770 ... ... 107,148 ... Information on the number of attacks in each district is reported as not available. Berar . . Akola . . . . 247 194 78.54 ... ... ... 232 178 76.72 277 277 100 197 191 96.95 982 638 64.97 1,935 1,478 76.38 Amraoti . . . 74 28 37.84 1 1 100 855 259 30.29 209 87 41.62 ... ... ... 264 202 76.51 1,403 577 41.13 Basim . . . . 248 108 43.55 ... ... ... 1,049 155 14.77 ... ... ... ... ... ... 389 193 49.61 1,686 456 27.05 Buldana. . . . 268 115 42.91 ... ... ... 33 14 42.42 7 ... ... ... ... ... 125 50 40.00 433 179 41.34 Ellichpur . . . 85 10 11.76 ... ... ... 336 35 10.42 230 173 75.22 2 2 100 373 217 55.18 1,026 437 42.59 Wún . . . . 1,535 1,116 72.70 ... ... ... 2,607 450 17.26 440 264 60.00 10 7 7000 5,235 3,784 72.28 9,827 5,621 51.19 TOTAL 2,457 1,571 63.94 1 1 100 5,112 1,091 21.34 1,163 801 68.87 209 200 95.69 7,368 5,084 69.00 16,310 8,748 53.63 Bombay Presi- dency. Bombay City . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 5 100 5 5 100.00 Deccan . . Nasik . . . . 91 50 54.94 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 100 92 51 55.43 Ahmednagar . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 112 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112 ... ... Poona . . . . 33 13 39.39 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 8 88.88 ... ... ... 42 21 50.00 Kamatak . . Belgaum . . . ... ... ... 15 7 46.65 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 3 75.00 ... ... ... 19 10 52.63 Dharwar . . . 3 3 100 ... ... ... 85 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 17 100 105 20 19.04 2 S
xcviii Showing Districts where outbreaks of Galtle-disease occurred during 1898-99xcix Murshidabad . . . 110 10 9.09 ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 116 10 8.62 Jessore . . .. 278 249 91.20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 7 100 280 256 91.42 Khulna . . . 23 6 21.73 ... ... ... 32 19 59.37 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 10 62.5 71 34 47.88 Rajshabi . . . 38 18 47.38 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 39 18 46.15 Dinajpur . . . 26 17 65.38 ... ... ... 5 1 20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 18 58.06 Jalpaiguri . . . 117 42 35.89 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 117 42 35.89 Darjeeling . . . 9 9 100 13 13 100 606 96 15.84 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 628 118 18.78 Rangpur . . . 375 241 64.26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 375 241 64.26 Bogra . . . . 45 21 46.66 ... ... ... 62 8 12.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... 39 25 64.10 146 54 36.98 Pabna . . . . 183 121 66.12 7 5 71.42 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 200 126 63 Dacca . . . . 87 76 87.35 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87 76 87.35 Mymensingh . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 11 100 11 11 100 Earidpore . . . 44 39 88.63 11 11 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 203 197 97.04 258 247 95.93 Backergunge . . . 101 101 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 100 107 107 100 Tippera . . . 227 192 84.58 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 20 85.23 248 212 84-48 Noakhaii . . . 367 265 72.20 9 2 22.22 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55 30 54.54 431 297 68.90 Chittagong . . . 3,422 3,253 95.06 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58 57 98.27 3,480 3,310 95.11 Patna . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 ... ... Gaya . . . . 14 6 42.85 ... ... ... 1,285 9 .70 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,299 15 1.15 Shahabad . . . 245 64 26.12 ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 251 64 25.49 Saran . . . . 985 501 50.86 ... ... ... 18 7 38.88 ... ... ... ... ... ... 233 170 72.96 1,236 678 54.85 Champaran . . . 326 92 28.22 11 6 54.54 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 337 98 29.08 Muzaffarpur . . . 84 82 97.61 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 68 48 70.58 152 130 85.52 Dharbhanga . . . 28 4 14.28 ... ... ... 76 3 3.94 ... ... ... ... ... ... 138 97 70.28 242 104 42.97 2 S 2
C Showing Disricts where outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1898-99ci Table showing the total number of animals which died and the total number treated by Veterinary Assistants during the year 1898-99. DISTRICTS. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assis- tants employed. RINDERPEST. ANTHRAX. FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE. PLEURO- PNEUMONIA. CHARBON SYMP- TOMATIQUE. OTHER DISEASES. GRAND TOTAL. Total Number died. NUMBER TREATED. Total number died. NUMBER TREATED. Total number died. NUMBER TREATED. Total number died. NUMBER TREATED. Total number died. NUMBER TREATED. Total number died. NUMBER TREATED. Total number died (col- umns 4, 9, 14, 19, 24 and 29). NUMBER TREATED. Cured. Result unknown. Total. Died. Cured. Result unknown. Total. Died. Cured. Result unknown. Total. Died. Cured. Result unknown. Total. Died. Cured. Result unknown. Total. Died. Died. Result unknown. Total. Died (columns 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30). Cured (columns 6, 11, 16, 21, 26, and 31). Result unknown (columns 7, 12, 17. 22, 27. and 32). Total (columns 8, 13, 18, 23, 28, and 33). Lower Burma. Akyab . . . . . . 1,068 4 1,323 55 62 30 137 1,462 4 7 2 13 655 ... 307 11 318 ... ... ... ... ... Most of the figures for the disease are included under Anthrax. 6,171 5 1,090 56 1,151 9,613 64 1,456 99 1,619 Kyaukpyu . . . . . . 134 1 37 ... ... ... ... 91 ... 4 ... 4 79 ... 10 ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... 3,166 2 244 58 304 3.373 2 258 58 318 Saudoway . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 35 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... 1,009 ... ... ... ... 1,046 ... ... ... ... Arakan Hill Tracts . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... 7(a) ... ... ... ... Hanthawaddy . . . . . 693 4* 340 15 18 3 36 271 5 4 2 11 193 130 ... 136 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,178 3 1,506 51 1,560 5,988 23 1,664 66 1,743 Pegu . . . . . . . 421 2 1,292 96 96 ... 192 317 ... 4 ... 4 322 1 805 ... 806 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7,541 6 335 1 341 0,472 102 1,240 1 1,343 Tharrawaddy . . . . . 494 3 674 150 195 11 356 561 33 13 2 53 35 ... 75 9 84 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 3,993 9 690 124 823 5,263 199 973 146 1,318 Promo . . . . . . 630 3 172 30 84 3 117 846 1 3 .. 4 82 ... 32 ... 32 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2,915 2 784 23 809 4,015 34 903 26 963 Thongwa . . . . . 635 4cii Table showing the total number of animals which died and the total number treated by Veterinary Assistants during the year 1898-99ciii TABLE N. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing the number of animals treated by Veterinary Assistants during the year 1898-99. DISTRICT. TEHSIL. RINDERPEST. ANTHRAX. FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE. PLEURO- PNEUMONIA. CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE. OTHER DISEASE. TOTAL TREATED. Number of villages visited. Number of Veteri- nary Assistants employed. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Aligarh . . ...... 285 67 73 425 ... ... ... ... 31 ... 12 43 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 139 355 502 321 206 443 970 108 1 Agra . . ...... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 42 358 402 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 108 280 394 9 150 638 796 117 1 Allahabad . ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Azamgarh . ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Almora . . ...... ... 68 230 298 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 ... 76 230 300 105 1 Temporary Bulandshahr . ...... 38 53 27 118 17 ... 10 27 ... ... 60 60 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 33 117 151 56 86 214 356 119 1 Bareilly . . ...... 899 16 412 1,327 ... ... ... ... 1 13 195 209 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34 226 168 428 934 255 775 1,964 211 1 Bijnour . . ...... ... 26 1 27 2 ... ... 2 ... 1 7 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 91 199 318 30 118 207 355 234 1 Budaun . ...... 882 99 652 1,633 133 3 24 160 5 34 580 619 .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 44 807 857 1,026 180 2,063 3,269 165 1 Banda . . ...... 520 525 519 1,564 44 1 2 47 31 214 557 802 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 104 171 289 609 844 1,249 2.702 186 1 Benares . . ...... 53 85 126 264 ... ... ... ... 2 50 132 184 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 15 73 90 57 150 331 538 248 1 Ballia . . ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Basti . . ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bahraich Bhinga Estate). ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 67 186 255 2 67 186 255 ... 1 Bara Banki . ...... 2 ... 3 5 167 40 107 314 ... ... 131 131 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 74 84 169 50 315 534 223 1 Cawnpore . ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dehra Dun ...... 132 90 77 299 5 ... ... 5 6 41 102 149 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 92 174 272 149 223 535 725 222 1 Etawah . . ...... 20 101 138 259 ... 4 2 6 2 76 611 689 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 27 191 220 24 208 942 1,174 100 1 Etah . . ...... 15 ... 4 19 25 .. ... 25 53 5 165 223 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 9 41 52 95 14 210 319 172 1 Farukhaba . ...... 242 110 32 384 45 25 ... 70 4 211 225 410 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 168 213 382 292 514 470 1,276 266 1 Fatehpur . ...... 14 19 7 40 ... 37 ... 37 1 3 170 174 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 55 133 193 20 114 310 444 193 1
civ Statement showing the number of animals treated by Veterinary Assistants during the year 1898-99cv Hardol . . 291 60 160 457 284 ... 27 811 112 61 280 358 ... 7 1 6 ... ... ... ... 41 105 665 511 628 233 1,079 1,940 136 1 TOTAL . 4,544 1,766 3,139 9,449 1,070 120 511 1,701 205 1,022 5,873 7,100 11 43 1 55 ... ... ... ... 193 2,547 5,764 8,504 6,023 5,498 15,288 26,809 4,667 31 North Punjab. Peshawar . Peshawar . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 127 129 2 ... 127 129 55 1 Swabi . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50 50 ... .. 50 50 15 Nowshera . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 51 52 1 ... 61 62 36 Charsada . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 12 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 55 56 1 ... 67 68 42 Mardan . . ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 56 58 2 ... 72 74 38 Kohat . . Kohat . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 400 400 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 ... 160 200 40 ... 560 600 10 By Imperial Salutris. Hangoo . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 200 200 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... 30 50 20 ... 230 250 8 Teri . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100 100 25 ... 100 125 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 ... 200 225 11 Hazara . . 63 82 ... 145 ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 54 ... 55 64 141 ... 205 252 Rawalpindi . Rawalpindi . . 10 ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... 377 377 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 225 225 10 ... 602 612 185 1 Gujar Khan . . Kahuta . . Murree . . . Fatehjang . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47 47 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 80 ... ... 117 117 50 1 Pindigheb . . Attcock . . . Jhelum . . ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Gujrat . . ...... 38 ... 21 89 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 609 610 ... ... ... ... 24 ... 1 25 2 81 600 383 85 81 931 1,107 439 2 Gujranwala . Gujranwala . . 18 ... 6 26 ... ... ... ... 3 ... 41 44 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 9 425 450 87 9 474 520 310 1 Wazirabad . . 21 ... 12 33 89 ... ... 39 ... ... 117 117 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 10 380 612 82 10 509 601 184 1 Hafizabad . . 157 38 193 388 112 ... 27 139 7 ... 816 323 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 20 222 256 290 58 758 1,106 275 1 Tehangah . . 132 3 175 310 35 ... 1 86 15 ... 320 335 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 4 2 377 883 186 5 874 1,065 297 1 Slalkot . . Hospital . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 81 53 ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 40 567 2,421 3,028 40 589 2,452 3,081 ... 1 Sialkot . . 3 1 ... 4 ... ... ... ... .. 68 565 638 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 229 882 1,120 12 298 1,447 1,757 558 1 Daska . . . Pasrur . . . 1 ... 4 5 2 ... 3 5 ... ... 163 166 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 515 1,139 1,662 11 515 1,309 1,835 354 1 Zafferwal . . Raya . . . 2 T
cvi Statement showing the number of animals treated by Veterinary Assistants during the year 1898-99cvii Rohtak . . Rohtak . . ... 7 ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... 36 ... 36 ... 3 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 22 ... 922 ... 966 ... 966 105 2 Sampla . . ... 18 ... 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51 ... 51 ... 69 ... 69 91 Jhajhar . . ... 30 ... 30 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 ... 26 ... 56 ... 56 105 Gohana . . ... 8 ... 8 ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 79 ... 79 ... 87 ... 87 74 Multan . . Multan . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 ... 105 120 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... 140 150 25 ... 245 270 150 l Shujabad . . ... ... ... ... 13 ... ... 13 13 ... 353 366 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 1 185 193 33 1 538 572 48 1 Lodhran . . ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... 11 ... ... 50 50 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 10 88 104 17 10 138 165 97 1 Mailsi . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92 92 ... .. 102 102 280 1 Kabirwala . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55 55 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... 265 272 7 ... 320 327 149 1 Gurgaon . . Gurgaon . . 183 ... 112 295 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 20 237 257 183 20 349 552 103 2 Rewari . . 2 ... 6 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... 45 45 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 80 118 2 38 131 171 208 Palwal . . . 61 ... 148 209 ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 8 356 373 70 8 519 597 310 Nuh . . . 20 3 56 79 ... ... ... ... ... ... 57 57 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 114 136 20 25 227 272 347 Ferozepur . . 55 ... 140 195 ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 53 59 57 4 219 280 150 Hoshiarpur . Hoshiarpur . . ... ... ... ... 21 ... 4 25 4 ... 604 608 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58 58 25 ... 666 691 92 3 Dasua . . . ... ... ... ... 35 ... 1 36 2 ... 195 197 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 37 37 37 ... 233 270 90 Garhshanker . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 63 ... ... 163 163 54 Unah . . 2 ... 1 3 32 ... 1 33 ... ... 285 285 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 19 34 ... 306 340 110 Hangra . . Narpur . . 58 ... 53 111 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 315 315 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 125 127 61 ... 493 554 15 1 Hamirpur . . 277 ... 105 382 56 ... 8 59 40 ... 7,849 7,889 ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 ... 33 33 373 ... 7,990 8,363 Not given. 1 Kangra . . 18 ... 9 27 21 ... 5 26 11 ... 2,236 2,247 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 217 225 58 ... 2,467 2,525 136 1 Karnal . . Kaithal . . 5 ... 10 15 6 ... 2 8 1 7 96 104 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 84 118 221 31 91 226 348 179 1 Karnal . . ... ... ... ... 12 1 26 89 ... 47 73 120 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 217 232 20 55 316 391 151 1 Paniput . . ... ... ... ... 3 ... 20 28 1 3 62 66 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 42 43 4 4 124 132 Thanesar . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 28 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 8 10 ... 2 36 38 Dera Ghazi Khan. D. G. Khan . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,139 ... 1,139 ... 1,150 ... 1,150 Nearly the whole dis- trict. 2 Jampur . Sanghar . . Rajanpur . . Delhi . . Delhi . . . 51 ... 39 90 ... ... ... ... ... ... 47 47 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 217 221 55 ... 303 358 45 1 Soneput . . 89 ... 15 64 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 75 168 246 42 75 183 300 107 1 Balsbgarh . . 658 ... 116 774 ... ... ... ... ... ... 101 101 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... 38 50 670 ... 255 925 70 1 2 T 2
cviii Statement showing the number of animals treated by Veterinary Assistants during the year 1898-99cix Jullunder . Jullunder . . 40 8 35 83 39 8 2 49 3 4 48 55 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 16 180 196 83 35 265 883 49 1 Nakodar . . 35 7 32 74 ... ... .. ... 4 8 85 48 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 11 26 102 139 50 42 169 261 39 1 Phillour . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86 86 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47 47 ... ... 133 133 36 1 Nawashahr . . ... ... ... ... 99 ... 2 101 .. ... 106 106 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 115 118 102 ... 223 325 213 1 TOTAL . 1,744 107 1,126 2,977 717 10 97 824 206 880 22,423 23,509 12 11 4 27 9 ... ... 9 327 4,307 8,405 13,039 3,015 5,315 32,055 40,385 7,640 52 Sind. Karachi . . Karachi . . 14 ... 26 40 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 25 26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 33 2,148 2,192 26 83 2,199 2,258 ... 1 Vety. Gra- duate. Malir . . . 24 ... 14 38 ... .,. ... ... ... ... 11 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 ... 25 49 9 1 Do. Shikarpur . Shikarpur . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 49 844 901 8 49 844 901 11 1 Do. Upper Sind Frentier. Jacobabad . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 ... 1 1 2 ... 1 Farrier Major. Hyderabad Naushahro . . 43 ... 60 108 1 ... ... 1 1 ... 47 48 .0. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58 22 134 214 103 22 241 366 89 1 Itiner- ating Vety. Graduate. Hyderabad . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 42 993 1,057 22 42 993 1,057 8 1 Vety. Graduate. TOTAL . 81 ... 100 181 1 ... ... 1 2 ... 83 85 ... ... ... ... ... ... 99 147 4,120 4,366 183 147 4,303 4,633 ... ... Berar. Akola . . Akola . . . 12 1 12 25 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 1 12 25 ... Do. . . . 8 ... 11 19 .. ... ... ... ... ... 14 14 1 17 5 23 ... ... ... ... 7 17 719 743 28 34 810 872 ... Do. . . . 12 ... 61 73 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Amraoti . . Amraoti . . 3 10 3 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... 65 65 3 2 3 8 ... ... ... ... 20 20 902 942 26 32 1,043 1,101 30 Basim . . Basim . . 45 5 69 119 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45 5 69 119 ... Buldana . . Chikhali . . 18 ... 71 87 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 ... 71 87 5 Wun . . Yeotmal . . 14 ... 45 64 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 ... 50 69 2 TOTAL . 110 16 272 403 ... ... ... ... ... ... 84 84 4 19 8 31 ... ... ... 27 37 1,621 1,685 141 72 2,055 2,273 ... Bombay Presi- dency. Nasik . . Naisik . . ... ... 2 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43 74 746 1,194 43 74 755 cx Statement showing the number of animals treated by Veterinary Assistants during the year 1898-99cxi Bengal. Purnea . . Arraria . . 44 ... 43 87 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44 ... 48 87 11 1 Darjeeling . Darjeeling Muni- cipality. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 1 13 14 ... 1 16 17 32 1 Ditto Siliguri . . 9 ... ... 9 21 ... ... 21 ... ... 451 451 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 ... 451 481 12 1 Muzaffarpur . Kanti . . . ... ... ... ... 7 8 ... 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 20 24 7 12 20 39 4 1 Ditto Muzaffarpur town . 1 ... 7 8 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 11 11 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 ... 6 7 4 ... 24 28 1 1 Ditto Sitamarhi . . 4 3 3 10 1 ... ... 1 3 ... 27 30 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 14 54 233 301 23 57 263 343 19 1 Saran . Gopalgunge . . 9 ... 20 29 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 1 9 16 15 1 36 52 19 1 Darbhanga . Bahera . . ... 2 2 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 4 ... 1 24-Parganas . Diamond Harbour. 109 ... 270 379 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109 ... 270 379 39 1 Dacca Dacca City . . 7 ... 9 16 ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 11 370 406 32 11 379 4 ... 1 Gaya . . ...... 3 ... 5 8 ... ... 2 2 ... 2 56 58 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 147 154 3 9 210 222 58 1 Patna . . Patna Municipality ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 10 178 196 9 10 178 197 ... 1 Shahabad . Dumraon . . 20 ... 26 46 ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 9 462 493 42 9 500 551 18 1 Chittagong . Cox's Bazar . . 57 33 137 227 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 8 10 57 35 145 237 ... 1 Howrah . Howrah Munici- pality. 44 ... 12 56 ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 8 ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 66 68 45 1 86 132 ... 1 Burdwan . 234 70 9 313 ... ... ... ... 4 ... 26 30 2 4 ... 6 ... ... ... ... 53 19 80 152 293 93 115 501 61 2 Champaran . 10 ... 65 75 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... 68 78 22 1 Tippera . . 1 ... 25 26 5 ... 4 9 1 ... 15 16 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 6 4 192 202 14 4 236 254 51 1 Puri . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86 522 608 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86 522 608 65 1 Cuttack . . 511 737 338 1,586 60 ... ... 60 ... ... 100 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 6 134 148 579 743 572 1,894 303 1 Balasore . 16 ... 141 157 3 ... ... 3 3 ... 412 415 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 133 134 23 ... 686 709 57 1 Port Blair ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 ... 15 34 61 10 316 387 80 10 331 421 34 2 TOTAL 1,079 845 1,112 3,036 99 8 6 113 11 88 1,653 1,752 3 4 ... 7 21 15 36 206 139 2,367 2,712 1,419 1,084 5,153 7,656 806 21
cxii TABLE O. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during 1898-99. Dispenserles. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURS. Last year's Balance. By Local Fund Grant. By Government Grant. By Municipal contribution. By other sources. Total. Pay. Travelling Allowance. Medicines Instruments etc., etc. Furniture land, etc., etc Contingencies stabling, house rent, etc. Transferred to Indian Veterinary Dispensary Fund. Total. Balance. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. North- Western Provinces and Oudh. No dispensary has been established by this Department in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. North Punjab. Sialkot . . . . ... 2,152 6 6 ... ... 51 11 3 2,204 1 9 1,373 8 0 288 0 0 243 2 3 ... 247 12 3 51 11 3 2,204 1 9 ... Gujranwala . . . 35 14 9 1,370 0 0 ... ... ... 1,405 14 9 722 14 7 441 4 0 ... ... 40 6 0 ... 1,204 8 7 201 6 2 Dera Ismail Khan . . ... 1,180 0 0 ... ... ... 1,180 0 0 711 0 0 258 0 0 211 0 0 ... ... ... 1,180 0 0 ... Total . 35 14 9 4,702 6 6 ... ... 51 11 3 4,790 0 6 2,807 6 7 987 4 0 453 2 3 ... 288 2 3 51 11 3 4,588 10 4 201 6 2 South Punjab. Amritsar . . . ... 2,810 12 7 ... ... ... 2,810 12 7 900 0 0 30 10 0 645 8 6 34 8 0 1,200 2 1 ... 2,810 12 7 ... Hoshiarpur . . . 91 6 9 858 0 0 ... ... 22 0 0 971 6 3 408 0 0 ... 355 1 5 ... 5 10 6 ... 768 11 1 1 202 10 4 Umballa . . . ... 923 14 6 ... ... ... 923 14 6 480 0 0 180 0 0 122 5 9 5 0 0 136 8 9 ... 923 14 6 ... Ludhiana . . . ... 359 9 0 ... ... ... 359 9 0 95 8 0 ... 224 7 0 5 6 0 34 4 0 ... 359 9 0 ... Rohtak . . . . ... 838 5 3 ... ... ... 838 5 8 527 18 3 140 5 6 108 14 0 35 5 0 25 15 6 ... 838 5 3 ... Ferozepur . . .. ... 562 0 8 ... ... 75 15 0 637 15 8 360 0 0 60 0 0 217 15 8 ... ... ... 687 15 8 ... TOTAL . 91 6 3 6,352 10 0 ... ... 97 15 0 6,541 1 5 3 8,771 5 3 410 15 6 1,674 4 4 80 3 0 1,402 8 1 0 ... 6,339 4 11 202 10 4 Multan . . . . ... 1,127 0 0 ... ... ... 1,127 0 0 685 0 0 295 0 0 95 0 0 ... 52 0 0 ... 1,127 0 0 ... Gurgaon . . . ... 981 12 6 ... ... ... 981 12 6 515 1 2 3 166 10 0 258 10 0 ... 40 12 3 ... 981 12 6 ... Kangra . . . ... 1,483 2 2 ... ... ... 1,483 2 2 1,104 0 0 ... 153 12 6 ... 225 5 8 .. 1,483 2 2 ... Delhi . . . . ... 1,248 10 3 ... ... ... 1,248 10 3 803 3 9 10 12 0 357 5 0 2 0 0 75 5 6 ... 1,248 10 3 ... Dera Ghazi Khan . . ... 43 0 0 ... ... ... 43 0 0 ... ... 43 0 0 ... ... ... 43 0 0 ... * Castration fees.
cxiii * Castration fees. Statement showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during 1898-99cxiv Statement showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during 1898-99cxv TABLE P. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing Tours of Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, during 1898-99, Bank, name, and designation of Officer. Districts visited. Pairs and Shows attended. NUMBER OF MILES TRAVELLED By road. By rail. By boat or stcamor. TOTAL. Veterinary Major R. H. Ringe, Superintendent, Civil Veteri- nary Department, North-West- ern Provinces and Oudh. Agra, Aligarh, Bareilly, Bom- bay, Budaon, Bulandshahr, Cawnpore, Debra Dun, Etah, Fatehpur, Hardoi, Meerut, Muradabad, Muttra, Muzafarnagar, Naini Tal, Rae-Bareli, Saharunpur and Shahjehanpur. Garhmuktesar, Batesar, Makanpur, Aligarh, Bulandshahr, and Muzafarnagar. 2,647 7,408 ... 10,055 Veterinary Lieutenant A. S. Trydell, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab. Hazara, Rawalpindi, Jhelum, Shahpur, Bannu, Dera Ismail Khan, Kohat, Lahore, J hang, Peshawar, Gujrat, Gujrauwala, and Sialkot. Jhelum, Jhang, Dera Ismail Khan, Bannu, Shahpur, Lahore, Guj- rat, Rawalpindi. 3,964 7,578 ... 11,542 Veterinary Captain F. Joslen. Superint endent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab. ..... Amritsar (Bysakhi) 83 931 ... 1,014 Veterinary Lieute- nantA. Smith. Amritsar, Gurdaspur, Feroze- pore, Hissar, Jullunder, Hoshiarpur, Umballa, Kurnal, Montgomery, Mul- tan, Dera Ghazi Khan, Muzafargarh, Delhi, Lu- dhiana, Gurgaon and Rohtak. Hansi, Amritsar (Dewali), Jalalabad, Delhi, Kurnal Kapurthala, Montgo- mery, Multan, Dera Ghazi Khan, and Um- balla. 1,992 7,169 72 9,233 Veterinary Captain H. M. Maxwell, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Baluchistan and Sind. Quetta, Pishin, Thal Choti- ali, and Kalat. Quetta and Sibi . . 423 1,132 ... 1,555 Ditto. Karachi, Shikarpur, Hydera- bad, Upper Sind Frontier, and Thar and Parkar. Sind, Moro, and Talhar . 391 3,437 ... 3,828 Veterinary Lieutenant W. B. Edwards, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Madras, up to 31st January 1899. Kistna, South Arcot, Salem, and Coimbatore. Tirrupur . . . 698 3,418 ... 4,116 Veterinary Captain G. H. Evans, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Burma. Hanthawaddy, Pegu, Thayet myo, Toungoo, Pakokku, Mandalay, Shwebo, Saga- ing, Kyaukse, Meiktila, Yamethin, Myingyan Katha, and Bhamo. Nil. 90 3,170 2,360 5,630 Veterinary Major F. Raymond Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal. Patna, Shahabad, Saran Champaran, Muzaffarpur Midnapore, Cuttack, Puri, Balasore, and Darjeeling. Sonepore and Barahpur 633 9,377 1,324 11,334. Veterinary Lieutenant F. S. H. Baldrey, Officiating Superinten- dent, Civil Veterinary Depart ment, Bombay. Sholapur, Bombay, Poona, Nasik, Khandesh, Thana, Belgaum, Dharwar, Kaira, Ahmedabad, Kathiawar, Palanpur, Surat, and Satara. Bajkot (Kathiawar) 1,008 8,348 ... 9,356
cxvi TABLE Q. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing Provincial cost of the Civil Veterinary Department during the official year 1898-99. Major Heads. Superintendent North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Superintendent North Punjab. Superintendent south Pujab. Superintendent, Baluchistan and Siud. Superintendent Bengal. Superintendent Madras. Superintendent, Rajputana. Superintendent, Central Provinces. SUPERINTENDENT, BOMBAY. SUPERINTENDENT, BURMA. Local Fund Charges. Provincial Charges. Local District Cess Fund. Provincial Charges I.