ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1897-98.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
NLS to Scan B&W and insert
NLS to Scan colour and insert
No. 196ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1897-98. THE "OFFICIAL" MACHINE PRINTING PRESS, MEERUT.
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR, THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1897-98. ii Pages. III.iii Pages. V. (A) EQUINE DISEASEiv Pages. North-Western Provinces and Oudh ... ... 145 Bengal ... ... ... ... ... ib. Rajputana ... ... ... ... 146 Punjab ... ... ... ... ... ib. Kashmir ... ... ... ... ... 148 Madras ...... ... ... ... 149 Lower Burma ... ... ... ... 150 Berar ... ... ... ... ... 157 Bombay ... ... ... ... ... 158 (7) Remarks 159 (8) Reliability of Statements showing mortality and imperfect system of reporting outbreaks ... ... ib. (9) Veterinary DispensariesGOVERNMENT OF INDIA. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1897-98. PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.-MILITARY SECTION. I.2 Number of stal- lions present. 7. The totals remain very much the same as last year, viz:3 16. One more point connected with the English Thoroughbred, viz: his feet. They appear to be getting smaller and worse year by year. Veterinary-Captain Maxwell, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Baluchistan, frequently brings to my notice how next to impossible it is to keep horses going in a dry climate and on rocky soil like that which exists in that Province ; their feet break away until there is absolutely nothing left; it is particularly in this direction where the Australian so far excels. Thoroughbred Australian stallions. 17. During the year under review the Government of India sanctioned the importation of six Thoroughbreds from Australia, and as usual they entrusted the commission to Messrs. Krcrouse and Madden. I am perfectly well aware that this fact does not give satisfaction to other shippers, still I feel convinced that with three or four different agencies purchasing for us in Australia it would be certain to lead to competition, and that the result would be that we would not have the same class of horses we are receiving now for the price paid. Messrs. Krcrouse and Madden never hesitate to pay a high price to secure a good horse, and as this is the third year during which selection has been left to them, and that they have invariably supplied us with the class of horse we require, I am of opinion that the present is by far the best arrangement that could be made for the purchase of Thoroughbred Australian sires. 18. As will be seen by reference to last year's Administration Report, Messrs. Krcrouse and Madden were unfortunate during the two first years in which they bought our stallions, to lose one on each occasion. In order to ensure six being landed, they imported seven, but I am glad to say, none died. The under- standing was that I was to be allowed to reject the one I liked least, or to purchase him at the price at which I am able to buy Australians that have failed on the Turf in this country. After most carefully inspecting the horses on their arrival in Madras, I felt convinced that it would be to the interest of Government to take the extra horse at Rs. 3,500 and to ask them to reduce the number to be imported from England during 1898-99 by one. 19. The following is a description of the horses received :4 "Libel"5 27. This gave but a small field for selection, still I was able to buy horses whose average measurements were as follows:6 1st.7 Both Superintendents consider that the Norfolk Trotter and Hackney strains have now been carried too far, especially in the central and southern districts, and that the feeling against them is growing stronger among breeders, in the great horse-breeding districts of Rawalpindi, Shahpur, and Dera Ghazi Khan, owing to their slowness, softness, and want of quality. Veterinary-Captain Joslen's remark that one strain of the Norfolk Trotter, if the produce is out of a mare wanting in substance, is beneficial, but in case where there have been two or more strains of this class of stallion, the produce has been short and thick in the neck, straight in the shoulder, heavy topped, and tied in under the knee, appears to me to aptly express the most approved expert opinion at the present day on this long standing controversy. When we find, as is undoubtedly the case, the opinion of the largest and most enlightened breeders coincide with that of Veterinary experts and Remount Officers, in advocating the substitution of Thoroughbred English and Australian sires for Norfolk Trotters and Hackneys, I think the case in favour of the larger employment of the former class, may be considered to have been fully proved. At present 50 out of the 96 stallions in the North Punjab, and 33 out of the 98 in the South Punjab, or over two-fifths of the total number are of the Norfolk Trotter or Hackney breed, and by gradually replacing these by a good class of Arab, Thoroughbred English or Australian sires, the popularity of horse-breeding will undoubtedly be increased Transit of horses from England and of donkeys from the Continent. 39. During the year we were unfortunate in losing a Thoroughbred English stallion "Father Thames" and two other horses of the same batch were landed suffering from 'Laminitis.' Veterinary-Major Mills, who receives the English horses on arrival at Bombay, stated in his letter reporting the occurrence, that he attributed these casualties in a great measure to over stimulating food given on the voyage, and to the fact that a supply of carrots, only sufficient to last 9 days, was put on board. 40. I have made this suggestion to the Government of India as also one to the effect that Officers of the Army Veterinary Department, when proceeding to India, should be put in charge of these horses. I feel that this would be most advisable, as it would tend to lessen the losses now sustained. 41. I fear there cannot be any doubt that these valuable horses have not the same accommodation on board the hired Transports as they had on board the Troopship. Veterinary-Major Mills brings the matter to notice in the following words:8 46. At an interview with His Honor, it was, therefore, decided that I should consider whether a suitable site could not be obtained elsewhere. With this object in view, I visited Abbottabad. Having placed myself in communication with the Deputy Commissioner of Hazara, it was decided to assemble a Committee to report upon a suitable site, and to discuss the question whether there would be any objections, on Military grounds, to the location of a Depôt at that station. 47. In September last, a Committee composed of:9 51. The Government of India, therefore, considered that there were strong- economic and geographical reasons for the change. In reply, the Government of India notified that the transfer, as far as horse and mule-breeding in Sind was concerned, would take place from 1st April, 1898. 52. In accordance with this decision, I proceeded to Ahmednagar and went over the accounts carefully, and obtained from the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, all information concerning the working of the horse and mule-breed- ing industries in Sind. I was then in a position to show the Government of India approximately, the cost in addition to the amount contributed by Bombay, which would have to be borne by Imperial Funds; but, in the interests of Government I trust that this amount will actually be exceeded, for as this country requires more mules, we must endeavour to develop mule-breeding in Sind, and it is only natural to expect that as development takes place so expenditure will increase proportionately. 53. I am pleased to be able to report that this change has taken place, for I feel convinced that when the new system is thoroughly started, its effects will be far reaching. 1st.10 78 were employed in the North Punjab out of 100 on the Register. 68 were employed in the South Punjab out of 103 on the Register, but of these, 15 were unallotted; the numbers really are 68 out of 88. 40 were employed in Baluchistan out of 51 on the Register. 56. In these, the four largest breeding centres, 252 stallions were at work against 247 last year. The remaining stallions were in the Depôts either for rest, conditioning, or acclimatization, or were on the sick list. Average number of mares covered per stallion. 57. Table IV. also shows the number of mares covered per stallion employed. The following is a summary for the past 3 years:11 Meerut, Saharunpore, Bulandshahr, Muzaffarnagar, &c., there has been a long continuance of the Hackney strain, too long in fact, and the Thoroughbred is imperatively called for ; but in the districts mentioned by Veterinary-Captain Ringe, horse-breeding is in a backward state and the mares require size, there the Hackney will do good in laying a foundation for future operations. On this point the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, makes the further following remarks :12 74. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, "when discussing this subject in his Annual Report, states:13 where it was possible to make comparisons. This matter has been made very much more simple the last few years, as stock got by the same horses in the Deccan and Sind are running together under identically the same conditions in the Depot paddocks and can be compared day by day. The question is a most interesting one, and I can only attribute the extraordinary difference to the large admixture of Arab blood in the Deccani mare, and after years of experience I find that working on certain lines you can be perfectly sure of breeding an animal which possesses a fixity of type that does not exist in other parts of India, and that a mare bred on these lines can be relied on if mated with a Thoroughbred, to throw true to her type year after year with practically little variation except increase in size. I do not know of any other part of India of which the same can be said, and mares, although covered by the same horse, will one season produce shapely off- spring and the next an awkward ungainly colt resembling neither sire or dam. This state of affairs is no doubt due to the fact that at no period of its existence has the Deccan ever been contaminated with coarse blood, and that its mares are more or less pure, whereas in other parts of India it is impossible to say to what coarse, common and remote ancestor your mare is going to throw back to. The drawbacks to the Deccan, however, are very great; it contains few mares, poor owners, and is very liable to famine all of which militate against any marked progress ever being made in horse-breeding and the work of years is thrown back by a single famine such as the one experienced last year. If the causes of rejection are carefully analysed, it will be found that they work out very satisfactorily and to a great extent prove that the buying of young stock in this part of India in expert hands need not be such a lottery as is commonly supposed, more especially when it is taken into consideration that stock which do not quite realize expectations as far as height is concerned for British Cavalry, can also be sent to Native Cavalry, providing care has been exercised in their purchase and they are suitable in other ways. Out of the number rejected, one was a chance get received from the Madras Lancers, one was issued to the 20th Hussars from the Hapur Depot found unsuitable and returned to this Depot to be sold, 3 cast for accidents and unsoundness, and 2 undersized, which realized at auction Rs. 385 each. These figures further analysed, show that this Depot was only answerable for 2 animals that did not grow sufficiently to enter either branch of the service, yet, were good enough at 3½ years of age to realize the fair price of Rs. 385 each. Accidents and unsoundness must occur, and therefore cannot be compared in this table. 79. Although Veterinary-Captain Morgan claims great success for the Ahmednagar Depôt I feel convinced that the Government of India will agree with me that such has not been obtained. The intention of the Remount Department in purchasing young stock is solely with a view of producing horses fit for service with British Cavalry ; with the production of horses for issue to Native Cavalry they are not concerned. If therefore, we add the one horse issued to Royal Artillery and the 2 issued as chargers, we find that of the total issued only 44.6 reached the standard fit for British Troops, or in other words that 55.4 of those issued were failures. 80. I fully agree that the first cross with the Arab is too small for British Cavalry, but I am glad to see the opinion which I have always held in Northern India, that the basis of our operations should be Arab blood, is borne out in Bombay. 81. The fact that one horse bred in the paddocks turned out sufficiently good to be issued to Royal Artillery can, in my opinion, not be held out as an argument for breeding in the Remount Depôts, a system against which Govern- ment has already given its decision. 82. Veterinary-Captain Morgan's sweeping statements, as to the comparison to be drawn between stock bred in the Deccan and other parts of India, is mislead- ing. In the first place this Officer is scarcely in a position to offer an opinion as he has not had the opportunity of judging of the class of stock got in Upper India, and his comparison between stock obtained by the same sires in the Deccan and Sind scarcely coincides with his description of the young stock exhibited at the Jacobabad Show. In this article he describes the Sind stock as high on the leg, flat sided, upright on their joints, in many cases unsound, and whose hind legs, though perfectly straight when bought, gradually get crooked as they grow older. When remarking generally on the young stock, as exhibited at Jacobabad, he describes it as "very good, shapely and well grown," and makes identical remarks on the eight head purchased by the Remount Agent. These opinions, differing as they do so materially, are hard to reconcile. 83. The questions raised in the above extract bearing on that of horse- breeding generally, call for certain comments which I would have refrained from making, being controversial in character, but I feel it necessary to state that I cannot understand Veterinary-Captain Morgan's allusion to " coarse blood." He evidently is alluding to the Norfolk Trotter or Hackney strain, and he states that at no period of its existence has the Deccan ever been contaminated by coarse blood, and that its mares are more or less pure, still, when we refer to the statistics given at the commencement of the extract above given, we find that 50 per cent. of Norfolk Trotter stock was issued to British Cavalry, 25 per cent. to Native Cavalry, and 25 per cent. were rejected. This shows that the Deccan must have been supplied with Norfolk Trotters in former years as we know it was.
14 84. I still adhere to the opinion which I have previously expressed that the basis of our operations for the improvement of indigenous stock must be Arab blood, that in some districts where mares require size, the Hackney is absolutely necessary, but that having gained the size required, good boned Thoroughbreds are likely to obtain more stock for British and in fact for Native Cavalry also, than any other class of sire that can be used. 85. Table V. furnished as usual by the Director, Army Remount Depart- ment, shows that the following were the results obtained at each of the Rearing Depôts:15 89. But it is mainly with reference to the class " unknown " that I would wish to speak. The results obtained by the stock by unknown sires are decidedly bad; showing as they do that out of a total of 329 which left the Depôts, only 92 were considered fit for British Cavalry; this only gives a percentage of 27.96. Nothing could be worse, but it goes to prove that the stock got by known sires is superior to that got by unknown, and it also goes to prove that as few as possible should be purchased; these generally are bought from dealers. 90. In last year's report I stated that Officers Commanding British Cavalry Regiments, whose regiments are mounted on Country-breds, might be asked to watch the working of those horses whose pedigrees are known and that they should be asked to submit their opinions as to the working capabilities of horses got by the different classes of sires. I am not aware whether this has been done or not. I however purpose addressing Government on this subject in a separate communi- cation, as the information thus obtained would be of great value. Country-bred Remounts Number pur- chased. 91. Tables VI, VI (a), VI (b) and VI (c), will show the number of remounts and young stock purchased. The following will show the number obtained during the past three years :16 99. Bombay shows 465 remounts purchased against 304 last year. The places from which they were bought, are as follows:17 At Choti Zerin 9 or 10 horses were offered for sale as Cavalry remounts. Their average age was 2½ years and height about 14-1½. Two out of the above number 1 wished to buy18 are lost to the State owing to the absence of purchasing Officers, the result being that these animals are sold to dealers who of course must make their profit subsequently. About 200 young stock were purchased by Bhojpuri dealers at the Nauchandi Show alone. The number of purchasing Officers attending at each Fair is as follows:PART I.21 PART I.22 Expeditions. Baluchistan and Central India, the two new centres, show improved percentages. The Deccan may be said to have entirely given up mule-breeding. Sind remains stationary, but I trust that an improvement will be possible in this important mule-breeding centre. 117. In our large mule-breeding centres of Northern India, the following mares have been covered during the past two years:23 126. The following were purchased in India:24 must be owned that the tendency in Mountain Artillery has been to demand bigger mules, and if this is the case we must raise our standard of measurements. 134. Last year, the average of the Italians was as follows:25 regret it as the Persian donkey is a coarse lethargic animal not well calculated to get good mules. 141. I was only able to purchase 12 Country-breds this year, 6 of which were full grown and 6 were youngsters which will be run at Babugarh for a year or two. The number is small, but this is attributable to the fact that so many were taken for the Tirah Expedition. The quality and size are, I am glad to say, improving, and I have issued strict orders that none but the best Jacks are to be used, as, in some instances, I found that an inferior donkey was being used for donkey-breeding as he refused to cover pony mares. 142. The price of these Country-bred Jacks is increasing yearly. This may be accounted for by the improvement which has taken place in their quality and size. Formerly Rs. 100 was the limit of price, but now Rs. 200 and Rs. 300 are frequently asked and any reduction is refused. When this is the case, however, I know that the reason is that the Jack is a good sire, and that the owner is paid from 8 annas to one rupee for each covering. I, therefore, do not press his sale for I know that he is likely to cover a number of mares in his owner's hands. 143. The question of the supply of donkey stallions is a most difficult one, and in a letter to the Government of India, I pointed out that irrespective of a suggestion which I have made to increase the breeding of Transport mules, and which would require a further supply of 25 for the next 3 years, we should be in a position to obtain 101 Jacks during the present year. This number is required to complete establishment, and to replace a number of very old donkeys which have to be kept at work owing to the fact that others are not obtainable. As the supply of both Ordnance and Transport mules is a question of the highest import- ance, I have addressed the Government of India with reference to the future supply of Jacks and feel confident that the matter will receive full consideration at their hands. Number of mules purchased by Government. 144. Table X will show the number of mules purchased by Government. The Remount Department bought 155 in India and 16 in Burma or a total of 171 against 397 last year. This is due to the large purchases made in Italy which, from our point of view, is to be regretted, as a large number of most excellent mules remained unpurchased in this country26 149. Some difficulties will arise during the current year in increasing the number of coverings owing to the great drain, especially in the Punjab, of ponies for the Tirah Expedition. 150. During the year under review, this Department was directed to assist the Remount Department in purchasing mature mules for the Reserve Mountain Battery which was formed with a view of meeting the deficiencies as they might occur in the Mountain Batteries of the Tirah Expeditionary Force, and the Malakhand and Tochi Forces. 151. I regret that we were not successful, as only 9 were obtained, but it must be remembered that we, not being a purchasing Department, had not the machinery ready to put into work at once, besides which, it is next to impossible to find animals, be they horses or mules, that are fit for service at once ; either they are too fat being in dealer's condition and therefore unfit for work, or they are out of condition through hard work. Still, I feel glad that this opportunity was given to this Department as it enabled its Officers to make themselves acquainted with the mule supply of their various circles, and I would bring specially to notice Veterinary-Lieutenant Turnbull for the assiduous manner in which he endeavoured to carry out the orders of the Government of India, and for the information contained in his report. Quoting from his report, to account for the small number obtained, he says :27 Jellaldbad Horse Show.28 158. As bearing on the question of the supply of mules which is one of paramount importance at the present time, I reproduce the report submitted by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, on the subject. He states :29 GUZERAT. Identically the same efforts were made in this Province, as in the Deccan, and the following table will show that the result proves far from satisfactory. The ryots steadily refuse to breed mules and I was compelled to abandon any further attempt. Table showing the progress of mule-breeding in Guzerat. Year. Stallions. Mares covered. Produce. Mares covered per stallion. Produce per stallion. REMARKS. 1883-84 0.60 ... 1884-85 0.60 ... ... ... ... 1885-86 1.0 16 ... ... ... } Statistics incomplete. 1886-87 ... ... ... ... ... 1887-88 ... ... ... ... ... 1888-89 ... ... ... ... ... 1889-90 ... ... .. ... ... 1890-91 ... ... ... ... ... } There was no donkey stallion. 1891-92 ... ... ... ... ... 1892-93 ... ... ... ... ... 1893-94 0.35 11 3 31.42 8.57 1894-95 1.0 17 6 17.0 6.0 1895-96 1.0 19 11 19.0 11.0 1896-97 1.0 19 9 19.0 9.0 KATHIAWAR. Several of the State paddocks have purchased donkey stallions within the last few years, and quite recently three more applications have been received. It is proposed, as soon as they are obtainable, to locate one or two donkey stallions in every paddock, and I trust that the industry, when fairly started, will flourish in this Province. The Bhavnagar State, some 8 years ago, bred a few mules which are at present in the Transport of the Imperial Lancers. They are without exception some of the finest I ever saw in India; short-legged, with immense bone and very powerful, and prove without doubt, that the climate and soil of Kathiawar is well adapted for this purpose. Table showing the progress of mule-breeding in Sind. Year. Stallions. Mares covered. Produce, Mares covered per stallion. Produce per stallion. REMARKS. 1882-83 1.0 4 3 4.00 3.0 1883-84 4.16 140 18 33.65 5.62 1884-85 6.57 214 10 32.57 4.80 1885-86 8.88 278 40 34.57 9.09 1886-87 15.08 570 61 37.79 9.80 1887-88 18.22 751 81 41.21 11.37 1888-89 19.25 838 66 43.53 6.38 1889-90 19.00 797 57 41.94 4.52 1890-91 20.00 846 83 42.3 4.88 1891-92 23.13 988 92 44.64 6.74 1892-93 19.13 814 99 42.55 5.17 1893-94 17.40 788 91 45.28 5.95 1894-95 18.00 687 89 38.16 4.94 1895-96 18.81 786 106 41.78 5.64 1896-97 22.40 693 164 30.93 7.32 Mule-breeding was commenced in Sind in the year 1882 and the above table will show what progress has been made. The majority of the stallions have been concentrated in the Shikarpur and Jacobabad districts. But stallions have within the last few years been placed in the Hyderabad district, the industry has taken root rapidly and promises to flourish. The Sindhi, I think, prefers breeding a mule to a horse and if only some scheme could be devised whereby a market could be found for all young mule stock, I feel sure that the industry would make very much more rapid progress than it has hitherto done. The proposed scheme of the Government of India for allowing all marcs whether branded or not, to be covered by donkey stallions, is a step in the right direction, although I wish to bring to the notice of Government that the rule of covering only branded mares has been more or less held in abeyance for several years, and the general principle followed out that no mare, no matter how bad she may be, is unlit to be mated with a donkey stallion, as it is an undoubted fact that some of our best and most shapely mules are out of the most unsound and ill-shaped mares in India. Parts of Sind can, therefore, be classed as distinctly good and capable of still further development. 159. From the above it will be seen that no mules can be expected to be bred in the Deccan, Khandesh, or Guzerat. I fear that, as far as Kathiawar is con- cerned, Government cannot expect to obtain a supply from this part of India; the number bred will no doubt be scarcely sufficient for local requirements, still, as reducing the demand from our own supply by the States breeding mules for them- selves, it will be a most useful adjunct to our own operations. 160. Sind promises well, and Government must be prepared to assist the breeders as much as possible by purchasing their young stock.
PART I.33 PART I.34 166. The numbers remaining on 31st March 1898 stood, as follows:35 There were 56 certificated mares present at the beginning of the year. During the year under re- port, 17 new Certificates were issued (11 of these being given in the Dera Ghazi Khan district) making a total of 73; twelve of these were branded by me and 21 were sold, died or not traceable, 5 others were rejected, leaving a balance at the end of the year of 35. Fifteen certificated mares were covered by Government stallions during the year under report. 175. With reference to the above extract from this Officer's Annual Report, but little benefit has been derived from this system, still, at the same time, little harm has been done and I see no reason to advocate any change. 176. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, remarks as follows :36 In continuation of para. 34 of my last Annual Report, I give here full details of the work done under this system, discussing the advisability or otherwise of its continuance any longer. Since 1895 Government have empowered 36 Officers to certify mares as being fit to be served by Government stallions. Out of the above number, two have retired and one is dead. Ten Officers were on leave and circulars were issued to the remaining 23, requesting them to forward lists of mares certified by them from 1st November 1896 to 31st March 1898. Replies have been received from 21 Officers, 16 stating that they have not issued any certificates owing to their being in non-breeding districts, or for want of opportunity, being employed on plague duty, &c. The remaining five Officers named below have forwarded lists of certificates issued by them. Name of Officer. Number of mares certified. Mr. Pogson, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Khandesh ... ... 2 Mr. Lambert, District Superintendent of Police, Ahmedabad ... 20 Mr. Gibb, Collector of Ahmedabad ... ... ... ... ... 5 Mr. Kennedy, District Superintendent of Police, Poona ... ... 4 Mr. Ingle, District Superintendent of Police, Bijapur (issued Certi- ficates in Kaira District) ... ... ... ... 6 Total ... ... 37 Messrs. Pogson and Kennedy state that the system does not work well as the owners do not take sufficient interest in it. Out of the above 37 certificates, 25 were issued in Ahmedabad, 6 in Kaira, 2 in Khandesh and 4 in the Poona district. These Officers have not adhered to the rule by which certificates were only to be issued in districts where the number of branded mares has not reached an average of 50 per stallion, As noticed in last year's Annual Report (para. 34) Mr. Bagnell issued 291 certificates. Out of the above number 54 were inspected this season, 53 branded, and 1 rejected. This work was done during the time I was on leave, by Veterinary-Lieutenant Walker, and I am unable to state what the mares were like, but gather from their descriptive rolls that the majority were under 13 hands. Owners in several instances in this district failed to produce their certificates, and it could not be properly ascertained whether all of them had been certified or not. The above facts will at once prove that little or no headway has been made by Civil Officers during the past 2 years and I am of opinion that the work is such that few take any interest whatever in it. Under these circumstances, I think it would be advisable to abandon the scheme entirely, as Sind having been removed from my jurisdiction gives me time to make complete and thorough detailed tours annually throughout the Presidency proper, and I see no reason why my camp during the cold weather should not be so arranged as to give every owner, that wishes, an opportunity of bringing his mare to be branded. 179. I have stated that as the system of granting Certificates as adopted in Northern India, is productive of no harm, I see no reason to advocate its abolition, but in Bombay, I agree with the Superintendent that as horse-breeding, which is under his supervision is now restricted to the Presidency proper and as he can visit every centre regularly, no reason whatever exists for the continuation of a system which leads to inferior mares being covered by Government stallions. Granting Certifi- cates to barren mares to allow of their being bought by Re- mount Officers 180. This system was introduced with the sanction of the Government of India with a view of enabling owners of mares who were desirous of selling them to do so to Remount Officers provided that they had been covered during two con- secutive years and had failed to hold. 181. On this subject the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states :37 1895-96. 1896-97. 1897-98. North-Western Provinces & Oudh ... 3,034 2,907 3,188 North Punjab ... ... ... ... 3,862 4,065 3,882 South Punjab ... ... ... ... 3,705 3,541 3,329 Rajputana ... ... ... ... 54 62 44 Baluchistan ... ... ... ... 2,253 2,571 2,418 Central India ... ... ... ... 118 81 41 Deccan ... ... ... ... 640 1,161 815 Guzerat ... ... ... ... ... 182 265 290 Sind and Cutch ... ... ... ... 457 493 460 Total 14,305 15,146 14,467 184. It is pleasing to note that the decrease in the number of mares covered by the horse stallions was comparatively small, amounting as it did to only 679 mares. The Punjab was responsible for 395 of this decrease, whilst the Deccan showed a decrease of 346. The North-Western Provinces, however, showed an increase of 281, which, considering the very bad year through which we have just passed, must be looked upon as most satisfactory. 185. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, as already stated when remarking on the average number of mares covered per stallion employed, attributes the falling off to the unpopularity of the Hackney stallions in certain districts. His statement is fully borne out by statistics con- tained in Table IV which, if consulted, will show the following results :38 190. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, when remarking on this subject, states:39 (d)40 also paying for the feed of the stallions, is mainly confined to the North-Western Provinces, although it exists to a certain extent in the Punjab and in a modified form in Baluchistan. 208. In the North-Western Provinces, thanks to the careful supervision and determination of Veterinary-Lieutenant Loughlin, which is strictly being continued by Veterinary-Captain Ringe, much more satisfactory results are obtained, and not nearly as many horses are returned in bad condition as formerly. The coverings at the stands are better and as an incentive to the Darindah who can conclusively prove that he has had the greatest number of mares covered at his stand and who at the same time brings in his stallions in the best condition, a Medal is to be awarded in July next when the stallions return to the Depôt. 209. I have said that the Darindah system exists in a modified form in Baluchistan. In this Province it is found necessary to entrust the stallions in many cases to the Chiefs, and I am sorry to say that in some instances they are neglected, especially is this the case with Sardar Kaiser Khan of Jhall and to a lesser extent with Sardar Sohrab Khan of Lehri. In their hands many Government stallions have suffered. I brought this to the notice of the Agent to the Governor-General when at Sibi, and I trust to see an improvement in future. 210. In the South Punjab but few Darindahs are in charge of stallions, they as a rule being placed in the hands of the Civil Authorities, still we find the following remarks made by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department of the Circle:41 214. Taken together, we find that 3,254 colts were castrated against 3,409 last year; the reduction being only 155, must be considered as most satisfactory, considering that so many colts were in bad condition that owners deferred the operation. 215. That the Veterinary Assistants are skilful operators cannot be denied. It is pleasing to find that not a single death took place amongst the 3,254 colts operated on by the Imperial or District Board Veterinary Assistants. 216. In the two districts of the Madras Presidency in which pony-breeding is carried on, castration has, I am glad to say, made some headway this year. On this point the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.45 PART I.PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.49 PART I.50 The average price paid by this Officer was Rs. 247. 235. Captain Unwin, 1st Punjab Cavalry, purchased 17 at an average price of Rs. 251, and reports them to have been a good class of remounts with very little unsoundness. 236. Captain Bailey, Bhurtpore and Rampore Imperial Service Lancers, reports that he found it difficult to obtain horses of 4 years or over of the sort required, still as he was able to secure 30 at an average price of Rs. 251 and that of these 17 were 4 years of age and over, I think he is to be congratulated on the success with which he met considering the small attendance. 237. Major Goad, Army Remount Department, attended, but could only obtain 4 head of young stock. This I am not at all surprised at, as this is in no way a breeders' Show. 238. Many Remount Officers have again brought forward the question of the advisability of again giving prizes at the Batesar Fair. This question was fully considered in consultation with the Local Government, and it was decided that as it was a purely dealers' gathering there was nothing to be gained by allotting money for this purpose. If dealers have horses for sale, they will take them to a Fair irrespective of whether prizes are awarded or not. Bulandshahr Horse Show. 239. This Show, when compared with that held in 1896-97, shows a decided falling off, still it must be remembered that last year the numbers were high owing to the fact that the Aligarh Show was not held. But I would have liked to have seen a better gathering at the head quarters of one of the best breeding districts in the North-Western Provinces. 240. The following statistics will show at a glance the relative positions of this Show and that held in 1896-97:51 Garhmuktesar Horse Show. 244. This Show commenced on 4th and terminated on 9th November 1897. Owing to the fact that this Show as well as the Batesar Fair are held in connection with religious festivals, they always clash, which is to be regretted. 245. Garhmuktesar must, as stated last year, only be considered a Mule Fair at which a local gathering of young stock takes place. 246. Owing to the fact that the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, had to be present at Batesar, he was unable to remain long at Garhmuktesar. still he brings to notice the fact that there were many young stock under 2 years of age, the produce of Government stallions, of excellent stamp. 247. This Show is yearly becoming more popular as a centre at which brood mares and young stock are collected. On this occasion 308 attended against 240 last year. 248. The number of mules attending showed a decided falling off, viz., 779 against 1,063 in 1896. This was to be expected, as large numbers had already been purchased for the Tirah Expeditionary Force, and I regret to say that the zemindars, who are so very credulous, believed wild rumours that if they brought their stock in, it would be seized for a nominal price. This is mentioned as a cause for the small number of mules attending this Show, but it does not apply only to this one in particular but to many others at which I was present ; still, however notwithstanding the small attendance, the Commissariat Officer who attended was able to purchase 162 at an average price of Rs. 137-8-0; this is nearly double the number purchased by the Commissariat Department in 1896. On the question of the number of mules purchased, the Commissariat Officer states:52 intended to purchase at the Fair, I feel certain that he would issue notices to the effect and that remounts would be obtained. To be of any value this communication should be made at least 2 months before the date of the Fair. Meerut (Nauchandi) Horse Show. 256. This Show was a very great success. It was held from 21st to 26th March 1898, and it may be said to be rapidly becoming one of the largest horse markets of the North-Western Provinces. 257. The attendance on this occasion was 1,612 against 1,577 last year, but this increase is all the more satisfactory when we consider that it consisted entirely of horses over 14 hands in height, of which there were 525 more than in 1896-97. This proves what I have long felt, that an improvement is taking place yearly in the stock brought to our Fairs and Shows; even in cases where the attendance is much less than in former years, one of the greatest causes of the decrease is due to the fact that zemindars and dealers only bring in such animals which they consider good enough either for sale or to compete for prizes. 258. The brood mare class was excellent, 135 competed against 129 last year. These consisted of big roomy mares of excellent stamp. 259. Two hundred and seventy-four head of young stock competed against 251 last year being an increase of 23. This is all the more satisfactory as it was of excellent quality. 260. Seventy-nine remounts were purchased against 110 last year. This was mainly due to the fact that fewer regiments were represented. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, complains of the small number of Officers who attended the N.-W. P. Shows this year. This question will be dealt with separately. 261. The following extracts from Remount Rolls will show that the class of remount obtainable at this Show was decidedly good. Captain Hobbs, 14th Bengal Lancers, states:53 268. The class of brood mare exhibited, of which there were 96, was excellent. They were good roomy mares of large size but the majority were overtopped not having sufficient bone to carry their own weight. This was still more evident in the young stock and it was owing to this defect that Major Goad was unable to purchase more than five head of young stock. 269. There can be no doubt that the Norfolk Trotter and Hackney stallion has increased the size of the brood mares, and that this strain has been continued too long. I am, therefore, pleased to be able to give the following extract from the report by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. When adverting to the coarseness and want of quality of the young stock at this Show, he states:54 Amritsar (Dewali) Fair. 278. This Fair was held from 20th to 29th October 1897, when 5,188 horses, &c., were present as compared with 6,397 last year. I place but little reliance on these figures as being in any way a guide to the number of remounts obtainable, as there is always so much rubbish brought to this Fair that no calcula- tion based on numbers present are at all reliable, still we must remember that Amritsar is the big horse market of Northern India and that in this way it has to supply the wants of the public as well as those of the services. To give an idea of the trade done at the Dewali Fair, I would quote the following extract from the report by the Deputy Commissioner:55 when we consider that 162 were obtained last year; this may be partly accounted for by the small number of Remount Officers present. On this point Major Angelo, who constantly attends this Fair, states that the attendance of purchasing Officers was the smallest he had ever seen at this Fair. 287. In addition to the above, 104 horses and 30 mules were purchased by various Native States, but whether for Imperial Service Cavalry or for their own Cavalry and Transport is not stated. 288. The Army Remount Department purchased 5 head of stock. 289. Major Angelo brings to notice the preponderance of long pasterns at this Fair. I cannot account for this defect, and it was not noticed by the Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department. He is also of opinion that more should be done to ensure the Certificates of Produce being forthcoming. On this point he states:56 and I further stated that, from long experience, there was no surer road to arrive at this than to preclude their stock from competing at these local Horse Shows. It has, I know, been argued that all stock should be allowed to compete, and that if stock got by our Government sires cannot hold its own against that got by Country-bred sires, we should be in a position to recommend that the large amount expended by Government to encourage horse-breeding might be saved, but I do not consider the question in this light at all; stock got by Government sires can beat Country-bred stock out of the field, and on this point there is a general concensus of opinion amongst all Remount Officers. The view I take of this question is that natives are very conservative even when their conservatism is against their own interests, and that the only way to overcome their prejudices against Government stallions is to insist on the rule, which applies to all Shows except those of Bannu and Dera Ismail Khan to the effect that produce must be by Government sires, being carried out. 297. My recommendation was not approved by the Deputy Commissioners of these districts, and as the Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records and Agriculture were of opinion that we should respect the opinions of these Officers, and that we should not introduce the change at once, I deemed it advisable to fall in with their views; still, I trust that the rule which prevails generally, will soon be adopted in these districts, as I feel it will be for their ultimate good. 298. Malik Yar Mahomed competed for the Horse-breeding Medal by show- ing what may well be described as a large and very fine collection of stock consist- ing, as it did, of:57 304. The most suitable class of sire is stated by the Judging Committee to be the Arab. This class is also preferred by the breeders. This opinion coincides with that which I have frequently expressed that the best strain for one or two generations is that of the Arab. Dera Ghazi Khan Horse Show. 305. This, one of the best if not actually the best in the Punjab. has, I am glad to say, regained its former state and I trust that it will be found that the horse-breeding industry has not suffered owing to the scarcity which pre- vailed last year. 306. Three thousand (3,000) animals were present against 1,231 last year, whilst it may be said the numbers that competed for prizes were exactly the same, viz: 560 against 559. 307. The brood mares, of which 82 were present, were good roomy ones, shapely, with good action and showed much breeding and bone. The Judging Committee did not consider them quite equal to those exhibited at Sibi (Baluchistan). 308. The branded fillies, always a class to be carefully considered, are described by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, as an excellent class, all by Government sires. He further adds:58 317. The conditions prevailing on the Frontier are naturally quite different with those existing elsewhere, and I see no objection to the Powindahs making use of our Government stallions, as they will find that the best market for their young stock is in British territory and we shall reap the benefit; but what I do complain of in this district is the number of branded mares belonging to zemindars that are covered by Country sires. On this point the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states, that this is the case with the best mares in the district. I have already alluded to this when referring to the Bannu Show, and I cannot but reiterate the opinion previously expressed that until prizes are confined to the produce of Government sires, the breeders will continue to use Country stallions. These two districts are the only ones where this prevails. 318. The Judging Committee expressed an opinion that horse-breeding in this district required the most careful supervision in the immediate future, and that there exists a nucleus for successful manipulation. I quite agree, but we require more assistance from District Authorities. This Department has done its best to foster horse-breeding in Dera Ismail Khan, and already Nawab Abdulla Khan, an influential man, has been allotted a Thoroughbred stallion. This may have a bene- ficial result, and it may be advisable to endeavour to enlist the assistance of more men of this stamp. The matter will be referred to the Local Government. 319. Another point brought to notice by the Superintendent, Civil Veteri- nary Department, is that there are 98 certificated mares in this district which remain unbranded. This question will also be referred, as it may happen that as these mares have not been inspected by the Superintendent, they may either be unsound or unfit to be covered by our Government stallions. 320. Three remounts were purchased by the 2nd Punjab Cavalry. Colonel Stuart, in reporting on these, status:59 Gujrat Horse Show. 328. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department reports this Show as disappointing. He attributes this to the fact that this district has suffered from scarcity more than any district in his Circle, and owing to this many good mares and foals died or were sold. 329. Again, Gujrat appears a favorite district for dealers who purchased 208 before the Show commenced, amongst these were some good young stock and many young mares which the district could ill afford to lose. 330. The actual number present, when compared with last year, showed an increase of 132, and the number that competed for prizes was 290 in 1897 against 320 on this occasion. This is easily accounted by the large purchases made by the Lahore and Amritsar dealers before the Show commenced. 331. The brood mares are spoken of by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, as being big roomy mares, but he adds that there was a noticeable difference between the mares, of this district and those of Shahpur. Norfolk Trotter blood being much more noticeable at Gujrat. The branded fillies are also spoken of as being rather coarse and short of quality. 332. The Judging Committee remark that the prize winners amongst the young stock were largely got by Thoroughbred or Arab stallions, and showed an improvement on the brood mare class. 333. This is one of the districts in which Norfolk Trotter or Hackney strains have been allowed to continue too long. 334. Eight remounts, or more exactly speaking, 6 remounts and 2 head of young stock, were purchased by the Queen's Own Corps of Guides. Four were bought for Police and one remount, 5 years of age, was secured by the Army Remount Department. It is satisfactory to find that of these 13, nine were by Government sires. Although the number purchased is small, still there can be no doubt but that many of those purchased by the dealers will ultimately find their way into the ranks of the Native Cavalry. Hansi Horse Show. 335. Nothing can be said in favor of this Show except that the animals exhibited were few and bad. Only 111 animals in all competed for prizes. The mares were in bad condition, and the young stock was small, ill-grown, and badly tended. The mules were so badly nourished that they are never likely to be fit for Government service. Three remounts were purchased. No medal was awarded. 336. On reading the above description of any Show, one would be in- clined to say that it should be abolished, but we must consider the severe famine which has prevailed in Hissar during the two past years, and it is to be hoped that now that scarcity has disappeared, horse-breeding will revive. Jellalabad Horse Show. 337. This Show was held from 17th to 19th January 1898, and considering the scarcity which has prevailed, it must be considered as having proved a success, as not only were there slight increases in the numbers attending and com- peting, but the animals also were in good condition, 2,597 were present against 2,469 last year, of these 281 competed for prizes against 257 in 1897. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:60 as they do small mares, it is pleasant to note that their produce at this Show were found to be sufficiently large and good to brand, and one was purchased for Native Cavalry. 341. Forty mares were branded during the Show, many of which were most excellent fillies by Government sires; such fillies cannot fail to produce good stock. 342. The arrangements at this Show were as usual excellent, and great credit is due to Rai Maya Dass to whose exertions the success of this Show is in a great measure due. His personal influence with breeders and the sound principles he inculcates are telling very visibly on this Show, and to this the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, attributes the quality and stamp of horse stock attending the Jellalabad Horse Show. Jhang Horse Show. 343. It will be remembered that two or three years ago it was found that this Show would have to be abandoned, as up to 1895 but little interest was taken in it. Thanks, however, to the exertions of Captains Douglas and Burlton, the two Deputy Commissioners, it has again revived, and by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, regularly touring through the district, I trust that this interest will be maintained. 344. The Show held on this occasion was equal to its predecessor in numbers but the exhibits are said to have possessed more quality. On this point the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:61 Jullunder Horse Show. 352. As usual, a small Horse Show was held on 6th October 1897. This is a purely local Show at which prizes are given by the District. It appears to have been better attended this year as 738 horses and ponies, and 31 mules were present. 353. Two horse dealers from Lahore attended, one purchased 20 horses, the other 40 ponies; the latter were for the Transport Department. In addition to the above, 29 foals, all of about 6 months of age, were purchased by Bhojpuri dealers. These were inspected by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, who reports them to have been a promising lot. 354. One of the mules present is reported to have been 3 years of age, and promised to become very suitable for Ordnance proposes. 355. Some useful mares are reported by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, as having been branded at this Show. Kurnal Horse Show. 356. This Show has not been held for two consecutive years on account of famine, and it is always found that when this is the case there is a perceptible falling off in the attendance. I am of opinion that whenever scarcity prevails in a district, strenuous efforts should be made to hold the various Horse Shows, provided fodder can be made available for the 2 or 3 days during which animals remain on the Show ground. My reason for this is that the prizes awarded are of great assistance to the breeders during famine times, and may enable them to tide over a bad season and thus they are not compelled to sell their mares. 357. Considering, however, that this Show had not been held for 2 years, it is satisfactory to find that although there was a falling off of 95 animals on the total attendance, still that only 11 less competed for prizes this year than in 1895, and it is satisfactory to note that 63 brood mares were exhibited against 36. It is always a good sign when we can record an increase in this class. 358. The great falling off, however, was in an important class, viz: Branded Fillies, only 10 competing against 49 in 1895. This is no doubt, in a measure due to the fact that this district had been too leniently dealt with by the late Superin- tendent, and it was considered necessary to improve the standard of the fillies branded. Fifty mares were branded at the Show. Speaking of the class for 'Fillies 3 years of age out of branded mares by Government sires,' the Judging Committee state:62 make the recommendation that Sirdar Nawab Fateh Ali Khan and others might be asked to show an example by keeping their young stock and selling it in the Show, thus giving Remount Officers a chance of purchasing it. 364. It now seems the universal custom to devote any money contributed for prizes by District Boards to mares covered by their ponies and to their young stock. No better system could be devised, as these Arab ponies, spread as they are all over the Punjab, are doing incalculable good, but surely a district like Lahore might have contributed more than Rs. 50. It is small matters like these which tend to make a Show unpopular. The mares covered by these ponies are generally owned by poor men to whom a small prize of Rs. 5 is of great value. 365. The Remount Agent bought two head of young stock, one by a Thoroughbred English the other by an Arab sire. Multan Horse Show. 366. This Show was held on 4th and 5th March 1898. Having known this Show from its infancy I can speak confidently of the improvement which is taking place. One of the main points noticeable is that of color. In olden days we saw few mares but white and roan, these are now the exception, and good whole colors prevail. Whatever success has been met with in other districts by the use of the Norfolk Trotter stallion in giving size to the mares, this has not been arrived at in Multan where this class of stallion does not seem to nick with the mares of the district. When reporting on the stallions most suitable to this district, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:63 the Judging Committee, they were a level lot averaging 14-3 or 15 hands. The young stock, generally speaking, showed much quality and there can be no doubt that it is improving year by year. 374. That this Show far surpassed others previously held, we have only to consider the Remount Rolls. The Remount Agent secured 13 head of young stock against one last year. 375. The 19th Bengal Lancers bought 19 head of young stock. Every one of these was by a Government sire. Fourteen were by Arabs, three by Hackneys, one by Thoroughbred English, and one by Thoroughbred Australian. I think that this says much for the Arab strain of which I am a great advocate. Major Beatson, who purchased for this regiment, states:64 are mainly sportsmen, and who also use their stock for tent-pegging, found that a long continued strain of this blood did not produce an animal suitable for their requirements, they therefore obtained the services of Thoroughbreds and Arabs earlier than other districts did. 387. The young stock classes did not fill as well as they otherwise would have done had there not been an epizootic outbreak of strangles in the district, which not only caused many deaths but also caused such debility as to prevent them being brought in. 388. The branded mare classes are reported as showing much quality. Some were really fit to show in any part of the world, being brought out in good con- dition and showing shape and quality of well bred English hunters. 389. One of the sights of the Show is reported by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, to have been the branded filly class in which 35 competed against 18 last year. It is described as follows by that officer:65 399. Umballa being a district in which the indigenous stock was worse than in nine-tenths of the districts of the Punjab, and this Department having a large percentage of Hackney stallions which had to be utilized, stallions of this breed have been mainly supplied to this district. Steps will, however, be immediately taken to replace this class of sire by either Thoroughbreds or Arabs. Conclusion. Punjab Shows. 400. In concluding his review on the Fairs and Shows held in his Circle, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, makes the following remarks:66 406. The Committee worked most conscientiously and well, sparing them- selves no pains to select the best animals in each class. Major Balfour showed the greatest interest in all matters connected with the welfare of horse-breeding in each district, and has made many valuable suggestions which will be attended to and carried out when possible. We were very fortunate to obtain the services of Captain Hardy, possessing as he does, a thorough knowledge of the mule require- ments of a Mountain Battery. Veterinary-Lieutenant Holmes was most assi- duous in his examinations, and showed great discrimination in judging brood mares for hereditary and nonhereditary diseases. The Committee worked in har- mony with all District Officials, and altogether was very successful. I cannot speak too highly of the value of these Judging Committees; when properly constituted, they tend greatly to secure uniformity in judging which could not be secured in olden days. BALUCHISTAN. Quetta Horse Show. 407. This Show was held from 5th to 8th October 1897 which is thought too late a date to allow of the dealers selling here and proceeding down country. It is also considered too late for the local breeders as the nights become very cold at this time of the year, and they do not care to expose their stock to it. Sufficient time, however, did not exist to give the importers notice of any change, and it was thought advisable to adhere to the original date this year. Next year it has been decided to hold the Show during the second week in September, and the Northern dealers have been acquainted with the fact. 408. Judged in comparison with the Show held last year, it was a great success. This Show must be considered from two points of view:67 413. One hundred and forty-eight (148) remounts were purchased by 3 regiments, viz: 5th and 6th Bombay Cavalry and 15th Bengal Lancers. Nine were bought for Police and 33 for Zhob Levies, making a total, with Captain Birdwood's purchases of 198. Compared with last year the numbers stand as follows:68 421. The following remarks by the Judging Committee on the various classes, will prove of interest:69 A small Show was held at Kotah, a description of which will be found in the Sec- tion "Horse-breeding in Native States," Kotah. TIRHOOT. Sonepore Horse Fair. 429. This Fair was held from 6th to 10th November 1897. The enumeration of animals attending this Fair is always faulty. On this occasion the number of horses attending is shown as from 2,000 to 3,000, so that we may surmise that the numbers were very similar to last year. 430. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, who attended the Fair describes the horses of better quality than usual. 431. Purchasing Officers were present from 2nd Bengal Lancers and Central India Horse Regiment, 12 were bought by the former regiment at an average cost of Rs. 289, and six were purchased by the Central India Horse, the average cost being Rs. 293-8-0. 432. Major Pollock, 7th Bengal Cavalry, purchased ponies for the Commis- sariat Department. On this point the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment states:70 SIND HORSE SHOWS. Jacobabad Horse Show. 440. Jacobabad (Sind Horse Show) commenced on 10th January 1898, and may be looked upon as having been very successful. There was a slight falling off in the actual numbers present, viz: 1,125 against 1,395 last year, but the general excellence of the exhibits is said to have been more than maintained. Great care was exercised in classifying and resulted in 80 animals being eliminated. 441. The brood mares and young stock are reported by the Superintendent to have been excellent classes and better than former years, whilst it is pleasing to learn that the gelding class was the largest and best that has ever been exhibited at Jacobabad. 442. Eight head of young stock were purchased for the Remount Depôt at Ahmednagar; these are described by Veterinary-Captain Morgan, the Superintend- ent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, as very good, well-grown, and shapely. This is worthy of note, and will have to be alluded to when allusion is made to a comparison drawn by him as to the relative merits of Deccan and Sind stock. 443. With reference to mules and mule-breeding, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, states:71 The mares covered by donkey stallions formed a large and good class and all the mules exhibited at this Show were bred in the immediate neighbourhood. A great many more mules bred and known to be in the district, were not brought by their owners for the reasons above stated. Talhar Horse Show. 450. This Show was very successful, 823 animals being exhibited against 791 last year. A satisfactory increase considering that all animals were strictly classified, and that only such as were fit to compete were allowed on the Show ground. 451. Remarking on this Show, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, states:72 the Government of Madras that a few prizes be reserved for such mares as are covered by donkeys, as naturally the best are put to ponies, and it is not feasible to expect the former to compete with the latter. 458. Mule-breeding may be said to be a new industry in Madras, and it is a beginning to find that "one poor mare with very good mule foal" was awarded a prize. 459. The Acting Collector of Salem, in his report, makes the following suggestion:73 471. A corresponding reduction of Rs. 650 had to be made in order to keep within the Budget allotment. The increases and reductions were as follows:PART I77 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.78 IN N. W. P. FARM. Of 8 big mares, 2 have foaled. 3 are in foal. 2 have not come in season since covering. 1 doubtful. Of 6 pony mares, 2 are in foal. 3 have not come in season since covering. 1 aborted. This is all the more satisfactory when we consider that the acreage under cultivation has increased from 32 to 46 acres. IN PUNJAB FARM. Of 8 big mares, 1 has foaled. 3 are in foal. 4 have not come in season since covering. Of 5 pony mares, 1 has foaled. 1 is in foal. 1 aborted. 2 have not come in season since covering. 486. Young donkeys continue to be run on the Farm but the number has been greatly reduced I am sorry to say; this is partly owing to the fact that the Home-bred donkeys, as stated above, did not develop in bone as they should; it was, therefore, decided to sell off 10 rather than incur further expense of feeding. Six excellent young ones were bought at Gujrat and Rawalpindi, but the number offered for sale this year was not equal to the number usually offered. This was no doubt partly due to the fact that many had been taken away for service. Result of running young donkey stock on the Farm. 487. The donkey stock, the produce of our Italian Jacks, bred in the Punjab, is improving annually, and if it only possessed greater height it would compare most favorably with the Jacks imported from Italy and Cyprus in girth and shank; the Punjabi donkeys thus bred frequently exceed the imported ones in these two last named points. 488. During the year under report, I was able to purchase 37 head of young donkey stock, some of these were at once allotted to Provinces for work, being of mature age. In addition to these, I was able to allot 16 from the Farm, and only 1 proved unfit. Had it not been for this useful adjunct it would have been necessary to keep on many old donkeys that have been got rid of. 489. I would have gladly bought more this year, but no more were available. A few excellent donkeys that were offered for sale were not bought as the prices asked were prohibitive, ranging from Rs. 200 to Rs. 300. The owners of these would not abate at all in price; this I have noticed previously, and when such is the case, I find that this is due to the fact that the owners let them out for covering at a fee of 8 annas to one rupee. When I find this, I never interfere with these men, as I feel that they are doing good service by keeping these donkeys for the purpose. Balance Sheet of cultivation poerations. 490. Tables XVII and XVII (a), are Balance Sheets of cultivation operations carried out at the North-Western Provinces and Punjab Depôts at Babugarh. The profits of the North-Western Provinces Farm are returned as having been Rs. 1,440-8-7 against Rs. 1,792-10-0 last year showing a decrease of Rs. 352-1-5, whilst the profits of the Punjab Farm were Rs. 1,008-0-9 against Rs. 1,118-3-0 last year, being a decrease of Rs. 110-2-9. 491. Great economy has been exercised in the management of these Farms in such matters in which expenditure could be reduced, otherwise the results would not have been as satisfactory as they are. This was mainly owing to the cost of
79 feed and keep of Farm animals, which amounted to Rs. 1,240-2-5 in the North- Western Provinces and to Rs. 1,384-6-3 in the Punjab in excess of last year. It is, however, pleasing to note that the outturn of the Farms showed the following increases:80 and vigour was equal to the first crop, due principally to top dressing with manure after each cutting), and 300 maunds of Karbi or Impey hay from the Kharif crop against 593 maunds 34 seers 'Charrie,' and 90 maunds 'Karbi' last year, making a total increased yield of this fodder for the year of 225 maunds. Experiment will this year be made with the Amber variety of Impey, viz: the American Sugar Solghums seeds have been obtained from the Deputy Director of Agriculture, Bombay Farms. Maize The area under cultivation was 60 bighas (12½ acres). Fifteen bighas were put down in April, the yield from this plot was 25 maunds. This crop had to contend with unfavorable climatic conditions, viz: the strong westerly winds which prevailed and dried up the top parts of the plants the plumes or male flowers, and as they did not shed their pollen as usual, the final flowers in the cob did not fertilize. The remedy is to keep the young cobs wet by artificial spraying during the time the pollen is being shed. The remaining 45 bighas were put down as a rain or Kharif crop and the yield was 103 maunds 9 seers. The total yield of the 60 bighas (12½ acres) being 128 maunds 9 seers against 12 maunds 20 seers off 10 acres last year. The proportionate yield this year for 10 acres was 103 maunds 9 seers, being an increase of 90 maunds 29 seers on last year's yield from the same area, but an increase in the total yield of 115 maunds 29 seers. The following varieties were sown:81 The result of this experiment was that (b) gave the greatest outturn of hay, (a) coming next, (c) third and (d) last. Also with (a) and (b) the hay was of much better quality, and not so coarse as (d). Bedding Grass. The total yield was 1,000 maunds, viz: 800 maunds from the Farm and 200 maunds from the Encamping ground. Of the 800 maunds from the Farm, 200 maunds were cut from round the ring fence during August and September; 200 maunds were sold to the South Punjab Depot at the rate of 4 maunds per rupee. Mauritius Water Grass. The area under cultivation was 82 Barley. One and a half acres was sown with barley on the same land from which a monsoon crop of jooar was previously got. The yield was 27 maunds and 30 seers barley and 30 maunds bhoosa. The grain is of good quality and the outturn is good. Maize. Four acres of this crop yielded 50 maunds 10 seers of grain, the cobs were well filled and the grain was well developed considering the unfavorable weather. The yield was fair. The seed was obtained from Alipur in the Bulandshahr district. Impey. One and a quarter acres of Impey was sown in February and gave 3 cuttings of green fodder before the rain set in; the yield was 677 maunds and 19 seers, which is satisfactory. Jooar. Three-quarters of an acre of jooar was sown; the seed germinated well and the stalks grew to a good height, but the yield of grain was bad owing to heavy rain falling just as the plants were in flower; this washed away the pollen, the result being that only 4 maunds 25 seers of grain were got and 150 maunds of dry churree. Hay. This year the hay crops were good. The Opehra encamping ground was given over to the North-Western Provinces Instruction Farm for grazing young donkeys, and a third of the Hapur encamping ground was taken instead for hay; the yield from this was 500 maunds, and from Nos. 1 and 10 paddocks 933 maunds; 292 maunds were obtained by purchase. In all 1,725 maunds of good hay were saved this year against 1,130 maunds last year. The grass was cut in time to make good hay, the new mowing machine having done very good work. This year, about half the paddock in No. 1 west was overrun with weeds, so much so that all the grass was choked. The Inspector-General ordered this land to be ploughed up and a crop of Impey was got from it. After this Impey was cut, the land was well manured and sown with Oats and a fair crop was obtained. There is a small plot of 'Oosur' land in this paddock on which gram was sown and found not to do well, so it was ploughed up and liberally manured. This land will be worked up and got fit during the monsoons. After another year this paddock will be free of weeds and we hope to get good crops of clean hay from it. Bedding. One hundred and fifty maunds of bedding grass was got from the Farm, 200 maunds were purchased from the North-Western Provinces Instruction Farm, and 1,150 maunds from Yadnagar; the total quantity of bedding stacked was 1,500 maunds.
PART I.85 PART I.86 maintained, but in addition to the servants required for the purpose, Dr. Lingard showed the necessity for the appointment of a Head Laboratory Assistant, and strongly urged that he should be an European. This appointment having been sanctioned, Mr. Max Kriebel arrived from Germany and was appointed on 19th March 1898. Another appointment which received the sanction of the Government of India was that of a Farm Jemadar on Rs. 30 per mensem, and if this man is properly selected from the class of agriculturists who understand hill farming, I feel that his appointment will amply repay Government. 509. At my inspection, I found large plots of land on the estate on which jooar and other fodder crops could be grown. Especially is this the case at Ritani, 2½ miles from the Laboratory at which place, cattle sheds, to accommodate 40 head of cattle from which those required for experimental purposes are drawn, exist. We therefore have at Ritani a large amount of valuable manure as well as a good supply of water. On this ground as well as on other plots, given a good monsoon, there is no reason why sufficient fodder for the year should not be grown. Veterinary-Lieutenant Walker is quite alive to the fact, and with the assistance of a good Farm Jemadar, I trust that all difficulties which have hitherto existed with reference to fodder, will have been removed. 510. From the above it will be seen that everything has been done to place this establishment on a satisfactory footing, and I trust that the Imperial Bacterio- logist will commence his researches, as affecting Rinderpest, at a very early date. Experimental Station in the Plains. 511. It having been felt that it was of the greatest importance that a station should exist in the plains at which the results obtained from experiments carried out in the hills could be confirmed, it was suggested that Dr. Lingard should be allowed to work at the Laboratory at Agra during the winter months; but on the question being referred to the Military authorities, objections were raised on the grounds that the use of the Laboratory (which is situated within Cantonments) for experiments connected with Rinderpest, would be likely to endanger the health of the troops by the infection of milch cattle. Owing to this decision, the question of an Experimental Station in the plains was very carefully considered during Dr. Lingard's visit to Simla, and I was firmly of conviction that the value of experiments conducted in the hills would be of little value to India unless they were confirmed by similar experiments in the plains. I felt it my duty to recommend the establishment of a small Experimental Station, keeping the requirements as low as possible in order not to increase the expenses connected with the Laboratory more than was absolutely necessary, for I feel that they have increased greatly. 512. I would not have made the abovementioned recommendation had I not felt that the Laboratory at Muktesar would be unworkable, except it were backed up by such an Experimental Station in the plains, which must be situated as close as possible to the Railway terminus, Kathgodam. The grounds on which I based this opinion were, that on three occasions:87 Supply of Mallein, &c. 513. I have further pointed out to Dr. Lingard and the Government of India that, with a fully equipped Laboratory, we should be in a position to prepare Mallein, Tuberculin, &c. The former is always required in this country for testing cases of Glanders, and the supply has to be obtained from England. There should be no difficulty in the matter, and I trust that Dr. Lingard will see his way to add in this and other ways to the usefulness of the Laboratory which has been erected at a great cost, and the up-keep of which amounts to a large sum annually.
PART I.91 PART I.92 522. Owing to a severe outbreak of Glanders in Bengal, the provisions of the Act were extended to the districts of Saran, Champaran, and Muzaffarpur; the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, and his Veterinary Assistant being appointed Inspectors and Veterinary Practitioners under Sections 4 and 7. OUTBREAKS REPORTED DURING THE YEAR. North-Western Provinces, 523. If we except the Saharunpore Road on which the dak horses belonging to native firms are a positive disgrace, these Provinces have been particularly free from Glanders. On the Saharunpore line, cases were discovered at:93 532. Another case occurred in which a Police horse was reported to have died of Glanders, but no report reached the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, until some weeks had elapsed. Even the nature of the disease from which this horse died is uncertain, but, in order to guard against the occurrence of such cases, the Commissioner of Settlements and Agriculture was good enough to issue a Circular to all Deputy Commissioners, and the Inspector- General of Police to all District Superintendents of Police, that all cases of Glanders were to be reported by wire to the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. Bengal. 533. Amost severe outbreak is reported in Tirhoot. At Kahala Factory, 4 horses were destroyed. At Pertabpore also, Glanders has occurred. At Chuckia, 9 horses have been destroyed. At Teegrah, 1 horse has been destroyed. At Sewan, 1 horse destroyed. This is evidently a widespread outbreak; it is doubtful where it originated, but there can be no doubt that it is one that has existed for some time, for a pony belonging to Saran was destroyed for Glanders at the Muzaffarpur Meet last year. 534. The Indigo Planters of Behar are only too anxious to rid themselves of this terrible disease, and are prepared to carry out such measures as might be determined on to stamp it out. The Planters Association sanctioned the purchase of a thousand doses of Mallein for the purpose of testing animals that have been in contact with those known to be affected with Glanders94 (iv)95 543. The fact that only 9 cases were discovered amongst cab horses goes to prove, I think, that many cases remain undetected. Veterinary-Major Mills, who is in charge of this Department in Bombay, recommends that its powers should be extended, and that its officials should be allowed to inspect private stables. I am not aware of the view which the Local Government will take of this suggestion; but if it does not meet with their approval, I think the Inspectors should be directed to carefully inspect all Hackney carriage horses on the various stands, especially at night. This would, I feel, lead to the detection of a number of cases that now remain undetected. 544. I regret to find that the practice of turning horses affected with the disease loose into the streets is still adopted; this of course is done with a view of preventing any further trouble, such as would be entailed by the disinfection of stabling, &c. Strict instructions were issued to the Inspectors to be most careful to endeavour to find out the owners of diseased horses found straying in the streets and attempts were made to trace them, but, as is usual in such cases, they were not successful. 545. The outbreak at Moombra in the Thana Collectorate was one of the most severe, as out of 100 horses removed to that place from Bombay, about 50 died, and although it is impossible to say that all died from Glanders, still we have evidence of so many cases occurring that it is to be surmised that the majority did die from this disease. 546. This may be said to conclude the record of cases which have been brought to the notice of the Department during the year; that the disease is widespread in India we cannot, I think, deny, considering that we have evidence of its existence in the North-Western Provinces, Punjab, Central Provinces and Bengal, and that it is known to exist to a great extent in Calcutta and Bombay. Every endeavour should be made to detect its existence, in order that attempts may be made to eradicate it, but with the very small staff at our disposal it is difficult to do so. SURRA. 547. Further progress in the collection of information regarding the above disease has been made during the past years. Veterinary Assistants have been supplied with printed circulars on which were printed questions concerning contagious diseases, which they were desired to answer, and among other things they were particularly ordered to make enquiries regarding this fatal horse disorder. Many replies have been received and much useful information has been collected, showing how wide-spread is this fatal malady. The information has been gathered chiefly from the Punjab and North Western Provinces, but it would be interesting to ascertain whether the disease affected animals elsewhere in the Indian Peninsula, and to what extent. It is hoped that the information will be forthcoming when the Bacteriological Survey has made more progress. 548. The vernacular names by which the disease is known are :96 Amritsar district. This disease accounted for 90 deaths in the Amritsar tehsil. The victims belonged to six villages, viz: Bhagwan, Begiwal, Nowshera, Nagli, Bhansali, and Khankot, all of which were low-lying. Bhansali suffering most as it lost 35 ponies and 35 donkeys in 1895. Delhi district. During the latter part of 1895 the village of Nagal Kalan lost all its donkeys. The tehsil of Sonepat seems to be a locality favorable to this disease, as during 1895-96 there were nine villages in which this disease appeared, which carried off 24 horses, 38 mules, and 8 donkeys. The country all about here is- low lying and subject to inundations. Ferozepur district. A few cases of Surra have been reported from this district, but it is scarcely worth noting except to show how widely spread is the disease. Only 12 fatal cases are reported to have occurred in 3 villages during the period of three years, and it is just possible that the deaths may be due to other causes. Gujranwala district. The disease has been extremely prevalent in this district, particularly in 1896. The reports which have been received show that Surra occurred in no less than 65 villages. In these villages there were said to be 611 horses, 41 mules and 1,668 donkeys; out of which there died no less than 103 horses, 1 mule and 367 donkeys or about one-fifth of the whole number. Nearly all the villages were in the Wazirabad or Gujranwala tehsil where the country is low-lying and subject to inundations. No cases have been reported to have occurred since the end of 1896. Gurgaon district.97 Ludhiana district.98 During the year reports were received by the Imperial Bacteriologist which have been tabulated as below :PART I.101 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. B.102 charges incidental to the extra work done by the Department. I beg to submit that the period embraced by the past five years has been one of great activity, and if the work shown as having been done during the past year is considered, in connection with the fact that we have but 16 working members in this Department, I trust that the Government of India will be satisfied with the results. 567. This Department is in its infancy and when the enormous interests which are confided to its charge are considered, I think it will be recognized that further expenditure is necessary. We may divide the interests involved as follows.:103 571. I am always pleased when Government Officials with whom rest the decision, or who are in a position to advise Government on the different classes of stallion required, will make an inspection of the new animals received, as I feel that it enables them to form correct opinions of the work done by its purchasing Officers, including Sir J. Watson, Mr. Sutherland, Messrs. Krcrouse and Madden, and myself. 572. From Ghaziabad I visited Murree, in order to obtain an interview, with the Deputy Adjutant-General, Punjab Army, on the subject of the Special Judging Committee, which is annually named to attend the various Horse Shows and Fairs held in that Province. 573. 1 then attended the examinations which were being held at the Lahore Veterinary College, and afterwards proceeded to Amritsar, at which place the Horse Fair was being held. 574. I then visited the Depôt at Babugarh when the annual allotment of new horses to the various Provinces, was made. I carefully considered the serious question of grain for the year, when I found that about 2,300 maunds would be required in addition to the stock in hand. As, however, I found that prices were even higher than I anticipated, owing to famine, viz:104 583. I also obtained an interview with the Resident, when the question of the constant outbreaks in connection with the introduction of cattle disease into British Territory, was discussed. I recommended for the consideration of the Council that immediately on disease appearing, quarantine should be established at Kohala on the Murree road, at Domel or Mozafferabad on the Abbottabad road. On the Bhimbar route the traffic is so slight that little danger exists of intro- duction of disease through this route. 584. The question of a Veterinary Officer being employed by the State was fully discussed, and the Resident fully agreed as to the advisability of this measure. His duties would be:105 596. I then visited Bhopal and discussed with Captain Newmarch, the Political Agent, the introduction of horse-breeding in the Narsinghur and Rajgarh States. 597. In December, I proceeded to Burma in order to discuss with the authorities certain questions on which the Government of India required informa- tion, and as I consider that no more fitting opportunity than the present will be found to record my opinion of the work done in that Province, I avail myself of it to say that the organization of the Civil Veterinary Department in Burma is about as perfect as any that can possibly be wished for. From Rangoon and from Mandalay I made short excursions to carefully consider the working of the Subordinate Veterinary Establishment, and after very careful enquiry, I felt firmly convinced that the closer that we can possibly assimilate the system in India to that which exists in Burma, the better will be the working of our Subordinate Staff. This question will be found fully dealt with under the heading of Veterinary Assistants. 598. I carefully enquired into the system of registration of cattle mortality in Lower Burma, which is far in advance of anything in India, and am now in a position to advise the various Local Governments on the subject when the time arrives for the more complete elaboration of the various systems now in vogue. 599. The points on which the Government of India had requested me to report, and which I was able to discuss with the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department and His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, were:106 In Veterinary-Captain Evans, the Department is fortunate in having an Officer of untold energy, and one possessing a most extraordinary power of organization This is at once seen when we consider that he has trained the Veterinary Assistants and organised their work in the districts, single-handed. His knowledge of the country, the people, and their customs, as well as of the language, is very great. This is of the greatest importance as Burma and its people differ so greatly from India, that an Officer appointed to this Province would be of little value for a year or two. We must, therefore, be prepared to face the day when this Officer's services will have to be replaced He has now been 13 years in India, of which nearly 9 have been spent in Burma, and as yet has not availed himself of furlough; as this must, however, come soon, I would beg most strongly to recommend the appointment of a second Officer for this Province, in order that the very important work now being carried on, may not be allowed to be retarded. The work is by far greater than any one man can be expected to do, and had we not had such a hardworking and conscientious Officer as Veterinary-Captain Evans, it would never have developed in the manner it has done. Further development is still called for, and, in time, the requirements of the Province will, in all probability, exceed 80,i, c. when the Upper Burmans recognize the value of Veterinary Assistants; at present, some districts have only one Assistant, and I have little doubt that in a few years such districts will call for two or more. For this reason, as well as for the others previously advanced, I very strongly beg to recommend the appointment of a second Officer for Burma, as soon as. possible. 600. I cannot conclude my remarks on my visit to Burma without recording the pleasure which I derived from my visit to that Province. The amount I learned, and the fact which was impressed upon me that we in India should, as far as possible, adopt the organization which exists in that country. 601. From Burma I proceeded to Madras where I purchased the stallions which had been brought over by Messrs. Krcrouse and Madden. 602. Whilst in Madras, I had a long interview with Mr. Winterbotham a Member of the Board of Revenue, when I pointed out to him how almost next to impossible it was to make any progress in Veterinary matters in that Presidency. I pointed out that of 13 Stock Inspectors, 6 had been dismissed on the grounds that they were not fit for promotion to the higher grade of Inspectors. As, however, I ventured to point out that men of the lower qualifications were required in the districts. We did not in fact require men who were all fitted for the higher grade appointments. 603. I also ventured to point out that not a single Dispensary existed in that Province, and that I had previously suggested that these 6 men might well be utilized in this way. Further, that out of only 7 Veterinary Assistants or Stock Inspectors as they are called in Madras, four had been utilized for a length- ened period on famine duty, thereby leaving a large Presidency with only 3 men available to supervise the welfare of cattle which were of inestimable value. As may be imagined from a consideration of the above, little or nothing is being done in the Madras Presidency. 604. As Christmas intervened, I devoted the holidays to the inspection of the new horse and donkey stallions and other matters connected with the Depôt at Babugarh. 605. In January, I visited Lahore to confer with the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, North and South Punjab, on the subject of the purchase of mature mules required by the Reserve Mountain Battery at Rawalpindi, which this Department had been asked to purchase. 606. Thence I proceeded to Bombay where I concluded my purchases of Arab stallions, and where I also was able to purchase two Thoroughbred Australians. 607. I then proceeded to the Jellalabad Horse Show in the Ferozepore district, and on my way to Sibi (Baluchistan) I halted at Faridkot and made my annual inspection of horse and mule-breeding operations in that State. I also halted at Bahawalpore and, as previously arranged, I carefully inspected all the mares, selecting such as were considered fit for horse and mule-breeding. I also started fresh registers for the stud which will enable reference to be made in future with facility. I then attended the Sibi Horse Show. 608. In February, I proceeded to Meerut at which place, with the sanction of the Government of India, I had started a Camp Office whilst on tour which I would place on record was of the greatest assistance to me, and having- obtained all the documents I required, I proceeded to Hissar as President of the Committee assembled by orders of the Government of India to report on the Cattle Farm at that place. 609. On conclusion of this duty, I visited Calcutta to confer with the Government of India and also with the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Bengal, on the subject of experiments which he is conducting in preventive measures to guard against Rinderpest in Behar.
107 610. Then I proceeded to Lahore and inspected the Veterinary College, when I laid before the Punjab Government certain proposals with reference to buildings which are required at that Institution. 611. I then attended the Horse Shows held at Multan, Bahawalpore, and Muzaffarnagar, and proceeded to Ahmednagar to confer with the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, respecting the transfer of horse and mule- breeding in Sind to Imperial control, which transfer was ordered to take place from 1st April. I also carefully inspected the accounts, to be in a position to advise the Government of India on the question of extra expenditure which would be required. I concluded my tour for the year ending 31st March 1898 by attending the Horse Shows held at Gujrat, Meerut, and Rawalpindi. Assistant to the Inspector- General, Civil Veterinary Department. 612. In April 1897, Veterinary-Captain Gunn attended as a Member of the Examination Board held at the Lahore Veterinary College. 613. From the 22nd May to 26th June 1897, he worked in the office of the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, collating information referring to cattle disease and breeding. 614. In July he proceeded to Lahore for the purpose of obtaining apparatus in connection with the collection and preparation of Rinderpest blood for use of the Imperial Bacteriologist. He then proceeded to the districts of Banda, Jalaon, and Sultanpur in the North-Western Provinces, on the Bacteriological research for Rinderpest, and having obtained a sufficient quantity of material he personally delivered it to Dr. Lingard's Assistant at Kathgodam on the 15th August 1897. 615. In September 1897, he attended as Member of the Board of Examin- ation held at Bombay Veterinary College. 616. Veterinary-Captain Gunn started on tour on the 26th October 1897 and returned to Head Quarters on the 8th March 1898, during which time he was employed on the Bacteriological Survey of the Punjab; he visited the districts of Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur, Sialkot and Gujrat. 617. On 30th January, he proceeded to Hissar as a Member of the Committee formed for the purpose of enquiring into the working of the Government Cattle Farm, in accordance with orders from Government, and returned to camp on the 16th February 1898. 618. In March 1898, he proceeded to Calcutta with specimens of ticks to work on that subject in consultation with the Superintendent, Indian Museum. 619. From the 24th to 31st March 1898, he attended as Member of the Examination Boards held at the Calcutta and Ajmere Veterinary Schools. 620. Veterinary-Captain Gunn was 260 days in camp, travelled 9,934 miles by rail, and 994 miles by road. Imperial Bacteriologist. 621. Dr. Lingard proceeded to Calcutta in April and May 1897, to enquire into an outbreak of Rinderpest and to collect material for his investigations, whence he travelled to Bombay to confer with Professor Koch on the subject of preventive measures against Rinderpest; he then proceeded to Fyzabad to assist in collecting material to work with at the Laboratory. Having obtained this, he returned to Muktesar with Professor Koch, and assisted in the demonstrations given by that scientist. 622. In September and October 1897, he was occupied in conferring with the Hon'ble Member, the Secretary to the Government of India, Department of Rev- enue and Agriculture, and myself, on subjects connected with the Laboratory; thence he proceeded to Kurnal to make enquiries relating to Surra, and from there he travelled to Ghazipur to obtain virulent blood to enable him to conduct experiments connected with Rinderpest. 623. In December 1897 and January 1898, he visited the Saharunpore dis- trict and Dehra Dun on matters connected with Surra. 624. In March 1898, he proceeded to Bareilly in connection with the selec- tion of a site for the proposed Experimental Station in the plains. 625. In all, he travelled 7,005 miles by rail and 667 miles by road.
108 Personnel of the Department. 626. During the year under review, certain changes have taken place. The following will show the resignations and appointments which have occurred:109 628. Although Veterinary-Lieutenant Trydell actually assumed charge of the duties of Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, on the forenoon of 1st April, he is shown in charge on 31st March, as his place as first furlough officer was filled by the appointment of Veterinary-Lieutenant Farmer on 24th March 1898. 629. It will be seen that although there was only one Officer on furlough, and one on privilege leave, still that it was necessary to have only one Officer instead of two as sanctioned at the Educational Establishments of Bombay and Lahore; this is in a measure due to the fact that one of the furlough Officers, when not actually required, holds charge of the duties of Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces, and it has been deemed more advisable to allow the Principals of the Bombay and Lahore Veterinary Colleges to work single-handed than to deprive the Central Provinces of an Officer, as much good work is being done in those Provinces in starting Dispensaries. There can be but little doubt but that another furlough or reserve Officer is imperatively called for. 630. We have lost two Officers by resignation, viz :110 636. As, however, he considered that it would be necessary to foster mule- breeding for some time, he proposed that one of the following measures should be adopted, in order to induce the people to avail themselves of the donkey stallion :111 mismanagement on the part of the syce, the donkey refused to cover. Steps will be taken to replace him at an early date if such is the case. 648. The Officer Commanding, 1st Regiment, Central India Horse, states that he is of opinion that mule-breeding will make considerable advance with the Regiment and in the district within the next few years. KURRUM. Horse and Mule- breeding beyond the Border. 649. The Commissioner and Superintendent, Peshawar Division, having, in a letter addressed to the Chief Secretary to the Government of the Punjab, expressed his opinion that the question of mule-breeding in Kurrum should not be allowed to drop, and His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor having stated that he would be glad if a donkey could be sent to the Political Officer on Special duty in the Kurrum, arrangements have been made for one to be sent. The covering months in the Kurrum Valley would appear to be from April to Sep- tember; it has, therefore, been arranged that the donkey should remain there during the whole year, if there is any probability of his covering 60 mares; if however, the mares fall much short of this number, it has been arranged that he should return for work in the Punjab during the cold weather when most mares are covered. This arrangement will obviate the loss of a donkey stallion which I anticipated in my last Administration Report, and will also meet the wishes of the Authorities. Mule-breeding in Dir, Swat, and Chitral. 650. In July last, the Political Agent for Dir, Swat, and Chitral informed this Department that the people in Chitral territory possessed a large number of mares, and further that they were prepared to undertake mule-breeding if a good donkey could be furnished for them. He asked whether a good Afghan donkey could be procured. Further correspondence on the subject followed, but evidently owing to the disturbances on the Frontier no further reply has been received. I am well aware that the people of Swat purchase young mule stock largely in our Fairs; it might, therefore, be well to encourage them to breed mules for themselves. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, will therefore be asked to address the Political Agent again on the subject. Cleansing of Horse Boxes. 651. This subject which has now been under discussion has at last received the sanction of all railways with the exception of the Bombay Baroda and Central India Railway which has not adopted Rule 2 on the broad gauge section of their railway, which provides for the cleansing of horse boxes en route, on the grounds that the distances on this section are so short that there is practically no need for it. They have, however, adopted the rules in their entirety on the metre-gauge section of the railway. As these rules have now been adopted on all lines, it may be convenient to reproduce them here to facilitate reference :112 chronic ulcers and sores, all of which give great trouble during the rains. The trial was conducted by 4 different Officers all of whom report favorably of its curative properties. Veterinary-Captain Gunn made an extensive trial of it on :113 659. It having been pointed out by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, that some of the breeders were unable to read Urdu, and that a certain number of Certificates should have the instructions printed in Hindi, a translation was made and submitted to the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, for approval. These are issued to such districts where Hindi is better known than Urdu. 660. A further advance has been made during the year under review by all District Boards in the Punjab who, at my suggestion and with the concurrence of the Director of Land Records and Agriculture of that Province, have adopted a similar form of Covering and Produce Certificates. These have the same rules printed on the back as those issued for Imperial horse-breeding; it will therefore be seen that much has been done to circulate information amongst the breeders. 661. At present, no Certificates are issued to owners of mares or young stock covered by, or the produce of, Provincial stallions in the North-Western Provinces. I purpose, however, addressing the Director of Land Records and Agriculture on this subject, recommending that it should be done, for not only do I consider it necessary to be able to trace the pedigree of as much stock as possible in this country, but the wider is the circulation of the advice contained in these Certificates the better will be the care of brood mares and young stock. Quarterly Veterinary Journal in Urdu by Vety. Captain Pease. 662. This journal has appeared regularly during the year and has maintained its reputation as one in every way calculated to keep Veterinary Assistants acquainted with the progress of Veterinary science. It has supplied a great want, and I am pleased to find that owing to a wider circulation than was anticipated, Veterinary-Captain Pease has been able to reduce the price at which it is issued from Rs. 8-4-0 to Rs. 5-4-0 per annum. At this low figure it should be in the hands of every Veterinary Assistant in India who is able to read Urdu. Issue of Agricultural Ledgers114 it is issued and considering the small circulation which a book of this description must necessarily have, it cannot possible pay. HORSE AND MULE BREEDING IN NATIVE STATES. 668. This is the fourth year during which endeavours have been made by me to extend these industries in certain States that have expressed a wish to obtain the assistance of this Department. I consider that by doing so, they are assisting us materially, as not only will they be providing for their own wants, and thus not enter into competition at our Fairs, but gradually, as numbers increase, the produce foaled in Native States will undoubtedly find its way into our markets. 669. A review will only be made of such States which have received advice from this Department, and instead of referring to them in the order in which I visited them, as has hitherto been done, I consider that my remarks will be better understood if I group them according to the Provinces or Agencies in which they are situated. 670. Again I would record my appreciation of the help and kindness which I have received from all ruling Chiefs and Political Agents of the various States which I have been able to visit during the past year. I regret that time did not allow me to visit Bhurtpore. NATIVE STATES IN THE PUNJAB. Bahawalpore. 671. I first visited this State on 9th October 1897, when I made a very careful inspection of the Stud. I found that 11 entires were kept of which only 3 were fit to be retained as stallions, the remaining 8 were likely to do more harm than good; on my recommendation, these were disposed of, and as the three that were retained were only ponies or galloways, it was decided to purchase a Thoroughbred Australian stallion, which has been done. At the request of the State, I returned in January 1898 when I thoroughly overhauled the Stud, selecting such mares as I considered fit for horse-breeding, relegating others for mule breeding, and casting such as were not fit for either. I found that of 67 mares, only 19 were fit for horse-breeding, 43 were retained for mule-breeding whilst 5 were recommended to be destroyed as being useless. As funds become available, more mares will be purchased for horse-breeding, and in time I trust to see this Stud placed on a sound basis. 672. I found that in addition to the mares abovementioned, there were 26 head of young stock on the run, but that no grain was allowed for them they being expected to live on the mares' allowance; this will account ffor their stunted growth. I recommended that, if it is considered advisable to maintain a Stud, it is of paramount importance that the young stock should be fed. The establishment has been placed under the direct orders of the Wazir of the State, and a Darogah, trained in the Ulwar Stud, has been appointed. 673. This State is doing all in its power to foster horse and mule-breeding, and I attach much more importance to this than to the Stud which I have just deseribed. Bahawalpore Horse Show. 674. A Horse Show was held from 8th to 10th March 1898, when prizes amounting to Rs. 1,025 were awarded. The following were the classes and the numbers which competed in each class :115 675. The numbers competing must be considered very satisfactory in Class I. (c). Many would have been found suitable for Native Cavalry had a purchasing Officer been present; as it was, a dealer had the Show to himself. 676. The brood mare class was excellent, and contained many very good roomy mares. In the young stock class, about 25 per cent. were good and well grown. 677. The pony mare class contained some very shapely roomy mares, in every way suitable for mating with Arab ponies or galloways. 678. The mule class was disappointing, as many mares had been covered by donkeys. This industry is getting a firm hold in the State. 679. This Show, as an organised institution, was started only 3 years ago and had to be abandoned for two years owing to scarcity. As a comparatively new venture, it must be considered a great success, and I can only add that it surpassed all my expectations. My best thanks are due to Jinweda Khan the Wazir of the State, for the great assistance he afforded me. 680. The following stallions are maintained at the Stud :116 This has been agreed to but unfortunately I am not in a position to supply one. It may be possible to obtain a Cyprian for this State during the current year. 686. The system of branding is rigorously adopted in this State, and as the selection of mares fit for horse-breeding is left as much as possible for my yearly visit, I am in a position to state that the brand is much sought after. The number of branded mares in the State has risen from 148 in 1896-97 to 180 on 31st March 1898. 687. As usual, a small Horse Show was held in October when Rs. 889 were distributed as prizes. 588 animals competed. Jhind. 688. Horse-breeding does not make the progress in this State which I anticipated it would. Whether it is owing to the famine from which the tehsils of Jhind and Chakri Dadri suffered, or whether it is from a want of interest shown in the matter by the Tehsildars, I cannot say, but the fact remains that the work done is not satisfactory. 689. At Jhind there was at first ample work for two stallions. One having died and not having been replaced, only one is now employed in this tehsil. 690. At Chakri Dadri, where only one stallion is employed, only 30 mares were covered in 1896-97. 691. At Sangrur, the Head Quarters of this State, a Country-bred stallion is maintained. He is worse than useless having shockingly bad fore legs. I pointed out to the Council of Regency how advisable it was that a horse that had covered 24 mares in 4 months should not be allowed to actually do more harm than good, and I recommended that an Arab should be obtained in his place. In reply, the President of the Council states that as only 5 of the 24 mares covered belonged to Jhind, whilst the remainder came from Patiala, Nabha and British territory, the State would not agree to purchase a horse for their use. 692. Mule-breeding makes but little progress; it however, is succeeding better than I anticipated at Sangrur, but in the other tehsil it may be said to be non-existent. 693. Last year the Durbar gave Rs. 400 at the Hansi Show to be competed for as prizes for mares and stock in the Jhind and Chakri Dadri Tehsils, but this year they decided to hold a small Show of their own, in connection with a religious festival, at Ramrai, distant about 5 miles from Jhind. One hundred and ninety-two (192) horses and ponies are said to have been present, also :117 697. Mule-breeding is very popular and more stallions are required; the purchase of one for this year has been sanctioned, but here again I am crippled by not being able to obtain any good Jacks. 698. Stables are now built at all the tehsils, and the State may be said to be thoroughly equipped. Only let the present policy be continued for 10 years, on the understanding that none but Arab sires are used, and I will guarantee that the indigenous stock of the Kapurthala State will not be, recognizable. 699. Two-hundred and fifty-seven (257) mares were covered by horse stallions. Four horses were employed during the whole year. These covered an average of 57 mares each. 700. Four donkey stallions were also employed, covering an average 55 mares each. 701. Sixty-two (62) head of young stock by the horse stallions, and 42 mules are known to have been foaled during the year. 702. As usual, a Horse Show was held on 25th and 26th February 1898. It was attended by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab; 191 mares and stock competed; this shows a reduction of 41 on last year when 232 were exhibited. This is said to be due to the famine which existed in the early part of last year. 703. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, reports most favorably of the stock seen at this Show. He adds:118 710. More might well be done to promote mule-breeding, only two donkeys being employed in the whole State. BHOPAL AGENCY IN CENTRAL INDIA. 711. Nothing has been done in the Bhopal State but. I am pleased to report that a beginning has been made in the States of Narsingarh and Rajgarh during the year. Two stallions have been purchased by the former State and, as I am informed by the Political Agent that owing to a minority it is under management, there is every hope that horse-breeding will be able to make a fair start. 712. The State maintains many horses, and a competent Veterinary Assistant has been appointed; the horse-breeding operations will be immediately under his management. Orders have been passed that none but selected mares are to be covered. Rajgarh has also been supplied during the past year with a very good Arab sire. 713. I would beg to record my thanks to Major Newmarch, the Political Agent, for the interest he has taken in the matter. RAJPUTANA. Bhartpore. 714. To my great regret I have been unable to visit Bhurtpore this year, as it is the only one of the Eastern States of Rajputana where any encouragement is given to horse and mule-breeding. 715. The Diwan submits :a return, through the Political Agent, showing that during the year under review, the three horse stallions have covered 129 mares, an average of 43 each; this is very satisfactory. The Arabs employed are high-caste, and the result of this cross must have a beneficial effect. Unfortunately no records have been kept of the results, so that it is impossible to say how many foals were dropped. 716. Mule-breeding.119 722. Great care is exercised in the selection of mares covered by the State stallions, and perhaps the rules are a little too stringent at first. 723. In this report, the Chief Member of the Council states:120 731. The following had been drafted out during the year :121 of their studs. All the studs have been supplied with good Arab sires as these are obtainable in the country, but considerable difficulty is experienced by them in procuring Thoroughbreds. Some of the States have applied for the services of Thoroughbreds on what appears to me to be conditions most favorable to Government. Taking all circumstances into consideration, and the position we now stand with regard to these studs, I trust that Government will be pleased to accede to their wishes, as these stallions will only be mated with big roomy marcs whose offspring placed under such favorable conditions, should grow into typical remounts. I think that I can safely say that the majority of these studs are now in good working order, and their future very promising. 740. The above must be considered satisfactory. Veterinary-Captain Morgan does not state on what conditions Thoroughbreds are to be supplied, but I have no doubt that the Bombay Government will meet the wishes of these States if they possibly can. 741. In order to give some idea of the good work done by Native States, I give the following summary which will show the number of mares cover- ed by horse and donkey stallions:GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1897-98 PART II.125 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1897126 752. The question of the advisability of introducing the system of branding has again been discussed in the North-Western Provinces. On this subject the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states :127 762. The number covered in our three large breeding centres of Northern India is most satisfactory, amounting as it does to 667. The number has been reduced in South Punjab by ho mares being shown as covered by stallions belong- ing to private persons. These stallions were inspected and found to be unfit for :stud purposes. The numbers for the past two years were as follows :128. As noted in para. 21 of last year's report, it is found that this information required for Table F. cannot be- obtained from the Patwaris' returns. It was, therefore, suggested to the Director of Land Records and Agrculture that the figures should be taken from the Annual Agricultural Statistics prepared in his office, but he advocated the abolition of the Table in question on the following ground:129 In Salem, however, it was the reverse, viz :130 Conclusion- 790. In concluding my remarks on horse-breeding by Provincial or District Board Agency, I feel I cannot do better than quote the following extracts from reports by the Judging Committee and the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, bearing on the subject. 791. From these extracts it will be seen that not only are these ponies and galloways producing fillies that are sufficiently well developed to enable them to be branded and served by Imperial stallions, but also in a few instances they are producing Remounts. Jellalabad Horse Show.PART II.133 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT MULE-BREEDING. Donkey stalliona belonging to District Boards, &c. 792. Mule-breeding by Provincial or District Board Agency exists to a very small extent. The following summary abstracted from Table J. will show exactly how many donkeys are employed:PART II.137 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. III.138 we take into consideration that Professor Koch has shown that virulent blood from a case of Rinderpest may completely lose its virulence after being exposed to a temperature of 87.8 F. for four hours, it is a matter for surprise that, taking into consideration that the material was obtained in the month of June in the plains, it ever reproduced the disease at all, and the fact that it did, must testify to the great care exercised in its collection and the precautions taken in its conveyance to the Laboratory. 808. I do not purpose to follow all the experiments carried out by Professor Koch at Muktesar. A full description has been furnished in the reports submitted by those Officers who attended. These reports are about to be published in the Agricultural Ledger, Special Veterinary Series. 809. We now require information as to the applicability to this country of Professor Koch's methods of immunising cattle against Rinderpest, enquiries were therefore made from the various Local Governments whether experiments could be carried out by the Officers who attended the demonstrations. The Bombay Govern- ment states that until there are more substantial grounds for expecting that the measure will be efficacious, it would be inexpedient to attempt any extensive measures of inoculations in the Province where the difficulties are very great. They state that the slaughter of cattle for experiments would almost everywhere in the Presidency proper, be objected to; but that should the occasion arise in Sind, where owners of cattle are not likely to object to such a step, or should Rinderpest break out in a Government Farm, experiments may be made on the spot by an expert. 810. I trust that the Government of Bombay will give effect to this decision, as occasions arise, as the value of these experiments will gain in importance in accordance with the different conditions of climate and other circumstances under which they are conducted. 811. In an interview with His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma, he informed me that he was quite willing to sanction any reasonable expenditure which might be entailed in conducting these experiments, and with Veterinary- Captain Evans in that Province I feel certain that we shall receive help from this direction. 812. But it has rested with Bengal, thanks to the energy and scientific attainments of its Superintendent, Veterinary-Captain Raymond, to be the pioneer in this important work, and as his last report is of great professional interest and as it may be a guide to other Officers conducting experiments, I have deemed it advisable to insert it in extenso:139 Close observation, which has been maintained since the beginning of the work in August down to the present, has failed to show any sign of Rinderpest in the animals treated, notwithstanding the fact that the disease has existed in the neighbouring villages for some time. I have carried out a series of experiments in order to ascertain if the animals immunised in August and Septem ber 1897 were still immune in January 1898. By a reference to my report of 11th October 1897 and appendices, it will be seen that certain animals were inoculated with bile and later with virulent blood. On the 28th of January some of these animals were collected at the Experimental Station and tied up amongst buffaloes Nos. 1 to 8 that had become infected with Rinderpest. These bullocks were fed with the buffaloes, and the post mortems of the buffaloes, as they died, or were destroyed, were conducted, as it were under their noses. More- over, virulent material from the sick buffaloes were rubbed on to the bullocks' muzzles and each bullock received subcutaneously 1 c. cm. of virulent blood from buffalo No. 1 on the 28th January and another 1 c. cm. of a mixture of virulent blood from buffaloes Nos. II and VII on the 4th February 1898. (Vide Appendix 1). Subsequently it was decided to enlarge the experiment, and 4 more bullocks were placed in the Experimental Enclosure, animals that had been inoculated with bile only in the experiments of 5th, 6th, and 7th September 1897 the details are appended (Appendix 1). The 4 animals were treated in the same way as the other bullocks with this exception, that they received only one injection of 1 c. cm of a mixture of virulent blood from buffaloes A1 and All on the 12th February 1897. The details of these experiments are tabulated and appended. The result of the tests has been that none of the animals showed any outward signs of Rinderpest. The tem. perature of K/L 4 rose 4/5 of degree F. on the 6th day. The temperature of KV rose from 102 degree to 103-4 degree on the 6th day. To resume. 261 head of cattle have been inoculated with the buffaloes' bile, they have shown, up to date, none of the outward signs of Rinderpest, though the disease existed and has since appeared in the neighbourhood. Many of them went to work the next day without inconvenience. Seven animals that had received bile in September were re-tested under conditions far more stringent than any animals are likely to be submitted to in usual practice. One of these showed a distinct rise in temperature, but none showed any outward signs of Rinderpest whatever. Of the 6 animals that had received an injection of bile plus blood in September, two had died of old age and debility, but none of Rinderpest between the September and January experiments, and four were submitted to the same stringent test as the other (bile) batch. One showed a slight rise in temperature on the 6th day, which fell on the 7th day. None of these animals showed any outward signs of Rinderpest whatever. I have to add that the injection of 1/1000 part of 1 c. cm. of virulent blood is sufficient to cause the usual visible symptoms of cattle plague to develop. I have now to report a small series of bile experiments that have been carried out at Belgatchia. From the 26th June 1897 to 11th September 1897, 21 animals were inoculated with Rinderpest bile, of these (3 bullock J. A., Bull J. A. I, Bull J. A. 2) were subsequently attacked with natural Rinderpest and one died. These animals had been injected on the 11th September with 10 c. cm. of bile from a bullock belonging to Beranagore Municipality that died on the 10th September 1897 of Rinderpest. These cases are important in regard to the length of immunity conferred by bile. Bullock J. A. was attacked four months and fifteen days after inoculation and died very quickly. Bullock J. A. 1 was attacked four months and 24 days after inoculation, his attack was very mild indeed. Bullock J. A. 11 was attacked five months and five days after inoculation. His attack was mild. I think it is worth noting that these cases were immunised with bile from a bullock that died of naturally acquired Rinderpest, whereas the bile used at Kanti came from buffaloes that had been killed. It appears there- fore:140 A.141 APPENDIX I. Animals experimented upon. BILE INJECTION. 1ST BLOOD INJECTION. 2ND BLOOD INJECTION. 3RD BLOOD INJECTION. Minimum duration of Immunity. REMARKS. Quantity. Dates. Quantity. Dates. Quantity. Dates. Quantity. Dates. Months and days. K L1. Bullock ... 10 C. C. M. ... 3rd Sept. 1897, 1 C. C. M. ... 28th Jan. 1898, 1 C. C. M. ... 4th Feb. 1898, ... ... 5 142 Dr. Simpson's Microbe of Rinderpest. 813. Veterinary Captain Raymond, the Superintendent Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, has made some interesting experiments with Dr. Simpson's reputed Microbe of Rinderpest. On this subject he states:143 817. The question having been referred to me as professional adviser to the Government of India, I recorded my. opinion as follows:144 825. The points to be arrived at are:145 of the Punjab. This Survey has been arranged under several heads, such as qua- lity of cattle in each tehsil of the district, the class of bulls at present with the herds, the desirability of re-organizing the present system of cattle-breeding, the localities in which certain contagious diseases are prevalent, the system of medical treatment adopted in each district, and the collection of such other information as is thought to bear on this important subject. It is again to be regretted that simi- lar information has not been collected concerning the districts of other Provinces, and it is hoped that more Officers will be appointed so that this important work will be no longer delayed. CATTLE DISEASE AS REPORTED FROM VARIOUS PROVINCES. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 832. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:146 I therefore addressed the District Officers in accordance with paragraph 3, line 13 of 983A of 6th June 1897, from the Director of Land Records. Thirty-one answers were favorable and thirteen unfavorable. There appear to be certain practical difficulties in the way of adopting the suggestions I ventured to submit, viz:147 841. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, states:148 to circumstances being unfavorable to the growth, and multiplication of pathogenic micro-organisms owing to unusual climatic conditions, as well as to the decrease in the number of the bovine stock of the country from the effects of famine. Foot and Mouth disease.149 25th August.150 six months. Surely a very small death rate. No doubt this inaccuracy is due to there being so few Veterinary Subordinates in this Presidency, so that the Government of Madras cannot expect much Veterinary help being given to the people unless more Stock Inspectors or Veterinary Assistants are appointed. ARAKAN DIVISION. Akyab. Lower Burmah. 854. Rinderpest.151 In the Kaladan township the disease prevailed in a mild form, causing no serious losses. 859. Foot and Mouth disease:152 PEGU. 868. Rinderpest.153 878. Foot and Mouth disease.154 were recorded, and at the close of the year six; seven hundred and forty-three animals died from cattle plague in this township. Less severe outbreaks were reported from the following townships, namely, Bassein, Kyonpyaw, and Ngaputaw; the total mortality amounting to 902. 887. Anthrax and Charbon Symptomatique.155 diseases prevailed in the Pantanaw township, and 206 animals are reported to have succumbed to them. In the quarter following only 59 deaths were reported after which period the disease ceased to give trouble. 894. Foot and Mouth disease.156 TENASSEKIM DIVISION. AMHERST 902. Owing to the absence of cattle plague the mortality is very much less than that recorded last year. 903. Rinderpest.157 912. Anthrax and Charbon Symptomatique. These diseases gave no trouble the total deaths recorded being 180. 913. Foot and Mouth disease. Very few deaths were reported from this cause. The highest mortality for the year namely 16 was reported from the Myoma township. SALWEEN HILL TRACTS. Health of cattle excellent. UPPER BURMA. 914. As in Lower Burma the great majority of outbreaks reported were not so extensive or so virulent as those reported during last year. 915 Rinderpest. During this year the disease was reported from the follow- ing districts, namely Lower Chindwin, Myingan, Pakokku, Minbu, Magwe, and Mandalay. Owing to the prevailing scarcity in many parts of these districts during the past year the cattle had suffered considerably in condition, and were thus rendered more liable to contract, and less able to withstand attacks of disease, and had the people not disposed of large numbers of their cattle to purchasers from Lower Burma, &c., the mortality would in all probability have been exceedingly heavy. Lower Chindwin, the Deputy Commissioner remarks:158 923. The total number of cattle attacked has increased by 3,880, the difference being mainly under Rinderpest where the figures are larger by 3,493. It is satisfactory to note a large decrease under Anthrax, only 26 cases being reported this year. All other diseases show a slight increase on last year's figures. The percentage of mortality shows a very slight improvement, but it has been high during both the past years. The failure of late rains in 1896 caused a great scarcity of fodder during the hot weather of 1897, and the supply of water being also short, the cattle were so reduced in condition that they were unable to withstand even the mildest forms of disease. The condition of the cattle in the Wun district, when the Veterinary Assistant visited it, was found to be miserable in the extreme through want of fodder, and there was doubtless a large loss from starvation beyond the figures of our return. The number of attacks and deaths in this district was con- siderably more than half the figures for the whole Province. The speedy appoint- ment of a Veterinary Assistant to Yeotmal appears to be highly desirable. The highest percentage of deaths occurred in Ellichpur, and the lowest in Basim; and it is peculiar that this should have been the case last year also. The chief disease in the Buldana district was Rinderpest; reports of four outbreaks were received and attended to. Foot and Mouth disease was most prevalent in the Amraoti and Basim districts, but it was not of a very fatal nature. The Veterinary Inspector attended to these outbreaks and apparently his treatment and instruction had the desired effect of reducing the mortality. Bombay. 924. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, states:159 the Survey Commissioner and Director of Land Records and Agriculture, owing to want of funds and the fact that the people will not allow their cattle to be treated by a Veterinary Graduate. This difficulty has not been experienced in other parts of the Presidency, and I think it is only a matter of time when villagers will, of their own free will, segregate affected cattle as reports received this year are very much more satisfactory on this particular point. 926. Several native drugs are reported to have been used by the owners, but it is difficult to ascertain how far they proved efficacious. No recourse to preventive vaccination has yet been had in this Presidency. Remarks. 927. That something has been done in this direction during the year under review cannot be denied; that as much as I would have liked to have been able to report as having been accomplished, has not been done, I cannot deny; still with this small staff at our disposal and the Subordinate Establishment not under proper supervision and control, I feel confident that more could not be expected. There are, however, two Officers who could assist more in this direction. I allude to the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces and Madras; their duties are or should be mainly connected with cattle, and they should devote themselves as much as possible to the investigation of disease: there cannot be a more important subject, and these Officers especially should do all that lies in their power to throw light on obscure diseases in their Provinces. I would also now add the Superintendent, Civil Veterinay Department, Bombay, to the list of Officers who should materially assist in this important section, as he has lately been relieved of the charge of Sind, and should now have much time to devote himself to all subjects bearing on the welfare of cattle in that Presidency. 928. Burma and Bengal do excellent work, and the other Superintendents do all they can in this direction considering the other duties which they have to perform. 929. The great want is more Officers, and a decision on the Subordinate Veterinary Establisment: given these, we would be better able to cope with this enormous question. 930. That dispensaries are increasing and doing excellent work, which matter will be dealt with under the proper heading, is to me a matter of great congratulation, for it is in the treatment of ordinary cases of simple disease which causes great mortality, and which render cattle useless to their owners for some considerable period of time through mal-treatment, that I want to see progress made at first, rather than in attempting to suppress severe outbreaks of disease, for as yet we are not in a position to deal with them, not having any legislation on the subject. The time will come, I feel, when we shall be able to combat the ravages of such diseases as Rinderpest, but it has not yet arrived, and pending the consummation of this much to be desired end, our duty is to gain the confidence of the people by attending to minor cases of sickness. Let them once see that a Veterinary Assistant is to be trusted, and they will more readily place themselves in our hands when we wish to introduce measures which will enable us to cope successfully with serious outbreaks of disease. Reliability of Statements showing mortality, and imperfect system of reporting outbreaks. 931. Attention should be paid to the approximate correctness of the statistics, showing the outbreaks which occur and the mortality during the year; at present their reliability is doubtful. The Chief Secretary to Government, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:160 District Officers. The reports continue to show that they are accurately kept up, the only irregularity of more than very rare occurrence, which has been recorded being the failure of the police patrols to remove the counterfoils at the prescribed intervals. 934. Attention has been paid to the system under which outbreaks of disease are reported, and I am pleased to note that this system has improved greatly. Formerly, an outbreak was at an end before a report of its existence reached the Superintendent, but even in cases where orders exist on the subject, they are not always carried out. Take for example Bengal where orders exist to the effect that the occurrence of serious or epidemic disease among cattle should be reported direct and, if necessary, by telegram to the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. We learn from the Government Resolution on the Superintendent's Annual Report that in many cases that Officer derived his first information of an outbreak of disease from a perusal of the Weather and Crop reports in the Calcutta Gazette. Improvement is noticeable in this direction in many Provinces. VETERINARY DISPENSARIES. 935. Feeling that no more certain way of gaining the confidence of the people existed than by starting dispensaries at which cases of ordinary disease and surgical operations can be performed, I addressed the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, pointing out the good that is done at these institutions, and also showing that, pending the appointment of a Special Veterinary Officer whose duties will be solely those connected with cattle and the supervision of the Subordinate Veterinary Staff, a great point would be gained by concentrating the work which would ensure more supervision of the Veterinary Assistants being exercised by the Officers at present in charge. Noting on this in his Annual Report, the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:161 gratis, but certain fees might be levied from Government servants or Native gentlemen who can afford to pay for treatment, and those might be arranged on a sliding scale. Further information on the subject of these most useful institutions can be obtained from the Annual Administration Report of this Department for 1895-96, pages 156 to 161. 940. The Board of Revenue agreed with my proposal which was submitted to the Local Government. The following is an extract from their Resolution on the subject:162 During the outbreak of Rinderpest at Patna segregation lines were opened, where several sick cattle were treated. The total number of cases treated by the Veterinary Assistant is 285, of which 154 were cured, 54 relieved and 77 died. Three oxen and 8 horses which were castrated by the Veterinary Assistant are included in the column "Other diseases:" Bhagalpur.163 950. With regard to these remarks made by the Deputy Commissioner on the Umballa Veterinary Dispensary I am of opinion that the money spent upon it could not possibly be laid out to greater advantage in other ways. If this Veteri- nary Dispensary were abolished and the Veterinary Assistant still kept on as an itinerant, the following would be the only saving in expenditure, viz:164 The time of the Superintendent is so fully occupied with horse- breeding operations that he cannot be expected to make these frequent visits to the several dispensaries, and it is very evident that proper inspection cannot be carried out until there is an Officer appointed for this special work. Court of Wards Dispensaries.165 960. This bald statement is very unsatisfactory when it is considered how important reliable statistics are for comparing the work done annually in these valuable institutions. From the above figures it would seem that 1,856 out of the total of 5,862 patients died or were incurable, being a percentage of 31.6, which must be considered by no means satisfactory. 961. The District Authorities of Sialkot are to be complimented for their energy in maintaining three Dispensaries. That these institutions are steadily doing good work may be seen by the steady increase of the number of patients treated. For the past three years the numbers are respectively 5,384, 5,433, 5,862. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces, states:166 Bombay. 966. The Superintendent Civil, Veterinary Department, Bombay, states:167 Veterinary Graduate Madak, Belgaum Dispensary. Inspected on the 21st November 1897 and found to be in good order, no arrangements owing to lack of funds could be made during the past year to erect the much needed buildings, &c. The number of animals treated during the year amounted to 1,607 against 1,898 last year, decrease being due to Bubonic Plague restrictions. In-patients 33; out-patients 1,574. Out of the above number 307 were horses, 728 cattle, and the remainder sheep, dogs, &c. Only four cases of castration are reported. The Veterinary Graduate paid 500 visits to owners' houses, and surrounding villages, and appears to have done good work. The report is satisfactory. Cases cured 168 Veterinary Graduate Haji, Karachi Dispensary. Inspected on 5th March 1898 and found to be in excellent order. During the year, 2,232 animals were treated against 2,824 last year, the decrease being due to plague, and the general unsettled state of the town. In-patients 208 and out-patients 2,024. Out of the above number, 874 were horses, 450 cattle, 187 camels, and the remainder goats, sheep, &c. The Veteri- nary Graduate attended outbreaks of Foot and Mouth disease and Rinderpest, in the town of Karachi. He appears to have been very successful in dealing with these outbreaks as the mortality was small, and the disease rapidly stamped out. He also attended a somewhat severe outbreak of Rinderpest in the district, and was equally successful in dealing with it. The isolation arrangements in this town are very good and no difficulty appears to have been experienced in persuading owners to bring their Rinderpest cattle to these wards. He made all arrangements for the disembarkation, locating, and despatching of Government stallions, attended the animals of the Zoological Gardens, Mounted Police, and paid over 600 visits to owners' houses. The Ceylon Government requisitioned for his services for the purchase of milch cattle, and all Police remounts were examined by him prior to purchase. Seven cases of castration are reported (3 horses and 4 bulls). The system of levying fees on wealthy people for the treatment of their animals appears to have been satisfactory and resulted in a net gain of Rupees 1,011169 434 or 2.18 per cent. died, 159 or 0.79 per cent. returned incurable, the result of 1,933 or 9.68 per cent. was unknown, and the remainder 352 or 1.76 per cent. were under treatment at the end of the year. It is satisfactory to note that the per- centage of cured and relieved has again increased this year, being 85.59 against 84.29 last year with a corresponding fall in the percentage died, incurable, and unknown. VETERINARY ASSISTANTS. 968. I have long felt that the persent organization of the Subordinate Staff is faulty, but have deferred offering any suggestions until I was in full possession of all facts connected with their working. Owing to my visit to Burma during the past year I was able to carefully consider the system under which they work in that country; it impressed me so greatly and I was so struck with the organization in that Province that I felt in a position to address the Government of India on the subject. I pointed out that the employment and control of Veterinary Assis- tants by the District Boards or Local Bodies was a mistake, that it would lead to the deterioration of these men, as no one but a professional man was capable of judging of their capabilities, and to such an Officer should they be made to look for their advancement. 969. The system adopted in Burma, and which works smoothly, is as follows:170 they become available are employed in the districts. The progress made in Veterinary matters in this Province is very reassuring. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, reports as follows with reference to the employment of Veterinary Assistants:171 North-West Provinces and Oudh. 975. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, N.-W. P. and Oudh, states:PART II-PROVINCIAL REPORT IV.175 PART II.176 This Department would welcome more money for the improvement of agricultural stock on which most of the wealth of the country depends. The Superintendent, Veterinary-Captain Ringe, has loyally worked for the objects of both Departments, and with the very limited funds at his disposal, the results have been distinctly good. 985. The Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab, states:177 This disposes of all I can suggest with reference to Siege Train bullocks. I now approach what is described as the secondary object of the Farm, viz: that of breeding high class bulls to improve the breed of cattle in the various districts of Northern India. Considered from a Military point of view, this is undoubtedly of secondary importance, but still if considered as such, it must be on the understanding that the Hissar Cattle Farm is the producing centre from which all bullocks required for Ordnance purposes are obtainable. If it is decided to recommend that all or even a portion of the bullocks so required are to be obtained in the open market, then I think you will all agree with me in thinking that this object described as of secondary importance at once assumes a most prominent position, for unless the various herds are supplied with good bulls, degeneracy must ensue. I have stated that this object may be considered as of secondary importance from a Military point of view, if the Hissar Farm is capable of producing all the Ordnance bullocks required, but 1 shall appeal to the Member of this Committee appointed by Government to represent the Civil side, to lay before you the urgency which exists for the establishment of some centre from which bulls of undeniable breeding can be procured. Veterinary-Captain Gunn, having carried out the Bacteriological Survey in many districts of the Punjab will be able to lay before us the requirements in this direction; as included in this Survey is the obtainment of full particulars concerning the breeds of cattle and the adequacy and suitability or otherwise of the bulls running with the various herds of cattle in Northern India. This Officer, as the expert appointed by Government owing to his special knowledge of cattle-breeding, will be able to inform us whether, in his opinion, the stock now on the Farm is calculated to produce the class of bulls required, and he will further be able to lay before us, for our consideration, any suggestions for the improvement of stock to meet this end. I shall ask you, as Members of this Committee, to give this important subject most serious thought, for, believe me, when I say that it is one of national importance; owing to the opening out of canals, large tracts of country are being brought under cultivation; this naturally results in the restriction of the grazing area and is likely to lead to a diminished outturn of plough cattle, whilst increased cultivation means the requirements of more bullocks. There is one point beyond which cultivation cannot extend, and this is when the maximum number of bullocks available in the country are employed; for, if cultivation does extend beyond this, it must mean the lowering of the standard of cultivation in a district which means poor outturn of crops, a decrease of revenue, and a general want of agricultural prosperity. You are well aware that the prosperity of this country generally depends on the agricultural interests; and on these grounds I feel sure you will bear me out in saying that the subject which I place before you now is one of national importance. Granted that cultivation is increasing, and, that as a consequence, the grazing area is diminishing generally in Northern India, it behoves all Local Governments to gradually improve their cattle stock, so that although numbers may decrease, quality will be maintained, and in this way the standard of cultivation will be maintained, if not improved. Veterinary-Captain Gunn will be able to lay before you statistics showing the great want of bulls in every district of the Punjab, village herds being invariably badly supplied, both as regards quality and numbers. The demand for plough cattle is to-day a burning question owing to the mortality during the late famine. Captain Dunlop-Smith will be able to inform us of the mortality amongst cattle in this important breeding tract, he having been Deputy Commissioner in this district during the late famine. I might further add that, although only 100 young bulls are selected annually for issue to districts, and that although the average number issued during the past 10 years has only been 64 per annum, still there is every reason to believe that the demand in future years will be much greater. The grounds on which I base this assertion are, that as the Bacteriological Survey progresses, and that the want of good bulls is brought to the notice of the District Boards, the demand will increase; further the whole question of cattle will be taken up as soon as the Subordinate Veterinary Staff is decided on. When this is done, there is every reason to believe that the extra Veterinary Officer whose duties will be confined to cattle, will be appointed to the North-Western Provinces and Punjab; and 1 feel confident that when these appointments are made, there will be a far greater demand for bulls, and this the Farm should be able to supply, provided that this can be done without a loss accruing to Government. 997. The Committee after very careful consideration of all facts laid before it, arrived, at the conclusion that the Farm should be in a position to increase the number of bulls available for issue up to a maximum of 200 annually, stating that the number now produced, viz. 100 is not sufficient. They also recorded their opinion that if only good bulls are bred on the Farm, the demand would increase considerably, and the benefits derived from their issue would be immense. 998. I have considered this question most carefully during the past four years whilst I have held the appointment of Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, and have refrained from giving any decided opinion hitherto, feeling as I did that we were not in a position to take the matter up, but I now feel it my duty to state that I consider that the matter is one in which all Local Governments should interest themselves178 impression. The Officers of this Department are fully cognizant of the importance of this matter and given a sufficient number, the Department will, I guarantee, not be liable to the accusation of neglect in this direction. 1001. But if this, as well as other matters connected with cattle are seriously taken up, Government must recognize that expenses will have to be incurred. The Government of India, will have to face the necessity of providing more Officers, and the Local Governments and Administrations will have to contribute either directly or through Local Bodies, to the cost of providing good bulls for issue to different districts. This question will have to be very carefuly considered, for naturally the Hissar Farm will never be able to supply all the bulls required for Northern India, nor would the class of bull which will be produced at this Farm, be suitable to all Provinces, or to all districts in those Provinces; it will therefore be for con- sideration whether nurseries should not be formed in which bulls of various sizes, but of approved breeds, could be reared, for as will be seen by an extract above quoted being a report by the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, North- Western Provinces and Oudh, mature bulls are not to be purchased. 1002. When this question is generally taken up viz. that of allowing any inferior bull to be let loose on the country as a religious act, it will undoubtedly have to be considered. Villagers complain sadly that they have really to maintain worthless bulls which actually prove injurious to their herds. North West Provinces and Oudh. 1003. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:179 Etawah. There is one young bull of the Kosi breed, located at Kudar Kot. The bull is popular. The stock obtained is too young to express an opinion on. Probable number of cows served during the year ... 4 Probable number of stock obtained ... ... 11 Bareilly. A bull has been transferred from Naini Tal and is at the Ramsay Farm. Mr. F. Welsh makes the following remarks regarding the bull:180 The few mouthfuls which he takes here and there is not taken any notice of by the zemindars, and no body feels the cost of his keep, and long experience goes to show that bulls enjoying perfect freedom serve better, are more sure stockgetters, keep in infinitely better condition and last longer than those confined. Besides which, they cost nothing to keep. The District Board of Etah states that it does not wish to purchase bulls at present with the funds at its disposal, as they do not seem sufficient to bear the cost of maintenance. This argument appears to run all through the answers given by the District Boards. It cannot therefore be too strongly represented that it is quite unneces- sary to maintain bulls; it is only expected that the bulls should be provided by the Boards for the benefit of cattle owners, and the bulls should then be maintained on the lands of the zemindars for whose special benefit the sires were obtained. This is only fair. Not only is it unnecessary to maintain bulls, but I go further and say that it is harmful to keep up bulls. Besides it is well known that some bulls will not serve properly in captivity. Stalled bulls very frequently become vicious and dangerous to both men and beast, and they fall off in power of the loins, which become narrow and mean through want of exercise. Punjab. 1007. In the Punjab almost every district possesses large numbers of Hissar bred bulls which freely roam about with the herds from year's end to year's end. They become great pets of the villagers, are extremely docile and are always in splendid condition. The people do not mind their grazing here and there in their fields because they give them a good return in getting superior young stock. In this way they are no expense to the District Boards, and are of very great service to the cattle owners and agriculturists. Central. Provinces. 1008. The late Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces, Veterinary Lieutenant Trydell collected information concerning the breeds of cattle from the districts of Nagpur, Seoni, Jabbalpur, Mandla, Domoh, Narsingpur, Saugor, Chindwara, Warda, Bhandara and at the Singaji and Rajim Fairs, where he believed that the best cattle were to be found. 1009. The distinct breeds are said to be Paraspani, Jeytpur, and Arvi. The ordinary cattle are not bred in the usual acceptation of the term. The sires of all stock are the offspring of the herds with which, they roam are considered suitable for emaculation. The cows are only of value for reproduction, their milking qualities being practically nil. They are seldom slaughtered, and are allowed to breed as long as they can. From the description it will, therefore, be noted that selection of either sex for the purpose of improving a herd is rarely resorted to, and these taken together with the fact that during a greater portion of the year grazing (only supplemented with a minimum quantity of grain whilst working) is quite insufficient to maintain an animal with proper nourishment. The Superintendent considers the reasons for the inferiority of the herds to be:181 1012. The average height of Arvi bullocks selected behind the shoulder is 52 inches, and that of a Jeytpur 48 inches. 1013. It is difficult to draw a distinction between the Paraspani and the Jeytpur breeds, but in the latter the shape of the horns may be considered a distinguishing feature. The chief faults of the cows of these breeds are that they are too leggy and have small bones, in other words they are too light; but it is considered that these defects might be remedied if judiciously selected bulls were placed with the herds. The stud bulls of the Paraspani had the same weak points abovementioned, and it is a source of regret that this has not been remedied. 1014. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, suggests that if good bulls were placed here, and a Cattle Show, at which prizes were awarded were instituted in the district he is of opinion that many good bullocks, suitable for Army purposes might be obtained. 1015. For really good cattle very high prices are realized, even Rs. 350 has been paid for a pair of trotting bullocks, while the average price for an ordi- nary pair is Rs. 80. Cows may be purchased from Rs. 5 to Rs. 25, and if properly fed yield about four quarts of milk daily. 1016. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, states:182 Bengal. 1022. In Bengal the subject of cattle-breeding has been taken up vigorously. Many schemes have been formulated, but so far they have not been very successful. It is now proposed to utilize the old Pusa Estate which was formerly a horse-breeding Depot. As land and buildings are available it is considered that this locality would be very suitable in which to start a cattle-breeding Farm upon intelligent lines. As this is a most interesting subject it has been thought advisable to furnish a full extract from Veterinary-Captain Raymond's reports:183 loose in some distant village where they would not be likely to mix with their own blood. The first thing to be done however is to prohibit the indiscriminate custom of turning loose young bull calves as "poon" without authorised permission. This custom in itself is an excellent one, and should be encourged among the well to do classes, but only selected young animals should be permitted. I make a very strong point of this. Why should wretched and undersized bull calves be turned loose to feed at the expense of the cultivators and to do them further harm by serving their cows. Yet this is what occurs almost daily, to the continued detriment of the agricultural stock. 1024. The plan which has been above suggested should not prove a difficult matter, particularly if an order could be issued permitting only good selected young males being turned loose as "poon." 1025. All bulls should be allowed entire liberty. Cows would then be served directly they were ready, and consequently the percentage of pregnant animals would then be greatly increased. 1026. The headmen of the village should be held responsible that the bulls were not ill used, and information should at once be sent to the District Veterinary Assistant in case the bull needed medical assistance. A register of all bulls issued should be kept by the Veterinary Assistant who would be required to submit a quarterly report stating:184 Minbu.185 III.186 1043. The number and descriptions of cattle censused were as follows:187 were brought to the Fair from Madura and Tinnevelly districts of which about 800 were Alumbadi, 1,000 Kangayam, and the rest local bred. Sanitary arrange- ments were fair and the supply of water was good and sufficient. No case of contagious cattle disease was detected. The following suggestions were made by the Stock Inspector:188 Pairs of Alambadi fetched as high a price as from Rs. 150 to 170. 1055. Uppadamangulam Fair, district Coimbatore.189 Burgoor, Amritmahal, Alambadi, and mixed breeds, and were brought from Palladam, Pollachi, Coimbatore, Metapolleum, Palaghat and Mysore. About 75 per cent. of the cattle were sold. Sanitary arrangements were fair. Owing to the lake and the stream which are used to provide drinking water in good seasons having run dry, and owing to the failure of rains there was difficulty in procuring water. There were however some wells at a little distance away from which water was obtained, though in some instances the owners of cattle had to pay 3 pies per head of cattle for water; 24 bullocks suffering from Foot and Mouth disease were discovered in the fair grounds and were treated in the hospital erected for the purpose. The following suggestions were made by the Stock Inspector:190 Districts from which cattle were brought. NUMBER OF CATTLE PURCHASED. Destination of cattle. Number. Number of bullocks pre- sent. Number of calves. Buffaloes Goats. Ponies. Total. AVERAGE PRICE OF CATTLE. Adults. Young stock Total. First quality bullocks. Plough bullocks 2 years. 3 years. Cows per seer. Buffaloes Females. Males. Khandesh ... 709 ... 709 Holker State . . . 864 ... ... ... ... ... ... 150 per pair. 70 per pair. 20 each. 40 each. 10 per seer yield. 60 each. 25 each. Nimar ... 417 ... 417 Nimar ... 378 6,569 130 22 21 32 6,774 Hoshungabad ... 152 ... 152 Hoshungabad . . . 36 ... ... ... ... ... ... Baluchistan. 1065. Quetta Show.191 One hundred and nineteen animals attended the Show against 179 last year, vide detailed below:192 The new arrangement of giving prizes independently of sales to the Commissariat is reported to have given universal satisfaction to exhibitors. Cattle.PART II.195 PART II.196 Results of Professional Examinations, September 1897. Examinations. Total candidates. Percentage of passes. Examined. Passed. First Professional ... ... ... ... 19 12 63.01 Second Professional ... ... ... ... 23 9 39.01 Third Professional ... ... ... ... 14 7 50.00 Total ... 56 28 50.00 1075. We are mainly interested in the results of the third or final examina- tion, and it is disappointing to find that only 7 candidates were successful out of 14, who presented themselves for examination. The small number of Veterinary Assistants turned out from this College is much to be regretted as it so greatly lessens its value from an imperial point of view; take for example last year when 8 Veterinary Assistants were required for service in Uganda, Bombay was unable to furnish one, and all were supplied from Lahore. 1076. When we compare the results with other teaching establishments, we find the following results:197 case of Bombay, I do not advocate the shortening of the course of training, bearing in my mind that even with the course, extending as it does to 3 years, the students are found to be wanting in practical knowledge. 1081. Why this failing should exist I cannot say, as there is good practice in the hospital as will be seen by the following figures:198 The increase is satisfactory, but still I fear that the cattle practice falls very short of the requirements, for it is in this branch that we require practical men. 1088. The great want in this school is a contagious disease ward, for when it is considered that the students leave this institution without even having seen a case of Rinderpest or even of Foot and Mouth disease, it will be at once imagined how unable they are to cope with the work which is expected of them. In equine practice it is of the greatest importance that Veterinary Assistants should be able to detect Glanders, and that they should be able to test cases by the use of Mallein, but such teaching is impossible without a contagious disease ward. 1089. The shoeing done at this institution is about the same as last year. The number attending the class for Nalbunds was increased from 6 to 9. This is a very popular and at the same time a most useful class. 1090. The demand for Veterinary Assistants still continue to be large. The Principal reports that there are no men unemployed. He adds:199 opinion that 2 years is not sufficiently long a period to teach the men practically; if it were actually two years it might be so, but with vacations they only obtain 15 months actual teaching, and it cannot be expected that good men should be turned out in that time. That some really good men have been turned out is due to the fact that they continue to educate themselves after they leave the school. 1096. Veterinary-Captain Pease brings forward a number of points in which he considers an improvement might be made in the curriculum, all of which had I think better be left for discussion when the scheme for the employment of the Civil Veterinary Department, Subordinate Veterinary Establishment, has received the sanction of the Government of India. On this point, he states:200 I would point out that the weakest subject of all the students is Bovine Surgery, nor can I see in what way we can improve them in this subject, as their knowledge is absolutely and essentially theoretical. In the case of Equine Surgery, we are able to show and make the students do every operation on the body of the horse previous to dissection. Were we able to do this in the case of the cow they would be as well up in Bovine as in Equine Surgery. 1103. This is greatly to be regretted, as knowledge of Bovine Surgery and Medicine is of the utmost importance in the training of Veterinary Assistants. The attention of the Principal should be drawn to this point on his return from furlough. One point I am glad to note is, that a contagious disease ward is now under consideration. If the Agent to the Governor-General is of opinion that it can be done without hurting the religious feelings of the people, cattle should be purchased and the various forms of contagious disease should be produced by inoculation; this would show the students the various forms of disease from beginning to end, and would be the means of imparting much practical knowledge to them. 1104. It is not, however, only at Ajmere where practical training in Bovine Medicine and Surgery is wanting; this is also felt at Lahore, and the suggestion made by the Committee which assembled on the Hissar Farm to the effect that all students should spend a certain time there, is worthy of consideration, for with- out such practical training we cannot expect Veterinary Assistants to be of much use in districts where their charge is mainly connected with cattle. 1105. It is unsatisfactory to learn that no Nalbund Class was held this year. The Officiating Principal, reporting on this subject, states:201 Bazar medicines have been seriously studied and a good collection of them formed. This. I think, is an important advance, because students are a little apt to overlook the cheaper and more easily procured remedies. In paragraph 11 of my last Annual Report I remarked:202 1115. One of the most pleasing features with this establishment is the steady increase in the practice obtainable at this School. On this point, Veterinary- Captain Raymond reports as follows:203 The number of boys now on the register is six. These Shans have been a sore trial. Beyond the fact that they are well behaved in class, I can say little that is good in their favor. They are not only dull and apathetic, but absent themselves whenever they feel weary of things in general. Fining them has little effect as they then do not pay for their board and lodging. Three boys, namely, Maung Po Lon, Maung Po Nya, and Maung Seik Ta, are now doing well and I hope they will turn out fair assistants. Maung Po Han, Maung Tok Pyu, and Maung No are not nearly so well up. They have been warned that, if by the 1st of June their progress is not what it should be, they will be sent back. 1120. Considering the raw material with which Veterinary-Captain Evans has to work, I think the results exceptionally good. It is only due to his untiring energy that he is able to keep the Veterinary Assistants up to the standard they have obtained. Veterinary-Captain Evans brings to notice the good work done by Mr. Batlivala. Veterinary Instruction in North-Western Provinces. 1121. There is no Veterinary School in the North-Western Provinces but a most useful system has been adopted by which students, prior to proceeding to the Lahore School, are awarded a scholarship of Rs. 5 per mensem for one year, and are sent to the Depôt at Babugarh for practical training in hospital work; this will thoroughly accustom them to animals and will tend to enable them to derive more benefit from the training which they receive at Lahore.
PART II.207 PART II.PART II.211 PART II.212 1136. The number of foalings per stallion employed rose from 13.57 to 12.78 last year; both these points are satisfactory. 1137. One thousand nine-hundred and fifty-nine (1,959) Country-bred remounts were purchased against 1,906 last year. This is very satisfactory, especially as so few Officers were able to attend the Fairs. 1138. One of the most encouraging improvements is in the number of remounts purchased with known pedigrees. This means that fewer were pur- chased from dealers, and this must also prove that better horses were purchased. The Army Remount Department obtained 82.27 per cent. of pedigreed horses against 54.37 last year. The Native Cavalry obtained 31.74 against 17.99. 1139. The cost of feed and keep has, I regret to say, increased. This was only to be expected, and I would record my opinion that had it not been for the great care evinced by the Superintendents, the increase would have been greater. The cost increased in North-Western Provinces by ... ... ... Rs. 34 per stallion. 213 1150. The rearing of young donkey stock has led to 16 Jacks being allotted to the Imperial lists for mule-breeding; this must be considered satisfac- tory. Castration. 1151. Castration by Imperial Salutris has improved during the year; this surprises me for many of the colts were in such low condition that they could not be operated on. The following will allow of comparisons being drawn:214 Veterinary Dispensaries. 1158. The Veterinary dispensaries continue to do excellent work. In the nine dispensaries of the Punjab 15,966 patients received relief against 13,975 the previous year. The North-Western Provinces are very backward, only one dispensary exists and only 20 cases were treated during the whole year. Good work has been done by the dispensaries in the Central Provinces. One additional institution has been opened. The number of cases treated in the Bombay dispensaries still shows a steady increase, viz; 19,975 against 19,613 last year. The number of dispensaries has increased to 17 in this Presidency. Bengal has also started dispensaries but it is too early yet to judge of their work. Cases treated by Veterinary. Assistants. 1159. Considering that these men receive such little supervision it is very creditable to have to report that the number of animals treated by them during the year has considerably increased. Cattle still form the largest class of patients. The Superintendents employed in the Punjab and North-Western Provinces have done a great deal in regard to collection of information about cattle. Considerable attention has been devoted to cattle disease by Bengal and Burma. The latter shows more than double the number of cases treated than there were last year. The following statement will show the improvement which has taken place during the past three years:215 1166. I would also record my best thanks to all the Local Governments and Administrations with whom I have been connected during the past year; they have heartily co-operated with me in all matters tending to the welfare of the De- partment. 1167. The same remarks will also apply to all Native Chiefs whose States I have visited during the year, and I would take this opportunity of thanking them as well as all Officers of the Political Department for their courtesy and help. Had it not been for the aid afforded me, the success which has been obtained in matters connected with horse and mule-breeding in Native States could not have been reached. SIMLA: A. E. QUERIPEL, Vety.,-Colonel, Inspector-General, The 15th July 1898. Civil Veterinary Department.
TABLE I.TABLE I. TABLE I. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE II IMPERIAL REPORTABSTRACT. Province. NUMBER DIED. NUMBER DESTROYED. TOTAL. PERCENTAGE OF DEATHS. PERCENTAGE DESTROYED. GENERAL PERCENTAGE. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. North-Western Provinces and Oudh 5 ... 2 ... 7 ... 5.20 ... 2.08 ... 7.29 ... Rajputana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Punjab ... ... 5 ... 1 ... 6 ... 5.20 ... 1.04 ... 6.25 ... South Punjab ... ... 5 ... 4 ... 9 ... 5.10 ... 4.08 ... 9.18 ... Baluchistan ... ... ... 2 ... 2 ... 4 ... 4.76 ... 4.76 ... 9.52 ... Central India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Deccan ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 ... ... ... 8.00 ... 8.00 ... Guzerat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sind and Cutch ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 1 ... ... 7.14 50.00 7.14 50.00
TABLE III. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE IV. TABLE IV. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE IV.TABLE IV.TABLE IV.TABLE IVTABLE IV.TABLE V. TABLE V. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE V.TABLE VI. TABLE VI. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE VI (a). Abstract showing the total number and pedigrees of Country-bred. Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1897-98. By whom purchased. Total number purchased. PEDIGREES. PERCENTAGE OF PEDIGREES. Furnished. Not fur- nished. Furnished. Not fur- nished. Army Remount Department... 141 116 25 82.27 17.73 Native Cavalry Regiments... 1,443 458 985 31.74 68.26 Police, North-Western Provinces and Oudh... 22 3 19 13.63 86.37 Police, Punjab... 41 31 10 75.61 24.39 Police, Bombay... 103 94 9 91.26 8.74 Imperial Service Troops... 209 2 207 0.96 99.04 xvi
TABLE VI (b). Statement showing the number of Country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regiments, &c., during the official year 1897-98. Native Cavalry Regiments. NUMBER OF COUNTRY- BRED REMOUNTS Where purchased. PEDIGREES Horses. Mares. Geldings. Total. Furnished. Not furnished. Total. 1st Bengal Lancers TABLE VI (b)TABLE VI (b)TABLE VI (b)TABLE VI (b)TABLE VI (c) TABLE VITABLE VI (c)TABLE VI (c)TABLE VI (c)TABLE VI (c)TABLE VI (c)TABLE VII. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE VIII. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE IX. Table IX. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE IX.TABLE IX.TABLE IXTABLE IXTABLE IXTABLE IXTABLE IX.TABLE IX.TABLE IX.TABLE IXTABLE X. IMPERIAL REPORTPART I.TABLE XI. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XITABLE XI.TABLE XII. TABLE XII IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XII.TABLE XIII. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XIII.TABLE XIV. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XIVTABLE XIVTABLE XV.TABLE IMPERIAL REPORTXV REVENUE SECTION. Western Provinces, Punjab, Tirhoot, and Baluchistan, during the year 1897TABLE XVConcluded. Western Provinces, Punjab, Tirhoot, and Baluchistan, during the year 1897TABLE XVI. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XVI.TABLE XVI.TABLE XVI.TABLE XVI.TABLE XVI.TABLE XVI.TABLE XVI.TABLE XVI.TABLE XVITABLE IMPERIAL REPORTXVII. REVENUE SECTION. NorthTABLE IMPERIAL REPORTXVIITABLE XVIII. TABLE XVIII. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XIX. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XX. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XXTABLE XXI. TABLE XXI. IMPERIAL REPORTTABLE XXII. TABLE XXII. IMPERIAL REPORTPART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. TABLES.
TABLE A. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Return of Horse, Pony and Donkey Stallions the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons during 1897TABLE B. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Casualty Roll of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons shown under separate heads during 1897-98. Brand No. Name. Class. Horse or Pony. Description of Casualty. Nature of Casualty. Remarks. North-Western Provinces and Oudh Provincial Government Stallions. 2,455 Purchitgarh ... Arab Horse Died Colic 2,404 Monal ... Arab TABLE C. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, shown under separate heads sold during 1897-98. Brand No. Name. Class. Horse or Pony. Name of Purchaser. Amounts sold for. Remarks showing cause of rejection. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Rs. Provincial Government Stallions. 2,447 Katkhuda ... Persian Horse Not recorded ... 37 Unfit for stud purposes, Courts of Ward Stallions. 2,450 Kamyab ... Arab Pony Not recorded ... 180 Not recorded. 2,463 Wakifkar ... Persian Horse Mr. Douglas ... 250 Not recorded. District Board Stallions. ... Khushkismat ... Arab Horse Mohomed Sultan Ahmed ... 275 Bad foalgetter. North Punjab. District Boards. 2 S. Anmol ... C. B. Horse Ghulam Hosain of Kalra ... 132 Unfit for stud purposes. ... Woolwich Infant ... Arab Pony Yusaf Ali Khan ... 130 Old and worn out. ... Catroorn ... TABLE D. TABLE D. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Services and Produce of each class of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, during 1897-98. Horse or Pony. Class. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. Provincial Government District Boards. Courts of Ward. Private persons. Stallions on Register. Stallions actually employed at stud. No. of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previ- ous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on Register. Stallions actually em- ployed at stud. No. of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previ- ous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on Register. Stallions actually em- ployed at stud. No. of mares covered. Average result of previ- ous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previ- ous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on Register. Stallions actually em- ployed at stud. No. of mares covered. Average result of previ- ous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previ- ous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. No. of produce. No. of not held. No. of not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. No. of produce. No. not held. No. not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Tear under report. Previous year- Year under report. Previous year. No. of produce. No. not held. No. not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. No. of produce. No. not held. No. not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse. Arab .. 27 26 25 1,186 1,065 45.6 42.6 356 577 132 14.0 23.0 5.3 1 1 1 40 35 40 35 7 16 12 7 16 12 4 4 3 48 63 12 21 4 28 31 1 9 10 7 2 4 36 75 18 19 37 32 6 9 8 1.5 Persian .. 5 5 6 346 376 69 62.7 115 212 49 19.0 35.0 8.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 22 .. 1 1 1 17 25 17 25 3 20 2 3 20 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Northern .. 1 1 1 70 41 70 41.0 12 23 6 12.0 23.0 6.0 1 1 1 15 32 15 32 7 22 3 7 22 3 .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Total .. 33 32 32 1,602 1,482 50 46.3 483 812 187 15.0 25.4 6.0 2 2 2 55 67 27.5 33.5 14 38 15 7 19 17.5 5 5 4 65 88 13 22 7 48 33 2 12 .. 7 2 4 36 .. 18 19 37 32 6 9 8 1.5 Pony. Arab .. 25 24 21 1,103 883 46 42 281 466 136 14 22 6.5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 1 10 8 5 8 .. 3 5 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Persian .. 1 1 1 50 68 50 20 28 2 28 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Total .. 20 25 22 1,171 933 47 42.5 301 494 138 14 22.5 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 1 10 8 5 8 .. 3 5 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. GRAND TOTAL. 59 57 54 2,773 2,415 49.0 44.0 784 1,306 325 14.5 24.1 6.0 2 2 2 55 67 27.5 33.5 14 38 15 7 19 17.5 7 7 5 75 96 11 19 7 51 38 1.5 10 7.5 7 2 4 36 75 18 19 37 32 6 9 8 1.5 lxxxvi
TABLE D.TABLE D.TABLE D.TABLE D.TABLE D.TABLE E. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Cost of feed, keep, attendants, &c., of Horse and Pony Stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, shown under separate heads during 1897-98. Province. District. NUMBER OF STALLIONS OR DAYS. TOTAL ANNUAL COST. AVERAGE COST PER STALLION. REMARKS. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Provincial Govern- ment. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Babugarh Depôt... ... 891 ... 383 10 3 ... 157 2 6 Agra ... ... 339 ... 238 15 9 ... 258 13 3 Aligarh ... ... 730 ... 487 13 4 ... 343 14 8 Bareilly ... ... 200 ... 150 0 2 ... 273 12 3 . .. Budaon ... ... 486 329 352 8 9 225 9 0 264 12 4 250 3 10 Bulandshahr ... 1,095 1,543 818 14 8 1,063 8 8 272 15 6 251 9 3 Bijnour ... ... 365 ... 277 13 9 ... 277 13 9 . .. Dehra Dun ... 365 ... 293 5 3 ... 293 5 3 . .. Etah ... 365 ... 240 0 0 ... 240 0 0 . .. Etawah ... 365 ... 307 14 5 ... 307 14 5 . .. Fatehpur ... ... 365 ... 229 2 0 ... 229 2 0 Hardoi ... 233 122 167 14 6 90 8 0 263 0 5 270 12 1 Meerut ... 1,490 2,307 1,169 2 8 1,636 7 7 286 6 6 258 14 7 Muttra ... 365 355 276 10 10 242 15 6 276 10 10 249 13 0 Moradabad ... 1,665 ... 1,308 11 5 ... 286 14 3 ... Muzafarnagar ... 1,702 853 1,370 7 7 656 0 10 293 14 5 280 11 7 Shahjebanpur ... 294 365 214 8 3 262 3 11 266 5 1 262 3 11 Rai Bareilly ... 365 ... 277 13 11 ... 277 13 11 ... Sultanpur ... ... 365 ... 290 9 6 ... 290 9 6 Saharanpur ... 1,343 1,031 994 6 6 727 1 9 270 4 1 257 6 7 Total 10,698 9,593 8,220 4 8 6,534 9 11 280 7 5 248 10 1 Courts of Ward Estates. Barabanki ... 365 ... 301 10 1 ... 301 10 1 ... Bareilly ... 365 ... 378 4 5 ... 378 6 6 ... Fyzabad ... ... 365 ... 227 1 0 ... 227 1 0 Partabgarh ... 327 ... 325 15 1 ... 363 13 1 Muzafarnagar ... 365 ... 295 8 0 ... 295 8 0 ... Total 1,122 365 1,301 5 8 227 1 0 334 0 6 227 1 0 Private persons. ... 365 ... 13 9 6 3 ... 139 6 3 3 Basti ... ... 730 ... 44 7 3 0 ... 23 9 0 Gorakhpur ... Total ... 1,095 ... 58 6 9 3 ... 195 8 5 xcii
TABLE E.TABLE E.TABLE E.TABLE F. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Return of Mares considered suitable for Horse, Pony, Male, or Donkey-breeding for the official year 1897-98. DETAILS. NUMBER OF MARES CONSIDERED STUTABLE For Horse breeding. For Pony- breeding. For Mule- breeding. For Donkey breeding. TOTAL. Balance on 1st April 1897 ... 9,899 21,618 10,961 12,207 54,685 Increase ... By purchase ... 1,263 2,215 1,816 1,603 6,897 By transfers, &c. ... 631 1,420 299 402 2,752 Total ... 11,793 25,253 13,076 14,212 64,334 Decrease ... Died ... ... 888 1,195 727 1,152 3,962 Sold ... ... 1,441 2,154 1,062 1,569 6,226 Transferred ... 1,285 1,595 595 2,202 5,677 Not accounted for ... ... ... 122 ... 73 195 Total ... 3,614 5,066 2,384 4,996 16,060 Balance on 31st March 1898 ... 8,179 20,187 10,692 9,216 48,274 In North Punjab ... ... 2,080 10,053 3,008 4,605 19,746 TABLE G. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Casualty Roll of Donkey Stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, shown under separate heads, during 1897-98. No Name. Class. Description of Casualty. Nature of Casualty. Remarks. South Punjab. Court of Ward. 472 Gantakul ... ... Italian. Died. Pharengitis. xcvii
TABLE H PROVINCIAL REPORT. Donkey Stallions, the property of District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, shown under separate heads, sold during 1897-98. Brand No. Name. Class. Name of Purchaser. Amount sold for. Remarks showing cause of rejection. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Court of Ward. 460 Ajitmal ... ... Persian Civil Veterinary Department 300 No longer required by the Estate. North Punjab. District Board. 1 Mehrban ... ... C. B. Civil Veterinary Department. 250 No longer required by Gnj- rat District Board. Burma. District Board. TABLE J. PROVINCIAL REPORT.
TABLE PROVINCIAL Services and produce of each class of Donkey Stallions the property of NORTHJ. REPORT. District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons during 1897TABLE PROVINCIAL Services and produce of each class of Donkey Stallions the property of NORTH CLASS OF DONKEY STALLION. DISTRICT BOARDS. COURTS Stallions on Register. Donkey stallions actually employ- ed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on Register. Donkey stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. For mule- breed- ing. For donkey- breed- ing. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. For mule- breed- ing. For donkey breed- ing. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Home-bred J.TABLE PROVINCIAL Services and produce of each class of Donkey Stallions the property of SOUTH CLASS OF DONKEY STALLION. DISTRICT BOARDS. COURTS Stallions on Register. Donkey stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on Register Donkey stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. For muleJ. REPORT. District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons during 1897TABLE PROVINCIAL Services and produce of each class of Donkey Stallions the property of CENTRAL CLASS OF DONKEY STALLION. DISTRICT BOARDS. COURTS Stallions on Register. Donkey stallions actually employ- ed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on Register. Donkey stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. For mule- breed- ing. For donkey- breed- ing. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. For mule- breed- ing. For donkey breed- ing. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule proJ.TABLE PROVINCIAL Services and produce of each class of Donkey Stallions the property of BURMA CLASS OF DONKEY STALLION. DISTRICT BOARDS. COURTS Stallions on Register. Donkey stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on Register Donkey stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. For muleJ. REPORT District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons during 1897TABLE PROVINCIAL Services and produce of each class of Donkey Stallions the property of TOTALS CLASS OF DONKEY STALLION. DISTRICT BOARDS. COURTS Stallions on Register. Donkey stallions actually employ- ed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Result of previous year's coverings. Average result of previous year's coverings per stallion employed at stud. Stallions on Register. Donkey stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. For mule- breed- ing. For donkey- breed- ing. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. For mule- breed- ing. For donkey breed- ing. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not field. Number not known. Number of donkey produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Italian J.TABLE K. Cost of feed, keep, attendants, &c., of Donkey Stallions, the property of Provincial Governments, District Boards, Courts of Ward, and private persons, shown under separate heads during 1897TABLE L. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Breeders' and other Colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Local Funds, in 1897TABLE L.TABLE M, TABLE M. PROVINCIAL REPORT.. Showing Districts where Outbreaks of CattleTABLE M.TABLE M.TABLE M.TABLE M.TABLE MPROVINCIAL REPORT. TABLE M. BURMA.
TABLE M.TABLE M.TABLE N. TABLE N. Statement showing the number of animals treated by Veterinary Assistants during the year 1897-98. District. Tehsil. RINDERPEST ANTHRAX. FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE PLEURO- PNEUMONIA. CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE OTHER DISEASES. TOTAL TREATED. Number of villages visited. Number of Veteri- nary Assistants employed. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. Died. Relieved. Cured. Total. North-Western Pro- vinces & Oudh. Agra ... ... 21 1 38 60 27 4 13 44 ... ... 7 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 173 175 48 7 231 286 140 1 Aligark ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 16 53 69 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 56 417 479 6 72 471 549 158 1 Bareilly ... ... 85 5 53 143 1 1 ... 2 ... 4 7 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 410 114 289 813 496 124 349 969 218 1 Bijnour ... ... 81 ... 1 82 ... ... ... ... 15 4 506 525 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 2 732 748 110 6 1,239 1,355 228 1 Badaun ... ... 168 8 169 345 89 4 53 146 2 24 694 720 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 46 905 954 262 82 1,821 2,165 196 1 Bulandshahr ... ... 111 22 5 138 22 ... 2 24 ... ... 33 33 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 58 121 181 135 80 161 376 297 1 Banda ... ... 56 36 136 228 96 21 4 121 5 34 85 124 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 70 124 208 171 161 349 681 132 1 Bahraich ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 11 71 83 1 11 71 83 Bhinga Estate. 1 Bara Banki ... ... ... 5 0 5 ... ... ... ... ... 11 2 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 58 24 87 5 74 26 105 158 1 Benares ... ... 4 35 2 41 ... ... ... ... ... 18 ... 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 1 11 4 63 3 70 32 1 Dehra Dun ... ... 14 3 10 27 ... ... ... ... ... ... 68 68 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 20 48 70 16 23 126 165 54 1 Etawah ... ... 2 6 14 22 ... ... ... ... 5 3 65 73 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 17 94 113 9 26 173 208 44 1 Fyzabad ... ... 4 2 8 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 8 14 1 ... Hardoi ... ... 12 ... 3 15 ... ... ... ... ... 1 21 22 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 8 10 19 13 9 34 56 22 1 Hamirpur ... ... 5 ... 106 111 ... ... ... ... 4 8 370 382 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 7 10 9 11 483 503 26 ... Jaunpur ... ... 14 320 190 524 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 14 320 193 527 71 ... Jalaun ... ... .. ... 4 4 ... 3 6 9 ... 44 124 168 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 17 97 115 1 64 231 296 46 ... cxxiv
TABLE N.TABLE N.TABLE N.TABLE N.TABLE N.TABLE N.TABLE N.TABLE N.TABLE O. TABLE O. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during 1897-98. Dispensaries. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Balan ce. Last year's Balance. By Local Fund Grant By Govern- ment Grant By Municipal contribution. By other sources. TOTAL. Pay. Travelling Allowance. Medicines Instruments etc., etc. Furniture land etc., etc. Contingen- cies, stabling, house-rent, etc. Transferred to Indian Veterinary Dispensary Fund. TOTAL. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. North- Western Provinces and Oudh. No dispensary has been established by this Department in North-Western Provinces and Oudh. North Punjab. Sialkot ... ... ... 2,258 2 0 ... ... 20 2 0 2,278 4 6 1,372 4 6 288 0 0 410 13 9 ... 187 0 3 20 2 0 2,278 4 6 ... Gujranwala ... 200 4 3 1,040 0 0 ... ... 0 10 6 1,240 14 9 704 12 0 418 14 0 ... ... 81 6 0 ... 1,205 0 0 35 14 9 Dera Ismail Khan ... ... 1,079 8 4 ... ... ... 1,079 8 4 645 0 0 271 3 4 158 0 3 4 0 0 1 4 9 ... 1,079 8 4 ... Total ... 200 4 3 4,377 10 0 ... 20 12 6 4.598 11 7 2,722 0 6 978 1 4 568 14 0 4 0 0 269 11 0 20 2 0 4,562 12 10 35 14 9 South Punjab. Amritsar ... ... ... ... ... 1,266 2 3 186 1 6 1,452 3 9 669 4 0 ... 401 11 9 12 8 0 368 12 0 ... 1,452 3 9 ... Hoshiarpur ... ... 766 0 0 ... .. 1 15 0 767 15 0 381 0 0 ... 292 0 9 3 8 0 ... ... 676 8 9 91 6 3 Umballa ... ... ... 944 1 4 ... ... ... 944 1 4 480 0 0 180 0 0 123 12 4 3 12 0 156 9 0 ... 944 1 4 ... Ludhiana ... ... ... 524 5 1 ... ... ... 524 5 1 116 6 1 0 ... 352 15 3 33 4 0 21 11 0 ... 524 5 1 ... Rohtak ... ... ... 705 11 3 ... ... ... 705 11 3 406 10 8 131 10 7 59 4 0 24 6 0 83 12 0 ... 705 1 1 3 ... Jellalabad Court of Wards Estate. ... ... ... ... 818 8 0 818 8 0 540 0 0 ... 278 8 0 ... ... ... 818 8 0 ... Total ... ... 2,940 1 8 ... 1,266 2 3 1,006 8 6 5,212 12 5 2,593 5 6 311 1 0 7 1,508 4 1 77 6 0 630 12 0 ... 5,121 6 2 91 6 3
TABLE O.TABLE O.TABLE P. TABLE P. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing Tours of Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, during 1897-98. Rank, name, and designation of Officer. Districts visited. Fairs and Shows attended. NUMBER OF MILKS TRAVELLED. REMARKS. Veterinary-Captain R. H. Ringe, Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Meerut, Saharanpur, Dehra Dun, Naini Tal, Mu- zaffarnagar, Cawnpur, Fatehpur, Lucknow, Rai Bareilly, Fyzabad, Hardoi, Moradabad, Bijnor. Bulandshahr, Agra, Aligarh, Muttra, Badaon, Bareilly and Shahjehanpur. Garhmuktesar, Batesar, Makanpur, Aligarh, Bulandshahr, Muzafar- nagar, Meerut (Nauchandi.) 2,510 4,998 ... 7,508 Veterinary-Lieutenant H. P. Turnbull, Superintendent, Civil, Veterinary Depart- ment, North Punjab. Hazara, Jhang, Lahore, Gujranwalla, Rawalpindi, Gujrat, Peshawar, Bannu, Dera Ismail Khan and Shahpur. Jhelum, Hansi, Amritsar, Jhang, Bannu, Dera Ismail Khan, Shah- pur, Gujrat and Lahore. 2,144 8,206 ... 10,350 Veterinary-Lieutenant A. S. Trydell, Super- intendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab. Jhelum and Sialkot Rawalpindi ... ..... ... ... ... Veterinary-Captain F. Joslen, Superintend- ent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab. Jullunder, Amritsar, Dera Ghazi Khan, Multan, Muzfargarh, Montgomery, Ferozepore, Ludhianah, Umballa, Hoshiar pur, Gurdaspore, Delhi, Gurgaon, Rohtak, Hissar and Kurnal. Amritsar, (Bysakhi,) Jullunder, Jalalabad, Delhi. Kurnal, Kapur- thala, Multan, Bhawalpore, Dera Ghazi Khan and Umballa. 2,012 8,431 72 10,515 Veterinary-Captain H. M. Maxwell, Super- intendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Baluchistan. Quetta, Pishin, Thal Chotiali, Kalat and Zhob Quetta and Sibi 1,576 2,323 ... 3,899 Veterinary-Lieutenant A. S. Trydell, Super- intendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces. Raipur, Nimar, Narsinghpur, Seoni, Chindwara, Nagpur, Wardha, Chanda, Bhandara and Sangor. Smgaji in Nimar, Rajim in Rai- pur. 1,197 5,207 ... 6,404 Inspected Dispensaries and attend- ed Cattle Fairs. Veterinary-Lieutenant J. Farmer, Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces. ... ... ... ... ... Assumed charge of office on 24th March 1898. Veterinary-Captain G. H. Evans, Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Burma. Hanthawaddy, Pegu, Tharrawaddy, Prome, Bassien, Myaungmya, Thongwa, Henzada, Toungoo, Salween, Thaton, Amherst, Pakokku, Mandalay, Shwebo, Sagaing, Kyaukse, Meiktila, Yamethin and Myingyan. Tharrawadday ... ... 330 6,190 2,984 9,504 Veterinary-Captain F. Raymond, Superintend- ent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal. Patna, Gya, Shahabad, Saran, Champaran, Muzaffar- pur, Darbhanga, Monghyr, Bhagalpur, Nadia, Jessore, Khulna, Birbhum, Cattack, Darjeeling, Muktesar and Bombay. Sitamarhi, Sonepore, Kalimpong, Barapur and Suri. 954 19,288 460 20,702 Veterinary-Captain J. W. A. Morgan, Su- perintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Bombay. Bombay, Ahmeduagar, Khandesh, Sholapur, Dhar- war, Belgaum Kaira, Ahmedabad, Deesa, Surat, Nasik, Poona, Jacobabad, Hyderabad, Shikarpur, Upper Sind Frontier and Kathiawar. Jacobabad, Moro, Talhar and Junagad 807 7,660 829 9,296 Member, Board of Examination, Bombay Veterinary College; in- spected Veterinary Dispensaries; purchased stallions at Bombay, visited State Studs and purchased young stock for the Ahmednagar Depôt. cxxxvi
TABLE Q. TABLE Q. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Statement showing Provincial cost of the Civil Veterinary Department during the official year 1897