ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1896-97.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
NLS to Scan B&W and insert
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] REFERENCE. Places marked thus X indicate temporary Stands where Stallions are sent when required during the Covering Season.
No. 207ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1896-97.
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1896-97. CONTENTS. PART I.ii PAGES II.iii PAGES. VI.iv PAGES. III.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1896-97. PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1896-97. PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.2 4. Twenty-three horses and two ponies were destroyed during the year under review. Of the 23 horses, 18 were destroyed as being old and unfit for stud purposes. 5. The total casualties from death or destruction, amounted to 38 against 51 last year. Considering the great disadvantages under which this Depart- ment has laboured during the year, I consider that the result must be looked upon as satisfactory. Sales. 6. Thirteen horses were sold during the year3 15. I see no objection to raise the age to 8 in any special case, it being understood that only a certain percentage of this age should be sent out; but I cannot agree to the height being raised to 16 bands, as I think experience proves that as soon as we begin to breed big ones in this country we go to leg, which of course is useless for Army purposes. 16. As before stated, only one half-bred was received this year. On this point, Sir John Watson says:4 the General Superintendent, Horse-breeding Department, an opportunity of reversing his policy, and I can only regret that he did not then accept it. Up to that date, this class of stallion had increased the size of the mares, although I am not of opinion that they gave them bone; had thoroughbred or Arab blood been introduced at this period, a better stamp of young stock would now have been obtainable; but the time has now come when I must speak plainly for, in my opinion, all districts which have had a continuous strain of Norfolk Trotter blood must be supplied with stallions of purer breed. I am sorry to differ with one who had the interest of horse-breeding so deeply at heart as Veterinary Colonel Hallen had, but in the interests of Government, and in the interests of the breeders, whose interests I am bound to safeguard, I am compelled to state that I feel greatly hampered by the number of this class of stallion at present on our strength. Of a total of 340 stallions, including the unacclimatized horses at the Depôt, we have 54 Norfolk Trotters, 59 Hackneys, and 2 Roadsters, making a total of 115 or about 34 per cent. These must gradually be got rid of, and I shall not recommend them to be replaced. Sixteen of these will be over 15 years of age next year, and their services might, with advantage, be dispensed with. 25. I have now been in charge of this Department for three years, and although I have always held that the policy of long continued strains of coarse blood were inadvisable for India, still, I have refrained from expressing any very decided views on the subject, but even if I were in favour of a con- tinuance of this policy, I would be compelled to give way before the over- whelming evidence which is brought before me against it. The Remount Agents inform me that the young stock by the Hackney stallion is excellent in appearance to about two years of age, but that after that they do not develop. Native Cavalry Officers inform me that they do not care to buy the produce of this class of stallions, as they find that it cannot keep in the ranks at a smart gallop, neither can it stand a hard day's work; but, in addition to this, the breeders now refuse to use them; their refusal is not based on any prejudice, for when first imported, and in fact for many years after, they liked their appearance. It is based, not only on the fact that Remount Officers do not care for their produce, but also on that of their having proved that they are not suitable for their work, either for riding, tent-pegging, or racing. It is well known that in many of our best breeding districts, the amusements in- dulged in by the breeders are either tent-pegging or racing, and as the breeders have so frequently put it to me:5 many of the faults in conformation which she possesses. Having accomplished this, we can then have one or two strains of backney blood to give the mare size of barrel, so essential to the carrying of a foal. Having succeeded in this, we have our brood mare, and then Arab or thoroughbred blood should be con- tinued with, in order to get horses suitable for Army purposes. The Hackneys that we would require would only be one or two a year, but as we have such a large number at present, viz., 34 per cent. of our total strength, I feel it will be some time before we require any. 30. I shall have more to say on this point, but shall defer doing so until remarking on "Stallions which produce the most suitable stock for the Army." Thoroughbred Australian. stallions. 31. During the year under review, the Government of India sanctioned the importation of 6 thoroughbred Australian stallions, and as in 1895-96, the commission was entrusted to Messrs. Krcrouse & Madden, who had supplied us so well on their first commission. I am pleased to be able to report that there has been no falling off this year: in fact I am of opinion that the stallion "Realm" was better than any we received last year, and had the Firm not unfortunately lost "Baratta," three days after landing in Madras, we would have had a great addition to our thoroughbred strength in this horse. 32. In my last Annual Administration Report I gave the terms of the agreement entered into with Messrs. Krcrouse & Madden, and I pointed out how advantageous they were to the Government of India, including, as they do, the landing of the horses at the shipper's risk, and their inspection by me within one month of landing. I further pointed out that the Firm lost one stallion shortly after landing him at Madras, and I regret to say that exactly the same thing occurred this year. Three days after landing, "Baratta" died from acute pneumonia. Although the Firm is quite willing to meet the wishes of the Government of India, they have asked me to represent that the terms of the agreement are very hard. They are quite willing to accept the terms and to incur the risk of bringing them over as they are able to cover this by Insurance, but they ask that if the horses are landed in good condition that they should then be at the risk of the Government of India. I consider that this is quite fair, and I shall be prepared, when soliciting Government sanction to the importation of Australian stallions for next year, to recommend that this change should take place. 33. The following is a description of the horses received:6 his best performances it may be mentioned that he won the Suburban Handi- cap at the Australian Jockey Club Spring Meeting, 7 furlongs, carrying 9 st. 8lbs, and beating 24 others. "Finis," is a horse showing any amount of quality, and when his measure- ments abovementioned are taken into consideration, it must be owned that he is an acquisition to any Stud. He also, as "Marble," is by "Marvellous," his dam being "Queen Bee" dam of "Sting" and "Waxy." This horse shows as much quality as "Donation" imported last year did, but in addition to this, he has more substance. "Orion" by "Canzoni" out of "Laura" having "Fisherman's" blood on the dam's side and "Bird-catcher" blood on the sire's side, is another most useful horse. He was purchased from Mr. Yeomans who had him at the Stud, and his stock are reported to have been excellent. "Dunfish," is a picture of a thoroughbred, and has splendid action. He is by "Dunlop" out of "My Lady." He won several races in Australia, amongst which may be mentioned the River Handicap at Bairnsdale, 9 fur- longs, carrying 9 stone 4 lbs. "Realm."7 I can only add that I fully agree with Mr. Krcrouse and will always regret his loss. 37. Having now completed my description of the horses imported by Messrs. Krcrouse and Madden, I would ask, granted that we can get such horses possessing blood combined with bone and substance, why should we import hackneys whose bone is undoubtedly soft, and who really do not measure as much below the knee. I have only to add that these horses were shown to Major-General P. J. Maitland, Secretary to the Government of India, Military Department, when he inspected the depôt, and I think I am correct in saying that he will fully bear me out in the descriptions above given. 38. In addition to the abovementioned Australian thoroughbreds, five more stallions of this class were in the market, I therefore obtained sanction from Government for their purchase, the cost being met by a corresponding reduction of horses from England. They were:8 40. From the above it will be seen that we have been able to purchase no less than 8 thoroughbred Australians in this country during the past year, and amongst them, are some of the best horses on our strength. The average price paid was R2,5l8 or about £160, landed in this country, and it must be remembered that of the 8, 6 were acclimatized horses; this means that we were able to put them to work at once instead of keeping them idle for nearly a year; and in this connection I would also point out that we do not run the risk of acclimatization. 41. The procedure of purchasing horses of this kind has proved so success- ful that I purpose always reporting to the Government of India any good horses that may be in the market, asking, at the same time, that if they ac- cord their sanction for their purchase, that a corresponding reduction be made in the number imported from England. The indent for the following year has to be submitted in August, but Sir John Watson does not generally com- mence buying until the following April; it is during the cold weather that purchases can be made in this country, and intimation can easily reach England before the purchases commence. Arab stallions. 42. During the year under review, I paid great attention to the Arab market, visiting it in October, again in December, and again in February, and came to the conclusion that, not only was it a market giving very little selec- tion, but that it was also one in which horses showing any quality were diffi- cult to find. Roughly speaking, only half the number of horses and ponies that are landed annually arrived this year, and well it was for the importers, for, owing to the prevalence of the plague in Bombay, up-country purchasers were very scarce, This, it might have been thought, would have reduced prices, but the Arab dealer is very headstrong; he knew that few good horses were landed, and in addition to this, a rumour went through the stables that exportation from Bussorah had been prohibited by the Turkish Authorities and was not likely to be re-opened for a year; this had the result of making the market tight: in fact I have never known it tighter than it was this year. As instances of this, I might mention one chesnut, a very high caste horse, with great bone; combinations not often met. I was particularly anxious to obtain him, and although the amount sanctioned was an average of R2,000 for each Arab, I offered the large sum of R4,200, but my offer was refused. This horse was afterwards purchased for His Highness the Maharaja Holkar, G.C.S.I., of Indore, at R6,000. Again, I offered R2,500 for another horse in December, and felt sure that as the market was getting worse, owing to the increase of the plague, I would be certain to get him, but I had to leave Bombay without him; on my return in February, I found that R2,800 had been offered by his Highness the Maharaja Sindhia of Gwalior, and it was with the greatest difficulty that I bought him for R3,000. 43. I do not purpose now to enter fully into the merits of this class of horse for stud purposes, but will content myself by saying that we cannot do without Arabs, and, in my opinion, the more we get the better. Roughly speaking, the cost of the English and Australian thoroughbred horses landed in this country, is R6,000, and I have already shown that the average price paid for Australians bought in India, that have raced and are no longer fit for the turf, was R2,518. I shall therefore ask the sanction of the Govern- ment of India to raise the price of the Arab to R2,500 instead of R2,000. The majority will be purchasable at the latter figure, but this increase will enable me to secure such horses as the one mentioned as having been bought by Indore. 44. Taken as a whole, I am satisfied with the Arabs purchased this year. In some instances, I would have liked them to have possessed more bone, but it must be remembered that the higher the caste the lighter in bone Arabs are; still, when we take the average measurements as being 14-3½ in height, 67½ inches girth, and 7½ inches shank, I think it must be owned that there is not much cause for complaint. 45. The Arab market was worse than I ever remember it for Galloways and Ponies9 cerned, and only 7 were bought. It was fortunate that this occurred this year, as, owing to scarcity, District Boards have not been able to extend their operations in this direction, or to even replace casualties; the requirements have therefore been very small. Transit of horses from England, and donkeys from the Continent. 46. Again this year it affords me great pleasure to be able to report that 24 horses were imported from England, and 42 donkeys from the Continent without a single casualty having occurred. 47. The system of obtaining the services of the Principal, Bombay Vete- rinary College, to superintend their landing, has proved of great value, and no casualties took place. As was adopted last year, all animals are taken to the College, and kept there until they are despatched. 48. The average cost of landing and keep in Bombay was R18-13-6, against R23-5-10 last year, and R37-15-5 in 1894-95, which, considering the price of grain, etc., must be looked upon as very satisfactory. Proposed removal of the Punjab stallion Depôt to Rawalpindi. 49. For some years it has been felt that the Punjab has suffered by not having its stallion depôt in the Province. Not only has it lost the use of its new stallions during the year for the time they are being acclimatized, but also has it to a great extent lost the services of its two Superintendents during the summer months by their being at Babugarh in the North-Western Provinces. These may be said to be the grounds on which the Local Government has suffered, but from an Imperial point of view, the cost of transit incurred by the removal of the thoroughbred English and Australian and other delicate stallions at the end of the covering season, and of their return to their districts in October, has long been felt to be a needless expense; again, the climate of Babugarh is not nearly as good as that of Rawalpindi for horses when being acclimatized; for these reasons I deemed it advisable to cause enquiries to be made, in order to decide on a suitable site for the location of the Depôt in the Punjab. Very careful enquiries were made in the different districts with a view to the selection of the best site, but, after due consideration, it was decided that Rawalpindi offered the greatest advantages, and in this I was confirmed in my opinion by the fact that, previous to 1882, the depôt had always been located there, and that the stallions had always enjoyed good health. 50. I therefore, in consultation with the Deputy Commissioner and the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab, selected a site which would have been in every way the best that could possibly have been selected, and to which, being outside of Cantonments, Municipal limits, and Park boundaries, it was thought no objection could be raised; it, however, unfortunately met with the disapproval of the Commissioner and the Military Authorities, and the scheme fell to the ground. 51. It, however, having been found that extra accommodation was required by the Army Remount Department for the location of the reserve of one thousand horses lately sanctioned by Government, and as this Department, by vacating the stables at Babugarh, now occupied by the Punjab Depôt, could release:10 was appointed, and the Government of India agreed to meet the pay of his appointment on the ground of the benefit which would accrue to the State, and especially to the Army, but the operations remained under the control of the Local Government. 53. Feeling that as Bombay was the only part of India in which Govern- ment horse-breeding operations were not under the control of the Imperial Government, and thus under my direct supervision, and further, as I felt that the demand for young stock for the military rearing depôts, for horses for Native Cavalry, for Imperial Service Troops, and for Police, as well as for mules for Ordnance and Transport purposes was increasing and also as I felt that we could not leave a single centre, capable of providing horses and mules for the above, undeveloped, I addressed the Government of India, recommend- ing that Bombay should be brought under their control as far as horse and mule- breeding operations were concerned, pointing out that if this were carried into effect stallions posted in one tract could be drawn to supplement those of another, where the prospects of development appear to be more promising; more- over, I deemed it advisable to point out that it was necessary that we should have the fullest and most complete information as to the progress and results of the operations in all parts of India, but that under the present system we do not obtain the necessary information. 54. I deemed it my duty to advocate this change, especially with reference to Sind, in which Province the horse-breeding operations are under the con- trol of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay. This, of all parts of Bombay, is the most promising centre for the development of horse and mule-breeding, and hitherto, owing to its isolation from the rest of the Presidency, it has not received the attention it deserves; this is accounted for by the fact that the Superintendent has under his charge the wide area covered by the Presidency proper, Kathiawar and Cutch, and he has therefore been unable to develop the resources of Sind as might otherwise have been done. In this opinion I find I am borne out by the Director of Land Records, who in his review of the Superintendent's report for 1895-96, says:11 Average number of mares covered per stallion. 57. Table IV also shows the number of mares covered per stallion employed:12 66. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:13 Stallions which produce the most suitable stock for the Army. 71. Table V (page xiii) furnished, as usual, by the Director, Army Remount Department, shows that the following were the results obtained at each of the Rearing Depôts:14 carefully considered these points when looking at the young stock at the many Fairs which I attend, and have come to the conclusion that the dealer class purchases quite second-rate stock, and that many of the better class pass into other hands; but again, I would ask, is our system of rearing satisfactory? The best young stock is undoubtedly produced in Baluchistan, Dera Ghazi Khan, and the upper districts of the Punjab. I am therefore of opinion that its removal from comparatively dry climates to a hotter and moister climate, must have a deleterious effect on it. In the first place, it suffers when first transferred, and again the good material which it puts on during the cold weather, is removed during the summer months, not only by the heat but also by being infested with ticks, which tend to reduce condition. 74. Owing to the abovenamed causes, the development of young animals is either retarded or rendered impossible. I would much like to see a depôt started in Baluchistan where soil and climate would produce horses15 81. The greatest falling off is in the purchase of young stock by the Army Remount Department; this Department bought 334 less than last year. I am pleased, however, to report that this was not due to the fact that the young stock was not obtainable, but rather that the requirements of the Department did not necessitate their buying more. 82. The Native Cavalry bought 59 less; this may be due to the fact that the Bombay market attracted many purchasers as, owing to the prevalence of Bubonic Plague in that City, Australian horses were being sold at very cheap rates. 83. The Punjab Cavalry purchased 35 more, but the Bombay Cavalry purchased 131 less. 84. By a Return received from the Inspector General, Imperial Service Troops, 227 remounts were purchased by Inspecting Officers against 164 last year. 85. Some regiments must have supplied their requirements from the waler market, as we find that:16 and this would render supervision a matter of great difficulty. Without super- vision no run can possibly prove a success, and therefore I propose that these runs should exist at every station where a Native Cavalry is quartered, and that they should be connected with the Grass Farms. If this could be arranged, all young stock with a Regiment could then be moved from run to run when one Regiment marches in relief of another. The only expense connected with the scheme would be the fencing of the paddocks, which, however, need not be of an expensive character, and frequently it is possible to find a site that would have natural boundaries on one or two sides; this is the only direction in which I can possibly see that Regiments might want assistance at the onset; the advantages are, however, so great that I feel they would outweigh any dis- advantages that might be brought forward against the scheme. 92. I have already stated that the system has been tried on a small scale by some Regiments, including the 6th Bengal Cavalry, 14th and 18th Bengal Lancers, and Queen's Own Corps of Guides. Wishing to obtain as much inform- ation on this subject as possible, I addressed the various Commanding Officers and the following resume will give their views on the subject. I might add that I am authorized by these officers to utilize the statements made by them. 93. I purpose commencing with the run of the Queen's Own Corps of Guides, as it was also referred to in last year's Administration Report of this Department. Colonel Egerton states:17 "The result of last year's buying was, that in October we only had six or seven horses left which were under four years old, and they will all be in the Riding School as four, by February. It now pays us to buy quite half the remounts at three years old and they get the full advantage of a year's run. "Disadvantages18 All are unanimous in opinion that the system leads to better development and docility, and that the remount, when sent to the ranks at four years of age, is not more expensive than the remount bought at that age in Fairs. 105. We have so many centres at which stock of these ages are available, that I commend the system to the notice of the Government of India, feeling assured that, if generally adopted, it would lead to the better mounting of our Native Cavalry. The Horse eommonly spoken of as "The Northern Horse." 106. We hear much about the difficulties experienced by Native Cavalry to obtain remounts. Granted that there is some difficulty to obtain them of four years of age, it behoves us then to watch carefully every source from which horses can be obtained. A very promising trade sprang up with dealers bring- ing horses from across the border to the Quetta Horse Show, and it was at one time thought that this would develop, and so it would have done, had it been fostered, but unfortunately the class of horse bought was not approved of by the Bengal Cavalry, and I fear that a good source of supply will be allowed to practically dry up for want of support. 107. In last year's Annual Administration Report I gave an extract from a report by General Sir J. Brown complaining that officers were not sent to Quetta to buy: the question was referred to His Excellency the Commander- in-Chief, and the Adjutant General in a letter to the Secretary to the Govern- ment of India, Military Department, states that five Regiments stationed nearest to Quetta, were asked their reasons for not sending remount parties to the Fair. All their replies were to the effect that they have not a very high opinion of the class of horses obtainable at the Show. 108. One Commanding Officer reports that the horses purchased by him in 1894 in Quetta, went utterly to pieces in the hot weather; they appear constitutionally unfit to stand the climate of the Punjab in the hot season, and in other respects, turned out unsatisfactory. 109. Another remarks that he does not consider the type of horse obtain- able at Quetta suitable for Native Cavalry, "he has found them difficult to keep in condition, and they feel the heat greatly." 110. Again, the Inspector General of Cavalry in his report on the remounts bought at Quetta by the 2nd Regiment, Central India Horse, says:19 114. The Officer Commanding. 7th Bombay Lancers, states:20 advantages than any other, and I am still in correspondence with the Deputy Commissioner of that district, and hope to be able to arrange another trial and a more successful one than the last. It only requires to be well started in one centre for the advantages to be apparent to all Officers Commanding Native Cavalry Regiments. 120. Something of the sort has been done during the year. An officer of the Queen's Own Corps of Guides proceeded to Shahpur in October last, and was able to purchase 15 head of young stock; and again, the Officer Com- manding, 3rd Punjab Cavalry, marched to Shahpur, visiting Talagang, Pindigheb, and other places, and although he was only able to buy a few, still, they were better than those purchased at the Fair. 121. I would be glad if all officers who intend to adopt this system in future would communicate with me before they start, as I could then instruct the Superintendent to give them every assistance, and the Zilladar of the district should be in a position to tell them exactly where the class of animal they require, be it young stock or mature horses, is to be found. Purchase of young stock by Remount De- partment, direct from breeders. 122. During the year under review, the Government of India requested the Director, Army Remount Department, to let me know the Fairs which the Officers of the Remount Department would attend annually, the dates on which they would be present, and the number of young stock they would be prepared to buy at each, On receiving this information, I was directed to acquaint the Deputy Commissioner of the district, and to ask him to circulate the information in all Tehsils. The Government of India expressed a desire that, if possible, arrangements should be made under which Remount Officers should attend each Fair visited, for not less than two days. 123. The following rule, issued by the Director, Army Remount Depart- ment, was added to those issued to Remount Officers attending Horse Fairs and Shows:PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A.23 PART I.-IMPERIAL REPORT. A24 134. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:25 but, as will be seen by the number above stated to have been purchased in India, not a single Persian was available; against this may be set off the three Arabs bought in Bombay. 143. With reference to the Persian market, I greatly fear that it is beyond our power to start a trade in this direction. The Government of India have been pleased to increase the price to be paid for this class of donkey until it has now reached R400, and this price I promised to pay for all good donkeys of a dark colour that were brought over. Mr. Omer Jamal Vuyani did his utmost to induce importers to bring them over, and at one time was confident that they would be tempted by the high price offered, but not a single one was offered for sale; we cannot therefore, in any way, depend on Persia as a source of supply. 144. Seeing the urgent necessity which exists for a supply of donkey stallions, I have drawn the attention of the various Superintendents, but especially that of the Superintendent, North Punjab, in whose Circle the best class of donkey mare is found, to the necessity for extending donkey-breeding, and I have sanctioned a few of the best Italian Jacks being used for selected mares; this must tell in time, and already this year I have seen a marked improvement especially in the young stock. It will be seen that I was able to buy 18 mature country-breds, and in addition to these I have purchased ten of an average age of 2¼ years, and shall allow them to run on the Farm at Babugarh; these will, I trust, in time develop into really good Jacks. Two of the young stock were in appearance Italian donkeys all over, and if only they will grow to the requisite height they will be equal to the Cyprian donkey now imported. The only matter for regret is that the supply is very restricted, but I trust that the steps which I have taken will lead to an increase in the number available each year. 145. I have dealt only with the donkeys which are purchaseable in India, the measurements of these are as follows:26 149. In a subsequent letter, Mr. Sutherland says:27 these will be 16 years of age on 1st January next; a large number of casual- ties may therefore be expected. During 1897-98, 30 are expected to be received by importation and 27 by purchase in India; taking into considera- tion the casualties which must arise, I fear the sanctioned increase will not be in any way reached this year. Number of mules purchased by Government. 158. Table X (page xxxix ) will show the number of mules pur- chased during the year. The Remount Department bought 397 against 312, being an increase of 85 over the number bought last year. The Commissariat Department purchased 1,532 against 1,434, whilst 202 were obtained for Native Cavalry and Imperial Service Troops Transport. In all, 2,131 were bought during the year against 1,746 last year. I am confirmed in my opinion that, given good Jacks, we can produce in this country all the mules required, either for Ordnance or Transport purposes. Supply of Ord- nance Mules. 159. The Government of India in their Resolution No. 828 I was able to afford him the following information:PART I.31 PART I.32 I do not purpose entering into the question of the number branded for mule-breeding; this system is only carried out in Bombay, and might well be abolished in that Presidency. The numbers remaining on 31st March 1897, stood as follows:33 ency than of strictness. The mares rejected were such that were either fitted to be covered by District Board stallions or by donkeys. 175. I have already pointed out, when reviewing the work done in the Farid- kot State, how popular the State's brand is; zemindars in that State are always anxious to obtain it, in order to secure the services of the two Arab stallions. 176. Branding may be said not to be in force in the following parts of India:34 180. All these points are brought to the notice of either the District Officers or of the Local Government, and, in time, we may be able to do away with some of the abuses. Granting of certificates by District Officers to allow un- branded mares being covered. 181. In paragraph 108 of last year's Administration Report, I mentioned that as the amount of harm done is trifling, and as it was stated that the system induced District Officers to take an interest in horse-breeding, I consi- dered it advisable that the system should be continued for another year. It now only remains for me to show the working of this system during 1896-97. 182. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, states:35 only 28 are 14 hands and over, the remainder varying from 12 to 13 hands, and a great many too young to be covered at present. The list, taken throughout, adds very little to the actual breeding wealth of the country. This officer, however, has taken the greatest interest in the scheme, and has done all in his power to help the Department and further the wishes of Government on this point." 189. A consideration of the above will show the following results:36 Number of produce foaled, showing averages to mares covered and stallions employed. 193. Table IV (page vii) will give results obtained, but, to facilitate reference, I give the following abstract:37 to District officials for verification; as these are found to be generally correct, we can safely say that these Returns are reliable. 199. It is, however, more with Produce Returns that I think we are still somewhat astray. To arrive at correct results, the Zilladars must travel regularly, and must ascertain personally the results of the previous year's coverings; this they frequently will not do, as is so often proved by the check applied by the District officials; in fact, one Zilladar, when called upon for his reasons for reporting the result of a covering incorrectly, stated that "when pressed for time, he arrived at the result by guessing." If one man is sufficiently honest to own to this system of working, 1 fear many more do so surreptitiously; still, the district check has had most favourable results, and taken altogether, the working during the past year has been more satisfactory. 200. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, reports:38 check was being discussed, the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab, showed how trifling would be the work thrown on the Patwaris; he showed that the highest average in any district is in Dera Ghazi Khan, where the Patwari would have six mares on his register; in extreme cases, a Patwari might have twenty mares. There is therefore but little excuse for the incorrect way in which this duty is performed. 208. In the North-Western Provinces, returns were, during 1895-96, received from only seven districts, but, during the year under review, returns were received from 34 districts. It is disappointing to find that the Superin- tendent reports as follows on the system:39 this duty to a Manager. This is the case at the Pavesra stand in the Muttra district, which is in charge of a Rajah; and referring to this particular stand, the Superintendent states:40 Colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants paid from Local Funds. 1895-96. 1896-97. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. . 201 145 North Punjab . . . . . . . 801 540 South Punjab . . . . . . . 643 679 Baluchistan . . . . . . . 69 234 TOTAL 1,714 1,598 223. By the above, it will be seen that the reduction in the number of colts castrated, amounting to 116, was due almost entirely to the small number castrated in North Punjab, which is accounted for in the foregoing extract from the report received from the Superintendent of that Circle. 224. In the four large horse-breeding districts of Northern India, we find that, taking the numbers castrated, both by Veterinary Assistants paid from Imperial and Local Funds, 3,053 colts were castrated against 3,402 last year. Considering the disadvantages experienced during the year under review, this must be considered satisfactory. 225. The small death-rate is a matter for cóngratulation, and should inspire confidence on the part of the zemindars. It amounted to the following small percentages:PART I43 PART I.PART I.47 PART I.48 239. The attendance this year is said to have been the smallest since the famine years of 1878.79, but from last year's report I find that 10,912 were present, whilst this year the returns show 11,246. 240. Although the numbers may have been less, still a large number of remounts were purchased for Native Cavalry, Imperial Service Troops, and Police, and the quality of those bought was decidedly above the average. One batch especially was noticeable, viz., that bought by Captain Weller, 14th Bengal Lancers. This officer purchased 38, and a better lot of remounts I never saw put together. At his request I measured the shank of all such that appeared to be wanting in bone, and found that they averaged 8 inches below the knee; this is very satisfactory, as it proves that an improvement is taking place in this direction. In all, 157 remounts were bought, and five head of young stock were obtained by the Remount Agent. 241. There is, however, one very disconcerting feature in the North - Western Provinces which was generally remarked this year; this was the number of young mares that were sold instead of being branded as usual; this is, of course, due to the prevailing scarcity, but I fear that this must tell against horse breeding in the future. I am, however, glad to state that this was more noticeable in this Province than in the Punjab or in Baluchistan. On this point, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North- Western Provinces and Oudh, states:49 247. The Remount Agent purchased four head of young stock and records his opinion that the stock was very inferior, and not up to the standard of former years; when, however, we read the report by the Com- mittee in which they class the 3 and 2-year old fillies as "very good", yearling fillies "good", foals colts " good ", foals fillies " very good ", and record their opinion that only the yearling colts were "poor", I am inclined to differ with this officer, and to think that he was hypercritical, owing to the fact that the Remount Department did not want to buy young stock this year. Garhmuktesar Horse Show. 248. This is the Mule Fair of the North-Western Provinces, but owing to the representations made by Mr. Wyer, the Collector of the district, it was decided last year, for the first time, to offer prizes for horse stock, and as a centre where the young stock of the district can be collected, Garhmuktesar should prove a very convenient centre for Regiments who have small runs in which to rear their young stock. This year it was only natural to expect that the numbers should be smaller, for only such as were likely to take prizes or such as were for sale, were brought in, still the falling off in horses was not so marked as was anticipated, 240 being present against 323 last year. There was actually an increase in the number of mules, 1,063 against 1,014 last year. 249. Eight head of young stock were purchased by the Remount Agent, and the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, remarks:50 myself that all the complaints made by the officers attending this fair, were well founded, and I trust that an improvement will be made during the next fair. 253. The attendance of officers was very small, and shows a great falling off when compared with last year. The attendance, as far as horse stock, also shows a falling off of 1,425. This may be accounted for by the fact that notices were issued to the effect that the fair would not be held, and subse- quently when it was decided to hold it, I am informed that the former notices were not removed. 254. On the subject of attendance of officers, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:51 the District authorities, a grant of R300 was given at the Bysakhi Fair, a similar amount being contributed by the Municipality; this will be alluded to hereafter. At this, fair, R45 was distributed to the owners of stock by District Board stallions. 264. To show the strides made by this fair, it will be necessary to com- pare the number of remounts purchased:52 270. The total number of horses and mules present this year was 5,049 as compared with 5,766 last year, being a reduction of 717. This, however, must not be wondered at and can be attributed to the high price of food. This did not in any way lessen the number of horses available for Native Cavalry, the reduction being brought about by less animals of a useless description being sent to the fair. 271. On the subject of remounts purchased, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states: 53 279. The branded mares, in which class 37 competed, were good and roomy, with good bone and substance, and were in every way suitable for breeding remounts. 280. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:54 Dera Ghazi Khan Horse Show. 291. This show was held on the 11th, 12th, and 13th March 1897, and if considered in point of actual numbers attending, must be looked upon as having been a failure, but as such I do not consider it, for it brought together the cream of the Dera Ghazi Khan stock, and when this is said it means a lot. 292. The numbers shown in the returns are 1,231 against 5,155 last year, but, as the Deputy Commissioner very justly remarks, last year His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab was present, and every one flocked to Head-quarters. 293. The number competing for prizes was 559 against 723 last year; this falling off was entirely due to scarcity. Some of the Tumandars informed me that the horses exhibited had cost them R1 a day to get into condition for the show. 294. It would be impossible to wish for a better lot of brood stock, of which 104 competed; and one of the most pleasing features of the show was, that a much larger number of branded fillies competed this year than last, and that the Superintendent was able to brand 76 mares at the show, demonstra- ting that, notwithstanding scarcity, the breeders had no intention of selling their brood stock. 295. Only 5 head of young stock was purchased by the Remount Depart- ment. This, however, can be no indication of the number available, as this Department reduced their purchases this year. Thirty remounts were purchased by Native Cavalry against 33 last year. It must be remembered that Dera Ghazi Khan is only a show, and as such, must be looked upon as a producing centre from which the larger horse markets are supplied. At Amritsar, some of the best remounts come from this district, in fact at the last Bysakhi Fair held there, a whole batch, numbering 30, was brought from Dera Ghazi Khan. 296. With reference to horse breeding in this district, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, remarks:55 300. In my last Administration Report, I stated that Gurdaspur was one of the most backward districts in the Punjab as far as horse breeding is con- cerned, but I am pleased to be able to note a great improvement during the past year which is mainly due to the interest taken in the matter by the local authorities. Gurdaspur can never aspire to be ranked amongst first class horse-breeding districts, but with continued interest taken in the matter, I feel that it could produce many a useful Native Cavalry remount. 301. On this occasion, 276 horse stock was present as compared with 178 last year; this must be looked upon as very satisfactory. 302. Referring to this show, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, reports:56 309. Sixteen remounts were bought at an average of R250, but, as before said, they were wanting in quality. 310. I trust to see a revival in horse breeding in this district, for the local authorities take the most lively interest in the matter; they maintain eight Dis- trict Board stallions, and on this occasion they contributed over R1,200 towards prizes. 311. As will be shown elsewhere, the two tehsils of the Jhind State' bordering on this district, are supplied with Arab stallions maintained by that State. With the sanction of the Local Government, the Council of Regency allotted the sum of R400 to be competed for by horses of the State. 312. On the subject of stallions, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:57 an Officer of the Civil Veterinary Department. By the Deputy Commissioner's report it would appear that an idea has got abroad that the owner of a mare receiving such a certificate is required to give a stamped agreement that he will pay R20 to Government if his mare is not passed or branded by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, on his next visit. The rule is quite clear, and the only promise enacted from an owner is that he will bring the mare for inspection on the first visit of an Officer of the Civil Veterinary Department, to the district. If the owner fulfils his promise, he is charged nothing whether the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, passes his mare or not. 320. I have addressed the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab, on this subject, and have asked him to kindly draw the attention of the Deputy Commissioner, Ferozepore, to the fact; this misinterpretation of the rule appears to exist in no other district of the Province. Jhang Horse Show. 321. This show was held on 1st and 2nd March 1897, and I am pleased to be able to report that it proved in many respects a greater success than even last year. It will be seen by reference to former reports that three years ago it was a matter for serious consideration whether it would not be advisable to abolish this show; this I would have recommended with the greatest reluc- tance, as from past experience I know that this district can be developed into an excellent breeding centre; the Jhang mares have long been noted as possessing wonderful stamina, and although they possess faults which it is necessary to correct before their progeny is fit for Army purposes, still, in them we have a foundation to work on which is to be found in few districts. It only required the cordial assistance of the District Authorities, and this we have fortunately obtained in the late and present Deputy Commissioners58 Committee and the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, report the stamp of mares kept for mule-breeding as being good, I hope in time, with the help of good donkey stallions, to be able to produce a few mules fit for ordnance purposes. 325. I cannot conclude my review of this show without conveying to Captain Burlton, the Deputy Commissioner of this district, the best thanks of this Department for his endeavours to maintain the interest in horse-breeding which was revived by his predecessor Captain Douglas, as well as for his promise of help in future. In his report he states:59 Lahore Horse Show. 334. This show was held on 26th and 27th March 1897, and cannot be said to have proved a success. One thing which must always militate against the success of this show is the fact that the dealers are always very active just before the show commences, and that they buy up all the best animals in the districts; this year, of course, things were worse than usual, owing to famine. 335. Only 713 animals were present against 1,018 last year, but there was an increase in the number that competed for prizes, the numbers being 247 against 220 in 1895-96. 336. The branded mare and filly classes filled well, and amongst them the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department reports that many were fine mares with at least one strain of English or Arab blood. 337. Five head of stock were purchased by the Remount Agent at an average cost of R300, and two remounts were purchased by the 15th Bengal Lancers at R270 each. On this point, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, remarks:60 343. The Senior Member of the Judging Committee states:61 352. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:62 Shahpur Horse Show. 362. In many respects this show, which is generally considered to be the best in the Punjab, was disappointing. When, however, we analyse the numbers and the quality of the stock generally, we are compelled to own that our disappointment is not so great. In a return received from the Deputy Commissioner, it is shown that nearly 900 less animals were present than last year, but the falling off in the number of branded mares and fillies was 35, and in the young stock 13, so that we may say, from a breeding point of view, that this show was up to the average. 363. The Senior Member of the Judging Committee reports that all the classes of horses shown were of good stamp and quality, and that the thorough- bred English class produced by far the greater number of prize-winners. 364. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, reports as follows:63 RAJPUTANA. 371. Two fairs are held annually in Ajmere-Merwara, and this year they were both visited by Veterinary Captain Hagger. (AJMERE-MERWARA). Pokhur Horse Fair. 372. Held from 16th to 20th November 1896, was quite up to the average, for although there were 253 less horses than last year, the number present was greater than any of the previous five years 1889-94. The sales were greater than usual, averaging 32.82 against 27.86 sold during the preceding year. 373. The class of horse brought now to the Pokhur Fair is not what it used to be when the Local Cavalry Corps and the Central India Horse used to obtain a large number of remounts. On this occasion, there were very few horses suitable for Army purposes, although there was a fair number of pro- mising young stock. No Remount Officers were present; but five very useful remounts were obtained for Police. 374. No prizes were awarded from Imperial Funds, but the Ajmere Dis- trict Board contributed R600. Colonel Thornton, Commissioner, Ajmere- Merwara, in distributing the prizes remarked that this was the first occasion on which stock by Imperial stallions had competed as a separate class. This young stock also competed in Class VI.64 Ulwar Horse Show. 382. Last year a Horse Show was held in this State for the first time and the review was included under the heading of "Native States;" as, however, it is now quite a recognised market, I feel that it is better that it should take its place amongst the other Horse Fairs and Shows held in India. 383. The number attending this Show was smaller than last year, there being 713 horses of all kinds against 1,193 in 1894-95, but, on this point, Veterinary Captain Hagger reports as follows:65 BENGAL. Kalimpong Mule Fair. 390. For the second year the Imperial Government has sanctioned the sum of R500 as prizes for ponies and mules brought to this fair. 391. Veterinary Captain Raymond, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, who attended this fair for the first time, reports as follows:66 "In attempting to improve the breed of Thibetan mules, it should not be forgotten that we may possibly find not only in the Thibetans themselves, but possibly the Chinese, competitors for the purchase of the improved stock. Hence, while great advantage will accrue by improving the breed of mules in Thibet, I suggest we may possibly be rewarded if mule-breeding in Sikkim be also encouraged as much as possible; for there, we may control the export. I propose, as soon as my other duties permit, to visit Sikkim and to report specially on this subject." 397, I certainly would not advocate our extending our mule operations beyond Sikkim, One donkey has already been at work there, but the trial proved a failure. This is stated to have been due to the fact that he was not a ready coverer. Another good donkey has been trained and will be sent to Sikkim, and I think we had better await the results before extending our operations in that direction. BALUCHISTAN. Quetta Horse Show. 398. This show was held on 7th, 8th, and 9th October 1896. This date is too late to suit the Northern dealers who arrive in September; much corres- pondence has taken place on this subject, and at last it has been decided to fix the date for 14th September; this will suit the Northern dealers admirably, and will also be better for the breeders who bring in indigenous stock, as they have hitherto complained that the nights are too cold in October to allow them to keep their stock out at night. The date now fixed will suit everybody who now attends the fair, admirably. Bengal Cavalry officers have not to be con- sidered, as they do not attend this fair, stating that they do not like the Northern horse. I do not purpose entering into this question here, but would invite reference to my remarks on the subject of this most important adjunct to our remount resources, as contained in paras. 106 to 118. 399. There was a considerable increase in the number of locally bred animals exhibited at the show, the numbers being:67 2 smaller Arabs, to cover small mares, had been allotted to Baluchis- tan. This year:68 410. But what was short in quantity was made up for in quality, for it would be impossible to wish for better stock: in fact, during my tour, which extends to all our best breeding centres in India, I do not see any stock that, in my opinion, are as good as that bred in Baluchistan. I know I am leaving myself open to question on this subject, as some of the stock bred in the old established districts of Dera Ghazi Khan, Shahpur, Rawalpindi, etc., may show more quality; but, for size, bone, and good, clean legs, I do not think any of the above named districts can lay claim to as good stock. 411. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, remarks as follows on this subject:69 418. All this is very disappointing, for if purchasers are not forthcoming for the stock bred it must be driven into the hands of the dealers, and the profit will be theirs instead of the breeders'. 419. On this point the Political Agent, Thal Chotiali, in his report on this show, states:70 do not recognize this as a strong claim, as old established fairs in other parts of India are always changing their dates to accommodate younger ones. I have referred the matter to the Government of Bombay, and I trust that an amica- ble arrangement will be arrived at, whereby neither shows will suffer. BOMBAY PRESIDENCY. Ahmednagar Horse Show. 423. Commenced on 12th November 1896, and was not as successful as that held during the previous years. On this point, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:71 432. The brood mares are said to have shown a distinct improvement on former years, both as to numbers and quality. 433. But the great point of interest connected with this show is mule- breeding. On this point, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, states:72 "The fillies showed an improvement in numbers and quality since last year. The class for geldings was disappointing, the ryots evidently not having grasped the fact of the advisability of castrating their young stock so far. "Ten Government stallions wore at the show. They were all in very good condition and well suited to the mares of the district." Additional remarks by the President of the Committee:73 451. The Punjab Committee was composed as follows:74 whose districts decreases have to be made, frequently feel aggrieved, but the decreases are absolutely necessary if increases have to be made. 462. During the year under review, I had R500 more at my disposal, having received a special grant of that amount for Kalimpong which had been paid out of the usual allotment during the previous year. This therefore allowed me to propose increases to the amount of R1,200 whilst only R700 had to be saved; these were distributed as follows:75 469. The following statement will show the number of remounts and young stock purchased at fairs and shows during the past three years:PART I.79 PART I.80 this purpose, and in connection with this, one interesting fact has been arrived at, viz., that donkeys do not grow after three years of age. Although well fed, those on the Farm did not average more than one-eighth of an inch growth in height between 3 and 4 years of age. Balance sheet of cultivation oper- ations. 478. Tables XVII and XVII (a), pages lxviii to lxxi are balance sheets of cultivation operations carried out at the North-Western Provinces and Punjab Depôts at Babugarh. The profits of the former amounted to R1,792-10-0, and of the latter, R1,118-3-0 against R1,866-12-4 and R811-0-7, respectively, last year; showing a decrease of R74-2-4 in the North-Western Provinces Return, and an increase of R307-2-5 in the Punjab Statement. 479. On comparison with the figures of last year, showing the actual expenditure incurred, and the outturn of crops grown, it will be found that in the North-Western Provinces Depôt, a larger amount was spent in the repairs of plant and machinery. Bedding grass had to be purchased. Feed of farm animals cost nearly double the amount of the previous year, and cultivation contingencies were correspondingly higher. The amount realized by the sale of stallions and lucerne seed was considerably less, while the market value of the outturn exceeded last year's figures by R1,623-12-8. In the Punjab Depôt, the debit for purchase of farm animals was less, and so were the cultivation contingencies; the cost of feed of farm animals exceeded last year's figures by R258-4-6. Sale proceeds of stallions, etc. amounted to R6,377-12-0 against R4,633-2-0 in the previous year. The market value of outturn was less by R614, and the valuation of foals produced at the Farm was also less by R240. Return of farm stock. 480. Table XVIII (page lxxii) shows the number of farm animals present on 1st April 1896, and remaining on 31st March 1897. Casualties. 481. Table XIX (page lxxiii) shows the number of casualties amongst the farm animals, which amounted only to:81 Lucerne. "There are 2¼ acres under cultivation (sown in ridges). The crop has done very well and has given a good outturn, viz., 1,715 maunds 35 seers. The crop was attacked by the Cheopa parasite which necessitated cutting the affected plots close to the ground, dressing with ashes and flooding. This quickly destroys the parasite. Guinea grass. The area under cultivation was ¾ acre. The outturn was very good, viz., 1,021 maunds 5 seers, against 330 maunds 23 seers last year from the same area. This plot was plentifully manured. Impey. The area under cultivation was 3 acres. The outturn was very satisfactory, being 593 maunds 34 seers, of Churri or green stuff, and 90 maunds of Karbi or dry stuff. Carrots. There was 4 kutcha bighas under cultivation, the outturn being 277 maunds 29 seers. Hay. There were 1,015 maunds of hay made during the year. The quality was excellent. The Hapur Encamping ground gave a poor outturn. This is attributed to want of sufficient rain, and also the young stock (donkeys) graze on one-third of the ground. The Hapur Encamping ground has also supplied us with 150 maunds of bedding grass. Rai Ram Chunder Sahai, late Tehsildar of Hapur, has given us every assistance in his power towards making the encamping ground a success. Oats. The area under oat cultivation was 4½ acres. The yield was 40 maunds of oat-seed and 60 maunds of Bhusa. The seed will be changed this year. Barley. The area under cultivation was 22/5 acres. The outturn, 38 maunds of seed and 30 maunds of Bhusa, was satisfactory. Moth. There was 2½ acres under cultivation. The yield was 7 maunds 11 seers, and 71 maunds 37 seers of Bhusa. Maize. The area under Indian corn cultivation was 10 acres. The yield, 12 maunds 20 seers, very poor, attributed to the sudden cessation of rain after sowing. Some of the plants became stunted and others dried up. This plot was too far from the wells to allow of irrigation. Jowari. The area under cultivation was ½ a bigha. The outturn was very good, being 21 maunds 23 seers. Sugar cane. The area under cultivation was ¾ of a bigha. The outturn was fair, being 16 maunds 25 seers 8 chittacks. Gram. The area under gram cultivation was 23 acres. The yield, 36 maunds of seed and 30 maunds of bhusa. a very poor outturn, attributed to (1) want of September rains which give strength and vigour to the plant, (2) the plants were also attacked by soondi, an insect which causes the plant to wither, and (3) the strong westerly winds prevailing during the time the gram was forming in the pod, also played great havoc. Mandua. The seed of this grass was sown, but owing to want of rain, it did not thrive. It is proposed this year to sow as is done in the Allahabad and Azamgarh districts, viz., sow in seed beds and transplant. The plot will be irrigated in May and the seedlings planted, and when the rains break, also weeded three times and after first weeding a top dressing of manure given." Punjab Farm. 487. The results obtained at this farm by the produce of the big mares employed at farm work; out of nine mares, five foals were obtained and one mare is now heavy in foal. 488. Of the 6 pony mares, two were bought late in the year, but of the remaining four only one had a foal. All are promising foals and are likely to prove fit for Army Remount purposes. Farm Produce. Punjab Farm. 489. This year has proved, as in the North-Western Provinces Farm, a most disastrous one for farm operations; even with day and night irrigation, many of the crops have proved failures. The following are the crops grown, showing the results obtained:82 Raju or Murwa. This was sown on well manured land and germinated well, but from want of rain, and the soil not being suitable for this variety of millet, the crop failed. Hay. The outturn of hay this year was very poor for want of rain. The Opeira encamping ground yielded only two hundred maunds of hay, though the land was ploughed and sown with grass seeds. The new grass came up very well, but, for want of rain, dried up, leaving only a scanty crop of the old spear grass mixed with 'kas' and 'dab.' Seven hundred maunds of hay were saved from paddocks Nos. 1 and 10, and two hundred and thirty maunds were purchased, making a total for the year of one thousand, one hundred and thirty maunds. Bedding. The bedding grass bought last year has lasted up to the present year, more will be bought next year. Manure. The method of saving manure in pits with covers, has been found satisfactory, and is being continued."
PART I.85 PART I86 These houses are absolutely necessary and Government should bear the cost. The alterations and additions noted above are not many or expensive; when done, the laboratory will be quite satisfactory." 492. I trust soon to hear that the defects have been made good, and that the laboratory is in every way ready for the commencement of the important Bacteriological work which Dr. Lingard will be prepared to undertake now that he has commenced his investigations into Rinderpest. 493. Owing to Professor Koch's visit to India and to the fact that Dr. Lingard, Imperial Bacteriologist, has been associated with him for the past six weeks, that officer states that he is unable to give more than a mere sketch of the work done during the year. The following outline has been received from him:PART I.89 PART I.90 as 1894, a case occurred, and also to the Transport marching to Landour, Chakrata, etc. This, I attribute to the fact that so many small owners have horses on that line; the se being men without much capital, renders it impossible for them to keep their horses in anything like condition; this, combined with hard work, renders them very susceptible to the disease. The case which did occur was discovered exactly opposite to the Body guard lines; the animal was destroyed, but having inspected the stables carefully, I considered that their location there was a great source of danger to the Body guard; I therefore recommended that they should be destroyed and that a stage should not be allowed in proximity to these lines. It having been pointed out by the Gov- ernment of the North-Western Provinces that the law, as contained in Act XX of 1879, did not allow the destruction of the Dâk stage, the Government of India, Military Department, asked that, under the orders of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, arrangements should be made for the destruction of the Dâk stables, the cost involved being borne by that Department. Pertabgarh. A case was reported from this district, but its exact nature is uncertain. PUNJAB. Simla. 498. A case was reported, the subject being an Arab pony that had left the Bombay stables for over a year. This pony had been thriftless ever since he had been in Simla, I have no doubt whatever that this is another case in which the disease lay latent for some time. This pony being one of four that were sent together from Calcutta, the remaining three were isolated and tested with Mallein and another was subsequently destroyed. Kangra district. 499. The worst outbreak occured in this district where cases were reported by the Veterinary Assistants, and on inspection by Veterinary Captain Joslen, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, it was found that at Dagraon, about 4½ miles from Palampur, three cases were very badly affected with the disease; one was the property of Mahomed Hyat Khan, C.S.I., Divisional Judge of Hoshiarpur, and the remaining two were said to be the property of his servant. The case which belonged to Mahomed Hyat Khan is stated to have been one of some standing; as another horse that had been stabled with these was reported to have been affected, enquiries were instituted to discover whether glanders existed there, but the enquiry revealed nothing. Nagrotha.91 and as both zilladars have been in both districts for many years, I feel confi- dent in stating that neither of these districts need be under the suspicion of being affected with the disease. I therefore addressed the Principal Veteri- nary Officer in India, asking him to assist in tracing the origin of the disease, and from a return subsequently received, I find that the regiment lost 7 in 1893, 1 in 1895, 1 in 1896, and 7 in February 1897, total 16. Of these, 11 were bought at the fairs held at Quetta, Sibi, and Sindh, 2 at Shahpur, 2 at Dera Ghazi Khan, and 1 at Lahore. From the above it will be seen that 11 were Northern horses imported from Meshed and Herat, and it is only feasible to expect that the source of danger lies in that direction; it will therefore behove Officers purchasing horses at any fair, where the Northern horse is offered for sale, to be very careful to have them inspected by a Veterinary Officer before leaving, and to segregate them for some time when they arrive at their destination. BOMBAY. 502. During the year under review, the Department has been placed on a more satisfactory basis, and is likely to be able to perform its duties more thoroughly than it has hitherto done; knowing, as we do, that Glanders and Farcy exist largely amongst Arabs and Persians, and as Bombay is one of the most important horse markets in India, we cannot possibly exercise too much supervision to prevent the disease extending to all parts of the country reached by horses bought in this city. 503. The report which is submitted by the Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, embraces the working for 15 months, as it has been decided to alter the date of its submission from 1st January to 1st April, in order to assimilate it with all others submitted to this office. 504. The control of the Department appointed to work the Glanders and Farcy Act has been transferred from the Commissioner of Police to the Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. Hitherto, its working was entrusted to Police Inspectors of the city; this was unsatisfactory, as with their multi- farious duties it was found impossible that they should do more than pay attention to cases which were brought to their notice. A special body of Police, consisting of 2 Havildars, 3 Naiks and 2 Sepoys, have been appointed: these men are distinguished by a chevron on the right arm with the letters " V. P." They are under the sole control of the Department. 505. The staff of Inspectors has been posted in four divisions, one of these officers being also in subordinate charge of the Government Lazaretto. The harbour has been made a separate division: the duty of the Inspector of this division is to inspect all imports. 506. One Chief Veterinary Inspector is appointed; this officer is respon- sible for the immediate supervision of the Inspectors and Police. It will therefore be seen that the working staff consists of:92 508. During the year under review, the number of animals imported was as follows:93 learn whether these cases were amongst newly-imported horses, especially as referring to the Australians. 512. Veterinary Major Mills brings to notice the insanitary condition of some of the Arab dealers' stables. On this point, he states:94 reported as Anthrax are either Charbon Symptomatique (black quarter) or "Galghotu" a disease of the throat affecting young buffaloes and calves; neither of these diseases are considered to be true Anthrax. Various other maladies are also returned as Anthrax, this being done owing to mistaken diagnosis. 518. As a certain percentage of animals inoculated succumb to virulent Anthrax, and as there is considerable danger of these animals becoming foci of disease, and spreading it about the country, it was suggested that the use or manufacture of anthrax vaccine should be postponed until we are satisfied that the disease really exists, and if so, to what extent it prevails. 519. Owing to the representations made to them by the Government of India, the Committee of the proposed Pasteur Institute agreed to omit the preparation of anthrax vaccine from the proposed objects of the Institute. SURRA. 520. During the present year there has been progress in the collection of information regarding the geographical distribution of this fatal disease. Printed circulars were sent to all Veterinary Assistants attached to the Tehsils in which they were required to visit every village and report on all contagious diseases affecting both horses and cattle. In this way much information has been collected so far as pertains to the Punjab and the North-Western Prov- inces; no other returns have been received, and this may be accounted for by the fact that the disease has either not been recognised in other Provinces or that there are no qualified Veterinary Assistants available to make the neces- sary enquiries. The Vernacular names by which this disease is known are many, viz:95 OUTBREAKS OF SURRA REPORTED DURING 1896-97. Amritsar District.96 NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. Dehra Doon District.97 SURRA. NUMBER OF SOLIPEDS IN VILLAGES. NUMBER OF DEATHS. DISTRICT. Horses. Mules. Donkeys. Total. Horses. Mules. Donkeys. Total. DATE. Delhi . . . 81 71 263 415 52 6 36 94 From December 1892 to December 1896. Karnal . . . 318 88 332 738 71 71 25 167 From August 1894 to March 1897. Amballa . . . 67 2 216 285 25 2 49 76 From November 1894 to November 1896. Hoshiarpur . . 74 ... 50 124 61 ... 32 93 From 1894 to 1895. Ludhiana . . 102 102 204 38 14 52 From February 1895 to November 1896. Ferozepur . . 295 6 322 623 153 1 113 267 From May 1893 to August 1896. Gurdaspur . . 5 ... ... 5 2 ... ... 2 From September 1896 to January 1897. Amritsar . . 88 3 109 200 71 3 45 119 From August 1894 to De- cember 1895. Lahore . . . 47 ... 52 99 36 ... 22 58 From December 1894 to March 1895. Gujranwala . . 202 4 331 537 39 ... 58 97 From November 1892 to October 1896. Jhelum . . . 31 15 63 109 3 2 1 6 From May 1896 to Decem- ber 1896. Mooltan . . . 37 ... 9 46 24 ... ... 24 From June 1893 to June 1895. Peshawar . . 32 ... 29 61 4 ... ... 4 During 1895. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. Saharunpur . . 25 ... ... 25 1 ... ... 1 During April 1896. Nainital . . . 1 ... ... 1 1 ... ... 1 During November 1896. Muzaffarnagar . . ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 From November 1896 to January 1897. CENTRAL PROVINCES. Jubbulpur . . 17 ... ... 17 6 ... ... 6 GRAND TOTAL . 1,422 189 1,878 3,489 590 85 395 1,070
PART I.101 PART I.102 of the building which enabled me, during an interview with His Honour the Lieuteuant-Governor of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, to lay before him the defects of the buildings, and to ask his assistance to cause them to be remedied. From Naini Tal, I proceeded to the Depôt at Babugarh where I allotted the new horse and donkey stallions to the various Provinces. Having heard very bad accounts of the dâk line between Saharunpore and Rajpur, I visited the line and was able to lay before the Superintendent of the Dun various suggestions for its improvement. I was also instrumental in causing the abolition of a horse stand facing the Body-guard lines, in which a case of glanders was discovered and which was always a menace to the horses of that corps. 526. In July 1896, by direction of the Government of India, I proceeded to Rawalpindi and Murree to attend a Conference with reference to the pro- posed new site for the erection of a Punjab stallion depôt. The Officer Com- manding, Royal Artillery, was deputed to meet me and to visit the proposed site. The Conference was composed as follows :103 this show would be held in future, was discussed. I then proceeded to Jacoba- bad where I had an interview with the Commissioner in Sind, at which I laid before him the views of the Agent to the Governor General, with reference to the dates of both the shows. I then visited the Bahawalpore State, and proceeded to the district of Ferozepore to attend the Jellalabad Horse Show. I then inspected the Lahore Veterinary College, and proceeded to Ulwar to afford the State professional advice with reference to horse and mule breeding from the Rissala mares. J then visited Bhurtpore. 531. In February 1897, I again visited the depôt, in order to see the horses lately imported from England, and to inspect the Farm operations; thence I went to Makanpore (Cawnpore district) to attend the horse fair at that place, in order to be able to advise on certain points that were under discussion. I then visited the Central Provinces, where I had interviews with Mr. Craddock, the second Secretary, and the Chief Commissioner. At the latter interview, various points connected with the working of the Department, were discussed. I then proceeded to Berar, where the same points were discussed with the Director of Land Records and Agriculture; thence I went to Bombay to endeavour to secure the remainder of the stallions required by this Department, and especially to obtain ponies for District Boards, which I had been unable to secure at my former visits, owing to the prohibitive prices asked. 532. In March 1897, I attended the Horse Shows held at Multan, Dera Ghazi Khan, Shahpur, Gujrat, Meerut, and Rawalpindi. In all, I attended 14 Horse Fairs and Shows. Assistant to the Inspector-Gene- ral, Civil Veteri- nary Depart- ment. 533. This appointment was held from 1st April to 15th October 1896, by Veterinary Captain Pease, and from 16th October 1896 to 31st March 1897, by Veterinary Captain Gunn. 534. In April 1896, Veterinary Captain Pease attended as a member of the Examination Boards held at Ajmere Veterinary School, and Lahore and Bombay Veterinary Colleges. 535. From 19th May to 30th June 1896, he worked in the Office of the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, collating information refer- ring to cattle disease and breeding. 536. In July 1896, he proceeded to the Laboratory at Muktesar to confer with the Imperial Bacteriologist, returning to Simla on 22nd July, when he took over charge, in addition to his own duties, of the Office of Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, who proceeded on 3 months' privilege leave. 537. Veterinary Captain Gunn started on tour on 31st October 1896, and returned to head quarters on 11th March 1897, during which time he was employed on the Bacteriological Survey of the Punjab; he visited the districts of Ludhiana, Ferozepore, Lahore, Amritsar, and Jullunder. 538. In March 1897, he visited the Rohtak district with a view to obtain bulls suitable for the improvement of the cattle in Bengal, which were required by that Government. 539. From 20th to 31st March 1897, he was engaged in examination duty at the Rajputana and Bengal Veterinary Schools. 540. Veterinary Captain Pease was 37 days in camp, and travelled 3,754 miles by rail, and 490 miles by road. Veterinary Captain Gunn was 135 days in camp, travelled 3,418 miles by rail and 1,070 miles by road, making a total of 172 days in camp, 7,172 miles travelled by rail, and 1,560 miles by road. Imperial Bac teriologist. 541. Dr. Lingard was engaged from 28th May to 22nd June 1896 in investigations on the road leading from Saharunpore to Rajpore, also at the Remount Depôt at Kurnal, at which place he halted eight days. 542. Again, he proceeded with the same investigations from 3rd to 20th September 1896, and visited Simla from 22nd to 29th idem, returning to Muktesar on 4th October. On 11th October he left Muktesar for Bombay and proceeded to England on leave, in connection with the appointment of an Assistant to replace Mr. Bamber, resigned. He returned to the Laboratory on 5th February 1897. 543. From 7th to 28th February he was engaged in investigations into the cause of mortality in Government bullocks at Quetta and Sibi, an account of which will be found in the Cattle Section of this Report (vide page 145).
104 Personnel of the Department. 544. During the year under review, certain changes have taken place; the following will show the resignations and appointments which have occurred:105 acquainted with the working of Veterinary Assistants in the districts, that I look forward with confidence to the results of the changes which have taken place in the teaching staff of this Institution. In Veterinary Lieutenants Larn- der and Loughlin we have lost two officers in charge of horse-breeding centres; this I regret, for these constant changes cannot but prove injurious to the success of our operations. In Veterinary Lieutenant Loughlin we have lost the services of an officer whom it will be very difficult to replace; in fact, I have no hesitation in saying that he is one of the ablest and most hardworking officer that has ever served under me, and I feel compelled to quote the opinion expressed by His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor on this officer's Annual Report for 1895-96. "This is the last report which will be submitted by Veterinary Lieutenant Loughlin, he having resigned the office of Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, and the Lieutenant-Governor regrets that these Provinces are losing the services of an officer so thoroughly efficient in the conduct of his duties". 546. Two transfers took place during the year:106 to the Imperial Bacteriologist. this period, the Government of India informed him that they were prepared to recommend his engagement until 31st August 1898, the date on which Dr. Lingard's engagement also ceases; his pay was then fixed at Rs. 550 without exchange compensation. Mr. Bamber accepted these terms, but subsequently, on receipt of the Right Honourable the Secretary of State's Despatch sanction- ing his appointment on the terms above mentioned, he objected to a number of points, and submitted his resignation. This having been accepted by the Government of India, he resigned on 24th March 1897. Appointment of successor to Mr. Bamber. 552. The question of a successor was carefully considered, and as Dr. Lingard was proceeding to England on three months' privilege leave, it was suggested that he should be consulted in the choice of his Assistant. This was done with the result that the Right Honourable the Secretary of State appoint- ed Dr. J. W. W. Stephens. This gentleman is a Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery, and a Diplomate in Public Health, Cambridge. He has filled the office of Assistant to Professor E. Klein, F.R.S., and for some time has filled a like appointment under Dr. A. A. Kanthack, lately appointed Profes- sor of Pathology and Bacteriology in the University of Cambridge. He held a Pathological and Bacteriological Research Scholarship presented by the Treasurer of St. Bartholome'ws Hospital, and a grant in money from the Scientific Research Committee of the British Medical Association. 553. The terms of his appointment are that the appointment should be for five years, that his pay be Rs. 900 per mensem rising annually by Rs. 30 a month, that exchange compensation allowance should be allowed, and that, if his services are retained after the expiry of five years, he will become eligible for pension and leave under the Civil Service Regulations, which may be applicable to his case, with effect from the beginning of his service in India. 554. The above terms are liberal, and I trust will be the means of our retaining Dr. Stephens' services; as from the high qualifications which he possesses, I anticipate that Dr. Lingard will find in him a valuable Assistant, especially as during his absence, he will be able to continue the series of observ- ations upon which he may be engaged, when it is necessary that he should leave the Laboratory to visit the scene of any outbreak with a view of collect- ing material for research. Result of Gene- ral Sir John Watson's visit to India in 1895-96. 555. As a result of Sir John Watson's visit to India in 1895-96, a report was submitted to the Under Secretary of State for India, in which that officer makes certain recommendations with which I regret I cannot agree, and, as professional Adviser to the Government of India on questions affecting the breeding of horses in this country, I feel compelled to record my opinion. 556. He first expresses his surprise at the facility with which the country- bred remounts of the 5th Lancers and 18th Hussars carry the heavy European trcoper. This, being the result of 20 years' breeding on the present system, must be looked upon as satisfactory. He, however, states that he does not consid er that these horses are up to 17 stone, and in this opinion I concur. 557. He then enters into the much vexed question of whether the Thoroughbred or the Hackney begets the best remounts, and gives the result of an experiment which was the selection of :107 558. Sir John Watson then brings forward two points connected with the Remount Depôts. The first is that purchasing officers should be allowed to purchase foals as they are weaned at seven or eight months. I quite agree with him in saying that liberty is most essential, still I feel that the difficulties in the selection of young stock at 18 months, the minimum age at which they are now purchased, are sufficiently great, and if they were bought at a younger age, the number of failures would be increased greatly. 559. The second point brought forward referring to the Remount Depôt is, that the Depôt Superintendents should be allowed to breed from a certain number of the best fillies on the Runs, between the ages of 3 and 5 years. With reference to this point, I shall say but little. The Government of India have already decided to leave breeding in the hands of the zemindars, and not to interfere with private enterprise, and I can only add that I fully agree with this decision. If once breeding were embarked in by Government, it would paralyse private enterprise. I think this argument alone is sufficient to crush the proposal, but if it is not, I shall be prepared to show that Government can never embark in the enterprise with any chance of financial success. 560. Sir J. Watson then propounds a theory that we are breeding on totally wrong lines; that we should have started with the indigenous breed of horses, which, by careful development and by wise selection and training, would have so improved that we would have had at this day stallions more valuable to us than any English or even Arab stallion that we can import. He then proceeds to state that in the human race the cross between European and Indian blood leads to no permanent or useful improvement, but rather to dete- rioration and sterility; and then he proceeds to ask the question, if the equine race has the same tendency, is it wise to trust entirely to the English horse to improve the native breed ? He also states that in his opinion the importation of the English sire into India has not led to the permanent improvement of the Indian breed of horses. 561. With the above I regret I cannot agree, if by permanent improve- ment he means that it is the intention of Government to improve the breed and then to have it to take care of itself. I agree with him in thinking that a permanent improvement has not taken place, but if he means that a perma- nent improvement cannot be maintained by the importation of fresh blood, be it English, Arab, or Australian, I cannot agree. I contend that not only will the improvement be maintained, but I feel confident that it will still be greater than it is at present if only careful selection of stallions is exercised, and that these stallions are allotted to districts with care by officers who are trained in the matter of proper mating, and this is one of my reasons for deprecating the constant changes of officers of this Department in horse-breeding appointments. 562. With reference to sterility, this cannot be borne out by experience; in fact, if we consider the subject, we will be able to bring to our minds many cases where fecundity, rather than sterility, is the result of the cross. 563. I regret that Sir J. Watson should have come to the conclusion that the Native Cavalry is not better horsed now than it was 30 or 40 years ago. This is not the opinion held by officers of this branch of the service, and with 20 years' experience in this country and with very close observance of the troop horses of the Native Cavalry, I can safely assert that those I saw in the ranks 20 years ago would have been unable to carry the weights now imposed on the horses, nor would they have been able to undergo the work which is now expected of them with the weight they now carry. 564. Sir J. Watson advocates the retention of local and indigenous breeds. These can now be said to consist of Kathiawars, Marwars, and Beloochees, and I have recommended that local authorities in these districts, who possess a knowledge of horse flesh, should be consulted; that they should be told the requirements expected from a cavalry horse of the present day108 GENERAL REMARKS. Horse breeding in Ajmere-Mer- wara. 565. It is a matter that has always astonished me that in a country where the inhabitants are really lovers of a horse, horse-breeding has never taken any hold. Last year I had to report failure as far as one stallion stationed at Kekri was concerned, and again this year only 18 mares have been served by him, and the percentage covered by the two horses109 575. The cost of feed was as follows:110 578. This concludes the review of what may be considered the horse-breed- ing districts of Central Provinces. The prospects may be summed up as follows :111 India Horse, has asked for the services of a donkey stallion with a view of covering the cast mares of the regiment, and has expressed a hope that he will be able to induce some of the ryots to avail themselves of the donkey's services. One has been sent, and I trust that the experiment will prove successful. 585. The Officer Commading, 1st Regiment, Central India Horse, at Agar, has also expressed his willingness to try the experiment of mule-breeding, and a donkey will be sent there in October next. KURRUM. Horse and mule breeding beyond the Border. 586. The donkey which has been employed in the Kurrum Valley was returned to this Department during the year. The experiment has not proved a success; still I feel assured that in time the people would be induced to avail themselves of his services. However, owing to the great demand for donkey stallions, and further, owing to the fact that no Persian donkeys were obtain- able this year, it has been found impossible to detail one for service in Kurrum; as soon, however, as we are able to work up to a full sanctioned strength, I shall send one. TOOHI VALLEY. 587. As stated in last year's report, a proposal was under consideration to place a horse and a donkey in the Tochi Valley. I expressed my ability to furnish a good Arab, but regretted that, owing to the demand for Jacks, I was unable to spare one. It was understood that all charges connected with transit, feed and keep, etc., would be met from the Political Budget for the administration of the Tochi Valley; but as this was not done, the suggestion of locating stallions there has fallen through. Cleansing of horse boxes and railway trucks. 588. The discussion on this subject, commenced last year, has been con- tinued. The points at variance have been accepted with the exception of the East Indian Railway, which objects to disinfect all parts with which the head or any discharge from the mouth or nostrils of the animal has come in contact, considering it necessary only to disinfect the floor. 589. With reference to this, I naturally pointed out that the very parts that would be affected with the virus of glanders would not be disinfected. As glanders is the disease of all others against which we have to protect horses in this country, I trust that this Railway will see the necessity of adopting this rule. 590. The Bombay, Baroda and Central India Railway propose only to disinfect their boxes when it is discovered that an animal is suffering from a contagious disease, relying, as they do, on a rule which exists in their Code, not to accept any animal for despatch suffering from a contagious disease. This is all very well if we could ensure proper inspection before loading, but as horses and cattle are generally loaded by natives, who never look at the animals, or who, if they did, would be utterly unable to diagnose disease of any kind, it would mean that the boxes would never be disinfected. 591. Both these Railways take no precaution with reference to scrapings and sweepings from railway trucks. (Bombay, Baroda and Central India Railway would do so if contagious disease was discovered.) 592. The Bombay, Baroda and Central India Railway have no rule referring to the cleansing of boxes through trap doors whilst horses are in transit ; considering the length of time that animals are in the train in this country, I trust that they will see the advisability of adopting this rule. 593. It will be seen that the points at variance have narrowed them- selves considerably, and I trust that these few will be accepted by the two railways concerned, in order that we may have one uniform system for the whole of India; and when this is effected, the question that will then have to be settled is that of supervision, to ensure the rules being carried out. Rules for guid- ance of Zilla- dars and Salu- tris. 594. It has long been felt that a short code for the guidance of the Zilladars and Salutris of this Department was required, especially as these subordinates frequently pleaded ignorance as to their duties. A code of this description has been drawn up during the year by Veterinary Captain Joslen, and has been circulated to all Superintendents for consideration. It has been made as complete as possible, and contains all the forms that are required to
112 be submitted by these men. It will now be printed in English and Urdu, and will be circulated to all the subordinates of this Department; and, through the Directors of Land Records, it will be submitted to all district officials, in order that they may become acquainted with the duties of the men serving in their districts. It is hoped that the publication of this short code will lead to the better working of the Zilladars, especially who, at present, are not very reliable. Advice to breed- ers, to be circu- lated by means of Covering and Produce Certi- ficates. 595. During the year under review, the question of endeavouring to increase the number of mares that hold, by the dissemination of knowledge as to the treatment of the mare at the time of covering, was considered. Veteri- nary Captain Pease's Manual on Horse-breeding cannot possibly reach each individual breeder; it was therefore decided to print the following simple instructions at the back of each Covering Certificate in English and in Urdu, and this will therefore be done in future:113 tific portions were abstracted, thus leaving all practical subjects; this was translated into very plain and simple Urdu, and was lithographed. The Gov- ernment of India sanctioned the distribution of 800 copies to the breeders attending the Horse Fairs and Shows, and this wide circulation can have but a most beneficial effect. Indian Quar- terly Veterinary Journal in Urdu. 603. The Quarterly Veterinary Journal, which was formerly edited by Veterinary Captain Pease, but which had to be discontinued in 1891 on his departure from Lahore, has been re-established, and already two issues have taken place. I am of opinion that this will prove of the greatest value to the Subordinate Veterinary Establishment, as it will enable them to keep up their interest in Veterinary science, and will also enable them to keep their know- ledge up to date. The native is too inclined to think that he has completed his education as soon as he has obtained his certificate, whereas he must be made to understand that it really only then commences. I therefore consider that, with this means at hand, every Veterinary Assistant should subscribe to this journal, and I am glad to say that in the majority of cases they have done so; those who have failed to subscribe are such as are well known to be men indifferent to their work, and about whom it is a question whether they should be retained in the service or not. The cost of this useful addition to Veteri- nary literature in Urdu is now Rs. 8 per annum, but as Veterinary Captain Pease does not wish to make money cut of it, he has informed me that, owing to its having met with a much wider circulation than he expected, he will shortly be able to reduce its price. Manual of Cat- tle Diseases by Syud Sardar Shah Gilani, 604. This Manual of Cattle Disease published in Urdu by Syud Sardar Shah Gilani, Lecturer at the Lahore Veterinary College, is, I am pleased to say, finding wide circulation. No less than 219 copies were subscribed for by the various States of Rajputana, and the Agent to the Governor General, in forwarding the indent for these, asked that 247 copies should be supplied in Hindi. The Under Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Central Provinces, also addressed this office, stating that Hindi is the language of 13 out of 18 districts of those provinces, and that, if the book was to find circulation there, a Hindi translation would be required. To meet this want, a translation has been made; this translation was not approved of by the Chief Commissioner, who stated that he would be willing to accept any Hindi version which is con- sidered by the Government of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh to be sufficiently simple and intelligible to the rural population. The Government Translator of these Provinces has been asked, through the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, if he will undertake the work. I trust, therefore, to be soon in a position to supply this long felt want. 605. As soon as this is settled, it will then be a matter for consideration whether it should not be translated into Mahratti, as the Chief Commissioner, Central Provinces, informs me that a translation should be made into that lan- guage to meet the requirements of four districts of the Nagpur country; if this is made, I have no doubt that the work would find ready circulation in the Hyderabad Assigned Districts. HORSE-BREEDING IN NATIVE STATES. 606. In the Annual Administration Reports of this Department for 1894-95 and 1895-96, I have given a resumé of the work done during those years in Native States. I have confined my remarks to those States visited by me and in which horse and mule-breeding operations are carried out under some system; that there are many others that would be glad to profit by the advice of this Department I feel assured, and I would at all times be glad to be informed on this point, either by the Political Agents, or through the Foreign Department. 607. I can only reiterate my remarks made last year. I have received the greatest kindness, and have been met most cordially by all the Rulers of the States which I have visited, and all my suggestions have been given effect to; in fact, I may truly say that, considering the short time that any attention has been paid to this important matter by this Department, now extending over only two years, the results have surpassed all my expectations. 608. I have been able to visit all the States mentioned in this report this year, and I trust that time will always enable me to do so, as on every visit,
114 I find different points on which professional advice is needed; and whilst the States so cordially assist us, I feel it my duty to help them in every way pos- sible. One of my main objects is always to reduce expenditure as far as I can, as I feel that in doing so I am enabled, when necessity arises, to advocate expenditure in the supply of an extra horse or donkey stallion. 609. I would draw special attention to the resumé which will be found at the end of this section (page 124, para. 684) giving the number of mares covered by horse and donkey stallions in those States, acting under the advice of this Department, and would point out that, as all the horse-breeding mares were covered by selected horses, the increase to the horse-supply of the country from this source must be great. 610. Following the system adopted in former years, the review of each State is given in the order in which I visited them. Jeypore. 611. In last year's Administration Report I noted that this State had purchased four good Arab stallions with the object of commencing horse- breeding operations; owing to the fact that stables had to be built, these horses were retained in the Babugarh Depôt until October, when they were sent to Jeypore. I was able to inspect the stables built at Head Quarters, which is the pattern adopted for the three outlying stands; they are admirably designed, and, with one or two trifling alterations which I was able to suggest, will meet all requirements. 612. I have laid down the lines on which these stallions should be utilized, and the Secretary of the Council has intimated, through the Resident, that all Nazims concerned have been ordered to circulate notices informing the people that the services of the stallions are to be obtained gratis. This is of course a new procedure, and it may take time to develop. I shall anxiously await the results which will be known next year, and I trust then to be able to report that their services have been fully utilized. 613. Two Veterinary Assistants belonging to the State passed the final examination at the Ajmere School last year; their employment to the best advantage had therefore to be considered. I was able to lay down for the con- sideration of the Council certain rules, and I suggested that they should be employed in those Circles where horse-breeding had commenced. One of these men was sent to Babugarh to be practically trained in the management of mares at the time of covering and of foaling, and also in the management of young stock. The Council on this point state :115 that at first it may be viewed with suspicion in a Native State, as it was in British territory when first started. I am quite satisfied with the results as a commencement, and as the Resident has urged the Durbar to take steps to make the stallions more useful, I anticipate better results next year. 618. I have already alluded to this State in the review of Horse Fairs and Ulwar. Shows, and there it was stated that:116 624. The inspection of the stallions and mares of the Rissalas was of great interest. I might mention that, before the matter was taken in hand by the Political Agent, these were mounted on any class of animal irrespective of size, color, soundness, age, or anything else, and naturally the placing of these corps under any system must be a work of time. I might further mention that there are 12 of these local corps, and with each, one Arab stallion and one donkey will be placed; these, in addition to covering the mares of the corps to which they are attached, will also cover Jagir and Zemindari mares. 625. At the inspection, 14 stallions were present, viz., 11 Arabs, 1 Persian, 1 Turkoman, and 1 Kathiawar; some are excellent, but, after careful consider- ation, I felt compelled to recommend that 7 should be got rid of as opportuni. ties offered to replace them, and already one has been purchased by the State. 626. At the inspection 152 mares were present: these were representative mares from 11 different Rissalas which, at the present time, number about 450 mares. The system is perfect; every mare is told off, either to be covered by the horse or by the donkey stallion, but it is in this direction that I am able to offer assistance. I carefully inspected each mare, and recommended in 31 cases that mares put down for horse-breeding should be relegated to mule-breeding, the reasons being either attributable to unsoundness or bad conformation. This left the numbers as follows :117 Owing, however, to the scarcity which prevailed, I could not recommend expenditure in this direction, but the Chief Secretary informs me that he hopes to be able to employ one more horse and donkey stallion during 1897-98. 631. It was not to be expected that many mares and young stock would be collected for my inspection, as such scarcity of fodder prevailed; still 45 mares were present and nearly all were in foal to State stallions. Thirty head of young stock also attended, 27 of which were by State stallions, and I was pleased to notice the general improvement of the young stock when compared to the dams. 632. The State is doing remarkably good work by improving the indige- nous breed of horses and thus adding to the horse-supply of India. 633. In connection with the horse and mule-breeding operations carried on in this State, a Horse Show was held in February 1897, at which Rs. 565 was awarded as prizes. This show will be found under the "Review of Horse Fairs and Shows in India." 634. Returns for the whole year have just been received in time to enable me to incorporate them in this year's review. They show 325 mares to have been covered by the horse stallions and 319 by the donkeys; they also show, as far as can be ascertained, that the results of last year's coverings were 87 foals by horse, and 54 by donkey stallions. This is very satisfactory. Patiala. 635. Horse-breeding, on any recognized system, does not make the pro- gress in this State that it does in others. This I attribute entirely to the fact that, except in the Home Stud, which is under the management of a late Over- seer of this Department, no one appears to be responsible for other arrange- ments; and even let us take the Home Stud, it can never prove a financial suc- cess, for its management is not carried on with that view. 636. I purpose giving, in extenso, a letter addressed to the Mir Munshi, Patiala State, after my last visit, embodying, as it does, the advice I was able to offer; from this letter it will be seen that with 9 horse and 2 donkey stal- lions employed, only 50 mares of any value are employed. The following is the letter above alluded to :118 (b) That such young stock that are likely to make remounts, should be transferred to the Imperial Service Troops, as by doing so the State would be saved the expense of purchasing them outside the State; in fact, I would go further and would recommend that the Remount Department who are prepared to pay double the amount paid by Imperial Service Cavalry, should be asked to purchase the best of these, that may not be required by the State. (c) The same remarks refer to mules. "There is one point that I would draw special attention to, viz., the general improvement of the horse stock of the State. This was begun 3 years ago, when eight stallions were posted to various Tehsils; last year only five were employed, but I regret to find that only two are at present out, four being at Bahadurgarb. "By the encouragement of this system of breeding, His Highness is conferring great advantages on his subjects; the money which is now spent outside the State in the purchase of remounts, would be spent in the State and the horse stock of India would be improved and increased. "I sincerely trust that attention will be paid to this most important matter, and that it will shortly be placed on some sound basis. If once properly organised on the lines previously explained by me, the expense to the State would be trifling and the amount of good that would be done, would be great. "Mule-breeding could be greatly pushed on the same lines, and would prove of great advantage by furnishing the Transport required by the State." I trust that, in future, more attention will be paid to the encouragement of horse-breeding from zemindari mares. 637. The final report, showing the working of the Stud, both as affecting the State Stud and zemindari mares, which was kindly submitted by the Foreign Minister, is more encouraging; from it I gather that in all 151 mares were covered by the horse stallions, of which 72 belonged to the Stud and 79 were the property of zemindars. 638. In accounting for the apparent diminution of numbers covered, the property of the zemindars, Mr. Mackay states :119 British territory, mainly from the Ferozepore district, are bringing V. I. mares to be served by them. As these breeders are entitled to the use of Gov- ernment stallions gratis, and as these are to be found in every Tehsil of that district, I recommended that a fee of Rs. 2 should be levied from such, as it frequently prevented mares branded by the State, receiving the services of the stallions. 644. Mule-breeding is becoming very popular, and soon it will be neces- sary to obtain another donkey, as the one now employed had covered 54 mares from 1st April to 12th November 1896. 645. As usual, a collection of mares and young stock was held during the Dassehrah, and a large sum was awarded in prizes. This will do much to encourage the breeders in this State. 646. The Run that was proposed to be started was still held in abeyance; this was mainly due to the scanty rainfall, but the Raja of Faridkot is keenly alive to the advisability of placing the best young stock bred in the State in a Run, and the matter will receive his attention as soon as possible. 647. As an addendum to this review, I am able just before sending this report to the Press to state that 97 mares have been covered by the Arab stal- lions, and 83 by the country stallions, which are very good of their class. Eighty-eight were covered by the donkey stallion. There are 148 mares, the property of zemindars, branded in the State. The young stock by the Arab stallions have been inspected by the Raja of Faridkot, who reports that they are satisfactory and liked by him. Bhopal. 648. In last year's report I stated that I was unable to visit this State; this, however, I did whilst proceeding to Bombay this year. During my visit I had a long interview with Major Meade, the Political Agent, and other Native officials of the State, when it was decided, as a preliminary measure, to ask the Durbar to afford the following information :120 connection with this, I might mention that not a single purchasing officer was present; these dealers also informed me that no prizes are offered by the Durbar as is done at Ulwar and Jeypur, where Rs. 800 and Rs. 1,000 respect- ively are awarded annually by the Durbars. Whilst in this State, I had the pleasure of an interview with Major MacIvor, the Resident; this officer is very keen on horse-breeding, and did much to foster the industry whilst Poli- tical Agent, Thal-Chotiali, Baluchistan. 650. I found that an attempt had been made to revive the old stud which I was informed had previously existed in the State; this was being done by Dr. Crofts and, as I stated in my letter to the Resident, I would have hesitated to make the following remarks did I not know that they were shared by that officer. I pointed out that to ensure success, either as a financial measure or as one of utility, good mares and stallions must be obtained, and as the small stud does not contain these, failure must result. If it is decided to make a commence- ment, I recommended that it should be done on a small scale, and that 50 good mares should be obtained, and one of the best Arab stallions that money could buy, should be purchased; this Arab, together with one of the Australians now at stud work, would suffice to cover the 50 mares above alluded to, and any others in the State from which it is thought advisable to breed. 651. I also pointed out the advisability of improving the horse stock of the State generally, especially as in such a large State an enormous number of horses are required annually for His Highness the Maharaja's own troops, the Imperial Service Cavalry, and for the Transport Corps. At present Gwalior is entirely dependent on Australians, Arabs, or horses bred in British territory, and therefore I suggested for the consideration of the Durbar that a com- mencement should be made in two districts, those being selected which possess the best mares. 652. If only an improvement were made in the breed of ponies, and that the Transport Corps were able to meet its requirements from the State, I feel that something would have been accomplished. These points are now being considered by the Durbar. Bahawalpore. 653. I visited this State in November 1896, and had interviews with the Nawab and Sayed Ibrahim Ali, Wazir of the State, to both of whom this Department is indebted for the cordial manner in which they have assisted in the development of horse and mule-breeding. 654. This State has suffered greatly from scarcity of fodder, and in fact to such an extent that the Horse Fair held annually at Bahawalpore had to be abandoned; it is therefore all the more satisfactory to find that the number of mares covered, both by horse and donkey stallions, is in excess of the number covered last year. The numbers being as follows :121 658. I feel that it will be better to confine horse and mule breeding to pri- vate enterprise. Already we have six Tehsils equipped with a horse and donkey each, and as these are meeting with success, it is hardly necessary to maintain an expensive establishment with but little prospect of success. Bhurtpore 659. Of the three States in Eastern Rajputana, Bhurtpore is the only one that has taken up the question of the improvement of horse stock; in fact, it is the only one that possesses any big mares. At the same time, I must say that Kerouli could assist by improving its breed of ponies, many of which I saw in the hilly country of this State. The country is admirably adapted for any enterprise of this sort, and mule-breeding could be made a most paying concern if it were adopted. I am led to make these remarks owing to the fact that the people of this State are to be met with at nearly every fair, either purchasing young stock or selling them when old enough to be sold as remounts. Men with tendencies this way would soon learn the market value of mules, and the industry, if once started, would soon flourish. 660. Whilst reviewing what had been done last year at Bayana Stud in the Bhurtpore State, I said that I would not advocate its abolition, but rather that it should be extended, and that the young stock should be brought up under the liberty system. This, however, was found impossible, as owing to the distance at which Bayana is from head-quarters, supervision could not be exercised. At present, about 20 head of young stock received from Bayana are in the stables, all bearing undoubtedly signs of being tied up from an early age. 661. I am aware that I am sometimes blamed for showing too great a desire to abolish these Home Studs, but I scarcely deserve the blame, for if the management could only be seen, it would at once be agreed that no practical value can accrue from their retention. Besides which, most States would not or could not stand the expense of both systems; the second system alluded to being that of placing good Arab sires at different centres for the use of the breeders of the State. This may be described as the general improvement of the horse stock of the country, and must in time lead to a large number of horses fit for Army purposes. A zemindar with a foal is likely to look after him, whereas in the Stud Farms, there is great neglect and general mismanage- ment. What I do advocate is, that each State that is assisting in horse or mule- breeding should have a run in which young stock, the produce of the State stallions, that are bought from the breeders, can be reared; this I have advo- cated at Bhurtpore, as the land can be obtained close to the stables, whereby supervision can be assured. 662. It will be remembered that the State commenced last year with three Arab stallions. These had covered at my visit to the State on 30th January 1897, 111 mares or an average of 37 each, and still the best covering months, Febru- ary and March, remained, so that we may expect that they will have covered nearly 50, if not fully that number, by 31st March 1897; this is most encourag- ing and satisfactory. 663. Mule-breeding has already made a great start, the donkey stallion having covered 25 mares up to the end of January. Three more Cyprian donkeys have been acquired by the State, and there is every chance of their services being utilized. Jhind 664. "I have stated in former reports how cordially this State has assisted in the development of horse-breeding in the Tehsils of Jhind and Charkhi Dadri, which are situated in proximity to the Hissar district, and which are the only portions of this State's territory in which good mares are to be found. 665. I regret that I was unable to pay a visit to the Council of Regency during this cold weather, as it has always given me much pleasure to discuss the prospects of horse-breeding operations with them, but time would not allow of my doing so this year. 666. With the sanction of the Council, Veterinary Captain Joslen, Super- intendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, whose circle lies in close proximity to the Tehsils of this State, which are interested in horse-breed ing, paid them a visit, and in his report, states :122 Here, as in most parts of India, that have had Arab or other blood for only a short time, we find the colors to be various. I mention this to show how much the infusion of good blood has had to say to the good whole colors so noticeable in our fairs. Of the 34 inspected by Veterinary Captain Joslen, the following colors are reported:123 the State. The results up to 31st March 1897 are encouraging, as already 16 mares had been covered. 675. The report on the Stud Farm Horse Breeding Operations, Kunegal, for the year, shows that 10 stallions were employed. Of these, 4 were English, 4 Arabs, and 2 Australians. These stallions covered 204 mares belonging to the Stud in addition to 19 belonging to private gentlemen; this gives an average of 22 mares covered by each stallion during the year, which must be considered low. 676. The births registered during the year were:124 (2) Breeding from Kashmiri mares, and buying the young stock at 6 months old and running them. (3) Breeding from Kashmiri mares, and allowing owners to run young stock to 3 years old, then buying them and keeping them till 4 years of age. 682. Kashmir promises well as far as mule-breeding is concerned; in fact, I feel convinced that, if only it once obtains a footing there, it will give us a vast supply of baggage mules. 683. Colonel Anderson is very anxious that I should see the operations, in order to advise with him as to any measures that are likely to prove beneficial to the industry, and if time will allow, I purpose visiting this State for a short time during the year. 684. To summarize the work done in Native States receiving advice or support from this Department, I give the following resumé, showing the number of mares covered by horse and donkey stallions :GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1896-97. PART II.127 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1896-97. PART II.128 stallions had served their full number of mares, and as their services were still required, a fee of one rupee per mare was fixed for each one served by a Provincial stallion in excess of 50." 693. The advisability of charging any fees is to my mind very doubtful. I fear it will lead to the Provincial ponies becoming unpopular, as the idea is sure to get abroad that fees are always to be charged, and I fear that this system will lead to extortion. I would much prefer that the matter should be left to the discretion of the Superintendent, as is done in the case of Impe- rial stallions. In the latter case, when a horse has covered his full comple- ment, a full report of the condition and vigour of the horse is submitted to me by the Superintendent, and I then issue orders that his covering is to be stopped, or that he may cover an extra 10 or 20 mares, the number being regulated by his condition, etc. This duty might be relegated to the Superin- tendent; the Local Government will be addressed on this subject. 694. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, states, with reference to the demand for District Board stallions:129 699. Taking the three large Circles in which horse and pony breeding is aided by District Boards, we find the following results during the past two years:130 703. Commenting generally on the results obtained by the attention paid to horse and pony breeding, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, states :131 709. Mule breeding was commenced in June last, and considering that it has never succeeded before, I think we may say that it has proved a greater success than was anticipated, 64 mares having been covered by the 4 Jacks bought by the Madras Government. The number of mares covered would have still been greater had they been employed during the whole year, and had one not been sick. On the question of mule breeding, the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Madras, states :PART II.135 PART II.PART II.139 PART II.140 The most serious outbreak of rinderpest in the Madras Presidency was that which occurred in the Bellary District. The disease has been present in this part of the country for some years, but it was only since 1894 that the epidemic began to assume serious proportions. In that year the reports stated that 551 animals had succumbed to this disease. During the next year the disease rapidly spread and became more virulent, and the number of deaths increased from 551 in 1894 to 4,728 in 1895, and 9,593 in 1896. The disease is said to have first broken out in epidemic form about January 1895, in the Taluks of Kudligi and Hadagally, but from the reports received it would seem that the disease had existed enzootically for some time previously. From a perusal of the monthly statements of cattle mortality in the Bellary district, it will be seen that the disease gradually became more virulent until October 1895, when the mortality reached over 1,000 a month. At the beginning of 1896 we find that the deaths increased to nearly 2,000. At this period the disease assumed a most virulent type, and an examination of the return above alluded to will show that the number of deaths in March, April, May and June were 2,643, 2,880, 2,548, and 1,887, respectively, after which months the epidemic gradually subsided. This table is most interesting as showing the gradual extension and growth of virulency, month by month, until the number of deaths had increased nearly tenfold. The average percentage of deaths to the total number of animals attacked works out roughly to 57.6, but as the number of deaths, and those of animals reported sick are not very accurately reported, the figures above may be only considered to be approximate. The Stock Inspector who was placed on special duty to make enquiries regarding the outbreak of rinderpest in the Bellary District states, that so far as he has been able to learn, the disease first appeared at the village of Mylar in the Hadagally Taluk, and from there travelled to the Cusba Harpanhally, and to Balligatti in the Kudligi Taluk about February 1895, during which month cattle fairs are held at the villages of Mylar and Kurvatti, which are within two miles of each other. In the Hospet Taluk the disease first appeared in May 1895 among the cattle belonging to the villages of Gadi- ganur and Kurkappi. Further enquiries showed that buffalo dealers from the Mysore State come annually to purchase, and it was their custom to collect their animals at a place called "Yelu Gudda" (seven hills) where excellent pasturage is obtainable. Having finished their purchases, they drive the animals in batches, and disperse by different routes. It is claimed that the spread of rinderpest can be traced partly to the cattle fairs held near Mylar and partly to these batches of cattle which have come from the Nizam's dominion. It is stated that rinderpest was prevalent in the villages of Mylar previous to the fair being held, and also after the cattle had dispersed, and that the disease had affected cattle for a period of three months during this time. The Inspector has therefore grounds for believing that, in all probability the disease spread from this focus. It seems incomprehensible that the authorities should allow a cattle fair to be held in a locality in which such a contagious disease as rinderpest was known to be present. Another point in the Stock Inspector's contention that the disease spread from Mylar is, that shortly after the cattle dealers had passed along the different roads, it was found that cattle belonging to villages situated on the road sides became affected, and that almost all the villages along the roads in all four Taluks Hadagally, Kudligi, Hospet and Harpanhelly were likewise infected.
141 Statement of Cattle Mortality in Belldry District from January 1895 to July 1896, TOTAL DEATHS FROM DISEASES DURING January 1895. February 1895. March l895. April 1885. May 1895. June 1895. July 1895. August 1895. September 1895. October 1895. November 1895. December 1895. January 1896. February 1896. March 1896. April 1896. May 1890. June 1896. July 1896. Adoni . . . . . 39 30 75 61 85 104 82 130 80 114 84 38 37 66 126 213 303 245 256 Alur . . . . . 11 12 18 17 27 38 60 37 49 60 23 18 25 47 158 273 486 586 502 Bellary . . . . . 16 46 28 30 52 47 96 61 41 66 62 34 53 219 641 494 523 330 113 Rayadrug . . . . . 31 21 21 58 28 51 37 32 42 33 40 16 169 226 200 65 172 196 93 Hospet . . . . . . 36 49 7 28 48 115 223 119 93 256 274 105 252 264 298 192 281 109 206 Kudligi . . . . . 9 23 56 12 37 128 102 49 101 87 460 542 410 416 337 488 226 202 348 Hadagally . . . . . 38 60 62 78 97 156 155 118 135 313 348 215 191 481 637 975 489 187 117 Harpanhelly . . . . . 4 17 101 36 80 81 191 186 59 106 107 103 99 137 246 180 68 32 10 TOTAL . 184 258 368 320 474 720 946 732 600 1,035 1,398 1,071 1,236 1,856 2,643 2,880 2,548 1,887 1,643 3
142 Statement showing the deaths in each Taluka of the Bellary District during the years 1894, 1895, 1896. Names of Talukas. 1894. 1895. 1896. Hadagally . . . . . . . 160 1,046 2,687 Kudligi . . . . . . . . 42 1,553 2,056 Hospet . . . . . . . . 42 1,141 727 Harpanhelly . . . . . . . . 42 759 622 Bellary . . . . . . . . 12 94 1,515 Adoni . . . . . . . . 12 98 468 Alur . . . . . . . . 12 1 1,068 Raedoong . . . . . . . . . 229 46 450 Statement showing districts in the Madras Presidency which were visited by Rinderpest during the year 1896-97. Serial No. District. No. of deaths. 1 North Arcot . . . . . 796 2 South Arcot . . . . . 92 3 Bellary . . . . . 8,351 4 Coimbatore . . . . . 18 5 Chingliput . . . . . 1,961 6 Nellore . . . . . 418 7 Salem . . . . . . 43 TOTAL 18,679 Rinderpest in Gilgit and Kash- mir. The Officiating British Agent in Gilgit reported in December 1896 the prevalence of Rinderpest in the Gilgit District. The disease appears to have been communicated from the Chitral side, as many animals are said to have died at Gakuch and Singal at the end of November last. The mortality was reported as slight; this, however, was due to the fact that zemindars did their best to conceal the existence of the disease. Vigorous measures were taken to check the spread of the disease by isola- tion of suspected cases and by the immediate destruction of all diseased animals. The British Agent also arranged to prevent cattle passing any of the bridges within the limits of Gilgit jurisdiction, and in that way he stated that he hoped to keep the disease out of Kashmir and the Punjab. Early in January 1897, the disease was reported to be abating in Gilgit, but fresh cases were reported in Bunji. The Resident of Kashmir sanctioned the establishment of a levy post on the right bank of the Indus to prevent the passage of diseased cattle. At the end of January, the disease was reported to be on the decrease in the district. It had not touched the villages above those in the main valleys, and the prohibition against cattle passing the main bridges of the district appar- ently localised the disease.
143 In February it was reported that only five cases had occurred during that month, but the outbreak must have been a severe one as 436 are shown as having died in January. In April, when the last report was received, the disease appears to have been stamped out in Gilgit. But in May the disease appears to have reached Kashmir, as it is reported in Buniar near Baramulla. This, I fear, is due to the opening of the passes and the transit of affected cattle. We are now watching its progress, in order, if necessary, to establish quarantine and inspection posts as was done in 1894, when rinderpest existed in the Kashmir Valley. Rinderpest was reported by the Governor of Jammu to be raging in some villages of Jammu; on receipt of this information I placed myself in communi- cation with the Punjab Government, with the result that sanction was accorded to the Deputy Commissioner, Sialkot, which district was more threatened than any other, to impose quarantine on cattle proceeding from Jammu. Veterinary Assistants were also at once posted to watch for cattle that were imported (i) via Nakhaul and Zufferwal, (ii) viâ Ranbhirsinghpura, and (iii) by the Chaprar route. These precautionary measures had, I am pleased to be able to report, the desired effect of preventing its introduction into the Sialkot district. Foot and mouth disease.144 hours. I only saw one animal dead of this disease, the post mortem examina- tion of which will be found in the report on the Amritsar District. Following is a statement of the number of deaths caused by the disease in the Punjab. Dera Ishmael Khan appears to have had serious losses, viz. 3,252, while none of the other districts show more than a few hundred. In Amritsar 542 deaths are reported to have occurred. In Jhang 438 animals died in the Chinot Tehsil, Jallandhar had 245 cases, and Jhelum had 193. The others had less than a hundred. Statement showing Anthrax including malignant sore throat and Black-quarter in the Punjab. District. ANTHRAX INCLUDING HAMGNANT SORE THROAT AND BLACK-QUARTER. REMARKS. Remaining under treatment. Result unknown. Cured. Incurable. Died. Total. Amritsar . . . . ... ... 20 ... 522 542 Delhi ..... ... ... 12 ... 63 75 Ferozepore . . . . ... ... ... ... 52 52 Jallandhar . . . . ... ... 27 ... 214 241 Gurgaon . . . . ... ... ... 18 84 102 Gurdaspur . . . . 4 4 9 38 148 203 Hoshiarpur . . . . ... ... 6 ... 57 63 Hissar . . . . ... ... ... ... 12 12 Kurnal . . . . 1 ... 5 ... 9 15 Kangra . . . . 13 ... 3 ... 87 103 Ludhiana . . . . ... ... 4 1 88 93 Mooltan . . . . ... ... 7 ... 25 32 Mozaffargarh . . . ... ... ... ... 4 4 Dera Ishmael Khan . . ... ... 21 ... 3,266 3,287 Bannu . . . . 10 ... 7 ... ... 17 Gujrat . . . . ... ... 32 ... 11 43 Gujranwala . . . . 1 ... 29 4 72 106 Hazara . . . . ... ... ... ... 1 1 Jhelum . . . . ... ... 25 18 150 193 Lahore . . . . ... 13 12 ... 17 42 Peshawar . . . . ... ... 4 ... 4 8 Shahpur . . . . ... ... 20 ... 8 28 Sialkote . . . . ... ... 3 ... 4 7 Jhang . . . . ... 3 ... ... 438 GRAND TOTAL 29 20 246 79 5,333 5,707
145 Hydatid disease as affecting transport bul- locks in Quetta. 721. In the month of November 1896 an outbreak of disease occurred amongst the transport bullocks at Quetta, and as the disease at the time appeared obscure, the Inspecting Veterinary Officer, Bombay Command, asked for the assistance of this Department, as no Veterinary Officer of the Army Veterinary Department is stationed closer than Karachi. I note this in order to show how one Department can come to the assistance of the other. 722. In accordance with the Inspecting Veterinary Officer's request, the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, directed Veterinary Captain Maxwell, who was on the spot, to investigate the disease and to afford all the help in his power to the Commissariat Department. At first the disease appeared to abate, but in January last it again assumed a severe form. Veterinary Captain Maxwell made two post mortem examinations, and all he could discover was the presence of numerous large hydatid cysts in the lungs, liver and spleen. During this period about 40 bullocks were attacked and about 50 per cent. of these died. As hydatid disease is so common in this country, Veterinary Captain Maxwell was diffident in ascribing the death of all these animals to this source. Dr. Lingard, the Imperial Bacteriologist, was deputed to Quetta in order that he might investigate and report on the disease; in the meantime, Veterinary Captain Maxwell continued his researches, and on 30th January 1897, submitted a supplementary report, from which I extract the following:146 "4. I would suggest that in the event of transport by animals being continued from Quetta to Sibi, viâ the Bolan and to Peshin, etc., on a large scale, as at present, some permanent provision for the supply of pure water should be made at different halting stations en route. This would, no doubt, entail considerable expense, but in the event of any urgent Military or other movement, it would be advisable that the risk of losing animals or having them incapacitated at such an important moment from preventible disease, should be minimised." 724. These recommendations are all practical and are worthy of considera- tion. The bullock lines are reported by Dr. Lingard as being situated in the open plain and as having small doors and windows, the latter opening, more or less, on all sides; these are in yards surrounded with walls about 5 feet in height, but which afford little or no protection from the wind. The alterations advocated in recommendation No. 3 appear to be called for. 725. Recommendation No. 2, to the effect that dogs be kept away from the bullock lines, etc., is necessary. Also of No. 1, that offal affected with hydatid cysts, should be destroyed, are necessary as, to quote from Dr. Lingard's report, we find that:147 728. The disease Dumree, above alluded to, would seem to be similar to that known as Tinea Tonsurans, which is very common among young cattle in England. It is caused by the fungus Tricophyton tonsurans. Its consti- tuents are smaller than those of Favus, and it does not project as cups on the surface, simply invading the epidermal structures and constituting a fine powder on the epidermis. It affects young animals, especially when exposed to damp, and with dirty skins, and is readily transmissible from ox to ox, or to man or other animals. It attains a greater luxuriance of growth in the ox than in man, and the disease, when first received by man from the ox, is so luxuriant that it has been described as specially distinct. Symptoms.148 Nitrate of Potash is extremely soluble in water, and also that it has a special action on the kidneys, viz., that of stimulation of the secretionary power so that the solution is. rapidly eliminated through the urinary system. Bill or Vill. 730. In nearly all the country through which I toured and which was lowlying and subject to inundations, a disease called Bill or Vill was said to be very prevalent. It was said to be caused by cattle eating a species of spider which forms cobwebs on the grass in the morning. The affected animal is said to be unable to move for three days, and continues lying down. It then rises, and seems to make a speedy recovery. The native treatment usually adopted is a mixture of mango pickle, onions, and Ak or Madar leaves. Many animals are reported to have suffered at the commencement of the rainy season. This disease would seem to be neither more nor less than colic, due to the engorgement of the rumen or large stomach with newly grown grass. When the grass first springs up after the first rains, the cattle, which have previously been starved, eat of it most ravenously, with the certain after results of colicky pains. The zemindars say that very few animals die of the disease, as they style it, and that the usual duration of the attack is about three days. The treatment adopted seems to be effectual. As several animals are usually affected at the same time, the disease is considered by the zemindars to be of a contagious nature, but, from the symptoms given, it will be readily recognised as a very ordinary ailment. Tick Plague or Texas Fever. 731. The Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, remarks as follows:149 Armed with the information contained in these reports, and backed by Regulations regarding the importation of animals from affected areas, we would be able to safeguard this country from disease brought from other countries. I am glad to state that the matter is now under the consideration of the Government of India. 733. It may be asked why the above is included under the Cattle Section of this Report whilst horses are referred to; the reason is that horses are immune, that they do not contract the disease, but that they are the means of carrying the tick, to which the disease is traced to cattle. 734. To show the virulence of the disease, and the necessity of guarding this country against the introduction of the pest into India, I would quote extracts from the Melbourne Age of 17th October last:150 "I would further recommend that a declaration in writing should be taken from every shipper entering any port in India from Australia, before he is allowed to land a single horse, to the effect that none of his shipment have been brought from the area which it may be deemed advisable to declare as infected. A very heavy penalty should be imposed on any person proved to have made a false declaration. " I do not think that the question of hides need be considered, as I am not aware that these articles are ever imported into this country from Australia. "I have attempted to limit my recommendations as much as possible, so that the Horse Trade, now existing between Australia and this country, may be interfered with as little as possible; but, bearing in mind the ravages committed by this disease, I feel that I would be failing in my duty were I to advocate any measures of lesser severity than those enumerated above; for even should the disease exist in this country, as I have hinted before, still it does not exist in any widespread form, and we are incurring the gravest responsibility if we allow of its introduction into this country in the face of the fact that the various Colonies of Australia have imposed the most stringent Quarantine Regulations against each other." Punjab. 735. Information collected.151 During my visit it was brought to my notice that the system of report- ing serious outbreaks of disease was unsatisfactory, and that in the majority of cases the only intimation received by the Superintendent was through statistics published in the Central Provinces Gozette. When these were seen by the Superintendent, he addressed the Deputy Commissioner of the district concerned, and the replies are generally so delayed that before the Superin- tendent can reach the scene of the outbreak, the disease is at an end. I there- fore proposed, for the consideration of the Chief Commissioner, that a Circular should be issued to all Deputy Commissioners asking them to enjoin on all Tehsildars the necessity of affording the Superintendent all help and informa- tion in their power, and that on the outbreak of any disease, when reporting the occurrence to the Deputy Commissioner, that they should, at the same time, send a copy of their report to the Superintendent; and I further recommended that, on receipt of intimation of the existence of any serious out- breaks in the Province, it should be an order that the Superintendent should proceed to the scene of the outbreak without delay. I am pleased to report the cordial manner in which my proposals were agreed to by the Chief Commissioner, as I feel that they will tend to the better working of the Department in these Provinces. Not only have all Deputy Commissioners been asked to communicate, by wire, all serious out- breaks of disease in their districts direct to the Superintendent, Civil Veteri- nary Department, but the Inspector General of the Police has also directed all District Superintendents to report all cases of glanders direct to that officer in the same manner; this will enable him to take the necessary measures for the suppression of disease. As the remarks of the Superintendent, Civil Veter- inary Department, with regard to cattle disease, are worthy of comment, an extract is here given. In his report he states:152 if properly trained, could hold charge of the dispensaries whilst the Veterinary Assistants went into the districts. (b) I was informed that it was proposed to have a Veterinary Assistant in each district and to equip small dispensaries, but as a know- ledge of Mahratti is essential to all Veterinary Assistants employed in Hyderabad Assigned Districts, I pointed out that local men would have to be sent for training to one of our Schools or Colleges. (c) At the request of the Director, I furnished him with forms for the registration of cattle diseases, which are used in other Provinces, and I trust soon to see some form adopted in Berar which will lead to reliable statistics being obtained under this heading. (d) Amongst other subjects discussed, were:153 Reports have been received from thirty seven out of forty-eight districts, it is therefore needless to state that the above numbers were only a part of those which were actually affected and died. Rinderpest154 Mortality amongst live-stock.155 Salem, and occurred chiefly in the months of July, August, and November. A large number of deaths from unspecified diseases has been reported from Godavari, Kistna, Kurnool, Bellary and Anantpur, and an investigation of the causes for this has been undertaken, but as yet no report has been received. Taking the losses from all diseases together, the death-rate was very high in Bellary, and exceeded 10 per mille in Kurnool and Anantpur, whilst the losses in Godavari amounted to 9.5 per mille. 742. During the year under review, owing to the severe outbreak of Rinderpest at Bellary, I deemed it necessary to solicit the sanction of the Madras Government to definite orders being issued regarding the transfer of Stock Inspectors to districts when serious outbreaks of contagious cattle diseases occur. In reply to this letter, the Board of Revenue informed me that, under General Order No. 3891, dated 29th September 1890, the staff of Stock Inspectors was to be reduced at an early date, and asked me to offer any suggestions I could on the subject, in order to enable them to prepare a revised working plan for the staff that remained. After an interview with the Commissioner of Settlements and the Deputy Director of Land Records and Agriculture, I was able to make the following suggestions which divide themselves under two headings:156 The working of the Superintendent of this Province has hitherto not been as satisfactory as it might have been; this was, however, mainly due to the fact that his duties had not been clearly defined. I was therefore asked by the Board of Revenue to prepare a scheme for the better working of the Depart- ment in that Presidency, and in doing so, I laid down the various duties of the Superintendent for the whole year, which, if followed, will lead to at least six months every year being spent in camp. I then attempted to give an outline of the work which should be expected of the Superintendent, and as it may prove of value to other Provinces that are interested in cattle, I give the following extract from my letter to the Board of Revenue:157 " Tabulated statement showing districts where outbreaks of cattle disease occurred during 1896-97 is appended (Table M, page ci) in the prescribed form. " Since 1882, when Mr. Finucane, the then Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Bengal, pointed out that the losses from cattle disease in Bengal amounted to a great deal more than eight lakhs per annum, the subject has been steadily kept in view by Government, and my predecessor accumulated a good deal of information. We now have several Veterinary Assistants avail- able to send into districts. "As regards the laws bearing upon the subject of contagious cattle disease I have been referred by the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Bengal158 9th159 " In practice, the cost would be small, considering the object to be attained. Bearing upon the suggestion of saving cost of keep to the owner, it may be remarked that compensation for slaughter is universal in Europe, as far as I know, and offers a precedent for providing cost of keep in this country, where slaughter is out of the question. "No doubt it would be possible to suggest very much more stringent methods, but I do not think they would have the slightest chance of being adopted. The Director of Land Records has added that the land and ambulance should be provided by the Municipality. " Dr. Koch's inoculation in South Africa.160 Myohaung.161 Sandoway. The cattle of this district have been healthy throughout the year. Fool and mouth disease.162 Rinderpest.163 Anthrax and Charbon Symptomatique.164 Henzada. Rinderpest.165 the last mentioned township, but continued to cause trouble in Zaya and Bilugyun, where 129 deaths were recorded. After this the death-rate was very small, and in August the cattle were free from the malady. A second and rather severe outbreak occurred in the Ataran township during August, causing the death of 152 head of cattle; in September 80 animals died, in October the disease died out. This township suffered the heaviest loss, as out of a total loss of 750 animals for the district, 414 deaths were registered in Ataran. Anthrax and Charbon Symptomatique.166 broke out in April in the Kunon and Bahuhaung Circles, carrying off 70 head of cattle. In May no deaths from Rinderpest were recorded in these two circles. In June, however, the disease re-appeared in the above-named circles, and was also reported from the Kelin Circle, and by July it was pretty general through- out these places, inflicting heavy losses, namely, Kunon 358, Bahuhaung 49, and Kelin 116. After August there was a steady and marked fall in the mortality in both the above-named townships. A small outbreak in April was reported from the Bonmadi Circle of the Kyaukkyi township. It continued for some little time. Anthrax and Charbon Symptomatique.167 Rajputana. 745, Following is the statement showing sheep and cattle diseases in Rajputana:168 The Superintendent remarks :169 planters, etc., which amounted to R1,027-13-0. No grant is made by Gov- ernment. The total expenditure of R1,227-13-0 was just balanced by the total income. The total number of cases treated was 159, of which 139 were cured; in 11 cases the result was unknown and 9 died. The Veterinary Assist- ant was also sent to investigate an outbreak of Rinderpest. While on this work he appears to have come across an instance in which the animals had been poisoned. The Superintendent reports that the dispensary is doing good work and is making its way. Patna Dispensary.170 was temporarily closed last year, has been re-opened. The total number of animals treated by these valuable institutions amounted, during the year, to 19,613 as against 16,999 during the previous year. Out of the above number 15,329 or 78.15 per cent. were discharged as cured, 1,204 or 6.13 per cent. relieved, 200 or 1.02 per cent. returned as incurable, and there were 570 or 2.9 of deaths. The results of 2,014 cases or 10.26 per cent. were not known, as the owners had taken the animals away. The working of dispensaries may therefore be said to be very satisfactory. With the exception of the Jalgaon and Khaira dispensaries, where there has been a slight falling off of patients, all the others show a steady increase, notably that of Sharakpur. The reasons of the decrease in those dispensaries named above are given in the return below, and would account for the smaller attendance. The good work that these dis- pensaries do should prove to the authorities the value of these institutions, and encourage them to establish more. The Superintendent remarks that " it is to be regretted that the arrangements partially made for the opening of more dispensaries had to be abandoned owing to the want of funds caused by the famine." Veterinary Graduate R. Ruben, Nasik Dispensary.171 of construction, and will do away with the present combined system of dispen- sary and pinjrapole. The report is satisfactory172 Veterinary Graduate Modak, Belgaum Dispensary.173 number of cases treated was 1,574 against 1,392 last year. In-patients 88, Pinjrapole in-patients 33, out-patients 1,453. Out of the above number, 612 were horses, 554 cattle, and the remain- der goats, sheep, etc. The Veterinary Graduate attended the weekly cattle markets and removed two bullocks suffering from foot and mouth disease. He also attended an outbreak of Variola Vaccinia at the village of Hansol, of which 27 died out of 87 attacked. He paid 141 visits to owners' houses, attended the Government stallions, and visited the Pinjrapole regularly once a week. The report is most satisfactory, and it is evident that the institution is gaining in popularity and is managed in a zealous and efficient manner174 above number, 385 were horses, 361 cattle, and the remainder goats, and small animals. Eight cases of castration are reported. A mild outbreak of Variola Vaccinia was treated by the Veterinary Graduate, and one case of Glanders destroyed. He attended Police horses belonging to the Government Farm. There is a slight increase in the number of patients treated, and the work done is satisfactory175 Veterinary Graduate Vedh, Shikarpur Dispensary.176 "The Veterinary Assistant of Badaon sent to Mirzapur during May, June, and July 1896. "The Veterinary Assistant of Naini Tal sent to Almora during August 1896. "The Veterinary Assistant of Bijnor sent to Gonda in October 1896. "The Veterinary Assistant of Shahjehanpur sent to Bareilly in October 1896. "The Veterinary Assistant of Hardoi sent to Ballia during January and February 1897, "The Veterinary Assistant of Shahjehanpur sent to Banda during March 1897. "This plan of sending Veterinary Assistants out of their own districts is unsatisfactory for several reasons:PART II.179 PART II.180 constitution is completely set, that is when all the eight permanent incisors are up (at five years old), the disposition of the animal is spoiled by castration, it becomes sluggish and lazy, and wants the metal necessary to make a good working bullock. It is admitted that it is next to impossible, in the ordinary system of herding village cattle, to keep back the young active and growing males, which are in consequence of these qualities likely to become the most prominent stock-getters. Separating them into herds by themselves and pas- turing them apart would no doubt, be an effectual plan, but this, under the present circumstances, is impracticable, except on large, well organized farms. With village herds, such a plan could not work on account of the intermixture of all classes as they return at night to their respective owners. From the foregoing remarks it will be seen that early castration is not advocated. An alternative for the operation, however, may be tried, and in many parts of the country where young males occasionally jump buffalo cows, an arrange- ment is made to prevent this. A common native preventive method is to suspend a cloth of about 18 inches square by the middle, so that it doubles over and hangs down from the rope which passes round the body of the young bull immediately behind the forelegs. This presents a screen, which covers the posterior of the cow as he jumps upon her, so as to effectually prevent the smallest chance entry. This arrangement is also free from producing evil consequences in the wearer. Owing to lack of executive staff I have had to undertake a portion of the duty of acquiring information regarding cattle-breeding, and am glad to say that considerable progress has been made in the collection of information during the past year from a tour through five districts in Southern Punjab. The chief points which have been dealt with regarding cattle-breeding in the Punjab are similar to those adopted last year, and may be repeated for con- venience sake. These are:181 The district is very largely cultivated, and except in the " Bet, " there is very little grazing ground in which to turn the milch cows and calves. In the Settlement Report it is stated that it is doubtful if there will be much waste of any sort left in 10 years, for already, when the assessments were announced, the people have begun to bring the remaining waste under the plough. The district is divided into low-lying and upland tracts. In all the low-lying country composed of principally the Budha-nala and the bed of the Sutlej there is plenty of grazing to be had, but grasses are not so nutritious as the grasses on high lands, and it has been satisfactorily proved that cattle bred in such swampy land never grow to any size; nevertheless they may become, with care and judicious feeding, stiff, sturdy animals, suitable for plough work. From observations made on tour it would seem that the zeminders in the " Bet " are not sensible to the advantages of improving their cattle, nor do take much interest in the matter. There can be no doubt that the ordinary stock are capable of improvement by the crossing of the cows with good bulls, and this may be observed in every village where the services of a good bull have been obtained. Ferozepur.182 should take little interest in such an important department of zemindari. A few Government bulls were said to be located in this tehsil, but none were to be seen. No doubt the soil and climate are prejudicial to cattle-breeding, and the zemindars are poor, and this probably accounts for their lack of interest in this matter. In the Tehsil of Taran Taran and Amritsar cattle are much finer, and a sufficient number of animals should be bred to meet all requirements. This has been recognised by the local Boards which have supplied several excellent bulls for the improvement of cattle breeding and much has been done in con- sequence. The zemindars invariably spoke of the bulls with appreciation, and showed the young stock with pride. The best class of animals were to be seen about Nowshera, Janroi, Sarahli, Kalan and Ramwala. Jallandhur.183 The indigenous bulls are, as a rule, ill-shapen and degenerate beasts them- selves; how then is it to be expected that they are likely to improve the breed of cattle. The usual custom prevails of turning a young bull calf loose as " pun " on the death of a relative by wealthy Hindus, but the majority of this class, principally Bunias, do not turn loose their best bull calf but their worst, and this ultimately grows up and becomes the village bull. If only good young bulls were turned loose, one or two annually, and the price of the calf paid to the owner by the community, we should soon have no cause to complain of the indigenous bulls. North-Western Provinces. 751, These Provinces have done something towards the improvement of their cattle, and considerable interest has been shown by Mr. Wyer, the Magis- trate of Meerut, who has done much to popularise the best breeds of cattle. The Superintendent, North-Western Provinces, addressed letters to the Chairman of each District Board, asking for certain information with regard to cattle-breeding, and requesting to know in each case if they were willing to purchase a bull for breeding purposes. The nature of the replies received was as follows:184 " The last named from Banda district died in March 1896, leaving four at work in the district. " The statistics which I called for through the Tehsildars, though incomplete, show that a great deal in the way of cattle breeding has been done in the district, about 300 calves having been brought forth during the last year, the produce of these bulls. The young stock is strong and of good shape for agricultural purposes and is much appreciated by the villagers. " I applied for two more bulls in October 1896, but the indent was not complied with owing to the present financial pressure. " The District Board do not see their way to undertake the management of any bulls owing to the low condition of the District Board finances. I am, however, trying to get the district gradually supplied with the required number of bulls through private individuals who were willing to undertake their management. Statement showing the services and produce of bulls kept in the Meerut District. Class of breed of the bull. Where stationed. Period of service. Total number of cows covered. Number not held. Number of produce. REMARKS. Hissar . . Demonstration Farm, Meerut. 20th Feb. 1895 to 31st March 1897. 182 22 160 A good coverer. Produce shapely and strong. Kanwarya . With Sheikh Wahid- uddin. 20th Feb. 1895 to 31st Jan. 1896. 91 11 80 Died in March 1896. Very much appre- ciated by the people. Nagori . . Murari Lall Court of Wards Estate. March 1895 to 31st March 1897. 16 of State ; a large number of cows in the neighbouring villages. 4 7 This is a very fine bull. Ditto. . Shibha Singh of Baleni. 1894 to 30th Sept. 1896. Not known. ... 30 Is much appreciated as he roams about the village near Ealeni. No accu- rate statistics can be obtained. Indigenous . . Babugarh . Not known. TOTAL ... 289 37 277 "As most of bulls roam about the villages with the ordinary Brahmini bulls, it is impossible to give accurate statistics of serving and produce." Fattehgarh. (h) A bull would be of great service to the district, and that application be made to the Superintendent, Veterinary Department, for one. Sultanpur. (i) No bulls kept by the District Board. The Board does not see its way to buy any at present, nor has it any funds with which to bear the cost of maintenance. Azamgarh. (j) The District Board keep no bull and cannot at present afford to buy or keep one. Muthra. (k) The financial position of the Board does not permit of its bearing the cost of keeping a bull. Jhansi. (l) No stallions kept by the District Board, and the District Committee cannot afford to buy any.
185 Gorakhpur. (m) Bulls are not kept by the District Board, and I do not think that the Board would be justified in expending money in the pur- chase of bulls. Cawnpur. (n) The Board will have no objection to keep a bull if the cost will be paid out of the District Board's funds, and there will be no need of subscription. NOTE.186 Moradabad. (x) There are no bulls kept by the District Board of Moradabad at present. There are no funds at present available for the maintenance of bulls or their purchase, and it is not likely that they will be available at present unless they could be arranged for by a corresponding reduction in the Horse-breeding Department. Sultanpur. (y) The District Board decided that it was not advisable to keep a bull. From the above noted replies it will be seen that187 "I have now shown that good bulls are required and in numbers. I have shown that we cannot get them now. The remedy seems to be that Bengal should breed her own bulls, providing it can be proved to be remunerative when all things are considered: with this object in view, information is being collected and estimates prepared for submission to Government. "The Bankipur cross-bred cattle.188 SOUTH PUNJAB. 755. Amritsar Dewali Cattle Fair, 1896.189 The Nimar breed was the only one represented in sufficient numbers, they are of medium size, active in appearance, good conformation, thick tail usually set too high, hump well developed, neck proportionate, loins level, but scarcely wide enough, head well put on, ears depressed, eyes bright and intelligent, limbs strong and well apart, hoofs black and strong. BENGAL. 758. Sonepur Cattle. Fair.190 MADRAS. Admancotta Cattle Fair, district Salem.191 supply of water good and sufficient. There were two cases of Epizootic Aphtha and one attack of Anthrax. The Anthrax case died. Disinfection and pre- ventive measures were adopted, and the dead animals buried deep. Kannicheri Cattle Fair, district Tinnevelly.192 were sold and the state of market was fair. Sanitary arrangements were not satisfactory. Supply of water was good and sufficient. There was no case of contagious cattle disease. Kukke Cattle Fair, district South Arcot.193 South Arcot and North Arcot districts, also from the Pondicherry State, and Taluks of Tanjore district. About 80 per cent. of the cattle offered for sale were disposed of. Cattle were sold very briskly, and the prices were about 15 per cent. higher than usual. The sanitary arrangements were satisfactory, and supply of water good and sufficient. There were seven cases of foot and mouth disease; these were all treated and discharged as cured. BOMBAY. 760. Ahmednagar Cattle Show194 Henzada, as residents of the riverside villages cannot be expected to bring their animals long journeys to the railway line. I certainly think this might be tried next year. The number of cattle entered was not large, but the animals exhibited were fine beasts, so much so, that the judges had some difficulty in selecting animals for prizes. A few buffaloes were shown, all excellent animals. A number of ponies, including several half-breds, were brought for exhibition. Maung Ne Dun's Burman pony won the first prize for Burman ponies, and Mr. Merwanjee's animal for half-breds. Tharrawaddy.PART II.197 PART II.198 766. In all 54 students were examined, the numbers in each class being as follows :199 Bombay ", " 1st Class Magistrate and Justice of the Peace in the District of Thana ". The multifarious duties connected with these many appointments of the Principal must interfere materially with the legitimate duties connected with the school, and I am of opinion that if he performs the duties of this establish- ment, those connected with the supervision of the Inspecting staff appointed for the working of Act XX of 1879 (Glanders and Farcy), and those connected with the receiving and despatching of stallions imported for this Department, his time will be more than fully occupied. 770. The practice at this institution was larger this year than last. The numbers were as follow:200 with the general run of the students who presented themselves for examination. On this point Veterinary Captain Gunn, in comparing the students who passed from the various schools, reports as follows:201 784. A most important change has been made since Veterinary Captain Pease's appointment as Principal. I allude to the division of the first and second year's men into two classes in equine, medicine, and surgery. On this point the Principal states:202 them at the final examination, still no Veterinary Assistant, whose name does not appear on the register, will be recommended by the Principal for employ- ment. 790. The largest employers of Veterinary Assistants are naturally this Department, and District and Local Boards and Municipalities in the Punjab. A Circular has been issued by the Director of Land Records and Agriculture of this Province to all Deputy Commissioners, stating that as cases have arisen in which Veterinary Assistants dismissed from the Civil Veterinary Department for incompetency or dishonesty have succeeded in obtaining employment under local bodies, His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor considers it advisable that all local bodies should, in future, employ only men recommended by the Principal, and as all dismissals will be reported to him, this measure will lead to none but trustworthy men being employed, and will, I feel convinced, tend to their performing better work than they have hitherto done, as they now know that their career in the Subordinate Veterinary staff will be carefully watched. Bengal Veterin- ary Institution. 791. Twenty five students attended lectures in Class A. Of these, 21 were new men, and four were failures from the previous year. Twenty two students attended lectures in Class B (the senior Class). Of the above 22, 14 presented themselves at the final examination, of whom nine passed and five failed to satisfy the Board of Examiners, who, as usual, were:203 793. The Principal should, in my opinion, not lose sight of the fact that Bengal will be required to be equipped with a thoroughly efficient staff of Veterinary Assistants when the Subordinate Veterinary Establishment is sanctioned by the Government of India. To make Senior Veterinary Assistants, we want men not only able to submit reports and to be good theorists, but having, as they will, the supervision of a number of Veterinary Assistants, they should be eminently practical; and this has hitherto been the great failing of the Bengal student. 794. On this point the Assistant to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, remarks in his report on the examination held at this institu- tion :204 " We must also bear in mind that as the different branches of the Bengal Civil Veterinary Department develope (and there is every prospect of their doing so very rapidly indeed), both the Assistant Superintendent and myself will be more liable to be called away for duty in the districts. Should this happen, I should be able to find in the lecturers men sufficiently reliable to be trusted to carry on the work at Belgatchia for a few days. " Looking at the question from these various points of view, it seems to me that it would pay us over and over again to procure and retain the services of the best men available, by offering such inducements as they are likely to accept. " The lecturers' pay is not enough to permit them to live respectably in Calcutta; besides this, they cannot find lodgings near Belgatchia, and have to spend money in going to and from the city. " I have gone fully into this subject in various communications to the Director, and hope a better provision under this head may be sanctioned. Mr. Fernandes, who was a successful lecturer, left during the year under review to become a Commissioned Officer in the Colonial Dragoons at Goa, where his pay is much better than he received here." 797. With these remarks I fully agree. If the present pay is not suffi- cient to induce the best men to offer themselves as lecturers, then the pay should be increased. Bengal is very cheaply run, for, in addition to the duties con- nected with the school, the Principal also performs those pertaining to a Superintendent of a Province. Rajputana Veterinary School. 798. The school year began on 1st July 1896, when 15 private pupils entered, against 7 last year. Six State pupils also joined the school. The increase in the number of private pupils testifies to the popularity of the school as a centre of instruction, and also to that of the Subordinate Veterinary staff. The total number of pupils at the beginning of the year was 38. 799. The result of the final examination is most satisfactory. Of 21 students who presented themselves for examination, 18 passed, giving a per- centage of 88.2 successes, against 81.9 last year. The examiners were:205 I trust that funds will soon be available for this necessary addition to this school. 802. The one drawback to the education of students at this school has been the want of practice. I am therefore pleased to report that it has shown great improvement during the past year. On this point the Principal states:PART II.209 PART II.PART II.213 PART II.-PROVINCIAL REPORT. VII.214 824. Two thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine mares were branded during the year, against 3,746 last year. This falling off is to be regretted, but was unavoidable. 825. I point with intense satisfaction to the progress made in Native States in both horse and mule-breeding; many States are co-operating most heartily in the development of both industries, and the fact that 1,586 mares have been covered by horses and 719 covered by donkeys must prove that the horse and mule supply will be materially increased thereby. Mule-breeding215 837. The foregoing only shows colts castrated by Imperial Salutris. The following have been castrated by Salutris belonging to District Boards and other bodies. The numbers castrated by them are as follow:216 7,055 last year, showing an increase of 9,456. The following statement will show the improvement which has taken place during the past three years:PART I.iii TABLE I.iv TABLE II.V Casually Roll of Government Horse and Pony Stallions, 1896-97vi TABLE III.vii TABLE IV.viii Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallions during 1896-97-contd. Horse or pony. CLASS. NORTH PUNJAB. Stallions on Register. SOUTH PUNJAB. REMARKS. Stallions on Register. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STAL- LION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS AVERAEB RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERING PER STAL- LION EMPLOYED AT STUD. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGR OF MARES COVERED PER STAL- LION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STAL- LION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse . . . Thoroughbred English . . . 20 12 13 995 917 82.91 70.53 290 547 80 22.30 42.07 6.15 24 11 9 730 693 66.36 77.00 215 432 46 23.88 48.00 5.11 Three-quarter bred . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Half-bred and Norfolk Trottera . . 34 32 34 1,482 1,659 46.31 48.79 439 10,48 172 12.91 30.82 5.05 15 14 17 679 828 48.5 48.7 223 432 173 13.11 25.41 10.17 Hackney . . . . . . 16 14 13 731 513 52.21 39.46 143 324 46 11.00 24.92 3.53 18 12 13 708 632 59.00 48.61 171 367 94 13.15 28.23 7.23 Roadster . . . . . ... ... 1 ... 45 ... 45.00 6 31 8 6.00 31.00 8.00 1 1 1 60 61 60.00 61.00 16 38 7 16.00 38.00 7.00 Australian . . . . . 6 2 1 124 31 62.00 31.00 7 19 6 7.00 19.00 5.00 4 3 2 214 212 71.33 106.00 54 104 54 27.00 52.00 27.00 Arab . . . . . . . 19 16 16 620 638 38.75 39.87 178 391 69 11.12 24.43 4.31 34 25 25 1,121 1,199 44.84 47.86 303 701 195 12.12 28.04 7.8 Persian . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Turkoman . . . . ... ... 1 ... 9 ... 9.00 3 5 1 3.00 5.00 1.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Countrybred . . . . 1 2 1 113 50 56.50 50.00 18 28 4 18.00 28.00 4.00 1 2 1 29 80 29.00 80.00 28 42 10 28.00 42.00 10.00 Total . 96 78 80 4,065 3,862 52.11 48.27 1,084 2,393 385 13.55 29.91 4.81 98 68 68 3,541 3,705 52.07 54.48 1,010 2,116 579 14.85 31.11 8.51 Pony . . Arab . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pegu . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL . 96 78 80 4,065 3,862 52.11 48.27 1,084 2,393 385 13.55 29.91 4.81 98 68 68 3,541 3,705 52.07 54.48 1,010 2,116 579 14.85 31.11 8.51
ix Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallions during 1896-97X Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallims during 1896-97xi Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallions during 1896-97xii Services and produce of each class of Government Horse and Pony Stallions during 1896-97xiii TABLE V.xiv Statement showing allotment of Remounts during the year 1896-97 and the class of Stallions by which they were gotXV TABLE VI.xvi TABLE VI (a).xvii TABLE VIxviii Statement showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1896-97. Native Cavalry Regiments. NUMBER OF COUNTRY- BERD REMOUNTS Where purchased. PEDIGREES. Horses. Mares. Geldings. Total. Furnished. Not furnished. Total. 10th Bengal Lancers . . Jhelum . . . 4 18 24 46 Lahore . . . . . ... 46 46 ... ... 1 1 Jhelum . . . . . ... 1 1 ... 4 4 8 Batesar . . . . ... 8 8 Total . 4 22 29 55 Total . . ... 55 55 11th Bengal Lancers . . Nowshera . . . ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... 12th Bengal Cavalry . . Sialkot . . . . . 36 28 6 69 Lahore . . . . . ... 69 69 ... 1 1 2 Sialkot . . . . . ... 2 2 Total 36 29 6 71 Total . ... 71 71 13th Bengal Lancers . . Peshawar . . . . . ... 15 26 41 Peshawar . . . . 9 32 41 ... 13 10 23 Lahore . . . . . 16 7 23 Total . ... 28 36 64 Total . . 25 39 64 14th Bengal Lancers . . Saugur . . . . 1 ... 1 2 Saugur . . . . . ... 2 2 ... 1 8 9 Amritsar . . . . . ... 9 9 7 14 3 24 Ulwar . . . . . ... 24 24 2 1 ... 3 Guriani . . . . ... 3 3 14 18 5 37 Batesur . . . . . .. 37 37 Total 24 34 17 75 Total . . ... 75 75 15th Bengal Lancers . Loralai . . . . ... 4 17 21 Amritsar . . . . . 1 20 21 1 4 3 8 Loralai . . . . . 1 7 8 ... 8 1 9 Dera Ghazi Khan . . . 3 6 9 ... 2 2 4 Multan . . . . . ... 4 4 ... 1 ... 1 Muzaffargarh . . . . ... 1 1 ... 2 2 4 Shahpur . . . . 4 ... 4 ... 3 4 7 Lahore . . . . 5 2 7 Total . 1 24 29 54 Total . 14 40 54 16th Bengal Cavalry . . Multan . ... 5 3 8 Rawalpindi . . . . 2 6 8 ... 13 6 19 Amritsar . . . . . ... 19 19 ... 3 7 10 Lahore . . . . . 1 9 10 ... 4 1 5 Jallalabad . . . . . ... 6 5 ... 7 9 16 Bulandshahr . . . . . ... 16 16 ... 1 2 3 Jhang . . . . . ... 3 3 ... 1 3 4 Multan . . . . . 1 3 4 . Total ... 34 31 65 Total . . 4 61 65 17th Bengal Cavalry . Umballa . . . . 5 5 2 12 Amritsar . . . . . ... 12 12 4 3 5 12 Guriani . . . . . . ... 12 12 ... 1 ... 1 Umballa . . . . . ... 1 1 Total 9 9 7 25 Total . . ... 25 25
xix Statement showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1896-97. Native Cavalry Regiments. NUMBER OF COUNTRY- BRED REMOUNTS PURCHASED. Where purchased. PEDIGREES. Horses. Mares. Geldings. Total. Furnished. Not furnished. Total. 18th Bengal Lancers . . Ferozepur . . . ... 1 ... 1 Rawalpindi . . . . 1 ... 1 3 10 1 14 Amritsar . . . . 7 7 14 2 3 1 6 Lahore . . . . ... 6 6 1 5 ... 6 Hansi . . . . 5 1 6 ... 1 ... 1 Ferozepore . . . . ... 1 1 ... 1 ... 1 Jellalabad . . . . 1 ... 1 2 4 1 7 Dera Ghazi Khan . . . . 4 3 7 ... 1 4 5 Shahpur . . . . 3 2 5 Total . 8 26 7 41 Total . . 21 20 41 19th Bengal Lancers . . Mian Mir . . . ... ... 1 1 Hissar . . . . ... 1 1 1 35 35 71 Lahore . . . . ... 71 71 Total . 1 35 36 72 Total . . ... 72 72 1st Punjab Cavalry . . Edwardesabad . . . 7 4 4 15 Amritsar . . . . 5 10 15 1 4 1 6 Bannu . . . . . ... 6 6 1 1 1 3 Haripur . . . . 1 2 3 3 4 ... 7 Jollalabad . . . . ... 7 7 ... ... 4 4 Multan . . . . 2 2 4 ... 2 1 3 Dera Ghazi Khan . . . ... 3 3 Total . 12 15 11 38 Total . 8 30 38 2nd Punjab Cavalry . . Dera Ismail Khan . . ... 1 1 2 Rawalpindi . . . . ... 2 2 5 8 12 25 Amritsar . . . . 2 23 25 ... 8 2 10 Dera Ismail Khan . . . . ... 10 10 2 11 1 14 Ulwar . . . . . 3 11 14 2 2 ... 4 Hansi . . . . . ... 4 4 ... 7 1 8 Dora Ghazi Khan . . . . 1 7 8 Total . 9 37 17 63 Total . 6 57 63 3rd Punjab Cavalry . . Kohat . . . . 13 8 9 25 Rawalpindi . . . . ... 25 25 3 3 1 7 Amritsar . . . . ... 7 7 ... 2 6 8 Kohat . . . . ... 8 8 1 2 10 13 Shahpur . . . . . 1 12 13 ... 2 7 9 Meerut . . . . ... 9 9 5 10 4 19 Lahore . . . . 1 18 19 4 7 2 13 Guriani . . . . ... 13 13 ... ... 2 2 Ulwar . . . . ... 2 2 ... ... 2 2 Pindigheb . . . . 2 ... 2 1 1 ... 2 Talaganj . . . . 2 ... 2 ... 2 .. 2 Pind Dadan Khan . . . . 1 1 2 ... 4 ... 4 Gujut . . . . 1 3 4 ... 4 ... 4 Hansi . . . . ... 4 4 Total . 27 40 43 110 Total . 8 102 110 5th Punjab Cavalry . . Dera Ghazi Khan . . ... 10 3 13 Dera Ghazi Khan . . . . 8 5 13 ... 7 23 30 Amritsar . . . . 3 27 30 ... 11 15 26 Multan . . . . 1 25 26 ... 1 ... 1 Harrand . . . . ... 1 1 Total ... 29 41 70 Total . 12 58 70 2 H 2
XX Statement showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1896-97. Native Cavalry Regiments. NUMBER OF COUNTRY- BRED REMOUNTS PURCHASED. Where purchased. PEDIGREES. Horses. Mares. Geldings. Total. Furnished. Not furnished Total. Queen's Own Corps of Guides Mardan . . . . ... 4 4 8 Shahpur . . . . . 3 5 8 ... ... 2 2 Mardan . . . . . 1 1 2 ... 1 ... 1 Rawalpindi . . . . 1 ... 1 2 5 8 15 Amritsar . . . . . 3 12 15 ... 2 7 9 Gujrit . . . . . 4 5 9 Total . 2 12 21 35 Total . 12 23 35 Police, Punjab . . . Westorn Circle . . . 2 2 ... 4 Peshawar . . . . . ... 4 4 1 2 ... 3 Rawalpindi . . . . ... 3 3 ... 4 ... 4 Dera Ghazi Khan . . . ... 4 4 2 1 ... 3 Bannu . . . . . ... 3 3 1 2 ... 3 Kohat . . . . . ... 3 3 ... 1 ... 1 Gujrat . . . . ... 1 1 1 1 ... 2 Sialkot . . . . ... 2 2 ... 2 ... 2 Manshera . . . . 1 1 2 1 ... ... 1 Khanpur . . . . ... 1 1 ... 1 ... 1 Dera Ismail Khan . . . ... 1 1 Total . 8 16 ... 24 Total . 1 23 24 Police, Punjab . . . Eastern Circle . . . 2 1 ... 3 Delhi . . . . ... 3 3 ... 1 ... 1 Sonepat . . . . ... 1 1 3 ... ... 3 Amritsar . . . . ... 3 3 2 ... ... 2 Kurnal . . . . ... 2 2 ... 1 ... 1 Gurgaon . . . . ... 1 1 1 3 ... 4 Lahore . . . . . ... 4 4 Total 8 6 ... 14 Total . ... 14 14 GRAND TOTAL . 16 22 ... 38 GRAND TOTAL . 1 37 38 Police, North-Western Pro- vinces and Oudh. Allahabad . . . . ... 16 4 20 Batesar . . . . ... 20 20 ... 10 7 17 Meerut . . . . 3 14 17 Total . ... 26 11 37 Total . 3 34 37 Imperial Service Troops Patiala . . . . 6 4 ... 10 Lahore . . . . . ... 10 10 48 15 18 81 Amritsar . . . . . ... 81 81 Jhind . . . . 12 6 8 26 Amritsar . . . . . ... 26 26 Nabha . . . . 10 6 8 24 Amritsar . . . . . ... 24 24 Bahawalpur . . . . ... 1 1 2 Amritsar . . . . . ... 2 2 Rampur . . . . 6 9 5 20 Amritsar . . . . . ... 20 20 4 5 1 10 Batesar . . . . . ... 10 10 4 1 1 6 Meerut . . . . . 1 5 6 Bhurtpur . . . . . 6 8 6 20 Meerut . . . . . 4 16 20 7 5 7 19 Batesar . . . . . ... 19 19 Ulwar . . . ... 3 6 9 Meerut . . . . . 2 7 9 Total . 103 63 61 227 Total 7 220 227 Army Remount Department Kurnal Depôt . . . 16 13 8 37 Lahore . . . . . 11 26 37 ... 1 ... 1 Rawalpindi . . . . 1 ... 1 9 9 13 31 Quetta . . . . . 24 7 31 Total . 25 23 21 69 Total . 36 33 69
xxi Statement showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1896-97. Native Cavalry Regiments. NUMBER OF COUNTRY- BRED REMOUNTS PURCHASED. Where purchased. PEDIGREES. Horses. Mares. Geldings. Total. Furnished. Not furnished. Total. Army Remount Department, Hapur Depôt . . . 22 10 4 36 Amritsar . . . . . 2 34 36 ... 2 1 3 C. V. D. (Babugarh) . . 3 ... 3 ... ... 1 1 Hapur Depôt . . . . ... 1 1 ... ... 8 8 Garhmaktesar . . . . 6 2 8 3 1 1 5 Batesar . . . . . 4 1 5 3 3 ... 6 Sibi . . . . . 5 1 6 1 ... ... 1 Jellalabad . . . . ... 1 1 ... 1 3 4 Bulandshahr . . . . 4 ... 4 Total . 29 17 18 64 Total . 24 40 64 Army Remount Department, Ahmednagar Depôt . . 6 3 ... 9 Ahmednagar . . . . 9 ... 9 1 1 1 3 Jacobabad . . . . 3 ... 3 ... ... 4 4 Wankamir . . . . 4 ... 4 4 1 ... 5 Palitana . . . . . 5 ... 5 1 ... 1 2 Bhavnagar . . . . 2 ... 2 ... 1 ... 1 Teur . . . . . 1 ... 1 ... ... 3 3 Seiur . . . . . 3 ... 3 Total . 12 6 9 27 Total 27 ... 27 GRAND TOTAL . 66 46 48 160 GRAND TOTAL . 87 73 160
xxii TABLE VI (c).xxiii 14th Ditto . . . . ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 24 3 37 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15th Ditto . . . . ... ... ... 21 ... 7 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... ... ... 16th Bengal Cavalry . . . ... ... ... 19 ... 10 ... ... ... 8 ... ... 5 ... 16 ... 3 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17th Ditto . . . . ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... 18th Bengal Lancers . . . 6 ... ... 14 ... 6 5 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... 19th Ditto . . . . ... 1 ... ... ... 71 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1st Punjab Cavalry . . . ... ... ... 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 7 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 3 ... 3 ... ... ... 2nd Ditto . . . . 4 ... ... 25 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... 3rd Ditto . . . . 4 ... ... 7 ... 19 13 ... ... 25 2 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 13 ... 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5th Ditto . . . . ... ... ... 30 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 1 ... ... Queen's Own Corps of Guides . . ... ... ... 15 ... ... 8 2 ... 1 ... 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Police, Punjab . . . . ... ... ... 3 ... 4 ... ... 4 3 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 2 4 ... ... ... Police, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Army Remount Department Hapur Depôt. ... ... ... 36 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... 3 1 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Army Remount Department, Kurnal Depôt. ... ... ... ... ... 37 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Yrmy Remount Department, Ahmednagar Depôt. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Imperial Service Troops. . . ... ... ... 153 ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 35 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . . . 17 1 16 436 1 378 30 2 45 43 2 14 14 1 20 1 3 38 2 58 22 149 106 3 1 8 4 12 9 3 2 44 1 13 8 TOTAL OF EACH DISTRICT. 18 15 435 1 378 30 47 50 14 15 21 3 38 2 58 22 149 118 4 12 9 5 45 13 8
xxiv Abstract showing the number of country-bred Remounts purchased in the different districts by Native Cavalry Regiments, etc., during the official year 1896-97XXV 15th Ditto . . . ... ... 8 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54 16th Bengal Cavalry . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 65 17th Ditto . . . 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 18th Bengal Lancers . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41 19th Ditto ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 72 1st Punjab Cavalry ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 2nd Ditto ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 3rd Ditto ... ... ... ... 8 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 110 5th Ditto ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 Queen's Own Corps of Guides ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35 Police, Punjab . . . . ... 1 ... ... 3 ... ... ... 2 ... 3 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 Police, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37 Army Remount Department, Hapur Depôt. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 64 Army Remount Department, Kurnal Depôt. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 69 Army Remount Department, Ahmednagar Depôt. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 3 4 5 2 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 Imperial Service Troops . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 227 TOTAL 1 11 8 1 11 2 2 1 4 7 3 1 2 1 31 6 9 3 4 5 2 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,629 TOTAL OF EACH DISTRICT 1 11 8 1 11 5 4 7 4 2 1 31 6 27 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 J
xxvi TABLE VII.xxvii Casualty Roll of Government Donkey Stallions during 1896-97. Brand No. Name. Class. Description of casualty. Name of casualty. REMARKS. SOUTH PUNJABxxviii TABLE VIII.xxix TABLE IX.xxx Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. BENGAL. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARS COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Persian . . . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... ... 16 ... ... ... 16.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 1 1 1 ... ... ... 16 ... ... ... 16.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
xxxi Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. NORTH PUNJAB. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mars. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Italian . . . . . . 74 62 71 6 3 6,212 5,519 457 301 84.06 77.73 76.16 100.33 1,094 3,666 759 78 179 44 15.40 51.63 10.69 26.00 59.66 14.66 French . . . . . . 3 2 3 1 1 198 317 60 55 99.00 105.66 60.00 55.00 70 215 32 9 38 8 23.33 71.66 10.66 9.00 38.00 8.00 Catalonian . . . . . 1 1 2 ... ... 68 122 ... ... 68.00 61.00 ... ... 22 91 9 ... ... ... 11.00 45.50 4.60 ... ... ... Bokhara . . . . . . ... ... 1 ... ... ... 33 ... ... ... 33.00 ... ... 4 28 1 ... ... ... 4.00 28.00 1.00 ... ... ... Punjabi . . . . . . 20 9 6 3 2 578 407 148 193 64.22 67.83 49.33 96.50 79 288 40 46 130 17 13.16 43.00 6.66 23.00 65.00 8.50 Home-bred . . . . . . 1 ... ... 1 1 ... ... 90 30 ... ... 90.00 30.00 ... ... ... 5 22 3 ... ... ... 5.00 22.00 3.00 Arab . . . . . . 7 5 8 1 2 401 582 84 104 80.20 72.75 84.00 52.00 79 451 52 16 84 4 9.87 56.37 6.50 8.00 42.00 2.00 Cyprian . . . . . . 14 13 14 ... ... 1,029 995 ... ... 79.15 71.07 ... ... 192 672 131 ... ... ... 13.71 48.00 9.35 ... ... ... Persian . . . . . . 12 9 8 ... ... 497 496 ... ... 55.22 62.00 ... ... 104 330 62 ... ... ... 13.00 41.25 7.75 ... ... ... Zanzibar . . . . . . 2 1 ... 1 1 70 ... 86 63 70.00 ... 86.00 63.00 ... ... ... 16 34 13 ... ... ... 16.00 34.00 13.00 Country-bred . . . . . . 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL 135 102 113 13 10 8,053 8,471 925 746 78.95 74.96 71.15 74.60 1,644 5,741 1,086 170 487 89 14.54 50.80 9.61 17.00 48.70 8.90
xxxii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey stallions during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. SOUTH PUNJAB. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previus year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held, Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Spanish (Catalonian) . . . . 6 2 1 ... ... 112 43 ... ... 56.00 43.00 ... ... 4 19 20 ... ... ... 4.00 19.00 20.00 ... ... ... Arab . . . . . . 9 8 9 1 1 730 794 16 49 91.25 88.22 16.00 49.00 127 404 263 1 27 21 14.11 44.88 29.22 1.00 27.00 21.00 Home-bred . . . . . . 2 1 1 ... ... 83 100 ... ... 83.00 100.00 ... ... 13 57 30 ... ... ... 13.00 57.00 30.00 ... ... ... Bokhara . . . . . . ... ... 1 ... ... ... 27 ... ... ... 27.00 ... ... 10 10 7 ... ... ... 10.00 10.00 7.00 ... ... ... Punjabi . . . . . . 8 7 6 1 1 484 427 80 38 69.14 71.16 80.00 36.00 92 312 23 2 24 12 15.33 52.00 3.83 2.00 24.00 12.00 Italian . . . . . . 51 39 42 1 ... 3,026 3,130 17 ... 77.58 74.52 17.00 ... 627 1,349 1,154 ... ... ... 14.92 32.11 27.47 ... ... ... French . . . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... 92 98 ... ... 92.00 98.00 ... ... 18 19 61 ... ... ... 18.00 19.00 61.00 ... ... ... Persian . . . . . . 10 6 4 2 2 456 271 72 67 96.06 67.75 36.00 33.50 51 147 73 2 30 35 12.75 36.75 18.25 1.00 16.00 17.50 Cyprian . . . . . . 11 7 5 ... ... 445 356 ... ... 63.57 71.20 ... ... 75 195 86 ... ... ... 15.00 39.00 17.20 ... ... ... Zanzibar . . . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... 76 16 ... ... 76.00 16.00 ... ... 1 11 4 ... ... ... 1.00 11.00 4.00 ... ... ... TOTAL 99 72 71 5 4 5,504 5,262 185 154 76.41 74.11 37.00 38.50 1,018 2,523 1,721 5 81 68 14.33 35.33 24.23 1.25 20.25 17.00
xxxiii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. BALUCHISTAN. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Italian . . . . . . 2 2 2 ... ... 41 53 2 ... 20.50 26.50 1.0 ... 19 31 3 ... ... ... 9.5 15.6 1.5 ... ... ... Cyprian . . . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... 29 4 1 ... 29.00 4.00 1.0 ... 1 1 2 ... ... ... 1.0 1.0 2.0 ... ... ... Meshed . . . . . . 2 2 2 ... ... 33 37 ... ... 16.50 18.50 ... ... 8 19 10 ... ... ... 4.0 9.5 5.0 ... ... ... TOTAL 5 5 5 ... ... 103 94 3 ... 20.60 18.8 0.6 ... 28 51 16 ... xxxiv Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. CENTRAL INDIA. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED, AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Spanish (Catalonian) . . . 1 1 ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... 11.00 ... ... ... Not known. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL 1 1 ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... 11.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
XXXV Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. DECCAN. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTULLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OR MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule-breed- ing. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Italian . . . . . . 1 1.00 2.22 ... ... 35 55 ... ... 35.00 2477 ... ... 6 36 14 ... ... ... 2.25 10.21 6.31 ... ... ... Persian . . . . . . TOTAL . . 1 1.00 1.00 ... ... 6 12 ... ... 6.0 12.00 ... ... 5 3 4 ... ... ... 5.00 3.00 4.00 ... ... ... 2 2.00 3.22 ... ... 41 67 ... ... 20.50 20 80 ... ... 10 39 18 ... ... ... 3.10 12.11 5.59 ... ... ... 2 K 2
xxxvi Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 2896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. GUZERAT. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD, NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERING PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule-breed- ing, For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Provious year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Jersian . . . . . . 1 1.00 1.00 ... ... 19 19 ... ... 19.00 19.00 ... ... 11 8 ... ... ... ... 11.00 8.00 ... ... ... ... TOTAL 1 1.00 1.00 ... ... 19 19 ... ... 19.00 19 00 ... ... 11 8 ... ... ... ... 11.00 8.00 ... ... ... ...
xxxvii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1896-97 CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. SINDH AND CUTCH. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED FEB STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERING PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Arab . . . . . . 2 2.00 2.81 ... ... 84 157 ... ... 42.00 55.87 ... ... 19 103 35 ... ... ... 6.76 36.66 12.45 ... ... ... Italian . . . . . . 16 13.40 10.00 ... ... 438 404 ... ... 32.68 40.40 ... ... 60 224 120 ... ... ... 6 00 22.40 12.00 ... ... ... Persian . . . . . . 4 4.00 3.00 ... ... 83 124 ... ... 20.75 41.33 ... ... 16 78 30 ... ... ... 5.33 26.00 10.00 ... ... ... Khorasani . . . . . . 1 1.00 1.00 ... ... 30 41 ... ... 30.00 41.00 ... ... 2 15 24 ... ... ... 2.00 15.00 24.00 ... ... ... Cyprian . . . . . . 2 2.00 2.00 ... ... 58 60 ... ... 20.00 30.00 ... ... 9 31 20 ... ... ... 4.50 15.50 10.00 ... ... ... TOTAL 25 22.40 18.81 ... ... 693 786 ... ... 30.93 41.78 ... ... 106 451 229 ... ... ... 5.64 23.97 12.17 ... ... ...
xxxviii Services and produce of each class of Government Donkey Stallions during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLIONS. TOTAL. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARKS COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For mule- breeding. For donkey- breeding. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Pony mares. Donkey mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule pro- duce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey pro- duce, Number not held, Number not known. Average of mule pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey pro- duce. Average of not held. Average of not known, Italian . . . . . . 187 150.40 167.22 8 4 10,678 11,256 498 333 68.27 67.3 62.25 83.2 2,502 6,328 2,426 94 190 49 14.96 37.84 14.60 23.50 47.50 12.25 Spanish (Catalonians) . . . 13 9 9 ... ... 505 487 ... ... 56.11 54.1 ... ... 139 251 97 ... ... ... 15.44 27.88 10.77 ... ... ... French . . . . . . 6 5 7 1 1 383 525 60 55 76.60 75.0 60.00 5.50 124 290 111 9 38 8 17.71 41.41 15.85 9.00 38.00 8.00 Arab . . . . . . . 19 16.00 23.81 2 3 1,260 1,743 100 153 78.75 73.2 60.00 51.0 304 1,062 377 17 111 25 12.76 44.60 15.83 5.66 37.00 8.33 Punjabi . . . . . . 39 18 15 4 3 1,178 964 228 231 65.44 64.2 57.00 77.0 215 658 91 48 154 29 14.33 43.86 6.06 16.00 51.33 9.66 Home-bred . . . . . 9 6 7 1 1 362 434 90 30 60.33 62.0 90.00 30.0 138 227 69 6 22 3 19.71 32.42 9.85 5.00 22.00 3.00 Country-bred . . . . . 5 2 ... ... ... 69 ... ... ... 34.50 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Persian . . . . . . 38 29.00 25 2 2 1,381 1,138 72 67 47.62 45.5 36.00 33.5 250 680 192 2 30 35 10.00 27.20 7.68 1.00 15.00 17.50 Cyprian . . . . . . 37 32.00 29 ... ... 1,952 1,759 1 ... 61.00 60.6 ... ... 385 1,072 302 ... ... ... 13.27 36.96 10.41 ... ... ... Zanzibar . . . . . . 5 2 1 3 3 146 47 160 97 73.00 47.0 53.33 32.3 4 34 9 29 51 17 4.00 34.00 9.00 9.66 17.00 5.66 Rokhara . . . . . . ... ... 2 ... ... ... 60 ... ... ... 30.0 ... ... 14 38 8 ... ... ... 7.00 19.00 4.00 ... ... ... Meshed . . . . . . 2 2 2 ... ... 33 37 ... ... 11.00 18.5 ... ... 8 19 10 ... ... ... 4.00 9.50 5.00 ... ... ... Khorasani . . . . . . 1 1.00 1 ... ... 30 41 ... ... 30.00 41.0 ... ... 2 15 24 ... ... ... 2.00 15.00 24.00 ... ... ... TOTAL 361 278.40 289.08 21 17 17,977 18,491 1,209 966 64.57 50.6 59.47 56.8 4,085 10,674 3,716 204 596 166 14.13 36.99 12.85 12.00 35.05 6.23
xxxix Table X.PART I.xliii TABLE XI.xliv Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc. etc., of Government Horse and Pony stallions during 1896-97. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. NUMBER OF STAL- LIONS OB DATS. TOTAL ANNUAL COST. AVERAGE COST PER STAL- LION. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. ... North Punjab xlv Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., etc., of Government Horse and Pony stallions during 1896-97. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. NUMBER OF STAL- LIONS OF DAYS. TOTAL ANNUAL COST. AVERAGE COST PER STALLION. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. BOMBAY. Deccan . . Poona . . . 2,752 1,443 3,380 0 0 1,378 0 0 443 0 0 349 0 0 Ahmednagar . . 4,327 2,710 6,189 0 0 2,774 0 0 523 0 0 374 0 0 Sholapur . . . 715 ... 866 0 0 . . . . . . 442 0 0 ... Satara . . . 365 365 380 0 0 378 0 0 380 0 0 378 0 0 Nasik . . . ... 730 . . . . . . 796 0 0 . . . . . . 398 0 0 Khandesh . . . ... 730 . . . . . . 740 0 0 . . . . . . 370 0 0 Bijapur . . . ... 61 . . . . . . 56 0 0 . . . . . . 335 0 0 Total . 8,159 6,039 10,815 0 0 6,122 0 0 484 0 0 370 0 0 Guzerat . Kaira . . . . 640 ... 717 0 0 . . . . . . 409 0 0 ... Ahmedabad . . . 744 730 939 0 0 596 0 0 461 0 0 298 0 0 Deesa . . . . 730 ... 759 0 0 . . . . . . 380 0 0 ... Total . 2,114 730 2,415 0 0 596 0 0 417 0 0 298 0 0 Sindh and Cutch. Bhuj . . . . 794 ... 783 0 0 . . . . . . 360 0 0 ... Hyderabad . . . 1,095 365 748 0 0 402 0 0 249 0 0 402 0 0 Shikarpur . . . 1,073 ... 1,204 0 0 . . . . . . 409 0 0 ... Jacobabad . . . 2,023 365 2,999 0 0 441 0 0 541 0 0 441 0 0 Total . 4,985 730 5,734 0 0 843 0 0 420 0 0 422 0 0 ABSTRACT. PROVINCES. AVERAGE COST PER STALLION. HORSE. PONY. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. North-Western Provinces and Oudh . 330 10 11 274 4 9 ...... ...... Rajputana . . . . . . 292 2 7 242 14 4 ...... ...... North Punjab..... 338 15 0 279 12 6 ...... ...... South Punjab ..... 404 15 8 307 6 6 ...... ...... Baluchistan . . . . . 474 6 2 381 5 1 ...... ...... Central India . . . . . 183 15 5 153 0 10 117 1 4 ...... Deccan . . . . . . 484 0 0 385 0 0 370 0 0 332 0 0 Guzerat . . . . . . 417 0 0 362 0 0 298 0 0 301 0 0 Sindh and Cutch . . . . . 420 0 0 401 0 0 422 0 0 354 0 0
xlvi TABLE XII.xlvii DETAILS. MARES. PRODUCE. Horse-breeding. Pony-breeding, Mule-breeding. Horse stock. Pony stock. Male stock. Donkey stock. Branded during the year. N.-W. Provinces . 412 ... ... Foaled during the year. N.-W. Provinces 687 ... 867 22 North Punjab . . 518 ... ... North Punjab 1,084 ... 1,644 170 South Punjab . 718 ... ... South Punjab 1,010 ... 1,018 5 Baluchistan . . 696 ... ... Baluchistan . 613 ... 28 ... Bombay . . . 236 250 39 Bombay . 393 204 127 ... 2,580 250 39 3,787 204 3,684 197 Certificated . North Punjab . . 63 ... ... Died . . Paluchistan . 79 ... ... ... ... Transferred from other districts. N.-W. Provinces . . 160 ... ... Sold . . Baluchistan 183 ... ... ... North Punjab . . 249 .. ... Stolen . Baluchistan 9 ... ... ... South Punjab 378 ... ... Baluchistan . . 5 ... ... 792 ... ... Died . . N.-W. Provinces . 251 ... ... North Punjab . . 425 ... ... South Punjab . . 402 ... ... Baluchistan . . 143 ... ... Bombay . . . 11 33 ... 1,232 33 ... Sold . N.-W. Provinces . . 73 ... ... North Punjab . . 384 ... ... South Punjab . . 301 ... ... Baluchistan . . 145 ... ... 903 ... ... Stolen . . N.-W. Provinces . . 14 ... ... North Punjab . . 30 ... ... South Punjab . . 23 ... ... Baluchistan . . 2 ... ... 69 ... ... Transferred to other districts. N.-W. Provinces . . 146 ... ... Baluchistan . . 12 ... ... Bombay . . . 5 22 ... 16 22 ... Struck off Register North Punjab . 18 ... ... South Punjab . 65 ... Bombay . . . 1,553 978 251 1,636 978 251
xlviii TABLE XIII.xlix Breeders' and other colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Imperial Funds in 1896-971 TABLE XIV.li Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of Government Donkey stallions in 1896-97lii ABSTRACT. Province. AVERAGE PER DONKEY STALLION. Year under report. Previous year. North-Western Provinces and Oudh . . . . . . 142 15 7 122 15 0 North Punjab . . . . . 186 15 1 147 8 3 South Punjab . . . . . 182 15 10 158 4 5 Baluchistan . . . . . 250 10 7 285 4 3 Bengal . . . . . . 286 12 6 284 8 0 Deccan . . . . . . 511 0 0 419 0 0 Guzerat . . . . . . 318 0 0 278 0 0 Sindh and Cutch . . . . . 304 0 0 269 0 0
TABLE XV.liv TABLE XV.- IMPERIAL REPORTlv (Referred to in paragraph 468, page 74). REVENUE SECTION. Western Provinces, Punjab, Rajputana, Tirhoot and Baluchistan and during the year 1896-97. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR MULES. TOTAL NUMBER OF SALES EFFECTED. PRIZES AWARDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's Fair or Show. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. Total number sold. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. Provincial Funds. From Local and District Funds. From private subscrip- tion. Total. Amount actually award- ed. Number of medals award- ed. 450 192 255 ... ... ... ... ... ... 162 450 192 255 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 410 195 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52 410 195 ... 1,200 ... 1,000 ... 2,200 2,200 2 1,060 300 255 278 124 16 140 210 81 137 148 300 81 137 700 ... 500 ... 1,200 1,113 1 700 280 70 114 ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 280 70 114 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 550 110 241 ... ... Unk now n.... ... 110 550 110 244 1,600 ... 609 ... 2,209 2,271 2 1,600 ... ... ... 124 16 140 ... ... ... 490 ... ... ... 3,500 ... 2,109 ... 5,609 6,584 5 ... 476 125 116 165 303 468 375 45 105 4,517 500 4 67 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 300 560 160 360 156 394 550 260 15 107 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 200 35 140 500 ... 715 ... 1,215 1,177 1 500 360 165 267 2 21 23 150 22 76 299 2,000 15 158 1,800 ... ... ... 1,800 1,800 2 1,800 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 42 42 42 24 ... ... 23 ... ... 450 ... 450 450 ... ... 350 210 263 1 20 21 305 20 123 201 350 7 98 1,200 ... ... ... 1,200 1,200 2 1,100 380 195 250 ... ... ... ... ... ... 102 380 4 ... 400 ... 1,080 400 1,880 1,810 ... 400 435 135 241 1 27 28 154 18 62 996 435 5 61 1,000 ... ... 516 1,516 1,516 ... 900 305 172 210 6 ... 6 220 130 168 9 305 130 191 600 ... 1,300 ... 1,800 1,490 ... 500 150 110 130 3 13 16 230 20 78 41 300 20 145 600 ... 292 ... 892 606 ... 500 360 260 291 ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 360 15 132 1,000 ... ... ... 1,000 970 ... 900 410 225 296 14 10 24 152 59 120 120 410 8 122 1,000 ... 150 ... 1,150 1,150 ... 1,200 470 140 287 26 1,177 1,203 370 1 185 2,091 700 1 351 2,000 ... 300 ... 2,300 2,300 2 1,950 350 230 287 5 12 17 205 83 124 86 375 15 154 1,400 ... 428 ... 1,828 1,778 2 1,350 ... ... ... 380 1,977 2,357 ... ... ... 8,525 ... ... ... 11,400 ... 4,715 916 17,031 16,247 14 ... 230 160 191 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 600 ... 600 530 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 600 ... 600 530 ... ... ... ... ... 74 ... 74 200 110 131 74 200 110 131 500 ... ... 500 270 ... 500 340 250 296 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 125 125 ... 250 123 ... ... to cattle ... ... ... 74 ... 74 ... ... ... 74 ... ... ... 600 125 125 ... 750 393 ... ... Stock by the District Board.
lvi Abstract of particulars regarding each Horse Fair and Show held in the North- FAIR OR SHOW. DATE WHEN FAIR OR SHOW WAS HELD. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOOK (NOT INCLUD- ING BRANDED MARES) PRE- SENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PUROHASED. From To Year under report. Previous year.. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Depart- ment. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Baluchistan. . . . . Quetta Show . . . . 7th October 1896 . 9th October 1896 . 1.491 1,285 399 241 296 950 20 140 2 162 Sibi Show . . . . 4th January 1897 . 7th January 1897 . 1,262 1,287 1,040 1,287 1,040 222 6 ... 5 11 TOTAL ... ... 2,757 2,572 1,439 1,528 1,336 1,172 26 140 7 173 Bombay Presidency. Ahmednagar Show . . . 12th November 1896 14th November 1896 600 976 546 926 212 ... 7 4 ... 11 Bhuj Fair . . . . . 15th February 1897 18th February 1897 522 488 522 488 108 28 ... ... ... ... Moro Fair . . . . 1st February 1897 . 3rd February 1897 878 782 623 782 169 22 ... ... 13 13 Sind Show (Jacobabad) . . 11th January 1897 14th January 1897 1,395 956 1,395 876 625 438 3 50 45 98 TalharFair . . . . 8th February 1897 . 10th February 1897 791 791 791 791 Not known ... ... 11 11 TOTAL . ... ... 4,186 3,993 3,877 3,863 1,114 488 10 54 69 133 Abstract, North-Western Provinces . ... ... 18,068 20,286 1,466 1,659 788 1,559 20 293 37 350 Punjab . . . . ... ... 24,675 32,261 4,461 4,731 10,496 7,606 51 424 4 479 Rajputana . . . . ... ... 1,240 1,493 150 99 414 826 ... ... 5 5 Bengal . . . . . ... ... 3,008 4,832 ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 8 Baluchistan . . . . ... ... 2,757 2,572 1,439 11,528 1,336 1,172 26 140 7 173 Bombay Presidency . . . ... ... 4,186 3,993 3,877 3,863 1,114 498 10 54 69 133 TOTAL . ... ... 53,934 65,437 11,393 11,880 14,148 11,651 107 919 122 1,148
lvii Western Provinces, Punjab, Rajputana, Tirhoot, and Baluchistan, during the year 1896-97lviii TABLE XVI.lix Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1896-97.lx Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1896-97lxi Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1896-97lxii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1896-97-continued. Name of Sires. Number of 1st prizes. Number of 2nd prizes. Number of 3rd prizes. Number of other prizes. Total number of prizes. HALF AND THREE-QUARTER-BRED ENGLISH NORFOLK TROTTERS, ETC.lxiii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Pairs and Shows of 1896-97lxiv Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1896-97lxv Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1896-97lxvi Statement showing the Government Stallion whose produce won prizes at the Rom Fairs and Shows of 1896-97lxvii Statement showing the Government Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Bone Fairs and Shows of 1896-97lxviii TABLE XVII.lxix to in paragraph 478, page 80.) REVENUE SECTION. North-Western Provinces Depôt for the official year 1896-97. No. By Stock. R a. p. R a. p. 29 Value of lands . . . . . . . . 1,076 4 0 30 lxx TABLE XVII (A).-(Referred IMPERIAL REPORTlxxi to in paragraph 478, page 80.) REVENUE SECTION. South Punjab Depot for the official year 1896-97. No. By Stock. R a. p. R a. p. 29 Value of land . . . . . . . . 868 11 0 30 lxxii TABLE XVIII.lxxiii TABLE XIX.lxxiv. TABLE XX.lxxv Statement of Instruction Farm amimals sold during 1896-97.--(contd.). BRAND NUMBER. Name and class. Stallion, mare produce. Name of purchaser. Amount sold for. REMARKS. 10 ...... C.B. Horse stock. Remount Depart- ment. 287 11 ...... C.B. Do. Do. . . 237 12 ...... C.B. Do. Do. . . 237 18 ...... C.B. Donkey mare. Umrao of Beglxxvi TABLE XXI.lxxvii TABLE XXII. IMPERIAL REPORTPART IIlxxxi TABLE A. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 686, page 127. Return of District Horse, Pony, and Donkey Stallions for the official year 1896-97. Details, DISTRICT HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS. DISTRICT DONKEY STALLIONS REMARKS. HORSES. PONIES. Arab. Persian. Northern. Country-bred. TOTAL. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Shan. TOTAL. TOTAL HORSES AND PONIES. Italian. Persian. Home-bred. Herati. Punjabi. Country-bred. TOTAL. Balance on 1st April 1896 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 7 1 6 ... 82 75 2 ... 1 78 160 1 5 3 1 1 ... 11 Increase Purchased in India . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 ... ... 4 ... 10 6 ... 5 1 12 22 ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Stallions of Central Provinces . . . . . . . . . 4 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 By transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... 2 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . . . . . . . . . 80 7 1 10 ... 98 83 2 5 2 92 190 1 6 3 1 1 2 14 Died . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 1 ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... 3 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Destroyed . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Decrease Transferred . . . . . . . . . 6 ... ... 2 ... 8 3 ... ... ... 3 11 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . . . . . . . . . 6 1 ... 2 ... 9 11 ... ... ... 11 20 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Balance on 31st March 1897 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 6 1 8 ... 89 72 2 5 2 81 170 1 6 3 ... 1 2 13 In North-Western Provinces and Oudh . . . . . . . . . . . 28 6 1 ... ... 35 24 1 ... ... 25 60 ... 1 ... ... 1 1 3 In North Punjab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 ... ... 2 ... 6 25 1 ... ... 26 32 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 In South Punjab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 ... ... 6 ... 44 23 ... 5 ... 28 72 1 2 2 ... ... ... 5 In Ceutral Provinces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 In Burma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Particulars from Madras not received in accepted forms; hence not included in this Table. 2 Q
lxxxii TABLE B. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 689, page 127. Casualty Roll of District Horse and Pony Stallions during 1896-97. Brand No. Name. Class. Horse or Pony. Description of Casualty. Nature of Casualty. REMARKS. North-Western Provinces. 2446 Duffadar . . Persian Horse Died Kidney disease. North Punjab. ... Raja . . Arab Pony Destroyed Unfit for stud purposes. ... Mahboob . . lxxxiii TABLE C. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 690, page 127. District Horse and Pony Stallions sold during 1896-97. Brand No. Name. Class. Horse or Pony. Name of Purchaser. Amount sold for. Remarks showing cause of rejection. Rs. South Punjab. Black Prince . Arab Pony Not known . In Ex- Not known. change for a mare. Burma. Thanlyet . . Arab Pony Syed Ameer . 155 Unfit for stud purposes. Rocket . . lxxxiv TABLE D. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraphs 697 and 702, pages 138 and 129. Services and Produce of each class of Provincial Horse and Pony Stallions during 1896-97. HORSE OF PONY. CLASS. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. REMARKS. Stallions on Register. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARRS COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STAL- LION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PRE- VIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Horse . . . . . Arab . . . . . . . . . 28 25 17 5 1,065 845 42.6 48.3 268 393 184 15.3 22.4 10.5 Persian . . . . . . . . 6 6 7 376 406 62.7 68 0 160 196 50 23.0 28.0 7.0 Northan . . . . . . . 1 1 1 41 43 41.0 43.0 10 20 13 10.0 20.0 13.0 etc., etc. . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 35 32 25.5 1,482 1,294 46.3 50.7 438 609 247 17.2 23.8 9.7 Pony . . . . . Arab . . . . . . . . . 24 21 21.5 883 1,111 43.0 51.6 336 492 283 15.6 22.8 13.2 Persisn . . . . . . . 1 1 1 50 60 50.0 60.0 29 30 1 29.0 30.0 1.0 TOTAL . 25 22 22.5 933 1,171 42.5 52.0 365 622 284 16.2 23.2 12.6 GRAND TOTAL . 60 54 48 2,415 2,465 44.7 51.3 803 1,131 531 16.7 23.5 11.0
lxxxv TABLE Dlxxxvi TABLE Dlxxxvii TABLE Dlxxxviii TABLE Dlxxxix TABLE E. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 700, page 129. Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of District Horse and Pony Stallions during 1896-97. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. NUMBER OF STALLIONS OR DAYS. TOTAL ANNUAL COST. AVERAGE COST PER STALLION. REMARKS. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. Horse. Pony. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Horses and Ponies. Babugarh Depôt . . 844 649 884 4 0 ... 216 2 9 ... Agra . . . . ... 365 ... 227 14 1 ... 227 14 1 Aligarh . . . ... 730 ... 469 6 7 ... 234 11 3 Bijnor . . . 304 ... 232 11 2 ... 279 6 2 ... Badaon . . 730 273 538 6 10 187 12 3 269 3 5 251 0 8 Bulandshahr . . 1,195 838 866 0 3 564 0 9 264 8 2 245 10 9 Dehra Dun . . . ... 365 ... 239 4 6 ... 239 4 6 Etah . . . . 365 ... 215 6 7 ... 215 6 7 ... Etawah . . . 365 ... 286 13 10 ... 286 13 10 ... Fatehpur . . . ... 365 ... 209 6 4 ... 209 6 4 Hardoi . . . ... 365 ... 249 5 9 ... 249 5 9 Muradabad . . . 1,323 ... 1,036 12 4 ... 286 0 6 ... Meerut . . 2,320 1,735 1,627 6 5 1,165 3 7 256 0 6 245 2 1 Muttra . . 365 ... 272 6 0 ... 272 6 0 ... Muzaffarnagar . . 1,701 1,095 1,283 5 7 783 15 4 275 6 1 261 5 1 Saharanpur . . . 1,460 942 998 7 5 631 6 1 249 9 10 244 10 3 Shajehanpur . . . ... 350 ... 241 5 0 ... 251 10 5 Sultanpur . . . ... 365 ... 267 4 3 ... 267 4 3 Rai Bareilly . . . 240 ... 204 6 10 ... 810 14 4 ... Total . 11,212 8,437 8,446 7 3 5,236 4 6 274 15 6 226 8 5 North Punjab . Peshawar . . . ... 730 ... 575 5 7 ... 287 10 9 Kohat . . . . 300 ... 260 13 4 ... 317 5 6 ... Rawalpindi . . . ... 2,555 ... 2,295 1 7 ... 327 13 11 Jhelum . . . 365 ... 277 12 6 ... 277 12 6 ... Gujrat . . . ... 1,316 ... 1,133 4 3 ... 314 5 0 Gujranwala . . . 307 1,095 245 6 4 721 7 7 291 12 1 240 7 10 Shahpur . . . 365 1,095 349 8 11 767 15 9 349 8 11 255 15 11 Sialkot . . . ... 1,460 ... 1,084 6 5 ... 271 1 7 Lahore . . . ... 1,460 ... 1,166 0 0 ... 291 8 0 Jhang . . . . ... 365 ... 279 6 9 ... 279 6 9 Dehra Ismail Khan . 673 ... 447 5 7 ... 242 9 10 ... Total . 2,010 10,076 1,580 14 8 8,022 15 11 287 1 3 290 10 1 South Punjab . Hissar . . . 1,825 1,095 1,512 14 1 787 14 10 302 9 7 262 10 3 Rohtak . . . 730 1,460 467 5 6 930 0 6 233 10 9 232 8 1 Gurgaon . . . 730 ... 567 0 5 ... 283 8 2 ... Delhi . . . . 730 ... 672 6 11 ... 336 3 5 ... Carried over . 2 R
xc TABLE E. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of District Horse and Pony Stallions during 1896-97xci TABLE F. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 705, page 130. Return of Mares considered suitable for Horse, Pony, Mule, or Donkey breeding for the official year 1896-97. DETAILS. NUMBER OF MARES CONSIDERED SUITABLE For Horse- breeding. For Pony- breeding. For Mule- breeding, For Donkey- breeding. TOTAL. Balance on 1st April 1896 . 10,861 23,912 10,684 17,429 62,886 Increase By purchase . 2,237 2,510 1,334 1,209 7,290 By transfers, etc. . 599 1,245 1,489 543 3,876 Total . 13,697 27,667 13,507 19,181 74,052 Decrease Died . . 828 1,429 538 1,023 3,818 Sold . . . 1,770 2,283 873 4,606 9,532 Transferred . 960 1,037 432 849 3,278 (a) Not accounted for . . 240 1,300 703 496 2,739 Total . 3,798 6,049 2,546 6,974 19,367 Balance on 81st March 1897 9,899 21,618 10,961 12,207 54,685 In North Punjab . . 2,619 10,938 3,097 5,802 22,456 In South Punjab . . 5,873 10,558 7,864 6,332 30,627 In Baluchistan . . . 1,407 122 ... 73 1,602 NOTE.xcii TABLE G. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Casualty Roll of District Donkey Stallions during 1896-97. Brand No. Name. Class. Description of Casualty. Nature of Casualty. REMARKS. Nil.
xciii TABLE H. PROVINCIAL REPORT. District Donkey Stallions sold during 1896-97. Brand No. Name. Class. Name of Purchaser. Amount sold for. Remarks showing cause of rejection. Nil.
xciv TABLE J. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 714, page 135. ;Services and Produce of each class of Provincial Donkey Stallion during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLION. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. Stallions on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD NUMER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULTS OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS.. AVERAGE RESULT OF PERVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For Mule- breeding. For Donkey- breeding. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule produce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Country-bred . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 Persian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 No information recorded. Punjabi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 TOTAL . 3
xcv Services and Produce of each class of Provincial Donkey Stallion during 1896-97. CLASS OF DONKEY STALLION. NORTH PUNJAB. Stallious on register. DONKEY STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AS STUD NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULTS OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULTS OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. For Mule- breeding. For Donkey- breeding. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Pony Mares. Donkey Mares. Year under report. Previons year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous yean Year under report. Previous year. Number of mule produce. Number not held. Number not known. Number of donkey produce. Number not held. Number not known. Average of mule produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Average of donkey produce. Average of not held. Average of not known. Home-bred . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1 1 ... ... 44 52 ... ... 44.0 52.0 ... ... 8 28 16 ... ... ... 8.0 28.0 16.0 ... ... ... Country-bred . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1 ... ... ... 45 ... ... ... 45.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Etc. etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL . 2 2 1 ... ... 89 52 ... ... 44.5 52.0 ... ... 8 28 16 ... ... ... 8.0 28.0 16.0 ... ... ...
xcvi Services and Produce of each class of District Donkey Stallions during 1896-97xcvii Services and Produce of each class of District Donkey Stallion during 1896-97xcviii Services and Produce of each class of District Donkey Stallion during 1896-97xcix TABLE K. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 716, page 135. Cost of feed, keep, attendants, etc., of District Donkey Stallions in 1896-97. Province. District. Number of donkey stal- lions or days. Total annual cost. Average per donkey stallion. REMARKS. North Punjab . . . Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Dera Ismail Khan . . 365 186 3 4 186 3 4 Gujrat . . . . 288 204 0 0 258 8 8 TOTAL . 653 300 3 4 218 1 9 South Punjab . . . . Multan . . . . 365 130 0 0 130 0 0 Jalalabad (Ferozepore) . 365 176 0 0 176 0 0 Hissar . . . . 365 182 9 5 182 9 5 Delhi . . . . 730 389 2 9 194 9 4 TOTAL . 1,825 877 12 2 175 8 10 Central Provinces . . . . Saugor . . . . 335 366 11 8 400 1 0 Burma . . . . . Southern Shan States . . 730 599 15 0 299 15 6 Abstract. Year under Report. Previous year. North Punjab . . . ... 218 1 9 155 8 2 South Punjab . . . ... 175 8 10 137 6 0 Central Provinces . . ... 400 1 0 ...... Burma . . . . ... 299 15 6 312 5 6 2 s 2
C TABLE L. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 719, page 135. Breeders and other Colts castrated by Veterinary Assistants and Salutris paid from Local Funds in 1896-97. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. NUMBER OF COLTS CASTRATED. Number of deaths result- ing from effects of cas- tration. REMARKS. Horse stock. Mule stock. Total. North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Agra . . . . . Aligarh . . . . 6 2 ... ... 6 2 ... ... Also 1 ram. ci TABLE M. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 743, page 167. Shouing Districts where Outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1896-97. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. RINDERPEST. ANTHRAX. FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE. PLEURO-PNEUMONIA. CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE. OTHER DISEASES. TOTAL. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked, Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Rajputana . . . Ajmore . . . . 1,024 432 420 46 46 100.0 516 66 13.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... 133 71 53.0 1,719 614 36.0 Merwara . . . . 3,291 1,171 36.0 ... ... ... 2,547 83 3.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... 916 287 31.0 6,754 1,541 23.0 TOTAL . 4,315 1,603 37.14 46 46 100.0 3,063 148 4.83 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,049 358 34.12 8,473 2,155 25.43 North-Western Prov- inces and Oudh. Agra . . . . . 512 268 52.3 ... ... ... 116 40 34.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 628 308 49 Aligarh . . . . 15 11 73 ... ... ... 303 140 46.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 318 151 47.4 Allahabad . . . . 787 394 50 ... ... ... 16 2 12.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 803 396 47.3 Almora . . . . 807 475 59 ... ... ... 28,255 758 2.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29,062 1,233 4.2 Bulandshabr . . . 155 99 63.8 198 100 50.5 97 19 19.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 450 218 48.4 Ballia . . . . . Unknown ... ... ... Unknown 35 Unknown ... ... ... ... ... ... Unknown 146 Unknown Unknown 180 Unknown Banda . . . . . 2,798 1,669 60 ... ... ... 739 189 25 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,537 1,858 52.5 Bara Banki . . . . 2,649 749 28.27 ... ... ... 734 297 40.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 185 70 37.8 3,568 1,116 31.27 Barcilly . . . . 40 20 50 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 20 50 Basti . . . . . *488 1,176 Unknown ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 488 1,176 Unknown Benares . . . . 2,190 1,337 61 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,190 1,337 61 Bijnour . . . . 88 32 36 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 88 32 36 Cawnpore . . . . 1,661 1,188 71.5 39 9 23 752 408 64 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,452 1,605 65.6
cii Showing Districts where Outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1896-97ciii North Punjab . . Peshawar . . . . 36 27 75 310 229 ... 558 16 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 100 906 273 30 Kohat . . . . 91 45 49 ... ... ... 99 60 61 ... ... ... ... ... ... 776 346 45 966 451 47 Hazara . . . . 226 224 99 292 298 99 12 12 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 530 624 99 Rawalpindi . . . . 292 257 88 58 48 83 261 61 23 ... ... ... ... ... ... 380 3 1 991 869 87 Jhelum . . . . 2,116 1,166 55 111 82 74 624 21 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 621 167 27 3,472 1,436 41 Gujrat . . . . 807 481 60 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 8 100 228 50 22 1,043 539 62 Gujranwalla . . . . 1,061 505 47 127 87 60 109 7 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,120 346 11 4,420 945 21 Shahpur . . . . 1,026 388 38 519 306 59 482 1 ... 20 2 10 ... ... ... 1,333 29 2 3,380 726 21 Sialkot . . . . 308 65 21 11 6 55 302 ... ... 9 8 89 ... ... ... 4,804 103 2 6,454 182 3 Lahore . . . . 739 430 58 509 295 58 809 45 6 4 2 50 71 ... ... 2,336 248 11 4,468 1,020 23 Jhang . . . . 1,601 765 51 118 66 56 38 31 82 ... ... ... ... ... ... 813 405 60 2,470 1,267 61 Bannu . . . . 1,074 680 63 4 4 100 1,081 70 6 97 7 7 11 5 45 633 518 82 2,900 1,281 44 Dera Ismail Khan . . 673 284 42 64 30 56 270 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,059 15 1 2,056 329 16 TOTAL . 9,953 5,317 53 2,113 1,441 68 4,645 334 7 130 19 15 90 13 14 16,104 2,231 14 33,035 9,345 28 South Punjab . . Hissar . . . . . 1,113 556 49.9 123 121 88.3 1,702 29 1.7 31 8 25.8 ... ... ... 705 12 17 3,674 726 19.7 Rohtak . . . . 18 12 66.6 12 12 100 60 ... ... 7 1 ... ... ... ... 865 ... ... 956 21 2.6 Gurgaon . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 143 3 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 824 25 3 967 28 2.8 Delhi . . . . 431 310 71.9 21 18 75 255 21 8.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 854 27 3.1 1,564 376 24 Umballa . . . . 906 513 59.9 ... ... ... 423 5 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 232 30 12.9 1,561 578 37 Kangra . . . . 6,094 3,358 55.1 39 26 66 865 6 0.6 35 26 74.2 ... ... ... 386 58 15 7,419 3,474 47.4 Hoshiarpur . . . . 2,537 1,218 48 85 76 89.4 319 3 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... 345 ... ... 3,286 1,297 39.4 Ludhiana . . . . 1,370 833 64.4 163 136 83.4 418 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,523 60 3.2 3,474 1,069 30.4 Ferozepur . . . . 616 341 55.3 62 58 93.5 750 12 1.6 11 5 11.4 ... ... ... 3,071 292 9.5 4,510 708 15.6 Multan . . . . 1,044 900 86.2 236 62 26.2 236 20 8.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,080 15 1.3 2,596 997 38.4 Gurdaspur . . . . 1,813 1,588 87.5 234 222 94.8 862 5 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... l,840 32 17 4,739 1,847 38.9 Amritsar . . . . 1,645 831 60.4 675 604 89.4 345 7 2 1 1 100 ... ... ... 605 72 11.9 3,271 1,515 46.3 Dera Gbazi Khan . . 1 1 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,051 1 0.9 1,052 2 0.1 Muzaffargarh . . . ... ... ... 3 3 100 ... ... ... 21 6 28.5 ... ... ... 626 35 5.5 650 44 6.7 Kurnal . . . 189 93 49 13 9 69.2 323 3 0.9 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 470 28 5.9 996 133 13.3 Montgomery . . . 64 20 31.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 196 3 1.5 260 23 8.8 Jallunder . . . . 2,426 1,811 74.6 231 208 90 1,703 62 3.6 3 1 33.3 ... ... ... 868 54 6 5,231 2,136 40.8 TOTAL . 20,207 12,465 61.5 1,900 1,555 81.8 8,394 176 2 103 47 45.6 1 ... 15,541 734 0.4 46,206 14,977 32.4 Central Provinces . Wardha . . . . 573 478 83 2,870 2,378 84 1,593 995 62 1,357 1,127 83 105 72 69 547 450 82 7,045 6,500 78 Naraingpur . . . . 2,323 1,623 70 481 396 82 1,535 619 40 782 579 74 402 317 79 9,059 6,919 76 14,582 10,453 72 Nimar . . . . 82 78 95 ... ... ... 163 113 69 ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 10 100 255 201 78 TOTAL . 2,978 2,179 73 3,351 2,774 82 3,291 1,727 52 2,139 1,706 79 507 389 76 9,616 7,379 76 21,882 16,154 19
civ Showing Districts where Outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1896-97-contd. PROVINCE. DISTRICT. RINDERPEST. ANTHRAX. FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE. PLEURO-PNEUMONIA. CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE. OTHER DISEASE. TOTAL. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths. Number attacked. Number died. Percentage of deaths Bombay . . . Bombay . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 22 100 22 22 100 Khandesh . . . . 526 243 48.19 ... ... ... 288 2 0.68 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 814 245 30.09 Nasik . . . . . 1,235 397 32.14 ... ... ... 741 63 7.15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,976 450 22.77 Ahmednagar . . . 1,574 565 35.89 ... ... ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,587 565 35.6 Decean . . . Poona . . . . . 1,476 862 58.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,476 862 58.4 Sholapur . . . . 121 65 45.45 232 81 34.91 4 ... ... ... ... ... 168 37 22.02 ... ... ... 525 173 32.95 Satara . . . . . 1,144 577 60.43 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,144 577 50.43 Belgaum . . . . 1,031 500 48.49 ... ... ... 22 ... ... ... ... ... 17 10 58.82 ... ... ... 1,070 510 47.66 Karnatak . . . Bijapur . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 100 Kanara . . . . 1,752 1,094 69.59 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,752 1,094 6969 Ratnagiri . . . . 3,510 1,858 62.93 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,510 1,858 52.93 Konkan . . . Kolaba . . . . 139 109 77.69 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 139 103 77.69 Thana . . . . . 515 315 6116 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 516 315 61.16 Broach . . . . 336 146 43.45 ... ... ... 28 1 3.57 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 364 147 40.38 Guzerat . . . Kaira . . . . . 61 16 26.52 6 4 80 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 20 30.3 Karachi . . . . 48 7 14.58 ... ... ... 44 1 2.27 ... ... ... ... ... ... 54 33 61.11 146 41 28.08 Sind . . . Shikarpur . . . . 804 401 49.87 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 804 401 49.87 Upper Sind Frontier . . 2,590 1,409 54-4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 7 100 2,597 1,416 54.5 TOTAL . 16,862 8,553 50.72 237 85 35.86 1,146 63 5.49 ... ... ... 185 47 25.40 83 62 74.69 18,513 8,810 47.58
cv Showing Districts where Outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1896-97cvi Showing Districts where Outbreaks of Cattle-disease occurred during 1896-97cvii Upper Burma. Pakokku . . . 116 ... ... 41 117 16 174 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 ... 63 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 66 ... 68 3,757 43. 246 14 306 Minbu . . . . 121 ... 997 222 166 35 322 ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 16 ... 16 ... ... ... ... ... The figures for this disease are included underAnthrax. ... 1 103 4 108 997 123 285 39 447 Magwe . . . . 125 ... ... 80 247 83 410 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 141 30 171 11,989 80 388 119 587 Mandalay . . . 130 ... ... 1 8 ... 9 ... ... 4 ... 4 66 ... 433 ... 433 ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 1,529 1 1,532 58 3 1,974 1 1,978 Bhamo . . . . 111 ... 19 22 13 ... 35 ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 38 ... 38 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 85 ... 87 29 24 136 ... 160 Myitkyina . . . 19 ... 28 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 28 ... 3 ... 3 Katha . . . . 40 ... ... ...8 16 2 26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58 ... 58 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... 10 2,898 8 84 2 94 Ruby Mines . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 297 ... ... ... ... Shwebo . . . 203 2 ... 30 182 86 297 ... 2 ... 3 6 ... ... 89 9 98 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 507 44 555 ... 36 778 141 955 Sagaing . . . 112 1 767 18 19 2 39 1 ... ... ... ... ... 54 9 63 ... ... ... ... ... 8 2 41 31 74 776 20 114 42 176 46 8 64 2,003 9 60 12 71 Upper Chindwin . . 50 1 ... 9 4 4 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lower Chindwin . . 68 3,440 41 105 6 162 4 ... ... ... ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... 109 ... 109 3,464 41 214 6 261 Kyaukse 113 1 196 1 1 ... 2 32 6 2 ... 7 93 ... 53 10 63 ... ... ... ... ... 95 ... 315 30 346 410 6 371 40 417 Meiktila . . . 360 1 ... 4 26 4 34 ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 248 48 296 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 394 36 430 16,926 5 668 88 761 Yamethin . . . 144 1 ... 35 66 2 102 ... 1 1 ... 2 ... ... 241 1 242 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 143 13 166 ... 36 450 16 502 Myingyan 70 1 ... 134 161 93 388 ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 315 21 335 ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 70 2 72 ... 134 647 116 797 TOTAL . 1,791 13 6,447 546 1,129 332 2,007 37 9 9 3 21 171 1,608 104 1,712 ... ... ... ... ... 113 13 3,662 199 3,774 43,637 668 6,308 638 7,514 GRAND TOTAL . 5,844 38 45,878 1,606 2,972 868 5,436 7,913 42 109 13 164 5,526 69 13,991 2,364 16,414 ... ... ... ... ... 52,695 82 10,969 1,029 12,080 149,881 1,789 28,041 4,264 34,094 2 T 2 N.B.cviii TABLE N. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 746, page 167. Statement showing the Number of Animals treated during the year 1896-97 and the Totals of 1895-96. PROVINCE. Dispensaries. BROUGHT OVER FROM LAST YEAR. ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR. TOTAL TREATED DISCHARGED DURING THE YEAR. BALINCE. IN 1896-97. In 1895- 96. CURED. RELIEVRD. DIED. RETURNED INCURABLE. RESULT UNKNOWN. TOTAL. Total 1895- 96. In. Out. In. Out. In. Out. Total. In. Out. In. Out. In. Out. In. Out. In. Out. In. Out. Total. In. Out. North Punjab . . . . . . Dera Ismail Khan Bhakkar . . . ... ... ... 1,044 ... 1,044 1,041 930 ... ... ... 782 ... 262 ... ... ... ... ... 1,044 1,044 930 ... ... Dehra Ismail Khan . . ... ... ... 1,012 ... 1,012 1,012 1,911 ... ... ... 386 ... 67 ... 4 ... 605 ... 1,012 1,012 1,911 ... ... Gujranwala . . . . . . . ... 40 ... 3,080 ... 3,120 3,120 3,372 ... 2,56 ... 24 ... 346 ... 61 ... 87 ... 3,085 3,085 3,332 ... 35 Sialkot . . Sialkot . . . . 3 47 16 2,419 19 2,480 2,455 2,467 17 1,821 502 2 41 ... 12 ... 89 19 2,465 2,484 2,417 ... 1 Pasrur . . . . ... ... ... 1,812 ... 1,812 1,812 1,721 ... 1,167 ... 75 ... 116 ... 10 ... 445 ... 1.812 1,812 1,721 ... ... Daska . . . . . ... ... ... 1,136 ... 1,136 1,136 1,196 ... 763 ... 240 ... 28 ... 11 ... 94 ... 1,136 1,136 1,196 ... ... Rawalpindi . . . . . ... ... ... 774 ... 774 774 ... ... 313 ... ... ... 369 ... 36 ... 56 ... 774 77 ... ... ... TOTAL . 3 87 16 11,277 19 11,364 11,383 11,597 17 6,632 ... 1,958 2 1,228 ... 134 ... 1,376 19 11,328 11,347 11,507 ... 36 South Punjab . . . . . Jelallabad . . . . . . . . . . ... ... 124 405 124 405 629 604 121 374 1 23 2 8 ... ... ... ... 124 405 529 504 ... ... Umballa . . . . . . . . 3 13 75 678 78 691 769 685 68 657 2 13 4 6 1 1 ... 5 75 682 757 672 3 9 Amritsar (Municipal) . . . . . . . . ... ... 615 2,144 615 2,114 2,759 2,577 553 1,848 ... ... 43 9 2 16 3 245 601 2,118 2,719 2,577 14 26 Hoshiarpur . . . . . . . 2 6 80 1,889 82 1,891 1,977 2,087 75 1,774 4 77 8 ... ... 22 ... 20 82 1,893 1,978 2,079 ... 2 Rohtak . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 956 ... 956 956 1,547 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 956 ... 956 956 1,547 ... ... Ludhiana . . . . . . . . ... ... 87 1,477 87 1,477 1,564 ... 63 ... 14 ... 4 ... 3 ... 3 1,477 87 1,477 1,564 ... ... ... Amritsar District . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 3,271 ... 3,271 3.271 2,672 ... 1,702 ... ... ... 1,615 ... 16 ... 31 ... 3,264 3,264 2,672 ... 7 Delhi . . . . . . . . . .. ... ... 1,564 ... 1,564 1,564 1,614 ... 1,139 ... ... ... 376 ... ... ... 49 ... 1,664 1,564 1,614 ... ... Multan . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 2,872 ... 2,872 2,872 3,295 ... 1,732 ... ... ... 1,030 ... 110 ... ... ... 2,872 2,872 3,296 ... ... Gurdaspur . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 4,739 ... 4,739 4,739 2,412 ... 2,350 ... 91 ... 1,746 ... 176 ... 367 ... 4,739 4,739 2,412 ... ... Gurgaon . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 967 ... 967 967 1,423 ... 917 ... ... ... 25 ... ... ... 25 ... 967 967 1,423 ... ... Kurnal . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 996 ... 996 996 587 ... 648 ... ... ... 133 ... 24 ... 140 ... 946 945 587 ... 51
cix BOMBAY. Kangra . . . . . . . . ... ... ... 7,319 ... 7,318 7,318 7,304 ... 3,208 ... 444 ... 3,466 ... 25 ... 175 ... 7,318 7 318 7,304 ... ... Dera Ghazi Khan . . . . . . . ... ... 190 862 190 862 1,052 404 189 862 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 190 862 1,052 404 ... ... Muzaffargarh . . . . . ... ... ... 650 ... 650 660 ... ... 580 ... ... ... 44 ... 26 ... ... ... 650 650 ... ... ... Total . . 5 19 1,171 30,788 1,176 30,807 31,983 27,114 1,069 17,797 22 651 57 8,353 6 416 6 3,490 1,159 30,712 31,871 27,090 17 93 Deccan . . . . . . . Nasik . . . . . . . 7 16 64 1,079 71 1,095 1,166 933 40 759 8 14 15 23 5 6 ... 279 68 1,081 1,149 910 3 14 Do. (Itinerant) . . . . . . . ... ... ... 531 ... 531 531 503 ... 363 ... 17 ... 20 ... ... ... 131 ... 631 531 503 ... ... Dhulia . . . . . . . . 9 9 209 1,682 218 1,692 1,909 1,604 126 959 43 257 33 35 6 21 5 412 212 1,684 1,896 1,586 6 7 Jalgaun . . . . . . . ... 27 ... 743 ... 770 770 925 ... 415 ... 88 ... 55 ... 12 ... 192 ... 762 762 898 ... 8 Bhadgaon (Itinerant) . . . . . . ... ... ... 585 ... 585 585 782 ... 257 ... 80 ... 20 ... 3 ... 219 ... 579 579 782 ... 6 Poona . . . . . . . . . 12 6 337 334 349 340 689 626 264 300 18 8 40 10 12 2 3 18 337 333 675 608 12 2 Karnatak . . . . . Belgaum . . . . . . . . 2 14 20 1,862 22 1,876 1,898 1,559 17 1,616 4 97 1 54 ... 8 ... 75 22 1,856 1,872 1,543 ... 28 Do. (Itinerant) . . . . . . . ... ... ... 1,021 ... 1,021 1,021 ... ... 917 ... 22 ... 4 ... 31 ... 27 ... 1,001 1,001 ... ... 20 Dharwar . . . . . . . . 1 19 33 907 34 926 960 543 18 624 9 116 3 27 1 2 ... 100 31 919 950 528 3 7 Guzerat . . . . . . . Ahmedabad . . . . . . . 4 30 117 1,433 121 1,453 1,574 1,392 104 1,244 3 26 5 20 1 30 2 94 115 1,414 1,529 1,358 6 39 Nadiad . . . . . . . . 2 24 21 1,641 23 1,665 1,688 1,574 13 1,351 4 118 6 22 ... 25 ... 121 23 1,610 1,663 1,548 ... 25 Kaira (Itinerant) . . . . . . ... 8 ... 711 ... 719 719 925 ... 544 ... 47 ... 71 ... 12 ... 33 ... 707 707 917 ... 12 Surat . . . . . . . . . . 6 13 79 833 84 846 930 738 63 791 4 25 10 1 1 4 ... 10 78 831 909 720 6 15 Sind . . . . . . . Karachi . . . . . . . . . 29 33 261 2,501 290 2,534 2,824 2,736 245 2,446 23 50 14 16 2 1 ... ... 284 2,613 2,797 2,674 6 21 Hyderabad . . . . . . . . . 10 13 266 1,036 276 1,049 1,325 1,260 232 933 15 64 9 11 2 1 ... 23 258 1,037 1,295 1,237 18 12 Shikarpur . . . . . . . . 3 26 124 872 127 898 1,025 894 111 578 3 41 3 42 6 7 1 211 124 879 1,003 865 3 19 Total . 84 238 1,531 17,761 1,615 17,999 19,614 16,999 1,233 14,097 134 1,070 139 431 35 165 11 2,003 1,552 17,766 19,318 16,677 63 233
cx Statement showing the Number of Animals treated during the year 1896-97 and the Totals of 1895-96cxi Statement showing the Number of Animals treated during the year 1896-97 and the Totals of 1895-96cxii TABLE O. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 746cxiii Statement showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during 1896-97cxiv Statement showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during 1896-97cxv TABLE P. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 808, page 209, Statement showing Tours of Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, during 1896-97. Bank, name, and designation of Officer. Districts visited. Fairs and Shows attended. NUMBER OF MILES TRAVELLED. REMARKS. By Road. By Rail. By Boat or Steamer. TOTAL. Veterinary Lieutenant J. Longhlin, Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North- Western Provinces and Oudh. (Prom 1st April 1896 to 4th March 1897.) Meerut, Ajmere, Cawnpore, Naini Tal, Saharunpur, Dehra Dun, Fattehpur, Lucknow, Rai Bareilly, Fyzabad, Hardoi, Bijnor, Muzafarnagar, Buland- shahr, Agra, Muradabad, Budaon, Bareilly, Shahjahanpur, Allahabad, Aligarh, and Muttra. Garhmuktesar, Batesar, Makanpur, Bulandshahr. 2,318 4,893 ...... 7,211 Visited Bacteriological Labor- atory, Muktesar; inspected Tonga line between Naini Tal and Kathgodam, inspected Dâk line between Saharanpur and Rajpur; enquired into outbreak of Glanders at Luck- now. Veterinary Captain R. H. Ringe, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. (From 5th March 1897 to end of official year.) Meerut, Bulandshahr, Aligarh, Agra, and Ajmere. Meerut (Nauchandi). 199 1,017 ...... 1,216 Attended Board of Examination, Ajmere Veterinary School. Veterinary Captain W. E. Hagger, Principal, Ajmere Veterinary School. Merwara, Ulwar, Jeypore, Bhurtpore, Ajmere, Nasirabad, Bandanwara, Sathana, Masuda, Khairwa, Kekri, Deoli, and Sawar. Tezaji, Ulwar, Jeypore, and Pushkar. 208 1,014 ...... 1,222 Visited Bhurtpore to investigate "Surra" amongst Durbar horses. Veterinary Lieutenant H. P. Turnbull, Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab. Hazara Kohat, Peshawar, Lahore, Rawal- pindi, Jhelum, Gujianwala, Gujrat, Bannu, Dera Ismail Khan, Shabpur, and Sialkot. Jhelum, Bannu, Gujrat, Shahpur, Lahore, and Rawalpindi. 903 7,079 ...... 7,982 ...... Veterinary Lieutenant E. W. Larnder, Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab. (From 1st April 1896 to 10th July 1896.) Ludhiana, Umballa, and Kurnal districts. Rawalpindi and Amritsar. 486 3,253 72 3,811 Inspected Transport Bullocks at Kalka; inspected Patbankot- Dunera, Lâk line; inspected Veterinary dispensaries.
cxvi TABLE Pcxvii TABLE Q. PROVINCIAL REPORT. Referred to in paragraph 814, page 213. Statement showing Provincial cost of the Civil Veterinary Department during the official year 1896-97. Major Heads. Superintendent, North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Superintendent, North Punjab. Superintendent, South Punjab. Superintendent, Baluchistan. Superintendent, Bengal. Superintendent, Madras. Principal Ajmere Veterinary School. SUPRIN- TENDENT, PROVINCES. SUPERINTENDENT, BOMBAY. SUPERINTENDENT BURMA. Central Provinces. Local Fund Charges. Provincial Charges. Local Distric Cess Fund. Provincial Charges. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. I.cxviii APPENDIX R.