ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1908-09. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SIMLA: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL BRANCH PRESS 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1908-09 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SIMLA: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL BRANCH PRESS 1909.
ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR. 1908-09. CONTENTS. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. PAGES Preface ... ... ... ... ... ... 1. Officers in charge ... ... ... ... ... ib. Inspector-General's tour ... ... ... ... 2. PART A.GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATION REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN INDIA FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1908-1909. Preface. A coloured Map which accompanies this Report, shows, in light red, the districts under the Civil Veterinary Department. The usual Tables are appended. Officers in charge. 2. The table noted below gives the names of the officers who held the several appointments in the Department during the year under report:2 Appointments. 1st April 1908. 31at March 1909. REMARKS. Superintendent, Bengal ... D. Quinlan, Esq. ... D. Quinlan, Esq. Superintendent, Eastern Bengal and Assam. W. Harris, Esq. ... W. Harris, Esq. Superintendent, Madras ... Lieutenant-Colonel W. D. Gunn. Lieutenant-Colonel W. D. Gunn. Superintendent, Burma ... Lieutenant-Colonel G. H. Evans. Lieutenant-Colonel G. H. Evans. 2nd Superintendent, Burma ... T. Rennie, Esq. ... T. Rennie, Esq. 3rd Superintendent, Burma ... ...... C. J. N. Cameron, Esq. Superintendent, Central Pro- vinoes. J. S. Jethiji, Esq. ... Major P. S. H. Baldrey. Veterinary Officer, Investi- gating Camel diseases. A. S. Leese, Esq. .. A. S. Leese, Esq. 3. I regret to say that the death of Mr. J. S. Jethiji was reported on the 25th August 1908. Only one officer, Mr. J. G. Cattell, joined the Department and was posted for training at the Muktesar Laboratory. Mr. Hartley the Physiological Chemist joined the Department on 16th April 1909. Mr. Cattell will shortly be posted to the Punjab for training in district work. 4. Colonel F. Raymond was granted an extension of service for three years and promoted to the rank of Colonel. 5. The following officers were on leave in England at the close of the year under report:3 outturn of graduates, accomplishing more than three times as much as any of the other Colleges. Bengal comes next but is weak in European teaching staff. Bombay next and Madras the youngest of the institutions, last. 9. The staff at the Punjab College remained unchanged. This college is at present much overcrowded there being no less than 109 students in the final year class and 73 in the second year. The Board of Examiners remark in their report that: &quot;the technical subjects contained in the 3rd year course require far more individual tuition than it is possible to give to such a great number of students.&quot; As a matter of fact the classes are far too large to be well taught and I have strongly recommended the Principal to reduce them to more workable limits. The demand for admission is very great and Govern- ment nominations fill up the class before any private students can be admitted. In the circumstances and considering the very great demand which exists for trained men there is a great temptation to admit too many students. 10. Considering the very large classes and the general prevalence of Malaria in the autumn, the results of the examinations must be considered very good as 69 out of 109 were successful in passing the final test, whilst 59 out of 67 passed the first, and 62 out of 73 the second year's tests. 11. The receipts from fees, etc., were Rs. 14,223, and 6,525 patients were treated in hospital. 12. I regret to say that it has been found impossible to complete the very necessary additions to the Anatomical rooms which have already received the sanction of Government but for which the land required has not yet been acquired. I understand that the additions to the laboratory will shortly be made and that the erection of a hostel for the students only awaits the acquisition of the site which has already been decided on. 13. In Bengal, Colonel F. Raymond has been relieved of the charge of the Provincial Department and appointed Principal of the Bengal Veterinary College and is in charge of the administration of the Glanders and Farcy Act in Calcutta, Howrah, Alipore and the 24 Parganas. This is a move in the right direction. The results of the year's work are good, 38 out of 51 students passed the first year's, 37 out of 48 the second, and 25 out of 29 the final year's test. 5,144 cases were treated in hospital, and Rs. 16,392-7-6 realized as fees for treatment. No new work of improvement was carried out during the year for want of funds, but His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor was pleased to signify his intention to sanction, if funds became available, a reappropriation for the conversion of the Assistant Principal's quarters into a hospital for students. 14. This College now trains men for Bengal, Eastern Bengal and Assam and Burma and some for the eastern districts of the United Provinces 15. Bombay.4 17. In regard to hospital improvements Mr. Framji Bomanji Jeejibhoy has given a donation of Rs. 3,000 for a colic box and the work is in hand. The hospital authorities have built a new road in their compound adjoining the road of the new Veterinary College. The question of building an operating theatre has been again referred to Government for a fresh plan and estimate to be prepared by the Executive Engineer, Presidency. Steps have been taken to place the library on a proper footing. 18. Madras.5 28. The demand for Bengal and Madras graduates is good, only 6 men at the former and 3 at the latter being unemployed, but 10 Bombay men have not succeeded in finding employment. 29. The number of matriculates who joined the Colleges has considerably decreased this year, Bengal has again dropped to 3, Madras to 7, Bombay main- tains its average, 16 out of 43, while the Punjab which is a Vernacular College shows a slight improvement, i.e., 10 against 7 last year. 30. In addition to the training of Veterinary Assistants, classes for transport drivers were held and 62 men were trained at the Punjab College, 4 in Bengal, and 17 in Bombay. 31. Sixteen nalbands were under training at the Punjab College and of these 9 passed the farriers examination. Two men were trained as nalbands in the Bengal College. 32. I am very glad to be able to report that more use has been made generally of the laboratories at the various Colleges where they exist, and that although we have been unable to carry out the recommendation of the Advisory Com- mittee of the Royal Society to post a qualified Pathologist at each college laboratory, a good deal has been done with the staff at our command. Arrange- ments have been made at the request of the Quarter Master General in India for assistance to be given to Army Veterinary Officers by the examination of material submitted by them for diagnostic purposes and advantage has been taken of this. Arrangements are also being made generally for the submission of material from Provincial Veterinary Assistants for the same purpose. In addition to the examination of specimens for diagnostic purposes and the prac- tical demonstration of the various contagious diseases occurring in the country, arrangements have now been made for the teaching of the theory and practice of rinderpest and other inoculation work so as to save the trouble and expense of sending men to the Bacteriological laboratory at Muktesar. This has, so far, only been found possible in the Punjab and Bengal Colleges where facilities exist Bombay has no conveniences for the purpose and neither has Madras. It is hoped, however, that this will shortly be remedied. 33. In the Punjab College contagious ward the work being done is as follows:6 are no funds available for the purpose, it has been found impossible to publish it entire, but the more important and interesting portions of it will appear in the pages of the Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science. The work done comprises:1 with all cases of contagious disease amongst equines occurring in the districts selected for horse-breeding under their Department, and we have no record of them. 46. The same remarks as were made last year regarding their accuracy, apply equally this year. The figures relate only to cases which have been brough tto the notice of the staff, and do not in any way represent the total mortality from contagious disease in our districts. 47. Glanders.8 59. In the United Provinces two cases of Glanders were detected on the Naini Tal-Kathgodam dâk line. They were destroyed and the usual precau- tions to prevent spread adopted. 60. In the Madras Presidency two cases are reported but no further infor- mation is given. 61. Surra.9 and one in Madras. In regard to the former it is stated that they were reported from the Thanas and were not seen by any one having any acquain- tance with veterinary matters. The same is true of the case reported from Madras. It is practically certain that no cases of Dourine actually occurred in either district and I think we may safely say that Dourine has ceased to exist in the country and that we may congratulate ourselves on the efficient measures which were adopted to stamp out the disease. 72. The Dourine Bill is still under consideration and will be proceeded with so as to ensure proper powers of dealing with the disease should it reappear in the country. 73. Epizootic lymphangitis.10 84. The Pegu Division had practically no disease; the few isolated out- breaks which did occur being promptly attended to and inoculation carried out as far as possible. 85. The Irrawaddy Division has also been very free from disease. At the close of last year it existed in a mild form in Bassein but was kept under control by the strenuous efforts of the local staff; the total mortality being only 294. 86. In the Tenasserim Division, Rinderpest continued with some severity in the Amherst district during the early part of the year, but it gradually abated and died out in October. The people in this district are reported to have been extremely careless and quite indifferent to any arrangements made for the pro- tection of their stock. 87. Upper Burma.11 Ferozepore: in the remaining districts the outbreaks are reported to have been small, and the mortality insignificant. 97. Contact animals were inoculated in 270 outbreaks and 60,258 cattle were treated. In one case there were 567 deaths after inoculation out of 12,671 animals, or 4.5%, but investigation shows that these were due to inter-current disease. 98. Opposition to preventive inoculation work is reported to be still met with in out-of-the-way places. The Superintendent, however, considers that this will decline to a minimum as the method is usually attended by most successful results and is uniformly appreciated. 99. Eastern Bengal and Assam.12 ignorance of and prejudices against inoculation, pamphlets are being issued. As a matter of fact the conditions existing in the Bombay Presidency are no more unfavourable for the extension of inoculation against Rinderpest than those which exist in many other parts of India. The Director does not seem to realize that better results have been obtained in some Native States, where prejudices are surely as deep rooted. No attempt whatever, worthy of the name has so far been made to deal with the serious animal plagues which exist in the Presidency. There are 35 Veterinary Assistants employed of which 33 are engaged in Dispensary work under local bodies. There are obviously too few men to attempt to cope with outbreaks of Rinderpest, and there has been so far absolutely no organisation whatever. It is hopeless to expect to make any headway in these circumstances, and the amount of success achieved is not less than might have been expected. 107. It is reported that 41 outbreaks were attended to, and 7,009 cattle were inoculated. 108. Anthrax.13 disease ranks next in importance to Rinderpest. It is satisfactory to note there- fore that a contribution to the study of the malady has been made by Mr. Gaiger of the Punjab Veterinary College which is being published in the Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science. Nothing definite regarding the manner of spread in the field has been discovered, but it appears pretty certain that the virus is not taken in through the digestive system but that it is a wound infection. 115. The Imperial Bacteriologist has also studied the disease from the point of view of obtaining a method of giving protection against it. He claims to have discovered a vaccine which will confer solid immunity up to at least three months, and this is as much as we can expect from a dead vaccine. The details of this work are published in his Memoir No. 1. The vaccine is now being issued for trial in the field. If it confer the immunity claimed, it will be of great use in the districts, for if used in young buffaloes during the rains it will carry them through the dangerous season and many will have a chance of get- ting the immunity which animals naturally acquire against this disease as they grow older. A vaccine which gives the immunity claimed for this one, is a great advance on anything we previously possessed, and the various Superinten- dents who so earnestly desire a means of protection should be glad to give it a fair trial. 116. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia is reported to have caused 34,124 deaths; the great majority of which occurred in the central inundated districts of the Punjab14 124. An outbreak of the disease occurred at the vaccine depôt at Belgaum but no details are given as to mortality, &c. 125. Other contagious diseases.15 Frontier work for the 3 Corps which draw their men from north of the Salt Range and would set free a large number of camels to help to remount other corps and to check the increasing prices. &quot;(ii) That as the camel grazing country of the Punjab is by extension of canals in certain districts, becoming so limited, and as this is acting so injuriously to the health of camels in the plains, sacrifices should be made in the healthier districts in which sufficient grazing is available, so that corps camels may remain in safety from Surra during the dangerous season; this would cause a greatly decreased death-rate in the camels, and relieve the strain on the camel supply. These sacrifices would be the opening of some of the rakhs in and to the north of the Salt range which have been closed for years to camel browsing. The closure of these rakhs has resulted in a great decrease in the breeding and supply of hill camels from healthy districts, and an enhanced price. It is a matter of great urgency. &quot;(iii) That where military requirements will allow it, the rest period of the corps camels should be adjusted so as to cover more fully the worst part of the Surra season, which in the Punjab is the rains and the following six weeks. In some corps the rest period begins on 1st June and ends on 31st August, and in these cases, from the Surra standpoint it would be much better if the rest period were made to begin about 30 days later. &quot;(iv) The Surra season will even then slightly overlap the rest period. As far as possible no concentrations or parades of camels should therefore be made which would cause them to march through irrigated or riverine areas or the foot-hills of the Himalayas before the 15th of October. If movements are necessary before that date, double marches are desirable through extensive irrigated districts, or night marching across narrow belts of irrigation (such as occur in Shahpur or Lahore districts) or (where possible) across belts of land subject to inundation from rivers and nullahs (such as the Deg Nullah); the camps should be made on high- lying land well away (1/2 mile) from standing water but protected from cold wind and in the foot-hills it would besafer, before about 15th October, to give rations than to send out to graze, provided the camping ground is well chosen. (These rations however should include a full missa bhusa ration.) &quot;(v) In May and June before the true &quot;Surra season&quot; a fair number of Tabanus are to be found in some Surra zones where there is a constant supply of standing water; the worst instances of this are to be found here and there in the foot-hills below the Himalayas, and certain localities on the North-West Frontier. In a corps containing much surra, these flies may spread infection and cause new cases and precautions similar to those given in paragraph (iv) are advisable when working camels there, for as a rule it is impracticable to avoid these zones in May and June. &quot;(vi) The examination of the blood of camels for surra should be part of the routine of a camel corps. The best time theoretically for this routine would be the rainy season; but owing to the condi- tions this is as a rule hardly practicable. The next best time is at the inspections at the end of the rest period; at this time every camel (in those corps which have a high mortality) should have its blood examined irrespective of its condition or temperature; most of the cases are of a few months or weeks duration and are showing trypanosomes pretty often. There is not the same ease in picking out cases after the end of the year because as the surra cases get older they do not show trypanosomes so often.
16 &quot;This routine should be as far as possible repeated at inspections throughout the year. In these routine examinations, two things are of vital importance:17 in this country. It is hoped that sanction may soon be obtained for the erection of the necessary buildings at Sohawa, so that work may make more rapid progress. The dog. 138. Rabies.18 that the disease was contracted, in the first instance, by a jackal which had eaten an animal dead of surra, and had been subsequently pulled down by the hounds and eaten by them. Both fleas and lice were found on the affected animals and as these insects have been conclusively proved to be capable of transmitting surra from dog to dog, rat to rat, and rat to dog, it seems highly probable that they spread it amongst these hounds, every one of which con- tracted the disease and died from it. 145. Musgrave and Clegg's experiments regarding the transmission of the disease by fleas, were carefully conducted and all sources of error were eliminated. They placed dogs in an area covered by sand and protected from insects by screens: a dog proved to be free from surra by animal experiment was separated from a surra dog by means of a screen to prevent them from touching each other, but at the same time allowing free passage to fleas. The healthy dog developed the disease on the 6th day. The experiment was repeated a number of times with positive results. All animals were then removed from the flea infected area and only healthy ones introduced after periods varying from 24 hours to 4 weeks. Although the fleas in the sand remained quite plentiful no infection occurred. It seems improbable therefore that the transmission is other than mechanical; there certainly being no evidence of distant transmission or of a life cycle in the flea. The Fowl. 146. Fowls.19 years for this purpose, and I think that both the Director and Major Walker have every reason to congratulate themselves on the results, as the institutions are generally appreciated by the people and are indeed a very great success in every way. 153. In the United Provinces, 5 Dispensaries have been opened; Agra, Farrukhabad, Fatehpur, Ballia and Azamgarh; and others are to be started at Moradabad, Bareilly, Meerut and Saharanpur. This province, where the inferior institutions provided are doing excellent work, is greatly hampered by the lack of funds, but it is hoped that in the near future a substantial portion of the special grant may be set aside for the purpose of building a well equipped hospital on the standard plan at each head-quarters of a district. It has been abundantly demonstrated that where properly controlled and in the charge of capable Veterinary Assistants the educative effect of these institutions is very great indeed, and they have a very good effect in inducing the people to report outbreaks of contagious disease and have them dealt with by proper methods. There can now be no doubt whatever that the people of the United Provinces thoroughly recognise the benefits derived from the Veterinary Department and that they are anxious to have the operations of the Department extended. The great drawback is that the local bodies have not the funds at their dis- posal to erect really good and well equipped hospitals. 154. In the North-West Frontier Province a new hospital was opened at Abbottabad and a Dispensary at Hangu. 155. In the Central Provinces the buildings for the Nagpur hospital were completed and occupied. 156. In Bengal two new dispensaries were opened at Chapra and Bhagal- pur, and the one at Khulna was closed. Proposals were made by the Chairmen of the District Boards of Hooghly and Champaran and Sub-Divisional Officer at Bettiah for dispensaries. 157. In Madras six new hospitals were opened, i.e., one each in Cocanada, Rajamandry, Trichur, Ellore, Tirrivannamalai and Tanjore. There has been an increase in the number of animals attending, which has this year averaged 2,348 per hospital, and the Superintendent thinks that they are becoming more widely recognised and popular. 158. In Bombay 4 new dispensaries were opened during the year; two in the Satara district, and one each in the Thana and Kanara districts. The build- ings of the new City dispensary in Poona have been completed and this has been greatly assisted by the liberality of Rao Bahadur Shet Ram Narayan Amarchand, who contributed Rs. 12,000 towards the cost of the buildings: a fact which rather indicates that these institutions are appreciated by the people. The average of cases treated is over 2,266 per dis- pensary, and as some of them have been recently started, and the Veterinary Assistants in charge do other work, the number is satisfactory. A large proportion of the animals treated are the property of cultivators and the cultivating classes generally are reported to be availing themselves of the benefits of these institutions more and more from year to year. The Superin- tendent remarks that &quot;the general utility of the dispensaries has been recognised by Government for some years past and their growing popularity tends to show that they are appreciated by the people. In addition to their ordinary function of providing treatment, they act as centres from which a correct knowledge of the care and rational treatment of live stock can be spread. The educative side of the dispensary is often overlooked.&quot; I can only say that in other Provinces where dispensaries are numerous they have been eminently successful in this direction, and have brought the existence of the Veterinary Department to the notice of the people. I consider that they are absolutely necessary to bring the Veterinary Assistants in touch with the people. One or two Veterinary Assistants in a district with no hospital or any other visible sign of their existence are not likely to get much in touch with the hundreds of thousands of inhabitants spread over a large area; whereas the provision of a good hospital immediately attracts attention and is a subject of conversa- tion in the surrounding country.
20 Thus hospitals in the tahsil towns are a very valuable means of spreading knowlege amongst the people. 159. Table VI shows the receipts and expenditure on Veterinary hospitals during the year. In some provinces fees are levied on Income-tax payers, cultivators' animals being treated free of charge. The fees are very small. In the Punjab the income from this source has risen from Rs. 7,198 last year to 12,444 this year. The Veterinary hospital at Simla shows a small profit to be credtied to Provincial funds after paying the salary of the Veterinary Assistant and the interest on the capital cost of the buildings. III.-BREEDING OPERATIONS. (1).-BOVINES. 160. Every endeavour has been made during the year to draw attention to the important subject of cattle breeding and in some provinces with a good deal of success. Serious consideration must be given to this matter if we are to avoid infinite trouble and inconvenience in the future. Notwithstanding the comfort which may be derived from the perusal of the census reports which generally tell a flattering tale, there can be no doubt whatever that there has been a serious decline in the breeding industry proper in most provinces on account of the decrease in grazing available, while on the other hand cultivation has greatly extended and the demand for plough bullocks has correspondingly increased. The extension of cultivation tends to destroy the cattle breeding industry. The growing of crops is generally a far more profitable occupation than is the breeding of cattle. When profitable cultivation is possible and grazing non-existent the cultivator does not want to be bothered with cows for breeding purposes as he finds it difficult enough to obtain a sufficient amount of fodder to feed his plough cattle. Stall feeding is far too expensive a business to allow of his breeding nor are the conditions suitable for the industry. If wealthy enough he will keep a cow buffalo in preference to a cow for milch purposes because it will give double the amount of milk from which he can obtain double the yield of ghee. In highly cultivated tracts therefore it is the general rule to find good bul- locks but not many cows worth anything for breeding purposes. The ideas held by some people that much good would be done in such tracts by inducing the cultivators to set aside cultivated land from which they are now deriving a good income, as grazing grounds and inducing the people to grow fodder crops for breeding stock is purely Utopian at the present time and not in any way a practical suggestion. It is far more likely and indeed occurs far more frequently for the grazier to become a cultivator than for a cultivator to become a grazier. There do exist districts in which cultivation has not so far extended as to entirely destroy all the grazing grounds and in such places a certain amount of breeding does go on and could be en- couraged. Our present efforts should be devoted so far as possible to better- ing the condition of the grazier, to preserving, so far as may be, existing grazing grounds, assisting the smaller graziers who have partially taken the place of the older breeders by providing them with really good well bred bulls for their herds. It will be found that in the highly cultivated tracts the majority of the cattle are purchased from outside and at present this outside supply must be fostered and encouraged. 161. Much good may be accomplished by encouraging breeders by the supply of good bulls in such tracts in cultivated districts as contain grazing. It is very evident to the most superficial observer that many of our best breeds of Indian cattle are deteriorating or in some cases absolutely dying out and that their places are being taken by inferior cattle. It is our obvious duty to preserve good bulls of such breeds in Government Farms. What is more necessary than anything as a beginning is to carry out the instructions contained in the Department of Revenue and Agriculture Circular No. 3021 survey of the country made in regard to its suitability or otherwise for cattle breeding. This survey of the breeding industry or survey of cattle is the first step to be taken. Whenever the question is discussed amongst those officials who are supposed to direct such work the chief thing that strikes one is the appalling ignorance which exists on this subject of the supply of and demand for agricultural cattle and of the breeding industry generally. As a matter of fact until such knowledge is forthcoming it is impossible to know what can be done. The Government of India have fully realized the necessity for this survey and it is for local Governments to take measures to get it carried out. Cattle breeding is one of the duties which is supposed to be dealt with by this Department but we have no staff and local Governments have so far taken no measures to provide any. Much can be done to improve matters and the conferences which it is proposed to hold on the subject in the United and Central Provinces will have a good effect; the only drawback to them will probably be the lack of collected information from each district which should form the basis of the deliberations. There can be no doubt whatever that if Provincial Governments take up this matter seriously much can be done to save the situation and to postpone the unhappy day when more serious deterioration has taken place, good bulls and cows have further decreased in numbers and when the supply will have become too small for the requirements of the cultivator in plough bullocks and when it will become imperative for breeding to be carried on with stall fed cows. Under present conditions good cattle are becoming scarce and the prices of such animals are increasing by leaps and bounds. All cattle are rapidly rising in value and the quality generally is deteriorating. What the price of good plough bullocks would be in the circumstances so complacently looked forward to by those who talk of land coming back from cultivation to grazing as a more profitable pursuit or of breeding from stall fed cows for which fodder has to be grown, may be easily imagined. There are of course tracts where cultivation yields so uncertain a profit that grazing might do as well but the land must be practically useless also as grazing land. This Department, excepting in so far as it is nominally responsible for cattle breeding, has no complaint whatever against the rise in value of agri- cultural stock because the scarcer and more expensive they become the greater will be the demand for our services to prevent them being carried off by plagues or to treat them for ordinary ailments. This appreciation of the services rendered is already growing rapidly and is greater than seems to be generally recognised. Conferences on the subject of cattle breeding cannot fail to be of service in every province. District Committees of men qualified to give valuable advice on the subject might well be formed and the question carefully studied. Such Committees will be in a good position to advise the Pro- vincial Officers as to what if anything can be done to improve cattle breeding. Wealthy Zamindars should be encouraged to maintain herds of the best local cattle. Courts of Wards, Jails, Agricultural Farms, Agricultural Colleges, etc., should all maintain good herds and act as distributing centres. Whilst district farms in suitable areas should be inaugurated. Stud bulls and their produce. 162. Table VIII gives the number of stud bulls, the property of Government and of local boards during the year. The information given under this head is in some cases very meagre and there are probably many more such bulls employed than are shown in the table. There is still a small but steady increase in number but it is somewhat insignificant, i. e., 38 Government bulls against 30 and 536 Local Board bulls, against 458, last year; of these no lessthan 437 are in the Punjab and 40 in the United Provinces, the numbers in the re- mainder of the provinces being very small. The Punjab has a declared policy and in pursuance of it 117 bulls were obtained during the year22 &quot;seeing that stud bulls are properly looked after are purely a district concern. &quot;This Department has laid down general principles but local conditions vary &quot;and the subject should be very interesting to rural members. Inilocalities. &quot;where bulls are appreciated and used intelligently the young stock show &quot;signs of great improvement since selected bulls have been more liberally &quot;supplied. With the rise of prices of bullocks cattle breeding on intelligent &quot;lines requires to be fostered by local interest.&quot; Local committees in other words would be best entrusted with this: duty. 164. In the United Provinces the same lack of funds for advancing Veteri- nary work stands in the way of much improvement being effected in the supply of bulls and although some of the district boards are now becoming alive to the necessity of doing something towards improving the class of cattle in their districts and bulls are wanted, they cannot afford to buy them. No doubt the forthcoming conference will help to put matters on a more satisfactory footing in this respect. Most of the bulls are at present the property of Court of Wards estates where interest is being shown in the question of cattle im- provement. 165. In the Central Provinces a great deal of attention has been given to the subject especially in the eastern part of the province where the cattle are extremely poor and badly cared for. A special report has been made to the Hon'ble the Chief Commissioner. As the question is of the utmost importance from an agricultural point of view, it is hoped that the. enquiry may result in some improvement in the present deplorable condition of the working cattle of the province. 166. In Bengal there have been many demands for bulls from various public bodies and private persons but only ten could be distributed. The question of providing strong, well made, low sized desi bulls for the improvement of stock is receiving attention and provision has been made in next year's budget for the purchase of young bull calves. The want of bulls in most parts of the province, especially in Muzaffarpur, Champaran, Dur- bhanga, Purnea and Shahabad, where good cattle are reared is very keenly felt; wherever the farm bred bulls have been sent the ryots have appreciated them. Arrangements are being made by this Department to purchase some Delhi buffaloes for the Hathwa Raj with a view to improving the milking capacity of the local breed. 167. In Eastern Bengal and Assam a good type of Brahmini bull has been obtained for Dacca, Bakarganj. Rangpur, Cachar and Sylhet. Two Patna bulls have been bought for the Khasi and Jaintia Hills. 168 In Madras eight Nellore bulls were purchased at the Ongole fair, bulls of this breed are now distributed to the districts of Tinnevelly, Madura, Madras, Guntur and Vizagapatam. This breed commands a ready sale to purchasers from foreign countries and this year breeders disposed of no less than 472 head to purchasers from the Philliphines, Java and Brazil at high prices. It is estimated that Rs. 60,000 changed hands on this deal alone. It is hoped that every encouragement may be given to breeders in this tract and that the foolishness of selling the best of their cows may be forcibly impressed on them. The ready market and good prices obtained should stimulate cattle breeding in the Nellore district but local prices will of course rise in sympathy. 169. In the North-West Frontier Province 4 bulls were purchased, 2 Dhanni bulls for Peshawar. 170. In Bombay there are no bulls belonging to Government but the Ahmed- abad district board has 8, Kaira 5, Surat 1, West Khandesh 1, and Ahmednagar 1. In addition to this, under the wise system introduced by Mr. Orr and continued by his successor Mr. McNeill, 87 bulls have been procured by this Department for the use of the people of the district. The system has proved very success- ful. The dearth of good stock bulls is becoming keenly felt in some districts and in a great number of cases inferior animals are being used. It is important
28 that measures should be taken in every district where breeding is possible, to improve and maintain the local breeds. Bull rearing and breeding Farms and Depots; 171. The main results of the working of the Provincial Cattle Farms are given in Table IX. 172. The largest and most important of these is the Northcote Cattle Farm at Chharodi which has continued under the supervision of this Department during the year, at the close of which the herd consisted of 5 stock bulls, 150 cows, 86 heifers, 30 heifer calves, 6 three years old bulls, 10 two years old bulls, 18 year- ling bulls and 22 bull calves. Seven stock bulls were sold. 47 bull calves and 48 heifer calves were dropped; a very good percentage. The farm as a bull breeding one is reported to be just beginning to get into thorough working order and in future years a steady and increasing supply of stock bulls will be available for issue, but at present the demand is greater than the supply. 173. The bull breeding farms and depôts in Bengal are situated at Pusa, Siripur and Kalimpong. At Pusa there are only 49 cows, 1 bull and 55 young stock. Three bulls were sent into the districts. The animals bred are report- ed to be disappointing in shape, and deficient in bone and substance notwith- standing that the cows and bull are good and the grazing and feeding in general are all that could be desired. It seems very probable that Pusa is no more suitable for cattle breeding than it has proved to be for horse breeding and rear- ing. The rejections from the young stock are many. The herd is under the management of the Imperial Agriculturist. The Inspector General of Agriculture has decided not to keep the herd after next year. Proposals with regard to the transfer of the herd to the Bengal Government are under consi- deration. 174. Siripur Farm.24 breeding animals, as they lamentably fail in observing changes of condition and health in them. They cannot in fact be trained in Zootechny in this country as the means do not exist at present. It is expected that cattle breeding will be transferred to the control of the Superintendent of this Department in the near future and that Veterinary Assistants trained at our Imperial farm at Hissar will be utilized. 181. In the United Provinces steps are being taken to acquire the land for a bull rearing farm it is proposed to establish as an experimental measure at Kheri. The smaller graziers here badly require assistance in procuring good herd bulls and the people are very hopeful of the success of this venture. Good mature bulls are very difficult to obtain in the open market and unless some definite and progressive policy be adopted it will soon be impossible to obtain suitable bulls for the small graziers in Kheri or for other parts of the province. 182. In the Punjab the scheme for a bull farm in the Jhelum colony has not progressed owing to the difficulty experienced in obtaining the necessary grazing rights. If sufficient grazing cannot be obtained the scheme will probably have to be dropped. The Punjab has the advantage of being able to obtain bulls suitable for many of the districts from the Imperial Farm at Hissar. Sheep breed- ing. 183. One has only to read the remarks in the daily papers and in the reports of the Forest Department to realize that the improvement of the wool bearing capacity of the hill sheep is becoming an absolute necessity. It was recently stated that the increase in the size and number of the flocks of sheep which are grazed for part of the year in the lower hills is a cause of anxiety. Whole hill sides are being denuded of forest growth and in Kangra the shepherds have had to leave their hereditary grazing grounds and go elsewhere in the winter. It is asked, is the surplus capacity of the forest areas to be used for the produc- tion of wool or of timber. The view of the Local Government is that hill forests must be protected even if this implies putting a limit to the increase of flocks kept for pastoral purposes. In short the sheep will decrease. In these circum- stances it is well that operations have been begun on a small scale in the Punjab and North-West Frontier Province to improve the quality as well as the yield of wool of the short tailed Gaddi sheep. A few merinos have been imported into the Hazara district and the Tochi Agency. There are altogether 17 Merino rams present, 12 in Hazara, 1 in the Tochi Agency and 4 in Dera Ismail Khan. Their services are appreciated. In order to obtain any real benefit from the operations, numbers of these sheep are required and a constant supply must be maintained so as to gradually grade up the local sheep. A number of New Zealand Alp rams are being imported for the Kangra district and are expected to arrive shortly. 184. None of the other provinces report anything regarding sheep breed- ing. It offers a great field for enterprise. Camel breed- ing. 185. The question of camel breeding in the Punjab has received a good deal of attention. The breaking up of the areas in which camel breed- ing has flourished is practically killing the industry so far as the supply of military camels is concerned. It may not perhaps be realized that the canal scheme in the Multan district will destroy the only remaining camel breeding area of any size between the Indus and the Sutlej. It is no matter for surprise, therefore, that good camels suitable for military transport purposes are becoming very scarce, high priced, and difficult to obtain. The various schemes which have been made, such as endeavouring to breed camels on canal tracts were doomed to failure and nothing now remains, if the camel is to exist, but to provide grazing in suitable surra free areas. The grazing lands of the Punjab are being surveyed in this connection and proposals have been made to open certain surra free grazing areas for breeding purposes in the Punjab. (2)-EQUINES (UNDER LOCAL BODIES). Horse, pony and donkey stallions. 186. The number of horse, pony and donkey stallions present at the begin- ning of the year is shown in Table X. There were 64 horses, 102 ponies and 99 donkeys against 59 horses, 112 ponies and 65 donkeys in the previous year.
25 187. They were distributed as follows:26 198. The prizes which are given at fairs perhaps excite some local interest and as well managed fairs produce a very large income to the districts it is well that a small amount in prizes should be distributed to cattle owners. Shows, if held in convenient places in good cattle breeding centres may excite some interest and they are undoubtedly a great success in some places. It is a matter for Local Governments to decide what is best to be done in regard to shows. Fairs will take care of themselves. IV.-SUBORDINATE ESTABLISHMENT. Numbers, su- pervision and work per- formed. 199. Table VII gives the strength of the subordinate establishments as they stood at the end of the year. All the services are now Provincial except that of the United Provinces. Bombay has only just arranged to organize the Subordinate Department and it is hoped that some improvement may be possi- ble when the scheme is developed and gets into working order. The develop- ment of the subordinate establishment is much hindered in the United Provinces for lack of funds and the Superintendent remarks in this connection that:27 Province. SANCTIONED SCALE. No. EMPLOYED DURING 1908-09 INCREASE DURING 1908-09. REMARKS Deputy Superintendents. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Dressers. Deputy Superintendents. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Dressers. Deputy Superintendents. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Dressers. Punjab ... ... ... 24 170 ... ... 12 127 ... ... ... 11 ... North-West Frontier. Pro- vince. ... 2 26 ... ... 2 26 ... ... ... 6 ... United Provinces ... 2 20 210 ... ... 9 100 ... ... ... 4 ... Bengal ... ... 9 30 229 ... ... 6 56 ... ... ... 6 ... Bombay ... ... 4 24 215 ... ... 1 34 ... ... 1 2 ... Madras ... ... 3 15 132 ... ... 2 47 ... ... 1 20 ... Central Provinces and Berar. ... 8 120 ... ... 6 75 ... ... ... 10 ... Burma ... ... 5 12 120 ... ... 10 107 ... ... ... 17 ... Eastern Bengal and Assam. 2 8 120 ... ... 2 33 ... ... ... 8 ... Sind, Baluchistan and Raj- putana. ... ... 2 ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... 2 ... Imperial. Government Cattle Farm, Hissar. 1 ... 2 ... 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... Bacteriological Laboratory. ... 2 ... 10 ... 2 ... 10 ... ... ... ... Veterinary Officer Investi- gating. Camel Diseases. ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 ... Total ... 26 145 1,348 10 1 52 620 10 ... 2 87 ...
28 PART B.-IMPERIAL ADMINISTRATION. BACTERIOLOGICAL LABORATORY. 204. Captain J. D. E. Holmes, M.A., D. Sc., was in charge of the labo- ratory and Mr H. E. Cross held the office of Assistant Bacteriologist. 205. The appointment of a Physiological Chemist in the place of the second Assistant Bacteriologist was sanctioned and after some delay Dr. Hartley, D. Sc., (London) was selected for the appointment but did not join until the end of the year. Mr. R. Branford was attached to the laboratory. Mr. Kriebel, Head Laboratory Assistant returned from leave in September and the second and third Laboratory Assistants, Messrs. Keiller and Goffi, remained in their respective posts. PREPARATION OF SERA. Rinderpest Anti-Serum. 206. During the year under report 545,974 doses have been prepared against 482,833 doses during the previous year. The serum issued amounted to 627,349 doses as against 440,585 doses or 186,764 doses in excess of the previous year. 207. The results of the Anti-Serum injections carried out in the field and collated from the respective returns received in this office are as follows:29 208. Every endeavour was made to prepare as large an amount of this serum, as possible. The work however was much impeded by continual out- breaks of Foot and Mouth disease, which was prevalent among cattle in the hills throughout the whole year and was introduced into Muktesar almost every month by newly arrived batches of bulls. The segregation of all fresh batches of bulls, the treatment of affected animals and the carrying out of precautions against the introduction of the disease into the laboratory sheds, has greatly increased the work of the Veterinary staff. 209. A proposal was submitted by the Imperial Bacteriologist to erect more kraals for the accommodation of the sanctioned reserve of hill bulls and the Executive Engineer was asked to prepare plans and estimates for the same in consultation with him, but so far no action has been taken in the matter. 210. The Imperial Bacteriologist reports scarcity of water during the months March to June and recommendations have been made by the Executive Engineer to ensure better control over the expenditure in private houses, etc. 211. The demand for anti-Rinderpest serum was greater by 186,764 doses than that of last year and the number of doses issued amounted to 81,375 more than manufactured. As was stated in the last Annual Report the labo- ratory is working close in the limit of what can be produced. 212. There is no doubt that each year will continue to show a large increase in the demand for this serum. The Ceylon Government and the Native States of Mysore, Coorg, Travancore, Cochin, Junagadh, Dhar, Baroda, Alwar, Kotah, Bharatpur and Nagod desire to be supplied with it. With the increase of the demand in British territory we shall be reluctantly obliged to withdraw the supply for abroad and Native States. 213. Anti-Rinderpest serum is reported to have been successful in curtail- ing outbreaks and preventing heavy loss among cattle and the popularity it has attained is entirely on its merits. 214. A number of experiments were conducted to ascertain the length of immunity resulting from varying doses of serum and also the effect of exposure to natural infection following the injection of seram. The results appear to show that the passive immunity afforded by large doses of serum is of a few weeks duration, but that when exposed to natural infection during this period animals contract a mild form of the disease without necessarily showing any clinical symptoms, and an active and durable protection follows. 215. Experiments have been carried out by the Imperial Bacteriologist with a view to discovering other methods of immunizing and of preparing serum, but no results of any importance have as yet been arrived at. The use of peritoneal washings as carried out in the Philippines is being tried. It saves 50 per cent in cost of the serum and the experiments so far made are promising. ANTHRAX ANTI-SERUM. 216. Twenty-nine thousand seven hundred and eighty-six doses of this serum were prepared as against 16,091 doses and 30,933 doses were issued against 38,772 doses during the previous year.
30 217. The following table shows the result of injections carried out in the field with Anti Anthrax serum:31 222. The serum was also used in an outbreak of Anthrax among the Poona Horse. The return furnished by the Veterinary Officer shows that from January to May 1908, 74 horses and mules had been attacked. On 21st May inoculations with the serum were commenced and continued up to July. From the former date, four cases occurred in June among the non-inoculated, and among the inoculated three were attacked more than three weeks after the serum injection. No further cases were recorded. HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. 223. The preparation of anti-serum or vaccine of high protective power was under investigation. A serum has been prepared which in doses of 5 to 10 c. c. affords complete protection against the inoculated virus for a period of six weeks, also a dead vaccine which protects for a period of two to three months. These products are under trial as to their suitability for field opera- tions. The serum is not likely to be of much use but the vaccine may be, if used during the rains in villages where the disease is enzootic. 5,140 doses of the new vaccine were prepared and 3,500 doses issued on trial. 224. The following statement shows the results of injections carried out in the field both with the old Anti-Serum and vaccines:32 statement collated from the returns shows results in the field. They have proved very successful:38 234. During the year 1908-09 the following doses of sera were prepared and issued from the Muktesar Laboratory:34 235. Research.35 241. Anthrax.36 254. Every endeavour has been made to improve the property by making pakka roads cleaning and levelling fields and tree-planting; a pakka road has been made through the Mundiawala block and another to the Chowni stock yards whilst the roads and fields have been raised and levelled in the latter. All masonry outlets of water-courses have been put in order. 255. The important question of tree-planting has received as much attention as possible. Nurseries have been established in the Mundiawala, Chowni and Sully blocks and over 700 young trees have been planted along the roads and water-courses. It is hoped that during the coming year 1,000 more may be transplanted. 256. Better accommodation is being provided for the sheep by utilizing some old disused stock yards, fencing off runs and putting them in order. 257. The Dutch Barns which were useless at Sully have been moved to the Home Farm and used to roof over the Machinery so protecting it from the weather. 258. Thanks to the favourable rains, there was good grazing in the bir and the stock remained in excellent condition during the year. The barani crops were also very good. It would have been easy enough to collect a lakh of maunds of first class reserve hay if circumstances had allowed of this being done. Unfortunately however the good rains did not prove to be an unmixed blessing. Fever was exceedingly rife amongst the people, the farmers' crops were excellent and labor already very scarce, commanded very high wages, as much as a rupee a day and two meals being paid by ordinary farmers during the harvest. Instead therefore of being able to take on extra labour from outside nearly half our ploughmen and gwalas absconded and in order to retain the remainder we had to pay batta. We could not, however, obtain sufficient labour at any price as it was not available. We had therefore to content ourselves with making about 30,000 maunds of good hay in addition to getting in our cultivated crops. Mr. Burke, who was in charge at this time, worked exceedingly hard and the results are due to his energy. 259. A good deal of damage was caused to the bir by fires due to sparks from passing engines. Several occurred during the year, one destroying over three miles of good grazing and a stack of hay, whilst considerable difficulty was experienced in preventing further loss. These fires are a source of constant anxiety and representations have been made to Government with a view to having spark arrestors placed on the engines. Nine stacks of old hay, in which but little nourishment remains, have been struck off and will be used as bedding grass. 260. During the earlier months of the year a good deal of loss was caused by Charbon Symptomatique in the young stock and it was eventually decided to inoculate all the young animals against this disease. A single vaccine, Black- legoids, was selected for the purpose and to Mr. Burke fell the unenviable task of carrying out the inoculation: considering that the cattle are practically wild it is very creditable to him that he carried out the work with only one casualty. The results have been satisfactory, only one death having so far occurred from the disease since the inoculation was done last August. All calves are now inoculated against Blackleg when they are branded and no deaths have occurred. 261. One small outbreak of Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia occurred but was stamped out with the loss of only 41 animals. 262. We were unfortunate enough to get an outbreak of contagious Pneu- monia amongst the donkey breeding stock which was promptly dealt with by segregation but we lost 13 donkeys from the disease before it could be got under. 263. Foot and Mouth disease also gave a certain amount of trouble but did not cause any mortality. 264. Open as the Farm is to the attacks of contagious disease, constant watchfulness is necessary to prevent an epidemic by adopting prompt measures
37 to prevent spread and the Veterinary establishment is to be congratulated on their success in this direction. 265. Breeding herd38 mares is steadily improving owing to farm bred fillies being added. Sanction has been received to gradually increase the number of mares to 100 by the addition of farm bred fillies. There were 34 births during the year, 17 colts and 17 fillies, a very fair percentage. The system of turning loose a jack with a num- ber of mares commenced in Colonel Morgan's time is still adopted with good results. 277. Donkey Colts.39 cultivation. The difficulties are very great, and the area dealt with, large. The water supply is uncertain, the surrounding land full of weeds, labour is scarce and wages are high. The heavy rains brought down a good many of our boundary walls which cost a good deal to repair. Eight miles of the Sully minor had to be practically redug, as it had completely silted up and the banks had been weakened by heavy rains and damaged by pig. 283. Machinery.40 290. The increasing demands on the College laboratories for teaching pur- poses and diagnostic work point to the necessity of increasing the number of Pathologists in the Colleges. This recommendation of the Advisory Committee I should be very glad indeed to carry out, but we have no Officers available for the purpose. Men are badly wanted in Bombay and Madras. 291. The subordinate Department is reported to have generally worked very well during the year. 292. Improvement is noticeable in the important duty of checking inocu- lation work, but the staff employed is very small and much remains to be done in this direction. 293. An important advance has been made by the Government of India having taken over the Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science as a Departmental publication. Sanction has also been given to the publication of two Memoirs in addition to that containing the research work carried out by the Imperial Bacteriologist. 294. I welcome the revival of the Indian Veterinary Journal (in Urdu) which has been produced by Captain Dawson in a quarterly form and is a very useful publication for the Urdu-speaking Veterinary Assistants, and I consider that the author deserves great credit for his enterprise. 295. I note that pamphlets on various subjects have been issued in certain Provinces with a view to instructing the natives. I may say that my own long experience of the country has not been generally favourable to this method of endeavouring to get at the people, and I think that, as a rule, it is a waste of time and money and I am not impressed with its importance or usefulness. There are many reasons which militate against its success. 296. Reports on the breeds of cattle have been prepared in Madras and the Central Provinces, and are being published. I have also reports on the cattle of Mysore and of Rajputana which it is proposed to publish when funds are available. 297. The collection of biting flies and ticks, which is such a very im- portant matter, is being carried out by this Department, the insects, as they are obtained, being forwarded to the Imperial Entomologist at Pusa. I understand that a great number of flies have been collected in various Pro- vinces but we have so far received no information whatever regarding them. The present arrangement is not by any means a good one. The intimate rela- tion which is recognised as existing between certain insects and the propaga- tion of diseases in animals, is well recognised. We want work done in this direction, but the existing staff at Pusa already have their hands full. We want the flies named, classified and described with life histories so far as pos- sible. We also require collections of named specimens in all our teaching institutions. I am hoping that some progress may be made in this direction in the near future and that the scientific results, including all observations and experiments, may be published from time to time in our Journal. The importance of this subject may be gathered from the fact that the Earl of Crewe has appointed a Scientific Committee of all the most eminent Ento- mologists in England, to arrange for an enquiry into it in Africa. I think it is time that the world knew that something is being done in this direction in India. 298. I have nothing but praise for the work done by the Imperial Veteri- nary staff during the year, and I think that they have reason to be satisfied with the results of their labours. H. T. PEASE, Colonel, SIMLA; Inspector General 15th October 1909. Civil Veterinary Department.
41 TABLE I. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during 1908-09. VETERINARY COLLEGES AND SCHOOLS. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. STUDENTS ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR, CLASSED BY PDUCA- TIONAL QUALIEI- CATIONS. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF STUDRNTS WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE THREE YEARS PRECRD- ING. REMARKS. ADMITTRD DURING THE YEAR. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final examination. REMAINING UNDER INSTRUCTION XT END OF YEAR. Scholarship-holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. Matriculated with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English. From fees. From other sources. Total. Salaries of Instructing Staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Government or Local Bodies. In service of other bodies or institutions. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. Rs. a. p. Rs. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. No. No. No. No. No. Bombay Vetorinary College ... 13 28 17 6 49 19 16 25 died, 1 left, 6 dismissed. 5,400 0 0 2,500 7,900 0 0 ... ... ... 56 (g) 15 22 9 10 (q) 3 are in temporary employment. Punjab Veterinary College Diploma or 3 years' course in Urdu. 12 55 69 40 231 (d) 21 10 30 27 8,184 0 0 6,039 14,223 0 0 47,604 0 0 30,285 0 0 77,889 0 0 (c) 183 176 13 ... ... Bengal ... .... 3 years' course in English. 38 16 25 4 75 17 3 51 ... No College-fee is charged students for instruc- tion Fine of students Rs. 48 48 0 0 38,445 8 3 2,900 5 8 41,345 14 11 78 67 ... 5 6 Madras Veterinary College ... 10 16 24 5 61 5 7 10 . 11,462 12 2 Nil ... 11,462 12 2 7,452 2 10 3,410 0 0 10,862 2 10 53 40 9 ... (f) 4 Burma ... ... Senior A ... (a) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Senior B ... (b) ... 25 3 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,191 0 0 11,438 0 0 15,829 0 0 24 21 ... ... ... Junior C ... (c) ... ... ... 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... ... 73 115 160 58 440 65 36 125 27 25,046 12 2 8,530 33,633 12 2 97,692 11 1 48,033 6 8 1,45,726 1 9 404 322 44 14 20 (a) Left. (b) 1 died, 1 removed as medically unfit. (c) 1 died, 1 left, 6 dismissed. (d) Those who were dismissed from the College after failure are excluded. This includes 3 men who were not allowed to appear in the examination owing to irregular attendance. (e) 4 are known as dead. (f) 1 minor remindar of Sivagiri and 3 died.
42 TABLE II. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1908-09. PROVINCE. EQUINES. POVINES. OTHERS. REMARKS. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and mouth disease. Hæmorrhagie septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and mouth. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. Rabies. Plague. Distemper. Surra. Pleuro-Pneumonia. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 United Provinces ... ... 2 ... ... ... (e)5 7 6,662 1,957 626 62 1,015 1.8 10,440 ... ... 30 ... ... (f)30 22 ... 3 .. ... 85 Punjab ... ... ... (g)33 5 163 ... 23 224 8,789 1,211 20,822 721 688 8,895 41,406 196 589 1,688 117 231 12,560 ... ... ... ... ... 14,781 Sind ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 4 1,734 2 8 ... ... 9 1,753 1 ... ... ... ... ... 54 ... 7 3 108 173 Rajputana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 356 ... ... 365 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 Bengal ... ... ... (h) 199 8 9 14 102 301 8,490 3,769 1,516 227 365 2,059 16,456 ... ... ... ... ... *40 ... ... 21 ... ... 61 * Tetanus. Bombay ... ... ... 27 ... 231 ... 4 261 4,825 157 2,660 444 238 71 8,395 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madras ... ... ... 2 (c)18 1 1 47 69 149,668 4,578 ... 4,708 12,511 41,988 216,451 ... ... ... ... ... 138 15 1 ... ... ... 154 Central Provinces ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Burma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (a ... 13,729 2,800 (b) (b)2,990 ... ... 19,519 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... Baluchistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (d)903 ... ... ... ... 27 930 North-West Frontier Province and North Punjab. 5 1 11 ... ... 17 403 107 422 226 19 ... 1,178 1 21 ... ... ... 120 ... ... ... ... ... 142 Eastern Bengal and Assam ... 21 36 70 ... 102 229 44,126 11,852 8,040 565 2,954 17,939 85,476 ... ... ... ... ... 3,878 ... ... ... ... ... 3,878 TOTAL ... 280 68 487 15 295 1,112 238,374 26,472 34,124 10,299 17,790 74,680 401,139 198 610 1,118 117 231 17,669 95 1 31 3 135 20,208 (a) There is no system of registration in force in Upper Burma. Military Police register 62 deaths, viz., Surra 60, anthrax 12. (b) These diseases are not differentiated by villagers or headmen, but are considered as different manifestation of anthrax and so are included under this heading. (c) Includes 2 cases in Madras Veterinary Hospital. (d) Small Pox 399, Mange 502, Kullag (Local name) 2. (e) Tetanus. (f) Fowl cholera 29, Tetanus 1. (g) The figures for equines relate only to non-selected districts, the Municipality of Lahore, and the Rawalpindi-Kohala Road, except where cases are treated in Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries in selected districts. (h) Not including 132 cases in the Sodepore Pinjrapole.
43 TABLE III. Showing results of preventive inoculation during the year 1908-09. Province. Name of disease against which in- cculation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which in- oculation was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNINOCULATED IN COURSE OF OUTBREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS. INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 United Provinces ... ... Rinderpest. Serum alone. 1,024 ... 5,198 2 ... 85,867 200 ... 63 ... (a) One outbreak and 2 recrudecen- ces of rinderpest. Punjab ... ... 270 ... 4,535 ... ... 60,258 ... ... 613 ... Sind ... ... ... (a) 68 68 1 ... 1,487 17 ... 2 ... Rajputana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madras ... ... ... 574 ... 18,996 80 ... 48,257 2,230 ... 64 ... Bengal ... ... ... 72 ... 1,954 ... ... 11,659 ... ... 115 ... Bombay ... ... 41 ... 611 ... ... 7,009 ... ... 136 ... Central Provinces ... ... 194 ... 2,515 ... ... 18,056 ... ... 5 ... North-West Frontier Province ... 13 ... 217 ... ... 4,380 ... ... ... ... Eastern Bengal and Assam ... 339 ... 7,673 121 ... 50,194 10 ... 144 ... Burma ... ... ... 35 ... 456 ... ... 2,336 ... ... 161 ... Total ... ... ... 2,582 ... 42,223 204 ... 289,503 2,457 ... 1,003 ... United Provinces ... ... Anthrax. Serum alone. 11 ... 59 ... ... 953 ... ... 2 ... Eastern Bengal and Assam 37 7 320 20 234 7,126 88 8 26 2 Madras ... ... ... 29 ...... 456 ... ... 2,353 ... ... ... ... Total ... 77 7 835 20 234 10481 88 8 28 2 United Provinces ... ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. ... 49 ... 225 ... ... 3,854 ... ... 35 ... Vaccine. Punjab ... ... 40 ... 380 ... ... 6,075 ... ... 13 ... Serum. Eastern Bengal and Assam ... ... 1 ... 73 ... ... 350 ... ... ... ... Madras ... ... ... 5 ... 47 ... ... 477 ... ... ... ... Vaccine. Total ... ... ... 95 ... 725 ... ... 10,756 ... ... 43 ... Punjab ... ... ... Hæm. Sept. Vac- cine. 2 ... ... ... ... 130 ... ... ... ... Punjab ... ... ... Black quarter. Vac- cine. 16 ... 40 ... ... 2,906 ... ... 1 ... North-West Frontier Province and North Punjab. Black- legoid. Vac- cine 24 ... ... ... ... 3,605 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... 42 ... 40 ... ... 6,341 ... ... 1 ... GRAND TOTAL ... ... ... 2,796 7 43,823 224 234 317,032 2,545 8 1,680 2
44 TABLE IV. Showing the number of animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during 1908-09. PROVINCE. Number of villages visited. Number of Veteri- nary Assistants employed. CASTRATIONS PER- FORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 United Provinces ... ... ... 14,778 69 198 87 21 306 112 32,912 986 34,010 6,526 11,859 2,002 20,387 54,703 Punjab ... ... 9,366 113 545 513 95 1,153 399 37,245 2,367 34,011 4,190 9,304 1,492 14,986 50,150 Sind ... ... ... ... 90 7 1 ... ... 1 ... 375 37 412 1, 22 420 479 2,021 2,434 Rajputana ... ... ... ... 345 3 ... 2 ... 2 ... 933 ... 933 64 223 59 346 1,281 Bengal ... ... ... ... 7,947 48 35 31 45 114 93 27,778 199 28,070 8,624 18,846 1,470 28,940 57,121 Eastern Bengal and Assam ... ... ... 6,382 35 48 166 52 26 670 39,163 643 40,476 4,317 17,328 1,625 23,270 64,012 Bombay ... ... ... ... 967 28 ... 10 5 15 7 7,465 247 7,719 691 7,180 378 8,249 15,983 Madras ... ... ... ... .. 31 42 234 ... 306 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 306 Central Provinces ... ... ... ... 5,537 20 7 17 10 34 18 17,176 1 17,195 816 11,320 258 12,394 24,623 Burma ... ... ... 17,752 (a)107 ... 1 ... 1 7 20,566 1 20,574 1,395 32,385 91 33,871 54,446 North-West Frontier Province ... ... 1,216 11 143 123 86 352 105 5,231 388 5,724 1,709 3,223 1,177 6,109 (b)12,185 TOTAL ... 64 880 472 1,019 1,217 314 2,550 1,411 182,844 4,869 189,124 29,454 112,088 9,031 150,573 342,247 (a) Includes two deaths, one drowned and one removed. (b) In addition to these 3,806 cases were treated by Inspectors and 457 by Assistants in Shan States.
45 TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1908-09. PROVINCE. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants em- ployed at Dispensaries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS TOTAL NUMBER OF IN AND OUT-PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expenditure. REMAINING ON 1ST APRIL. ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR. TOTAL. DISCHARGED DUR- ING THE YEAR. BALANCE ON 31ST MARCH. NUMBER TREATED DURING THE YEAR. AVERAGE DAILY ATTENDANCE. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovine Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. United Provinces ... 33 33 31 7 5 1,519 550 246 1,550 557 251 1,505 548 244 45 9 7 9,120 7,202 5,198 24.9 19.7 14.2 10,670 7,759 5,449 23,878 46,704 0 0 38,958 0 0 Punjab ... 86 86 102 62 28 2,675 1,361 449 2,777 1,423 477 2,728 1,402 461 49 21 16 45,259 72,608 22,424 ... ... ... 47,987 74,010 22,885 144,852 1,82,288 0 0 1,61,971 0 0 Sind ... 6 6 13 3 9 447 1,779 203 460 1,782 212 445 1,750 205 15 32 7 3,801 4,204 2,771 ... ... ... 4,261 6,986 2,983 13,230 41,028 8 6 24,828 2 11 Rajputana ... 2 3 ... (e) ... (e) ... (e) 45 22 38 45 22 38 43 22 37 2 ... 4 267 400 517 ... ... ... 312 422 555 1,289 4,908 10 3 1,559 10 2 Bengal ... 27 27 85 310 8 1,355 2,991 200 1,440 3,301 208 1,400 3,197 202 40 104 6 11,913 25,989 6,419 6 120 32 13,353 29,290 6,627 49,270 61,913 0 0 37,261 0 0 Eastern Bengal and Assam. 14 14 4 (b) 14 1 102 395 30 106 409 31 99 393 28 7 11 3 3,039 9,443 2,362 ... ... ... 3,145 9,852 2,393 16,390 20,822 0 7 18,989 15 8 Bombay ... 27 27 24 36 4 710 959 175 734 995 179 699 953 174 35 42 5 7,802 38,945 7,895 ... ... ... 8,536 39,940 8,074 56,550 64,660 5 7 60,136 1 2 Madras ... 16 20 74 56 148 1,314 1,029 997 1,388 1,085 1,145 1,332 1,016 1,114 66 69 31 9,149 16,400 6,067 6.72 8.63 5.53 10,637 17,485 7,212 35,234 48,430 7 6 46,853 15 1 Central Provinces... 48 48 11 5 3 231 340 44 242 345 47 228 328 44 14 17 3 10,867 35,982 9,108 175.67 417.06 137.90 11,109 36,327 9,155 56,591 35,268 11 0 60,729 14 9 Burma ... 104 107 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,763 8,601 375 4.63 23.83 1.02 1,763 8,601 375 (c) 10,739 ...... ...... North-West Frontier Province. (a) 17 (b) 17 22 2 6 1,017 182 148 1,039 184 151 1,013 181 151 26 3 3 7,937 8,461 3,606 ... ... ... 8,950 8,642 3,767 21,349 6,210 6 5 6,196 4 2 TOTAL ... 380 388 366 495 212 9,415 9,608 2,530 9,781 0,103 2,742 9,492 9,795 2,660 289 308 82 110,917 228,235 66,742 ... ... ... 120,623 238,314 69,465 428,402 4,92,134 1 10 4,57,484 0 6 (a) Includes three reserve Assistants. (b) Includes four casualties and three at Headquarters. (c) In addition to these 392 cases were treated by Inspectors and four by Assistants in Shan States. (d) 18 were erroneously shown last year. (e) Correct figures shown this year.
46 TABLE VI. Abstract showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during 1908-09. PROVINCE. RECEIPTS EXPENDITURE. REMARKS. Last year's balance By Local Funts. grands. By Government grants. By Municipal contribution. By fees. By other sources. Total. Pay. Travelling allowances. Medicines instruments, etc. Furniture, etc. Contingencies. Total. Balance. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Rs a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. United Provinces ... 4.954 0 0 35,186 0 0 1,500 0 0 2,721 0 0 1,080 0 0 1,263 0 0 46,704 0 0 23,575 0 0 2,708 0 0 6,837 0 0 671 0 0 5,267 0 0 98,958 0 0 5,755 (b) 0 0 Punjab ... ... 63,089 0 0 1,05,110 0 0 1,029 0 0 12,444 0 0 616 0 0 1,82,289 0 0 43,382 0 0 2,745 0 0 19,445 0 0 3,895 0 0 92,504 0 0 1,61,971 0 0 ... Sind ... 16,876 15 11 11,244 0 0 5,517 4 7 3,190 0 0 4,192 6 0 7 14 0 41,028 8 6 14,762 13 7 1,435 7 7 2,075 10 11 105 4 8 6,448 14 2 24,828 2 11 16,200 5 7 Rajputana ... 1,395 2 5 540 0 0 ... 1.670 0 0 535 8 0 767 15 10 4,908 10 3 1,128 1 6 ... 180 11 6 9 7 0 241 6 2 1,559 10 2 3,176 (c) 1 5 Bengal ... 1,808 (d) 0 0 19,990 0 0 5,610 0 0 3,553 0 0 3,127 0 0 17,825 0 0 51,913 0 0 18,309 0 0 3,156 0 0 5,431 0 0 4,943 0 0 5,422 0 0 37,261 0 0 14,652 0 0 Eastern Bengal and Assam. 1,072 10 10 12,443 11 7 4,862 8 1 1,729 0 0 288 8 11 435 9 0 20,822 0 5 9,101 9 8 2,919 10 9 3,927 2 2 475 11 0 3,165 14 1 19,589 15 8 1,232 0 0 Bombay ... 35,459 (a) 11 5 30,366 8 0 19,498 7 8 2,576 0 0 3,844 12 1 1,489 14 10 93,235 1 0 35,843 5 4 6,038 13 8 3,396 5 5 1,338 3 9 16,843 7 8 53,460 3 10 29,774 13 2 Madras ... ... 10,834 6 8 480 0 0 938 14 0 12,441 11 2 1,909 13 4 26,604 7 2 22,963 8 8 609 4 0 3,722 6 4 2,054 0 3 17,504 1 1 10 46,863 15 1 ... Central Provinces... ... 19,968 11 8 1,050 0 0 10,881 3 7 871 13 0 2,496 14 9 35,268 11 0 36,545 14 8 7,392 15 10 9,464 2 4 1,346 11 0 5,980 2 11 60,729 14 9 47 TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the pear 1908-09. PROVINCE. How occupied. Whether paid from Proviacial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate Teaching Staff. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. No. United Provinces ... In Dispensaries ... Local ... ... ... 29 ... Provincial ... ... 2 ... Private ... ... ... 1 ... Municipality ... ... 1 ... On other work ... Local ... ... ... 46 ... Provincial ... 9 6 ... Manicipality ... ... 2 ... In Dispensaries and other work Local ... ... ... 13 ... Punjab ... ... In Schools and Colleges ... Provincial ... ... ... (e) 6 In Dispensaries ... ... Do. ... ... 85 ... On other work ... ... Do. ... 12 (a) 42 ... (a) 29 Itinerating Veteri- nary Assistants. 5 Office Veterinary Assistants. 2 Veterinary Assis- tants on Tonga line. 6 Reserve Veteri- nary Assistants. (b) 11 On itenerating duty. 1 Reserve. 1 Attached to office. (c) Includes three Re- serve Assistants, two at Headquar- ters and one drowned. (d) Includes two died, one removed. (e) 2 Professors. 1 Assistant Professor. 2 lecturers. 1 Demonstrator. North-West Frotier Pro- vince and North Punjab. In Hospitals ... ... Do. ... ... 7 ... On other work ... Do. ... 2 (b)13 ... Vacancies on 31st March 1909 Do. ... ... 6 ... Burma ... In Schools and Colleges ... Do. ... ... 1 1 In Dispensaries ... Do. ... ... (c) 48 ... Local Funds ... ... (d) 58 ... On other work ... ... Provincial ... 10 ... ... Central Provinces ... In Dispensaries ... Do. ... ... 2 ... Foreign service ... ... 1 ... Local ... ... ... 22 ... Foreign State ... ... 1 ... On other work ... Provincial ... 4 5 ... Local ... ... ... 20 ... Berar ... ... In Dispensaries ... Provincial ... ... 1 ... Local ... ... ... 21 ... On other work ... Provincial ... 2 ... ... Local ... ... ... 2 ... Bombay ... ... In Schools and Colleges ... Provincial ... ... ... 4 In Dispensaries ... ... Provincial and Local ... 3 ... On other work ... ... Provincial ... 1 ... Madras ... ... Itinerating and atteading cattle Fairs and Shows. Do. ... 2 (f)28 ... (f) Includes 2 Veterinary Assistants who re- signed. In charge of Hospitals ... Local Funds and Provincial. ... 13 ... Ditto ... ... Raja's ... ... ... (g) 4 ... (g) 4 includes one Vete- rinary Assistant having no lien on Government serviced Ditto ... ... Society for the Pre- vention of cruelty to animals (Bellary). ... (h) 1 ... In charge of quarantine Depôt Foreign (Ceylon Gov- ernment). ... 1 ... (h) Having no lien on Government service. College work ... ... Provincial ... ... ... (i) 4 (i) 1 Assistant Principal and 3 lecturers. Sind ... ... In Schools and Colleges ... ... ... ... ... In Dispensaries ... ... Local Fund ... ... 6 ... On other work ... ... Do. ... ... 1 ... Rajputana ... ... In Dispensaries ... ... Imperial ... ... 2 ... (j) The Veterinary Assis- tant at Dumka. On other work ... ... Local Fund ... ... 1 ... (k) Includes 2 Veteri- nary Assistants em- ployed by the Dum- raon and Hathwa Raj States. Baluchistan ... On other work ... ... Imperial ... ... 1 ... Eastern Bengal and Assam. In Hospitals ... ... Local ... ... ... 7 ... In Dispensaries ... ... Provincial ... ... 2 ... (l) One Veterinary Assistant employed by the Khurda Gov- ernment States and 1 by the Government of Angul. Ditto ... ... Local ... ... ... 4 ... Itinerating ... ... Do. ... ... ... 17 ... Inspection ... ... Provincial ... 2 ... On other work ... ... Do. ... ... 3 ... (m) Includes 2 Assistants employed by the Pinjrapole Societies of Calcutta and Hazaribagh. Bengal ... ... In Dispensaries ... Do. ... ... (j) 1 (n) 6 Local ... ... ... (k) 24 ... On other work ... ... Provincial ... 6 (l) 2 ... (n) Includes 1 Assistant Principal, and 5 Lecturers. They are all ranked as Deputy Superiatendents. Ditto ... ... Local ... ... ... (m) 29 ... TOTAL ... ... 50 616 21
48 TABLE VIII Return of Stud Bulls for the year 1908-09. PROVINCE. PROPERTY OF GOVERNMENT. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BOARDS. REMARKS. Number on 1st April 1908. OBTAINED DURING THE YEAR Casualties during the year. Balance re- maining on 31st March 1909. Number on 1st April 1908. OBTAINED DURING THE YEAR. Casualties during the year. Balance re- maining on 31st March 1909. Number. Average price paid. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 United Provinces ... ... (c) 9 ... ... 3 6 (d) 36 5 51 1 40 Punjab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 379 117 ... 59 437 Sind ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rajputana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Bengal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bombay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 6 ... ... 16 Madras ... ... ... 19 ... ... 1 (b) 18 ... ... ... ... ... Central Provinces ... ... 5 18 ... (a) 16 7 ... ... ... ... ... Burma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North-West Frontier Province ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 4 ... 1 14 Eastern Bengal and Assam ... ... (e) 3 4 ... ... 7 (f) 17 15 ... 5 27 TOTAL .. 36 22 ... 20 38 455 147 ... 66 536 (a) 1 lent, 1 died, 6 sold, 8 castrated. (c) 4 were omitted last year. (b) The bulls are posted thus :49 TABLE IX. Showing main results of the working of Provincial Cattle Farms during the year 1908-09. PROVINCE. Name of farm. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. VALUATION OF STOCK, GRAIN AND RODDER REMAINING AT CLOSE OF YEAR AS DETAILED ON REVERSE. REMARKS. Sale of animals. Sale of Produce. Other heads. TOTAL. Salaries of establish- ment. Feed and keep of animals. Cultiva- tion expenses. Purchase of animals. Other heads. TOTAL. Cattle. Grain. Fodder. TOTAL. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P Rs. Rs. A. P. Rs. Rs. A. P. Central Provinces ... ... Telin Kherl ... 785 0 0 863 0 0 ... 1,648 0 0 890 0 0 5,902 0 0 ... ... 385 0 0 7,177 0 0 13,935 2,480 0 0 262 16,627 0 0 Ditto Powar Khera ... 508 8 0 ... ... 508 8 0 287 10 3 1,844 11 2 ... 236 5 0 475 8 0 2,844 2 5 1,955 669 7 9 354 3,978 7 9 Bombay (Gujrat Ahmedabad) ... Northcote Cattle Farm, Chharodi. 2,063 0 0 ... 242 8 0 2,325 8 0 3,634 7 8 6,660 0 0 3,044 10 0 ... 2,863 2 0 16,202 3 8 18,020 297 5 0 3,600 19,917 5 0 Bengal ... ... ... Pusa ... ... 817 0 0 ... ... 817 0 0 251 0 0 4,805 0 0 ... 638 0 0 ... 5,694 0 0 3,173 ... ... 3,173 0 0 Ditto ... ... ... Siripur ... 1,025 0 0 868 0 0 500 0 0 2,393 0 0 793 0 0 12,017 0 0 ... ... 1,503 0 0 14,313 0 0 6,200 ... ... 6,200 0 0 Ditto ... ... ... Kalimpong ... 100 0 0 ... 579 0 0 679 0 0 391 0 0 147 0 0 ... 60 0 0 81 0 0 679 0 0 658 ... ... 558 0 0 TOTAL ... ...... 5,318 8 0 1,731 0 0 1,321 8 0 8,371 0 0 6,247 1 11 31,375 11 2 3,044 10 0 934 5 0 5,307 10 0 46,909 6 1 41,841 3,396 12 9 4,216 49,453 12 9 NOTE.50 Valuation Statement of Cattle, Grain and Fodder in hand at close of the year 1908-09. NUMBER OR QUANTITY. Description. Rate. Value. REMARKS. No. Quantity. Rs. Rs. Mds. TELIN KHERI FARM. Cattle. 20 ... Bulls ... ... ... ... 200 4,000 Including one stud bull, 46 ... Cows ... ... ... ... 50 2,300 29 ... Male stock, 2 years' old 150 4,350 10 ... Ditto 1 year old ... ... 100 1,000 9 ... Ditto calves ... ... 75 675 20 ... Female stock, 2 years' old ... ... 40 800 17 ... Ditto 1 year old ... ... 30 510 15 ... Ditto calves ... ... 20 300 166 ... TOTAL ... 13,935 Grain and Rodder. ... 135 Khandi ... Cotton seed ... ... ... Rs. 18 per Khandi. 2,430 ... 524,000 Doolas Hay ... 2,000 per Rupee 262 ... ... Kirby, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... ... 2,692 GRAND TOTAL 16,627. POWAR KHERA FARM. 13 ... Bulls ... ... ... ... 75 975 21 ... Cows ... ... ... ... 30 630 4 ... Male stock, 2 years' old ... ... 50 200 2 ... Ditto 1 year old ... ... 20 40 4 ... Ditto Calves ... ... 10 40 3 ... Female stock, 2 years' old ... ... 15 45 1 ... Ditto 1 year old 10 10 3 ... Ditto calves 5 15 51 ... ...... ... 1,955 ... ... Grain and Fodder ... ... ... ... ... ... Mds. Seers. ...... ... ... ... 324 24 Cotton seeds ... ... ... Rs. 2-1-0 per md. 669-7-9 247,850 Pullas Hay ... ... ... ... 700 Palas per Rupee. 354-0-0 ...... ... 1,023-7-9 ...... ... ... GRAND TOTAL ... ... 2,978-7-9
51 Valuation Statement of Cattle, Grain and Fodder in hand at close of the year 1908-0952 Valuation Statement of Cattle, Grain and Fodder in hand at close of the year 1908-0953 TABLE X. Return of Horse, Pony and Donkey Stallions under Local Bodies for the year 1908-09. Details. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. HORSES. PONIES. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred (Punjabi). Persian. Catalonian. Arab. American. Sicilian. Total. Arab. Persian. Thorough bred, English. Country-bred. Australian. Total, Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Deli. Shan. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 28 Balance on 1st April 1908 ... ... ... ... 59 ... 2 4 1 66 98 ... 5 2 1 106 172 11 17 25 2 30 2 2 10 99 Increase ... Purchased in India ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 9 ... 1 ... ... 10 13 ... ... (a) 6 ... (b) 7 ... 1 ... 14 Received by transfer ... ... 15 ... ... ... ... 15 7 ... ... ... ... 7 22 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 TOTAL 77 ... 2 4 1 84 114 ... 6 2 1 123 207 11 17 31 2 41 2 3 10 117 Decrease ... Died ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... 2 3 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 3 Sold ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 5 ... 2 2 ... 9 11 4 1 2 2 ... 1 1 11 Destroyed ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 4 ... ... ... ... 4 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Transferred to ... ... ... 15 ... ... ... ... 15 6 ... ... ... ... 6 21 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 TOTAL DECREASE ... 19 ... ... ... 1 20 17 ... 2 2 ... 21 41 5 1 3 2 5 1 1 ... 18 Balance on 31at March 1909 ... ... .... 58 ... 2 4 ... 64 97 ... 4 ... 1 102 166 6 16 28 ... 36 1 2 10 99 United Provinces ... ... ... ... 41 ... 2 1 ... 44 6 ... ... ... ... 6 50 ... ... 3 ... 9 ... 2 ... 14 Punjab ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... 5 56 ... 3 ... ... 59 64 5 14 23 ... 21 ... ... 7 70 North-West Frontier Province... ... 8 ... ... ... ... 8 10 ... ... ... ... 10 18 1 2 2 ... 6 1 ... 3 16 Bombay ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 3 ... 7 11 ... 1 ... ... 12 19 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bengal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madras... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... ... 12 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Burma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Central Provinces ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... 58 ... 2 4 ... 64 97 ... 4 ... 1 102 166` 6 16 28 ... 36 1 2 10 ... (a) Purchased in India. (b) Purchased from Europe, were kept at Hissar.
54 TABLE XI. Services and Produce of each class of Horse, Pony, and Donkey Stallions, under Local Bodies during 1908-09. Horse, Pony or Donkey. Province. Stallions on Register on 31st March 1909. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 . 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... ... United Provinces ... 44 36 37 1,838 1,995 51.05 53.9 Punjab ... ... 5 5 5 272 283 54 56 Bombay ... 7 6.59 5.07 295 220 44.76 43.39 North-West Frontier Province. 8 8 8 495 458 61.87 57.25 TOTAL 64 55.59 55.07 2,900 2,956 52.17 51.86 ...... Pony ... ... United Provinces ... 6 8 9 386 470 48.2 52.2 Punjab 59 60 60 3,233 3,176 54 52 Bombay ... ... 12 11.41 11.17 343 342 30.06 30.61 Madras ... 12 13 13 239 284 17.5 (a) 21 North-West Frontier Province. 10 10 10 505 482 50.5 48.2 Bengal ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... Burma 1 3 4 58 93 19.3 23.2 Central Provinces ... 1 1 ... 6 ... 6 ... TOTAL ... 102 107.23 107.17 4,770 4,847 41.48 45.22 Donkey ... United Provinces ... 14 9 5 412 224 45.3 44.8 Punjab ... ... 70 70 47 2,846 2,639 41 56 North-West Frontier Province. 15 15 10 482 572 32.13 57.2 TOTAL ... 99 94 62 3,740 3,435 39.78 55.4 (a) The stallions at stud are under the Provincial Department of Government.
55 TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of Horse, Pony, and Donkey Stallions during the year 1908-09. Province. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. A. P. Rs A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. United Provinces ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Punjab ... ... 382 0 0 305 0 0 374 0 0 312 0 0 202 0 0 158 0 0 Sind ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rajputana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bengal ... ... ... 224 4 0 151 8 0 ... ... Hathwa Court of Wards Es- tates. Bombay ... 518 0 0 497 0 0 501 0 0 475 0 0 ... ... Madras ... ... ... 397 9 0 280 10 0 ... ... Central Provinces ... ... ... 75 9 9 9 ... ... ... North-West Frontier Province and North Punjab. 336 5 0 295 3 0 328 11 2 325 12 5 219 12 11 164 (a) 1 3 Burma ... ... 220 4 4 294 10 6 ... ... TOTAL ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (a) The increase is due to the high prices of grain.
56 TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding Horse Fairs and Shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1908-09. PROVINCE. Number of Horse Fair and Shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZES AWARDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's Fair or Show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Deptt. For native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. No. of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. United Provinces ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Punjab ... ... ... 7 3,768 3,397 1,106 1,012 2,734 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 23 ... ... ... 76 1,500 ... 1,464 20 2,984 2,365 4 ... Sind ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rajputana ... ... ... 1 627 1.022 188 428 ... 627 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 278 ... ... 500 ... 500 442 ... ... Bengal ... ... ... 8 11,667 12,652 211 259 82 2,223 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,046 ... 150 171 58 199 578 552 1 ... Bombay ... ... ... 1 464 ... 464 ... 174 116 ... ... 3 3 Rs. 1, 000 paid for 3 remounts. ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 1,000 1,500 1,500 ... 4,000 2,090 2 ... North-West Frontier Province and North Punjab. 3 1,061 1,416 898 1,164 757 ... 2 ... 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 2,320 ... 923 ... 3,243 2,290 3 ... Burma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL ... 20 17,577 16,486 2,867 2,863 3,747 2,969 2 ... 4 6 ... ... ... ... 23 23 ... ... ... 6,426 4,820 1,650 4,558 277 11,305 7,739 10 ...
57 TABLE XIV. Abstract of particulars regarding Cattle Fairs and Shows held during the year 1908-09 PROVINCE. Number of Cattle Fairs and Shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMALS SOLD. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZES AWARDED. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial funds. From Provincial funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. United Province ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Punjab ... ... 32 1,328 131,286 (a) 64,255 35,788 8,511 7,789 ... ... ... ... ... 89,091 0 0 3,888 ... ... 12,002 0 0 669 0 0 12,671 0 0 10,715 0 0 7 Sind ... ... 3 269 262 85 10 14 ... 332 ... ... ... ... ... ... 928 50 0 0 ... 1,670 0 0 ... 1,620 0 0 1,202 8 0 ... Rajputana ... ... 1 ... 1,731 ... ... ... 4,335 ... ... 43 0 0 ... ... 61 ... 62 pairs of Bullocks 45 camels. ... ... 62 0 0 ... 62 0 0 62 0 0 ... Bengal ... ... 14 205 105,705 8,423 18,627 16,321 382 15,818 54 44 0 0 22 0 0 35 0 0 58 15,001 0 0 922 ... 900 0 0 1,865 0 0 117 0 0 2,872 0 0 1,650 0 0 2 Bombay ... .... 6 1,695 6,874 1,683 724 1,051 ... 9,155 ... ... . .. ... ... 910 10 0 1,710 ... 3,500 0 0 700 0 0 942 0 0 5,142 0 0 3,195 0 0 7 Madras ... ... 14 799 64,274 1,003 1,651 1,728 ... 1,368 ... ... . .. ... ... 248 10 6 70,823 ... 3,800 0 0 4,166 0 0 7,673 13 6 16,639 13 6 7,109 4 0 24 Burma ... ... 1 15 42 11 14 55 ... 57 ... ... . .. ... ... ... 194 100 0 0 1,245 0 0 ... ... 1,345 0 0 1,141 0 0 ... Central Provinces ... ... 10 124 28,438 6,311 4,706 13,456 7 1,671 ... ... . .. ... ... 6,635 2 9 455 300 0 0 ... 1,022 0 0 62 0 0 1,384 0 0 991 0 0 98 Baluchistan ... ... 2 227 143 62 12 6 ... 11 ... ... . .. . .. ... ... 450 500 0 0 ... 90 0 0 50 0 0 640 0 0 585 0 0 2 North-West Frontier Province... 4 207 302 218 23 222 42 132 ... ... . .. . .. ... ... 1,100 1,700 0 0 ... 675 0 0 52 0 0 2,427 0 0 2,137 0 0 6 Eastern Bengal and Assam ... 46 1,522 154,830 15,219 6,911 9,413 1,036 1,991 89 162 5 0 73 8 0 147 4 0 125 1,55,305 0 0 296 ... 116 0 0 927 0 0 30 0 0 1,073 0 0 803 0 0 ... TOTAL ... 133 6,291 493,877 33,015 96,938 78,054 14,313 38,324 ... . .. . .. . .. ... 2,67,191 6 9 80,915 2,650 0 0 9,561 0 0 23,069 0 0 9,695 13 6 44,876 13 6 29,590 12 0 146 (a) Cows and young stock together=64,255.
58 TABLE XV. Showing main results of the working of the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory during 1908-09. 59 TABLE XVI. Return of animals for 1908-09. Details. Herd bulls. Supernumerary bulls. Cows. Male produce. Female produce. Castrated produce. Ordnance bullocks. Cultivation bullocks. Mules. Pony mares for M. B. Pony stallions. Camels. Donkey stallions. Donkey colts. Donkey mares. Donkey fillies. Rams. Ewes. Male lambs. Female lambs. Wethers. Zebra. Total. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 1st April 1908 ... ... 22 ... 1,097 900 699 18 ... 309 137 38 1 7 (a) 12 58 85 39 4 238 90 158 ... 1 3,918 Increase ... By birth ... ... ... ... 406 381 ... ... ... 22 ... ... ... ... 17 ... 17 ... ... 95 100 ... ... 1,038 60 TABLE XVII. HISSAR FARM. Results of donkey, mule and zebrule-breeding during 1908-09. 61 TABLE XVIII. Abstract showing main results of the working of the Hissar Farm during the official year 1908-09. Rs. A. P. Receipts paid into Treasury. 1. Sale of animals (a) ... ... ... ... ... 78,233 13 0 2. Sale of produce ... ... ... ... ... 16 8 0 3. Other heads ... ... ... ... ... 20,657 5 9 TOTAL ... 93,907 10 9 Expenditure. 1. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers ... ... ... 12,648 1 8 2. Ditto ditto of subordinate staff ... ... 30,101 7 4 3. Cultivation expenses ... ... ... ... ... 14,698 11 1 4. Feed and keep of animals including reserve fodder Rs. 2,455-9-9 ... 34,814 15 7 5. Purchase of animals ... ... ... ... 6,756 0 0 6. Other heads ... ... ... ... 9,669 2 8 TOTAL ... 1,08,688 6 4 Value of animals issued on book credit. 1. Siege-train bullocks ... ... ... ... 18,750 0 0 2. Army transport bullocks ... ... ... ... 3. Bulls ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4. Mules and donkeys ... ... ... ... 20,300 0 0 TOTAL ... 39,050 0 0 Valuation of animals, grain and fodder on hand at end of year. 1. Valuation of animals as per Table XVI attached ... ... 2,72,389 14 8 2. Do. of grain ... ... ... ... ... 2,589 12 8 3. Do. of fodder ... ... ... ... ... 54,698 6 8 4. Do. Machinery and dead stock articles ... ... 11,977 4 11 TOTAL ... 3,41,655 6 6 (a) Includes &quot;Valuation of animals issued on Book credit.&quot;
