Board of Agriculture in India PROCEEDINGS OF THE First Meeting of Veterinary Officers in India Held at Lahore on the 24th March 1919 and following days WITH APPENDICES [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1919 Price eight annas or nine pence.
Board of Agriculture in India PROCEEDINGS OF THE First Meeting of Veterinary Officers in India Held at Lahore on the 24th March 1919 and following days WITH APPENDICES [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1919
No. C./658. FROM G. A. D. STUART, ESQ., B.A., I.C.S., Offg. Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE AND AGRICULTURE, SIMLA. Dated Camp Bombay, the 14th April 1919. SIR, I have the honour to submit the Proceedings of the First Meeting of Veterinary Officers, held at Lahore on the 24th March, 1919, and following days. These proceedings have been recorded by Mr. A. W. Shilston, Second Bacteriologist, Muktesar, who acted as Secretary. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, G. A. D. STUART, Offg. Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India.
CONTENTS. Page INTRODUCTORY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 List of members and visitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ib Programme . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Opening of ProceedingsThe First Meeting of Veterinary Officers in India. INTRODUCTORY. 1. The First Meeting of Veterinary Officers in India was held at Lahore on the 24th March, 1919, and following days, under the presidency of Mr. J. Mackenna, M.A., C.I.E., I.C.S., Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India. MEMBERS. The members present were :2 13. Lieutenant-Colonel G. K. Walker, C.I.E., O.B.E., F.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Bombay. 14. Major K. Hewlett, M.R.C.V.S., Principal, Bombay Veteri- nary College. 15. Mr. D. A. D. Aitchison, M.R.C.V.S., M.P.S., Principal, Veterinary College, Madras. 16. Mr. F. Ware, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Madras. 17. Mr. D. Clouston, M.A., B.Sc., Officiating Director of Agri- culture, Central Provinces, Nagpur. 18. Mr. D. Quinlan, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veteri- nary Department, Bihar and Orissa. 19. Mr. W. Harris, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veteri- nary Department, Assam. VISITORS. 2. In addition, the following attended as visitors :3 PROGRAMME. SUBJECTS DISCUSSED. 3. The programme before the Meeting consisted of the following subjects:5 PROCEEDINGS. In opening the proceedings Mr. Mackenna said :6 Defence Force. Amongst our old comrades Colonel Baldrey has been given the decoration of C. M. G. " But apart from the incidence of war, the period which has elapsed since our last meeting has been an important one in other directions. In the first place the report of the Public Services Commission has brought into prominence many questions connected with our future organization a large number of which find their place on our agenda to-day. As a result there is no doubt that, to mention only one, the important question of veterinary education will have to be tackled from a wider standpoint. " Again, there is the whole question of the reorganization of all branches of the service7 go into the open market to get them because there will be a very large demand for veterinary officers to make good the wastage of these years of war. In the Provincial and Subordinate Services, if we are to attract the best type of young Indian, we shall certainly have to raise the educational standard of our veterinary colleges and the natural corollary to this is that we must offer higher rates of pay. " One word more and I am done. I selected Lahore for this sectional meeting firstly on account of the outstanding position which it has for years occupied as a centre of veterinary education in India, and secondly as a compliment to the doyen of the depart- ment8 " We require more explicit data as to the standards of education at the various colleges and a clearer view of the number of men likely to be required in the respective ranks before we can formulate measures for fixing those standards, and before we can really make recommendations for the necessary educational facilities. " There would be many details to be worked out which would necessarily include the revision of the various curricula and exami- nation systems. I think every one will agree that for each standard it is desirable to have uniformity, as far as possible, and I do not consider that there would be any great difficulty in bringing that about. " These questions would ordinarily be dealt with suitably by the head of the department, if there were one, as he would be in a position to go round and study the various local conditions and compare them. As we have no one in a position to do that, I am of opinion that what is required is a small committee to visit the different colleges and, in consultation with principals, to report on the existing standards. Superintendents of provinces would be consulted also, of course. One member of the committee should be an officer of district experience, as it is mainly for the districts that men are required. I do not think it would be advisable to include a Principal of an existing college on the committee as he would naturally be disposed to favour his own system and the committee should be quite unbiased. " There is at least one important point, however, on which this Conference might usefully express an opinion. I consider that the main issue at present is to decide whether we require two separate courses of instruction, one higher and one lower, or not, or whether it is possible to graft the required higher education on to the existing one. It is perfectly clear that more highly educated men have got to be provided in future in India to meet our requirements for the provincial services. " The Public Services Commission's report is very explicit on this point, direct appointments to the higher ranks being advocated, though I am inclined to think that a little service in the inferior grades to give the men experience would be beneficial. Whether these men would be admitted into the imperial service or not is a matter for future discussion. It might be possible to select a few who were capable of undergoing further instruction abroad or possibly in India to fit them for such promotion, but that is not feasible at present and I think we had better deal with nearer issues. In the meantime, Indians who are to be appointed to the imperial service should go abroad for their veterinary education.
9 " I am convinced10 as a temporary measure. One solution would be to fix on one of. the existing colleges as suitable for higher education and constitute it as such with a well qualified staff. The other colleges would then be classed as schools to educate two years' course veterinary assistants only. One extra school would have to be provided in the province where the college was established. The other solution is to provide a new college and turn all the existing institutions into schools. " I consider that the present system of veterinary education in India is not satisfactory for present needs and that the mistake has been made and is still being made of trying to aim at too ambi- tious a course with poorly educated material. As the cost of living increases, the position becomes worse. " I have considerable experience as an examiner, and I say that a very large proportion of the students are not sufficiently educated to grasp and assimilate what they are now taught. The consequence is that they learn as much as they can by heart in order to get through their examinations. We have aimed too high and have tried to make a too highly finished article from poor material. Too many of our recruits come to us after having failed elsewhere. It is true that many of our men have done well, but if we look squarely at facts we shall find that in most cases praise has come from quarters where men merely did as they were told and filled the part of dressers under direct supervision. " I will refer only briefly to post-graduate education. It is required for men who have the aptitude and desire to improve themselves and who, by its means, can aspire to special promotion or special appointments. It will be of great assistance no doubt to the exceptional man in the veterinary assistant class who wants to get on. It will not take the place of the 4 years' course that is now required for the future veterinary graduate though he would also be benefited by it of course. " I do not know how my proposals would fit in with the new terms and conditions of service issued for the Indian subordinate veterinary corps, but I imagine that 4 years' course graduates would expect to enter the army as senior veterinary assistants (Indian Officers). " The officiating Director of Veterinary Services attended the Committee meeting on veterinary education at Poona, but he was not prepared to discuss this point though I myself asked him to do so. The military authorities should be consulted before any great changes are made. It is a pity that their new terms have just- been issued, because some alterations may be necessary." The President pointed out the complexity of the subject and asked whether a sub-committee would be better able to deal with
11 it in its entirety. Colonel Walker was of opinion that the views of the meeting should be first ascertained in order to guide the committee in their deliberations. Colonel Smith opposed the proposal of a committee going round the various colleges, but thought it would be better to discuss the matter at the present meeting. He was also opposed to Colonel Walker's proposal to reduce the course from three to two years. Major Hewlett and Colonel Farmer expressed views similar to those of Colonel Smith. Colonel Farmer thought that the practice of sending students at the colleges into the district during their vacation time to obtain practical experience of their work was very desirable, and he offered to place them under reliable men at dispensaries. Referring to the question of two standards of veterinary graduates, Mr. Clouston said that in the case of agricultural students it was found that men who were not educated up to the Matricula- tion Standard did not assimilate the teaching they received and, in consequence, those who were better educated when they began the course were able to grasp the subjects more readily, and the result was that they were greatly superior at the end of the course. He said that it was the practice in the Central Provinces to place those who passed well in their final examination on a higher rate of pay than those who scored low in it. Colonel Smith stated that this practice had been followed to a certain extent in Bengal and the rates of pay had recently been raised to those of sub-assistant surgeons. The President referred to the results arrived at by the Confer- ence which met recently in Simla, and stated that these would be placed before the committee appointed to consider this question. Colonel Pease was very opposed to going back to a two years' course of instruction which would have the effect of nullifying the progress made, as men with such limited instruction had not proved successful in the past. Colonel Walker then said that he had made his suggestions with a view to provoking discussion: The crux of the whole matter was that if a better stamp of men was required, a better scale of pay should be given. Colonel Edwards said that the Royal Army Veterinary Corps wanted a better class of men. They were trying to send better men to the colleges for training, and if four years' course men were available, they would be glad to take them. Mr. Sheather referred to the question of sending Indian gra- duates to England for post-graduate courses which were for the B
12 most part highly technical and concerned with work in labora- tories, and questioned whether such courses were really suitable for men whose work would be in the field in India. Colonel Smith thought that Mr. Sheather was referring to the courses of a parti- cular college, and said that a course of the kind required could be obtained at one or other of the colleges in England. He thought that by sending the best students in the Indian colleges to a veteri- nary college in England the most suitable Indian recruits for the imperial service would be obtained. Mr. G. Taylor said that in the Punjab, the annual expenditure on the veterinary department was very small in comparison with the value of the cattle in the province, and he thought that if the figures were brought to the notice of Government, they might be more inclined to provide increased funds for the department. He thought the present veterinary assistant was being asked to under- take more responsible work and more technical knowledge was required of him than in the past, and it was necessary that better scales of pay should be given in order to attract better men. He considered that post-graduate training should be carried on in India and an institute for this purpose and for research work ought to be established. Officers coming from home would also be able to obtain at such an institution a training in Indian diseases. The President then proposed the appointment of the following sub-committee to report on the whole question of veterinary edu- cation. Lieutenant-Colonel A. Smith (Chairman), Colonel J. Farmer, Lieutenant-Colonel G. K. Walker, Lieutenant-Colonel W. B. Edwards, Major K. Hewlett, Messrs. D. Clouston, D. A. D. Aitchison and W. Taylor. The proposal was put to the meeting and carried. The sub-committee met the following afternoon13 the recommendation made by the Public Services Commission that a course of training should be instituted in India in order to enable Indians to qualify for the Imperial branch of the department is not practicable. " The small number of recruits annually required, approximately two would not justify the very large outlay necessary to establish an efficiently equipped college which would be necessary to carry out the Public Services Commission's recommend- ation. Rather we would suggest that in order to assist Indians to qualify for the Imperial branch of the service, selected youths be sent to Europe by the aid of State scholarships there to qualify as Members of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. " (b) That the education required for the different grades in the provincial services should be provided at the existing veterinary colleges, all candidates going through the same curricula with post-graduate courses for the higher grades. In addition to veteri- nary education, it is considered essential that the educational qualifications for entrance to the colleges should be raised, and before this is possible, the prospects of graduates must be improved. " (c) Revision of the curriculum is necessary. It is thought desirable to add certain now subjects, and it is considered that the three years' course at present prescribed is not of sufficient length to allow the subjects now included to be taught with any degree of thoroughness : four years are necessary. The curriculum should be on the lines prescribed by the R. C. V. S. for the colleges in England and we suggest that a detailed syllabus should be separately prepared by the Principals of the Indian colleges whose report will be submitted for final consideration at the next Veteri- nary meeting. If the suggestion with regard to curricula is adopted, this will tend towards uniformity, as far as teaching is concerned. For the examinations, it will be only possible to obtain uniformity by the appointment of a permanent Board of Examiners." Mr. Oliver then proposed14 in his province, but it was often difficult to control the itinerating men owing to the lack of supervising staff. Mr. G. Taylor agreed with Colonel Walker regarding the difficulty of controlling the itinerating men and said that in the Punjab they found the hospitals of much greater value. Colonel Smith and Mr. Harris both pointed out the importance of touring assistants for controlling contagious diseases, which was the chief aim of the department. Mr. Quirke said that, in the North-West Frontier Province, there were no itinerating veterinary assistants, and when the men at hospitals were required to deal with contagious diseases, the com- pounder was left to carry on the work. To attract suitable com- pounders he had recently improved their scales of pay. Colonel Smith pointed out that the conditions in the various provinces required different methods and it was necessary to adopt those found most suitable in each case. The President agreed with Colonel Smith and proposed the following resolution :15 in other publications. Colonel Pease agreed that it would be difficult to start the journal again under the present conditions. The President then proposed the following resolution which was carried :16 was emphatically laid down at this time that horse-breeding opera- tions were to be regarded as primary and paramount. It was frankly admitted that the supervising staff was inadequate, but this was defended on the ground that money was required to create a strong subordinate agency trained and recruited in the country. " The department was considered to be established on these lines in 1892, but it was not until 1895 that rules were finally issued for acceptance. In point of fact, the department was not consti- tuted until 1901 when the number of appointments had grown to 22 or 23 including the Imperial Bacteriologist. The rules for the Army officers were then finally accepted by a number of officers who were to form the nucleus of the new department. It had been decided that future recruits should be obtained direct from the colleges. For these officers different rules were drawn up. " A resolution of the Government of India, Revenue and Agri- culture, No. 26-123, dated 4th July 1893, had defined the duties of the department rather fully. The following were the main heads :17 ment. It. would be inappropriate for me to criticise that report publicly, but I may say that the opinion of many officers outside this department including officers of the Army Remount Depart- ment coincided with mine. " One thing was clear and that was that the Civil Veterinary Department officers were too few to cope with the work. That was remedied to a great extent when the Army Remount Depart- ment took over by a very large increase in the number of officers. " Whether the results of the recommendations of the Commission have been satisfactory or not, it is not for me to say, but I will aver that if the Civil Veterinary Department had been given the chance, they would have been as good. At the time it seemed hard that a department that had just been constituted for the purpose should be treated with contumely before it had had its chance. The obvious disabilities arising from employing temporary officers who had no great interest in the country, and possibly an imperfect knowledge of the language and conditions, had at last been removed. The Government of India, at this stage, made a gallant attempt to regenerate the department which had received a severe blow. (Personally I think that it was at this time measured for its coffin.) Their matured opinion was very clearly expressed in paragraph 9 of their despatch, No. 137, dated 5th May, 1904. It should be read by all interested. It is a very important despatch in the history of this department. One point was made in this despatch which I desire to bring out very particularly. It stated that ' an increased number of assistants of necessity entails the appointment of addi- tional inspecting officers if the best results are to be obtained and if money is not to be wasted wholesale for want of effective super- vision '18 and these must have increased since then. The number of Imperial Officers for district work has remained practically the same but an extra officer for the Punjab and one for the North-West Frontier Province have been provided, also one for Burma but a school has been established too. Lately, an extra officer each for Madras, the Central Provinces, the United Provinces and a separate one for the North-West Frontier Province have been sanctioned but not em- ployed. Even with these, the charges of the Superintendents will remain much too large. I wonder if the members of this meeting realize that there is one officer in charge of Sind, Baluchistan and Rajputana, and one Superintendent in charge of Bombay with an establishment of 1 Deputy Superintendent, 4 Inspectors and 83 Veterinary Assistants actually employed but more sanctioned. " So far as district work is concerned, I think it is clear that Superintendents can do nothing more under present conditions than they are doing now. In spite of great disabilities a good deal of progress has been made in several provinces. A large number of dispensaries are doing good work, and contagious disease is re- ceiving greater and more efficient attention. The duties of a Superin- tendent are very multifarious and exacting. I have referred to this matter here to indicate that although the Government of India realized the danger of stinting the superior staff in charge of esta- blishments as far back as 1904, they have not warded it off. " Returning to the history of the department, I wish to refer now to the abolition of the Inspector-Generalship which had effect from 1st April, 1912. Before this the Government of India had been coquetting rather strongly with decentralization and had reduced the authority and usefulness of the Inspector-General very consi- derably. When the decision finally had effect, however, it was a great shock to the department. Apart from the fact that it was considered a breach of faith (officers had been recruited on the understanding that the appointment was open to them), it had a very serious effect on the department. I am a great believer in measures of decentralization myself, but I am quite certain that in a scientific department such as this, matters may easily be carried too far. Directors of Agriculture, with the best intentions in the world, cannot realize the scope of the department's possibilities. and they have no means of guiding their veterinary officers' professional energies. The Agricultural Departments proper have taken up most of their attention and the Veterinary Departments have been neglected. Their job is to administer and, in doing this, they cannot estimate sometimes the relative importance of a well ordered office and professional efficiency. It seems to me also that there is a very pernicious influence in India which impels Local Govern- ments and Administrations to differ, if possible, from a central
19 authority for the sake of differing. This is generally expressed by referring vaguely to differences in local conditions. Sometimes, I think, the Government of India rather encourage this system. It may work in administrative questions but it can easily be over- done in professional matters. It results frequently in junior officers, with little or no experience, dogmatizing as if they had nothing to learn, knowing that their Local Governments will probably back them up. " There are many reasons why a head of the Civil Veterinary Department is wanted in India. One of the greatest is to create a morale among its members, and for this he should have authority. He should be specially selected as having the confidence of the officers of the department, and for his experience, so that his advice would be valuable. As it is, the Government of India have no one to advise them as to the respective merits of their officers or regard- ing their work. The Local Governments are unable to get a matured opinion based on experience in other parts of India. Young officers are put into positions of responsibility very quickly20 which are obviously insufficient and not easily understandable when there were 5 for 32. Out of 42 appointments, there are now 12 vacancies and 7 officers in military employ, i.e., 19 vacancies. This is due mainly to the war, of course, and one has to recognize that. It would be interesting, however, to know what steps are being taken to fill up these vacancies, and if there is any response from desirable candidates. " It is clear that as far as numbers are concerned, the department is in a parlous state. Some of the few remaining military men are on the eve of retirement. We military men have received a cordial invitation from the Public Services Commissioners to retire, but I understand that the Government of India are not so keen to part with us. " I think I have said enough to show that the Imperial branch of the department is practically moribund, and that if it is intended to revive it, a reorganization is required to include the reappoint- ment of a head. " If nothing is contemplated, it were better to put the corpse in the coffin and give it a decent funeral, as soon as possible, leaving it to Local Governments to appoint an officer occasionally in the same way as they might a Boiler Inspector. " If I have convinced the members of this meeting that a reorganization is required, I will ask them to pass a resolution to that effect. But before doing so, I will add that, as I have already shown, the department was originally constituted to deal mainly with horse-breeding operations which were to have first claim on its energies. It always has been and still is entrusted with horse- breeding in non-selected districts and, as far as I know, the duties are carried out as satisfactorily as they can be with the limited facilities that are invariably provided in the shape of financial support. In the Bombay Presidency, the horse-breeding operations, which had been taken over by the Army Remount Department in 1903, were handed back to the Civil Veterinary Department in 1910. They had to be conducted on a much smaller scale and a reduced establishment, as economy was suddenly discovered to be desirable. Special officers of the Army Remount Department and an Indian officer had been employed, but they were taken away and the Superintendent, Civil, Veterinary Department, was given no extra assistance. I have heard it said that very little is done by the Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, for horse-breeding. That is not a statement which I can agree with altogether, but it serves as an illustration of the way in which this unfortunate depart- ment is generally used as a whipping post. One cannot do much without money and staff.
21 " When horse-breeding was taken away there remained, of the main headings, disease and instruction, both of which were very important. In addition, the subject of cattle-breeding gradually came forward as a field for enterprise. This was brought about entirely by the efforts of the department itself but received very little encouragement outside. When Major Morgan put up a cattle- breeding scheme in Bombay in 1900, one Commissioner wrote that ' nothing more impresses a district officer than the immense good the Veterinary Department may do the country, but I doubt if cattle-breeding is the likeliest direction. I would rather ask them to concentrate more force against cattle disease. ' " Nevertheless, the officers of the Civil Veterinary Department have gained a good deal of knowledge regarding cattle-breeding conditions in many provinces and, in some, considerable spade work has been done. A good deal of useful information has been collected by the Civil Veterinary Department officers and recorded. " Since cattle have become more valuable, it is clear that the question of improvement and conservation cannot be shelved any longer, and Government have recently shown signs of interest in the matter. " The general view appears to be that the Civil Veterinary Department has done little or nothing for cattle-breeding, regardless of the fact that neither the staff nor the money has been provided in spite of our representations and that no one wanted to do anything till lately. The tendency is to hand over cattle-breeding to the Agricultural Department with, of course, a special staff for the purpose. The plain fact is that it is easier to obtain additional superior staff and grants of money for the Agricultural Department than for the Civil Veterinary Department. I am not going to raise the old question as to whether a veterinary officer or an agricultural officer is the right man to look after cattle-breeding. That was settled in a very sensible way at Pusa in 1916. It was wisely stated that it required the services of a full time officer of experience. All I have to say is that the road to success in this direction is full of difficult problems and pitfalls, and that much patience and time is required. " Get the best man possible and if he is a veterinary surgeon so much the better as he will start with a considerable handicap in his favour. " I am all in favour of special men being appointed for cattle- breeding but I contend that they should be veterinary surgeons, if possible, and that, even if they are not, they should belong to the Veterinary Department and not to the Agricultural Department.
22 The head of the Veterinary Department is more suitable as a controlling officer than the head of the Agricultural Department unless the latter has specialized in the subject. " The subjects of disease and instruction (veterinary) are defi- nitely Civil Veterinary Department prerogatives, and I do not quite see how they can be handed over to any other department. Even in selected districts, I consider that equine disease should be dealt with by this department. I understand that during the war this has been so, and I have not heard of any difficulties. " To sum up, I submit that a properly constituted Civil Veterinary Department, with sufficient staff and resources, is the proper agency for dealing with animal disease, veterinary instruction and all questions connected with animal husbandry including operations for improving the breeds of farm animals. " I come now to the question of staff to carry out these duties. I have already touched on the necessity for a head. If there is to be an Imperial Department it is essential to have one. If the Provincial Departments are to be allowed to go their own ways entirely, the need is not so great, but until there is a fully developed department in each province with an experienced local head, I do not see how you are going to carry on with any degree of efficiency without a guiding hand. It appears, then, that the smaller the depart- ment, within limits, the greater the need for an Imperial head. I think it is clear that for many years we must have a considerable number of Imperial officers recruited from abroad. There is much pioneer work to be done for which outside experience and imagina- tion are required. A large portion of the superior staff at the colleges must be specially qualified and this applies also to all officers engaged in research work. District officers need initiative and experience, and a sufficient number should belong to the Imperial branch. They can be assisted by Provincial officers when properly qualified men for these posts are available in sufficient numbers. At present they are not sufficient. At the last Veterinary Conference, held in Calcutta in 1908, I stated that Deputy Superintendents would be no use unless they could take over and perform the routine duties of gazetted officers in charge of circles. They should not be employed merely as glorified Inspectors. " The respective provinces differ very much in their relative advancement and scope, and the number of superior staff required must depend a good deal on the size of subordinate establishments. The staff of officers that I have proposed to the Government of Bombay for district work is as follows :23 1 Superintendent for investigation of disease. 1 Superintendent for cattle-breeding. 1 Superintendent for horse-breeding. Deputy Superintendents in charge of divisions, for routine work, each division consisting of 5 to 6 districts. " In course of time, as subordinate establishments increase, the areas of the Deputy Superintendents would be reduced until possibly we had one for each district when they might be called District Veterinary Officers. I stated that ' if Government were desirous of seeing progress in those important branches of veterinary effort which comprise investigation and treatment of epizootic disease, cattle-breeding and horse-breeding24 " With regard to the nomenclature of the various posts in the department, the title ' Superintendent ' is now used largely all over India for a superior grade of clerk. Indian States employ Directors of Veterinary Departments even when there is nothing to direct. The Agricultural Department nomenclature comprises Deputy Directors of Agriculture, Divisional Superintendents of Agriculture, Superintendents of Farms and District Agricultural Overseers25 This resolution was carried unanimously. Colonel Walker proposed and Colonel Farmer seconded the following resolution.:26 " II. The following nomenclature is suggested :27 SUBJECT V.28 Mr. Oliver seconded the resolution and it was carried unani- mously. In connection with the treatment of surra, several members referred to having obtained promising results, but on a limited scale, and all emphasized the urgent necessity for further experimental research in this direction. The President, in bringing the discussion to a close, laid stress on the need for further research and said that this would be embodied in resolutions under Subject IX. SUBJECT VI.29 Colonel Walker proposed the following resolution :30 Mr. G. Taylor referred to the large number of cases of tuberculosis which he had found in the slaughter houses at Ferozepore and Simla as shown in his article in the " Indian Journal of Medical Research." At Ferozepore, about three per cent. of the cattle slaughtered were found to be infected. So far the disease had been found almost entirely as the result of inspections at slaughter houses, but it was evident that the disease was fairly prevalent in Northern India. The conditions under which cattle were kept in the Punjab during the cold weather favoured the spread of infection. Colonel Pease stated that many cases had been found in bovines, and a few also in camels, at the Lahore Veterinary College. Mr. Sheather pointed out the necessity for experimental investi- gation into the type of organism responsible for the infection of cattle in India, the susceptibility of Indian cattle and the virulence of the organism occurring in Indian cattle suffering from tuberculosis. The majority of the cases reported appeared to have been of a chronic nature with lesions restricted practically to the thoracic glands. Several members referred to the unsatisfactory results following the subcutaneous injection of tuberculin in India which are mainly due to the variations in the climatic conditions of the country. Mr. Sheather suggested that the ophthalmic test should be applied. Mr. G. Taylor proposed the resolution31 Colonel Walker proposed the following resolution:32 veterinary entomology and would be partially under the control of the head of the veterinary department. Mr. Sheather pointed out that with the present staff research work was practically impossible at Muktesar; routine serum work and administration occupied a very large portion of the time of the officers. There were other difficulties in the way of research at Muktesar: isolation rendered the place difficult of access and diseases could not be investigated under natural conditions. Muktesar had, for all practical purposes, reached its limit of ex- pansion, was absorbed in serum preparation and, for the investiga- tion of zootechnical problems, was quite unsuitable. With the completion and expansion of the new laboratory at Bareilly, many of these difficulties would be eliminated but the necessity for experimental stations in the various provinces would still remain. The. President remarked that there appeared to be three courses open: (a) to finish and expand the new laboratory at Bareilly, (6) to establish a new central research institute, or (c) to make provision for research at the veterinary colleges. Mr. Clouston referred to the necessity for research officers in the provinces but stated that they should be under the control of the head of the central institute and not under the local departments. The President then moved the following resolution:33 SUBJECT X.34 Mr. Ware said that the Cattle Diseases Act had proved valuable in Madras in dealing with cases of cattle disease at fairs and else- where, but circumstances frequently prevented it from being put into operation. Colonel Walker thought that legislation was bound to come more particularly in connection with enforcing inoculation but, at pre- sent, it was impossible to make such legislation. Even in Madras, although the Act gave power to the veterinary officer to order slaughter, this power was not used. Mr. Oliver thought that it would be inadvisable to seek powers to compel inoculation, but it might be advisable to obtain them to prohibit movements and thereby to compel owners to agree to ino- culation before permitting movement of their animals. Colonel Walker thought that legislation was desirable as it would show that the veterinary department wished to be in a position to deal with the problem, even if it would not be enforced for some- time. Mr. Ware proposed the following resolution:35 Hence, research in animal husbandry was essential. He discussed the breeding of pure types and the dual purpose animal from Indian breeds. He thought that the dangers associated with cross-bred animals should not be exaggerated, and said that the veterinary department was prepared to deal with the question. He referred to the uneconomic practice of keeping old and useless cattle alive, and pointed out that the buffalo was a hindrance in some ways to the breeding of good Indian cattle. Mr. Sayer thought that owners who were sufficiently progressive to take up half-bred animals as milk producers would willingly accept simultaneous inoculation for the protection of their animals against rinderpest. Colonel Pease said that the whole purpose of the breeding of half-bred cattle was for the production of milk, but, as a general policy, he considered the system wrong. There were several good breeds of Indian cattle, but their breeding has been neglected. Experiments with Brittany cattle had shown that when the cross-bred stock were turned out in the villages, they gave little more milk than the indigenous cattles; when kept under good condi- tions, however, their milk yield was considerably higher. He referred to the danger of increasing the virulence of certain diseases by passage through cattle of imported strain owing to their greater suscepti- bility. Colonel Farmer described the breeding operations which had been carried out at the Hissar farm. He thought that one of the main reasons of the deterioration of stock in the villages was the large number of inferior bulls that were left uncastrated, and said that during recent years the veterinary department of the Punjab had carried out castrations to a greatly increased extent. Mr. Clouston said that in the Central Provinces there was no indigenous breed with good milking qualities. Imported bulls were being used, but the breeding operations were under strict super- vision; cross-breeding experiments with other Indian breeds for the purpose of improving milk production were also in progress. He urged that the chief aim should be to encourage the growth of fodder crops to properly feed the animals before attempts were made to improve the breeds. Colonel Walker then proposed the following resolution:36 Colonel Farmer seconded the proposal and it was carried un- animously. At the close of the proceedings, Colonel G. K. Walker proposed a vote of thanks to the President, and referred to the very sympathetic attitude which he had always adopted towards the veterinary de- partment. Mr. Oliver seconded the motion which was carried unanimously. Colonel Farmer proposed a vote of thanks to the Secretary, which was seconded by Mr. Quirke and carried unanimously. The meeting then came to a close.
37 List of Resolutions passed at the First Meeting of Veterinary Officers in India, held at Lahore from the 24th to 26th March, 1919. Subject I. 1. That the report of the sub-committee (on Veterinary Educa- tion) be adopted. 2. That the meeting of the Principals of the Veterinary Colleges to revise the curricula should be held in Calcutta. Subject II. 3. That this meeting is of opinion that the importance of establishing veterinary dispensaries with a staff adequate to deal with outbreaks away from headquarters should be impressed on Local Governments and on District Boards. Subject III. 4. In view of the depleted staff of the department, it is not con- sidered expedient or feasible to raise the question (Revival of the "Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science") at present. Subject IV. 5. That this meeting is of opinion that the present consti- tution and organization of the Civil Veterinary Department are utterly inadequate to cope with the work demanded of it, and it, therefore, respectfully represents to the Government of India the absolute necessity of filling up all existing vacancies in the Indian Civil Veterinary Department without delay, and would emphasize the importance of a large expansion of all provincial work of the country. 6. That the department should be placed in a position to deal with the diseases of animals, veterinary instruction and all operations for improving the breeds of horses and agricultural stock in India. 7. The report (of the sub-committee on reorganization of the Civil Veterinary Department) was unanimously adopted by the Meeting. 8. That the report of the sub-committee (on Veterinary Educa- tion dealing with the constitution of the staffs at the veterinary colleges) be adopted. 9. That the Government of India should be asked to include in the list of officers of the Civil Veterinary Department the names of all officers of Provincial Cadre classified under separate provinces. 10. That a central authority in the person of a Director General is required to initiate and co-ordinate the work. He should be a specially selected officer with experience in each branch, if possible, and he should be given some measure of authority over the officers of the department. Subject V. 11. That it be recommended to the Government of India that in Section 8, Clause (b), of the Dourine Act, the word "microscopical" be omitted.
38 Subject VI. 12. That when an adequate and sufficiently trained staff is available, the question of adopting the simultaneous method of inoculation against rinderpest more generally might be taken up as being more economical and more effective. Subject VII. 13. That the need for investigation of the whole question of tuberculosis in India was urgent and should be emphasized in resolutions framed under Subject IX. Subject VIII. 14. That it is considered that any suitable measure that can be adopted for reducing and destroying the surplus population of dogs is desirable, but that it does not appear to be possible under the conditions prevailing in India to deal more effectively with the disease. Power should be given to veterinary practitioners to order the detention and destruction of dogs suffering from rabies. Subject IX. 15. That in order to deal with the physiological and pathological problems of animal husbandry in India it is necessary to have a fully equipped central research institute with an adequate staff. The Muktesar and Bareilly Laboratories, if the necessary staff is supplied, might be developed into a central institute of the kind proposed. In view, however, of climatic and other considerations it may be necessary to consider alternative sites. The staff should be sufficient to permit of the deputation of officers to work out problems in collaboration with provincial veterinary officers either at provincial laboratories or in the field. 16. That the Meeting is in favour of the creation of a separate organization for the study of the insect parasites of men and animals, the connection with the Civil Veterinary Department being on the lines suggested by Mr. Howlett in his note. Subject X. 17. That it should be left to the Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India to determine whether veterinary officers should be invited to the meetings (of the Board of Agriculture in India) or not. 18. That for the present, meetings of veterinary officers should be held annually. 19. That all members of the Civil Veterinary Department should be invited to future meetings. Subject XI. 20. That in the opinion of this Meeting some form of legisla- tion is necessary to deal with cattle diseases, especially as regards segregation and the movements of cattle, and that such legislation should be introduced, when possible. Subject XII. 21. That except in special cases, where rapid milk production is required and where efficient control is established, the general importation of exotic breeds of cattle is not to be recommended at present. The main policy should be the improvement of indi- genous breeds by selection.
39 APPENDIX A. Note on Veterinary Education. (F. Ware, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Madras.) In discussing the question of veterinary education in India, owing to the diversity in the general educational standard of the youths in the different parts of it, it is extremely difficult to formulate proposals which can be made applicable to the whole of the country. In this connection, it is interesting to note the remarks of the Hon'ble Sir Claude Hill on this subject at the last meeting of the Board of Agriculture:40 years and at the yearly class examination there should be a written paper as well as oral exami- nation for each subject." Mr. Wilson of the Central Provinces says:41 APPENDIX B. Note on the revival of the "Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science" or the issue of some such periodical reserved for the publication of the scientific work produced at the Muktesar Laboratory and by the members of the Civil Veterinary Department and Army Veterinary Corps in this country. (F. Wake, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Madras.) "The Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science" appears to have been discontinued concur- rently with the abolition of the Inspector-Generalship of this department, but the loss of the latter, however much it was felt by the department, did not mean that original veterinary work ceased either at Muktesar or in the provinces. In other words, if the journal justified its previous existence, and this seems never to have been disputed, there is as much reason for its issue now as there was before, provided some one can be found to edit it. Moreover, now that conditions may permit of the superior service both at Muktesar and in the provinces being strengthened, the present seems to be a good time to revive it, for, with a strengthened superior service ample material should bo forthcoming to assure its success. As things are at present, a veterinary officer in this country, when wishing to publish some of his work, has to choose between sending it to the "Agricultural Journal of India," or to be published as a Memoir or Bulletin by the Agricultural Department, or to one of the English pro- fessional papers. Objections can be raised to each of these alternatives and there is no doubt that the lack of a veterinary journal of a high standard in this country at least does nothing to encourage veterinary officers to do any original work, even if it does not actually deter them from publishing work they have done. Owing to the time and energy required to run such a journal for the whole of India success- fully, it is not likely that any local officer would undertake to do it without monetary remunera- tion, but considering the importance of having such a journal, in which the scientific veterinary work already done and to be done in this country in the future would be collected for easy reference both by workers in India and in other tropical countries, and the incentive it would offer to publish research and original work, the Government of India might bo asked to consider the advisability of offering a suitable remuneration to a veterinary officer in this country will- ing to take up the editorship.
42 APPENDIX C. Note on the extent to which the serum simultaneous method of inoculation against Rinderpest can be carried out amongst the cattle of India, particularly with reference to the best way of supplying each province with the necessary virulent blood. (F. Ware, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Madras.) Now that the point has been definitely settled by the work which has been done in the last two years amongst military dairy cattle that even pure-bred Australian cattle can be satisfac- torily immunized by the serum simultaneous method against rinderpest with a very small percentage of losses, it is necessary to consider ways and means for introducing this method as soon as possible amongst the cattle of the civil population of this country and so do away with the necessity for relying only on the serum alone method which has several limitations, to combat this disease. The serum simultaneous method might be undertaken in two classes of animals, viz., (1) as an animal inoculation of the animals of a herd, which had not previously been done, whether rinderpest were prevailing in the neighbourhood or not, and (2) amongst the animals of a herd or village actually affected with the disease, in order to obviate the necessity of re-inoculating the unaffected animals several times while the disease lasts. As regards the first class, the virus for the initial inoculations would have to be procured from Muktesar or Bareilly, unless a specially virus producing station can be started in each province. This however soems to be a difficult thing to arrange, principally owing to the difficulty of obtaining suitable animals in sufficient numbers. Supposing that the initial supply of virulent blood is obtained from Muktcsar, owing to the lack of a local virus producing station, the supply of virus for the second inoculation of the primary herd and inoculations of succeeding herds of cattle, many of them containing imported blood like those belonging to the Military Dairy Farms, it is easy to arrange for a few young susceptible animals to be sacrificed to supply virus for both the purposes mentioned, but this would often be very difficult to arrange when dealing with animals belonging to private individuals. When dealing with a herd of country-bred animals it would probably not be possible to obtain suitable virus producers at all, and when some of them contained imported blood it would be just those that the owner would want to protect most. By arranging to inoculate the herds of several owners together, it might be possible some- times to obtain the 2 or 3 susceptible calves required but this would be the exception rather than the rule. In addition, there is the fact that the people of this country dislike taking life, which is really what happens to the virus producers, so that in dealing with animals belonging to natives of the country it would be preferable, if we wished the method to become popular amongst them, to obtain the virus from outside. In dealing with outbreaks of rinderpest in villages, groat difficulty is found at least in some parts of the country, in persuading the people to give their cattle the opportunity of contracting inoculation with sorum, and it seems possible that at least some of them would not object to the simultaneous inoculation, provided the virus were obtained from outside and they did not see the animals bled. It would bo a great advantage, therefore, and save much time and serum by avoiding further re-inoculation if arrangements could be made to give the animals of those people willing for it a dose of virulent blood simultaneously with the serum. The chief points for discussion therefore are whether any arrangements can bo made locally in each province for the supply of virulent rinderpest blood and, if not, whether the Director of the Muktesar Laboratory can arrange to supply the provinces with it in the quantity likely to be required.
43 APPENDIX D. Proposals for the provision of laboratories and staff for the study of insect parasitology. (F. M. Howlett, B.A., F.E.S., Imperial Pathological Entomologist.) These proposals aim at providing adequate facilities for a comprehensive study of "medical" and "veterinary" insects, and a staff sufficient for the purposes of research, for the carrying out of practical measures or demonstrations on a small scale, and for a certain amount of educa- tional work in special lines. The work would consist in the study of the insect parasites of men and animals, with speoial reference to the needs of the Medical and Veterinary Departments, who would have partial control of its direction. I suggest the creation of an independent depart- ment acting as an entomological link between the two departments just mentioned: any medical or veterinary officer should have the right to accommodation in the home of insect parasitology, and vice vers. The precise relations of this department with existing or proposed medical or veterinary Institutes and Colleges, as regards specimens and collections or matters connected with teaching, will be best arranged by consultation. There should be a central station in an accessible and well-chosen locality within reach of various climatic conditions; the neighbourhood of Deolali, Poona or Dehra Dun (particularly the first two) are not unsuitable. As sub-stations, advantage might in most cases be taken of existing laboratories, but in special instances it would be necessary to construct small buildings, and for these provision has been made in the estimated expenditure, which is as follows:44 I suggest that Mr. Awati should be transferred to the department of parasitology on the conditions of service mentioned above, but that his services should be at the disposal of the Medical Department as hitherto. Similarly, one entomologist should be considered as definitely at the disposal of the Veterinary Department for any purpose or line of work for which he might be required by the head of that department. Any other special lines of work which it might be desirable to take up would bo arranged in consultation with the heads of the medical and veteri- nary departments or their scientific officers, and for such enquiries any or every member of the staff should be considered available, each expert being held practically responsible for the conduct of his own branch, subject to the general supervision of the Senior Expert. Attached workers. Provision has not been made for giving regular courses in elementary parasitology, though this would not involve more than an extra initial outlay of Rs. 25,000 (for an average of 20 students) and say Rs. 500 recurrent. Special instruction would however be given to officers or nominees of any department, up to the limit of accommodation provided Medical and Veterinary officers having the first call. I have not included in the staff any, Bacteriologist, Pathologist, Protozoologist or Chemist. Collaboration with experts in these branches would however be very desirable and at times essential. Accommodation and equipment would be provided which would enable such experts to carry out enquiries at the central station and Government or private enterprise might be stimulated to provide a few Research Studentships from Indian and European Universities. Information Bureau. The Central Station should perform the functions of an information bureau on insect parasitology, and should circulate abstracts of all literature on the subject published in India, together with a classified card-index of references. Copies of all Government publications relating to the subject should be forwarded in this connection. Under the above head I place also such activities as the preparation of cinema-films, lantern- slides, and, if necessary, lectures or pamphlets or small text-books required for special purposes or for distribution. Publications. With regard to "scientific" publications, and the extent to which the existing organs of the Medical, Veterinary, or perhaps other departments should be used, I think that consultation would be advisable. Personally, I am not sure that there is room for an independent publication. Buildings. The full scheme as proposed comprises one central station with ramifications in the form of sub-stations in various parts of the country. The question of the nature and number of these sub-stations I have left indefinite as being a matter for discussion, and to a great extent dependent on the general form of biological organization, which may or may not involve the establishment of all-round "biological stations." I should be prepared to put up a detailed scheme, if desired. As regards the main buildings, i.e., the central station, the principle of small detached laboratories has been adopted in view of the very great saving in expenditure thereby secured. Collections, Library, Administrator's office, and clerical staff are in one building, while the great majority of the rest consist of combinations of small circular buildings (rondavels). These are very cheaply constructed, adaptable to many uses and have the considerable advantage of permitting the independent construction or expansion of any one section of the total laboratory accommodation proposed. The use of this system allows of good laboratory accommodation for one expert and four assistants being provided at a building cost of well under Rs. 3,000. A "Guest-House" for the use of visitors and attached workers is included in the estimate. The cost of providing water and power, and of any necessary road-construction, is so largely dependent on circumstances that it has been omitted from the estimate. It will be realized that it must take some time to fill the posts proposed, and the full pro- gramme as regards both building and other expenditure would come only gradually into opera- tion. ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE. Initial. RS. Main building, 7,500 sq. ft. @ Rs. 5 per sq. ft. ..... 37,500 Laboratories, equivalent to 50 Rondavels of 16 ft. diameter, @ Rs. 750.......... 37,500 Apparatus of all kinds, materials, fittings, and furniture . . 1,10,000 Initial Library Grant . . . . . . . . 10,000 1,95,000
45 Rs. 10 Bungalows @ Rs. 10,000, and 1 Guest-House @ Rs. 20,000 1,20,000 Quarters for assistants, clerical and menial staff . 1,25,000 Purchase of 100 acres of land....... ?10,000 Total Initial Expenditure 4,50,000 (N.B.CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
PROCEEDINGS OF THE Second Meeting of Veterinary Officers in India Held at Calcutta from 26th February to 2nd March, 1923 WITH APPENDICES [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1924 Price Re. 1 As. 12.
PROCEEDINGS OF THE Second Meeting of Veterinary Officers in India Held at Calcutta from 26th February to 2nd March, 1923 WITH APPENDICES [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1924
Agents for the Sale of Books Published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN EUROPE. Constable & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.O. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trbner & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E.O., and 39, New Oxford Street, London, W.O. Bernard Quaritch, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. P. S. King & Sons, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. H. S. King & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C., and 9, Pall Mall, London, W. Grindlay & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W Luzac & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.O. W. Thacker & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. T. Fisher Unwin, Ltd., 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.O. Wheldon and Wesley, Ltd., 2, 3, and 4, Arthur Street, New Oxfor St., London, W. C. 2. Messrs. East and Weut, Ltd., 3, Victoria Street, London, S. W. 1. B. H. Blackwell, 60 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Deighton, Bell & Co., Ltd., Cambridge. Oliver and Boyd, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. Ponsonby, Ltd., 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. Ernest Leroux, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, Holland. O to Harrassowitz, Leipzig. Friedlnder and Sohn, Berlin. IN INDIA AND CEYLON. Thacker Spink & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Newman & Co., Ltd., Calcutta. R. Cambray & Co., Calcutta. S. K. Lahiri & Co., Calcutta. B. Banerjee & Co., Calcutta. The Indian School Supply Dept, 309, Bow Bazar Street, Calcutta, and 226, Nawabpur, Dacca. Butterworth & Co. (India), Ltd., Calcutta. Kai M. C. Sarcar Bahadur and Sons, 90/2A' Harrison Road, Calcutta. The Weldon Library, 57, Park Street, West, Calcutta. Standard Literature Company, Limited, Calcutta. Lal Chand & Sons, Calcutta. Association Press, Calcutta. The International Buddhist Book Depot, 4, Chandney Chowk, 1st Lane, Calcutta. Higginbotham & Co., Madras. V. Kalyanarama Iyer & Co., Madras. G. A. Natesan & Co., Madras. S. Murthy & Co., Madras. Thompson & Co., Madras. Temple & Co., Madras. P. R. Rama Iyer & Co., Madras. Vas & Co., Madras. E. M. Gopalakrishna Kone, Madura. Thacker & Co., Ltd., Bombay. D. B. Taraporevala, Sons & Co., Bombay. Mrs. Radhabai Atmaram Sagoon, Bombay. Sunder Pandurang, Bombay. Gopal Narayan & Co., Bombay. Ram Chandra Govind & Son, Kalbadevi, Bombay. Proprietor, New Kitabkhana, Poona. The Standard Bookstall, Karachi, Rawalpindi and Murree. Mangaldas Harkisandas, Surat. Karsandas Narandas & Sons, Surat. A. II. Wheeler & Co., Allahabad, Calcutta and Bombay. N. B. Mathur, Supdt., Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Munshi Seeta Ram, Managing Proprietor, Indian Army Book Dept, Juhi, Cawnpore. Rai Sahib M. Gulab Singh & Sons, Mufld-i-Am Press, Lahore and Allahabad. Rama Krishna & Sons, Lahore. Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Delhi. Supdt., American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. Proprietor, Rangoon Times Press, Rangoon. The Modern Publishing House, Ltd., 70, Sparks Street, Rangoon. Manager, The "Hitavada," Nagpur. S. C. Talukdar, Proprietor, Students & Co., Cooch Behar. A. M. & J. Ferguson, Ceylon. Manager, Educational Book Depts, Nagpur and Jubbulpore.* Manager of the Imperial Book Dept, 63, Chandney Chowk Street, Delhi.* Manager, "The Agra Medical Hall and Co- operative Association, Ltd." (Successors to A. John & Co., Agra).* Supdt., Basel Mission Book and Tract Deposi- tory, Mangalore.* P. Varadachary & Co., Madras.* Ram Dayal Agarwala, 184, Katra, Allahabad.* D. C. Anand & Sons, Peshawar.* Manager, Newal Kishore Press, Lucknow.* Maung Lu Gale, Proprietor, Law Book Dept, Mandalay.* Times of Ceylon Co., Ltd.CONTENTS PAGE INTRODUCTORY 1 List of members and visitors . . . . . . . 1 Programme . . . . . . . 3 Opening of Proceedingsii CONTENTS PART IIIProceedings of the Second Meeting of Veterinary Officers, held at Calcutta, from the 26th February to the 2nd March, 1923. INTRODUCTORY. The Second Meeting of Veterinary Officers in India was held in Writer's Buildings, Calcutta, from the 26th February to the 2nd March, 1923, under the presidency of Colonel G. K. Walker, C.I.E., O.B.E., F.R.C.V.S., Principal, Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore. Members. 1. Colonel G. K. Walker, C.I.E., O.B.E., F.R.C.V.S., Principal of the Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore (President). 2. Mr. J. T. Edwards, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Director, Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, Muktesar (Secretary). 3. Mr. K. Hewlett, O.B.E., M.R.CV.S., Principal of the Bombay Veterinary College. 4. Mr. E. S. Farbrother, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay Presidency. 5. Mr. P. J. Kerr, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, and Veterinary Adviser to the Government of Bengal. 6. Mr. A. D. MacGregor, M.R.C.V.S., Principal of the Bengal Veterinary College. 7. Mr. D. Quinlan, M.R.C.V.S., Director, Civil Veterinary De- partment, Bihar and Orissa. 8. Mr. P. B. Riley, M.R.C.V.S., Deputy Director, Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa. 9. Mr. G. G. Howard, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.H., Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa. 10. Mr. C. W. Wilson, M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Adviser to the Government of the Central Provinces. 11. Major R. F. Stirling, F.R.C.V.S., Second Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces. 12. Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., Chief Superintendent, Civil Veteri- nary Department, Madras Presidency.
2 13. Mr. Krishna Murthi Ayyar Avergal, Professor of Pathology and Bacteriology, Veterinary College, Madras. 14. Mr. W. Harris, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Assam. 15. Mr. T. F. Quirke, M.R.C.V.S., Chief Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab. 16. Mr. R. Branford, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar. 17. Mr. C. J. N. Cameron, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.H., Second Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Burma. 18. Captain S. G. M. Hickey, M.R.C.V.S., Officiating Veterinary Adviser to the Government of the United Provinces. 19. Captain W. H. Priston, F. R. C. V.S., Second Superinten- dent, Civil Veterinary Department, United Provinces. 20. Khan Saheb Sheik Naiz Mohammed, Officiating Third Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, United Provinces. 21. Mr. R. T. Davis, M.R.C.V.S., Professor, Bengal Veterinary College. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA DELEGATES. The following representatives of other Imperial Services attended the conference at the request of the Government of India:3 PROGRAMME. The agenda placed before the meeting comprised the following subjects:4 (2) The present position in respect to research and the efficacy of methods of treatment. (3) Information with regard to trypanosomiases, other than surra, found in India. (d) Contagious abortion: information regarding its incidence among imported and indigenous stock; proposals for control. (e) Tuberculosis: prevalence of tuberculosis among live-stock in India, and the danger of infection to human beings from this source. (f) Parasitology (helminthology and entomology): necessity for instituting a survey of the incidence of the grosser parasites of live-stock in India and for the formation of central departments to control work in this connection. (g) Infectious lymphangitis in cattle: causation and treat- ment. (h) Nasal granuloma in cattle: causation. (i) Rabies: measures of control. (j) Diseases of sheep: nature, incidence, and control of the more important disease conditions among sheep in India. III. GENERAL. (a) Legislation: the desirability of introducing further legis- lative measures for the control of animal diseases. (b) Statistical: methods of obtaining and recording statistical information regarding the incidence of epizootic diseases in India; suggestions for improvement. (c) Animal husbandry: what is the role of the Civil Veterinary Department in dealing with problems directly concerning the live-stock industries in India? (d) Methods for facilitating and improving the supply of sera and other laboratory products, particularly in regard to the needs of remote districts. (e) Meat inspection: is it within the present competence of the department to deal with this problem; what further arrange- ments for training personnel for the special duties entailed are required? (f) Methods to be adopted to correlate technical information and render authoritative advice on professional problems. (g) The advisability of amalgamating certain Veterinary Ser- vices in India.
5 PRESIDENT'S OPENING ADDRESS. In his opening address at the previous meeting of Veterinary Officers in India held at Lahore in March 1919, Mr. Mackenna, Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India, who presided, referred to the Veterinary Conference at Calcutta in 1908 which was independent of the Board of Agriculture. It was resolved at the conference that a Board of Veterinary Science should be es- tablished, but the proposal did not materialize. At the meeting of the Board of Agriculture at Poona in December 1917 it was proposed and accepted that periodical meetings of veterinary officers should be held every three years with the result that this is the second meeting of the kind to be held. The orders of the Government of India on the resolutions of the first meeting were that sectional meetings of veterinary officers might be held in alternative years, i.e., in the years in which the Board does not meet, and that one or two members of the Veterinary Service from each province would constitute a sufficient attendance. It has been decided also that technical and professional subjects should form the chief business, administrative questions being dealt with at the meetings of the Board of Agriculture. In consequence, it has pleased Government to permit the senior veterinary officer present to preside. It has fallen to my lot to have the honour and, incidentally, the responsibility of preparing the agenda. I trust that I shall be able to satisfy both Government and you in the performance of my duties. The privilege of presiding is tempered by the fact that seniority has its disabilities and that time means changes. Since our last meeting, Colonel Farmer and Mr. Shilston have died. Both officers have left many friends in the Service and in India to deplore their loss. In each case devotion to duty contri- buted largely to early demise. Colonel Pease, who had to his credit many years of distinguished service in India, has retired, and we miss other senior officers in Colonel Smith, Major Oliver, and Mr. George Taylor. I beg to accord a welcome to those officers who have been deputed to attend by their respective Governments, and I trust that everyone will join in contributing to the usefulness of our discussions. We have a heavy programme before us and there are some very important matters to examine.
6 At this stage I do not propose to deal with any of them in detail I have endeavoured to include in the agenda all the subjects sug- gested by the respective veterinary officers through their Local Governments, and I will call upon them individually to present their cases in due course. It may be necessary to form committees to discuss the details entailed by the complexity of some of the subjects under reference, but we will come to that later. The question of education is the first subject we have to deal with and at the present time it ranks very large. We have to bear in mind that Indians are to be educated in veterinary science up to a sufficiently high standard to enable them to fill the highest positions available. At the previous conference certain definite decisions were arrived at, and at the Meeting of Principals held in Bombay last year the details of the course of study were comprehensively worked out. I understand that the Government of India consider the scheme to be very thorough and worthy of serious considera- tion by Local Governments. They have already congratulated the Government of the Punjab on the adoption of a four years' course of study. Mr. Secretary Hullah's note on the subject is before you and you will perceive -that he writes in pessimistic strain. The lack of adequate hospital practice alone must rule out Muktesar as a possible place for a veterinary college. Veterinary colleges can only thrive in populous centres where other educational facilities exist. Mr. Hullah thinks apparently that a four years' course of study is only required for a very limited number of men, viz., those who are to receive gazetted rank, whereas it was the unanimous opi- nion of the members at our previous meeting that four years was the requisite minimum for all. In view of the general desire to provide a good veterinary education for Indians this view is doubtless correct, but it is clear that aspirants will be few unless prospects are improved. It is not reasonable to expect a man to spend at least four years of his life at a college where a severe course of study is required without holding out some adequate return for the necessary outlay in time and. money. In short, the problem is inevitably complicated by the external financial question, and although it is not within our province to discuss finance, we shall waste our time if we ignore its consideration. We can hardly be expected to advise the creation of a cheap and inefficient agency, but the question of ways and means certainly complicates matters. We should not fail, however, to impress certain facts in respect to veterinary education on a public which is lamentably ignorant of the true position. The empiricism practised by the latter gener-
7 ally, demonstrated by the unlicensed use of drugs on subjects unable to protest and unsystematic and haphazard experiments in the secrets of nature, is an indication of the general estimation held of an art which requires for its effectual practice a wide knowledge of many of the sister sciences. Science cannot be taught without the use of expensive apparatus and equipment. I do not wish to labour the point, but it seems to be necessary to affirm as strongly as possible that, as students of veterinary science must be taught "cause and effect," a long and expensive education is necessary, more especially in respect to preventive medicine. If, on the other hand, a band of empirics licensed to dispense drugs and to perform certain crude operations is required, the position is different. My own view is that if the latter course is to be adopted, we should draw a very strict line of demarcation between those who are educated to know the reason why and those who are mere mechanics. I am inclined to think that the middle course hitherto pursued has been only moderately successful, but I have no desire to influence your deliberations at this stage of the proceedings. The section on epizootic diseases is of great importance as, apart from the economic factor, we are dealing with questions of very great professional interest. Anthrax has been given a prominent place, as, being communicable to human beings, it has an added importance. In this connection we are fortunate in having with us, as a visitor, Colonel Hutchinson, the Public Health Commissioner with the Government of India, who has made a special study of the economic issues. The same remarks apply to tuberculosis, which is also to be discussed. The need for close collaboration between the medical and veteri- nary services need not be emphasized. The veterinary profession owes much to the medical profession, and it is a source of gratification to be of any assistance to the latter in dealing with its problems. Rabies was discussed at the previous conference,but the subject has been re-submitted by Madras and we shall hear if there is any- thing new to learn about it. The need for a separate organization for the study of insect parasites was discussed at the last conference and the matter is. still under the consideration of the Government of India. The general questions are very wide in their scope and it is doubt- ful whether we shall be able to deal with them adequately in the time
8 at our disposal It will serye a useful purpose, however, if the seeds of further progress can be planted in the hope that nutrition will be provided. The subject of legislation was discussed at the pre- vious conference, but the Government of India doubted whether with the existing staff any practical advantages would be gained by enhancing the legal powers of enforcing preventive and curative measures against cattle disease. The position has not altered materially since then. The need of improving our means of obtaining more accurate statistical information is obvious. We are all aware that the existing systems are unsatisfactory. The role of the department in respect to animal husbandry was discussed at the last conference. Animal husbandry is a very wide subject intimately connected with complicated economic factors. There are few problems more complex than the problem of how to effect an improvement in cattle breeding in India, and there is an increased public demand for salutary measures. Such measures, to have any chance of success, require to be discussed in a broad- minded and comprehensive spirit by men who have special knowledge of the scientific side and, in particular, considerable experience of the peculiar conditions occurring in this country. It is certain that Government cannot provide large capital expenditure to invest in animal industries, but model farms and dairies are necessary for educational purposes. Private enterprise on sound lines should be encouraged. I consider that each Province ought to appoint a standing advisory committee to deal with the question. Committees should not be large and should be formed of well- informed non-officials associated with veterinary, agricultural, and dairy experts, with a revenue officer as secretary. It might be advisable also to constitute a central committee on the same lines with the Government of India, to which references could be made and reports submitted. With the aid of the reports the central committee should be able to frame certain principles and circulate them for information and guidance from time to time. This method of dealing with the matter conforms in principle with the views of the committee which discussed Subject XII at the meeting of the Board of Agriculture at Pusa in 1916. The Government of India concurred in the report of the com- mittee and in reviewing the proceedings of the last Veterinary Conference stated that they were not prepared to reconsider the matter at present. The subject has been entered in the agenda
9 as it was included in the list of suggestions received from several. Governments, but the question for the time being is one for the administration. I am not prepared to allow the matter to be dis- cussed, therefore, unless any member of the conference has some- thing to bring forward of strictly professional interest. You are again reminded that administrative questions are to be dealt with at the meetings of the Board of Agriculture. The reference from Burma in respect to the storage of serum has been widened in its scope as I feel that the question will repay a full discussion. Meat inspection was suggested by Mr. Cross, who is not present. Perhaps some other members of the conference may have some remarks to make on the subject. The remaining subjects will be presented by their respective sponsors in due course. I will not take up more of your time except to express the hope that the results of our deliberations will be appreciated favourably by Government. The Civil Veterinary Service in India is well known to be inordinately weak for the nature and scope of the work that is demanded of it. The economic factor should in itself demand a liberal policy, but we have experienced many serious set-backs and there seems to be very little prospect of immediate progress. It behoves us, however, to look upon the future as cheerfully as possible and to do our utmost individually and collectively to increase the respect that is due to the profession which we have chosen. It should be our daily duty "to improve our knowledge and to do something progressive for our art. We have to fight against ignorance and apathy, but that need not dishearten us. The great master Pasteur fought a glorious fight. If we cannot approach him, we can emulate him. We may take as our motto "Decolatus sed vivus" and give our best.
10 PART I.11 "Nothing has arisen since 1919 to make the proposal more practi- cable. On the contrary the financial situation, the completeness of the autonomy of the provinces, the fact that "veterinary matters" are now an entirely provincial concern and also a trans- ferred subject render the proposal more difficult and impracticable now than in 1919. "The proposal put forward in, the note (circulated to members of this conference) by Mr. Hullah, the late Secretary to the Govern- ment of India in the Revenue and Agriculture Department, that there should be a single college for all India and that all Local Governments should contribute to the necessary capital outlay and pay fees for the students so that no cost at all would fall on the Government of India, is contrary to the opinion of the Lahore conference and is logically unjustifiable, and that such a course would be agreed to by the local Legislative Councils is highly im- probable. "It is probably true, as Mr. Hullah says, that the Imperial Service will in time disappear and presumably its place will be taken by a superior Provincial Service entirely under the Local Governments. The Provincial Service can never be large, probably in Bombay not more than five officers, for many years to come. The cost of training these five officers in Europe or America by means of State scholarships would be less than the contributions to the Government of India for buildings and upkeep of a central college. After the five men had been trained, the wastage would be very small indeed12 and quite impracticable for many years to come, if ever. It is also more than doubtful if men taught up to the standard suggested would justify their existence in the districts in the place of the present Veterinary Assistants. In my view the scheme proposed in Bombay should remain in abeyance." After some discussion with the Chairman, Mr. Hewlett made it clear that he wished to adhere fully to the decisions arrived at in sections (a) and (6) of the report of the sub-committee on veterinary education at the first conference held in Lahore in 1919 (pp. 12 and 13). In view of the financial situation existing in each province and the absence of adequate prospects for veterinary graduates he no longer adhered to the statements contained in section (c). It appeared to be beyond the means of Provincial Governments to carry out a scheme involving a four years' course of training such as was outlined in the Bombay conference, and it must be remembered that the Veterinary Services were now entirely transferred subjects and in all provinces were at present controlled directly by the Local Government. He therefore maintained that a course covering a period of three years was all that could be attained at the present time. He regarded the Bombay programme as too ideal and ambitious. Mr. Cameron explained the conditions of service in Burma where there were two grades of personnel, namely, a lower grade, starting at Rs. 40 a month, who were trained at the schools at Burma, and a higher grade, from whom were promoted Deputy Superin- tendents, who had received their training at the Bengal Veterinary College. He believed that one of the existing colleges in India might be utilized as a central college for the training of Provincial Officers of the higher grade. His views in regard to the details of training which appeared to him to be indicated were distributed among the members in a circular. He did not consider it necessary to build a new college for higher training. Some of the basic training could be imparted at the universities, while training in preventive medi- cine could be given at Muktesar. The Chairman maintained that it would be useless to educate, by means of post-graduate training, men for higher posts who had not received an adequate basic training. He agreed that no province could afford to educate all of the veterinary personnel required up to the highest standard. It seemed to be necessary, therefore, to institute a short course of training, probably covering only two years, for a certain number of men. The four years' course, which aimed at providing men who already possessed a groundwork of education with an intelligent grasp of their profession, was required for the higher posts. He had suggested this procedure to the Punjab
13 Government and he believed that in time there would be a much greater demand for the more highly educated men. Mr. Hewlett thought that we ought to adhere to the three years' course of training, and that a sufficient number of men for the higher posts could be obtained by proper post-graduate teaching. In particular, he wished to impress upon the meeting that for certain of the higher posts, as for example, for the teaching of anatomy, it was quite unnecessary to put the selected men through a course of pathology and allied subjects. The Chairman contended that the men who were selected for the higher posts in the Service, including the men who were to bear the responsibility of teaching, should have a wide general education and a sound knowledge of the basic sciences. The subjects which Mr. Hewlett considered to be unnecessary were of great importance in veterinary science. Mr. Kerr recapitulated the views which he had already presented to the members in a circular. The first point to be decided was what the position of the services was likely to be in future. It had to be admitted that the services must become rapidly Indianized. At the present time there were a number of Bengalis under training in Europe with a view to appointment to the Imperial Service. It had also to be decided whether there should be direct recruitment to the Deputy Veterinary Superintendent grade, or whether men of this grade should be promoted from the lower ranks. Mr. MacGregor stated that the training at the colleges must cater predominantly for men of the Veterinary Assistant type. Any further training must be imparted in post-graduate courses. He was emphatically of opinion that no additional subjects could be included in a scheme of three years' training, for it was his experience that in order to teach properly the subjects that were already down for study in the three years' curriculum at least four years were necessary, particularly in view of the fact that the large number of gazetted and other holidays observed at his college interfered very materially with the prosecution of study. Mr. Cameron further dwelt upon what he considered to be a satisfactory method of post-graduate training for men who had undergone the initial training of Veterinary Inspectors and were selected for promotion to the Veterinary Deputy Superintendent grade. Mr. Branford contended that if such men were not given a comprehensive ground-work of education to commence with, they could not be deemed capable of taking full advantage of advanced. post-graduate study. B
14 Mr. Farbrother believed that we should concentrate upon the better training of men of the Veterinary Assistant class, and he was further of opinion that men of the Veterinary Deputy Superintendent grade should be selected men from this class who had undergone further training. Mr. Edwards subsequently dealt at length with the problem which was now directly before the meeting, namely, whether any revision of the conclusions noted in this section of the agenda was necessary. His views had already been communicated briefly to the members in his circular. He strongly maintained that the Bombay programme represented the minimum required for the inculcation of an intelligent conception of veterinary science as the science stood at the present day. He pointed to the advances made in our knowledge during recent years, since the time when shorter courses of study were adequate. It now seemed that financial conditions forbade the education of men employed in the veterinary services up to this satisfactory standard. In view of these circumstances, he submitted to the meeting that, for what might be termed routine work, such as that of serum inoculation and the diagnosis and treatment of simple clinical cases of disease, men drafted from a class intimately con- nected with the live-stock industries might be trained in a short time, perhaps for a period of only two years, to undertake such work satisfactorily in the field. Such men must not be regarded generally as possessing an understanding of their vocation, but would perform certain duties mechanically. He further referred to the experience of distinguished individuals who had been engaged in veterinary teaching in Europe and said that though such author- ities recognized that the training imparted in some of the most important schools had obvious shortcomings, it was nevertheless such as was required in the type of man demanded by the public, namely, the general practitioner. Likewise, in India, the training of the veterinary personnel should be such as was required in the type of. individual for which the Indian public was willing to pay and with whom they were satisfied. Ik was of no use trying to impose for- 15 Bombay meeting, and (2) a lower cadre trained to accomplish certain tasks, menially or mechanically, representing by far the greater proportion of the service numerically, and useful in certain allotted and restricted functions. An intelligent perception of the science need not be required of these men, and a short course of study, probably not exceeding two years, might be found sufficient, whereas for the men admitted into the higher posts and who were destined to perform the incalculably important function in the economy of a well-ordered State, namely, the control of contagious animal disease, the Bombay programme represented the irreducible minimum in primary veterinary education. He further maintained that the teaching resources of the country were now so limited that it would be necessary to concentrate all their best available resources in teaching personnel and equipment at one centre in order to im- part an intelligent system of training such as that outlined at Bombay. Mr. Hewlett stated that the last speaker seemed to have over- looked the fact that some of the most distinguished members of our profession were men who had been trained when the period of study demanded was only three years, or even two years. By analogy, he maintained that men could at the present clay achieve like advancement by superimposing post-graduate instruction upon the shorter, three years, course of study. Mr. Edwards explained that the men whom Mr. Hewlett had in mind as having achieved distinction had passed through their college training when the amount of knowledge available in regard to animal disease was relatively very small, and such men had achieved distinction by continuous study after graduation. The Chairman likewise maintained that the advances made in veterinary science during recent years had been so enormous that an expansion of the course of study was inevitable. A con- centration of the best available teaching resources in one province seemed to be indicated and the other provinces should be invited to send their students to be trained up to the standard required for the higher posts at such a central college. Mr. Quinlan and some other members objected to a course of study extending over only two years, even for the lowest grade of the service, as they believed a recommendation of this kind would be regarded as a retrograde step by Governments. The Chairman in addressing the meeting next day at the resumed discussion of this section of the agenda stated:16 the course of instruction prepared by the Principals at Bombay- I shall ask for a formal resolution to that effect. There is no doubt that it represents a genuine attempt to educate Indians up to the highest standard in veterinary science. Personally, my only fear is that four years may prove to be rather too short a time for students admitted to the colleges after passing the Matriculation standard of examination to grasp the work. My experience in the Punjab is that the Matriculation standard is not very satisfactory. We should aim at obtaining students with the Intermediate qualifications in science, and the Punjab prospectus provides for them. "It is clear, however, that for financial reasons this compre- hensive course cannot at present be adopted at all our colleges. It has been suggested that it should be adopted at one and that is probably the only course open at present. It has to be decided later if promotion to gazetted rank should in time be limited to men who have gone through a four years' course of study as students. "A four years' course cannot then be generally adopted for two reasons; first, because all the existing colleges cannot be enlarged, equipped and. staffed sufficiently, and secondly, because the graduate cannot be paid highly enough to encourage students to enter for a course of training of this duration. "We have got to put up therefore with a large proportion of less educated and lower paid men for the present. "A course of study must be devised for them, and although Local Governments will have the deciding voice in the curricula adopted at their own colleges, it will be helpful and advisable if we can suggest a suitable course, or even alternative courses, at this meeting. We may appoint a committee for the purpose and lay down general principles for its guidance. There is a division of opinion as to whether the course should remain at three years as at present or should consist of two years in future. As you know, I am in favour of the latter course, but I will try to present both points of view to you as fairly as possible. "The arguments in favour and against are both professional and financial. From a professional point of view we know from past experience of the three years' course that animal pathology, includ- ing bacteriology and parasitology, which are essential in a study of State veterinary medicine, cannot be taught in a three years' course to students who have no previous knowledge of the basic sciences of chemistry, physics and biology. The subject has grown enor- mously since the three years' course was first instituted about a quarter of a century ago. We have progressed a lot since then. In Lahore we made this discovery some years ago and a four years'
17 course was first instituted by Colonel Pease, when he was Principal of the College. It was recast entirely by me as it exists at present. The Punjab University is discussing our affiliation and the grant of a degree in veterinary science. I am aware that it appears to be a retrograde step to return to a two years' course, and there is no doubt that we cannot expect to turn out scientific men in that time. But my point is that we cannot hope to do so in three years either, and I believe that in a three years' course, chemistry, botany and pathology cannot be included. The scope of veterinary study has developed so much that three years' study for men of inferior pre- liminary education is quite insufficient. Why then pretend to give a qualification that cannot be substantiated in its practical outcome? If we do not pretend to turn out scientific men, I think we can turn out useful assistants in 'veterinary aid' in two years, and that brings me to the financial aspects. There is no doubt that men who have done three years will not remain content with the present rate of pay, whereas two years' men should remain satisfied. If the pay of the three years' men has to be raised, it may be that the existing establishment of the veterinary services will be reduced and not increased. Further expansion and increase of expenditure should be directed, I consider, to the employment of a larger propor- tion of well trained men, who would be in responsible positions and be capable of carrying out investigation and giving sound profes- sional advice. If we continue the three years' course, the men who have gone through it will expect to be considered eligible for promotion to gazetted rank, for which they will be poorly equipped by reason of their limited knowledge of the basic sciences. Our experience of post-graduate instruction at Lahore is that in the great majority of cases these men are unable to grasp pathological study owing to their ignorance of histology and general biology. Doubt- less, brilliant exceptions occur, but in such cases many years of subsequent patient study are involved and they must be treated as rare individuals. I repeat that the time is rapidly approaching when the three years' men will be dissatisfied with their pay and prospects, and that, in my opinion, we should create a class of men who will do useful work in the field on what we can offer, and be content. The increased expenditure on establishment should be directed to employing a larger proportion of well educated men capable of taking responsible positions. We owe it to our profes- sion to insist that a man who describes himself as a veterinarian should be well educated and capable of meeting members of other scientific professions on equal terms. The time will come in India, as in other countries, when a legal status will be given to qualified veterinarians. If we look ahead, therefore, we should, in order to avoid complications, create a well educated class entitled to the
18 use of the term 'Veterinarian,' and also, in order to meet the present financial difficulty, a class of assistants who will not be entitled to&gt; the use of the word 'Veterinary.' Personally I think the word 'salutri' is quite suitable. "I hope that Colonel Pallin will speak on this subject, for although at the present moment no recruits are required for the Army, some will doubtless be required in the course of time. Sir John Moore was whole-heartedty in favour of the four years' course and supported me in putting through the present course at the Punjab Veterinary College. "If Indian veterinary officers are to be employed in the Indian Army in future, I think you will agree that a four years' course is essential for them. There may be room, however, for a number of salutris to assist in the larger hospitals." Colonel Pallin stated as follows:19 "We all know what fine rulers, statesmen, soldiers, legal ad- visers, etc., India can produce, but my view is that Indianiza- tion of the Government services has its limitations, and I venture to say that these limitations are more accentuated in regard to the classes from which our Indian veterinary graduates are drawn than in any other Indian community which aims at obtaining Govern- ment employment in positions at present filled by gentlemen with European education and qualifications. Only quite recently I was reading an account of a speech made by His Excellency the Gover- nor of the United Provinces at some function at the Agricultural. College, Cawnpore, at which he said, as well as I can remember, 'Agriculture is by far the most important industry in this country, and I do not think that any one is likely to dispute this statement.' Consequently, in view of your close connection with agriculture and the importance of keeping live-stock free from contagious and infectious disease I fail to see why your service does not appear to receive more consideration from the Government and carry more weight with the general public. In fact, I was more than surprised to find a statement by Mr. Hullah in his criticism on your educational scheme to the following effect: 'The difficulty, of course, lies in the existence of the Imperial branch of the Service. That branch will, I have no doubt, soon cease to exist' Gentlemen, with all due deference to the Indian gentlemen at present employed in your department, my considered view is that it will be a fatal mistake if the Government of India ever try to officer your service with Indians only. "Irrespective of ability, caste and religious principle will always make it very difficult, if not impossible, for the Indian to carry out a campaign against a contagious and infectious disease amongst animals unless he is directed and supported by British officers. "I am quite with you in your efforts to improve the education and training of your Veterinary Assistants. But I should be very wary about going beyond a certain point, for not only will you find yourselves gradually absorbed by gentlemen with Indian veterinary qualifications, but all the good work which has been done by your service in this country since its formation some 35 years ago will be wasted. If I may say so, what is required of you is to put your own house in order first. No officer without the diploma of the R.C.V.S. and at least one post-graduate course should be accepted for service in the Imperial branch. After they have been accepted these officers should aim at keeping themselves qualified up to the highest standard; for this purpose I maintain that searching examinations should be passed periodically before promotion is obtained to the higher appointments of your service.
20 "More unity and co-ordination of your colleges and provincial offices appears to be necessary, and for this purpose I am convinced that you are certainly in need of a Director, who should occupy a corresponding position to that of the Director-General of the Indian Medical Service. "Judging by the correspondence which has been going on in the veterinary journals for some time the officers of the Indian Veterinary Service appear to have certain grievances in connection with their conditions of service. I am of opinion that the settle- ment of these grievances is very largely in your hands. You must co-ordinate and combine if you want to attain success, but, first and foremost, you must by your presence and bearing, as well as by the economical results of your professional work, make the public and Government realize that you not only justify your posi- tion but that you are worthy of more sympathetic treatment and improved terms of service. "This leads me up to the subject of the necessity for the re- organization of the Indian Veterinary Service. This subject is not down for discussion at this meeting, but your educational ques- tion is so absolutely interwoven with your organization that it is very difficult to review one without considering the other. At the time I was preparing my notes for this meeting, I had not had an opportunity of perusing the proceedings of your first meeting, which was held at Lahore during March 1919, but I see now that the whole history of your service and the necessity for reorganization was most ably expounded at that meeting by Colonel G. K. Walker, and I consider that we should not allow this conference to break up without passing some further resolution on this subject, at the same time drawing the attention of the Government of India to the fact that the members of this conference view with deep concern the whole future of the Indian Veterinary Service; the utility and economical value of this Service is of such importance to the State, provided it is properly organized and efficiently staffed, and they, the members of this meeting, therefore, very much regret that the Government of India does not appear to have taken any steps seriously to consider the views put forward in resolutions Nos. 5 and 10 passed by the veterinary conference assembled at Lahore between the 24th and 26th March, 1919." The Chairman stated that purely administrative questions could not be discussed at the Meeting. Continuing, Colonel Pallin said:21 sibly four years' curricula running side by side, I would suggest adhering to your present three years' curriculum and then from amongst the successful graduates select men for a one year's post- graduate course, of which not less than six months would be spent at Muktesar. These men would be called upon to pass a further examination at the termination of that post-graduate course, and if successful, would be granted some form of post-graduate certi- ficate and would be noted as qualified to fill the appointment of Veterinary Inspector and for early promotion to the rank of Deputy Superintendent after having carried out the duties of Veterinary Assistant in the field for, say, not less than two years, to the satisfaction of the District Officer and Veterinary Adviser of the province." In reply to the Chairman, Colonel Pallin stated that the reason why there had been no demand for recruits as certified Indian veterinary officers in the Army during the past two years was because there were no vacancies. He would be quite satisfied with a course of training extending over three years for these officers. He did not consider it necessary to extend the training further for holders of the Viceroy's Commissions. Further, if veterinary officers holding the King's Commission were to be appointed to the units that were in future to be officered entirely by Indian officers, these veterinary officers ought to possess the diploma of the Royal College of Veteri- nary Surgeons. He considered that it was impossible to discuss the question of education adequately without entering into a con- sideration of the constitution of the Civil Veterinary Service as it was to stand in the future. This consideration was essential al- though the President ruled, at the request of the Government of India, that such administrative questions were to be discussed at meetings of the Board of Agriculture. Mr. Quinlan stated that teaching up to the highest standard as was formulated in the Bombay programme, could only be under- taken if adequate teachers were available, and this essential could only be attained by improving the conditions and salary of teachers; it appeared that such improvement was impossible in the present financial situation. Mr. MacGregor referred to the note of dissent inserted by Sir Prank Sly in the Report of the Public Services Commission to the effect that teaching up to the highest standard for the veterinary service should be undertaken in Europe, and that it was not feasible to teach to this standard at present in India. He agreed with this view. The Chairman proposed that, as an agreement appeared to lave been reached regarding the course of study drafted by
22 the Principals at Bombay, the following part of a resolution be adopted:23 higher and the lower standard. At present there was no demand in Bengal for men educated for a period of four years in accordance with the system laid down by the Principals at the Bombay con- ference. Khan Saheb Sheikh Naiz Mohammed was against a two years' course of instruction, for the men turned out in this manner would not have sufficient ability to render satisfactory information in regard to the occurrence of contagious diseases. In many districts there was only one Veterinary Assistant left in charge of the large area represented by a single district. Mr. Cameron stated that he had had sixteen years' experience in Burma with what was termed a double cadre. For the lower cadre men were at first trained for a period of two years, but this short period was found by experience to be insufficient and it was then increased to three years. At the present time, this period appeared to he the minimum that could be satisfactorily adopted. He agreed that there should be two cadres in the services, namely, a higher one trained for a period of four years and a lower one which might be trained for three years. Mr. Quinlan agreed with the view that it was necessary to con- stitute a division of cadres, into a higher cadre and a lower cadre. There would, however, be difficulty in the eastern provinces of India in adopting a scheme based on such a division in view of the poor quality of men who were now turned out of the Bengal college. The conditions might well be different in the other three colleges in India. He thought that close contact with European teachers formed a most important element in framing the character of the men who passed through any course of veterinary study in India. He considered that for the present a three years' course of study covered all that was necessary for the training of the subordinate veterinary personnel required in his province. The main obstacle towards the improvement in the type of men produced at the Bengal college was represented by the lack of ability of the teachers them- selves, although occasionally some good men were forthcoming as the result of the three years' course of training. He believed that it would be certainly a retrograde step to go back to the two years' course of study. He thought it would be impossible for the two years' men to carry out the work now required of such men in the districts. Men of this type could perhaps he improved by passing through a post-graduate course of study subsequently extending over about 18 months. Mr. Wilson was in favour of continuing the existing method of instruction at the colleges without any fundamental revision of the three years' course now in vogue.
24 Mr. F. Ware agreed with Mr. Wilson, but considered that it was necessary to revise the three years' course by the insertion of the subjects25 In the three years' period of study, pathology, as had been suggest- ed by Mr. Ware, could not be properly taught, as it pre-supposed a knowledge of histology and general biology. For the short period of study, it would probably be well to eliminate not only these subjects but also chemistry and botany, and not attempt to produce thereby men with any pretence to scientific attainments. Our knowledge in regard to the nature of animal disease had increased so much during the last 15 or 20 years that a sound frame work of education in the science could not be imparted in a period of three years, and men trained for this period would not be worth, or capable of, further education in their profession. He favoured the admission of students who had passed the University Inter- mediate examination in chemistry and biology as soon as possible. The Matriculation standard in science was not sufficient. Mr. Hewlett maintained that the two years' course of study had been tried in Bombay and was not found successful. He con- sidered it necessary to continue the system of training men for at least three years. In reply to Mr. Ware, Colonel Walker said that he had suggested to the Punjab Government that men who went through a four years' course of training should start on a salary of Rs. 100 a month. He would not be able to get recruits for the course if the graduates were made to start at the ordinary commencing salary of Veterinary Assistants, namely, Rs. 60 per month. Mr. Ware said that he saw no objection to the prolongation of the course to four years in the Madras college. Mr. Hewlett considered that prolongation would be too expen- sive at the Bombay college, where the students were not stipen- diaries for the most part. Mr. Quinlan said he could not see his way to agree with the institution of the higher course of training at the colleges on account of the lack of training facilities at present existing in the country. Teaching up to the higher standard was not possible in the existing circumstances. After further discussion the two following parts of a resolution were passed:26 The Chairman (Colonel Walker), Messrs. Hewlett, Wilson, Cameron, Quinlan, Ware and MacGregor, with Mr. Edwards as Secretary. Before presenting the report of the committee, subsequently, the Chairman said that arising out of the proceedings of the com- mittee he thought that it would be advisable to amplify the first paragraph of the resolution already passed during the discussion on this section of the subject of education, as the paragraph appeared incomplete as it stood. With the proposed addition, this part of the Resolution would read thus, Resolution I (a) (1) The system of study drafted by the meeting of Principals at Bombay is approved as a curriculum representing the present minimum requirements for the training of Indians in India up to the highest standard of veterinary education necessary for the country, as demanded by the Public Services Commission (1912-14). (2) The constitution of a Board of Veterinary Studies as recommended by them is urged very strongly, and the Board might be authorized to make minor modifica- tions and additions to the course from time to time as required and in consideration of the needs of the several provinces. The desirability of raising the standard of preliminary education as soon as possible is worthy of early consideration. (3) It is considered that Muktesar is unsuitable for such a course and immediate steps should be taken to institute it at one of the existing colleges and, as soon as financial considerations permit of the constitution of an efficient organization for dealing with problems connected with veterinary state medicine, at the other colleges also. Mr. Hewlett strongly protested against the constitution of a Board of Studies as he believed it was not consistent with the general policy of devolution and made for centralization. Otherwise, he agreed to the addition. The Chairman pointed out to Mr. Hewlett that as a member of the Principal's Conference he had already agreed to the formation of the Board of Studies. Mr. Hewlett said that he had since changed his mind. The addition was agreed to by all the other members.
27 The report of the committee, appointed to consider the duration and scope of the shorter courses under part (c) of the resolution, was as follows:28 "(2) Clinical Veterinary Practice: the nature and methods of treatment of the common non-contagious diseases of the domesticated animals. Surgical methods (including examinations for soundness, ageing, and surgical shoeing). Obstetrical methods." The above report was unanimously approved and accepted by the meeting. The committee was unable to progress further with the tasks allotted to it in the time available; hence the Chairman put the following supplementary resolution covering the remainder of the terms of reference to the full meeting. It was carried unanimously (Mr. Hewlett dissenting). "It was decided that the detailed syllabus for the course should be drawn up by a Central Board of Studies. Persons who pass through the proposed course should be entitled to the designation 'Veterinary Assistant.' " SUBJECT I (b).29 "With regard to the men already in the existing appointments who have only gone through a three years' course, or less in some cases, I am of opinion that promotion should only be given in future to selected men who have undergone post-graduate instruction. Post-diploma courses should impart different kinds of instruction suitable to the needs of the various appointments which have to be filled. Two courses of nine months each are detailed in the pros- pectus of the Punjab Veterinary College. They are intended for three years' men who have not had the advantage of having been fully trained in pathology and the other sciences. If possible, both courses should be taken by candidates selected for Deputy Superin- tendentships before promotion. For officers selected for profes- sional chairs special training is required, and until a higher standard is reached in our veterinary colleges it is apparent that special arrangements have got to be made for them. In the Punjab we have deputed and are deputing selected men to Europe and other colleges in India to fit them to teach up to the higher standard of veterinary education now adopted at the college. They should be able to train likely successors, but I am a great believer in change of environment during the teaching of the specialist if it can be arranged. I think, therefore, we might suggest that, in future, those men who have not undergone a four years' course should receive post-diploma instruction in State medicine before they are promoted to the rank of Deputy Superintendent, and that before he is promoted to a professorial chair carrying gazetted rank a man should have received special extra-mural instruction in the subject which he is to teach. "In both cases the special study should be approved by a competent authority before promotion has effect. I do not think that promotion should be given to any man who cannot serve 10 years or more before retirement." Mr. Hewlett said: "With regard to the qualifications required for promotion from the subordinate department to the Provincial Service, my view is that the matter being entirely of provincial concern had better be left to the Local Governments and their Advisers." Khan Saheb Sheikh Naiz Mohammed had circulated in his printed copy of observations upon this item in the agenda the following note on the requirements of subordinate members of the department selected for promotion to the Provincial Service:30 (b) Good administrative ability; (c) Must have gone through a post-graduate course; (d) Should be up-to-date in his professional knowledge (e) Must have served as a Veterinary Inspector in the Depart- ment for at least 5 years. Mr. Cameron again referred to the experience gained in connec- tion with the two cadres in the Veterinary Service in Burma. Pro- vincial officers, i.e., Deputy Superintendents, had all been trained at the Bengal Veterinary College and possessed Matriculation certi- ficates of the Calcutta University, and a thorough knowledge of the English language was also demanded of them. On graduation they were admitted into the service in the category of Inspectors. It was possible that an Inspector might serve as such for as long as 9 years before he was promoted to the grade of Deputy Superin- tendent, and in the case of many, the capacities displayed by them did not hold out for them any likelihood of obtaining promotion at any time during their career. It was possible for a Veterinary Assistant trained at the schools at Burma to attain before the end of his service the rank of Inspector, but ordinarily he held this rank for a period of only a few years, four or five perhaps, before retire- ment. Mr. Wilson stated that none of the Deputy Superintendents in the Central Provinces had matriculated. He considered that the qualifications necessary for promotion to this rank should be left in the hands of each of the provinces concerned. The framing of any rules which might be required should be arranged entirely by the particular provinces, and he considered that it was essential to send the men selected for promotion out of the provinces for post-graduate training. Mr. Ware stated that in Madras post-graduate courses of instruc- tion were given at the veterinary college to Assistants selected for promotion to the rank of Inspector and also for Inspectors selected for promotion to the rank of Veterinary Deputy Superintendent. He thought that the qualifications expected of men promoted in these grades should be left to the Local Governments. Mr. Hewlett agreed with this view. Mr. Hickey pleaded that a system of uniformity in the matter of promoting subordinate members to the Provincial Service should be adopted throughout the country. In adjacent provinces the standards in vogue might vary greatly and cause considerable discontent in the province where higher qualifications were demanded.
31 The Chairman said it seemed that the question at issue now resolved itself into whether the qualifications should be left entirely to the Local Governments to decide upon, or whether it was advis- able to standardize them. Mr. Branford thought that some general indications concerning the qualifications of selected men were desirable, but thought that no immutable rule should be laid down. Mr. Davis thought that the difficulty might be surmounted by not admitting as candidates those who did not possess a Matricula- tion certificate. Mr. Farbrother stated that there appeared to be required two categories of Veterinary Deputy Superintendents, namely, one destined to occupy posts in the colleges, who were expected to be specialists and therefore required post-graduate training, and secondly, one serving in the districts for whom further training was not essential. The latter category could be selected as in the past, by the experience gained with regard to their work in the field; the best men for the class of work which they were expected to undertake could not be surely discovered by an examination system. Mr. Quirke considered that this matter had best be left to the discretion of the Local Governments. Mr. Quinlan stated that a system analogous to that adopted in Madras was in vogue in Bihar. Mr. Kerr considered that a post-graduate course of instruction, with the adoption of certain necessary tests, should be insisted upon as a necessary qualification. Mr. Harris stated that in Assam there was only one Veterinary Deputy Superintendent on the staff in his province. He considered that it was desirable to lay down that a man promoted should undergo a post-graduate course of training and be examined: otherwise a delicate situation might be created by selecting men for promotion who did not appear to deserve such promotion in the minds of their colleagues on the ground merely of seniority. Mr. Hickey agreed with this view and pointed out that discon- tent might arise among Inspectors if selection based upon the opinions of a superior officer with regard to past work were the means of promotion. Mr. Kerr admitted that certain members might display evidence of suitability on account of the administrative ability they had displayed in the course of their career, but notwithstanding this it was in his opinion preferable to standardize the system of promo- tion. C 2
32 After some further discussion it was resolved unanimously:33 "They considered that there would probably be only a few Provincial Officers who possessed the requisite education and ability to reap the full benefit of such a course. "They suggested in lieu a course of two years in England for these ill-educated men and stated that they were advised that special study of the kind would be of 'greater value' than a study of the subjects required for the diploma of R. C. V. S. After two years' study it was proposed to promote these men to the Imperial Service in spite of the fact that they would not have the qualifications that they had considered necessary a year previously. This scheme was sent to Local Governments for opinion and in due course reached me. "I said that I considered the proposal to be retrograde and that it appeared that the admitted backwardness of veterinary educa- tion in India was being put forward as a plea for lowering the standard of the Imperial Service. I pointed out the revised course of four years' study at the Punjab Veterinary College approximated closely to that of the R. C. V. S. and that the instruction provided in the basic sciences would enable students to take advantage of post-graduate training on the lines suggested by the Government of India. "I stated that Provincial officers holding chairs in subjects for which they had special qualifications and aptitude and in which they had gained distinction were in a different category and should be regarded as special cases. I added that if. in pursuing a policy of expediency, it was decided to send members of the Provincial Service for training, equal facilities should be given to men employed in the Punjab in spite of the fact that I did not agree with the proposed course: It would obviously be hard on men of equal ability in one province to be denied advantages given to men in other provinces. "It seems to me that in making selections for the Imperial grade without expert advice the Government of India are in a very diffi- cult position. Provinces do not demand equal standards of attain- ments in their Provincial Services, and their recommendations are influenced accordingly. A selection Board of Imperial Officers is certainly indicated. "The Government of India apparently had some support for their scheme for training selected men in England as it was sent to the Secretary of State for approval. "He referred it to Sir Stewart Stockman and Professor Edwards, who doubted its practicability and suggested that the desired train- ing should be given in India.
34 "On Professor Edwards' arrival in India he was consulted. He drew up a very enthusiastic scheme extolling the advantages of Muktesar for the purpose. This scheme was presented to the Principals at the Bombay conference, who were unable o discuss it at the time in the detailed manner considered necessary. "It was suggested that it should be circulated for opinion as it appeared to be open to considerable criticism and amendment. The opinions of the Superintendents were obviously necessary. The Principals had already suggested that selected students who had taken the proposed degree in veterinary science, i.e., after the four years' course of study, might be regarded as candidates for appointment to the Imperial Service, after undergoing a further course of post-graduate instruction in India. The Government of India, however, ignored these suggestions and decided, without taking further advice, to adopt Mr. Edwards' proposals and to start the course from the 1st July, 1922, by way of trial. The letter propounding this was dated 16th June and was received by the Principal, Punjab Veterinary College, on the 18th July. "It is understood that some provinces have nominated candi- dates and they are undergoing instruction. They have a flying start, therefore, of any possible candidates from Punjab. As a matter of fact the Punjab Government were not asked to send any men. "I am unable to accept the course as drawn up by Mr. Edwards. It is merely an outline and lacks detailed information. Mr. Edwards suggested that prior to admission candidates should be interviewed and submitted to certain tests by an examining board. As far as I know this very obvious and necessary safeguard has not been adopted. "It was also suggested that only men who had at least 10 or more years service to put in should be deputed, which appears to be sound. I understand, however, that this suggestion has also not been put into effect. What sort of test, if any, is to be applied at the end of the course remains to be seen. "Recently, a Provincial Service officer in Madras has been pro- moted to the Imperial grade without having done this course. "I will sum up the situation. In 1920 the Government of India drew up a scheme for training Provincial officers for promotion to the Imperial Service. In 1921 they revised the scheme, but it was not approved by the Secretary of State. In 1922 they insti- tuted another. In 1923 they promoted an officer without any of special training which they had previously announced necessary. I repeat that I am bewildered by the comparative rapidity of the changes brought about and the obscurity of the situation.
35 "What are the qualifications required for the promotion of Provincial officers to the Imperial Service and who is to be respon- sible for their promotion? "Are Provincial men who have been promoted to fill a certain proportion of the Imperial posts or is promotion to be given as a reward? I am opposed to making the Imperial Service a sort of selection grade and such a course would be obviously extravagant. "If this is going to happen the sooner the Provincial and Imperial grades are amalgamated the better. The scheme would probably be economical as the pay would be revised on a uniform scale between the two services, non-domiciled officers receiving adequate overseas allowances. "In the meantime if the Government of India are determined to promote a certain number of Provincial officers to the Imperial Service, I think we should recommend very strongly that some standard of qualification should be laid down. It should comprise special post-graduate instruction successfully completed in (a) particular subjects (Professors) or (b) State medicine (District Officers). A detailed syllabus of minimum requirements should be prepared by a committee of veterinary officers. I consider also that only men of outstanding character and ability should be selected and that a Selection Board of as permanent a constitution as possible should approve of every candidate before promotion." Mr. Hewlett submitted the following note:36 Mr. Hewlett further stated that he understood that the men at present selected for training with a view to entering the Imperial Service would be employed in the provinces from which they came. In this manner they would represent merely a selected grade of Provincial officers drawing Imperial Service pay. He considered that the promotion of officers to the Imperial Service by this method had better be left in abeyance for the present, and that the Imperial Service, properly so called, should be restricted to British officers as hitherto, recruited in England. The training of Provincial officers with a view to replacing Imperial Service officers had also better be left in abeyance for the time being. The men now under training, he thought, should be admitted into the Imperial Service grade, but when a superior Provincial Service grade was created, they might be made to enter that category of the Service. The men under training should be promoted if there were appointment available when they emerged from training. He had recently advocated the promotion of Provincial officers who had done remarkably good work during their careers, but this method of promotion should be rare and exceptional. Indeed, he was not prepared to recommend men for promotion for some time to come. The Chairman said he believed that the Punjab Government would have stern objections towards making the Imperial Service a selection grade for Provincial officers. Mr. Howard explained the predicament in which some members of the Imperial Service now undergoing their period of probation found themselves. It appeared not unlikely that they would be turned out of their appointments when the promoted Provincial officers had completed their training. Mr. Krishna Murthi, in making answer to the remarks made in the President's discourse, stated that since the year he had got qualified in 1909, he had taken great pains to submit himself virtually to continuous post-graduate instruction under eminent masters and that on account of the efforts which he had made in this direction and the services which he had rendered, he had been selected for appointment in the manner stated to the Imperial Service. Mr. Kerr was in a dilemma as to the object of recruiting for the Imperial Service in this manner. Mr. Hewlett explained that in the Report of the Public Services Commission it had been stated that a certain proportion of Pro- vincial Service officers must be promoted to the Imperial Service after undergoing further training, and that the Government of India had taken steps officially in accordance with this recommend- ation.
37 Mr. Wilson explained that he had deputed one of his officers to the Muktesar course with a view to having him trained more especially in laboratory technique. He subsequently discovered that the officer was being trained in the general duties expected to be performed by men of Imperial Service rank. Mr. Hewlett believed that it was clearly laid down that the promoted men must be subsequently employed in their own pro- vinces. Mr. Quinlan agreed with the observations made by the Chairman regarding the high-handed manner in which the Imperial veteri- nary officers in charge of provinces had been treated in the matter of the training of the men now undergoing instruction with a view to promotion. Mr. Howard maintained that only men possessing the diploma of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons should be eligible for the Imperial Service. Mr. Quirke likewise stated that the M. R. C. V. S. qualification of its equivalent should be insisted upon. He pointed out that there would arise difficulties of a commercial nature if men were admitted not possessing these qualifications, as certificates in regard to animal disease were not accepted by certain corporations or individuals unless they were signed by a holder of that particular diploma. Mr. Cameron also stated that this objection was a real one, for it often occurred that there was difficulty in granting a certificate in regard to the export of hides from Burma when no M. R. C. V. S. was available. The Government of Australia, for example, would not accept a certificate in respect of exported hides unless it was signed by a M. R. C. V. S. Mr. Riley also raised the question regarding the possibility of hardships for Imperial Service officers now under probation, when the men now under training became promoted. The Chairman then proposed the terms of a Resolution:38 Mr. Hewlett opposed the institution of tests on the admission of officers for training upon the advice of a Selection Board. Mr. Quinlan submitted that the question of safeguards might be left to the experience of Mr. Edwards, who had undertaken the training of these officers at Muktesar. Mr. Edwards explained the main aspects of his experience gained in training the officers selected for promotion during the past year at Muktesar. He insisted that it was necessary to examine men of the type selected for promotion carefully beforehand in order to ascertain whether they could carry a superstructure of post-graduate training involving an intelligent appreciation of modern know- ledge regarding animal disease. It was his experience that logical discussion on broad issues with ill-educated men merely conveyed to them the impression that they were being imparted a theoretical teaching, and such men were not capable of grappling with the difficult propositions encountered by practical workers in disease investigation. There appeared to be an all-round clamour among officers occupying posts in the Indian Services, who had ceased their training in Europe at a comparatively very early age, that all that was necessary to attain full competence and efficiency in their pursuit was to attend a so-called post-graduate course of train- ing; whereas, in reality, competence could only be acquired by hard work and study and long apprenticeship under a skilled master of the calling. It seemed that the self-styled "practical" man in the veterinary profession in every country was a man who never read, or studied, and was too much obsessed with his innate abili- ties to seek improvement from the experience of others. He had found great difficulty in impressing upon the students whom he had under training the need of submitting themselves to repeated testing in order to gauge their progress; he could not undertake to train men satisfactorily unless they were prepared to submit themselves unconditionally to what he considered to be essential tests. It had been represented to him by students that in post-graduate courses elsewhere no system of tests was instituted. He had had to point out to them that the ordinary post-graduate courses were attended by men who generally paid for their instruction themselves and attended the courses at considerable personal sacrifices in order to improve their knowledge concerning matters in which they were deeply interested. The men he had had for training were at first under the impression, in common with many other individuals, that training in practical work merely involved recognition of type specimens at the class-room bench, and failed to realize that scienti- fic investigation involved tedious and prolonged examination of material which did not invariably conform with the type specimens
39 selected usually and purposely for the ready teaching of class stu- dents. He pointed out also the difficulty he had had to convey to students the necessity of unremitting attention to their work if they wanted to acquire competence in the methods in disease investi- gation. He had found that they had become the slaves of office procedure, with its restricted hours and numerous so-called gazetted holidays. The resolution as drafted by Colonel Walker seemed to be an indispensable safeguard for ensuring that men deputed for training would make the effort which was expected of them during their attendance at such courses. He further wished to impress on the meeting that he had strongly advocated the training of veterinary graduates who were selected to occupy the highest posts in the service in India at Muktesar, because the institution now presented facilities which were probably unrivalled in the world for the teaching of problems in animal preventive medicine, particularly those peculiar to India. The resources of the institution could best be developed if research and teaching were prosecuted at it concurrently. Moreover, the wealth of material for study and the strength of the staff available for imparting instruction in the side of their profession of importance to the State, namely, what might be termed animal preventive medicine, epizootiology, or State veterinary medicine, far surpassed those available in any veterinary institution at Home, where, moreover, the susceptibilities of the Indian student would not be specially considered. With patient training he had found the students become more amenable, and they certainly possessed ability, so that he was confident of the ultimate success of the training. The course at present was merely a trial course, and he had submitted his report on the first session of the two years of study to the Govern- ment of India. The needs of the men deputed for training would always be carefully watched, and the instruction given would be modified as necessity arose to fit them for the duties which they would subsequently fulfil. The resolution drafted by the Chairman was then passed un- animously. SUBJECT I (b) (3).-THE DIRECT APPOINTMENT OF INDIANS TO THE IMPERIAL SERVICE. The Chairman said: "With regard to the direct appointment of Indians to the Imperial Service, I presume that the same quali- fications as those required by the Secretary of State for British officers will be considered necessary. Hitherto, the Secretary of State has selected only British officers who possess the diploma of
40 the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, and have passed through a post-graduate course of training or have some special qualification. I do not know if similar qualifications have been demanded from Indians recruited for the Imperial Service. In future, recruitment will be almost confined to Indians. I think all we can say is that we hope it will be possible to maintain a high standard in the recruits and enlist Indians of high character and good education. I consider that Indians selected for scholarships abroad should be selected by a competent board in India, and that after completion of their training they should be examined before appointment by a com- petent board in London. The minimum qualification for recruit- ment should be that of the Membership diploma of the R. C. V. S. for the present. Later, when the University degree in veterinary science has been instituted in India according to the recommenda- tions of the Principals' Conference, the course proposed in their report might be adopted." Mr. Hewlett submitted the following note: "In my view the direct appointment of Indians to the Imperial Service should be made by the Secretary of State from youths sent to Europe to study as State scholars and from youths studying in Europe at their own expense. Later, no doubt this method will have to cease if the recruitment of Indians to the Imperial Service ceases and the superior Provincial Service takes its place. In that case the appoint- ment of our officers will rest with the Local Governments, who, probably, would wish to select the youths and send them to Europe or America to study as State scholars." Further he stated that, in his opinion, Indians appointed direct to the Imperial Service should possess the diploma of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons and should be given a post-graduate course of training in this country on appointment. Mr. Edwards stated that he believed that the Government of India would be in a position to provide technical facilities for the training of appointed men for one year in this country on arrival to take up their posts. Mr. Quinlan maintained that it should be impressed upon the men who had gone to the United Kingdom in order to qualify them- selves for the diploma of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons that it was necessary during their course of training to observe the conditions of cattle practice with reputable practitioners in the large dairying districts in England. The feeling among Indian students trained at the Indian colleges was that their own professors were noticeably defective in their practical knowledge of cattle practice. He considered this knowledge essential on account of the predominant position of the ox as a domesticated animal in India.
41 Mr. Edwards explained that the difficulties which had forbidden insistence upon a form of apprenticeship during the college curri- culum for British students would be much accentuated in the case of Indian students undergoing training in England. They would probably meet with little sympathy even if they exhibited a marked inclination to better their practical experience in regard to cattle practice while they were undergoing training in England. He believed that facilities existed which were admirably suited for their training in this respect in this country and he mentioned particularly the herd of dairy cattle at Pusa maintained under the supervision of the Imperial Agriculturist, and the well known breeding herd of draught cattle at Hissar. His own students under training had recently been sent to Pusa in order to study the improved conditions of maintaining dairy cattle there adopted, and he contemplated deputing them to other centres. It was much more likely that the susceptibilities of students would be studied at these institutions on their return from training in England. Khan Saheb Sheikh Naiz Mahammed in his note on the subject stated: The candidates (Indians) for direct appointment to the Imperial Service should be subject to the same rules and regula- tions as are at present in force for the Service. The Chairman subsequently addressed the members on the neces- sity of adopting safeguards for maintaining a high standard of general education, basic scientific training, and modern professional knowledge in entrants to the Imperial Service. Although the membership diploma of the R. C. V. S. had been hitherto recognised as the essential qualification for entrance to this branch of the Service, the Secretary of State had demanded additional attainments in candidates for vacant posts in view of the fact that the work upon which they were subsequently engaged was of a highly responsible nature and required considerably more knowledge regarding the larger issues in controlling animal disease than was usually obtain- able from the teaching imparted in the four years' curriculum laid down for membership graduation by the R. C. V. S.,42 and university Matriculates who passed successfully through the prescribed courses of study at the schools were granted degrees in Science (Veterinary Science) by the universities concerned. The prescribed courses could be taken concurrently with the course for the membership diploma of the R. C. V. S., but it was recognized that ordinarily an additional year would have to be spent in study by those who took both courses. As the courses of training pre- scribed by the British universities were calculated to impart the soundest primary veterinary knowledge that was desired in candi- dates for the Imperial Veterinary Service, he strongly commended to the members that they should embody in the resolution drafted under this section an expression which would convey to the Secre- tary of State the view that in the selection of candidates, who neces- sarily possessed the diploma of the R. C. V. S., preference should be given to those who possessed a university degree in veterinary science of a British university. If the system of study formulated by the Principals' Conference at Bombay were adopted eventually, it would be imperative to impress upon the Secretary of State that the standard represented above, by the degrees granted by the British universities, was the standard considered to be necessary for entrants to the Imperial Service. The Resolution passed by the members was as follows:43 veterinary college might undertake such a course of training, and if you agree we will appoint a committee to define the courses required in order to obtain some uniformity. The system of post- graduate instruction that should be laid down for Provincial officers selected for promotion to the Imperial Service forms a large problem, but I think the same committee should be able to deal with it. We have Mr. Edwards' scheme to go on and it should be helpful. Imperial officers should take up post-graduate courses under the leave study rules and we may make some suggestions for such courses." Mr. Hewlett:44 Mr. MacGregor stated that the course of training for Veterinary Assistants could probably be undertaken at the colleges, as all that seemed to be required was to resuscitate the enthusiasm of men who had lost touch with their colleagues on account of their isolation in the Mofussil. Mr. Hewlett thought that a course of training should be insti- tuted for the best type of Veterinary Assistant at the commence- ment of his career, if he displayed any enthusiasm in this direction, and he suggested that a course might be given to such men for five or six months at Muktesar. Mr Cameron considered that it would be better before dealing with the question of post-graduate training to settle upon the details of a three years' course of study, and that the discussion under this heading might be postponed until the decisions of the committee appointed were available. After some discussion it was resolved to refer the details under the whole of Section C to the consideration of the committee appointed. As the Committee was unable, however, to complete the labours allotted to it, the Chairman subsequently proposed the following resolutions to the meeting, as they appeared to him to embody the views of the members. The resolutions, which were carried unanimously, were as follows:45 PART II.46 ment of the Bombay Presidency, who referred the matter to the Commerce Department of the Government of India. It was then referred to the Revenue and Agriculture Department and after examination of the conditions existing in India, the Secretary drafted a Bill on the lines of the Glanders and Farcy Act for dealing with the disease. The Bill was next forwarded to him (the speaker) for technical opinion, and advice was submitted upon the peculiar problems connected with the institution of proper measures of anthrax control based upon the general experience of other countries in this respect. In particular, the essential differences in the nature of measures designed with the object of eradicating the two diseases, glanders and anthrax, were pointed out, for in the former the living, usually chronically, affected animal was the point of attack, whereas in the latter disease the carcase of the dead animal was mainly to be considered. It was explained that from the general experience in regard to anthrax it would undoubtedly be found that the disease had a much wider prevalence in India than was evident from the statistics furnished in the reports of the Civil Veterinary Department if a proper system of reporting deaths from this disease were adopted. He related the experiences which had been published in connection with the spread and prevalence of the disease in Argentina and in South Africa, in particular, where it had rapidly assumed the position of the most important infectious disease of cattle in the country. He understood that the condi- tions which had made for the widespread and even epizootic pre- valence of the disease in these countries obtained to a marked degree in numerous localities in India, and in view of this circum- stance he had recommended the insertion of a clause which would enable Local Governments to enforce vaccination in the scene of considerable outbreaks. Unfortunately, the matter of legisla- tion was now in abeyance, at the instigation of the Honourable Member of the above department. Again, the speaker read extracts from a lecture upon the subject of anthrax control given recently by Major-General Sir John Moore, late Director of the Army Veterinary Services in India, at a Meeting of the Royal Society of Medicine in London. It would appear from this address that the lecturer considered there was no excuse for delay in the institution of legislative measures for the control of the disease in India. While he (Sir John Moore) served at the headquarters of the Government of India he had submitted a comprehensive draft of such a measure for dealing with anthrax, together also with detailed drafts of measures for controlling other infectious diseases of animals, to the Government of India. Having in mind the probable outcome of the deliberations of the Special Anthrax Committee of the International Labour Organization of
47 the League of Nations, the evidence already available with regard to the incidence of anthrax in India, together with the economic situation that would arise from the adoption by importing countries of prohibitionary measures in regard to Indian exports of wool, hair, and hides, it appeared that the time was fully ripe for the introduction of legislation to deal with this disease. Legislation of this kind would have for its immediate effect the testing of the machinery represented by the Indian Civil Veterinary Department; the strengthening of this machinery to cope with this disease, although it would undoubtedly prove economically beneficial in itself, would prove to be of incal- culable benefit in controlling concurrently the manifold epizootics of great domestic economic concern. He believed that a compre- hensive measure in the form of a Diseases of Animals Act would be the best form of primary legislation, whereunder certain infec- tious diseases, of which anthrax formed a concrete example, could be scheduled as necessity arose. Orders could be formulated by Provincial Governments then for the application of measures concerning the particular disease. In order to secure uniformity in action throughout the country it would be well for a technical conference to draw up a set of model regulations in regard to each disease for the guidance of Provincial Governments. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson said that he was peculiarly interested in this disease on account of the fact that it was trans- missible from animals to men, and it went to prove that the problem of disease was one and indivisible whether affecting men, animals or plants. The incidence of anthrax infection in man was undoubtedly rare, but the rarity of the infection was no argument against the adoption of stringent measures of control. He stated this in particular as in hydrophobia, for example, costly measures of control were in vogue. Four Pasteur institutes were maintained for the purpose of preventive treatment in India, whereas in regard to cholera, which occurred in infinitely greater distribution, resources for combating the infection were much smaller although it might be safely said that if the amount of money spent for the control of hydrophobia were spent on cholera, much greater benefit would accrue to the country at large. Another point of importance was that any measures which were instituted for controlling anthrax would likewise be of great benefit in providing organization for the control of other diseases. Human anthrax in India was very rare, so far as he could gather. From the very few cases that were on record directly due to infection from animals it would appear that the majority discovered were through infection from shaving brushes. The rarity of the disease in India, however, was not by any means universal. In some other countries the disease was D2
48 comparatively common. He gave some statistical summaries and such statistics could be divided up as follows:49 resolution was passed that the International Labour Office should appoint a committee of experts to advise on the question of the prevention of anthrax in all its aspects. It was also pointed out that wool exported from India lost in the process of disinfection 55 per cent. of its weight and this loss meant gross adulteration or a very dirty wool. A great deal of the wool exported from India is skin wool, i.e., wool taken from a dead animal, and thereby the danger from anthrax is greatly enhanced. It ought to be possible to prevent the exportation of skin wool. The danger of infection from hides and skin was far more serious, and human anthrax from handling hides and skin was practically worldwide. India is not the only country involved in the export of infected hides and skins but takes a prominent position. The importance of this source of infection lay not only in the direct danger of infec- tion from the hides and skins but also indirectly on account of the contamination of other objects from this source. In the United States of America and Germany a large number of epidemics have been recorded, due to the flooding of pasturage by streams into which effluent from tanneries had been admitted. There were also instances on record of infection being left behind in the ships used for transporting these commodities, and grain and hay carried subsequently in the vessels had caused epidemics among horses. Infected bone-meal also gave rise to anthrax. One case had been recently recorded in London, caused by the importation of bone-meal from India. Soil infection also must be considered. Infection from horse hairs was not a serious one as far as India was concerned. The offending countries in this respect were Russia and Siberia. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson then related that he had attended the committee referred to, which met in December last, and it considered firstly the problem of wool disinfection. He considered that this question would again undoubtedly form a part of the agenda of the International Labour Conference that would meet in 1923 or 1924. He gave an estimate of the large sums of money that would need to be expended in completing the processes for the disinfection of wool alone in India. Roughly about 120 million pounds of wool would have to be dealt with yearly. The actual plant needed for the disinfection would involve an initial expenditure amounting to about half a million pounds and the recurring annual expendi- ture would amount to from a quarter to half a million pounds sterling. With regard to wool and hair the committee recom- mended that all wool and hair liable to infection should be dis- infected by an approved method before use industrially.
50 As regards horse hair and pig bristles a resolution was passed to the effect that all such material must be disinfected before use in industry. The question of hides and skins was not taken up in detail, for no process of disinfection is known at present which can be depended on not to injure the hide for industrial purposes. Further research was recommended. The question of eradication of animal anthrax was referred to the International Agricultural Institute at Rome. It would appear from the above resolutions that India is now faced with either the adoption of the compulsory disinfection of all wool before it is used industrially, or the eradication of the disease among animals by preventive measures. Disinfection must be regarded as a confession of failure, and such failure was due to the inadequacy of knowledge or to a lack of facilities for applying such knowledge. In regard to anthrax prevention, knowledge is sufficient for a policy of eradication, if sufficient money was available for this purpose. It seemed therefore that the Indian Veterinary Department had an unrivalled opportunity for pressing for a reorganization sufficient to meet the necessity for preventing disease. On the one hand Government is confronted with the possibility of an unproductive expenditure on disinfection of about half a million pounds sterling annually to save a few cases of human anthrax. On the other hand, much smaller expenditure on the prevention of the disease in animals would accomplish the elimina- tion of human anthrax and at the same time improve the condi- tion of stock in this country. The measures indicated were: early notification of cases among animals, the efficient disposal of car- cases, the limitation of movement of infected herds, and perhaps preventive inoculation. The policy of preventive inoculation against the disease must be seriously considered. South Africa, as had been mentioned by the previous speaker, was faced with this very serious problem, and the Government of the Union has now sanctioned a campaign which at first would cost 200,000 per annum. In regard to hides and skins, there was no process of disinfection at present generally accepted as efficient. More research was needed in order to evolve a satisfactory method, and it seemed that the facilities for such research in India were unrivalled. In the neighbourhood of Bombay, for example, the industry was concentrated in one area and the conditions were thus splendid for observing the efficacy of disinfection. He recounted briefly the process for the disinfection of infected wool as carried out at Liverpool. The fundamental difficulty connected with this lay
51 in the fact that the resistant spore was embedded in a dense blood clot. Throughout the process there was no handling of the wool. The dust involved in opening bales was aspirated into the furnace. The wool passed automatically through two tanks containing an alkaline soap solution at a temperature of 112F. The wool was pressed through rollers between each tank. After thorough scouring in the alkaline soap solution the wool was passed through two dis- infecting tanks containing 2.5 per cent. of formaldehyde at 102F. The wool was pressed through rollers between each tank. The wool was next dried in a current of air at a temperature of 160F. The wool after drying was fit for use. The whole process occupied one hour. In the case of hides and skins many processes had been recom- mended, but there was no process that the trade would accept until by research it was shown possible to evolve a process which effectively disinfected the hides and did not injure the skins. A satisfactory process now appeared to have been evolved by a practical tanner, by which the hides were subjected to the action of a solution of perchloride of mercury and formaldehyde. More research work upon the process was, however, needed before it could be applied to the trade. In the case of bone-meal the material was ground up and subjected to the action of super-heated steam. Mr. Cameron indicated the difficulties which had to be faced in Burma and the steps which had to be taken in order to attempt to solve the problem of anthrax control. In Burma contagious diseases were dealt with by the Burma Village Rules that had to be applied by the village communities, and under these rules a death register was maintained in Lower Burma by the village headman and every animal that died had to be reported to him and a rough diagnosis given. The reporting agency had to be so primitive because the Veterinary Assistants often had charge over an area covering about 500 square miles and could not attend to indivi- dual deaths. Where a disease was reported as contagious, it was the duty of the village headman to report it to the Sub-divisional Officer, who then reported it by telegraph to the Veterinary Adviser. As anthrax assumed sporadic form most frequently it could not be expected that village headmen were able to diagnose the condition. The Sub-divisional Officer was unable to diagnose and the Veterinary Assistant likewise was not competent to diagnose it. Moreover, an animal might die at a distance of 200 miles from the railway. The result was that the hides of such animals were taken off by the owners of the animals and sold. Under the Village Rules it should be stated that if a case was suspected to be anthrax the carcase
52 must be buried intact and slashed after it had been put into the grave in order to prevent the subsequent digging up of the carcase. In his opinion if all animals that die suddenly were buried merely on suspicion of anthrax, their owners would be subjected to hard- ship. On the other hand there were difficulties with regard to the disposal of the carcase. It was stated in the Rules that if the carcase could not be buried it must be burnt and it often happened in the rains that water covered the ground to a depth of 3 feet or so, so that carcases could not be buried and in such conditions it was usually impossible to burn the animals. Mr. MacGregor stated that he remembered that while he went through his post-graduate course, anthrax organisms disappeared within a few days from the bodies of guinea-pigs that had succumbed after experimental infection with anthrax. He wondered whether it would be possible to dispose of an animal effectively by blocking up the natural orifices and protecting it against wild animals so that the organism might in this manner disappear from the carcase. Mr. Cameron further stated that the Contagious Diseases Act in England as amended by the Act of 1894 might well be taken as the model of an Act to deal with animal diseases in India, and he thought that Local Governments might be allowed to make their own orders under it. In Burma the export trade in hides was large and the owner of an animal was liable to a fine of Rs. 5 only if it was discovered that the hide had been removed from an animal that had succumbed to a contagious disease. He con- sidered that a fine of this magnitude was far too low. It was his experience that when a large epizootic occurred in any locality, the number of hides that came from this locality was very large. The deaths in such an outbreak might be due to rinderpest, or anthrax, or other contagious disease, and as the fine was so small and the chances of detection almost infinitely small it was worth the owner's while to run the risk of being fined Rs. 5 only consi- dering that he might easily sell half a dozen hides without detection. The hide firms always insisted that they had disinfected the hides and they were free from anthrax, but no fine would divulge the method of disinfection nor could they adduce proof that the hides in question were free from disease. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson stated that in view of the resolution passed by the committee he had previously dealt with, a certificate would only be taken and recognized as effective in the case of wool, if the process of disinfection adopted had been approved by a special committee to be appointed under Interna- tional Agreement.
53 Mr. Ware stated that the difficulties which Mr. Cameron had enumerated as applying to Burma seemed to be often very formid- able in Madras. For example, no mortality rate had been returned in goats in that province, although the goat population seemed to be innumerable. The mortality from anthrax recorded among other animals in Madras seemed to be larger than the total mortality from this disease in all the other provinces put together. Mr. Cameron further said that he had not observed any anthrax in goats in Burma. He had explained the system of reporting, but when sudden deaths occurred among goats they were attri- buted by the owners of the animals to sun-stroke, snake bite, or some other condition. Mr. Farbrother stated that he had experience of the outbreak of anthrax referred to by Mr. Edwards which had actuated the Gov- ernment of India to take action in regard to legislation. He could not discover anthrax organisms in that suspected outbreak. In Bombay, anthrax was practically never reported except in cattle. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson mentioned, however, that the incidence of sheep anthrax in Sind was of such importance that it had attracted most peculiar attention. Mr. Farbrother said that during his experience in Sind he had confirmed the presence of anthrax in all classes of animals except goats. Further, he pointed out the difficulty of controlling anthrax on account of the existence of the Native States all around the borders of Sind. Mr. Hewlett stated that in Bombay the disease had come to his notice in horses, cattle and dogs. Mr. Kerr from his experience in Bengal said that the disease appeared to be comparatively rare, but no dependence could be placed on the reports received as the owners were not perturbed over deaths involving only two or three animals. In fact, the poor type of animal kept in this province succumbed so frequently from exhaustion or overwork that a sporadic case of anthrax would stand no chance of being reported. One of the main difficul- ties about reporting was that owners did not place much value on their cattle and if they died the owners were prepared to cut their losses quickly and report the death as due to a series of conditions covered by one generic vernacular name, and hence the veterinary authorities could not be enlightened in any manner with regard to the true incidence of anthrax. Mr. Krishna Murthi stated that in the city of Madras a number of outbreaks had been known to occur and were all reported. A system of reporting had been adopted. In the case of hides
54 intended for export, samples amounting to six hides from each consignment were chosen by the exporting firm at random and were sent to the laboratory for bacteriological examination. The system of examination was guinea-pig inoculation, as this was deemed to be the only reliable method. No cases had been encountered during the past five years while this method had been adopted. The examination was undertaken with a view to giving a certificate. The hides had to be certified to have been collected from districts that were free from anthrax. The speaker detailed the method of bacteriological examination. Mr. MacGregor inquired what steps were recommended by the International Committee for the sterilization of bone-meal and whether it should be sterilized as bone-meal or raw bones. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson stated that there were several methods that could be adopted. For bones which were used for glue the latter were boiled for 15 minutes in water at 120C., four hours in water at 180F. or steeped for a minimum of 24 hours in milk of lime or in concentrated hydrochloric acid for 48 hours. Mr. MacGregor wondered whether the digestion at 50 pound pressure was necessary as this had been insisted upon in the case of bone-meal exported from Bengal to New Zealand. A process involving 25 pounds pressure for two hours was also recommended. Mr. Branford asked Colonel Hutchinson if there was any evidence of wool sorter's disease in India. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson stated that no evidence had hitherto been obtained of this disease. The only evidence avail- able was in regard to three cases that had occurred in jails. He considered that the system of reporting deaths among human subjects in India was not so inefficient as is generally supposed. The reporting authority was the village officer and he reported the death according to the most prominent symptom. A Registration Manual containing simple instructions in regard to the symptoms was issued to each officer giving just the prominent symptoms of the familiar diseases. In order to demonstrate the reliability of this method it was stated that in regard to measles, for example, which was a very common disease, when he had examined the statistics obtained from the registers of the village officers, the age incidence of mortality from this affection corresponded exactly to the age incidence reported in civilized countries. This was a very striking point. Mr. Branford considered that the evidence which had been adduced in the course of the discussion in regard to the necessity of training the personnel to control this disease had made a very
55 strong case for the institution of a four years' course of training, for the Veterinary Assistants could not be depended upon to diagnose the disease. Mr. Quinlan stated that in Bihar the position was much the same as in other provinces. The village chowkidar was the report- ing agency and it was difficult to get from him information quickly enough. The whole question resolved itself into one of providing an adequate staff. It must be pointed out to the Government very clearly the absolute necessity of providing an efficient veteri- nary staff, otherwise it would not be possible to carry out the recommendations of the International Committee. It ought to be laid down as the considered opinion of the meeting that this aspect should be put before the Government of India in the strongest terms and should be explained before the International Board of Agriculture and the Geneva Convention. This problem must be adequately solved first of all if we were to be considered in a position to carry out the instructions of industrial countries. Mr. Wilson stated that in the Central Provinces no knowledge with regard to anthrax could be obtained unless the disease occurred among animals in some of the Government institutions. Elsewhere the occurrence of deaths was not reported promptly enough. On Government farms outbreaks had been dealt with most effectively by serum inoculations. No regulations could be enforced in the province without adequate staff. Mr. Hickey stated that in the United Provinces single cases were not reported, for it often happened that the Veterinary Assistant might arrive at the scene of the outbreak 10 days after the death had occurred. Anthrax was only diagnosed when blood films were sent to him for examination from the local authorities. Mr. Harris stated that in Assam the disease occurred sporadi- cally but uniformly throughout the province; and on some tea gardens, a few coolies had been infected by handling carcases. The local authorities had used Muktesar serum successfully for the treatment of these men. There was no reporting agency in Assam and the knowledge he had obtained with regard to the disease was derived from the reports of the Veterinary Assistants them- selves. He mentioned that in his province there was no agency which would be capable of carrying out any legislative measures. A large part of the country was water-logged and measures for the proper disposal of carcases would be difficult to undertake. Mr. Branford emphasized the importance of studying sheep diseases. Hitherto sheep had not been considered important enough, but he had found that when there had been outbreaks
56 of anthrax among cattle at Hissar the disease had likewise affected the sheep at the same time. Colonel Pallin said that he had received no report of anthrax among military animals during the past year while he had been A. D. V. S. to the Eastern Command. Twenty years ago, however, while he was stationed at Meerut he had experience of an outbreak of anthrax among the artillery horses. During the previous year the disease had also occurred among these horses and he took pains to trace the origin of the outbreak, and after taking the usual precautions he fixed on some stacks of hay which the artillery horses used to have in those days, and which were procured from the same place and made up of grass brought in by the grass cutters. It was concluded that the butts of these stacks were the source of infection. The stacks were burnt to the ground and no further trouble was caused. In 1902, about the same time, his attention was called to the sudden deaths of horses in the Viceroy's bodyguard at Dehra Dun. When he got to the stables he discovered that five horses there were already dead and five more were on the point of dying. Thus ten animals out of 110 became affected. The source of infection was traced to the green grass brought in by the grass cutters which was found to have been cut from the banks of a river into which carcases were usually thrown. On his recommendation no further supplies of grass were brought in from this area, and no further cases of disease occurred. A considerable amount of disease was caused and spread by throwing carcases into the beds of rivers. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson further emphasized that the country was at present faced either with heavy expenditure in setting up methods of disinfection, which would be quite unpro- ductive or with what would also admittedly be a heavy expendi- ture upon controlling disease in live-stock, which nevertheless would connote an improvement in live-stock, so that this expenditure would be productive. Unless steps were taken to eradicate the disease the export trade might suffer. In reply to Mr. Hewlett he stated that compulsory legislation might be advocated by the International Labour Conference to meet in 1924 and admitted that eradication could not immediately follow the enforcement of legislation. Mr. Kerr raised the question as to the susceptibility of goats to anthrax. He was under the impression that they were more resistant than the other domestic animals. Mr. Edwards said that, in his experience recently at Muktesar, he found that certain strains of anthrax proved to be extremely
57 virulent upon experimentation with goats, whereas other strains which had been kept in the laboratory for some time proved of very low virulence for all classes of animals. There was some evidence available pointing to the existence of strains of relatively low virulence among infected animals in the field. Mr. Ware stated that fairly recently a shipment of goats amounting to 500 head that had been sent from Madras to Colombo suffered a 50 per cent. mortality from anthrax on arrival at Colombo. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson stated that 510 goats were found to have succumbed to anthrax at one of the slaughter houses at Colombo. Mr. Smith stated that he had experience in buying sheep and goats for Government for export to Mesopotamia during the war. A large number of the sheep and goats had succumbed to anthrax. The Chairman stated the discussion had now resolved itself into a consideration of the subject under three heads: (1) the prevalence of the disease; (2) the necessity for research; (3) the institution of preventive measures. With regard to the first of these heads, it had been brought out in the discussion that the disease was extremely virulent and it was fully realized that a large quantity of anthrax-infected material went out of India. A large number of the diseases scheduled in the returns under the heading of hmorrhagic septicmia was undoubtedly anthrax. When "hmorrhagic septicmia" received a separate column in the returns, some deaths were probably included which were in reality anthrax. He still favoured the view that indigenous animals in this country were probably possessed of a large degree of immunity and became infected with the latent form of disease. Secondly, on account of this relative immunity, the mortality did not correspond with the enormously high proportion of infected material represented in the figures for the export returns. Wool and hides were most likely infected from a small proportion that had died from the disease. He thus contended that much further research into this question was necessary. Thirdly, with regard to legisla- tion, it would be necessary to discuss this question later on under subject III (a). A resolution would probably be drafted to cover the peculiar requirements of this disease. However, as had been pointed out by Mr. Edwards, the problem of anthrax afforded a concrete example which indicated the necessity for the application of such measures. In India the state of the country with regard to legislation for the control of animal disease was almost as bad as it could be. Obviously the first necessity in connection with the control of the disease was to institute compulsory notification, but this problem was difficult. In some provinces there was
58 maintained a register of deaths. At least such was his experience in Bombay and in the Punjab. At the present time it was un- likely that we could proceed very far in regard to notification. In anthrax there were no prominent symptoms, and the symptoms presented by cases of infection due to acute hmorrhagic septicmia were to a layman almost exactly similar. Sir John Moore had thought that notification could be enforced and likewise that com- pulsory segregation could be effected by orders from the Deputy Commissioner or by means of the police agency. However, there seemed to be insuperable difficulties in the way of enforcing segre- gation measures in general. The first and essential necessity was, however, that there must be available a sufficiently highly trained veterinary staff. Mr. Kerr also maintained that, in order to carry out effectively any veterinary police measures, an additional veterinary staff was imperative. Legislative measures should, however, be uniform in their application, but this was not possible with the Provincial Services, particularly when the control of the subordinate veterinary personnel in the Provincial Service was in the hands of District Boards, with a Chairman who held office for a comparatively short period and had no permanent or predominant interest in this kind of work. A resolution, the terms of which were drafted by a sub-committee consisting of Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson, Messrs. Branford and Smith and Major Stirling, with Mr. Edwards as Secretary, was subsequently unanimously passed by the meeting:59 (iii) that the only sure way of dealing with the situation, and at the same time of lasting economic benefit to the country, is by making a persistent effort to prevent the spread of infection among animals, and thereby to secure the control and ultimate eradication of the disease. The success of any measure designed with these objects will depend upon (i) efforts to improve the agency for notification, (ii) an increase in numbers of the veterinary personnel of all grades consistent with the work which has to be done, (iii) improved facilities for the education of the veterinary personnel recruited in India in the problems connected with the control of epizootic diseases, (iv) legislation (see resolution under Subject III a). SUBJECT II (b).-RINDERPEST. To REVIEW THE EXPERIENCE ALREADY GAINED AS TO THE RELATIVE ADVANTAGES OF THE "SERUM SIMULTANEOUS" AND "SERUM ALONE" METHODS OF INOCULATION IN INDIA AND OTHER COUNTRIES. The Chairman stated that at the first meeting held at Lahore in 1919 there was a strong feeling among the members that the simultaneous method might be adopted more generally, and a resolution which he read was passed to that effect. Since then Messrs. Pool and Doyle had published a Memoir in which they indicated the very fleeting immunity conferred by "serum alone" and they commended the advantages of the simultaneous method. He believed it would be a great advantage if this method of inoculation could be performed generally on young animals, under a year old, before they became very valuable. Mr. Quirke said that he had put forward this question in order to find out what was the experience obtained in the districts with regard to the simultaneous method. He considered that it was undoubtedly the better method if it was practicable in the districts. They were always ready to progress in this direction in his province if they were sure of the means. In the Punjab it would be possible to introduce the method at first on the Government farms but he was not clear as to the efficacy or safety of the method at present. Mr. Hewlett stated that in his considered opinion the wide- spread use of "serum alone" in combating the disease was fore-
60 doomed to wastage in time and money on account of the fleeting immunity conferred by this method and its uselessness when applied to animals already infected. This wastage was particularly accen- tuated on account of the conditions which obtained in the districts where outbreaks occurred. The veterinary staff had no means of enforcing inoculation and preventing the movement of animals in the scene of an outbreak or to ensure the mixing of the inoculated animals with infected cattle in order to give them opportunities of direct infection and thereby secure active immunity. Having all these facts in mind he thought that the present method of inoculating serum alone was not really doing much good. He considered that this question should be earnestly discussed by the officers from the provinces. Mr. Quinlan stated that in Bihar the only place in which the simultaneous method had hitherto been adopted was at the Govern- ment cattle farm where about 150 cattle had been inoculated by this method and no deaths had occurred therefrom among them. It would be, however, in the present conditions quite impossible to apply the methods to the cattle in districts where the population was largely Hindu, unless great changes took place in the attitude of the people towards inoculation. Where the owners of animals were Mohammedan in religion, the method would be more easy of application, as they would not resent the taking of blood for the virus inoculation to such a degree. As regards the so-called "serum alone" method, it was admitted that it had limitations and so far as his own experience went, he was emphatic that the owners believed that it did a considerable amount of good and that large numbers of cattle were saved. In fact, villagers now came forward and asked for their cattle to be inoculated as a preventive measure, when they feared an impending outbreak. These villagers who sought for inoculation were mainly Mohammedan and members of co-operative societies, where these societies were in existence. Mr. Branford stated that the problem which confronted them in the districts was twofold: first of all, what form of inoculation to adopt in the face of an outbreak, and, secondly, what form of inoculation to adopt as a preventive measure. In the Punjab the disease seemed to be spread largely by the movement of animals to and from fairs and it was not impossible to prevent the spread in these circumstances. In the neighbourhood of Hissar there had only been three outbreaks of rinderpest in the course of 12 years and he had successfully treated his cattle with "serum alone" as a preventive measure on these occasions. He believed that in the face of an outbreak the simultaneous method would be more effective, but he thought that there was great risk of.
61 setting up a focus of infection in carrying out the simultaneous inoculation if the virus was introduced into a locality where the disease did not already exist. When rinderpest had occurred at Hissar, the cattle were not removed on account of the danger of infection to the neighbouring cattle. Khan Saheb Sheikh Naiz Mohammed stated that he believed that the system of double inoculation could be gradually adopted in the United Provinces and a start might be made with cattle belonging to Government institutions and District Boards. Colonel Pallin stated: "During 1920 the Government of India decided to adopt the serum simultaneous method of inoculation against rinderpest as a general measure for all Government bullocks and Government dairy farm cattle. Having only returned to this country last February after an absence of several years I am not quite au fait with the results obtained throughout India during the first two years during which the Army Veterinary Service has adopted the serum simultaneous method of inoculation against rinderpest for Government animals, but I am informed that on the whole the results obtained were very satisfactory. However, in view of the fact that it is stated that the mortality following on the serum simultaneous method of inoculation against rinder- pest should not be more than 0.8 per cent., [Pool and Doyle] I am greatly concerned at the high rate of mortality which has oc- curred amongst the Government dairy farm cattle during the present cold weather, particularly at Allahabad and Sitapore, which farms came under my veterinary administration. At the former place 39 Government dairy farm young stock and five imported bulls belonging to an American Mission were inoculated during November last with the following results:62 While at the latter place, i.e., Sitapore, 50 young stock varying from 10 to 15 months were inoculated during the first week in January last with the following results:63 only diarrh64 in a position to ensure better results. Whether the fault lies with the serum or not I am not prepared to say, but at the request of Mr. Edwards all the serum remaining over from these inoculations has been returned to him for examination and he will no doubt inform you what are the results of this enquiry." Mr. Hewlett stated that he was under the impression that for a number of years the inoculation at the military dairies had been in charge of a Veterinary Deputy Superintendent (Mr. V. E. Phadke, G.B.V.C.), deputed from Muktesar for the work and that although several thousand cattle had been inoculated, the morta- lity was extremely small. Mr. Smith stated that Mr. Phadke from Muktesar had inocu- lated in his group of military dairies about 2,500 head of cattle and that the mortality was not 1 per cent. The mortality among Ayrshire cattle was extremely small. He complimented this officer for the large amount of time he spent and trouble he took with the cattle during the process of inoculation and his constant solicitude for any evidence of piroplasmosis. He mentioned a very bad outbreak which he had experienced at Mhow. About 120 animals were put into the rinderpest camp and treated with serum and not one of those animals became subsequently infected with the disease. Mr. Ware stated that he had begun this method of simultaneous inoculation in Madras in 1918, and since that year over 400 animals had been inoculated. Those inoculated included one Ayrshire bull. During this season he had inoculated in one camp over 100 cattle, at the Agricultural Farm, Coimbatore. The inoculated cattle subsequently suffered from severe reactions although he had taken all reasonable precautions with regard to the inoculations. None of the inoculated animals, however, died. Out of the 400 animals which had now been inoculated only one small calf had died. In the inoculated animals, however, piroplasmosis made its appearance very often. In the districts he had hitherto inoculated only about 25 animals in one camp. He experienced very great difficulty in securing the necessary degree of isolation for the animals while they were under process of immunization. Mr. Branford did not consider that there was much danger of the disease spreading during the process of immunization if simple measures were taken to prevent the spread. Mr. Ware stated that he had recommended a certain budget allotment in Madras for the purpose of adopting this method of inoculation. It seemed that in future it would be difficult in his province to resort to the "serum alone" method on the same
65 large scale as it had hitherto been employed on account of the fact that the Government had now decided to charge a fee for it, and it was probable that in future the numbers of animals that would be inoculated by the simultaneous method would be increased and that the numbers done by the "serum alone" method would be reduced. Mr. Riley stated that he had carried out the double inoculation on two occasions after having studied the method at Muktesar. In his experience the process gave rise to considerable anxiety when the inoculated animals contained imported blood. While he was in charge of the inoculation of the Pusa herd he was for- tunate in having every facility for the task and the work was carried out successfully, with no deaths subsequently. He was very careful to examine the blood of the inoculated animals for piroplas- mosis when they exhibited a rise of temperature and also to have them properly housed at night time. At the agricultural farm attached to the Asylum at Ranchi he had likewise obtained very great facilities for carrying out the work, but the inoculation was performed late in the year in April. The animals were country bred animals and their temperatures subsequently ran up extra- ordinarily high, to 107 or 108 F., but there were no deaths. He lost three "controls" (virus producers) out of four. He considered that work of this kind could not be carried out in the field in Bihar unless some method could be evolved to eliminate the use of "controls". He obtained fresh virulent blood for the work from Bareilly. The use of "controls" in distant centres made it impossible to undertake the work. Mr. Farbrother stated that he had no personal experience of the inoculation, but one of his Veterinary Deputy Superintendents, Mr. Vacha, had performed the work in the Bombay Presidency at a certain place quite recently where 66 cattle had to be inoculated. He was entirely successful with the work, but what struck him (the speaker) was the period of time which was required, namely, about three weeks, to carry out the work. The method was, there- fore, impracticable in the districts. In any event it would hardly be possible to recommend legislation for the adoption of the method on a larger scale. Mr. Ware raised the question as to the best method of provid- ing virus for the districts. Mr. Quinlan asked Col. Pallin about the conditions under which the animals in the Sitapur and Allahabad outbreaks were housed, because in his experience animals affected with even a mild form of rinderpest were liable to succumb if proper attention was not paid to the housing.
66 Col. Pallin stated that special chuppers were built for these. animals as they were showing signs of weakness and the weather was cold. Mr. Quinlan was particularly emphatic that it was very neces- sary to pay attention to the housing of animals during the rinder- pest reaction. Col. Pallin stated that it would be of great assistance to him to have the indications for carrying out the method redrafted as had been promised by Mr. Edwards. Mr. Smith wished to lay particular emphasis on the feeding of animals while they were under the process of immunization. He had found it necessary to place them on laxative diet consisting of bran mash and treacle and to omit hard food such as grain, etc. Mr. Davis asked Mr. Edwards what the method was in use at present in Upper East Africa where he believed transport difficul- ties were much greater. Mr. Branford believed that the department was not yet strong enough to undertake the work of serum simultaneous inoculation in the districts. Mr. Hewlett again emphasized that the serum simultaneous method should be used in large dairies and in other concerns of this kind, but he held out no hope of successfully dealing with rinderpest by the use of serum alone in the manner it was now generally adopted. Mr. Edwards stated that the exceptionally heavy mortality which had occurred at certain military dairies during the present season had caused him a great deal of anxiety, and searching tests were being carried out at the laboratory in order to investigate the origin of these accidents. In the outbreak first reported67 definitely asserted to be rinderpest. In the Allahabad outbreak, however, undoubted symptoms of rinderpest did develop in many of the cases which succumbed later during the course of observations, but in many of the fatalities occurring elsewhere the records pointed to the development of a condition with acute blood destruction. He had already retested a sample of serum returned from the Allahabad dairy and found it to be protective at the dosage stipulated at issue, but there had been quite an appreciable falling off in potency since the time of the original test. He had been much exercised about the manufacture of potent serum since he had taken over charge of the laboratory, particularly as he had lost a short time after his arrival the collaboration of Mr. Pool, who had evinced during his tenure of office at the laboratory such extraordinary solicitude in this matter that his competence was probably unrivalled. He had thus, soon after Mr. Pool's departure, taken in hand the personal super- vision of the manufacture and testing of all rinderpest serum and made provision, as he thought, for the issue of anti-rinderpest serum from the laboratory of sufficiently high potency so that it could all be used safely for the "serum simultaneous" inoculation. The occurrence of excessive mortality in the military dairies this season had therefore come as a considerable surprise, and he was sparing no pains to obtain information upon it which would enable him to take steps to obviate these accidents in future. The results of his investigations would be fully reported upon later. In order to test the safety of the method with the use of the materials produced at the laboratory he had deputed one of his colleagues (Mr. Bennett) to carry out under his directions the immunization of the valuable Pusa herd of cattle, comprising Montgomery and cross-bred Ayr- shire-Montgomery cattle, and the results, upon 80 animals, which he had only just learnt, had been completely successful. A priori, there would appear to be no reason to fear any accident following upon the simultaneous inoculation provided an adequately large dose of a sufficiently highly potent anti-rinderpest serum were injected into the animal at the same time as the small dose of virulent rinderpest blood. There was a great deal of recorded evidence forthcoming from other countries pointing to the relative safety and extraordinary efficacy of the method when applied to a consider- able cattle population; he had in mind particularly the results achieved in Egypt, in East Africa, and towards the conclusion of the war in the zone bordering the southern limits of the territory formerly known as German East Africa where the application of the method effectually prevented the southward extension of rinderpest into Southern Africa. In the Italian colony of Eritrea the wholesale inoculation of all the cattle population every two years by this method had been recommended. Moreover, the evidence showed.
68 that the simultaneous method conferred an immunity which was in all probability life-long, whereas inoculation with serum alone as had recently been clearly demonstrated by Messrs. Pool and Doyle gave the animal an immunity which could be depended upon to give it a sure protection for a period of only nine days. Having in mind the durability of the protection conferred by the simultane- ous method and its recorded comparative safety elsewhere where it had been tested on very large numbers of cattle there could be no doubt that this was the method of choice for combating rinderpest in India, and if the method were systematically adopted throughout the country there seemed to be no reason why the disease should not soon become extinct. The difficulties which stood in the way of its universal application, notably the prejudices and apprehensions of owners, had been pointed out by previous speakers. In spite of the knowledge available with regard to efficacy of the method it was, however, well known that its adoption was not always free from danger. In the first place, there was danger of setting up fatal rinderpest unless the serum injected simultaneously was of certainly dependable potency. The manufacture of a serum of the required potency did not appear to be an easy task, for the experience of his laboratory had recently been that in spite of repeated massive hyperimmunization the serum obtained from the serum producers gradually fell off in potency after the early bleedings, so that great care had to be taken not to issue serum for the simultaneous method obtained from later bleedings. However, with a highly potent serum, it had often been found possible to mask completely the reaction following upon the injection of a rinderpest blood of high virulence, and the inoculated animal was found subsequently to be immune. He had found also that the practice of utilizing buffaloes for serum production and hill bulls as virus producers, although it had been found an economical procedure for the manufacture of serum for preventive purposes, had a drawback in that the serum of the buffalo became markedly hmolytic for the blood of the ox after repeated hyperimmunization.* For the simultaneous inocula- tion of cattle, where large doses of serum had often to be injected into animals of high susceptibility, he believed that special care should be taken to issue only sera specially prepared and tested as to a high degree of potency from cattle (hill bulls), or sera from the first bleeding, exclusively, of buffaloes. The risk due to intercurrent piroplasmosis was well known, and the appearance of so-called "redwater," due to Babesia bigeminum * Researches carried out at the laboratory subsequently indicated that this view of the origin of the accidents was justified. J. T. E., November 1923.
69 or other piroplasms, might be twofold in origin: first, the virulent blood itself might contain infective piroplasms, in which case symp- toms of redwater would occur after an incubation period of seven to nine days, while on the other hand, the inoculated animal might suffer an attack of acute piroplasmosis due to the resuscitation in virulence, owing to the depressant effect of the rinderpest infection, of piro- plasms lying dormant in the animal's system and kept in a latent state subsequent to a former, natural piroplasm infection,70 properly prepared and tested, was one of most reliable products judged by its efficacy known to prophylaxis. The protection conferred by it was certain and immediate, and in the scene of an outbreak it was the method that should always be applied to cattle exposed to infection. If cattle protected in this manner were immediately allowed free intercourse with infected animals there was a chance that they might contract infection, and develop a durable immunity of the kind conferred by the simultaneous inoculation; but experience had shown that it was well not to put much dependence on this eventuality, and that it was better to repeat the serum inoculation at intervals of nine or ten days while the outbreak persisted. The judicious use of serum alone upon all exposed cattle in this matter would undoubtedly bring about the limitation and extinction of outbreaks, as was accomplished by Mr. Smith in the military dairies. The serum issued from the Muktesar laboratory was all rigorously tested as to its efficacy for this purpose, and workers in the field had to see to it that the serum used by them was not such as had deteriorated by prolonged or improper storage and was administered in the dosages indicated by the susceptibility of the inoculated animals. Further, he stated that as rinderpest was the most important single disease of live stock in India he had marshalled the resources of the Muktesar laboratory for the investigation of the disease, for its etiology was still obscure beyond the fact that it was usually held to be due to a filterable virus and he described the progress of the work done. A small committee was then formed consisting of Messrs. Harris, Quinlan and Cameron with Mr. Edwards as Secretary to draft the terms of a resolution embodying the views of the meeting. The resolution, passed unanimously by the meeting, was as follows:71 (3) That investigations upon the nature of the rinderpest virus and upon the factors involved in the safe conference of a satisfactory immunity should be regarded as research projects of primary importance. (4) That meanwhile, until the time arrives for the wholesale adoption of a process of active immunization, the "serum alone" method of immunization, though it confers but a passive, fleeting immunity, should be regarded when properly applied as the system best suited for general adoption in the face of outbreaks in India. SUBJECT II (c).72 The review dealt with the position up to the time it was published, June 1921, and it was submitted to the Government in order to explain the position. Government had apparently rejected the proposals submitted by the committee on the score of expense. He had regarded the action proposed by the committee as vital, for there was no comparison between the present economic loss from deaths among animals due to surra and the relatively very small expenditure that would have to be laid out in the proposed investigations. Mr. Edwards in his note had suggested that efforts should now be con- centrated upon treatment. He (Mr. Fletcher) pointed out that if one were to take the analogous examples of malaria, it was admitted that the eradication of this disease could only be effected by attack- ing the actual means of transmission, for no advance could be made in this direction by the administration of an efficacious remedy, namely, quinine. To put off investigation on the plea that a remedy might be found was in his opinion a weak argument. In malaria it was agreed that efforts should be concentrated on the eradication of the mosquito as the means of controlling the disease. He more- over thought that as a general policy it was most unwise to assist the Government in finding a means of escape from the considered opinion of a technical body such as had been constituted in the manner of the Surra Committee. It was likely that this would form a precedent and that Government would regard scientific committees as vacillating and untrustworthy. In reply to the Chairman, who asked if he was conversant with the recent work of Mr. Cross on the tick transmission of surra, Mr. Fletcher replied that he was acquainted with this work, but not- withstanding the claims put forward he considered that it did not in any way point to less research in this connection being required. Mr. Cameron stated that in Burma the disease was more prevalent than was represented in the map drawn up to show its distribution, and he considered that it was necessary to check a large amount of evidence still in order to get a correct appreciation of the situation. In the affected districts there were prevalent many kinds of Tabanid flies, and surra was well known to affect "belts" of country. The agency by means of which it was transmitted was quite unknown, but several species of flies might be suspected. In discussing the question as to whether existing legislation was suffi- cient to deal with the disease or not he mentioned that it almost invariably happened that the "Veterinary Practitioner" appointed to take the action laid down under the Glanders and Farcy Act was not within a reasonable distance of the scene of the outbreak to seize the affected animal. The Government of Burma had recently
73 declared that men who had acted in the appointment of Veterinary Deputy Superintendents for two or three years could be regarded as "Veterinary Practitioners" within the meaning of the Act, in addition to the members of R. C. V. S. But even so, the area for which each of these officers was responsible was so considerable that he could not reach the declared case of infection in time. Even if the Veterinary Practitioner was within reach, he could not find any means of having the animals shot, for in a country where all the inhabitants were Buddhists, including the Veterinary Assistants, it was extremely difficult to get the law enforced. The result was that it was not uncommon for an animal found to be affected to be turned out into the jungle rather than shot on account of these religious prejudices and thus it became a reservoir of infection. The legislation should be modified so that the animal could be seized by the police and kept in segregation until it could be declared free from infection. If an animal was certified to be infected after a microscopic examination, it should be destroyed by the police. In the course of the discussion it was pointed out that the rules which each province was entitled to draw up under the Act should be made uniform in this respect in each province. He had found no other trypanosomes in bovines other than what he believed to be those of surra. He thought that Mr. Fletcher's recommenda- tion that a small whole-time committee should be appointed to work upon surra was a sound one. Mr. Edwards elaborated the points submitted to the meeting in his note. He explained the position which had arisen subsequent to the Fourth Meeting of the Standing Committee on Surra, in 1921, and he reiterated his belief that the problem of surra should not be attacked alone, but efforts should be made to prosecute its study as part of the much larger problem of the whole group of diseases among live-stock in India caused by protozoan parasites, concerning which our knowledge was lamentably defective as compared with that existent in other countries upon diseases of this kind and in view of the economic issues entailed. It might very likely transpire that the Government of India would be sorely disappointed with the economic benefits that would accrue from the labours of a specially appointed body of investi- gators working for a certain term of years, although from a philosophical standpoint the information they would be able to furnish would undoubtedly be of great value. He said this particularly as he had in mind the analogy of the formidable African trypanosomiases of man and the domesticated animals. In spite of the fact that a great deal of very precise knowledge was now available regarding the parasite, the vectors, and the pathology of these conditions, no practical results on a large scale had yet been
74 derived from this knowledge; for, those who were reckoned to be authorities in this field of study could not make up their minds whether it was best to attack the problem by clearing the forests which harboured the vector or by stamping out the game believed to act as reservoirs of the trypanosomes ; in any event, both pro- positions appeared to be economically quite impracticable. Hence, short of avoiding the areas in which these diseases were known to occur nothing seemed to have been done except to exploit the possibilities of therapeutic treatment. He considered that the results hitherto recorded in connection with the therapeutic treat- ment of this group of diseases to be distinctly encouraging. He had in mind the information recently published concerning the efficacy of the German preparation "Bayer 205" in the treatment of human sleeping sickness, and the prospects opened up by the successes claimed appeared to be so considerable that it had been put forward that the German Government would hold out the disclosure of the method of preparation of this compound as the basis of negotiations for the return of her African tropical posses- sions. He also mentioned the successes claimed by Dr. Pearce, of the Rockefeller Institute, with cases of human sleeping sickness in the Belgian Congo; this worker had kindly placed at his disposal a quantity of the preparation (tryparsamide) which he employed for the experimental treatment of surra, but the results hitherto obtained seemed to indicate that this disease in horses was not easily amenable to treatment. The results following treatment with tartar emetic in certain trypanosomiases, such as the surra of camels investigated by Cross and the trypanosomiasis of cattle in South Central Africa due to Trypanosoma congolense, were well known. [At the Muktesar laboratory he had obtained remarkably good results in the treatment of bovines affected with trypa- nosomiasis, caused by a trypanosoma indistinguishable from that of surra, by intravenous injections of tartar emetic] Spirochtal affections, which might be regarded as nearly related, had proved often to be most susceptible to chemotherapeutic treatment. A large amount of information was now scattered in the literature upon the chemotherapeutic treatment of this class of disease, and it seemed that a co-ordinated effort should now be made to ascertain the efficacy of the various classes of drugs, believed to act as remedies, upon a large scale upon naturally infected cases in the field. In the case of the domesti- cated animals susceptible to surra any system of treatment ultimately recommended must be efficacious, cheap, and easily applicable. He therefore proposed to seek the co-operation of the Veterinary Service in the field to the largest possible extent for the observation of the effects of certain remedies which suggested
75 themselves. Work of this kind undoubtedly took considerable time, but as it would cost Government very little or nothing there was no excuse for keeping back this kind of investigation on the plea of financial stringency. With regard to the larger problem of the whole group of protozoan diseases, he stated that the opportunities for valuable research in this field were immense. For the past year at Muktesar systematic examinations had been made upon cattle more particularly for protozoan parasites, and they had come across a large number of cases of bovine coccidioses, four cases of infection set up by parasites identical in appearance and distribu- tion in the body with that of the formidable East Coast Fever of cattle in Africa (Theileria parva), and innumerable examples of infection in cattle with small piroplasms of the type Theileria mutans. During his stay at Muktesar Mr. Sheather had discovered a parasite in cattle very similar to that of malaria in man, and a number of cases had been found since. Very little seemed to be known with regard to the nature and distribution of the "red- water" parasites of cattle in India, and he was particularly interest- ed in this matter on account of the dangers involved in the active immunization of cattle against rinderpest. In all questions connected with insect transmission of these diseases he would look to the Imperial Entomologist for assistance, for any work directly dealing with insects was of too specialised a nature to be readily taken up by the veterinary pathologist. Again, he thought the time was ripe for the permanent appointment of a specially trained and experienced protozoologist for work and advice upon all ques- tions dealing with protozoan parasites of veterinary interest. He thought the proto-zoologist would best be placed on the staff of the Muktesar laboratory, where he would be incorporated in a team for the investigation of surra and the other trypanosomiases and all the important classes of diseases due to protozoan parasites of economic interest in the live-stock industry of the country. Mr. MacGregor thought that surra was a disease which could not be much affected by therapeutic treatment and he could not agree to the analogy between it and certain of the diseases mentioned by Mr. Edwards. Mr. Hewlett said that he would be pleased to carry out the treatment suggested in the lazaretto in Bombay. He had previously tried the treatment and had found no difficulty in carrying it out. The only difficulty was the expense of maintaining the animals, for he had no money available for their upkeep, but he could probably manage to keep three or four horses at one time. He considered that the existing legislation was not adequate but was quite justified. With regard to information upon the presence of trypanosomiases
76 in other animals, it had been discovered at the college that in Bombay about 2 per cent. of the cattle harboured trypanosomes in their blood. The percentage in buffaloes was higher, about 10 per cent. He could not declare what species of trypanosomes were represent- ed in these estimates, but his colleague Mr. Sowerby was of opinion that they were Trypanosoma evansi. Outbreaks of trypanosomiases in buffaloes in Bombay sometimes led to fatal termination in the affected animals and upon death their blood was found to be teaming with trypanosomes. Mr. Branford stated that he had tried Cross's treatment for surra upon one affected camel and the animal was completely cured. Mr. Wilson stated that the present legislation placed him in a paradoxical position, for if a case of surra was confirmed in an equine animal this animal had to be destroyed, whereas in the neighbour- hood it might be quite easy to discover similar trypanosomes in the blood of cattle, but these animals could not be slaughtered. Affected cattle yielded readily to treatment. Without doubt, this anomalous position would be severely criticised in future. The Chairman believed that all present were agreed that the existing state of legislation was not satisfactory. He entertained grave doubts as to the efficacy of existing methods of treatment. In his own hands the treatment recommended by Holmes had not given satisfactory results and recently at the Punjab Veterinary College the method of treatment recommended by Cross had been tried on a number of infected camels with no success, due possibly to the animals being old and in very poor condition. He believed that chemical treatment would not cure animals unless it was combined with good food and favourable climatic conditions. Purity in the drugs employed appeared to be essential also. The urgent necessity for further research was clear, and it was regrettable that the recommendations of the Fourth Standing Committee on Surra had not been adopted. After some further discussion a committee comprising Messrs- Ware, Fletcher, and Farbrother with Mr. Edwards as Secretary was appointed to draft resolutions in conformity with the opinions expressed by the meeting. This committee drafted the following resolution, which was passed unanimously by the Meeting. Resolution II (c) (1) Investigations into the nature and mode of transmission of the animal trypanosomiases in India should be prosecuted forthwith. Likewise, the whole problem of the important protozoan diseases of the domesticated animals of the country should be approached concur- rently. For this purpose it will be necessary to streng- then the technical resources at present available in the
77 country for research into different aspects of the above projects, comprising the entomological, protozoological, and pathological aspects, by centralization of the facilities available in each of these pursuits, and the delegation, on request, of workers to assist those engaged directly in the elucidation of the disease problems. An experienced proto- zoologist should be appointed to the staff of the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory for research into these problems. Entomological assistance should be derived from the staff of the Imperial Entomologist. These workers would find unlimited scope for their activities, in addition, in the investigation of the economically high- ly important diseases of live-stock caused by protozoan parasites, other than those of surra. (2) Efforts to obtain a cheap, effective and easily applied remedy for the cure of surra, in particular, and other protozoan diseases should be prosecuted on a large scale in the laboratory and in the field, and the co-ordinated services of the whole veterinary profession in India are required for this purpose. (3) In view of our present inadequate knowledge of the trypano- somiases of animals in India, and the likelihood that the pathogenic trypanosomes find a reservoir frequently in relatively resistant host species, the present legislative measures dealing with surra should be reconsidered in the light of better information that may be procured on further research directed with the object of elucidating these peculiar conditions. SUBJECT II (d).-CONTAGIOUS ABORTION. INFORMATION REGARDING ITS INCIDENCE AMONG IMPORTED AND INDIGENOUS STOCK ; PROPOSALS FOR CONTROL. Mr. Edwards explained the text of his note already circulated among the members. Tests at the Muktesar laboratory had indi- cated that in the Punjab and elsewhere the common form of equine contagious abortion was very prevalent and tests upon one herd of military dairy cattle had shown a high incidence of infection with the common form of contagious bovine abortion. Contagious abortion and tuberculosis were the most serious menaces to live-stock in Western countries, and of these two conditions probably contagious abortion ranked first as a cause of direct economic loss to the stock breeder. In India, the import- F
78 ance of this disease was probably masked by the much greater attention paid to the serious epizootic diseases of the country, notably rinderpest. In the case of tuberculosis, it seemed that the incidence of infection in India was very low, and among indigenous cattle it would probably be found that the prevalence of contagious abortion was likewise low as compared with that obtaining in more civilized countries on account of the conditions which obtained there due to the efforts made to improve the breeds of cattle and horses. With the resulting greater movement of animals, dependent largely upon the much better transport facilities, animals infected or acting as carriers of infection spread the disease readily over great distances. Inasmuch as with the improvement of live-stock breeding in India, the same factors would most likely also prevail, it was probable that these diseases of both cattle and mares would before long assume very considerable importance. It seemed, therefore, that steps should be taken soon to ascertain the prevalence of the infection in the various parts of the country and the relative susceptibility of indigenous and imported cattle. Effective measures of control for both equine and bovine abortion depended upon early diagnosis of the condition, so that as soon as it was found affecting a herd or stud, segregation measures could be promptly instituted. In bovine abortion vaccination was resorted to in some countries on a fairly large scale, but inasmuch as vaccination implied the inoculation of animals with the living causal organisms, and hence might keep alive indefinitely the disease in carriers, it should not be a method to be lightly undertaken, particularly if the disease could be eradicated by simple preventive measures. It appeared, therefore, that it might be found that in cattle, parti- cularly, both tuberculosis and contagious abortion were conditions that could be checked at the present time in this country on account of their low incidence. We might be able, in this manner, to avert the evil which is prevalent among Western herds in this respect, with the early institution of proper measures of control. Mr. Branford explained his views concerning the experience gained on the Hissar farm. He was not inclined to believe that contagious abortion in cattle was a new disease in this country. On the Hissar farm, at any rate, it appeared to have been in existence for many years. He had published records showing the number of cases of abortion which had occurred in the herd over a period of ten years and it seemed that the number of cases which occurred each year was relatively small. He was inclined to believe that contagious abortion assumed importance not on account of the spread of civilized methods of improving breeds of live-stock but on account of the aggregation of large numbers of cattle in certain localities.
79 Mr. Wilson stated that in the course of his experience with certain herds in the Central Provinces a few cases of abortion had occurred and these were strictly confined to half-bred cattle. No cases appeared to occur among indigenous cattle. Mr. Hickey stated that in his experience no contagious abortion existed on the Government agricultural farms in the United Provinces. Mr. MacGregor stated that investigations carried out at the slaughter houses in Calcutta and tests on jail cattle undertaken in order to determine the true prevalence of tuberculosis had revealed a much greater incidence than was generally suspected. Indeed, he encountered quite a number of cases of tuberculous mastitis. If systematic investigation were similarly performed with a view to ascertaining the prevalence of contagious abortion, it would most probably be found that the disease was fairly common. He asked Mr. Edwards, if it was not true that the disease tended to extinguish itself if it was allowed to run its course in the infected locality. Colonel Pallin recounted the history of the outbreak in the Lucknow military dairy, which he presumed was the outbreak referred to by Mr. Edwards. On account of the abnormal number of abortions which had occurred in the dairy during the past year, the officer in charge had approached the Muktesar laboratory, and the animals were systematically tested. He gave figures showing the percentage of animals of various classes infected. The following is a summary of results of the agglutination test for contagious abortion carried out on the animals belonging to the Government dairy farm, Lucknow, during October and November 1922 :80 to which each Government dairy farm was infected and steps are now being taken to call for information regarding the incidence of contagious abortion in India, on the receipt of which the question of the vaccination of all Government dairy farm animals as a whole would be taken up. The Chairman considered that contagious abortion now deserved more attention, as it appeared to be assuming considerable import- ance, judging from the evidence which had been presented. Mr. Wilson stated that while he was at the Hissar Cattle farm, from May 1906 to January 1908, multiple cases of abortion occurred among pony mares and cows there. Mr. Riley stated that to his knowledge no cases of contagious abortion had been discovered in Bihar and Orissa in cows or mares. Mr. Harris also stated that no evidence of the disease had been obtained in Assam. During the last few months he had made careful inquiries through the veterinary personnel in regard to the possibility of its existence. After further discussion the following resolution was unanimously passed :81 " I have previously sat with Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson on a committee to discuss tuberculosis from the public health point of view. I know that he is an authority on the subject. " I will ask him to give us his views." Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson stated that what he particularly wanted to urge was the immense importance of undertaking further investigations with regard to the whole problem of tuberculosis in India. At the present time they were merely groping in the dark. The prevailing impression was that tuberculosis of cattle was a rare disease in India, but from the returns which had been derived from the village officers for many years, it could well be seen that it was an important disease in man. Human tuberculosis was related mainly with industrial development, and in certain old established centres of industry, such as Bombay, the mortality from tuberculosis was high. The high incidence in industrial centres, however, was gradually becoming reflected in rural areas and undoubtedly was connected with the migration of workers. In some rural areas it had now become a serious disease. The important point was to get reliable evidence with regard to the proportion of cases of human tuberculosis due to infection with tubercle bacilli of bovine origin. So far as one could gather it would appear that by far the greater proportion of cases of tuberculosis in adult human beings traceable to bovine origin was that which comprised tuberculous disease of the bones and joints, the so-called " closed " tuberculosis. The other forms of tuberculosis were regarded for convenience as cases of " open " tuberculosis. It appeared that the percentage of cases of the closed type was practically the same in India as in other countries. He had attended the International Conference on Tuberculosis in 1920 and compared the figures obtainable from India with those of the whole world. The figures obtainable were derived from the cases which came to hospital for treatment. About 18 per cent. of the cases fell into the " closed " type, and this figure was almost exactly the same as that representing the incidence of this type in any other country. The mortality figures of Bombay city indicated that only 10 per cent. were due to the closed type. In Calcutta the proportion was less, namely, 5.5 per cent. He referred to the recent work of Stanley Griffiths upon the strains responsible for the " closed " type of tuberculosis. Out of 132 cases of the "closed" type examined, 13.6 per cent. were due to the bovine strain. Of the persons under 16 years of age, 20 per cent. were due to the bovine strain. In persons over 16 years of age it was just over 6 per cent. In India, the work hitherto done had been some- what sketchy, and the number of cases investigated very small; so far as he was aware the bovine type had not been isolated from
82 human lesions. He suggested that investigations should be carried out in India on two lines : (1) More should be done to ascertain the true prevalence of tuberculosis in cattle ; (2) Work should be done in regard to the differentiation of the types responsible for bone and joint tuberculosis in human beings. He considered that the first line of investigation suggested was of vast importance to the hygiene of man, for the " closed " form of tuberculosis was due in many cases to bacilli of the bovine type, and a very large proportion of cases of the tuberculosis of children was traceable to infection from the milk supply. He described the efforts of the Medical Research Committee at Home at the present time in this direction, and stated that they were now in the course of carrying out extensive investigations on the reliability of tuberculin tests. The information which would soon be available would be of very considerable value. As regards the milk supply, almost every province was now legislat- ing or contemplating legislation on the ordinary lines dealing with the adulteration of food and the prevention of the sale of adulterated milk. Mr. Edwards first related the action which had been taken recently by the Government of India and the maritime provinces in drafting regulations under the Live Stock Importation Act, 1898, for the prohibition of importation of cattle suffering from tuber- culosis. The landing of cattle was now prohibited except at a few ports and all the maritime provinces had drafted regulations for prohibiting the importation of tuberculous cattle. From the available evidence it seemed that the incidence of tuberculosis among animals in India at the present time was low. Where examination of carcases of cattle at slaughter houses had been undertaken the incidence was found to be about 3 per cent. He summarized the information which had been published in this respect. In quite recent years some careful experimental work had been done on a relatively small scale by Glen Liston and Sopar- kar in Bombay and by Sheather at Muktesar. It seemed from the results of the former workers that the susceptibility of Indian cattle to infection was rather low, whereas the Muktesar work appeared to indicate that the bovine strain of organism found in India was of a relatively low virulence. In most of the cases recorded, the lesions had assumed the form of localised, discrete tubercles, but in a case which had now been recorded by Mr. Sowerby in an indigenous ox from the Bombay Presidency the lesions seemed to be widely distributed throughout the body. It would, therefore, seem that cattle in India that became infected were quite liable to suffer from the disease in a serious form. However, he considered that a great deal of research work must be done as soon as possible to obtain more information upon these important points relative to the
83 susceptibility of indigenous cattle and the virulence of the prevalent strains. Although the disease was probably rare, it would perhaps be found on further investigation that, as had been revealed in the course of the discussion on anthrax, it was more prevalent than had been suspected if a more thorough search for the condition was made. Recently, he had approached the Director of the Indian Medical Research Fund Association with a view to obtaining the assistance of a colleague from his staff to collaborate in further work to be undertaken at Muktesar, and he understood that Dr. Soparkar was to be deputed for this work. As had been pointed out in the course of the discussion on contagious abortion, tuberculosis and contagious abortion were now the two most important infectious diseases of cattle in Western countries. It had been stated by a distinguished authority recently that there were probably not ten large herds of considerable size in England free from the disease, and it was said that the average incidence of tuberculous infection in Europe was probably from 20 to 30 per cent. in all cattle. This extraordinary high incidence of infection was undoubtedly connected with the economic development of the cattle industry. This development was correlated with the efforts made to improve the breeds of cattle for the special purposes for which they were destined, which entailed the introduction of individuals from other herds, improved facilities of transport, aggregation of large number of cattle in closed estab- lishments, and the development of the dairy industry. With the economic development of the cattle industry in India, it was not unlikely that the same factors which had operated to cause the spread of tuberculosis in other civilized countries would obtain in this country also. Perhaps on account of climatic conditions there would not be the same danger of spread due to the adoption of systems of housing as there had been in cooler countries. Notwith- standing this, he believed that in places such as the Southern States of U. S. A. and in Argentina, the conditions were not far different from those in India and tuberculosis had become a serious menace to the rapid economic development of the cattle industry. If we were thus confronted eventually with a comparable danger, it was obvious that in the event of proof forthcoming that the incidence of infection at the present time was very low, the most serious pre- cautions should be taken to prevent the disease from obtaining a foothold in the important herds in the country, so that the condition of affairs which existed at the present time in the important herds in Europe should not be allowed to establish itself in India. He would thus like to impress upon the meeting that they should recommend the prosecution of reasearch into the question of the prevalence and nature of tuberculous infection in cattle in India with the utmost speed, and that endeavours should then be made to
84 establish measures of control based upon those findings. It was, however, likely that the Government military dairies would com- mence efforts in this direction immediately with the cattle under their control. Colonel Pallin stated that as far as his experience went the in- cidence of tuberculosis in cattle in this country must be small, for, as far as he was aware, no case of tuberculosis had been reported among the cattle in the military dairies and the milk was sterilized before issue. The question of applying the tuberculin test to the cattle at the dairies had not yet been taken up, but he regarded it as a practical suggestion. Evidently, it would undoubtedly supply information of considerable value. Mr. Hewlett stated that a case of typical tuberculosis in a country bred animal belonging to the military dairy farm at Jubbulpore had been brought recently to his notice by the D. D. V. S., Southern Command. Mr. Smith stated that during 15 years' experience in the military dairy farms of which eight were spent as Controller of a Circle in which about 27,000 cattle were under his charge and which were maintained in an area extending from Quetta to Wellington, no case of tuberculosis had come to his knowledge in any animal that had died after attaining the age of one year. Post-mortem exa- minations on at least four out of every five of the cattle that had died were carried out by Members of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons and not one authenticated case of tuberculosis was dis- covered. At one dairy the disease was at one time suspected among the animals and two animals were sent to Muktesar alive for observa- tion. The animals were found to be suffering from Johne's disease. One case was suspected at Quetta some time ago, but it was doubtful whether it was in reality tuberculosis. He admitted that in the districts the disease was sometimes discoverable, but he contended that the chances of spreading infection in this country were very small indeed, as by far the greater proportion of the cattle lived continuously under natural conditions, in the open air. Mr. Krishna Murthi said that the first case of tuberculosis in cattle was detected by him at the Madras Veterinary College in the year 1916, and in the same year, when he was deputed to work in the Bombay Bacteriological Laboratory, he found that Colonel Glen Liston and Dr. Soparkar were engaged in investigating an outbreak in the Zoological Gardens, Bombay, and testing the susceptibility of Indian cattle. He added that the same subject came up again for discussion at the Medical Research Section of the Indian Science Congress last year. During his experience for the last seven years he had come across about twelve cases of tuberculosis
85 among bullocks belonging to the Corporation of Madras, and all these cases had been confirmed by him microscopically. Specimens were also sent by Mr. Aitchison to Colonel Glen Liston who had made mention of it in the Indian Journal of Medical Re- search. He added that last October he had occasion to test a bullock by means of the tuberculin test; a positive reaction was obtained and the animal was destroyed. On post-mortem examina- tion the lesions found confirmed the test. In the cases he had seen, the lesions were of the acute type (involving the pleura, lungs, bronchial and mediastinal glands, mesentric glands and intestines, and even kidneys). Though he was strongly of opinion that the nature of the lesions indicated that they were set up by the common bovine type of organism, yet he had no experimental proof to adduce in support of this contention. He had made inoculations, however, into guinea-pigs, and in one of these small animals he discovered generalized tuberculosis with involvement of the spleen, and demonstrated the lesions in a specimen that he brought with him to the meeting. He said that it was of the utmost importance that immediate steps should be taken to ascertain whether the cases of tuberculosis in cattle met within this country were of the bovine type as found elsewhere. Mr. Smith further stated that while the Delhi Durbar was in progress he, had under his charge 4,500 cattle for the provision of milk for the troops stationed there. About 250 of these cattle were selected at random to be tested by the tuberculin test, but no animal reacted. Mr. Wilson stated that about the same period several hundred milch cattle were brought up to various places on the railway line for the supply of milk to the royal train. Twenty or thirty cattle were tested by the tuberculin test, with negative results. He considered that a source of great danger to the human population was represented by the cattle maintained singly or in very small numbers of about two or three by Indians of the well-to-do classes within their small compounds and kept shut up always in a small room. There was no means of inspecting these cattle. Mr. Branford said that his experience corresponded very largely with that of Mr. Smith. About 4,000 cattle were maintained at Hissar and these lived almost entirely out of doors except that at times they were brought in to be given additional food in partly covered yards during the colder weather. All these animals were country-bred animals. Post-mortem examinations were always made. During his twelve years' experience at the farm he had detected only three cases of tuberculosis. Previously, while Colonel Farmer was in charge of the farm, several cases of tuberculosis were detected
86 and Colonel Farmer claimed credit for eradicating the disease from the farm. Mr. MacGregor said that he had obtained sufficient evidence in Bengal to make him feel sure that the question of prevalence should be investigated. Out of 48 jail cattle tested by Colonel Raymond, 10 reacted. Four or five were suspicious on the first test and eventually they reacted on retest. Mr. Farbrother said that three cases of tuberculosis were reported in the Bombay Presidency last year. One of these occurred in a buffalo herd. The Chairman stated that while he was in the Bombay Presidency a strongly worded circular had been issued asking those concerned to pay particular attention to the investigation of the possibility of the occurrence of tuberculous lesions in cattle. Mr. Hickey stated that in the United Provinces investigations had been carried out in two centres, namely, at the slaughter houses at Cawnpore and at Allahabad, and about 3 per cent. of the animals admitted for slaughter were found affected with tuberculosis. Recently, a horse which was suspected to be suffering from surra died and was proved to be affected with tuberculosis. The cattle found to be affected in the slaughter houses were mostly old animals and the lesions discovered were small. Mr. Ware said that he would like to know if it would be of use to carry out investigations on the prevalence of the disease by testing cattle by means of tuberculin. During the last two months he had tested 60 cattle, and four were reported positive, but the disease had not yet been confirmed by post-mortem examination. Mr. Fletcher asked Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson if it had come to his knowledge that recently it had been suggested that cattle should be used as traps to attract mosquitoes away from human beings and that for this purpose they should be kept in human dwellings. He wondered what effect this would have upon the problem. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson replied that it was beyond doubt that mosquitoes did prefer cattle, but it was about as unlikely that cattle would have any more effect in diminishing the number of cases of malaria than the keeping of cats would have upon the incidence of plague. In certain districts cattle had proved a factor in the spread of malaria by bringing in with them, on their return from their work from the vicinity of irrigation canals, a number of mosquitoes to human dwellings. Mr. Hewlett stated that he had experienced considerable difficulty in applying the tuberculin test on account of the enormous fluctua-
87 tions that took place normally in the temperatures of cattle during the hot weather. Mr. Edwards explained that it was now considered advisable to control the results obtained by the subcutaneous test by perform- ing simultaneously the so-called ocular or ophthalmic, and the intracutaneous or intradermic, tests. He explained to the meeting the methods of performing these tests. The intracutaneous test, which simply involved the injection of a small quantity of concen- trated tuberculin into one of the anal, or caudal, folds of skin and observing the occurrence of a sustained thickening in the injected fold, was now considered to be very reliable confirmatory method of testing. The Chairman stated that he had had experience in testing cattle by means of the subcutaneous test at Lahore, but he had failed to obtain reliable results on account of the uncertain tem- peratures. He considered that the anal test carried out concurrently would be an ideal form of testing. Mr. Cameron confirmed the views of Colonel Walker with regard to the unreliability of the subcutaneous test from his experience in Burma. According to the present arrangements all cattle imported had to be segregated for a month and tested. He hoped that the tail test would enable him to obtain more reliable information. Mr. Wilson asked if in these cases where the subcutaneous test had been unreliable, on account of temperature fluctuations, blood examination had been made beforehand as it was his impression that these great fluctuations might be caused by blood infection. The Chairman stated that he had made examinations and no blood parasites were found. Mr. Cameron said that no such examinations were made in the cases he had in mind. Mr. Edwards said that the Muktesar laboratory could readily supply concentrated tuberculin for the anal test on request, and that the cost of the material used for each injection would be small. After further discussion the meeting appointed a small committee consisting of Colonel Pallin, Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson, Messrs. Branford and Smith, with Mr. Edwards as Secretary, to draft a resolution embodying the views of the meeting. The meeting subsequently unanimously endorsed the following resolu- tion drafted by the committee :88 In view of the experience gained in other countries with regard to the spread of infection in susceptible animals, it is clearly indicated that steps should be taken to ascertain accurately the prevalence of infection. Research into the nature of the organisms responsible for the disease and the relative susceptibility of the different breeds of cattle in the country should be prosecuted forthwith. If this research should indicate that tuberculosis is at present rare among Indian cattle measures should be taken to eradi- cate it and to limit as far as practicable the introduction of the disease from outside sources. The Conference is of opinion that these measures are urgently demanded by reason of the grave dangers to the live-stock of the country, the purity of the milk supply, and the catastrophes of bovine tuberculosis in children. SUBJECT II (f)--PARASITOLOGY (HELMINTHOLOGY AND ENTO- MOLOGY) ; THE NECESSITY FOE INSTITUTING A SURVEY OF THE INCIDENCE OF THE GROSSER PARASITES OF LIVE-STOCK IN INDIA AND FOR THE FORMATION OF CENTRAL DEPARTMENTS TO CONTROL WORK IN THIS CONNECTION. The Chairman said : " We all recognize, I think, the importance of further studies in parasitology and the subject is a very wide one. At the last meeting a resolution was passed on the subject which I will read to you. It runs as follows :89 to helminthology in India. A large number of species of worms had not yet been described. There was no standard work on the Indian worm parasites and the same thing might be said with regard to ecto-parasites. Mr. Fletcher, Imperial Entomologist, explained what he was trying to do for veterinary workers. He was at present engaged in writing a text-book that would give information upon the impor- tant insects concerned with animal disease, and he exhibited a number of coloured plates depicting these insects. He would be glad if the meeting would indicate to him in what way he could render still more assistance. He was interested in the creation of a Central Entomological Research Institute in which workers would be engaged in all branches of entomology. It would be a great pity to split up the present entomological staff under his charge. He was prepared to send out members of his staff who were specially trained in the various branches of entomology to the assistance of veterinary investigators to elucidate problems connected with insect transmission of disease or for undertaking surveys of the insect population. Strictly speaking, ticks and mites did not come under the heading of entomology and he was not taking up their study at present. However, it had been put forward that the Zoological Survey of India should be reorganized so as to include a staff of special workers engaged in the study of the branch of zoology to which these animals belonged. It was quite possible to consti- tute a branch of this kind to work in association with the entomolo- gical staff. They had a large amount of material representing insect and other transmittors of disease at Pusa, and the collection required examination and identification. He stated that the scheme for the creation of an institute to deal solely with so-called veteri- nary entomology had been dropped, presumably on account of financial stringency. He thought that it was much better, however, to gather together in a central institute workers engaged in all branches of entomology, rather than have a separate institute for pathological entomology, on account of the economy that would be effected, both in obtaining and maintaining collections, records and literature on the subject and in co-ordinating the labours of the workers. Mr. Edwards represented that in the present state of our know- ledge, the subject which had been taught at the veterinary schools under the name of parasitology might be taken to cover an extre- mely wide range of subjects. In its exact meaning the word para- sitology, that is, the study of parasites and parasitism, was almost synonymous with pathology, and took within its scope the nature of all kinds of parasitic forms, from the largest to the most minute
90 and their effects upon the hosts. The term, however, in the minds of most people generally implied the study of the larger forms of animal organisms which were parasitic upon man and other animals, and the study of these larger forms came within the range, particu- larly, of helminthology and entomology, with arachnology. These sciences had now advanced to such a degree that it was not possible to attain competence in either, unless the worker devoted himself seriously to research during the whole of his time in one only, and as Mr. Fletcher would admit, in the subject of entomology, the whole field represented by it could not be understood to such a degree that reliance could be placed upon the opinion of any one worker in even more than one or a few branches of the subject, for the different classes of insects needed special and prolonged study. Likewise, it was too much to expect a man who might have been trained so. as to become a tolerably efficient veterinary scientist to assimilate without fail the details of systematic knowledge and technical methods involved in either of these two subjects. In fact, the helminthologist and the entomologist required a natural aptitude and a life training in either class of work. He did not hold much hope, therefore, of obtaining proficient workers in these branches of sciences, by deputing Indian veterinary graduates to attend short courses of study abroad, where these subjects were systematically taught in teaching classes. For the urgent needs in helminthological research in connection with the important diseases of the domesticated animals in this country, it would be best to obtain the services of at least one fully trained, experienced hel- minthologist for the work; entomological problems should be re- ferred to the Imperial Entomologist, who had consented to depute a worker or workers specially versed in the branch of the subject in view, to assist veterinary investigators during the course of their researches into animal diseases in which insect problems entered. The Chairman stated that he was not dealing with the research aspect when he referred to the training of a so-called parasitologist for his staff. The man so trained would be required merely for teaching the students going through a course of veterinary study at the college. He was looking at the matter from the teacher's point of view. If the individual appointed would specialize in one branch so much the better. For special studies, he agreed that the best policy was to create central organizations for the purpose. The committee, already appointed to deal with the subject of trypanosomiasis, was asked to draw a resolution embodying the views of the meeting.
91 The following resolutions were submitted by it, and were passed unanimously :92 introduced the subject of infectious lymphangitis in cattle (an abs- tract of his paper is printed in Appendix II). He said that in the outbreak he had dealt with, he noticed the same symptoms and lesions as were observed by previous workers, and in the course of his argument regarding the mode of infection by the causative agent, he pointed out by means of charts and diagrams that the various superficial abcesses of the body were mainly in correlation with the extent of the superficial area of the skin drained by the various lymphatic glands of the body. He added that in his attempt at the elimination of the various possibilities of modes of infection, the only possible conclusion he could arrive at was that the infection must be due to some suctorial insect, especially cattle lice, although he had not actually proved this contention at the time. He quoted here, as an analogy, the belief held by medical experts before and after the work of India Plague Commission regarding the mode of infection in plague. He then referred to the character of the organism and the lesions, specimens of which he demonstrated. He also added that in the treatment of the complicated cases a vaccine was prepared and used by him, which in his opinion was found effective. The Chairman pointed out that in the short time available for the meeting, it was much to be regretted that it was not possible to attempt a discussion on the technical aspects of Mr. Murthi's paper. The paper should be published in extenso in a professional journal so that the members might be able to estimate the thorny parts adduced by the author. On the motion of Mr. Hewlett, seconded by Mr. Cameron, a hearty vote of thanks was accorded to the author for his paper, and the following resolution was passed unanimously :93 Murthi said that it was unnecessary for him to describe in detail the lesions of the disease, because he found on his. arrival at Calcutta that the disease existed in other parts of India also, causing trouble to cattle owners and was widely known. He added that the cause of the disease was in his opinion a streptothrix, which possessed acid and alcohol fast staining characters. He claimed to demons- trate the presence of streptothrix organisms very close to the papillae of the skin, from which he inferred that the infection must be through wounds caused by the misuse of the nose string or by contact of any other abrasion with infected food or water. In discussing pro- phylactic measures he deprecated the common method of feeding- and watering animals which is at present adopted in the Madras Presidency. Mr. Edwards said he had examined with great interest the pre- parations exhibited by Mr. Krishna Murthi and more particularly as he had obtained evidence of the widespread existence of this con- dition in India from the specimens sent to him for examination at the Muktesar laboratory from Assam, Bihar and Orissa, and the Bombay Presidency. The results of the examinations at Muktesar had been presented to the meeting in a note by Mr. Hugh Cooper, Pathologist on the Muktesar staff. In the preparations examined at Muktesar the clusters of club-shaped structures simulating those seen in actinomycosis lesions were clearly observed and he had at the meeting a number of paintings and photographs taken to show these structures. Hitherto, however, they had failed to demonstrate the causal organisms. He had examined Mr. Krishna Murthi's specimens carefully in order to find out if there was any real evidence of the presence of a streptothrix, as he had mentioned in his communication. Apparently, the author believed that granule and club formation was invariably associated with the presence of streptothrix organisms. He reminded him, however, that even the so-called actinomycosis of cattle in other countries, particularly in Argentina, and also, it was now known, in a very large degree in Europe, was caused not by streptothrix but by a small bacillus, namely the so-called actino-bacillus of Lignieres and Schutz. It had also been stated that club formation could be set up by other organisms. In the preparations sub- mitted by Mr. Krishna Murthi he could see no evidence what- soever of the presence of streptothrix filaments and apparently the author had not been able to demonstrate these organisms by cultural examination. However, it was to Mr. Krishna Murthi that the credit belonged for having discovered the granule forma- tions in this interesting and apparently widespread disease condition of Indian cattle. G
94 A hearty vote of thanks was accorded to the author by the meeting for his interesting paper and it was resolved :95 whether it is practicable to go further than this in rural areas, but they commend the matter to the notice of the Local Government.'." A note had been circulated among the members of the conference beforehand forthcoming from Mr. Aitchison on the subject of pro- phylactic vaccination of dogs against rabies. As Mr. Aitchison was not present, his colleague, Mr. Krishna Murthi explained to the meeting the results of the further work intimated in the note. Mr. Krishna Murthi reviewed the results of prophylactic inocula- tion against rabies in dogs carried out in Japan and America and said that experiments on similar lines were being conducted by Mr. Aitchison and himself at the Madras Veterinary College. They were, however, very sorry that they could not make the results of the first series of experiments available to the members of the con- ference as there was a delay in getting the prophylactic vaccine from Colonel Cornwall, who was unavoidably absent at Lucknow for the Indian Science Congress. He raised the question as to whether any legislation could not be passed regarding immunization of dogs against rabies if the results of experimental inoculations conducted at the Madras Veterinary College proved successful. The Chairman enquired whether Mr. Krishna Murthi thought that even then rabies could be stamped out. Mr. Krishna Murthi said that he was fully aware that it would be impossible to eradicate rabies altogether, but that its incidence might be greatly diminished. Mr. Edwards said that the results of the experimental inoculations carried out by Messrs Aitchison and Krishna Murthi should be very carefully considered before any measures could be suggested to Government to deal with the disease in the manner indicated, and should therefore be examined as soon as they were available by a competent technical authority if the authors should come to the conclusion that the method evolved by them was capable of wide- spread practical application. Tests upon the efficacy of certain forms of vaccine were at the time being conducted in France. He thought that the matter should thus be referred for consideration to the body constituted as the Central Standing Advisory Committee on Epizootic Diseases and Research, the formation of which he was going to propose to the meeting in drafting resolutions after the discussion on Subject III (f) (Methods to be adopted to correlate technical information and render authoritative advice on professional problems). G 2
96 The meeting then resolved unanimously97 The Chairman stated that at the present time veterinary students were not taught the methods of diagnosing and treating sheep diseases to any important degree in the Indian colleges. He was not certain as to what extent it would be safe to distribute medicine direct to the owners. Mr. MacGregor did not think that sheep diseases hitherto had been considered to have a sufficiently high relative importance to have special instruction imparted upon them at the colleges. Mr. Wilson maintained that in view of the gross ignorance of sheep owners in general the distribution of printed instructions among them would not prove of any use in dealing with sheep diseases. Mr. Edwards then showed in what form propaganda steps might be undertaken ; for example, in South Africa wire-worm remedy was distributed in powder form from the Veterinary Research Labora- tory and instructions with regard to dosage took the form of simple notches on the handles of the spoons issued for measuring the single doses necessary for sheep of the various ages. He contended that a sound elementary teaching of students at the veterinary colleges in comparative pathology (including, particularly, parasitology) would necessarily imply instruction in the diseases of the sheep, for there was nothing very particular about the special pathology of this animal, except that certain classes of disease, notably those due to the grosser, worm, parasites, were relatively more frequent and assumed greater importance in it. Mr. Branford thought that the education of owners might be left out of consideration in the present backward condition of India as an important factor in controlling sheep diseases. Mr. Krishna Murthi stated that at the Madras Veterinary College the students were taught to identify the gross parasites of sheep, for example, but no special instruction was set apart for sheep disease. Mr. Wilson thought that useful information concerning the parasites of sheep in India might be collected at slaughter houses. Mr. Branford stated that he would like to know the views of members regarding the prevalence of rinderpest among sheep, for he remembered great mortality some years ago from this disease in sheep at Mirzapur in the United Provinces. Mr. Wilson stated that he had not observed rinderpest in sheep during his eight years' experience in the United Provinces. Mr. Hewlett, likewise, had seen no rinderpest in sheep in Bombay.
98 Mr. Branford also raised the question as to the prevalence of anthrax in sheep. It was decided to relegate the discussion of this point to that of Subject IIa (Anthrax). The meeting subsequently unanimously resolved :99 PART III-GENERAL. SUBJECT III (a)100 of tuberculosis, for example, in regard to which it had taken about four years for Local Governments to draft rules for the prohibition of importation of tuberculous cattle. A concrete example of an important disease which would undoubtedly be scheduled under an act of this kind was anthrax, which he had discussed at length when that subject was before the conference. It would be a great advantage to the veterinary services and the administrative autho- rities to have all central legislation concerning animal diseases amalgamated in a single comprehensive measure. Mr. Hewlett agreed with the last speaker, for although with the machinery available for carrying out sanitary police measures it would be impossible to achieve very much at present, yet a begin- ning must be made. He had pointed out in connection with rinder- pest control that owing to the lack of means of enforcing any method of control at the present time no headway could be made. He insisted that the act should be permissive and the rules pro- vincial. Mr. Edwards pointed out that it was most important that such rules should be carefully framed by members of the profession who were well versed in the special problems of epizootiology and sanitary police. It might well happen that if Local Governments were left alone to draft regulations, they might be advised by a recently recruited officer who did not have much experience in this class of work and who was not aware of the technicalities of the relevant problem. He therefore impressed upon the conference that any regulations drafted should be carefully considered by a small committee of members who were best acquainted with these problems, so that the policy might be as far as possible uniform throughout the country; likewise, the hands of individual members representing the department in the provinces would be strengthened in renderng advice to their Governments if this advice had the support of an authoritative body that represented the several provinces and had taken pains to collect the best technical information available on the problem at issue. In the course of a discussion with Mr. Hewlett, the Chairman pointed out that the control of epizootic diseases could not be regarded as a political question, for it was an imminent one in every part of the country and respected no political barriers. Mr. Ware pointed out that in Madras this form of legislation seemed to have been adopted many years ago, in the form of the Madras Cattle Diseases Act, 1866, and he could not see why. a similar act had not been introduced elsewhere. Under this act it was made compulsory on the owner to notify any contagious disease among cattle.
101 After some further discussion it was unanimously resolved:102 counterfoil was sent to the Sub-divisional Officer. The Veterinary Assistants in Burma were all touring officers and when they got to a village they inspected the registers, checked the results and signed their name on the last counterfoil. From time to time the inspecting veterinary officer checked the signatures and glanced through the alleged causes of death and ascertained the date of the last death. On the whole this system worked fairly well, but much depended on the village headmen who sometimes were guilty of neglecting their work. For example, in one village no animal was reported as having died for five years. In some districts lectures were given by the veterinary officers in the course of their tours to village headmen and others so as to give them some idea of the methods of notifying cattle deaths. Small text-books were also issued through the Deputy Commissioner for the use of those who were interested, and recently in some districts, as above mentioned, a system of examining men after the course of lectures in regard to their proficiency in this respect had been adopted and prizes amount- ing sometimes to Rs. 50 were awarded to those who got the highest marks. As a result of these endeavours it had been found that the standard of the entries recorded had very much improved. In Upper Burma, on the other hand, this system of cattle death registra- tion had not been adopted and the number of deaths was estimated roughly by the district authority. The use of the cattle deaths register had been recommended for adoption in Upper Burma. Mr. Hickey said that the system of recording in the United Provinces was very bad. The recording agency was the Revenue Department and the deaths were reported to the authorities by the patwaris. Mr. Wilson stated that in the Central Provinces information regarding animal deaths was obtained from the police in some districts, and from the Revenue Department in other districts. Mr. MacGregor stated that this was the system in vogue in Bengal. It frequently happened that the officials were much too busy with their other work to pay the necessary attention to the reporting of animal disease. He suggested that the work might be entrusted entirely to the revenue officials. Mr. Farbrother stated that in the Bombay Presidency deaths were reported by the Revenue officials through the village patel. Khan Saheb Sheikh Naiz Mohammed stated that the first essential was to educate the cultivators so that they could be induced to report mortality to the revenue officials. At present there was no proper system of obtaining information in his province (U. P.) from the revenue officers. The returns collected were of no benefit to the Civil Veterinary Department. He suggested that the Police
103 Department might be put in general charge of this class of work and that they should instruct the village chowkidar to insist upon the reporting of deaths. He recommended the same system of report- ing as was adopted in connection with human disease. He consi- dered that the police authorities were better fitted for this work than the revenue authorities. Mr. Cameron stated that in Burma statistics with regard to deaths were collected and eventually passed through the Revenue Depart- ment, but in the case of rinderpest, the Sub-divisional Officer telegraphed the occurrence of an outbreak to the veterinary authorities. Mr Riley stated that in Bihar a system of reporting similar to that described as obtaining in Lower Burma was in vogue. Deaths- were reported to the village chowkidar who then reported them to the Sub-divisional Officer, and this officer sent one copy of the report to the police and one to the touring Veterinary Assistant. Mr. Ware stated that in Madras the notification of deaths was done through the revenue officials, who sent one copy of the report to the Tahsildar and one copy to the touring Veterinary assistant. There was difficulty in obtaining reliable information from some villages and in cases of delinquency the village headman had to be suspended or fined. In other villages fairly reliable figures were given. Mr. Wilson stated that in the Central Provinces the village patwaris suffered in the event of delinquencies of this kind. In Bihar, Mr. Riley stated, the chowkidar was in some cases- negligent. Mr. MacGregor stated that in Bengal the police chowkidars had so much to do that the authorities were not prepared to punish them for their neglect in this direction. It had been well recognized that an unsatisfactory situation did exist and it was thought at one time that it would be a good plan to sanction rewards for the satis- factory reporting of diseases. A simple method of reporting by distributing differently coloured postcards representing different forms of diseases for return to headquarters had at one time been thought of, but officials appeared to be very lax generally in all matters concerning deaths in animals. Mr. Ware considered that in those provinces where the reporting authority was not mentioned, it was important to try to lay down as soon as possible who was responsible. Mr. Quirke stated that in the Punjab the reporting of deaths was done through the patwaris. They had tried the system of reward, but this method proved quite ineffectual and was liable to
104 abuse. Many attempts to improve the system were made by cir- cularising the District Boards asking them to offer suggestions as to methods of improving the reporting of deaths, but in the Punjab no result was obtained, so that at the present time nothing better than the village patwari was obtainable for the work. Mr. Harris stated that in Assam a similar system was in vogue. Deaths were reported to the village headman and he passed the information through the police to the Sub-divisional officers and to the Veterinary Assistant. The reports were checked from time to time by the Veterinary Superintendent. However, there was no system of checking the headman, and pressure should be applied to that individual. Mr. Wilson stated that the statistics available could not be regarded as affording any reliable evidence with regard to mortality. In his experience he found that animal owners were often unscru- pulous about the notification of diseases. He had even found that they would report the occurrence of an attack of foot-and-mouth disease in twenty animals in order to attract the Veterinary Assis- tants into the locality for the treatment of an animal belonging to a particular owner. The Chairman discussed the question of rewards for the noti- fication of disease and he doubted the advantage of such methods. The Government of India produced a statistical table showing the incidence of disease in the various provinces, but he did not consi- der that these statistics had much value. It appeared from the discussion that the system of reporting differred greatly in the several provinces. Every annual report contained a paragraph dealing with this perplexity. He considered that this matter should be referred to a central authority in order to have a uniform system throughout the country. The publication of reliable statistics was a matter of vital importance to the Government, to the Veterinary Service, and to foreign countries who accepted these figures as indicating the incidence of animal disease in the country. In all civilized countries the publication of reliable statistical information was regarded as an important economic concern, and therefore if India considered herself a civilized country it was incumbent upon her to take steps to improve matters in this direction. Mr. Quirke considered that the conference ought to make some suggestions in this matter. Mr. Hewlett, however, thought that as the control of animal diseases was now a " transferred subject " under the Reforms, this subject should be left to the Provincial Governments who should be asked to improve their methods.
105 The Chairman contended, however, that as the statistics pub- lished by the Government of India referred to disease throughout the whole country it was essential to have some uniform system. Mr. Edwards maintained that it was particularly for investigat- ing fundamental questions in veterinary administration of this kind that he was proposing a " permanent standing committee on veterinary administration" under subject III (f)(Methods to be adopted to correlate technical information and render authoritative advice on professional problems). Matters of this kind, of far-reaching impor-, tance to the administration of the department, could not be hurried- ly dealt with at the conference, and for the reasons stated by the Chairman he considered that uniformity in the drafting of improved schemes was essential. The subject of statistical inquiry was a most complex and difficult one at the present time and required expert advice ; he recommended therefore to the meeting that the problem involved should be the subject of careful deliberation by the " Central Standing Advisory Committee on Administration " if the meeting approved of the creation of this body. Mr. Wilson thought that improvement in the system might have to take the form of propaganda work to be undertaken by Local Governments. Mr. Ware referred to the financial difficulties that might result from attempts to improve the system, for a slight rise in the pay of the village officials in Madras recently amounting to Rs. 4 a month had resulted in the addition of four crores of rupees to the Govern- ment budget during the year. Mr. Harris stated that in Assam the difficulty was an enormous one for the village headmen were not paid for the work, and hence no penalty could be inflicted. Khan Saheb Sheikh Naiz Mohammed thought that the police should take the work up as part of their duties and should be supplied with a suitable small text-book together with the necessary informa- tion connected with it. He found that the patwaris were quite indifferent with regard to the notification of the disease. The chowkidar would presumably care more and get better information. The meeting unanimously passed the following resolution :106 SUBJECT III (c).107 undertaken by Mr. Quirke in the Punjab with a view to improving the milking qualities of the breeds of cattle. At the last meeting of the Board of Agriculture at Pusa, the formation of a Central Cattle Board was recommended, and one of the functions of this board would be to formulate and control herd books in connection with the indigenous breeds. He saw quite well that the Provincial Governments looked for a central authority to give them advice on these matters and efforts in this direction were much more impres- sive when they were regarded as Imperial concerns. Mr. Quirke stated that he was in full agreement with what Mr. Smith had said with regard to the improvement of the indigenous breeds with a view to increasing the milk supply. He had already commenced work along these lines and had established a herd book in what he regarded as a suitable area for the purpose in the Punjab. In this area the breed of cattle had been kept pure, as there was no communication by means of railways between it and the outlying districts. He had thought it would be well to make a start even as late as the year 1923 with a herd book so that a permanent record would remain of this breed. It was indispensable to stimulate local enterprise in this subject, but unfortunately at the present time it did not pay the zemindar to breed good cattle as the prices obtained for improved cattle did not run to what would be considered profitable. Mr. Smith stated that the Chairman had raised in his opening address the very question which had come most prominently in their minds in connection with the cattle industry at the Board of Agriculture meeting held at Pusa, last year, namely, the estab- lishment of a Central Cattle Board. Mr. Hickey stated that in the United Provinces an advisory board had been established last year for this purpose. After some further discussion the meeting unanimously resolved:108 At the meeting Mr. Cameron stated that the conditions in Burma seemed to be somewhat different from those prevalent in India. The journey from Muktesar to Rangoon took 10 days and frequently the serum was conveyed at a high temperature, probably near boilers in the hold of the ship, and deterioration appeared to take place within that time. Sometimes he received a telegram from the borders of Siam asking for a supply of serum. Supplies had to be transported thereto by carts and other primitive methods. The question upon which he desired information was whether some methods might be evolved to prevent the deterioration of serum during transport. The serum which he had in mind was anti- rinderpest serum. Again it was frequently a cause of inconvenience to him that mallein was supplied in bottles containing 100 c.c. It would be a great advantage if it could be supplied in single doses in sealed tubes, as in the provinces it was not required for more than a few animals at a time. Mr. Hewlett stated that he had had experience in the despatch of large quantities of Muktesar serum during the war to Egypt, Mesopotamia, and elsewhere, and he had had no complaints about deterioration. He had not experienced any difficulty in regard to mallein on account of it being supplied in bulk. He found that he could decant the liquid and issue it for inoculation in the. quanti- ties which were necessary. Mr. Wilson wondered whether something on the principle of a Thermos flask could be devised for the transportation of serum bottles. He found that if the cases were embedded in white sand during transport deterioration did not set in. Mr. Cameron stated that the kind of conveyances available in Burma in many parts precluded this method of transport. Mr. Harris stated that in Assam he had encountered no material difficulties in maintaining the quality of serum. He would like to know at what temperature serum commenced to deteriorate. Per- haps cans similar to those used for the transport of perishable goods might be devised for the purpose of carrying serum. Mr. Cameron stated that he had in mind a publication which had been issued recently by the authorities in the Phillipines with regard to methods for keeping serum cool during transport. Mr. Hickey stated that no difficulties in this respect had been experienced in the United Provinces. The Chairman likewise stated that no difficulties had been encountered in the Punjab. Mr. Farbrother had had no difficulty except when serum had had to be transported to some remote parts of the Bombay Presidency.
109 Mr. Edwards explained that the question of supplying serum in a more easily transportable form and of preventing deterioration when it became exposed to relatively high temperatures had already engaged his attention. At the present time he had ordered from abroad a plant for drying serum at a low temperature, and if the results obtained after the experimental trials were satisfactory the whole problem brought forward by Mr. Cameron might be completely solved and serum could be issued in a convenient form and in much less bulk, so that it could be readily transported to remote districts. He was also sanguine that the quality of the serum could be re- tained much longer. He did not consider it necessary therefore at the present juncture to discuss the methods of better dealing with the liquid serum until the results of his experiments were available. Experience elsewhere, in America particularly, with dried serum, such as dried anti-swine-fever serum, had given promising results In the course of further discussion with Mr. Cameron, he assured him that there would be no difficulty in supplying him with mallein. from the Muktesar laboratory in such small quantities as he desired for immediate use. He also stated that he had recently been en- gaged in preparing mallein for the intra-palpebral test so as to have available a product comparable with the French malline dilue. The diluted mallein thus prepared was found to be quite as effective as the French product after comparative tests upon experimentally infected animals and it would be issued from the laboratory in small glass tubes at as cheap a rate. Mr. Edwards further stated that he wished at this point to impress upon those who made indents for serum that it would be a great advantage if they all possessed cold storage facilities for the storage of supplies of serum in anticipation of their likely needs. Serum could be manufactured at the Branch Laboratory at Bareilly during the winter months at very much cheaper rate than at the parent Muktesar laboratory. During the few winter months that had just passed large quantities of serum had been manufactured there in anticipation of demands from the provinces. For the last two years, however, it seemed that the demands from the provinces were not as large as had been expected, and large quantities had had to be transported back to Muktesar. It would be advantageous to the laboratory and to the officers in the provinces if adequate arrangements were made in each province for the cold storage of serum in anticipation of likely demands, and if this serum could be indented for while the manufacture of serum was being undertaken in the cold season at Bareilly. He commended to the meeting the passing of a resolution to this effect. Mr. Hickey stated that he would like the meeting to pass a resolu- tion with regard to cold storage, as in the United Provinces his cold storage facilities were limited to one cool storage chest. H
110 Mr. Harris stated that in Assam a reserve of serum was main- tained in the cooler parts of the province, namely, in the hill stations. Colonel Pallin intimated that if a resolution were passed to the effect that cool storage facilities should be provided in each province where such facilities did not already exist, the case would be met as most of the provinces appeared to be provided for in this respect. After further discussion it was resolved unanimously:111 " It is unlikely that much will be done at present, but I consider that if we educate men to perform the duties efficiently there will be a demand for their services eventually." Mr. Farbrother, who had stated his veiws in his circular note, informed the meeting that in certain localities there was at present a demand for this class of worker, but the duties could not be under- taken by the Veterinary Assistant posted in the locality as he had to tour his district for a considerable part of his time, and while he was away from his headquarters there was nobody left to do the work except a salutri or compounder. He thought that the work was essentially a matter for the municipalities to take up themselves. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson stated that the appointment of meat inspectors had now become essential in many parts. He had a great deal of experience in regard to cattle slaughter. Near Bombay there was one large slaughter house in which buffaloes, mainly, were killed and their meat subjected to a process of drying and then exported to Burma. The conditions of the slaughter house were very bad and there was no inspection whatever of the meat. The question which he wished to ask the meeting was to what extent veterinary colleges could undertake the training for this work, as men for the work must be provided. Mr. Quinlan thought that much useful information with regard to the incidence of tuberculosis and other diseases would be obtain- able with an adequate system of meat inspection. He thought that the Military Department could co-operate by assisting them in the system of meat inspection. Mr. Hewlett stated that the students at the Bombay college were admittedly not given an extensive course of training in meat inspection, but they were given theoretical training at the college and elementary practical instruction at the Bandra slaughter house. He agreed with Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson that the condition of affairs at the Kurla Slaughter House, where dried buffalo meat was manufactured for the purpose of export to Burma, was disgraceful. But he did not consider that the state of affairs in the other slaughter houses in Bombay was quite so bad. Before a proper course of instruction could be given to the veterinary students at the slaughter houses, it would be necessary to enforce the inspection of meat at the slaughter houses, and this was a matter for legislation. Khan Saheb Sheikh Naiz Mohammed believed that the inspec- tion of carcases at the slaughter houses would give valuable informa- tion relative to the investigation of disease in general, for at the present time it was customary for animal owners to send their diseased animals to the slaughter houses to be used as human food. H 2
112 Mr. MacGregor stated that the inspection of meat was undertaken at the slaughter house in Calcutta by a Veterinary Assistant who had undergone no special course of instruction in the subject before he was posted to this appointment; Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson asked if it would not be possible to institute a special course of study dealing with meat inspection in the veterinary curriculum. Mr. Farbrother stated that this class of instruction could be undertaken in the slaughter houses as he believed that it would otherwise entail a very expensive curriculum. The Chairman stated that instruction in meat inspection had been included in the Bombay programme for the four years' course of study. Mr. Edwards maintained that a system of veterinary training necessarily provided the best ground-work for the education of a competent meat inspector. In reality, meat inspection might be regarded as a very simple form of applied pathology, or study of the technique of post-mortem examination. The voluminous treatises available on this subject were almost entirely text-books dealing with the grosser pathological changes found post-mortem. If the information concerning these changes were deleted from such books, there would be little left. He admitted, however, that if it were thought necessary to teach students in full detail the pro- cesses of refrigeration, slaughter house construction, the utilization of by-products, etc., a special course in meat inspection could be made very prolonged and expensive. Otherwise, he considered that a few weeks' experience in a slaughter house was quite sufficient to give a veterinary graduate all the further information he required to deal with this special work. In England, meat inspection resolved itself very largely into the detection of tuberculous lesions. At the present time, the importance of undertaking meat inspection with a view to minimizing the risk to human beings of contracting tuberculosis from this source was not deemed to be so great as it was a few years ago, for it was admitted that the proportion of cases of human tuberculosis contracted by the ingestion of tuber- culous meat must be very low indeed, and the dangers from the tuberculous milk of cattle would seem to be incomparably greater. The really important sources of danger to human beings from the ingestion of meat could not be detected by any system of meat inspection which consisted merely of naked eye inspection of the carcases. He meant to say that the so-called " food poisonings " which in reality were specific bacterial infections, due for the most part to Grtner's bacillus, Bacillus botulinus, and certain other
113 organisms, were usually related to no changes visible to the naked eye in the meat. Mr. MacGregor contended that it would be necessary to train the veterinary graduates further to recognize such conditions as putrefactive changes and changes due to " fevered flesh." Mr. Edwards maintained that this aspect of the problem ought to be well inculcated in any veterinary student who had been properly taught the pathology appertaining to his ordinary training. More- over, these were changes which would be readily detected by the consumer himself and were not usually attendant with danger to him, but were such as to make the meat nauseous to the senses. He admitted that the general principle of meat inspection was to safeguard the consumer against any risk of purchasing meat other than that for which he paid, namely, the " wholesome " and " un- tainted " flesh of the healthy animal from which it was purported to be obtained. In the three years' course of study which had been drafted by the Conference during its proceedings, the subject of meat inspection had been included in the final year of the course of study, in " State Veterinary Medicine." He believed that they could well assure Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson that there would be no difficulty in providing municipalities and other bodies with men sufficiently trained for carrying out meat inspection from the colleges when this course of study had been adopted, if these bodies were prepared to pay a reasonable rate of salary for their services. It was resolved subsequently unanimously :114 wished to impress upon them that, although in the course of their previous discussions they had often made reference to the need of specialized workers, yet as a profession they had one common task to perform, namely, the control of animal disease, and one sub- ject to study, namely, the investigation of animal disease. In. reality, it was this common pursuit which bound them together and represented the task which they held themselves capable of performing for the public benefit. He wished to impress upon members that political controversies and discussions on administra- tive matters ultimately led to no benefit either to the public or to the members themselves if they did not, as a professional body, possess a sound ground-work of technical information. Although he insisted that the pursuit followed by the veterinary profession represented an entity in the economy of a civilized country, yet they could not pursue their endeavours in complete isolation, but they must work in close collaboration with workers whose pursuits- frequently overlapped their own to a large extent, and in this con- nection he referred particularly to workers in the medical profes- sion and in animal husbandry. The proposals which he wished to put forward in order to accomplish these desiderata might be sub- mitted in a practical form under three heads, namely : (1) The- need for the institution of a professional journal as a medium for the dissemination of information of technical interest to the profes- sion in India. (2) The need for the establishment of small central advisory bodies that would be able to collect reliable information and render authoritative advice to Government upon certain of the peculiar aspects of their calling at any time. (3) The need for amalgamation or collaboration with workers in kindred pursuits. Under the first of these headings he maintained that without a medium for the publication of observations and for obtaining in- formation upon the problems connected with the peculiar conditions of disease of live-stock in India, members who were not in a position to consult the voluminous literature dealing with matters directly or indirectly connected with their professional duties would lose touch with the progress made in modern knowledge connected with their calling. He insisted that if a medium of this kind were estab- lished, it was absolutely essential that it should be regarded as a purely technical publication and on no account be allowed to degenerate into a medium for the expression of political or quasi- political information. In the note which he had circulated he had given his reasons for the establishment, as soon as practi- cable, of a journal conducted along the lines upon which the Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science, now defunct, had been conducted in the past. He recapitulated these reasons and maintained that it should be within the competence of the pro-
115 fession in India to publish a quarterly issue containing original communications to which might be added abstracts of information from other journals regarding matters of relevant interest to them. Secondly, the need for small standing committees which might be called upon by the Government of India at any time to render representative and authoritative advice on technical questions had become more and more evident in the course of the deliberations of the conference, so that he need hardly dwell upon the urgency of this proposition. He proposed, therefore, that they should estab- lish three Central Standing Advisory Committees, the composition of which would be left to the Government of India and which would be in a position to submit the considered and collective views of the Service whenever there was any need of their advice. He gave examples of the inevitable delays and difficulties which appeared to have been experienced by the administrative authorities at the seat of Government from having to refer questions on technical matters to Local Governments who were separately advised by their veterinary officers. If small powerful bodies of officers could be gathered together, a clear expression of the views of the profes- sion in the country could be formulated for the guidance of the Central Governments and the Local Governments and thereby the position of the individual adviser would be greatly strengthened. The Committees, he submitted, should be three in number to deal with the following questions :116 Their services as investigators of animal disease might be considered of direct economic importance only to the owners of domesticated animals but it might be stated that indirectly they were of inestim- able value in the elucidation of the whole problem of disease, which was tantamount to the maintenance of health in the whole popula- tion. The Chairman stated that Mr. Ware's note did not appear to be admissible, as he referred to the question of creating Directors of Veterinary Service in each of the provinces. The Government of India had ruled that it was not within the competence of the conference to discuss administrative questions, but he was inclined to admit it if Mr. Ware could show that the proposition had a pro- fessional aspect. Mr. Ware said that the professional aspects of his note were quite obvious, for in Madras there was a professional head at the college and an administrative head of the service in the field, and their posts were entirely separate and independent. If the service had a single head the functions of the college and of the service could be co-ordinated. In the case of all other departments in the province there was a local head. Mr. Hewlett was rather sceptical as to the merits of the advice tendered with regard to reviving a professional journal in India. He pointed out that it would cost a great deal of money and labour to conduct a departmental journal, and this journal would only deal with certain aspects of veterinary diseases. He stated that it was ruled as the outcome of the 1908 conference that no articles would be submitted to other journals than the Journal of Tropical Veteri- nary Science except with the approval of the Inspector-General, but this stood in the way of recording cases. He believed that it would be best to publish professional information in one or other of the journals in the United Kingdom, as, for instance, in the Veterinary Journal. He was entirely opposed to any policies of centralization, and although he favoured the creation of central bodies for purposes of research and certain epizootic diseases, he was much against any interference with local administrations. Mr. Quinlan had no doubt but that the great majority of those present would entirely agree with Mr. Edwards in his proposals for the co-ordination of effort, particularly in regard to education and epizootic diseases. Not only did he think that a Central Committee should advise the Local Governments upon questions of education but it ought to take in hand the examination of teaching institu- tions and consider the methods of examining students. Mr. Kerr considered that one of the chief advantages of institut- ing Central Committees would be that they would strengthen the
117 hands of the Local Government officers. He felt that this applied particularly to the province in which he was situated. A young veterinary officer recently recruited to the department would un- doubtedly feel that he much needed the support and experience of a representative body in tendering advice to his Government. The Chairman was emphatic as to the need of introducing a Central Board to deal with education. He felt that a local officer would frequently need the assistance of such a body to support his own expression of opinion to his Government. He gave an example of an experience which he had when he wished to institute a 4 years' course of education at the Punjab College. His scheme was examined by his own Government and approved subject to alteration after the results of the meeting of Principals. As the result of some difference of opinion with the Director of Agriculture the scheme was further examined by a special Committee appointed for the purpose. It was approved finally but the procedure would have been simplified had there been an expert central body to refer to originally. As Principal of a College and as a Fellow of the University he had endeavoured to dissipate the idea that veterinary education was merely an exercise in mechanical methods. His connection with the University had shown him that a properly constituted Board of Studies had advantages and that the deliberations of such a body were more likely to lead to fruitful results than the opinions of an individual. He considered that when the colleges became affiliated to the universities, Veterinary Faculties should be consti- tuted. When that came about, the need of a central body might not be so apparent, provided that sufficient expert advice in the Faculties was available. Even then, however, a Central Board might be very useful. He agreed that a Standing Committee on Research and Epizootic Diseases was indispensable. With regard to Administration he had nothing to say except that the present position appeared to him to be an almost impossible one. The Government of India must have advice from some source and he felt that local veterinary advisers would like to have their advice confirmed by a central body in some instances. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson stated that he was in whole- hearted agreement with all that Mr. Edwards had said upon co- operation in the investigation of disease, for whatever branch we might represent or wherever we were situated the problem of disease must be regarded as a single problem. This point had been very well brought out by the Advisory Committee on Research into Diseases of Animals. This body had definitely pointed out the utility of research in the diseases of animals in relation to the investi-
118 gation of human disease and deplored the lamentably small support given to this kind of research at home and in the dependencies. Specialization was certainly an advantage, but specialization should be regarded as a necessary division in the application of labour to the investigation of disease problems. The Medical Research Council in their last report again emphasized the vital need for close co- operation between veterinary and other pathologists. Human pathology was still in a lamentably backward state, and the progress they had made in recent years was due almost entirely to the study of disease processes in animals, correlated with the study of clinical cases in hospitals and elsewhere. If the problem of disease investiga- tion was absolutely one, the need for co-operation was patent. The only question was how was it to be carried out. The Medical Research Council administered funds for the purpose of undertaking research, contributed by the State. In the report of the Advisory Committee on Research into the Diseases of Animals, the establish- ment of a body analogous to the Medical Research Council was recommended. In India, there was a Medical Research Fund which had been in existence for 10 years and was entirely supported by contributions from Government, and he hoped to get some support for it from charitably disposed individuals. He deprecated any interference on the plea of retrenchment with the efforts of this association. He commended the institution of a small body for the control of research in animal disease, and co-operation between the two associations could be made very close indeed. The point laid stress upon by the Medical Research Council was in regard to interchange of workers. Interchange could easily be arranged in this country. He noted that Mr. Edwards had already com- menced efforts in this direction, for he was endeavouring to make arrangements for Dr. Soparkar to work at the Muktesar laboratory. If the Central Standing Committee proposed to the meeting were adopted and if it was in possession of certain funds, co-operation among workers could be made extremely close. His dream had been to see the establishment of a large institution in which the workers of the two professions pursued their objects side by side. He gave the meeting some of the experiences regarding the causes of failure and success of committees ; one of the essential factors to success was that a committee should be constituted so as to represent the highest professional authority. The Central Committee on Educa- tion could well exercise the same salutary effect upon education undertaken by provincial bodies as did the General Medical Council at home, for although this body did not interfere with the activi- ties of the provincial bodies, yet if they had reason to suspect some defect in the system of training they deputed men to examine on the spot the whole of the method, and this helped to keep up the stand-
119 ard of medical education at home to a somewhat high level. Another point of great importance in his mind, particularly in regard to medical education, was to create a standard of education at the provincial schools so that the degree obtained would be recognized in other countries, for this reacted greatly on the status and prospects of the graduate. It would be much more difficult for the Provincial Board to secure this recognition abroad than it would be for the Central Board. Mr. Fletcher cordially supported Mr. Edwards. He further gave his experience of the difficulties encountered by him in en- deavouring to centralize efforts in regard to entomology in India. Four years ago the question of establishing a journal of entomology in India came up before the Meeting of the Entomological Con- ference and the proposal to commence such a journal was not adopted, because it was decided that there were not enough workers in the country on this subject to supply material for the regular issue of the journal. It was felt that the journal might be conducted with enthusiasm at the commencement, and then after two or three numbers had been issued there would be great difficulty in obtaining material. The multiplicity of journals gave great trouble to those workers who had to collect references from all the literature now available. If the journal became defunct it added greatly to the difficulty of the worker, for papers published in short-lived journals? were likely to be lost to him. It was an advantage to have articles dealing with one branch of science, or one aspect of it, published as far as possible in one journal. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson stated that for many years medical literature in India was published in the form of scientific memoirs. When the Medical Research Fund Association got into possession of a grant, the first thing they did was to establish a journal. He was a consulting editor of this journal and though the amount of work he did himself was negligible, he could well see the enormous amount of work entailed in conducting the journal. One of the great arguments in favour of conducting a journal was that a good central library for the purposes of reference could be established with the periodicals obtained as exchanges. The expenditure entailed in producing the journal was almost recovered in this manner by the price of the journals received in exchange. The Chairman stated that the department had been very sterile for many years in the matter of publications. One of the reasons was that district officers were too busy to undertake research, and officers employed at colleges were largely engaged in teaching and in routine duties. He believed that the Journal of Tropical Veteri- nary Science had been dropped largely on account of its expense
120 to Government. Veterinary Officers were asked to contribute their publications to the Agricultural Journal of India, but this journal was not circulated to any appreciable extent among workers in the veterinary profession. He regarded it as an unsuitable journal for veterinary articles and considered that this ruling of Government had disappointed many members of the service. Mr. Smith believed that a journal especially published for veteri- nary workers in India would be much more acceptable to veterinary workers in general. He had experience in editing a trade journal (on dairying) and found difficulty in obtaining material after a few issues, even from the very people who had promised support. How- ever it must be freely admitted that the problem of the ox was an universal one throughout India, unlike crops, which varied in distribution and in nature according to local conditions, climatic and otherwise. The ox was present everywhere so that it was of prime interest to the whole population, and not a matter of mere local interest. Next in importance to the ox itself was the disease of the ox, for the cultivator depended upon the efficiency of the ox to carry out his work. He believed that the institution of central advisory bodies to deal with the various problems connected with the disease of the ox would be a tower of strength to the community, and that the more centralized the control of disease was made, the more powerful would be the opinions of this board. Mr. Ware asked Mr. Edwards how he proposed to undertake the conduct of the journal with the present numbers of officers in the department. Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchinson described how it might be pos- sible to undertake the work of the Indian Journal of Medical Re- search, published four times a year, if three professional workers devoted to it a part of their time. Mr. Edwards, in reply to Mr. Ware's question as to ways and means for conducting the journal, stated that probably one original note or article would become available at Muktesar for each quarterly issue and he expected that at least one would be available from the provinces. In addition, summaries of articles published elsewhere in journals and reviews of literature dealing directly and indirectly with matters of interest to veterinary workers in India would be utilized to make up the rest of the journal. With regard to staff, even if he did not obtain help from without, there were five pro- fessional workers of Imperial grade sanctioned for the staff at Muktesar. If these workers were to keep abreast with the infor- mation published in connection with the calling in which they professed to be competent, then they ought to possess an inti- mate acquaintance with the scientific literature and a sufficient
121 knowledge of the art of writing for publication so that they ought to be able to conduct the quarterly issue readily among them. He would not recommend to the Government the retention of any member upon his staff who did not possess sufficient literary and scientific ability to express useful information in a printed publi- cation. The meeting referred the drafting of the resolution embodying its views to a committee consisting of Colonel Pallin, Lieutenant- Colonel Hutchinson, Mr. Smith, and Mr. Branford, with Mr. Edwards as Secretary. The following resolution was subsequently passed, Mr. Hewlett dissenting:122 It did not appear to be within the competence of the meeting to deal with it, but the matter might be referred to the authorities concerned. Mr. Hickey, representing the Veterinary Department in the United Provinces, said that he agreed with Mr. Quirke and would like a resolution drafted, embodying his recommendations. The meeting then unanimously resolved :123 LIST OF RESOLUTIONS. I. Education. (a) Is any revision necessary of the conclusions arrived at by the Sub-Committee on Edu- cation at the First Confer- ence held at Lahore in March 1919 and by the Meeting of Principals of Colleges at Bombay in February 1922 ? (a)(1) The system of study drafted by the Meeting of Principals at Bombay is approved as a curriculum represent- ing the present minimum require- ments for the training of Indians in India up to the highest standard of veterinary education necessary for the country, as demanded by the Public Services Commission (1912-14). (2) The constitution of a Board of Veteri- nary Studies as recommended by them is urged very strongly, and the Board might be authorized to make minor modifications and additions to the course from time to time as required and in consideration-of the needs of the several provinces. The desirabi- lity of raising the standard of prelimi- nary education as soon as possible is worthy of early consideration. (3) It is considered that Muktesar is un- suitable for such a course and imme- diate steps should be taken to institute it at one of the existing colleges and, as soon as financial considerations permit of the constitution of an efficient organization for dealing with problems connected with veterinary state medicine, at the other colleges also. (4) In view of the circumstances arising out of the existing situation of the country it is not practicable to intro- duce this system of education generally. (5) Less costly, shorter courses must conti- nue (see report of committee upon proposals for shorter courses, page 27).
124 (b) What qualifications should be required for :125 (2) Provincial Officers ? (2) The institution of post-graduate courses of study at Muktesar and elsewhere for Provincial Officers is approved by this Conference, and the curricula for these courses should be examined by the Board of Studies. (3) Imperial Officers ? (3) Imperial Officers should be given facilities for taking post-graduate courses at Muktesar and abroad. II. Epizootic diseases. (a) (1) Prevalence of anthrax among the various classes of live-stock in India. (a)(1) The evidence available shows that anthrax is a serious disease of live-stock in India and is much more prevalent than the official records would indicate. (2) The necessity of instituting legislation to deal with the disease ; the scope and nature of such measures. (2) The Conference, having considered in detail the incidence of anthrax among animals in India and men handling animal products in other countries and the economic issues resulting there- from, resolved :126 The success of any measures designed with these objects will depend upon:127 (c) Trypanosomiases: Surra. (1) Is the existing legislation for the control of surra adequate ? (2) The present position in respect to research and the efficacy of methods of treatment. (3) Information with regard to trypanosomiases, other than surra, found in India. (c)(i) Investigations into the nature and mode of transmission of the animal trypanosomiases in India should be prosecuted forthwith. Likewise, the whole problem of the important proto- zoan diseases of the domesticated animals of the country should be approached concurrently. For this purpose it will be necessary to strengthen the technical resources at present available in the country for research into the different aspects of the above projects, comprising the entomological, protozoological, and pathological aspects, by centralization of the facilities available in each of these pursuits, and the delegation, on request, of workers to assist those engaged directly in the elucidation of the disease problems. An experienced protozoologist should be appointed to the staff of the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory for research into these problems. Entomological asistance should be derived from the staff of the Imperial Entomologist. These work- ers would find unlimited scope for their activities, in addition, in the investiga- tion of the economically highly import- ant diseases of live-stock caused by protozoan parasites, other than those of surra. (ii) Efforts to obtain a cheap, effective and easily applied remedy for the cure of surra, in particular, and other protozoan diseases should be prose- cuted on a large scale in the laboratory and in the field, and the co-ordinated services of the whole veterinary profes- sion in India are required for this purpose. (iii) Legislation. In view of our present inadequate knowledge of the trypano- somiases of animals in India, and the likelihood that the pathogenic trypa- nosomes find a reservoir frequently in relatively resistent host species, the
128 present legislative measures dealing with surra should be reconsidered in the light of better information that may be procured on further research directed with the object of elucidating these peculiar conditions. (d) Contagious abortion : infor- mation regarding its inci- dence among imported and indigenous stock ; proposals for control. (d) Recent evidence shows that contagious abortion is an important disease of live-stock in certain parts of India, and further investigations should be prosecuted in regard to its origin, regional distribution, susceptibility of the various classes of live-stock to infection, and the institution of proper measures of control. (e) Tuberculosis : prevalence of tuberculosis among live- stock in India, and the danger of infection to human beings from this source. (e) The evidence available shows that tuberculosis is present in cattle in India but is insufficient to indicate to what extent it prevails. In view of the experience gained in other countries with regard to the spread of infection in susceptible animals, it is clearly indicated that steps should be taken to ascertain accurately the prevalence of infection. Research into the nature of the organisms responsible for the disease and the relative susceptibility of the different breeds of cattle in the country should be prosecuted forthwith. If this re- search should indicate that tuberculosis is at present rare among Indian cattle measures should be taken to eradicate it and to limit, as far as practicable, the introduction of the disease from outside sources. The Conference is of opinion that these measures are urgently demanded by reason of the grave dangers to the live-stock of the country, the purity of the milk supply, and the catas- trophes of bovine tuberculosis in children.
129 (f) Parasitology (helminthology and entomology) : neces- sity for instituting a survey of the incidence of the grosser parasites of live- stock in India and for the formation of Central depart- ments to control work in this connection. (f) (1) Entomology : On account of the great importance of insects in the transmission of animal diseases, as causes of direct injury to live-stock in India, and the high degree of specialization necessary for a proper appreciation of the various aspects of entomology, the staff of the Imperial Entomologist should be strengthened to the degree requisite for rendering assistance to investigators into the insect problems connected with animal diseases. Similarly, facilities should be rendered for the establishment of a staff attached either to the Imperial Entomologist or to the Zoological Survey of India for the study of ticks and mites concerned with animal diseases. (2) Helminthology: In view of the enor- mous economic loss caused by, and our present inadequate knowledge concern- ing the prevalence and the nature of the species of, parasitic worms present in animals in this country, the appoint- ment of a whole-time helminthologist to investigate the subject from the standpoint of animal disease is urgent- ly required in the interests of owners of live-stock in India. This officer should work under the direction of the Imperial Bacteriological (Veterinary) Laboratory. (g) Infectious lymphangitis in cattle : causation and treatment. (g) Mr. Krishna Murthi's original paper on "Infectious Lymphangitis amongst. Cattle in the Madras Presidency" should be published in extenso in a professional periodical. (h) Nasal granuloma in cattle : causation. (h) Mr. Krishna Murthi's original paper on "Nasal Granuloma in Cattle occur- ring in the Madras Presidency" should be published in extenso in a professional periodical. (i) Rabies : measure of control. (i) Any proposed measures of control based on prophylactic vaccination of dogs against rabies should be referred to the Central Standing Advisory Committee on Epizootic Diseases and Research (see resolution under Subject III f) K
130 with a view to advising Government upon the desirability of enforcing measures of widespread preventive inoculation of dogs against the disease. (j) Diseases of sheep : nature, incidence and control of the more important disease con- ditions among sheep in India. (j) On account of the economic importance of sheep diseases in India, further steps should be taken to render assistance to sheep owners by means of propa- ganda and by the better education of the veterinary personnel in the pecu- liar problems connected with the main classes of diseases affecting sheep. III. General. (a) Legislation : the desirability of introducing further legis- lative measures for the control of animal disease. (a) This Conference considers that the time has arrived when a Diseases of Animals Act should be introduced to give permissive powers to Local Governments to frame rules for the enforcement of sanitary police measures for the control of contagious disease in animals. (b) Statistical : methods of obtaining and recording statistical information re- garding the incidence of epizootic diseases in India ; suggestions for improve- ment. (6) In view of the administrative and professional importance of obtaining reliable statistics in regard to the mortality incidence in animal disease a more thorough system of notification than the present very unsatisfactory system of reporting should be investi- gated immediately and introduced. The system approved should- as far as possible, be uniform in its application throughout India. (c) Animal husbandry : what is the role of the Civil Veteri- nary Department in dealing with problems directly con- cerning live-stock industries in India. (c) This Conference strongly favours the establishment of Cattle Boards, Central and Provincial, and considers essential that the veterinary profession should be adequately represented on these bodies. (d) Methods for facilitating and improving the supply of sera and other laboratory pro- ducts, particularly in regard to the needs of remote dis- tricts. (d) (1) Adequate cool storage facilities should be provided in all provinces where such facilities do not already exist for the preservation of serum. (2) Experiments regarding the possibility of manufacturing a satisfactory dried anti-rinderpest serum should be pro- secuted as speedily as possible, and,
131 in the event of failure to obtain satisfactory results from these experi- ments, some convenient method of transporting serum should be devised. (e) Meat Inspection : is it within tie present competence of the Department to deal with this question ; what further arrangements' for training personnel for the special duties entailed are required ? (e) Training in meat inspection is now provided in certain Veterinary Colleges in India and can be extended in scope as the demand for efficient meat inspectors increases. (f) Methods to be adopted to correlate technical informa- tion and render authorita- tive advice on professional problems. (f) In order to correlate technical informa- tion and render authoritative advice on professional problems the Confer- ence is of opinion that :132 blem; hence, no real advance in the study of disease is possible without co-ordination of all workers in this field. (g) The advisability of amalga- mating certain Veterinary Services in India. (g) The system of control of equine conta- gious diseases in certain districts of the Punjab and United Provinces indicates an unsatisfactory duplication in veteri- nary endeavour. The suggestions of Mr. Quirke (Appendix IV) are com- mended to the notice of the authori- ties concerned.
133 APPENDIX I. Report of the Meeting of Principals of the Indian Veterinary Colleges held at Bombay Veterinary College on the 8th to 10th February 1922. In accordance with the instructions received from the Agricultural Adviser to the Govern- ment of India (D. O.'s 353-2 and 351-2 of 21st January 1922), the above meeting of Principals commenced its proceedings at the Bombay Veterinary College, Parel, at 10 a.m. on the 8th February 1922. There were present the following members who had been requested to attend the meeting:134 (d) Animal Management. (Prior to examination all candidates should produce a certi- ficate from the Principal of the College showing that they have satisfactorily passed a test in riding.) Second Year's Study135 The subjects for examination, method of examination and number of marks allotted to each subject shall be as follows:136 A student who fails in one subject only shall be allowed to appear for a supplementary examination in that subject after a subsequent period of 3 months' study, provided that he had attained 60 per cent. of the total number of marks in the examination and is certified by the Principal to have pursued his study of that subject satisfactorily. Final Examination in Veterinary Science. This examination shall take place once a year only, at the end of the fourth year of study, i.e., two academic years after the student has passed the intermediate examination in veterinary science. No student shall be eligible for examination who has attended less than three-fourths of the lectures, practical work and demonstrations, and hospital practice prescribed in the curriculum. All students shall produce at the practical and oral examinations their note books containing a description of the practical work they have executed in the course of their studies, and case records, duly initialled by the teacher concerned. A student may present himself for examination in both or only one of the two groups of subjects (Part I, State Veterinary Medicine, and Part II, Clinical Veterinary Practice) at one time, but before he can be granted the diploma of the college or allowed the right to practise as a veterinarian or enter the State Veterinary service he must produce evidence of having passed in both groups. Failure to pass in any of the subjects of a group will necessitate the student presenting him - self again for an examination in all the subjects of the group after a further period of one year's study; but, on the other hand, if a student fails to satisfy the examiners in one Part only and passes in the other Part he may be entitled to present himself again for examination in only that Part in which he had failed and receive the diploma if he then passes in that Part. The subjects for examination, method of examination, marks allotted, and proportion of marks required in each subject to attain the pass standard shall be as follows:137 The Meeting considered that the scheme of study and method of examination outlined by them was of a sufficiently comprehensive and advanced character to justify recognition by the local Universities as an approved degree course in science and the conference by these bodies of a special degree in science, entitled B. Sc. (Vet.) on students who graduate in this course. SYLLABUS. GENERAL OUTLINES. First Year's Study.138 FINAL COURSE OF STUDY. PART I.139 II.140 Prospects of Graduates. As the proposed curriculum aims at satisfying the desires of the Government of India to establish a higher standard of Veterinary education in India, and the cost of training is thereby enhanced, the Meeting considered that in order to obtain the necessary recruits it was essential that the pay and prospects of graduates should be considerably improved, so as to compare favourably with those of other scientific professions in India. University Status and Affiliation with the Universities. The course of study proposed was considered to be of a sufficiently high standard to warrant university recognition and the conference of a special degree in Science at the Universities [B.Sc. (Vet.)] affiliation of the Colleges with the Universities was regarded as a necessary step towards the attainment of the requisite professional status. Path of Ascent to the Imperial Service. The Meeting considered that selected students, who had taken the proposed degree in Veteri- nary Science, might be regarded as candidates for appointment to the Imperial Service after undergoing a further course of post-graduate instruction in India. Scheme of post-graduate study suggested by Mr. Edwards to be given at Muktesar to lseected Officers of the Provincial Service prior to entry to the Imperial Service (see attached copy). The suggested post-graduate course of study was briefly discussed and the Meeting was of the opinion that it had not had sufficient opportunity to study the subject fully and that it could not express definite views on its merits without mature consideration. It was further of the opinion, however, that pending final consideration of the suggested scheme the proposal to send Provincial Officers to England should be held in abeyance and that, in the meantime. Mr. Edwards' scheme should be circulated to Provincial Governments for opinion at the very earliest opportunity. A. SMITH, The 15th February 1922. President.
141 APPENDIX II. An abstract of a paper on "Infectious Lymphangitis among cattle in the Madras Presidency" by Mr. V. Krishna Murthi. This disease is prevalent among cattle of the Madras Presidency, especially draught ones. The symptoms exhibited by the animals are similar to those observed by Colonel Raymond, the late Colonel Holmes, and Mr. Sheather in the outbreaks of the disease investigated by them. In the great majority of cases the superficial glands become involved and very occasionally the lungs are affected in which case the prognosis is unfavourable. The mode of infection has been traced to some pre-existing wounds, especially yoke galls by both Colonel Raymond and the late Colonel Holmes. But the writer is of opinion that the infection seems to occur through some suctorial insect especially cattle lice. The causative agent resembles the one referred to by Mr. Sheather. This can be demonstrat- ed in smears of pus from natural as well as experimental lesions taken from the affected glands before they have undergone complete caseation. The organism shows extensive pleomorphism on culture media. Intraperitoneal injection of cultures of organisms produce orchitis in guinea- pigs. Sections of affected glands reveal in early stages extensive formation of new connective tissue with suppurating focii. When the lungs become involved they are found studded with nodules which contain pus similar in character to that in the affected glands. Sections of affected areas of lung tissue reveal catarrhal pneumonia. The bronchial glands have not been found to be affected even in severe cases of lung affections. The general treatment adopted was surgical opening of abscesses followed by antiseptic dressings. In complicated cases a vaccine prepared from broth cultures of the organism has been used and the results are recorded.
142 APPENDIX III. An abstract of a paper on "Nasal Granuloma in cattle occurring in the Madras Presidency" by Mr. V. Krishna Murthi. Nasal Granuloma is an infective disease prevailing among cattle in the Madras Presidency. The disease is chronic in nature and limited to the nasal mucous membrane where they are found as small rounded growths varying from a large millet seed to a big pea and having the appearance of granulation tissue. The animals affected continuously sneeze and produce a snuffling noise during breathing accompanied by a thick muco-purulent discharge from the nostrils. No constitutional disturbance is generally noticed. The causative agent is due to a variety of streptothrix. This variety is demonstrable in sections of tissues. In respect of staining characters it differs from Actinomycosis bovis in its being both acid and alcohol fast and from other varieties of streptothrix described, in the lesions being particularly confined to the nasal mucous membrane. The mode of infection arises through wounds on the nasal mucous membrane coming in contact with infected food or water.
143 APPENDIX IV. Note on "The advisability of amalgamating certain veterinary services in India" by Mr. T. F. Quirke. On the grounds of economy I think that it would be possible to maintain greater efficiency of the veterinary services in this country with the same financial expenditure if an amalgama- tion could be arranged. The present system by which control of equine diseases in the selected horse breeding districts in the Province numbering fifteen is vested in the Army Remount Department (Agricultural Circular No. 4) is very unsatisfactory. Our experience is that there is continually overlapping of work between the subordinates of the two departments,whilst there is undoubted dissatisfaction in the villages in the method of dealing with equine diseases. The present veterinary strength of the Army Remount Department is insufficient to carry out the multifarious duties entrusted to them in addition to the work of dealing with equine diseases in the villages of their districts. Under the present arrangements only cases of equine disease when brought to our hospitals are dealt with by our staff in these districts. A Veterinary Assistant of this Department in course of his work visiting a village in which he detects equine disease is required to report the fact to the nearest representative of the Army Remount Department who will take the necessary measures for dealing with the disease. It would obviate the necessity for a second visit from a similarly qualified member of another Department, if diseases both equine and bovine were in the control of one Department, which could be in a position to allocate work more expeditiously than is the rule at present and so economise staff. In addition, the control of disease in the districts would be under the supervision of officers belonging to a whole-time India service with experience of village conditions and more in touch with the people. Again, I feel that by the present system of working in water tight compartments the valuable professional experience which is obtainable in Army Remount Depts, e.g., Mona and Sargodha, on the horse breeding farms, and military dairy farms is denied to the Imperial and subordinate staff of the Civil Veterinary Department. As regards Imperial officers such experience would be invaluable to them throughout their service, whilst for the subordinate staff these depts and breeding farms both for horse and cattle would act as a training ground under European supervision for gaining experience in the care and management of animals in health and disease before being placed in charge of our district hospitals. When one considers that the progress of veterinary work in this country depends so much on the efficiency of the individual members in the veterinary services it would appear important that such opportunities as the country does offer of gaining professional experience should be opened up for the benefit of the profession. There are many other points which may be noted in favour of an amalgamation. I feel how- ever that I have noted sufficiently with a view to the subject being discussed at the veterinary conference which I trust will include representatives from the different veterinary services in India.
CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING. INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
