CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT LEDGER SERIES No. I. MAIN HEAD . STOCK DISEASE. SUB-HEAD . CONTAGIOUS DISEASE. SUBJECT: RINDERPEST-CATTLE PLAGUE. 1894. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1894.
CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT LEDGER SERIES No. I. MAIN HEAD . STOCK DISEASE SUB-HEAD . CONTAGIOUS DISEASE. SUBJECT: RINDERPEST-CATTLE PLAGUE. 1894. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894.
CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PRINTING OFFICE, 8, HASTINGS STREET.
PREFACE. THE enclosed article, which has been collected from various sources, but chiefly from M. Galtier's "Maladies Contagieuses," is forwarded for information. M. Galtier's article is from his last edition. The following works have also been consulted: Walley's "Four Bovine Scourges," Fleming's "Sanitary Science," "Report of the Indian Cattle Plague Commission," Gunn's "Cattle Diseases in the Central Provinces," Thacker's "Reports to the Board of Revenue, Madras," and my own "Reports to the Government of the Punjab." The article is circulated interleaved with a request that any additions or corrections may be made on the blank sheets. Information on any disputed or doubtful point will be acceptable. HENRY T. PEASE, F.R.G.S., F.Z.S., Asst. to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Dept. MEERUT, 1894.
RINDERPEST2 general symptoms observed in India. In some cases here, however, and invariably in Europe, other symptoms are found, which, when they appear, are considered to be pathognomonic of the malady, and these are discoloration of the mucous membrane of the mouth, followed by des- quamation of its epithelium, leading to the formation of extensive charac- teristic sores covered by bran-like flakes of epithelium, and also con- gestion of the vaginal mucous membrane in the cow. The post mortem lesions of Rinderpest are more characteristic than the symptoms, and the more important of them are to be found in the digestive organs, especi- ally at the pylorus and intestines, and also on the skin. These lesions consist of congestions, ecchymoses, infiltrations, swelling and desquama- tion of the epithelium, the presence of pustules and the like. With regard to the vera causa, the virus of this disease, the researches which have been made up till the present time have not evolved definitely what it may be; but it appears probable that the latest enqui- ries in Russia have led to its discovery in the form of a micrococcus. Whatever the intimate cause of the virulence may be, it is undoubtedly generally disseminated throughout the whole of the organs and tissues of the body and exists in the blood, all the fluids and solids and the discharges coming from the sick animal. Rinderpest, as I have said before, is always present in India, and it is, so far as my experience has been, never absent from the Himalayas, whither it has probably been introduced from China. It is a curious fact that all countries bordering on China are subject to the never-ceas- ing ravages of the plague, and that such has been the case for an exceedingly long time may be probably inferred from the fact that its virulence has become much decreased, as is the case with other diseases3 of these parts is cool or cold and more or less moist. In the plain dis- tricts of the Punjab, on the other hand, the disease is of a much milder type as a rule, and 60 to 65 % of recoveries may sometimes be observed under treatment. These parts have an exceedingly dry and hot climate in the hot weather when the disease usually appears, and it seems reason- able to infer from the above facts that there may be some attenuation brought about by the heat and dessication. In India, as in Russia, we often get the disease in what has been termed the ''benignant" form. It may be so slight as to pass unnoticed, there being no symptoms beyond slight fever and looseness of the bowels, and it is to this form that is alluded to as existing when the disease has apparently died out, but is in reality only flickering, and ready to burst forth again at the first favourable opportunity. The same occurs in Steppe cattle, and it has happened that Russian oxen imported to occidental countries have brought typhus with them when they have not been even suspected to be suffering from the disease. It appears from the literature on the subject that Rinderpest origin- ated in the extreme orient China, and has been spread by nomads and traders. The Huns are credited with the introduction of the disease into Europe. Symptoms.4 when the animals are shut up in stalls, than in the summer; less severe in animals existing under good hygienic conditions than in those badly housed and fed; more severe in the hills than in the plains of India, etc., etc. Rinderpest, like other contagious maladies, does not declare itself suddenly after the introduction of its germ into the organism, but there is the usual period of incubation, the duration of which is variable, but generally short: this period is ordinarily from 4 to 21 days, but the medium duration is from 6 to 10 days or from 5 to 9 days. In several cases inoculated by me, there was fever after from the 4th to the 6th day following the operation; but this is too small an experience to place any weight upon. The first symptom of the existence of Rinderpest is a rise of the internal temperature, often preceded or accompanied by shivering or rigor. Although this sign of itself, occurring as it does in a host of other affections, has no precise diagnostic value, it assumes one when the disease already exists in the village or on the farm, and it permits us at least to suspect the disease if not to certainly affirm its existence, and allows of our taking measures to prevent the animal in which it is noted becoming a new focus of the disease. The animal temperature rises to 102° F. or 105° F., or even in some cases to 106° F. This elevation may occur in from 36 to 48 hours after inoculation, and often exists for two or three days before any other symptom is noted. It is more or less pronounced according as the disease is going to be more or less severe. In India we must not be misled by the great variation which exists in the temperatures of animals at different parts of the country. As a rule the temperature increases with the heat and decreases with the cold5 In milch cows, almost one of the first symptoms is a diminution in the yield of milk, which becomes serous in character and small in quantity or altogether arrested. The increase of temperature and the disturbed lactation are the only symptoms noticed for from 24 to 48 hours. The urine becomes deeper in colour, containing more solids. Urea is much increased in quantity. The disease remains for a short time characterized by these vague symptoms, then its course rapidly advances, and, during the next three or four days, more or less marked symptoms appear. The temperature, elevated at first, does not maintain the same alti- tude during the whole course of the disease. It soon descends either because some improvement has taken place, which is rare, or because the subject becomes very rapidly weakened. The surface temperature is irregular, the ears and extremities becoming cold. The sick animal soon falls into a state of somnolence, stupor and coma; the eyes are lustreless and half-covered by the drooping lids. The conjunctivæ are reddish-yellow in colour, either uniform or darker in patches and ecchymosed; it is always the seat of a hypersecretion, which shows itself at first by a limpid flow from the eyes, to which soon succeeds, in a progressive manner, a yellow discharge, which by degrees becomes purulent, greenish in colour, and irritates the skin over which it flows. As the animal becomes fatigued, the erect position becomes pain- ful, and the sick generally asume the recumbent one and remain down. The skin is hot, congested, and dry; sometimes it is covered with sweat, more particularly in certain regions, as at the base of the ears, etc.; the epidermis exfoliates and is easily detached; the hairs are erect; the general sensibility is exaggerated. In white-skinned animals we notice the congested appearance better, as the skin assumes a brick red colour. We may observe trembling and shivering of certain groups of muscles, and as the disease progresses the animal may shake. When the disease is of some considerable duration, locomotion becomes painful and difficult. With regard to the digestive apparatus and the function of digestion we observe numerous symptoms in connection with them. Inappetence becomes in most cases complete, but not always; rumination is suspended; eructations of gas are of frequeut occurrence. The mouth soon exhales a f6 epithelial cells of a yellowish or greyish colour. The sick animal fre- quently moves the jaw and grinds the teeth. The muffle swells; its epithelium softens and is removed. The buccal membrane sometimes presents, in addition to its congested appearance and its yellowish red colour, which is very manifest on the gums, the sides and inferior surface of the tongue, ecchymosed patches more or less hidden by epithelium which has become thickened. The papillæ are congested. The thicken- ing of the epithelial layer which covers the mucous membrane of the mouth is not always regular. The mucous membrane of the mouth often presents an uneven appearance with a greater or less number of saliant points, at the level of which the thickening has been more pronounced; at these points the derm of the mucous membrane has been more congested than at others. For this reason the epithe- lium of the mouth easily desquamates; it detaches itself in small masses from the more thickened points and is removed with the saliva. This desquamation occurs on the surface of the whole of the mucous membrane and more especially in certain spots, the labio gingival cushion, cheeks, tongue, etc., in the form of plaques or grains. The result is that the derm is denuded at a number of points, and there presents itself of a reddish-yellow colour. The reddish colour which the saliva sometimes assumes is explained by this epithelial desquamation; the derm being denuded, its capillaries congested and distended with blood, may be the seat of hæmorrhage, and blood thus becomes mixed "with the saliva. The lips are almost invariably swollen, and vesicles may be sometimes seen resembling those of aphtha and formed by the collection of serous material beneath the epithelium. In Europe these changes in the structures of the mouth are almost invariably met with. In India, on the other hand, they are by no means well marked, but they are occasionally met with in severe outbreaks of the disease. If the mouth be carefully examined, we may observe in some cases irregular patches of congestion and invariably a dark congested appearance at the posterior part, fauces and pharynx, and in some cases erosions will be met with there; but as regards the tongue and labio gingival membrane, the characteristic appearance which constitute the pathognomonic symptoms in Europe are frequently wanting. The abdomen becomes tender, painful on pressure; the animal looks round at the flanks, as in colic; it paddles with the hind feet which are brought well under the belly; it frequently switches the tail, and in this manner indicates the presence of abdominal pain. The rectal mucous membrane is hyperærnic, swollen, red and infiltrated. There are rumblings of the bowels, borbyrygma, often audible at some distance, which indicate the progress and aggravation of the disease, and that the constipation which existed at first is about to give place
7 to diarrh8 being mocerate derangement of the bowels, and it very frequently terminates in recovery. Cases having been reported in which as many as 75% of the animals attacked recovered under treatment. It is by no means unusual to find animals in this country suffering from the disease presenting very slight and badly marked signs. The only symptoms in certain cases are simply elevation of temperature, congested skin, redness of the conjunctival mucous membrane and the pituitary, a discharge from the eyes and nose, moist rattling cough, slight dullness and diarrh13 All these facts lead us to the conclusion that it may be preserved in the soil, and direct experiments have established the fact. Feser has caused the disease by injecting the microbes found on the plants from marshy pastures of the Alps, where the disease is rife. Gotti caused the disease by injecting the water, in which had been washed earth from San Arcangelo, where the disease had been prevalent, under the skin of young oxen It is apparent, therefore, that the germs may be preserved in the soil or on its surface, and this explains how it is that animals which live in places where these germs exist, may ingest them. The virus offers great resistance to those chemical agents which we designate bactericides; it is only sterilized, especially when dry, by the most energetic of these. Solutions of potash, lime, sulphate of iron, sodium chloride, arsenious acid, chloride of zinc, turpentine, sulphurous acid, etc., are useless for purposes of disinfection. The agents which may be recommended for this purpose are:10 below the normal; patient becomes restless, weak, lying down ; the eye sunken, the countenance anxious, the senses somewhat aberrant; 70 per cent. succumbed. The above is an excellent description of the form assumed in very many outbreaks. In other countries the disease is always severe and more fatal at its first onset, and presents during its course two successive periods11 become deep, and the animal after short agony succumbs amidst con- vulsions. Rinderpest does not always terminate fatally. In India and Russia and in other eastern countries very large numbers sometimes recover from the malady, but the mortality seldom is less than 50 per cent., unless in extraordinarily slight cases. When recovery takes place after a serious attack, which is rare, it is always preceded by a long period of convalescene, during which relapses may occur, and after which certain permanent lesions may remain. The benign form of the disease is most frequently followed by recovery : animals apparently recovered must be considered as suspects until fifteen days have elapsed since recovery, because virulent matter may remain on the surface of the body for this time. When an animal begins to progress towards recovery, the first sign indicative of improvement is an increased quantity of fæculent matter in the evacuations, which gradually assume a more consistent character ; the pulse becomes softer and fuller, then the appetite begins to return, the warmth of skin natural, and lastly rumination and the secretion of milk returns. Rinderpest resulting from inoculation differs hut little from the spontaneous disease; the symptoms are the same; its medium period of incubation is from 5 to 6 days and may vary between 3 and 21 days, and its severity is about the same. The virus of Rinderpest does not appear to be attenuated by successive cultivations, and inocula- tions during an epizooty cannot be recommmended at present, although some cases of the inoculated disease are of the benign form. Rinderpest always assumes an epizootic form in a country into which it is introduced; it is rapidly transmitted from the first sick to other animals and spreads from the first stable to others, over localities and districts, etc., tending always to propagate itself and not to disappear. The disease varies according to season, in India being especially noticed in some parts at the end of the hot weather or after the first rains; it extends more easily in moderately warm weather and is more fatal in winter; excessive heat seems to modify its severity and limits its spread. In places where it is enzootic, it is not generally fatal. Symptoms of inoculated Rinderpest (Fleming).12 and partial tremblings are observed, and shiverings, particularly in the ulnar and patellar muscles; a paroxysm of fever sets in, which lasts from one to six hours. After the paroxysm, which at times terminates the disease, the animal gets up and its liveliness and appetite return ; but there may occur a relapse of greater severity, and when these relapses persist uninterruptedly, it is an indication that the fever is assuming a putrid character. The pulse becomes small, quick, irregular and inter- mittent, and is imperceptible towards the close of the malady. The region of the loins is very sensible, and the animal nearly falls when pressure is made at this point; the visible mucous membranes are dry, at first red coloured, and, if the disease continues, subsequently of a pale yellow, then a bluish hue ; the matter discharged is thick and stringy, the eyes are tearful, the muffle hot and dry, the ears, base of the horns and limbs are cold. To constipation succeeds a serous diarrh13 Diagnosis.14 not uniform, when it is marbled, there are points where stasis has occur- red with rupture of the capillaries and hæmorrhages. The congested state of the integument and of the various organs which explains the coloration already mentioned is itself produced by the action of the blood, which becoming altered is irritant, over excites and paralyses the vaso- motor nerves, from which results a dilatation of the capillary vessels and congestion, which is followed by an exosmotic movement leading to effusion of the blood plasma and numerous cellular elements. The hyperæmia which takes place on the mucous membranes is always followed by hypersecretion, which shows itself by the production of the morbid matter constituting a sero-sanguinolent or muco-san- guinolent discharge. The catarrhal state is accompanied by a very active epithelial desquamation ; this is a constant characteristic; it may be regularly distributed over the surface of the body, or else it is more profound at certain points. Vascular ruptures are produced after the congestion ; and besides these ruptures an infiltration due to exosmosis of the blood plasma always forms in the sub-mucous connective tissue. This infiltration is more or less pronounced and is very manifest in certain organs (abo- masum and small intestine), and it explains the turgescence which the mucous membranes present. The exosmotic movement gives rise not only to the passage of cellular elements to the surface of these mucous membranes, but it also establishes an inflammatory condition ; the cellular elements proliferate, and the cellules so formed at the surface of the inflamed part undergo rapid granulo fatty degeneration or are transformed into pus elements. The condition of the cadaver is variable, according as the animal has died a natural death or has been slaughtered before the disease has run its course. During the course of Rinderpest emaciation rapidly comes on, commencing at the hind quarters. The eyes are bleared, the nasal discharge purulent, saliva f15 ecchymosis; these changes also exist in the interstitial connective tissue of muscles in the perinervous and perivascular tissues. The meat will then present special characters when the animal has succumbed to the malady. The articular synovial membranes and the tendinous ones have a wine-coloured, brownish, uniform or spotted hue, and contain a sanguinolent serosity. The muscles are sometimes little or not at all altered, but in those animals which have died of the disease they are profoundly changed, softened, their fibres altered, some having undergone colloid or granu- lar degeneration. Certain oviform bodies which are regarded as the ova of entozoa are sometimes met with in the muscular fibres, but their real nature has not been yet satisfactorily decided. In the sub- stance of the muscle we may meet with ecchymoses, red-yellow colour, brown or black patches, more particularly in the muscular interstices. None of the above diverse changes have any real pathognomonic value. The true lesions are those met with in the digestive apparatus; these are numerous, occurring from the mouth of the anus or through- out the whole of the digestive tract. We find a very intense state of congestion and an uniform or patchy coloration which is particularly well marked in the abomasum, in the neighbourhood of the pylorus, and in the small intestine. Everywhere the infiltration is very abundant. The catarrhal and the inflammatory state evince themselves by a hypersecretion of muco-purulent matter, accompanied by swelling and desquamation of epithelium, so that the granular degeneration of the cellular elements is brought about by the exosmotic movements or results from the cellular proliferation. In the mouth we find very characteristic lesions in Europe. The lips are always swollen more or less; their connective tissue is infiltrated. The tongue is hypertro- phied ; the buccal membrane is swollen. The mouth exhales a f16 coloration is not easy to see, this is due to the thickness of its covering At points where the epithelium is thinner the derm appears reddish- yellow in colour, brownish-black or marbled. There is always swelling and infiltration of the mucous membranes and connective tissue. The follicles and glandules of the mucous membranes are hypertrophied and congested; their secretion is more abundant and the follicles may open out and become ulcers. These various lesions also appear in the pharynx, the epithelium of which is swollen and easily detached. The pharyngeal mucous mem- brane is congested and the seat of catarrh; it is covered with a purulent mucus; the sub-mucous tissue is thickened and infiltrated, and the glandules are hypertrophied. These alterations are sometimes met with, but to a less degree, even in the 17 surrounded by a line of demarcation. At other times separation is com- plete and a wound or ulcer remains, the tissue of which is actively congest- ed. The summits of the folds of the mucous membrane sometimes present superficial ulcerations. The gastric mucous membrane often has a cribbled aspect from the changes in the glandules which are inflamed, congested, more salient, and have their orifices enlarged. The sub-mucous tissue is much infiltrated. In the small intestine we find a muco purulent or caseous, greyish-yellow, or red material, exhaling a f18 other times the product has been completely removed, and the ulcer remains clearly cupuliform. In the third period, then, the follicles are transformed into characteristic ulcerations, the borders of which are salient and somewhat indurated ; they are always encircled by a reddish areola, which may, however, be brownish or black. The hyperæmic zone which encircles the follicles is reddish at the commencement, but becomes later brown or black in colour, and is seen in this state when the disease has been of some days' duration. Peyer's patches are hypertrophied, always covered with a greyish viscous material which is produced in abundance and may completely hide them. They are surrounded by an areola which is first red, then brown or black. The elements which compose them present the same altera- tions as the analogous changes in the mucous membrane. The follicles are hypertrophied and hyperæmic, and give to the patch the aspect of a fragment of skin ; they are turgid, sometimes ulcerated, and may present the same characters as those which are disseminated on the surface of the mucous membranes. The villosites are hyperæmic and their epithelium is often desquamated. Brown pigmentation, or even black, is seen in the solitary glands around the agminated patches and the ulcerations; we see it also at other points of the mucous membrane under the form of spots, plaques, etc. This pigmentation by degrees replaces the red coloration of the commencement; it shows itself when the disease has lasted for four or five days, and is consequent on modifications which occur in the colouring matter of the blood. In other parts of the intestine (cæcum colon, rectum) we observe alterations much resembling those of the mucous membrane of the small intestine. We also find a muco-purulent, viscous, very adherent greyish- yellow or reddish material rich in cellular elements. The epithelium is swollen, softened, and in course of desquamation; the mucous membrane is hyperæmic and the sub-mucous tissue is infiltrated. In the cæcum we sometimes meet with a caseous material of a fibrinous appearance exuded and adherent to the surface of the mucous membrane at several points. This material presents itself under the form of filaments, and if we detatch it a denuded point remains which is greatly congested ; it appears to be produced by an exudation which is established from certain ecchymosed plaques. The liver may present certain alterations, being sometimes yellow or earthy yellow in colour and its cells undergoing degeneration. The mesenteric glands are hyperæmic and congested ; they are red or brownish coloured and softened. The mucous membrane of the respiratory passage is more and more altered. The pituitary is hyperæmic, reddish yellow ; its tint is uniform or marbled with darker spots, points or hæmorrhagic plaques ; it is
19 catarrhal and covered with a yellowish muco-purulent and greenish coloured product; it is thickened and its sub-mucous tissue is infiltrated ; its epithelium is desquamated, and it sometimes presents wounds with loss of substance and covered with a pseudo membranous product. On the laryngeal mucous membrane as also the tracheal and bron- chial, we find the same alterations (hyperæmia, uniform or marbled coloration, catarrhal condition, muco purulent products, etc.) The lung is more or less hyperæmic, and its interlobular connective tissue is the seat of a more or less abundant exudation. There is pulmonary 20 itself by contagion. Reynault thus gives a résumé of his conclusions : " Rinderpest propagates itself exclusively by the very active contagious properties which affected animals ; the products of their excretions and their debris when dead possess properties which impregnate other animals, people, and things which have touched or approached them, their excretions or their debris, and which these may transport to other animals. It is only when they have been exposed to contagion, when they have been brought into contact in some way with one or several of the impregnated agents, that our animals can contract Rinderprest. But these agents are numerous when sick animals and healthy are living in the same fields or only in neighbouring fields, in the same stables or in adjacent ones, frequenting roads, or drinking the same water, mixing one with another on the highways or at fairs or markets, etc. They are always dangerous, but at the same time easy to avoid, when sick and healthy animals inhabit fields of farms or villages a little removed from each other, if all communication what- soever is not completely suspended between the animals, the people and things which after touching or approaching the animals and places affected, approach and touch shortly afterwards healthy animals." Contagion being recognized as the sole cause of Rinderprest, we must study with care the nature and characters of the contagion and endeavour to determine the mode and conditions of its transmission. Cantagion, as we have said, is the cause of Rinderpest, as has been clearly proved by numerous observations and from the fact that we can transmit it from one animal to another. It is permanently located in certain portions of India and the steppes of Russia, and in these countries it is relatively benign, so much so in fact that the animals attacked sometimes appear little sick or not at all, and in this way it often happens that a dangerous animal, or one suffer- ing from the disease, may be transported to a country or place and disseminate the disease amongst healthy animals. This very frequently happens in India, especially in those parts of the country where it is the custom to drive away the apparently healthy animals from an infected village to other grazing grounds where they may come in contact with other healthy animals, and for this reason it is that this mode of proceeding has to be condemned. From the above facts it will be evident how very easy it is for the disease to be spread from place to place. Contagium.21 morbid products, etc., contain the contagium and may propagate the disease. The nature of the Rinderpest virus seems to have been determined according to the later researches in Russia, and it appears to be believed that it is a parasite of the bacterian order. Semmer in 1871-74 observed the presence of a micrococcus in the organs of animals attacked with Rinderpest. The same observation was made by Klebs in 1872, who considered that a micrococcus was the active agent in the production of the disease. This micrococcus, which is found in the saliva, and is fixed in the epithelium determining its softening, gives rise to salivation, extends in the glands and passes into the vessels, where it forms heaps and provokes stasis, hæmorrhages, etc. Semmer, like Klebs, had found micrococci in the blood, tissues, secretions and excretions, and had considered them as the contagious elements of the disease. Placed in contact with the mucous membranes, these micrococci penetrate into the blood, multiply, are arrested in the capillaries, determine stasis, extravasations, hæmorrhages, spread in the tissues and lead to changes. Semmer and Archangelski have estab- lished the role which these micrococci play in the production of the disease. Having experimentally transmitted cattle plague to the sheep, they have found micrococci in the ganglia of the animal after death and have sown them in sterilized broth and cultivated them in contact with filtered air at a temperature of 37° C. A cultivation at the third generation inoculated into a sheep gave fever, after which the animal resisted the effect of the inoculation of a second and a first generation heated for an hour to 46°22 Kostitchschew has found micrococci and bacilli. Saulljew by culti- vating the blood of the heart of an animal dead of Rinderpest in sterilized bouillon has obtained micrococci and bacteria inoculable to mice and rabbits. He considers that the pathogenic microbe of Rinder- pest is a bacillus, which is transformed into a micrococcus and again assumes the bacillary form under certain circumstances. It gives a greyish-white colour on Agar Agar, becoming afterwards citron coloured, then red. The greyish-white colonies are the most virulent. M. Piot, Veterinary Surgeon in the Egyptian Administration, in 1883, announced that he had succeeded in attenuating the virus of Rinderpest by heat to such a point as to give an inoculated animal only a slight attack of the disease, after which, however, it became immune or protected. Whatever may be the intimate nature of the virus of Rinderpest and of its attenuation by cultivation and by heat, we are certain tha it exists in every part of the animal body, in all the organs and tissues, in all the fluids and in all the secreted and excreted matters23 have shown that lesions quite characteristic of the disease were present. This is very significant and would naturally lead us to the conclusion that an animal is virulent and capable of transmitting the disease before any symptom has been noted24 it is consequently dangerous to let animals graze where the cadavers have been interred. It has also been stated that the cadavers of Rinder- pest animals exhumed after some months of burial, may still transmit typhus. This expression of opinion does not seem to be exactly true; it is perhaps much too alarmist. In 1874 M. Visear D'Arras exhumed some Rinderpest cadavers after 10 or 12 months of burial, and caused ruminants to graze over and smell the debris with no result. M. Reynal did not succeed in transmitting the disease by inoculating with mate- rial from an animal 58 days after death. It appears, therefore, that the cadavers, even when buried, do not conserve the virus for such a long period as has been stated, but as the truth is not yet absolutely estab- lished on this point, it is necessary for us to act with great prudence with regard to it and to take every precaution. The flesh, fresh skins, and in a general way all the fresh debris are dangerous, and for a certain period may serve as a means of conveyance of the virus. But on this subject, as well as on that of buried cadavers, the duration of the conser- vation of the virus has been greatly exaggerated. The researches mention- ed by Reynal give us a fairly exact idea as to the danger resulting from the skin, horns, bones, and hair of Rinderpest animals. The skin of an animal dead of Rinderpest has not any contagious property when tanned or dried. No record of the introduction of the disease into a country by the medium of tanned or dried skins has ever been published, and hence it is not necessary to prohibit the importation of dried or tanned skins from a country where Rinderpest exists, provided it is at some con- siderable distance. In 1745, Courtioron tried to transmit Rinderpest to two cows by means of very fresh skins removed from animals dead of the disease, but did not succeed, and he concludes his remarks on the subject of the experiment by saying " not regarding the experiment which I have made as a reason to doubt the popular opinion, it may per- haps be expedient to order that skins may be kept in an infected village in a particular place and may be rendered saleable after a certain period has elapsed." In 1769, Camper in Holland placed the fresh skin of a Rinderpest cadaver in close proximity to two calves, but did not succeed in transmitting the disease to them by this means. Victor D'Azyr made attempts at transmission but was not successful : he, however, did not consider his experiment conclusive, and counselled the burial of animals dead of the plague in their skins. Other experiments made by Camper in 1769 by inoculating with fragments of fresh skin proved that six days after death of the animal they may retain their vitality. Spinola, from what he has himself seen and from what Russian authori- ties state, believes that fresh skins coming from a neighbouring country may be dangerous, but not those from a distant country. Buniva has observed the propagation of the disease by means of the hides. It has for a long time been known that fresh skins are a fruitful source of the
25 propagation of the malady, but how long do they remain dangerous ? According to an experiment made by Camper they are virulent six days after the death if the animals have been buried. According to Victor D'Azyr, scraps of skin may cause the disease six months after the animal has been buried. Loringer considers that fresh skins maintain their viru- lence for eight days after their removal from the cadaver; hence it follows that skins coming from a distance are not dangerous, especially if well dried and salted. Does the Rinderpest virus preserve its virulence for any length of time on the surface of the litter, dung, forage, mangers, in the water, discharges, etc. ? We are not. in a position at present to offer an opinion on this point, although it is an immensely important one. It appears that the virus deposited on the surface of solid bodies cannot be pre- served for more than four or five days in the summer or 15 days in the winter. And even this time may be abridged if they are exposed to a continuous current of air, and if at the same time they are submitted to the action of heat and the rays of the sun, or if the weather be cold and humid, for then the process of putrefaction rapidly destroys it. In these various cases the virulence does not extend over many days, generally about 11, at least so it appears. The virus found in a stable where not exposed to currents of air, and where the air is not changed, may remain virulent for a longer period, according to some observers 8 to 10 days. Placed in a flask it preserves its virulence for from 4 to 8 days, and if the flask be hermetically sealed it does so for a slightly longer period. It may also remain virulent for a longer time, 12 to 30 days, if herme- tically sealed in a vaccine tube or placed between glass slides, particularly also if placed in vacuo ; but in any case the virus remains virulent for a much shorter period than does that of sheep-pox (variola ovina) or cow- pox (variola vaccinia). The virus may preserve its virulence in water for a time, the length of which remains to be settled. In the dung, which is the richest receptacle, the germs may be rapidly destroyed by putrefaction; at the end of a month they have been found to be inno- cuous. Nevertheless it is necessary to take into account the assertions of those who attribute to the virus of Rinderpest a more prolonged viru- lence, and of these the most rational appear to be those of M. Chauveau. "The expired air," he says, "is not the excretion which is richest in viru- lent elements; indeed, it has been experimentally shown that it is poor in comparison with others. The tears, discharge from the nose, saliva from the mouth, milk, urine, and excrement more particularly contain an enormous amount of the virus, and unhappily the pernicious properties rejected on to the litter, dung, on the roads, stables, pastures, etc., may remain virulent in the open air for several weeks. These are the most dangerous vehicles of the virus, and those of which it is most necessary to destroy the contagious action." But what can we think of those pre-
26 tended cases in which cases of transmission obtained after prolonged dessication for several years ? What credence is to be accredited to the opinion which holds that infected stables may remain dangerous during several years. What conclusion are we to draw from a fact of transmis- sion attributed to the administration of an infusion of hay taken from a stable where the disease had been present five months previously? What importance are we to accord to successful experimental inoculation with material kept for a year ? Is it not rational to think that there has been some exaggeration, or that coincidences may have led to error ? Is it not probable that if the virus enjoys the power of so conserving its viru- lence, occidental countries to which the disease is imported could be only freed from its ravages with the utmost difficulty, for notwithstanding that a good system of disinfection be adopted, it is extremely difficult to attack all the germs. We have already seen that Rinderpest virus does not resist intense cold nor a temperature of moderate elevation, and hence is only preserved in the stables, during the severe weather of the more elevated and cold ranges of the Himalayas. The experiments of Semmer and Archangelski have shown that it is sterilized by cold at 15° to 20° C, and also by a temperature of 56° C. The sterilization of Rinderpest virus is hastened by putrefaction, dessication, currents of air, æration and ven- tilation, an elevated temperature, intense cold and light. In practice we must have recourse to these means as far as is practicable without danger. The sterilization on the contrary is retarded when the air is confined and not renovated, when it is humid and fresh, where light does not reach the virulent matter, when dessication and putrefaction are retarded. Modes of Contagion. 27 one stable, farm, or village to another through the intermediary of diverse solids or liquids, food, water, etc., etc., which are soiled with contagious materials and which are smelt, licked, or ingested by animals. The malady is also, although less frequently, transmitted by the atmosphere, and in this particular it is well to decide or to enquire whether the atmosphere which surrounds the sick animal is dangerous at great distances. Accepting as demonstrated, for it is demonstrated that the air may act as a medium for transmission of Rinderpest, we should also recognize that although it has been stated that this medium is capable of carrying the materies morbi for a distance of 500 yards, it appears probable that it does not transmit to large distances. On this point, in the localities where Rinderpest has been prevalent, it has been noted that when due care has been taken, and the places carefully seques- trated, no cases of the malady have occurred, although in close prox- mity to others where Rinderpest has claimed several victims (Chauveau Visear). The distance to which volatile contagion is possible would seem, therefore, to be not very great. It naturally varies according as the contagious atmosphere is very rich in virulent material, and whether the contagium bearing atmosphere has been exposed to winds or to current of air, and as to whether the malady is severe, more or less gene- ral, and whether there are any obstacles around the centre of infection. A wall, hedge, forest or hills may greatly retard the spread of the dis- ease by the atmosphere; but I must repeat that in the majority of cases it is not the air which is the most fruitful source of spread of Rinderpest. Under ordinary circumstances the contagious zone does not exceed 20 to 40 metres. It is by ingestion that the disease generally propagates itself. M. Chauveau says : "I have demonstrated that the spontaneous eva- poration of the most virulent matter taken from a subject attacked with Rinderpest is incapable of drawing out any infections emanation. The drops of a liquid which condense on the walls of a bell glass under which this evaporation is conducted proves on inoculation to be devoid of virulence, whilst the least particle of the material from which it has been obtained gives Rinderpest when inoculated under the skin. I have found moreover, in analyzing rigorously well-observed facts, that contagion by germs sown in the air plays only a secondary role in the propagation of the malady to a distance. It is particularly by ali- mentation that this propagation is effected. The dejecta sown on the roads, in pastures, ponds of drinking water, or transported to a distance by means of animals or men who have trodden in them, infect the food and water." A very good example of the spread of the malady by the water supply is to be found at the end of this in an appendix, and came under my own observation in the Kotkhai tahsil of the Simla district in India.
28 It is probable that the disease in the Himalayas spreads to a great extent in this way, by the people pollutting the water-supply by throw- ing into the streams or their feeders the carcasses of animals dead of the malady. It may be again repeated that it is contagion by ingestion which plays the most important part in the dissemination of Rinderpest; the virus excreted by the diseased, or arising from their cadaveric debris, being preserved by external media and introduced into the system with the food and drink ; and it is easy to divine that this conditions are frequent and numerous where the disease exists in a part where sanitary and precautionary measures are neglected. Animals may infect them- selves either by licking the walls, mangers, racks, and other objects soiled with the virus, or by eating food into which the virulent material has fallen, or by drinking water to which it has gained access. The principal means, agents, vehicles, or intermediaries which may serve for the propagation of the disease are very numerous, and the disease when it is introduced into an organism nearly always gains access by means of the food, drink or air, these being contaminated in a variety of ways, serving to transport the virus29 Carcasses badly buried which carnivorous animals may disinter, carnivorous animals after a meal on a dead Rinderpest carcass. We may easily imagine the danger which the majority of these intermediary vehicles may give rise to. A single sick animal is capable of infecting a public drinking place whence healthy animals may become infected; similarly it suffices for sick animals to soil a pasture with their excretions and secretions in order that it may be the means of infecting other animals grazing over it five, six, or even twelve days afterwards. Pastures are rendered dangerous when they have been manured with litter which has been in contact or has been soiled with the virus from sick animals. Conveyances, railway trucks, and the various utensils which have been in contact with sick animals are dangerous, preserving their infective properties for several days. Litter fæces, etc., are very dangerous materials, being very rich in the virulent matter. Animals which smell, lick, or ingest them become infected. Animals and men who walk about on these materials carry the virus away on their shoes and spread it about as they walk. In this manner also, dogs or other animals walking about in a stable where animals are suffering from the disease get their feet, skins, and hair impregnated with the virulent material, and may afterwards soil water or forage which, when ingested by healthy animals, will induce the disease. The same is true of the human being, the owner, the veterinarian, and the men employed in looking after the sick. If these persons are not very particular to cleanse themselves, and more especially their shoes, they may, and often do, carry away the virus, and by soiling roads, forage, water, etc., become unwittingly the means of spreading the malady amongst other healthy cattle. It is really the boots of people engaged about sick animals which are the most dangerous owing to the likelihood of their cleansing being overlooked, and owing also to the material with which they become soiled bearing such large quantities of the virus; and the feet of animals are dangerous for the same reasons. Sheep may trans- port the virus of this diseases in their wool without becoming themselves affected with the disease; but it is probable that wool does not preserve the vitality of the virus for long, and that when it has been dried, and more particularly if also disinfected, it is not dangerous. Cadavers or debris of Rinderpest affected animals which have been badly buried constitute a danger. They may be disinterred by carnivorous animals and dragged about over the herbage and soil it with the virus, so that healthy animals grazing may ingest the poison and take the disease. Moreover carnivor- ous animals when devouring diseased meat impregnate their lips, hair, and paws with the virus, and may thus transport them from place to place. Rinderpest may under certain circumstances be transmitted by direct contagion. Healthy animals may infect themselves by licking
30 the sick; young calves become affected by sucking a sick mother. Lemaitre has observed the infection of a bull consequent on his bulling a sick cow, although the earlier symptoms of the disease were not manifest at the time. Lastly, may not the intrauterine transmission of Rinder- pest not be considered to be established by the large number of abortions which occur in sick animals ? Neuhauss has observed intrauterine contagion accompanied by the development of the disease in the young animal. To recapitulate then, although contagion may be accomplished by inhalation, by accidental inoculation, and by heredity, we must look to the digestive organs as playing the principal role in this respect, they most frequently receiving the contagion through the medium of the food and drink. This point, which has been brought forward by numerous observers, is now admitted by all. Therefore, in epizootics of Rinder- pest, it behoves us not to seek the cause of the propagation so much in atmospheric influences. Species susceptible to Rinderpest.31 also suffers very severely from the disease, it being very fatal in him ; numerous instances of the disease in this animal have been cited by various authorities, and some have come under my own personal obser- vation. Antelope also suffer from the disease, as do Cervidæ generally. The gooral and kakar or barking deer have been seen dying in large numbers from this disease in the Himalayas. The auroch, peccary, gazelle, and stag also contract the disease, as do also the Bubalus arni and the Mithun and Tsain. It has been observed in the wild pig of Sumatra, and has been transmitted experimentally to them. It may be probable that such animals as the cat and poultry even may become affected. But it is in the Bovine species that the receptivity is greatest, al- though all individuals of this species do not evince it to a similar degree. It is true that certain individuals evince a greater predisposition to contract the malady and to take a more severe form of it than others do. Animals indigenous to the Steppes are no more predisposed to the disease than others; if they have it more frequently than others, it is because the epizooty is never extinct in the country ; and the same is true in some districts in India, for instance, Kotkhai, Seoraj, Kulu, Kangra, Assam, etc. In the Russian Steppes, however, whether it is that the affection has lost some of its proper virulence or whether the animals evince a greater natural resistance, or one acquired as the result of natural vaccination, the disease is often found to assume a benignant form in these parts, whilst it is very grave when imported thence to occidental countries, as has been frequently observed. The disease in some parts of India, and notably in those parts which are naturally dry, hot and arid, where the temperature of the air rises very high, is frequently noticed to be of a far milder type than is the case in other parts, notably the hills, and it has appeared probable that dessication of the virus by the great heat and dryness influences its virulence to a considerable extent, which would account for mild out- breaks with large numbers of recoveries following the reception of the virus into the system. Another point which may have some influence is that the animals live almost entirely in the open air. There can be no doubt that the receptivity of the small ruminants, sheep and goat, is very much less than that of the ox. This fact has frequently been brought forcibly to my notice in the Himalayas, where the " gaddi " shep- herds keep enormous numbers of these animals, and where there are numbers also in every village. In these parts I have seen the sheep and goats kept side by side with affected animals of the Bovine species, feed- ing over the infected pastures and drinking the same water, but it has been only in exceptional cases that they have become diseased. The few cases of outbreaks amongst flocks of sheep and goats mixed have been slight, not spreading rapidly, considering the adverse conditions under
32 which the animals are kept, and causing but a small percentage of casu- alties. It may be therefore safely said that it is not rare for them to resist or to pay a very small tribute to contagion. Man appears to run little if any danger either from the manipula- tion of the debris, or from consumnig the flesh of animals dead of Rinderpest, or from drinking their milk. It is a common practice in some parts of India, and I believe also in the other countries, for the people to eat the flesh of animals dead of the disease, and no bad conse- quence has ever been reported from people having done so. Dogs and soliped animals appear to be equally refractory. Immunity and preventive inoculation.33 the position of the Indian farmer and cowherd be infinitely bettered, and the prosperity of the country much increased. We have for a long time sought to confer immunity against rinderpest by inoculating either with typhic virus or with cow-pox. Inoculations with typhus virus have been made chiefly in Russia. Thousands of experiments have been made by the Government of that country, who are so deeply interested in the solution of the problem. Various virulent materials have been used, notably the tears and the nasal discharge. These materials were used sometimes in the fresh state, at others preserved for a certain time. They were diluted with water, glycerine ; cultivated after the method indicated by Pessina; it has been sought to mitigate or attenuate them by passing them through the organism of the goat and sheep, but none of these attempts have succeeded, and after several years of experiments the official commission nominated terminated its operations in 1864, by saying that they were constrained to close the establishments of Orenberg and Kerson, and to abandon as useless any new attempt at inoculation, seeing that, so far, the mortality due to inoculation has been nearly as great as that from natural infection. Nevertheless, in 1870-71, when the disease deci- mated our cattle in France, Jacques Valserres, amongst others, sought to resuscitate the practice by publishing the ideas of a century before (1746) ; by Dodson at the time of the great outbreak in England, and in 1815 by Dupuy. Happily they did not find a sufficient number of proselytes. Since these attempts were made great progress has been made in the study of contagious disease, notably as regards the attenuation of virus, and it has been sought to apply the new methods of attenuation of virus to that of rinderpest. Thus, in the summer of 1881, Semmer was sent with Professor Ranpalle to the south of Russia to apply M. Toussaint's method of attenuation. From some experiments we have made, says Semmer, it appears that by ten minutes' heating at 55º C. the contagion of rinderpest is completely destroyed. About 30 grammes of blood heated to 55° C. and nasal discharge treated in the same way were injected into the skin of healthy animals. No im- munity against natural contagion resulted; four calves thus inoculated were placed amongst sick animals in a closed place and died from rinderpest. A temperature of 55° C. is therefore too elevated for attenuation (Neumann). Attempts at inoculation by Tonssaint's method were made in Egypt under the direction of M. Piot; twelve animals in- oculated resisted natural contagion (Echo de Sociétés, etc., 1883) These results were encouraging, and it was hoped would bear fruit, but nothing has yet come of it. During the epizooty in England, 1865-66, Dr. Murchison assimilated variola and rinderpest as lancisi, and Ramazinni did at the beginning of last century and recommended D
34 vaccination. But observation soon proved that the two maladies ex. ercised no influence on each other. It has been advanced that there was antagonism between the development of aphthous fever and rinderpest, but this has been disproved. With regard to the experiments which have already been carried out, numerous inoculations were made in Russia during the last century, as well as in the present one. The method adopted has been to take material from a case of the naturally-contracted disease, preferably from a mild one, and to pass it successively through a number of animals, with a view of weakening or attenuating its virulence, if possible, and by inoculation of the attenuated virus to produce a mild form of the disease, but one still capable of conferring immunity. This method of successive cultivation in animals has been carried on to the fifteenth generation, but it is found that the material so treated very often induces, on inoculation, as virulent and fatal an attack of the disease as the original virus. Inoculated rinderpest induced in this manner comports itself in the same fashion, and is just as severe as the naturally-contracted disease, being frequently fatal. The mortality appears to vary in different countries, but it is always considerable. In Russia it varies from 4 to 60 per cent. of the animals inoculated. Another method which has been tried is that of selecting animals which have the disease in a very mild form and inoculating others with the tears, saliva, etc., with the idea that by so doing a mild attack of the disease would be induced; but the argument on which this method was adopted has no scientific or practical basis, and is erroneous, for, as is well known to be the case in this and other diseases (for it has already been stated that animals suffering from a mild attack may be the means of inducing the most virulent outbreak amongst other cattle), the benign- ity of the disease appears to depend more on individual idiosyncracy, previously-acquired immunity, or some temporary attenuation of virus which recuperates itself when passed through a susceptible animal. A good example of this is to be found in the fact that attenuated authrax regains its pristine virulence when passed through suitable subjects. Supposing, then, that the mild attacks were due to the introduction of virus attenuated in this unknown manner, when we consider that the bovine species is the one most susceptible to the disease and forms the best soil for the growth and development of the virus, we should have more grounds for supposing that the attack induced by inoculation from the mild case would be more severe in its intensity when introduced into the system of an animal not having the peculiar individual idiosyn- cracy. However this may be, and whatever view may be taken of the case, it cannot be denied that the results of the methods already tried have been unsatisfactory in the extreme, and their adoption has never been seriously considered in Europe; and in countries in the East where
35 they have been tried, they have been completely abandoned as not only useless, but harmful, from the fact that they multiplied the centres of contagion. Up to the present time the recent attempts which have been made in Russia on the one hand by Semmer and in Egypt by Piot have not led to any practical results, and protective inoculation has not yet reached the state of perfection which would permit of its being recommended for general adoption as a means of conferring immunity against rinderpest. That this state may be reached there is every reason to believe, and the results of the investigations which are to be carried out in India are looked forward to with much interest. Treatment.36 condition, it is generally considered advisable to administer a laxative in order to clear out the organs of all the semi-digested food, which, as we are aware, if allowed to remain, forms toxic materials which, when absorbed into the system, give rise to serious disturbance and aggravate the disease, and moreover irritate the digestive mucous membranes with which they remain in contact. This, then, appears to be logically reason- able, and we may use any laxative which it may seem to us most desirable, taking care that its action be not too pronounced or the nature of the laxative too irritant. Veterinary Surgeon Thacker, who has treated some 2,541 cases of the disease with great success, always used for this purpose two or three ounces of finely-divided sulphur in two quarts of gruel and administered morning and evening until some slight laxa- tive effect is observed. The report of the Indian Cattle Plague Commis- sion shows that they agree in this particular, and states that "mild laxatives in the early stages are undoubtedly advantageous, but that severe purgation is positively harmful." Admitting this first step in treatment, then, and still bearing in mind the typhoid nature of the disease, and the lesions found in the digestive tract, the importance of withholding solid food will be evident, considering the inability to digest it which must result from the state of the absorbent mucous membrane, and the consequent irritation which must result from its introduction into the canal. Too much stress, then, can scarcely be laid upon the import- ance of withholding solid food and substituting for it fluid and easily- digested nutriment; milk and eggs, to which has been added some papaiya fruit, would be the most suitable diet were it not that in many cases papaiya cannot be obtained and milk and eggs are too expensive a form of diet for animals of little value. We have, then, to turn to the next best fluid food, which is gruel of various kinds. The Indian Cattle Plague Commissioners recommend thin rice-water. When the stage of diarrh37 Marriott found very good results follow the use of opium in large doses in this disease; and I have used a compound of hyoscyamus and opium with good results, but it is too expensive for general use. If the diarrh38 The insidious character of the invasion of the malady renders it almost certain, generally in small villages, that the majority of cattle in the same village will have been exposed to contagion, owing to the fact that the animals are herded together during non-working hours, feed over the same pastures, drink at the same water, and associate freely on roads and in the fields during working hours. When we take into considera- tion the fact that the disease is present in an animal for a very consi- derable time before any marked symptoms of illness are manifested, during which period, if reliance is to be placed on Semmer's experiments, it is capable of communicating the disease to other animals, and that it is soiling the roads and pastures, as also the water, with its saliva and excretions, it is not to be wondered at that large numbers of cattle are attacked apparently in a short time. In addition to this, there is the fact that until some few animals are affected and the disease has reached an advanced stage, it is not recognized, and during the whole of this time so long as they can walk they are driven to graze with the rest of the herd. In villages, therefore, where the whole of the cattle are grazed in one herd, the chance of doing very much by isolation of the sick is small. But there are many cases where several herds are formed and frequent different pastures and watering-places, and are not asso- ciated together, and it is in these cases that benefit arises from the adoption of this measure. With regard to the best and most suitable methods of suppression, it will be best to leave these for the various officers of the Civil Veteri- nary Department to report upon, as so much depends upon local condi- tions, customs, and prejudices. This will therefore be done. G. I. C. P. O.CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT LEDGER SERIES No. II. MAIN HEAD . . STOCK DISEASE. SUB-HEAD . CONTAGIOUS DISEASE. SUBJECT: ANTHRAX. 1894. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1894.
PREFACE. THIS article has been compiled chiefly from the last edi- tion of Galtier's "Maladies contagieuses," but many additions have been made. The following works have been consulted: Micro-organisms and Disease, Sydenham Society; Koch on Disinfection; Friedberger and Frohner, Medicine; Fleming's Sanitary Science; "Crookshank's Manual of Bac- teriology"; Cornil and Babes "Les Bacteries"; Frænkel's Manual of Bacteriology; Armatage, Disease of the Ox; Peuch and Toussaint on the Ox, etc. The subject of Loodianah disease in the horse has not been dealt with, being at present under investigation. The compiler would be greatly obliged for cover glass preparations and blood in capillary tubes, also pieces of tissue (spleen, kidney, etc.) in alcohol, from horses attacked with Loodianah disease. VETY. LIEUT. HENRY T. PEASE, F.R.G.S., F.Z.S., Asst. to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, MEERUT, 1894.
ANTHRAX. Synonyms.2 body, and according to the species of animals which it attacks. Thus it is called malignant pustule in man, splenic apoplexy (Sang de rate) in small ruminants, and charbonous fever or simply charbon in the other species. Definition.3 individual peculiarities of constitution, according to the channel by which the virus has gained access to the system, and to the amount of it which has been introduced. These variations will be briefly noted later on Charbon is always sudden in its appearance, manifesting itself by grave symptoms, which run a rapid course, and very frequently have a fatal termination; but at times we meet with cases running an apparently abortive course, the sudden and startling symptoms subsiding almost as suddenly as they appeared and the case terminating in recovery. In some cases so sudden is the appearance and so grave the character of the symptoms, and such is the rapidity with which death takes place, that we have been led to confer on it the name of apoplectic Anthrax, charbon foudroyant, and miltzbrand apoplexie in Europe, and in parts of India "Goli-ki-sat." This form of the disease is gener- ally supposed to be caused by the infection of the animal with the "spores" of Anthrax, and Friedberger and Frohner state that it can be induced experimentally by causing an animal to ingest them. In these cases, from the first appearance of any disturbance to the death of the animal, ten minutes or a quarter of an hour only may elapse, and we often find a number of animals left apparently healthy overnight dead in the morning. This form of the disease is most commonly met with amongst sheep and oxen, and at the beginning of an outbreak, the first cases almost always being the most severe. In these cases of apoplectic Anthrax, the animal generally commences to shiver, staggers about, or goes round in a circle, bleeds from the nose and often also from the anus, breathes very rapidly, and finally falls to the ground, where, after a few convulsive kicks, it dies, blood nearly always issuing from the nose and anus after death. These symptoms sometimes also come on whilst the animal is at work or at pasture. Other cases run a much slower course, the symptoms being much less rapidly evolved, and the disease lasting for from 2 to 24 hours. Following the reception of the virus of the disease into the system we observe the period of incubation, variable in duration, and during which no important symptom has betrayed the serious changes which are occurring at least when the entrance has occurred at a point which is hidden from view, as in cases where Anthrax is spontaneously contracted by animals ingesting the germs with their food at pasture, etc., and at its termination general symptoms of the disease suddenly appear; for, when the virus gains entry by the digestive organs, or by the respira- tory tract, the local disorder which it gives rise to is not visible. In other cases, however,4 particularly the subglossan and subparotidean ganglia. In other cases again, when the germs have been absorbed by the surface of a wound situated on the exterior of the body, the local disturbance caused at the point of entry is first visible, there being at first, as we shall see later on, local tumefaction more or less appreciable, which may, however, be absent in some species of animals. The local tumefaction is soon followed by swelling of the ganglia in the vicinity of the injury through which the lymph from the inoculated part passes, and this again is followed by general symptoms of the disease. Once the malady is clearly declared, its symptoms consist in altera- tion of the blood and the circulatory apparatus, as well as in the func- tional modifications which are explained by embarrassment of the circu- lation and by the toxic phenomena to which the germs or their products give rise. The blood is modified in proportion as the duration of the disease is prolonged. Nearly normal at the commencement it becomes progressively richer in leucocytes, more viscous, its globules become more agglutinative and blacker in colour, reddening more imperfectly on contact with the air; it coagulates less readily, giving a soft, black, and diffluent clot; it assumes virulent properties, is inoculable, and gra- dually more bacilli appear in it. When the blood has undergone these profound modifications, blood-letting, if attempted, gives a mere drib- bling flow from the wound, and if practised, always, if anything, acceler- ates the course of the disease. On microscopical examination of such blood when it is thus entirely altered we observe immobile batonnets, either straight or curved, cylindrical, and of one or two articulations or segments, easily seen in the spaces between the agglutinated blood cor- puscles. If the blood is examined at the commencement of the affection before it has undergone in a marked degree the above-mentioned altera- tions, it shows regular and non-agglutinated globules; the bacilli are not numerous, and a microscopical examination does not always reveal their presence. Given this double character of the blood of animals affected with Anthrax, it is necessary when a microscopical examination of the blood is negative, to inoculate an animal (a rabbit or a guinea-pig) susceptible to the malady, and to observe whether the disease is con- tracted by it or not. Coincident with the alterations above mentioned in the blood, the circulation becomes profoundly modified. The cardiac impulse, normal at first, becomes often strong, tumultuous, and precipitous at a given moment, and later feeble, and indeed nearly imperceptible at the end of the disease. The pulse becomes small, feeble, and almost imperceptible; we sometimes observe a venous pulse very manifest at the jugular. The circulation is impeded on account of the abnormal viscosity of the blood,
5 and also by the obstruction of a more or less great number of capillaries (bacterian embolism); in those regions where the skin is fine and thin it becomes red and congested; the conjunctival mucous membrane, which often presents petechial spots, becomes of a more or less dark red colour; the other mucous membranes also become congested, or of a reddish yellow, blue, purple, or black colour and studded over with ecchy- moses, vascular ruptures, hæmorrhages, which give rise to epistaxis, or to the emission of sauguinolent urine or fæces (hæmorrhagic charbon). (Edematous engorgements and tumors make their appearance in the subcutaneous tissues. At the same time, or even before these disturbances of the circula- tion, we observe changes in the lymphatics. We observe at first turges- cence of the ganglia in the neighbourhood of the point where the virus has been absorbed, and later on, in these through which the lymph is carried by the vessels. The commencement of the malady is generally accompanied by a notable elevation of the temperature, which rises to 40º, 41º, or 42º C. This fever appears due in part to the reaction of the elements of the organism against the presence of the microbes which they attempt to destroy. We may therefore appreciate the moment of the commencement of Anthrax by the thermometer. This elevation of temperature does not, as a rule, persist for very long, but the normal degree is gradually reached again. When the disease is about to terminate fatally, the temperature often falls below normal, descending towards the end to 36º, 35°, or even 34° C. Coincident with elevation of the temperature we may observe dryness and staring of the coat, and general hyperæsthesia of the dorsolumbar region. The general sensibility is extremely exaggerated at the com- mencement, and becomes deadened, more or less, at a later period. We sometimes notice a certain nervous surexcitation at the commencement the animal is restless, excited, cattle bellowing. These may even become rabiform, and we may also have convulsions, spasms, and tetanic con- vulsions; but to these symptoms signs of dulness, stupefaction, torpor, apathy, and somnolence soon succeed; the strength quickly diminishes, adynamia and ataxy are rapidly produced; the animal becomes weak, totters in its gait, is apathetic, remains plunged in a state of torpor and coma which lasts until death closes the scene. At other times we per- ceive muscular twitchings of the thighs, shoulders, continuous tossing of the head, shivering, and grinding of the teeth, the eyes revolving in the orbits, etc. These various symptoms are the consequence of poison- ing by microbian products, capillary obstruction, embarrassment of the circulation, and localization of the lesions on the nervous centres.
6 Sometimes symptoms of pulmonary congestion are predominant, the respiration is impeded and accelerated, it increases in rapidity and be- comes more and more painful and noisy. In some cases I have noticed it to be rattling, owing to an exudation of serosanguinolent material into the tubes, and in these cases the fluid becoming sucked up into the smaller bronchi occludes them, thus causing death. Occasionally, fol- lowing a more or less violent congestion of the mucous membranes of the anterior respiratory passages, we get some hæmorrhage from the nose, or the flow of a yellowish red serosity may be noticed issuing from the nostrils. The digestive apparatus suffers notable modifications. The appetite is diminished, then disappears; thirst is sometimes increased but not always. In cattle rumination ceases, the rumen appears full, the left flank being tense; the digestion is profoundly disturbed. The tongue and the buccal membrane are in some cases congested, tumefied, and black or violet coloured; the tongue often pendant, cold, and covered at certain points with vesicles filled with sanguinolent sero- sity. We may also have tumefaction of the throat, more or less easily detected by swelling or by tenderness on handling; this hinders degluti- tion and respiration, and is a very common form of the disease in India, especially amongst equines (charbonous angina). In these cases the swelling and tumefaction generally commence under the throat and about the parotid region, and extend down the neck and to the chest. This form is said to be due to infection by the bacilli, and it may be produced experimentally, as may all cases of charbon with visible localization (Friedberger and Frohner). In other cases we observe abdominal symptoms most marked; we have abdominal pains, sometimes very severe, at others more or less fugitive in character. In some we meet with intestinal apoplexy and interrhagia; the fæces in such cases become diarrh7 8 the outside. The fever rapidly becomes intense, 9 by great excitability. Trembling, shivering fits and sweats, either general or partial, appear, the loins are tender on pressure. Colic is sometimes observed. The strength rapidly diminishes, the hind quarters swaying about when the animal moves. About this time a f10 The local symptoms consist in the appearance on the general surfaces of the tongue and the frænum and also on the gums, palate, and lips of an eruption of bullæ or phlyctenæ. These phlyctenæ are white at first, often presenting a pearly aspect, but they soon change to yellow and progressively become almost or entirely black; their situation may be either on the summit of a thickened portion of submucous tissue, or they may be directly under the mucous membrane. It is a very notable fact that the eruption of these vesicles is in the vast majority of instances unaccompanied by fever, and this might perhaps justly be taken as evidence to show that the disease is at first local, and also that it arises from infection through the mouth and does not become general until the vesicles have advanced to maturity, and then the virus enters the general circulation and gives rise to the symptoms of Anthrax fever. This supposition is of very great importance clinically; for if these local symptoms are comparable to what goes on in the point of inoculation in some diseases, we can do much by discharging their contents and subjecting them to stringent disinfection. To resume, the phlyctenæ rapidly increase in size, in some cases assuming the proportions of a fowl's egg. The tongue becomes much inflamed, 11 rapidly terminates in death. The symptoms noticed are that the sheep stops feeding and ruminating, bleats, trembles, the breathing is hurried, the eyes prominent, and visible mucous membranes congested. The animal stumbles about, or perhaps turns round in a circle and falls to the ground; there is much distress, convulsions come on, a frothy san- guinolent discharge issues from the nose, and the urine is mixed with blood; death occurs in an incredibly short time, sometimes in a few moments. In other cases, however, the disease is announced by certain prodro- mic symptoms. The animal appears excited, there is unusual expression of countenance, redness of the skin in those parts where it is fine about the eyes, nose, and ears; the conjunctivæ are red and their vessels inject- ed. The temperature is elevated, etc. The blood soon becomes black; the appetite disappears, rumination ceases, the sick animal remains behind the flock, the abdomen becomes distended; the fæces coated, soft, and sanguinolent. The respiration becomes painful, dyspn12 prostration, intermittent colic alternating with somnolence and coma, muscular weakness, swaying of the hind quarters, dryness and heat of the skin; shivering and trembling of the muscles at the arms, limbs, quarters, etc., sometimes vertigo, etc. The blood soon under- goes the changes already noted; the circulation is at first accelerated, the heart-beats are strong and tumultuous, the pulse becomes small, quick, thready, and imperceptible. The mucous membranes are con. gested, dark coloured, violet, or reddish yellow. The tongue is con- gested and dark coloured; the colicky pains become more persistent; the animals make frequent expulsive efforts; the rectal mucous membrane is sometimes everted as a violet tumour; the fæces become sanguinolent and diarrh13 hown by uneasiness, pawing, and looking to the sides is sometimes manifested. The fæces are fluid or blood stained, the skin is harsh and dry. The respiration becomes tumultuous and hurried, the nostrils dilate, and the animal foams at the mouth. The temperature finally declines, the animal staggers at every step; convulsions, and delirium or coma ensue, and death closes the scene.14 want pustule." Sometimes cases of internal charbon, bronchopulmo- nary or intestinal, show themselves, following the introduction of germs into the digestive or respiratory passages. External charbon, which follows the accidental inoculation of the virus at any point of the surface of the body, is observed in those persons who manipulato fresh charbonous material, or materials containing the spores; it is observed in veterinary surgeons, butchers, horse-slaughterers, herdsmen, etc., and persons who make post-mortem examinations of animals which have died from the malady, or who have manipulated the debris: it has also been met with in persons working in wool, hides, horns, etc. Wounds, punctures, excoriations, and scratches which may exist previously or occur at the time of manipulating charbonous materials, may serve as the point of entry of the bacillus or its spores. It may sometimes happen that the contact or the bites of flies which have frequented charbonous carcasses or material may give rise to local charbon. The bacilli, inoculated into any part of the body whatsoever, multiply, causing at their point of entry a local lesion; then around this lesion a swelling appears, and 15 ganglia of the neighbouring parts. The bacilli in greater or less numbers may be seen in the Malphigian layer, the superficial part of the pustule, in the eschar, in the subjacent and peripheral tissues, in the derm and the 16 The muscles are congested and spotted with blood spots and hæmorr- hages due to embolism of the capillary blood-vessels caused by their be. coming blocked up with baccilli. Their tenacity and consistence are diminished and they become softer and more friable. They have a reddish, yellowish, or brownish tint, according to the case. Tumors are sometimes met with in certain regions in those where the connective tissue is loose and abundant. They may have as their starting point a ganglion, which becomes hypertrophied and congested, and softened and surrounded by a zone of more or less extensive colour- less yellow gelatiniform infiltration, They may also be found in regions where there are no ganglia ; they offer a central zone formed of black-material, and an outer zone yellow and gelatiniform. These tumors are non-crepitant. They have their seat in the subcutaneous connective tissue, they sometimes invade the muscles, which are then black, soft, friable, and surrounded by a more or less diffuse infiltration. The skin is easily detached over the tumors. The blood offers the most important alterations, and the changes which occur in it are the cause of all the other lesions; it is the blood which carrying the bacilli and their poison spreads these agents through the various tissues and organs of the body. It becomes black even before death; it is generally incoagulable or coagulates badly and imper- fectly; it is often muddy or forms soft easily broken-down clots ; it is virulent and may be inoculated, producing the disease even before death, and it preserves its virulence for some time after death in the body. The red corpuscles are more or less altered, often irregular in shape and crenated at their margins; they are more stricky, and, adhering to each other, collect into irregular masses. The red corpuscles lose their color- ing matter which dissolves in the plasma and by which the lining mem- brane of the blood-vessels and the heart becomes tinted or stained a cherry-red colour. The blood of animals dead of Anthrax contains the virus in some quantity, and this is most important. The heart is more or less decolorized and flabby, looking as though it had been cooked, and of an earthy aspect. It is usually filled with black, muddy, and incoagulated blood or blood feebly coagulated into soft black clots. The endocardium is tinted red by the coloring matter of the blood ; ecchymoses and hæmorrhages appear on the endocardium, the cardiac muscle, and on the pericardium, which often contains a quantity of red serosity. The vessels contain black blood, viscous, muddy and incoagulable, which gives a red tint to their internal tunics and stains the fingers. In the capillaries of the various tissues and organs we may meet with clots (Toussaint). The capillary system is more or less gorged
17 with blood ; there is here and there exudation of sanguineous plasma from which results an infiltration of yellow gelatiniform plasma in the tissue around the vessels. The ganglia are nearly always more or less changed, hypertrophied, congested, infiltrated with fluid, and softened. The ganglia, acting as they do more or less the part of filters, collect as a rule large quantities of bacilli. The ganglia at the seat or point of entry of the bacillus into the system are those first attacked, and as the lymph from them circu- lates to the neighbouring ganglia, these also become altered. Thus, where the mouth or throat has been the seat of entry of the poison, the ganglia of the throat are first attacked, and we get the enormous swelling of the throat of Loodiana disease, which extends to the ganglia of the neck, and the 18 The vessels of the mesentery are filled with muddy blood, and we may find more or less extensive h19 congested and filled with sero-san guinolent fluid rich in bacilli. The pia mater may be more or less vividly congested, whilst at times may be seen a veritable apoplexy with hæmorrhage at the surface of the brain, the vessels of which are filled with muddy blood. The bacilli are found in the blood in the excreted materials which are sanguinolent, in the lesions of all the tissues and organs : they are more particularly abundant in the capillaries of the tissues or organs which are the seat of the congestions, ecchymoses, spots, etc., in the spleen, ganglia, liver, gastro-intestinal mucous membrane, etc., when these organs are mani- festly altered. Lesions obserevd in small Ruminants dead of Splenic Apop- lexy.20 Lesions in Solipeds dead of Spontaneous Charbonous Fever.- In horses dead of charbon we observe, as in the large ruminants, black coloration of the blood, ecchymoses on the various organs, infiltra- tions, vascular ruptures, and hæmorrhages into the majority of the tissues, the subcutaneous connective tissue, peritoneum, intestinal walls, pericardium, heart, endocardium, ganglia ; tumefaction, congestion, and infiltration of the lymphatic system ; 21 suspected by Davaine, Pollender, and Brauell; but the latter, however had considered their presence as a proof of the existence of charbon Pollender very exactly describe the bacillus of charbon, its length, breadth, and its presence in the disease. He compared it to vibriones, and considered it to belong to the vegetable kingdom (Cornil and Babes). Brauell described this bacillus in charbon affecting man (Virchows Arch- ives, 1857). Delafond, in the year 1860, in his turn observed the bacillus in charbonous blood, and he had observed it both in the spontaneous and in the inoculated disease. He found them in the blood some hours before death, and he recognized the fact that they become rapidly very abundant during the last moments of life. He found them in consi- derable numbers in the ganglia adjacent to the point of inoculation; he remarked that the bacilli, imprisoned by the fibrin, become rare in the serum after death, and he indicated the method of finding them in the clot by breaking it up. Delafond had finally suspected the nature and rôle played by the batonnets discovered by Davaine; he regarded them as vegetable crypto- gams, as plantules susceptible to be transformed into mycelium; he tried to cultivate them, and saw that they lengthened, doubling, treb- ling, and quadrupling their length; he considered them capable of form- ing spores, a property which did not become experimentally verified until 1876, when Koch accomplished it. Pasteur having in 1861 demonstrated that butyric fermentation was determined by a bacillus, Davaine returned to his observations of 1880, and asked himself whether the bacillus discovered by him in charbonous blood might not be the pathogenic agent of the malady. He endeavoured to demonstrate its rôle by various experiments. He in- oculated rabbits and guinea-pigs with charbonous blood, and took from these inoculated animals, at longer and larger intervals from the time of inoculation, droplets of blood which he studied microscopically, and which he used for further inoculations. In this manner he found that so long as the blood did not contain the bacilli it remained inactive in the production of the disease, but when the bacilli made their appearance in the blood, some hours before death it became virulent and inoculable. These experiments, repeated a number of times, gave the same results, and led to the conclusion that the bacillus, to which he had given the name "Bacteridie," was the agent by which the transmission of the disease was accomplished. Davaine also observed the multiplication of the bacillus in the blood of inoculated animals; he observed that the mani- festation of the disease coincided with the multiplication of the bac- teridium, and that the blood of inoculated animals only became virulent at the moment when it presented bacilli.
22 Davaine bad recourse to another method of demonstration; he endeavoured to isolate the bacilli, to obtain blood deprived of them; for this purpose he had recourse to the inoculation of females during the period of gestation. Before him Brauell had observed that the blood of the f23 Jaillard and Leplat obtained a malady which killed, in the same manner as charbon, but without bacilli, by inoculating charbonous blood taken from a cadaver in course of putrefaction which did not present bacilli in rods; and they concluded that the rod could not be consi- dered as the morbific agent of charbon. Davaine then distinguished charbon due to rods (bacteridia) and the pretented or so-called charbon without bacteridia, to which he gave the name of "maladie dela vache;" he considered the latter to be a special malady, of a septic nature, killing more quickly than charbon and inoculable to birds.24 virulent. This proved at least that the virulence did not reside in the liquid part. Pasteur recognized the formation of spores in a pathogenic microbe connected with his studies on the causes of the diseases of silk-worms, and he found that these spores were very resistant bodies and were capable of germination several years after their formation; but this fact not having been verified in the case of the bacillus of Anthrax, showed Davaine's observations to be incomplete and allowed the discussion to continue. P. Bert in 1876 discovered that oxygen at a pressure of several atmospheres killed anatomical elements and living beings, whilst it was inactive upon diastases, soluble ferments, and venoms; he submitted the bacillus of charbon to its action; he also submitted this virus to the action of absolute alcohol; and he observed in both cases that inoculation gave a rapidly fatal malady, without the appear- ance of the bacillus ; in these cases the charbonous blood had become septic, contained spores, and produced septicæmia, the disease from which the inoculated animals died. Koch in 1876 first observed the multiplication of the bacillus of charbon by the formation of spores; he cultivated it in blood plasma, aqueous humor, in the presence of air; he placed a minute quantity of charbonous blood in a drop of serum or aqueous humor; he saw the bacillus lengthen and form an inextricable felting of mycelium. He saw it not only form segments, but also very refractile spores, very close together and regularly spaced in the interior of the filaments. He saw the filaments become destroyed, leaving in their place spores laid out in a line and maintained in position by a uniting substance formed of the last vestiges of the filaments; he lastly saw the spores isolate themselves and become free. He inoculated the spores, causing charbon; he cultivated them in blood plasma, aqueous humor in the presence of air; he saw them stretch, lengthen, and form rods. He observed that they were more resistant and preserved their virulence for a longer period than the rods. Briefly, Koch, by cultivating the bacilli in the aqueous humor or serum, in the presence of a moist atmosphere at a temperature of 35° to 37° C., saw the rods lengthen considerably, double, tenfold, one hundred fold, their length, turning about and forming an inextricable network or felting, lose in some hours their uniform structure and their trans- parency, their contents become granular; very shortly granulations or very refringent spores were formed more or less close together and at regular intervals, and resembling in their form and distribution inter- laced chaplets of pearls. These dissociate and leave in their place lines of
25 spores which were maintained in position by a mucous uniting substance, but soon separated, becoming free. He observed that at 35° C. the bacilli rapidly developed and presented spores at the end of 24 hours, whilst at 30° C. they did not form them for three hours, at 18° to 20° C. at the end of two or three days. Below 12° and above 45° C. the bacilli did not develop. He recognized that the development of the bacilli required the presence of air, and that if cultivated in a medium poor in oxygen, they became muddy, broke up, and were destroyed. Pasteur in 1877 devoted himself to the study of contagious disease; he completed the demonstration of the parasitic nature of charbon; he demonstrated, by employing the method of successive cultures inaugur- ated by him, that the bacillus was the morbific agent of charbon, and that, if the virus resisted the action of compressed oxygen, this was due to the great tenacity of the spores which it contained, and which, contrary to what is the case with the rods, are not influenced by it. Koch had observed that the microbe of charbon might reproduce itself by scission or by the endogenous method. During the life of a sick animal, the batonnet multiplies by scission, elongates, is compressed, bends in one or several places, separates into several segments or baton- nets, which in their turn comport themselves in a similar manner after death. The batonnets cease to multiply by scission, oxygen being want- ing and septic bacteria get the upper hand. The bacilli, however, under certain conditions, produce spores before their destruction, which, once formed, may preserve and perpetuate the virulence for a long time. Pasteur, as we have said, submitted charbonous virus to successive cultures outside the organism, and repeated the experiment a great number of times, and, at last, isolated the bacillus from all the ele- ments which accompanied it in the drop of blood employed to sow the first culture; these elements did not multiply and finally disappeared; the bacillus alone multiplied and became purer in each successive cultiva- tion; it was obtained pure under the form of filaments; and by inoculat- ing the liquid which contained it, charbon was induced with multipli- cation of the bacillus. If the culture liquid or charbonous blood was filtered through porcelain, it was deprived of the bacilli and ceased to be virulent. The method of successive cultures, repeated a number of times, permitted us to get rid of all the elements which accompanied the bacillus, such as red and white globules, granular matter which were introduced in sowing the first culture, and trans- mitted in less and less numbers to some of the subsequent ones. The cause of charbon then is the bacillus and no other element, since the bacillus alone was preserved in the whole of the cultures, and neither a dissolved substance nor any poison whatever produced by it and
26 regenerating itself at the same time in the successive cultures, since once the bacteridium is removed from the blood or culture liquid, as is the case when it is filtered through plaster or porcelain, the malady cannot be produced by the inoculation of the liquid thus cleared. If it be supposed that the plaster filter causes any change in the plasma which traverses it so as to destroy in it any virulence which it might be endowed with, the contrary may be proved by using numerous double paper filters, or by leaving charbonous blood in a place free from germs. It separates into two parts; the plasma, obtained by decantation, is deprived of bacilli which have become caught and imprisoned in the coagulated part, and it does not produce charbon on inoculation. In addition to this the blood of the f27 The bacteridium of Davaine, still called Bacillus anthracis, presents itself in the blood of a sick animal, or shortly after death, under the form of batonnets or short rods only. These rods are either simple, or they may be formed of two, three, or more segments, straight, or sometimes crosier-shaped or bent and cylindrical. They are often articulated by an enlarged extremity presenting somewhat similar appearance to that of the articulatory surfaces of the phalanges. In the median line of these articulations is a clear, transverse line altogether characteristic. They vary in length according to the subjects from which they are obtained, and to their seat; they are longer in the guinea-pig than in the mouse, and in both than in the ox; longer in the exuded material, in the 28 The bacillus resists the action of potash, ammonia, sulphuric acid, etc., preserving its form after having been submitted to the action of these substances. When we treat a ninfinitesimal portion of blood or dried pulp of an organ with a drop of acetic, or, better, formic acid, we see all the anatomical elements pale and disappear, whilst the bacilli persist perfectly clearly. The bacillus stains well with all aniline dyes, gentian violet, methyl blue and violet, fuchsine, rubine, etc. We may obtain beautiful preparations with the ordinary methods of a simple coloration, and more especially by double staining by Gram or Weigert's method. These preparations may be made with blood, exudate from diseased points, pulp of an organ, as the spleen, ganglia, liver, lung, marrow of bone, etc., epiploon villosities of the intestine, etc., and sections of organs previously hardened in alcohol. Staining the rods.29 they are then washed and placed for three minutes in the following :30 aqueous humor, urine, vegetable infusions, broth, potatoes, gelatine, and peptonised jelly. It thrives well in neutral urine, but meat broths are preferable; it does well in gelatine or jellies as well as on potatoes. Air and free oxygen are necessary to its existence ; it is "Ærobic ;" it cannot be cultivated in vacuo, nor in the presence of carbonic acid, nitrogen, or hydrogen. It is not cultivated below 16° C. At 16° C. the bacillus does not form spores, at least for a very long time. It is cultivated rapidly at from 42° to 45° C., but at the latter temperature spore-formation is prevented or arrested. It does not grow in chicken broth at a temperature of 45° C. The temperature most favourable to the rapid development of the bacillus and the formation of spores is 30° to 35° C. The filaments are killed by a temperature of 60° C. or by carbonic acid or alcohol. The spores do not suffer any alteration from contact with the air, either in their vitality or their virulence; they resist the action of alcohol, carbonic acid, and vacuum, as well as, for a short time, a temperature of 95° centigrade; they are, however, killed with certainty at 100° C. When the condi- tions are favourable, the bacteridium multiplies at first by scission or segmentation as in the animal body. The temperature of the blood of birds (41° to 42° C.) hinders multi- plication, and in order to show that the temperature hindered develop- ment in the fowl, M. Pasteur cooled the bird by keeping the body in water, and so, on inoculation, produced the disease. It must be remem- bered, however, that in some exceptional cases birds may take charbon without being thus cooled down; for instance, the sparrow, which has a high temperature, is very susceptible to the virus. By the inverse process Gibier has been able to produce charbon in frogs and in fishes, by causing them to live in water at a temperature of 35° C. The blood of these animals, after inoculation, contained a large number of bacilli. The culture media should be sown with pure charbonous material containing nothing but the bacilli, such as the blood, products of the spleen, ganglia, etc., taken with antiseptic precautions from fresh cada- vers; and if we are only able to obtain an impure seed, it is necessary to sow it upon a solid medium, so that we may be able afterwards to separate the colonies of the different microbes. Culture of the Bacillus in liquid media.31 which they are held in suspension, and sometimes adhering to the side of the tube; these flocculi enlarge and become more numerous ; the culture liquid remains clear and limpid in the parts not occcupied by the flocculi of filaments. The floccuent appearance, snowy or resembling cotton, is characteristic. By degrees the culture changes its appearance; after some days, the liquid becomes slightly brown or yellowish coloured, the flocculi disintegrate, and a white or slightly yellow powder forms at the bottom of the culture which spreads through the liquid and renders it turbid when shaken. Culture of the bacillus on solid media.32 Cover-glass impressions.33 fractile spores; chains of spores still maintained in line by the jelly-like membrane of the filament; and lastly, masses of spores in a hyaline sub- stance, which appears to support them, and free spores animated by brownian movements. If bacilli grow in the depth of a fluid medium they do not form spores, and as new bacilli appear, or the old filaments increase in length, degeneration sets in. This degeneration gradually affects greater and greater numbers, and when the fluid is exhausted for the formation of new bacilli it necessarily follows that the whole growth becomes involved in degeneration, the whole mass becoming smaller, and finally only débris remaining. Such cultures34 bacilli without spores, sown in broth and cultivated at a temperature of 35° to 37° C., produce spores ; they are, therefore, not rendered truly asporagenous by cultivation at 42° to 43° C. At too low a temperature the bacillus does not form spores, but it does not lose the power of doing so when cultivated at a proper temperature; spore formation does not take place below 15° C. In 1883 MM. Chamberland and Roux ob- tained asporagenous bacteridia, by causing weak antiseptics to act upon the cultures, using phenic acid and bichromate of potassium for the purpose. In this manner the bacillus cultivated for eight days in a culture medium to which a two-thousandth of bichromate of potash was added, lost the faculty of producing spores, and remained aspora- genous in successive cultivations; it killed guinea-pigs in three or four days, and the cultures sown with the blood of the charbonous guinea- pig remained asporagenous. Lehmann, in 1887, discovered another method of producing asporagenous bacilli, which only formed false spores, and which did not regain the power of forming spores after having been passed through guinea-pigs and mice, and his method was repeated cultivation on gelatine. Behring, in 1889, obtained similar bacilli by cultivation on gelatine, to which rosalic acid or an antiseptic had been added in a dose insufficient to kill the microbe. M. E. Roux has pointed out a certain method, and one easy of application, of obtain- ing cultures of asporagenous bacilli. The following is a résumé of his method:35 broth, to which 20 ten-thousandths of phenic acid has been added, remains sterile, the bacilli sown in it rapidly perishing. After eight or ten days we take a little of the culture from each of the tubes and heat it for fifteen minutes to 65° C., and then sow the heat- ed portion in ordinary veal broth; in a couple of days the sowings made with material from the tube to which 2 ten-thousandths of phenic acid have been added show themselves to be fertile. Those made with mate- rial from the tube containing 4 ten-thousandths and 6 ten-thousandths often give a culture on the following days, but the others remain for the most part sterile, and so prove that the bacillus sown was without spores. The proportion of the antiseptic necessary to prevent the formation of spores varies with the composition of the broth, the origin of the bacilli, and the facility with which air gains admission to the culture. It is for this reason that we take the precaution of using a number of tubes with slightly varying quantities of the antiseptic added to them, and differing in no other respect; unforeseen results often occur in these experiments. We may find, for instance, a tube containing 6 ten-thou- sandths of the antiseptic produce no spores, whilst one sown in 10 ten- thousandths may contain them, although the two tubes have been sown with the same blood. The bacillus does not suddenly lose the power of forming spores; if we remove it from the antiseptic medium, after three or four days of culture only, it will form spores if we sow it in a non-antiseptic broth. In order that it may become asporagenous it is necessary that the contact with the antiseptic be prolonged. Sown in ordinary broth, without the application of heat, the aspora- genous phenic cultures rapidly develop at 33° C.; and the daughter cultures have no spores; even after a long time they perish without having formed them. We may make successive cultivations of these bacteridia, either in broth, gelatine, nutritive gelatine, coagulated serum, or liquid serum, without their forming spores. They have not, however, lost their virulence; inoculated into guinea-pigs they kill them in from 30 to 36 hours and rabbits in from 48 to 60 hours. At the seat of inocula- tion there is extensive 36 under these circumstances, rapidly produces spores. The aqueous humor of a rabbit's and the sheep's eye is a particularly favourable medium for the production of spores, and the ordinary bacillus gives, in it, after twelve hours, beautiful spores, capable of resisting a temperature of 15° C. and 190° C. The asporagenous bacillus does not produce spores even when cultivated in fresh, aerated aqueous humor. This, then, is no temporary and passing change of the bacilli of charbon, but a permanent hereditary change, and at present we are not acquainted with any method by which we may endow the bacilli so modified with the power of producing spores. The appearance of cultures of asporagenous bacilli closely resem- bles that of ordinary cultures of the bacillus. In broth they give flocculi which are more easily broken down; the filaments of the asporagenous bacillus are shorter and slightly thinner; they often contain in their interior refractile grains, smaller than spores, and not resistant to heat. At the commencement of the culture the filaments are transparent and stain well; in proportion as the culture ages, many of them become granular, swell up and stain badly. Cultivated on gelatine, the asporagenous bacilli appear to liquefy it more rapidly than do the ordinary bacilli. Broth in which the sporeless bacilli develop is less coloured in the incubator, and gives less abundant crystals of ammonio-magnesium phosphate than that which has nourished the ordinary bacillus of charbon. The cultures of asporagenous bacilli finally perish at 33° C. after a longer or shorter time, but generally within a month. If after some days in the incubator we place them at the temperature of the air, they remain alive for a much longer period. Sporeless cultivations have been preserved in this manner sown in broth for 155 days, at the end of which time they have given cultures; they did not, however, contain any spores, and after heating at a tempera- ture of 65° C. for fifteen minutes were sterilized. In other cases, these asporagenous cultures remained in a cupboard in the laboratory, being still alive after 81 days; a culture on nutrient jelly was still alive after 47 days. In these old cultures very few bacilli remained alive; to resuscitate them they should be sown in large quantity, and after several days we may perceive development taking place; the virulence of these cultures without spores persists until they perish. A culture taken a short time before its death or the death of its filaments is active and destroys guinea-pigs and rabbits. In the mother cultures, on the contrary, made in the presence of an antiseptic, there is a diminution of virulence, as MM. Chamberland and Roux have long since pointed out. The daughter cultures made from phenic cultures about eight days old37 sporeless bacilli must be in a condition particularly favourable to attenuation, since they remain exposed in the form of filaments to the atmosphere at the temperature of the incubator. It is to the action of air upon the mycelium without spores that MM. Pasteur, Chamberland, and Roux have attributed the attenuation of the virulence of the cultivated bacilli at a temperature of 42.5° C. These two con- ditions38 possibility that in nature conditions may be realized which transform ordinary bacilli into attenuated and asporagenous ones. The experi- mentalist, who should meet a similar bacillus, would be very much puzzled to recognize in it the " Bacillus of charbon." He would not have the slightest hesitation in regarding it as a species of Saprophyte without associating it with the bacillus anthracis. It is necessary, in fact, to have followed step by step, in well-conducted experiments, all the series of changes of the bacillus to be certain that the inoffensive and sporeless microbe is the virus of charbon ; microbes are easier to modify than is generally admitted. It is with great trouble, in fact, that in our laboratories we preserve them with their characteristic appearance, in careful conditions of culture. We are not justified either in declaring that two microbes are not related to each other because their colonies are not quite the same, and one of them liquefies gelatine more rapidly than the other. What are these differences when compared with that which exists between attenuated sporeless and virulent spore-bearing charbonous virus? Insignificant in truth, and they should not authorize any experimentalist to regard as issues of different stock, two microscopic organisms very similar in other respects. The dissimilarity between microbes of the same origin is due doubtless to the diverse vicissitudes to which they have been exposed, and to incidents with the nature of which we are unacquainted. It is sufficient for us to avoid attaching too much importance to artificial characters and distinctions. If the work of attenuation of the virus prove to us that virulent and fatal microbes may become inoffensive, the converse, or the return to virulence of these attenuated microbes, leads us to suspect that a saprophyte may become virulent. The pathogenic organisms with which we are at the present day acquainted may be ancient saprophytes which have become progressively adapted to parasitic life. These ideas, enunciated often enough before, explain the interest which biologists and pathologists attach to experiments which furnish well-established examples of these permanent modifications of microbes. In old cultures we may find abnormal forms, filaments with swellings, irregular or ovoid, or with a series of granulations varying with their size. The spores of the bacillus are very refractile, and it is easy to distinguish them from pseudo-spores, either by staining, or, better, by heating them for fifteen minutes at a temperature of 65° C., which destroys the filaments and all material not true spores without destroy- ing spores which resist a temperature of 90° C. for fifteen minutes. The spores are difficult to stain, not being affected by ordinary dyes, and herein they differ from the bacilli. We may, however, stain them in several ways; firstly, by heating them for nearly an hour at a tempera- ture of 200° C., or by passing the slide or cover glass, upon which is
39 placed and dried the drop of the culture, through flame, then treating them with a hydro-alcoholic solution of gentian violet or some other stain. Secondly, by leaving them for 24 hours in a warm solution of fuchsine in aniline water (Erlich's solution), decolorizing with nitric acid 30 per cent. or by absolute alcohol, and exposing them to the action of a hydro- alcoholic solution of methyline blue. By the first of these methods the spores alone are stained, the elevated temperature having so altered the filaments as to render them unable to fix the coloring matter and the spore able to do so. In the second method a double coloration is achieved40 of putrefaction when they are sown in the same medium. Their develop- ment may be retarded or stopped in culture media when, either intention- ally or unintentionally, they are sown with other ærobic microbes as some common bacteria are; in such cases it may happen that the microbe of charbon develops little or not at all, or that it perishes after a certain time. Inoculated alone into the organism they generally kill, although they have to battle against the cells; but inoculated in company with common bacteria they may perish without causing any disturbance. (Pasteur.) The antagonism is not always so marked; and the microbe of charbon may develop at the same time as others in the same medium; as, for instance, in the milk of the cow attacked with specific mammitis sown with the cultivated microbes of the two diseases. (Nocard.) Nevertheless, the antagonism of the microbe to other microbes is worthy of mention. We know that the bacillus anthracis develops badly in a medium wherein the microbe of fowl cholera already exists, that it is possible to render inoffensive the inoculation of the microbe in that rabbit by preceding it with, accompanying it by, or following it by the inoculation of the microbe of erysipelas (Emmerich, Watson, Cheyne, Pawlowsky); that the inoculation of certain inoffensive or pathogenic microbes (bacillus prodigiosus, staphylococcus pyogenes aureus, pneumo- coccus) may also exercise a certain protective influence against the microbe (Pawlowsky) ; that the microbe of " Rouget " may hinder the effects of the microbe of charbon on the guinea-pig (Zagari); that a saprophyte bacterium closely resembling the bacillus anthracis, growing and giving spores like it, but without its pathogenic action on small animals, and capable of giving them a certain immunity against the bacillus anthracis, has been found in air and water (Hueppe and Wood). Again, new observations have been made in these later days relative to the antagonism of the bacillus to other microbes. Bouchard, Frenden- rich, Guignard and Charrin have remarked that the pyocyanic bacillus lessens the infection of anthrax in the rabbit and guinea-pig; it has also been found that sterilized pyocyanic cultures exercise an antagonistic action to the bacillus of charbon (Woodhead and Cartwright Wood). Boin and R41 Blagavettehensky. This investigator has found (1) that the simul- taneous inoculation into the eye of pyoeyanic bacilli and the bacillus of charbon generally opposes the development of the latter without, at all events in the immense majority of cases, rendering the animal re- fractory to a future charbonous infection; (2) that pyoeyanic bacilli in- oculated at some little distance from charbon bacilli exercise a much slighter effect upon them; (3) that the pyoeyanic bacilli exercise a direct action upon the bacilli, hindering their development; (4) that suc- cessive injections of the two microbes into a being do not prevent the development of charbon; (5) that sterilized cultures of the pyoeyanic bacilli can only influence the development of the bacilli when used in very large doses; (6) that outside the body development is arrested; (7) that the proximity of the products furnished by the pyoeyanic bacillus exercises a harmful influence on the development of the bac- teridia; (8) that the products of the bacillus exercise the harmful influence. Resistance of the "bacillus" to Physical and Chemical Agents.42 moist atmosphere, and can bear 80º C. for some time; they are capable of resisting temperatures of even 100º, 110º, 115º, 120º and 123º, when they are ancient, dried, or heated in dry air (Koch). Sometimes, however, contrary to the observations of Koch and Wolffhugel, who have seen spores not destroyed by a heat of 140º until after three hours' exposure M. Massol has found that they are always destroyed after an exposure of 57 minutes in dry air at a temperature of 100º C. To resume, spores resist a temperature of 95º C. for ten minutes in a moist atmosphere, whilst they are destroyed in less than five minutes when the temperature is carried to 100º C. Below 80º C. they preserve their vitality for a considerable time; we may heat them for a number of hours at 70º without destroying them (Roux). All the spores of a culture do not present the same degree of resistance to heat. At a temperature of 70º C. the spore of charbon does not perish for a very considerable time when heated without the presence of air; in the liquid in which it was formed this long heating does not sensibly modify its virulence; it is necessary that the heating be prolonged to nearly the limit of the resistance of the spores for the virulence to be lessened; and, on the other hand, even though by this means the virulence is lessened, its lessening does not appear to be of the nature of a true attenuation, for bacilli born of spores which have been heated in this manner for 165 hours at a temperature of 70º C., kill guinea-pigs and rabbits. At the same temperature the spores, heated in the presence of the air, die more quickly; and, before dying, lose their virulence, or it becomes sensibly diminished. Inoculated into animals they remain in- active from 24 to 36 hours, but their culture is still virulent. Some- times, when we inoculate cultures of spores heated in the air for a longer period (64 hours), a real attenuation of their virulence may be observed which may be preserved in successive cultures. Oxygen, on account of its oxidysing properties, is then the agent which interferes most wich it. Spores already attenuated by Pasteur's method are more easily acted upon by heat than are spores which have not been attenuated. Spores heated in the presence of oxygen undergo the same modifications, with little less rapidity than those heated in the presence of air. The filaments from spores heated in air or without air rapidl y form spores in cultures (Roux). Rapid desiccation kills the rods and filaments; slow desiecation does not prevent the formation of spores, which explains how it was that Davaine found charbonous blood virulent a long time after desiccations The spores once formed bear desiccation, preserve their properties for a very long time, resist putrefaction, alternate lowering and raising of temperature, humidity, desiccation, etc. Dried spores may preserve their virulence for years.
43 The action of light upon the microbe is important. M. Arloing's ex- periments led to the following results: Istly, that gaslight modifies the vegetation of the microbe but little, that it retards the evolution of the spores sown in broth, without modifying their pathogenic properties; 2ndly, that sunlight is more active, hinders the evolution of the spores and the development of the bacillus, and gradually attenuates cultures; 3rdly, that exposure to the sun for two or three hours in July, between 35º and 39º C., destroys the power of vegetating in broth culture media freshly sown with spores; 4thly, that it requires 27 to 30 hours' exposure to the sun, in the same conditions, to sterilize the mycelium of the same bacillus in a state of full development, and that before death takes place the microbe undergoes a series of progressive alterations which transform it into a vaccine of less and less activity. It had been considered that the least resistance of the spores, shown by these results, was due to the fact that those which were sown com- menced to germinate despite the action of the rays of the sun, and that the young mycelium in course of formation rapidly undergoes the sterilizing influence of the sun's rays. And this explanation of the phenomenon appeared to be demonstrated by the results obtained by M. Straus, who observed, with regard to the resistance of the spores, that when they are immersed in pure water germination does not occur for four hours, whilst in broth it may commence rapidly (in two hours). Nevertheless, M. Arloing obtained death of the spores after an hour's exposure to the rays of the electric light acting on cultures kept in ice at a temperature at which germination is impossible. In addition to this, putting aside the intimate mechanism which presides over sterilization, it remains an established fact that exposure to light more or less rapidly destroys the spore of charbon, that it may kill it very rapidly, or not till 29 or 54 hours have elapsed (Roux), and that its action is more or less rapid in proportion to the intensity of the light and according to the surrounding medium which, being modified, when culture has already commenced, renders the steriliza- tion slower. On the other hand, it is averred that the action of light is due to the presence of oxygen, and that the spores of bacillus autbracis live longer when they are exposed to the action of light without air. Similarly, M. Roux, experimenting on the spores of charbon, believed that the action of light is due to that of oxygen, and that the action of light favoured the action of the air, and that in the absence of air the spores are modified much more slowly. Under the combined action of light and air there is produced in a culture medium a chemical change which arrests the evolution of the germs; generally, flasks containing broth and the germs do not cultivate when placed in a stove, after two hours' exposure to light; whilst those
44 containing only broth after two hours of exposure to the action of light, and to which spores are afterwards added, cultivate for the most part when placed in the incubator; nevertheless, when the broth has been exposed for three or four hours the spores shown in it do not germinate. Yet the spores are not killed neither after two hours' nor after seven hours' exposure to the action of light; and when shaken in a medium which has been exposed to the action of light, and in which they will not germinate, then sown in a medium which has not been so exposed, they vegetate; germination is, it is true, if anything the more retarded the longer the spores have been exposed, or the longer they have been kept in the medium which has been exposed to the action of rays of light. Exposed broth, in which the spore does not develop, is suitable for the cultivation of the filaments; germina- tion is arrested by a modification of the medium, which is insufficient to arrest the multiplication of the rods. Oxygen plays an important part in the modification of the medium, for, after exposure, the spores exposed in a medium deprived of air germinate in the same medium when it is aerated, whilst those which have been exposed to the action of both light and air do not germinate when so treated. In addition to this, broth deprived of air or placed in an atmosphere of carbonic acid may remain exposed to the action of light for many hours and afterwards may serve for the cultivation of the rods or spores; whilst a few hours' exposure to light and air renders a broth unsuitable for the development of the spores. The action of light and air is rapid when the receiver is freely open and contains only a small quantity of broth. We may increase the effect of light and air by adding to the broth substances which oxydise easily; in such manner, veal broth to which glucose has been added, becomes, after exposure, more unfavourable to the germination of spores than broth to which sugar has not been added. A medium which has become unsuitable to germination after the exposure may regain its original properties when kept in diffused light or partial darkness. Cultures of spores which have been exposed to the action of light without air, preserve their germinating power for a long time, becoming slower and slower in performing the process as they remain for a longer period in the medium. Cultures of spores which have been exposed, without air, for 83 hours, have not sensibly lost their virulence. It is the same with cultures of spores submitted for 54 hours to the action of light and air. The filaments, as M. Arloing has demonstrated, exposed to the sun and air in broth for a sufficient length of time, become by degrees attenuated, and their cultures follow the same course (Roux). Under the double influence of oxygen and light, oxydation, which is hurtful to the life of the microbe, occurs. It is averred lastly by
45 Duclaux that spores exposed in a dry state may preserve their power of vegetating for a month or more. The oxygen, which is necessary for the development of the bacillus anthracis, may, under such circumstances, contribute to its attenuation, or may even destroy it. Its action is more particularly marked in adult bacilli, the spores bearing its presence much better. Compressed oxygen also acts more energetically on the rods or filaments than on the spores. When chemical germicides are caused to act upon the microbes we still observe great differences between the resistance of the rod and that of the spore; the adult bacilli are killed more rapidly and with much smaller doses than are the spores. Bromine, iodine, and chlorine may be used as germicides when we are dealing with the baciilus anthracis even in the spore form. According to Davaine 7 milligrammes of iodine sterilizes a litre of fluid in which has been placed 1 centimetre cube of charbonous blood; it arrests the development of charbonous microbes in culture media in which it has been dissolved, and kills the spores after 24 hours' contact (Koch). Char- bonous spores perish after an hour's exposure to chlorine water and the rods are destroyed more quickly (Perroneito). Chlorine gas, 25 to 50 per cent., kills the spores of charbon in a minute (Galtier), but in practice these agents are little used. As to sulphurous acid, we know that it is unable to sterilize the spores of charbon; and after the experiments of M. Thionot we cannot count on sulphurous acid in large quantities used for 24 hours to destroy the microbe of charbon. Essence of turpentine which has been considered as capable of destroying the bacillus and its spores (Pasteur), may be inactive against the latter (Koch). Solution of nitric acid must be used in high percentage to kill the spores, whilst a 2 per cent. solution of hydrochloric acid should be sufficient to kill the bacilli and their spores (Koch). A 5 per cent. solution of cresyl rapidly destroys the adult bacillus; but the spores resist its action for a considerable time 46 "The plain figures in the second column signify that the spores removed from the disinfectant solution on those days developed on the nutrient jelly as actively as in the control experiments, and had there fore not been affected by the action of the carbolic solution. The figures bearing an asterisk signify that the spores transferred to the jelly on those days yielded scanty or retarded growths, less active than those of the control experiments. The doubly underlined figures in dicate complete sterilization47 acid rapidly destroys the rods and filaments of bacillus anthracis, but the spores resist a 5 per cent. solution for 24 days." Koch also remarks of several compounds of carbolic acid which were tested as to their power of destroying anthrax spores, but all proved to be less powerful than the pure acid, and he decided that car- bolate of zinc stands next to carbolic acid as a disinfectant. Anthrax spores were found to be absolutely unaffected by lying for 110 days in a 5 per cent. solution of carbolic acid in oil, or 70 days in a solution in alcohol. Even the sensitive anthrax bacilli were not more affected by 5 per cent. solution of caroblic acid in oil than by pure oil, as will be seen from the following table:48 upon gelatine, whereas, after exposure for an hour to a 1 in 50,000 solu- tion, the growth was as vigorous as in the control experiment. Quinine impedes the development of anthrax bacilli at a dilution of a 1,200 per million, and entirely prevents it at 1,600 per million. What becomes of the microbe in the cadavers, cadaveric debris water and soil.49 18º, 20º, 25º C., the cadavers preserve their virulence for a much shorter period. In addition to this, all things being equal, the virus preserves its life for a much longer period when the carcase containing it has been opened and cleaned. It preserves itself equally in cadaveric débris in the charbonous products, in the dejecta and excretions of the sick, in the urine and fæces; putrefaction causes them to lose their virulence. But, thanks to the presence of air, spores may form in these various products, and in that case, of course, the virulence persists for a longer time. The virulence of charbonous meat may or may not be destroyed by salting (Peuch); after a thorough salting it may be, but after an incomplete one it may preserve its vitality. If the bacilli do not form spores in the cadavers, as we know they do not, when they do not gain access to the air, still those which are rejected from the mouth, nose, and anus in the blood which usually flows from these natural orifices, also those in the urine and excrements, gaining, as they do, exposure to the air and oxygen, go on to spore formation. The bacilli are often exposed to the air in this manner, or by skinning the carcases before burying them, or by allowing the blood and excretions to remain on the latter, etc., and spore formation takes place. The spores, once formed, preserve their vitality and their virulence for years; they will remain latent, but capable of development when introduced into suitable surroundings,50 Pasteur and Schrakramp have observed that the bacillus runs through the whole course of its development in the soil. It is very probable that spores sometimes cultivate in stagnant water rich in organic matter. We have observed the presence of charbonous germs in water where they have been carried by the rain. It has been perfectly clearly demonstrated, by experiment and by observation that charbonous germs are preserved in the soil. "By washing suspected earth and allowing the water to settle," says Pasteur, "then submitting the deposit so obtained to a temperature of 90º C. for some minutes, we destroy all the germs excepting the spores of anthrax or septicæmia, if there are any; by inoculating animals with this deposit we get in some septicæmia, and in others charbon. In this manner the presence of charbonous germs has been detected in earth from graves three to twelve years after burial of animals suffering from charbon; animals have been seen to contract charbon after having eaten herbs, etc., grown on graves two years after burial; forage deposited on soil con- taining spores of charbon has been observed to commuicate the malady. Spore formation occurs more especially in the superior layers of the soil, but it may occur also in the deeper layers when the soil is permeable and the temperature favourable; Soyka has noticed that it occurs more rapidly in a humid soil than even a culture medium. it does not occur in water deprived of organic substances (Rivolta), but the spores are preserved in the water. In the same manner, according to the researches of Kochstetter, whilst the bacillus is preserved three days in distilled water, in ordinary water the spores remain for more than 154 days; according to the researches of MM. Straus and Dubarry, the bacillus may exist for two months in water, and the spores more than 130 days. To sum up, these charbonous germs preserve their vitality for years in the soil which covers charbonous animals' graves, and in the soil surround- ing them; this soil may communicate charbon twelve years after the burial of the carcass, and perhaps even a longer time. We may discover germs in such graves, and may by intravenous injection of rabbits, guinea- pigs, or sheep, which are not easily susceptible to septicæmia, with the residue of the deposit from water with which they have been washed, induce charbon and thus verify the suspected material. Although the cadavers have been buried at a good depth, charbon germs, despite the filtering action of the soil, remount to the top of the graves, where we find them, as has already been seen; Pasteur, Feltz, and Boilinger contend that they are brought to the surface by means of earth-worms, but this view is denied by Koch, who claims to have proved to the contrary by experimentally burying earth-worms in earth con- taining the spores, and on careful examination of the casts of these worms, finding no trace of charbonous germs of any kind. Pasteur,
51 Feltz, and Bollinger, however, state that worms proceeding from char- bonous graves deposit in their casts, and especially those found in spring and autumn, such a number of these germs that it is sufficient to inocu- late the deposit from the water with which these have been washed to produce the disease. Pasteur has been able, by employing certain an- tiseptics which have little or no effect on the virus of charbon, but which destroys a great number of other germs contained in earth, to cultivate and obtain a pure culture from the casts of worms. Pasteur, and later Feltz, by mixing the bacillus in earth and causing worms to live in it, have observed after some days that the casts extract- ed from these worms contained the germ of the disease, for they gave it on inoculation, and it was possible to cultivate it from them. It has been in addition to this remarked that on soils in which worms do not live, such as schistous, granitic and chalky, charbon is unknown, whilst where the soil is clayey, loamy or alluvial, it is common. On the other hand, it is very natural to suppose that worms are not the only means by which charbon germs are brought to the surface; all creatures which live in the subsoil may bring up the germs. The germs so brought to the surface of the soil spread about attach- ing themselves to plants; they may be taken up with dust, by the feet of animals, penetrate into the respiratory passages, attach themselves to the skin, hair, or wool; they may be carried by rain and deposited at some distance; they may be carried into streams, ponds, pools, tanks, swamps, deposited on their banks, and thus have more opportunities of penetrating into the organism. These facts explain the following, which have been frequently observed: the frequent and successive appearance of charbon in animals which are pastured on tainted pastures; the cessation of danger in certain tainted pastures after a certain time; the infection of certain pastures, which not having previously been dangerous, suddenly become so; the appearance of charbon on soils where charbonous animals have never been buried; the appearance of charbon in inundated pastures, etc., etc. Besides this, other circumstances than the burial of charbonous carcasses may facilitate the dissemination of germs. The bacilli may, as has already been explained, form spores in the blood which has escaped from the sick animal, or from the cadavers, in the dejecta, manure, urine, and various other matter proceeding from charbonous cadavers, and it is easy to conceive that there are numerous circumstances which favour the dissemination of germs, more particularly when we consider that the germs may multiply and form spores when they arrive on vegetable detritus, marshy ground, etc. So it has been observed that animals contract charbon when pastured on marshy ground or land subject to E2
52 inundation; animals placed in folds or stables, the floors of which have been taken from anthrax graves; animals pastured on lands manured with litter from charbonous sources, and those marching on roads over which charbonous animals have been travelling. Nocard and Jouanne have seen the importation of manure, especially artificial manure in the form of dried blood, lead to an outbreak of charbon. In the same manner charbon may be introduced into a locality where it did not previously exist, by the utilization of manure coming from a country where charbon exists, by the use of manure from horse slaughterers' yards when certain parts, such as the matter from the digestive canal, have not been steril- ized, by the excrements of animals which have swallowed the germs without having become inoculated, etc. Slugs, for example, may swallow the germs of anthrax and pass them out intact, and other animals may doubtless do the same. Emigration of animals usually checks or stops an outbreak when the animals are conducted to non-dangerous pastures, but when emigration is adopted a danger of corrupting the new pasture is inevitable; the danger is considerably lessened by submitting the cadavers and the dejecta of animals, which fall sick after the emigration has been carried out, to disinfection or destroying them. When the germs exist at the surface of the soil, rain splashes them up on to the herbage; dust also carries them on to plants, and it is easy, therefore, to conceive that herbage and forage may be infected on tainted ground and thus rendered exceedingly dangerous; we have also seen lastly that water may contain and spread the contagion, giving rise to charbon in animals which drink it. Contagion how produced.53 the foetus, and that the blood of the latter is not virulent, nor does it contain rods, when borne by a charbonous mother. They consequently were led to the belief that perfect filtration occured in the placenta, the rods being arrested by the flexuous capillaries there. However, it has been for some years established that this rule is not an absolute one, but is subject to some exceptions. Although generally we do not observe the presence of rods nor the existence of virulence in the blood of the f54 and are, if anything, more numerous in its tissues the longer the mother survives the inoculation." Malvoz has also observed that the bacillus may in the guinea-pig pass from the mother to the f55 Contagion by ingestion.56 from fields in which, or near which, charbonous carcasses have been buried. Sometimes it has been observed that charbon has appeared in animals ordinarily refractory to the disease following the ingestion of charbonous meat, as in pigs, birds, dogs, lions in menageries, and even in man, etc. Bonnet d'Iseghem has observed the transmission of charbon to a person who had eaten cooked charbonous meat. Pasteur has observed that sheep fed with aliment previously soiled with charbonous germs became in a certain proportion sick. He has observed that guinea-pigs fed on aliment with which the spores of charbon have been previously mixed contract charbon with difficulty. He has found spores in the excrement of sheep and guinea-pigs. He has recognized that we may considerably increase the mortality when we mix sharp-pointed materials with charbonous fodder57 tumefied ganglias ft, infiltrated, and marked with blood-spots, are very rich in them. M. Rodet has besides noticed that guinea-pigs which have swallowed charbonous material have not contracted the disease; and he has noticed animals of the same species become charbonous from eating the eadaver of a guinea-pig dead of charbon, the osseous debris of which had doubtless wounded the bucco-pharyngeal mucous membrane. In short, when we inoculate charbonous virus into the lingual, buccal, pharyngeal mucous membrane; when we chafe, wound, or other- wise injure these mucous membranes, and deposit charbonous matter on them, we induce charbon with initial lesions in the neighbouring structures. Dr. de Maurans has also noticed the influence of the action of rough, pointed forage, etc., in the development of charbon; he has observed that in Provence charbon shows itself more particularly during drought, when the animals consume dry herbs or leaves of almond trees, which wound the mucous membranes of the first digestive passages. It has also been noticed that animals which are suffering from the lesions of aphthous fever are more prone to contract charbon. It has also been seen that in Beauce, the mortality is greatest when animals are conduct- ed to graze on stubble fields, as they are then more liable to wound the mucous membranes, etc. Perroncito caused "guinea-pigs to be fed with food mixed with the adult bacilli and saw only one become charbonous; having fed ten others with food sprinkled with spores, six became affected. From these experiments the following conclusions may be drawn: that following the ingestion of aliments soiled with the charbonous virus, infection may occur in the intestine; it is more difficult and rarer with the bacilli than with the spores; it may, however, occur when bacilli are included in pieces of meat and escape the action of the gastric juice, which is in reality a bactericide, and find parts of the intestine deprived of epithe- lium by the action of parasites or by the action of hard irritating por- tions of food; charbon which results from ingestion is generally due to the introduction of spores, but even the spores require for their absorp- tion portions of intestine deprived of its epithelium. The mucous membrane of the intestine, even when normal, may, according to Kitt and Koch, absorb the spores of charbon. Although the gastric juice generally destroys the bacilli it respects spores. Koch having caused animals to swallow spores included in a potato, saw that they died of intestinal charbon, whilst sheep fed in the same way on bacilli were not affected; whilst the observations of Toussaint and Pasteur tend to establish the fact that absorption occurs by the bucco-pharyngeal mucous membrane, or that it is favoured by wounds of various kinds,
58 Koch thinks that it occurs in the intestine, and that the spores fix them- selves in the follicles or Peyer's patches and then gain entrance to the lymphatic system. Be whatever it may the real point of entry, there remains no doubt that the ingestion of food and water soiled with charbonous germs may induce the disease. It is, however, advisable to add that the ingestion of charbonous germs is not always followed by the development of the disease59 been observed that cases of broncho-pulmonary charbon occur in man as the result of the inhalation of charbonous dust. The charbonous virus may in reality be absorbed by inhalation sometimes the germs may be arrested in the nasal cavities, trachea, bronchi, and be afterwards expelled with the mucus. Nevertheless the microbes may pass through the epithelium of these parts. Muskatblath has produced charbon by injecting the bacillus into the trachea. Buch- ner has obtained it by pulverizing in the respiratory passages, waters charged with the spores. Tchistovitch has produced charbon by the intertracheal injection of the bacilli. Transmission through the skin.60 animal with charbon after having bitten and soiled the proboscis with blood of charbonous animals. In this connection it may be remarked that in the Hôtel Dieu Hospital in Paris, M. D. Mollière had under treatment and cured a man attacked with anthrax (malignant pustule) following the bite of a fly which he had smashed on the bite. Besides, the intervention of the fly may be an occasional cause in certain cases, where, owing to the itching which it gives rise to, the person scratches and may thus inoculate charbon, or indeed any other virus, he has, on his hands or under his nalis; this frequently happens to those who work with charbonous dèbris. Whether the fly directly inoculates, or whether it simply gives rise to irritation, causing the person to scratch and inoculate himself, it is none the less true that it is commonly believed to be a source of trans- mission. It often happens, however, that local accidents of a different nature inducing malignant pustule are wrongly interpreterd. It is not, nevertheless, impossible that flies soiled with the virus of charbon may become agents in its transmission. It may be taken as a general rule that the bites of most flies in this particular are of little danger, their bites being in themselves rarely dangerous. In short, it is recognized clearly at the present day, and is a generally admitted fact, that the development of charbon in countries where it is endemic and propagates itself, is more especially due to the pre-ervation of the germs from buried cadavers, dèbris, products and dejecta, etc. The germs may be disseminated and charbon imported into districts in various ways, by the movement of flocks or herds, by the transportation of forage taken from contaminated sources, by dogs, which, after having ingested charbonous material, may pass out the germs (spores) with their excrements, and thus contaminate the herbage on which they are depo- sited, or the water in which they drink after having made a meal off a charbon carcass, and jackals and other scavengers may do the same; or by water flowing, as in inundations; or by wool impregnated with de- jecta or blood containing the virus, or by water in which it has been washed, etc., etc. Burials, clandestine, defective, not sufficiently deep, those made in places to which animals are permitted ready access, in earth containing many worms, etc., explain, together with the utiliza- tion of charbonous dejecta, the frequence and persistence of the disease. Burials of carcasses carried out in sandy, calcareous, and chalky soils are less dangerous, the germs in such cases not remounting to the surface, but remaining where deposited; but even in these cases the tops of graves are dangerous, because there is every possibility of the soil cover- ing them being contaminated with germs which have escaped from the carcass. Formerly the development of charbon was considered to be spon-
61 taneous and attributed to diverse influences. At the present day the expressions "spontaneous development,'' "spontaneous birth," are em- ployed to express the natural development of the disease following reception of the germs from the media surrounding the animals. The causes cited formerly to explain the spontaneous development of the disease may be considered as simple circumstances favourable to con- tagion; they act by favouring the preservation and multiplication of the germs and their introduction into the organism. These causes are numerous, and it is at the present time easy to interpret their mode of action. For a long time an elevated temperature and warm seasons have been marked as favourable to the development of the malady, and more particularly have warm moist seasons been blamed; this is in reality due to the fact that a relatively elevated temperature and a certain degree of moisture favour the multiplication and development of the germs, the formation of spores, etc. For years it has been noticed that charbon more especially occurs at the end of spring or commencement of autumn, during the summer, during warm years, during warm seasons, tempes- tuous and humid, during warm succeeding moist weather, etc. Ponds, marshes, morasses, swamps, low-lying alluvial ground, sedgy vegetation, and stagnant water generally are cited as causes. All these favour the preservation and multiplication of the germ of charbon and its introduc- tion into the organism; there is a propitious ensemble of conditions; a favourable medium which furnishes suitable aliment; contact of the air, and an elevated temperature, favourable to the formation of spores. Forage and water may contain the bacilli, and the animals by in- gesting them may contract charbon. Dust may convey the virus and it may be thus conducted into the organism. All localities where charbon is prevalent contain in their soil, water, or the herbage which grows upon them, the germs of the disease. Places having a humid soil, a clay subsoil, favour the preservation and multiplication of the germs; and their waters, as well as their herbage, may communicate charbon. It has been pretended that changed aliments or foods in excess may cause charbon, but this has no trace of truth in it, provided that the foods do not contain the virus of the disease. Decomposd water cannot produce charbon if it does not contain the virus; and neither excessive fatigue nor insufficient food ever produce the malady of themselves. It has been remarked, as we have already stated, that charbon more particularly appears in rainy years, especially when the rains are followed by excessive dryness. The rain water dissolves a large quantity of organic and mineral materials which, when heat follows, constitute a favourable medium for the development and multiplication of the germs. We have also blamed damp habitations, badly kept and ventilated; but whatever be their defective hygiene,
62 they cannot cause the development of charbon if they do not contain the germs. Sometimes, however, as we shall see presently, debilitating influences play a certain part by inceasing the predisposition. We may take it as a fact that anthrax, like charbon syptomatique, is a malady arising out of certain soils which are capable of preserving the virus. Its development, like that of charbon symptomatique, depends greatly on infection from the soil and infection by the soil; it appears more particularly when the humidity of the soil becomes lower after it has been subject to humidity and a sufficient elevation of temperature for the development of spores to take place. Absorption of the virus, its mode of action, pathogeny.63 into the vein is inconsiderable, their multiplication is slower and more difficult. Be that as it may, the vessels preside over the absorption of the virus deposited in a wound, and the penetration of the microbes from the region inoculated may take place very rapidly, for, if five minutes after inoculation the inoculated part be amputated, it does not always stop the course of the malady, which clearly shows that a part at least of the virus has penetrated beyond the amputated portion. According to M. G. Colin, the virus of charbon inoculated by subcutaneous punctures into the ear of a rabbit caused charbon and death, although the ear was amputated 5, 4, and 3 minutes after the inoculation. According to Davaine, the virus of charbon deposited in wounds on rabbits, of the extent of a shilling, made by excision of the tegument, did not generally cause charbon when the wounds were cauterized with sulphuric acid, etc., one hour after the inoculation, and hence it may be concluded that the nature of the wound influences the rapidity of the absorption. There is great irregularity in the duration of the absorption of the virus of charbon, even following inoculations by puncture (subcutaneous). M. G. Colin has observed that inoculation of the horse produces a marked local lesion, and that excision or cauterization of the tumour may prevent general infection. M. Rodet has observed that even in the inoculated rabbit the virus propagates itself with variable rapidity; sometimes excision after 5 minutes have elapsed since the inoculation, does not prevent infection, whilst excision after from 1 to 10 hours stops it in certain cases. Moreover, excision arrests or does not arrest the infection, according as it is deep and well removed around the seat of inoculation. The germs are taken up by the lymphatic vessels and multiply in the lymph, their propagation varies according to the conditions which the inoculated part is in, and according to the activity to the virus being greater or less. The rapidity of their absorption depends on the facility with which they gain admittance to the lymphatic system; in cases of accidental contagion they may remain for a considerable time at the point of inoculation before entering the lymphatics. Incubation.64 it be, and whatever be its degree of susceptibility, offers a certain amount of resistance to charbon and to othar microbes; it acts against them through the medium of its cellular elements and its fluids. Fodor has clearly shown the bactericidal rôle of the blood of the rabbit in the case of the virus of charbon; he has observed that these microbes, injected into the veins or sown in fresh blood taken from the animal, are destroyed in large numbers. The susceptibility of the rabbit to charbon after intravenous injection is explained by the localiza- tion of the bacteria in the parenchymatous organs, where it can develop free from the harmful influence which the blood exerts upon it, and finally invade this medium. Nuttal has likewise observed the bacteri- cidal action of the blood, either normal or defibrinated, of the rabbit, mouse, pigeon, sheep, dog; of the aqueous humor, the pericardial fluid of the dog and rabbits to the charbon virus. Buchner also has recog- nized it in the blood of the rabbit and dog; and he attributes it to the serum itself. Wurtz has besides observed that the bacillus anthracis, either in the state of rods, filaments or spores, is destroyed after an hour's sojourn in white of egg at 38º C. Behring, Nissen, Metchnikoff and Roux, etc., have noted the bactericidal properties of the blood of the rat. On account of this bactericidal property of the blood and other fluids acting against the bacteria, we may explain why a small dose of the virus may fail to produce the disease, whilst a large one may do so. The bactericidal action of the serum of the blood is aided in its anti- microbian work by the intervention of the cells of the tissues, more particularly that of the leucocytes which play the part of phagocytes. The spleen, according to the observations of Bardoch, producing phago- cytes, exercises a great influence; it plays an important part, protecting the blood against the invasion of microbes. In 25 dogs deprived of their spleens, 19 succumbed to charbon, whilst 5 only in 25 animals with the spleen intact contracted the disease. Again, whilst normal rabbits bore the anti-charbon vaccination by Chamberland and Roux's method, which will later be described, rabbits, whose spleens had been removed, died in the proportion of 26 to 35 from the first vaccine. Leucocytes act not only against the adult bacilli, but also against the spores. Smirnof, Bitter, Lubarsch, and Fischer have observed that the bacilli may preserve their virulence for several days in the animal tissues of immune animals, such as sheep and frogs. From the experiments of M. Trapeznikoff recently published, we may draw the following conclu- sions; in refractory animals the am65 and transport them to the various organs which exercise a bacteri- cidal or sporicidal influence such as, if not to actually destroy them, renders their germination difficult; when the spores have had time to germinate before being taken up by the cells, the bacilli to which they give existence are seized and destroyed by leucocytes; the spores taken up remain for a long time alive and virulent, and if the phagocytes which have taken them up weaken and die, they germinate, become transformed into filaments, which may in their turn be taken up and destroyed; in animals not refractory, the spores are seized by the leucocytes in the same manner, but they germinate and destroy them. Manner in which the bacilli, etc., act upon the system.66 alteration in the nervous centres ; hence it is indicated that they should be searched for in these organs when the animals have shown sign of cerebral localization of the malady; this mode of action, as is the case with the preceding one, does not always suffice to explain death. It is more particularly by producing a veritable intoxication that the bacteria determine death. The microbes of charbon in fact secrete toxic matters. Charbonous blood previously filtered and then mixed with normal blood, renders the globules of the latter more agglutinative (Pasteur) ; this implies the presence of some diastase. Besides this, according to Toussaint, we produce a local inflammation in animals which are refractory to the disease with filtered blood, which proves the presence of a soluble pathogenic substance. Hofa has found a very active ptomaine in cultures of the virus made on meat. M. Chauveau, by inoculating 100 grammes of the blood of a sheep dead of charbon, has caused rapid death of the inoculated sheep which was previously vac- cinated ; death was due to veritable poisoning, and there was no mul- tiplication of the germs in the blood. M. Gamaleia, by treating the spleen of a charbonous animal with strong alcohol, and afterwards removing the coagulum with water, has obtained a liquid which caused high fever in the rabbit. To sum up, then, when an animal has become accidentally or experi- mentally inoculated, the bacilli multiply at the seat of inoculation, and secrete diastatic and toxic products. They set up irritation, inflamma- tion, exudation, local infiltration and 67 membranes, in the connective tissues, etc. With these changes, the asphyxiating supply of bacilli increases more and more, as does also the sum of their diastatic and toxic secretions, and death occurs more particularly as a consequence of poisoning by these. Degrees of Receptivity68 If such is the influence of species, it is necessary to add that it may be modified more or less by influences, which remain to be examined, by race, individuality, age, mode of inoculation, by certain debilitating influences, and by the quantity and quality of the virus. Race may exert a considerable influence, rendering quasi-refractory animals belonging to species the most predisposed. So it is in the ovine species, the Algerian races offering a natural resistance to charbon. Algerian sheep were introduced on this account to the shores of the Mediterranean. This peculiarity of the Algerian sheep, well known to breeders in the south-east of France, has been verified experimentally by M. Chauveau. However, the resistance of Algerian sheep is not always absolute; it may be overcome by the introduction of a strong dose of the virus (Chauveau). From observations made it appears that certain of these sheep contract spontaneous charbon, and also that the quasi-immu- nity becomes much weaker, and finally lost in those animals which are imported and reared in France. Also, according to M. Chauveau, French sheep imported into Algeria do not appear to acquire a like im- munity, and it is therefore beyond doubt that the immunity is due to race. The Indian sheep is very susceptible to the disease. Horses, which in Sardinia, Russia, Siberia, etc., are frequently attacked, are more rarely so in France and Central Europe. Toussaint says the ass, and Tayon more particularly the African ass, contracts charbon less easily than does the horse. Certain subjects belonging to species the most susceptible, may some- times present an individual immunity not becoming, infected in danger- ous centres, escaping experimental infection by ingestion, and sometimes even resisting inoculation. This individual immunity may be due to the great resistance of the organism to the disease, or, better, to a certain degree of natural vaccination which the animals have undergone in the media where they live. The age of animals contributes greatly to modify their receptivity; with a few exceptions it is more especially in youth that the contagium is virulent; young animals belonging to quasi-refractory species may be more easily infected than adults. In the same way young pigs ordina- rily contract charbon after inoculation (Crookshank and Peuch) ; young birds and puppies may be infected in large proportion by inoculation (G. Colin, 69 contracted charbon. Again, injection of the virus into the anterior chamber of the eye is more fatal in the pigeon than is subcutaneous in- oculation. Numerous influences may modify the receptivity of the ani- mals ; these are for the most part influences which are of a debilitating nature. So, as Pasteur has shown, we may render the fowl susceptible by lowering its temperature; and Giber shows that, inversely, we may in- oculate the frog successfully by raising the temperature. Sheep are, ac- cording to Rodet, rendered susceptible by bleeding before inoculation, Feser states that feeding on watery foods intensifies the action of the virus. Bardach says that ablation of the spleen, and the intravenous in- jection of inert powders, increase the receptivity in the dog. According to Charrin and Roget, fatigue renders white rats, which are often refrac- tory, more apt to contract charbon. Canalis and Morpurgo state that inanition commenced some days before inoculation, or even afterwards, renders the pigeon susceptible to charbon, and it is the same with the fowl. Privation then may result, as I have observed, in many animals in increase or even creation of susceptibility. So also, according to Platania and Wagner, the introduction into the system of such sub- stances as curare, alcohol, chloral, enables us to give charbon to the frog, fowl, and pigeon. So may previous disease or bad hygienic conditions increase the receptivity of animals. The quantity and the quality or energy of the virus has a consider- able effect on the susceptibility of individuals to charbon; the least susceptible animals may be rendered more or less gravely ill by the introduction of strong large doses of the virus, more particularly when it is very active. Algerian sheep, for example, may become charbon- ous after inoculation with very large doses of virus (Chauveau). To sum up, the differences which have been observed regarding the receptivity of animals relates to the species, race, individuals, age, state of health, hygienic conditions, the mode of entry of the virus, and its quality and quantity. This resistance is variable; it is more or less permanent and complete: it rarely, however, enables animals to withstand experi- mental inoculation. It is explained by the increase and diminution of the power of the phagocytes and the bactericidal state of the tissues; the influences which diminish it act by lessening these two powers. Natural immunity leads us to the consideration of acquired or con- ferred immunity of vaccination, and the attenuation of the virus of charbon. Attenuation of the virus of charbon.70 M. Pasteur, after having observed that fowls fed upon food soiled with the material of fowl cholera, became vaccinated, endowed with immunity, and rendered refractory, when they did not die, also noticed that certain sheep which had ingested food soiled by the virus of char- bon, escaped death after having been visibly ill, and that they after. wards resisted inoculation with charbonous material. He asked himself if it might not, under these circumstances, be possible to vaccinate sheep against the disease by previously submitting them gradually to the ingestion of food soiled by the spores of charbon (July 1880). After this, M. Pasteur observed, in September 1880, that the cow might recover spontaneously from charbon, and that once recovered she was vaccinated. Pasteur then came to the conclusion that ovine and bovine animals which had recovered from spontaneous charbon or from the inoculated disease were immune. M. Chauveau also noted the immunity of Algerian sheep and the immunity of lambs born of a mother inoculated with the disease during gestation. Attenuation by heat.71 be able to inoculate it without causing the death of the animal, and that we could at the same time confer an immunity against the attacks of a non-attenuated virus. He obtained charbonous blood, suitable for inoculation, which did not produce charbouous fever in a fatal degree, but only a very slight attack, and which conferred immunity, by heating for ten minutes, at 55° C., charbonous blood which had been previously defibrinated. Scarce- ly had this mode of procedure been published than it was attacked by Pasteur, who was not, however, able to confute the fact that heat was capable of attenuating the virus of charbon. Toussaint was for the moment mistaken as to the explanation of the mode of action of heat and believed that the heating destroyed the bacteria; he attributed the immunity to the introduction into the organism of a material which was antagonistic to the development of the bacteria. In reality he was nearly, in so thinking, attributing the immunity which he had obtained to the action of heat in attenuating the virus. Pasteur denied this explanation; he remarked that the bacillus could resist a temperature of 55° C. for ten minutes, and even for a longer time ; he recognized that the bacilli were modified, and that it was not the soluble product formed by it during its life which was the cause of the vaccination in Toussaint's experiments; he observed that when heat was sufficiently applied to kill the microbes, as could be assured by culture, inoculation was not preventive. However, as we shall see later, the soluble products are capable of conferring immunity. Besides this, Trasbot had recognized that the blood of the f72 been applied and has succeeded in giving vaccines with septic virus73 it is sown. Amongst these attenuated bacilli of various degrees of virulence, it becomes easy to find one which, when inoculated into animals, only gives them a mild and benign attack of the disease, and confers upon them immunity against the non-attenuated virus. At temperatures the most elevated compatible with the culture of the bacillus, varying with the medium used, they do not form spores. They do not grow at 45° C., but will at 42°-43° C., and at 425° C. they do not form spores in cultures made in flasks where the liquid is deep enough. Koch says that they do so when cultivated on plates. The bacilli, cultivated in chicken broth, either neutral or feebly alkaline, in contact with the air, at a constant temperature of be- tween 42°-43° C., do not even after a very long time form spores. Left at that temperature, in contact with the air, the microbe, after being multiplied by seission and forming a filamentous mycelium, becomes rapidly of less virulence. During the first days it passes through various degrees of attenuation. Each of these various con- ditions of virulence, more or less attenuated, may be reproduced by culture. Each attenuated microbe constitutes a vaccine against the superior microbe; and it is easy to discover, in these successive viruses, vaccines capable of producing charbonous fever in animals without destroying them, and to confer such immunity on them as to preserve them from the mortal malady. Once attenuated, the microbe preserves its attenuation in the new cultures, and is sown in fresh media maintained at a less elevated temperature; it then produces spores of an attenuated virulence, from whence are produced again bacilli equally attenuated. To recapitulate, the bacillus cultivated at 42°-43° C. in contact with the air, becomes progressively attenuated ; each state of virulence is reproduced by culture, preserving its proper virulence ; attenuated virus may produce spores similarly attenuated when placed in a me- dium the temperature of which is 33°-35° C. The spores which they produce are attenuated like the bacilli, and keep better. Each attenuated bacillus may be considered as a vaccine to the one superior to it in viru- lence ; it gives a benign form of disease, when sufficiently attenuated, and confers protection against a graver attack : in this manner, by inoculating animals, first with a very attenuated virus, and then with a stronger one, we are enabled to confer upon them immunity against very virulent charbon without running any, or scarcely any, appreciable danger of causing serious illness, or destroying them. At the end of 12 or 13 days, the bacillus, cultivated and maintained in contact with the air at 42°-43° C., loses its virulence as regards the adult guinea- pig, and when inoculated into it does not kill it, whilst it lives and may be cultivated and reproduce itself in this inoffensive condition. At
74 the end of 31 days it only kills young mice ; and at the end of a month and a half it entirely loses its virulence. The microbe of charbon may be attenuated without any marked change in its morphological characters ; it may retain this attenuation in cultures, produce attenuated spores, give only a benign form of disease, and confer immunity. The attenuated virus presents a thinner, shorter, and more divided form of bacillus ; and the spores are very small. The virus attenuated by exposure to the air at a temperature of 42° to 43° C. is less abundant, and forms upon the sides of the flasks a uniform deposit, whilst the virulent virus forms a flooculent, snowy mass, made up of long filaments. When we sow attenuated spores, however, we obtain filaments forming flocculi. The attenuated bacilli and their spores are less stable, and perish after some months. The attenuation obtained by this method is due, according to M. Pasteur, to oxygen : he has recognized the fact that the action of oxygen varies with the temperature and with the culture medium ; he also recognizes the influence of the temperature for he has seen the guinea-pig resist for five or six days inoculations made with a virus heated to 42°-43° C. in closed tubes. The virus attenuated by ten minutes' rapid heating at 55° C. does not preserve its attenuation in cultures in the same way as those attenuated at 42°-43° C.; this is not due to a difference in the mode of action, but to the duration of the action of the temperature. The virus of charbon of a very attenuated virulence, may regain it progressively, so long as it has not been killed outright, by successive cultures upon animals which are very susceptible and very young, then upon older animals, then upon animals less susceptible. If we commence upon guinea-pigs of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 20, 30 days old, then pass on to those several months old, then to the sheep, for example, we resuscitate the viru- lence; in this return to virulence we may, by cultivating virus at the various stages of the process, produce vaccines of the various degrees of activity. In the practice of protective inoculation, according to M. Pasteur's method, we employ successively two vaccines of different degrees of attenuation, commencing with a very attenuated virus, ob- tained by exposing culture at 42.5° C. for 15 or 20 days, and following this up with a second vaccine less attenuated, derived from cultures exposed to the air at 42.5° C. for 10 or 12 days. In the vaccines prepared according to M. Pasteur's method just described, the properties acquired are not absolutely fixed. After a series of successive generations, or during the prolonged inactivity of an attenuated culture, the virulence may become modified, increase or decrease, and hence it becomes necessary to return from time to time to the commencement of the operations, and produce fresh vaccines in order to be certain of the results. We must never lose sight of the fact that charbon vaccines regain their virulence when they have
75 developed in a sheep or other animal, and have accidentally destroyed it after inoculation. After the publication of the results which we have set forth, the method of attenuation instituted by M. Pasteur was tested outside his laboratory; and these tests were fully confirmative (Feltz, Perroncito, etc., etc.); to-day the method is applied in various bacteriological institutes. Attenuation in the soil.76 vaccine (vaccin fort), and that we should inoculate animals first with the weak and later with the strong vaccines, allowing some days' interval between the inoculations as is done in M. Pasteur's method. M. Chauveau besides demonstrated in 1883 that heat may be used to attenuate cultures of the virus rapidly; that cultures developed in 20 hours at 42°-43° C. may be attenuated in this way very quickly in 3 hours at 47° C. they become so attenuated as to be innocuous to the adult guinea-pig; that we may produce attenuation without the aid of oxygen ; that we may produce attenuated cultures capable of form ing a stock and producing batonnets or rods and filaments equally attenuated, from the spores developed in it. By means of heat, M. Chauveau has been able to obtain an attenuated virus capable of trans- mitting its attenuation to the successive cultures which it serves to sow. It suffices in order to do this, firstly, to leave the cultures in broth sown with a drop of charbonous blood for 20 hours at a temperature of 42.5° C.; secondly, to place them after this time for three hours at a tem- perature of 47° C. to lessen its virulence ; thirdly, to expose the culture so heated, or a broth sown with it, to a temperature of 35°-37° for from five to seven hours to allow of the formation of spores; fourthly, to heat the spore-bearing culture for a period of from one to one and a half hours at 80° C. The spores, already attenuated in a certain measure before this last heating, are still further attenuated to such a degree as to be innocu- ous to the sheep excepting in very exceptional cases; they are, at the same time, able to germinate in new media and to produce a mycelium attenuated like themselves. In order to obtain vaccines by this method of procedure, it is sufficient to make cultures in bulk, the first two as we have already described, and the third by sowing the attenuated virus in a large receptacle containing a considerable quantity of broth, assuring its rapid multiplication by allowing filtered air to gain access to the medium of culture; lastly, in the fourth, we give definite attenuation by a fresh heating. In order to do this and to ensure an equal attenuation of all the spores, we place the cultivation in tubes of 10 cubic centi- metres capacity; seal them and keep them plunged for an hour in water heated to 84° C. for the first vaccine, and at 82° C. for the second. M. Chauveau attributes the attenuation so obtained to the action of heat. He decides that in these cases oxygen has little, if anything, to do with the attenuation, and moreover states that it takes place more rapidly in vacuo than in the presence of air ; that in M. Pasteur's procedure heat also plays the principal part. However, M. Chauveau realizes that the fixity of the attenuated virulence produced by heat is less than that produced by M. Pasteur's method, and that the attenua- tion produced by the combined action of air and a less elevated temper- ature (42.5°), but acting for a considerable time, is transmitted and
77 maintained better in future cultivations. That which the microbes have taken a longer time to acquire, they preserve better. Having abandoned the procedure of attenuation by rapid heating as inferior in its results to the method of attenuation slowly by the combined and prolonged action of air and heat, M. Chauveau afterwards obtained results of greater scientific interest and greater practical value by cultivating the virus in contact with compressed oxygen. P. Bert had demonstrated that oxygen at high pressure, which respects the vital- ity of the spores, kills the adult microbes, and M. Chauveau asked him- self whether this gas, maintained at a pressure less than that at which it kills, might not comport itself as an agent of attenuation. He found that oxygen under pressure, and compressed air, could attenuate cultures of the virus and render them fit for vaccination. Air under moderate pressure augments the virulence of the microbes as regards the guinea- pig and sheep; under a little greater pressure it increases the virulence for the guinea-pig, but attenuates it for the sheep; lastly, under a pressure near that which arrests vegetation (13 atmospheres), cultures at 35° C. are sufficiently attenuated to not kill the sheep, but they still destroy the guinea-pig. In this way, after having made four successive generations of a culture, leaving each generation for three weeks at a pressure of 8 atmospheres of air at a temperature of 38° C., M. Chauveau observed that the last generation, which still destroyed the guinea-pig, did not kill the sheep; a new culture being sown with this fourth generation and four new successive generations being obtained at a pressure of 9 atmospheres, we may obtain graduated vaccines of different intensity progressively decreasing. By employing pure oxygen, we may obtain the same result with a pressure five times less. After these preparatory trials, M. Chauvea udecided upon the fol- lowing modus faciendi to obtain charbon vaccine: sow several flasks with ordinary virus, and enclose them in a well-closed metallic re- ceptacle; substitute pure oxygen for air, and accumulate it in the receiver up to a pressure of 2½ atmospheres, place the receptacle in a stove regulated to a temperature of 35°-36° C., and leave it to from 15 to 30 days, taking care to maintain the oxygen at a pressure of 2½ ; after the 15th day take seed from some of the flasks to fertilize large flasks in which at first a small quantity of broth is placed; leave these new cultures at the ordinary pressure of the air, and after several weeks add sterilized broth in order to dilute them. We obtain, in this manner, cultivations of various degrees of attenuation. We may confer im- munity on the sheep by inoculating him with two drops of this diluted fluid, and on the ox by five drops. In this manner, then, the attenuation obtained by cultivation under
78 compressed oxygen transmits itself to cultures of the second generation made at 36°-37° C. and under a normal pressure, and the cultivations attenuated in this manner may confer immunity upon the ox and sheep More than this, the blood of a guinea-pig killed by this attenuated virus will be vaccinal for the sheep. The virus of charbon attenuated by cultivation under compressed oxygen can confer immunity by a single inoculation. It is as in- nocuous as that of M. Pasteur; it preserves its acquired properties during- several months,79 quantity may be insufficient to betray the pathogenic activity still in- herent to the cultivation. In order to reveal it, it becomes necessary to employ the method of cultivating it afresh or inoculating with a strong dose. In a cultivation, the various bacilli have not all the same virulence nor the same power of vegetating; time changes the weaker ones first, and by degrees the cultivation becomes poorer in microbes which are virulent and capable of growing; but if at a given time inoculation with a small dose is insufficient to betray the vestiges of virulence which remain, cultivation allows of our growing a generation of virulent bacilli. Analogous phenomena are produced in cultivations experimentally attenuated ; and certainly we ought, in the study of the influences capable of restoring the virulence, to take account of a spontaneous selection of the virulent agents in the cultures of restoration. An ordinary simple cultivation may suffice to restore the virulence to an old culture (Arloing). Perroncito has succeeded in obtaining a charbon vaccine, capable of conferring immunity on the ox by a single inocu- lation, by cultivating the virus for five days, and then exposing the cultures to air heated to 20°-25°. Attenuation by Antiseptics. 80 requent sowings from the original flask, we get a series of cultivations of decreasing virulence, which may furnish, as in the case of cultures at 42°-43°, attenuated virus capable of preserving animals into which it has been inoculated as a preventive, from mortal charbon. Repeated cultures of the vaccines reproduce virus with attenuated properties and perpetuate them. The filaments obtained in these conditions, in place of being abundant and long as in normal cultures and matting themselves into flocculi resembling cotton-wool, are more scanty in numbers and shorter, and deposit themselves in grumous masses on the walls of the receptacle. These bacilli, so altered in their form, easily give numerous and resisting spores. " Phenic acid is not the only agent which gives these results; with bichromate of potash we may obtain analogous ones. A broth to which has been added 1-1000-1-700 of bichromate of potash, will not cultivate the virus, which dies quickly in such a medium. A weaker dose of bichromate of potassium, 1-2000-1-5000°, allows of the development of the bacillus; but, under these conditions it does not form spores, and soon loses its virulence to such a degree that sown three days after the com- mencement of the experiment, it gives a cultivation which kills rabbits and guinea-pigs, but only a small percentage of sheep into which it is inoculated; a cultivation prepared from a bichromate broth, after ten days, still destroys rabbits and guinea-pigs, but does not kill sheep; lastly, after a longer interval the cultures become innocuous even to guinea-pigs. Smaller proportions of bichromate of potash retard the formation of spores without absolutely preventing them. The bacilli formed from the filaments which have undergone the action of bichro- mate, form spores, which perpetuate their properties and assure their pre- servation. Moreover, if the action of the bichromate has been prolonged, the bacillus loses the property of forming spores. In this way, cultures issuing from a flask at 1-2000, after the 8th day from the commence- ment of the experiment, have never formed spores, and it has been the same with all successive cultures issuing from it. These bacilli, in- capable of forming spores, inoculated into guinea-pigs, destroy them in from three to four days. A small drop of their blood sown in broth gives an abundant cultivation of bacilli, which does not form spores; they remain in the state of filaments, and after thirty or forty days they perish. " The diminution of the virulence of the bacilli so modified by means of antiseptics, is not a passing one; the cultivation does not regain its virulence. The bacilli, so attenuated by the action of antiseptics that they either do or do not form spores, preserve in repeated cultures a lessened virulence. It appears, therefore, that the varieties of bacilli so created are, if anything, more fixed in their new degree of virulence, as the action which has modified them is exercised more quickly upon them.
81 " Other antiseptics exercise an analogous action to those of phenic acid and bichromate of potash. On the other hand, the dose of the antiseptic necessary to produce a determinate effect varies with the com- position of the culture medium. Each of the varieties of the bacillus has a special action upon the various species of animals. So that the bacilli attenuated by means of bichromate of potassium, may destroy sheep, or at least render them very ill, after which they are protected, whilst they do not produce any appreciable effect upon guinea pigs and rabbits, nor are they protected by the inoculation. " In another series of experiments we have submitted the filaments to the action of a chemical agent in the midst of a liquid where its deve- lopment is not possible; we have caused an antiseptic dissolved in pure water, which contains no nutritive element, to act upon the formed bacillus. " The filaments of a drop of charbonous blood placed in water in which phenic acid 1-600 has been dissolved, perish rapidly ; we have seen before that it lives and grows for a month in a nutritive medium which contains the same proportion of phenic acid. In a phenicated solution 1-900, the filaments remain alive for a very long time, as is proved by the fact that cultivations may be made from them after several month. During the whole time occupied in the experiment, they do not form spores, and their virulence becomes enfeebled. So that the cul- tivation of filaments which has remained for a month in contact with a solution of phenic acid 1-900 kills rabbits and guinea pigs. A cultiva- tion made after three months contact does not kill rabbits. Under these circumstances, the loss of virulence is less rapid than is the case when the bacillus vegetates in the presence of an antiseptic. But a short time elapses between this diminution of virulence as regards rabbits and the death of the cultivation. " The essential condition in the attenuation of the virulence of the virus of charbon, either by the method of cultivating at 42°-43° C., or by the employment of antiseptics, is the absence of spores in the filaments submitted to the prolonged action of the air, heat, or various chemical agents. The spore is the form in which resistance or permanence of virulence is most marked. It preserves, so to speak, from the action of the surrounding media, the properties of the filament which has given it birth. Despite this resistance to external agents, the spore may be modi- fied and attenuated in its virulence like the filament itself. " Well formed spores of the filaments, fifteen or twenty days old, are placed in contact with 2 % solution of sulphuric acid, and exposed at a temperature of 35° C. in closed tubes, which are frequently shaken to ensure thorough contact of the spores with the acid. Every two days a small quantity of these spores is sown in broth (veal) rendered slightly G
82 alkaline. The cultivation so obtained during the first days kills rabbits and guinea pigs; the cultivation made on the fourteenth day only kills a small percentage of the guinea pigs into which it is inoculated. The bacilli, etc., so obtained form numerous spores, and preserve their attenu- ated virulence in successive cultures. "But it is worthy of remark that cultures issuing from spores treated with sulphuric acid, which have lost their virulence as regards rabbits have not done so as regards sheep, and destroy them in the pro- portion of 7 to 10. This fact, and the analogous ones already quoted, shows that each species of animal has a particular receptivity for each of the races of virus which we have been able to prepare by artifices of cultivation. " The diminution of the virulence of the spores and lastly their death under the action of sulphuric acid occurs, if anything, more rapidly as the temperature is more elevated and the acid more concentrated, and more slowly as the temperature is lower, and the acid solution more diluted." Zagari has attenuated the virus, by making it live in a broth which has cultivated the microbe of fowl cholera, and Pavone by culti- vating it in a broth which had already cultivated the bacillus of typhus. In the same manner of working, we may also cite the progressive attenuation which Manfredi has obtained by cultivation in a medium containing a certain proportion of fatty material. The bacillus anthracis sown in a medium composed of gelatine or nutritive jelly containing an emulsion 1/3 of its volume of fatty matter develops well and liquefies the gelatine. When more than one-third of fatty matter is present, the cultivation is slower and the bacillus forms long filaments with few spores; it ceases to liquefy the gelatine. When two-thirds of fatty matter is present, development does not occur. Si- multaneously the virulence of the culture diminishes to its disappearing point; this attenuation depends upon the fatty matter introduced into the medium, for it augments and diminishes with the proportion of this material; but temperature and time have, at the same time, a great in- fluence. So in the cultures of Manfredi, the virulence disappeared in two or three days at 37° C., in twenty or thirty days at 28°-30° C., in twenty-five to forty-five days at 19°-20° C. On the tenth day at 28°-30°, the cultivation killed all the guinea pigs, and the majority of rabbits inoculated; at the twentieth day it did not kill rabbits or large guinea pigs; beyond the twenty-fifth day it only killed mice; at the thirtieth day it lost all virulence. The attenuated bacilli preserve their degree of virulence when placed in ordinary media; more or less it has been noticed that in return cultures, a slight increase of virulence which has been only slightly attenuated occurs, and that there is a slight
83 diminution in those very much attenuated. These return cultures re- gain the property of liquefying gelatine, but they liquefy it more slowly than normal cultures. According to M. Duclaux, the attenuation so obtained is explained by the fact that the fatty matter employed in oxidysing impoverishes the medium in oxygen, saponifies and becomes acid. Various means of attenuation.84 protective inoculation; the bacillus in passing through a refractory animal, increases in virulence and this increase occurs in the 85 interval of 12 or 15 days we inoculate a stronger vaccine (deuxieme vaccin), which completes the immunity. It is customary to make these two inoculations at different points on the body, the parts selected in the sheep being for the first inoculation, the inside of the right thigh, and for the second the inside of the left thigh, whilst in oxen the one is made in front of and the other behind the shoulder. In the case of horses, the inoculation is made in front of the shoulder in saddle horses, so that the point may not be in the way of the saddle. Full grown sheep of all ages, lambs even when very young, ewes more or less advanced in pregnancy, some in the point of lambing, have been vaccinated without any untoward consequences. Still accidents have sometimes been reported as occurring in young lambs, when the same vaccine used at the same time in full grown sheep produced only a more or less slight disease, but not death. With the vaccines now in use even very young lambs can be vaccinated without inconvenience. The vaccination of ewes on the point of lambing has also given rise to some accidents. Several times abortions have been reported to us. We thought at first that these accidents ought to be attributed more to the shaking which the animals had undergone in being turned over on to their backs in order to present the internal aspect of the thigh to the operator, but it may also be possible that the fever from which the ewe suffered may have directly induced abortion. According to researches, which have recently been made in collaboration with M. I. Straus, it appears that, contrary to the view hitherto held, bacilli introduced into the mother, sometimes pass into the f86 taneous disease. Morever, recently inoculated animals are better able to resist the disease which rages generally in summer and autumn. In oxen slight 87 warm, and then aspirating two or three syringes full of the water in order to cause the piston to swell. Water which has not been boiled must not be used for this purpose. It is of course of the utmost importance to employ antiseptic precautions in so far as regards the employment of a perfectly clean and sterilized syringe. We must also be extremely careful that we use every expedient to prevent the entrance of germs into the vaccine whilst aspirating it into the syringe. The syringe then being perfectly clean and filled with the vaccine completely, we turn the little nut which is at the top of the stem until it reaches the division marked I on the stem. Then an assistant seizes the sheep or goat to be vaccinated and presents the inner aspect of the thigh to the operator by turning the animal on its back in a sitting attitude. The operator now introduces the needle under the skin, towards the middle of the right thigh and presses the piston until the nut touches the syringe. The inoculation of the first animal is thus made. The syringe is now removed and the nut on the piston turned until it stands at 2. The second sheep is now inoculated and so on. One Pravaz' syringe holds enough for 8 sheep. The syringe is filled again and the process repeated. With a little practice 150 to 200 sheep can be vaccinated in an hour. After an interval of 15 days we inoculate them in the same way with the " dexuieme vaccin " in the left thigh. Oxen and Horses.88 containing the vaccine, the caoutchouc cork by which it is closed ought to be carefully put back into the tube each time after the syringe has been filled, and only the extremity not directly in contact with the tube ought to be touched with the fingers. There is another cause of impur- ity which it is almost impossible to avoid. The outer surface of the needle, in fact, becomes quickly covered with scraps of wool, hair, or even of dung; in this way each time that the needle is put into the tube in order to draw up a fresh quantity of liquid some of these foreign bodies gets mixed with the liquid and destroys its purity; in consequence when but little fluid remains, that is to say, when the needle has been plunged into it ten times, the liquid is almost always impure. We have endeavoured to obviate these difficulties and we believe we have succeeded in the syringe constructed under our direction by M. Colin. With this syringe once filled 50 sheep can be vaccinated in succession. The vaccine is not in contact with serial impurities, and cannot be soiled by foreign bodies sticking to the outside of the needle. It can be easily cleaned. Strictly speaking a single syringe of this pattern would do for all vaccinations; but it appears to be preferable to get two syringes, one for the first, and other for the second inoculation. This syringe has certain inconveniences; the liquid injected is not seen, and the quantity injected cannot be regulated with the same precision as when a Pravaz' syringe is used. The vaccine for this syringe is sent out in tubes identical with ordinary tubes, except that both extremities are closed by small caout- chouc corks. The smaller cork is to be withdrawn and the extremity of the tube introduced into the reservoir of the syringe : on removing the other cork the liquid runs into the reservoir. In all cases, whatever kind of syringe be adopted, a tube of vaccine which has once been opened must never be used on the next or following days, for in that interval the vaccine liquid may have become altered by foreign organisms. If the vaccine when sent out cannot be used for three, four, or five days, the tubes ought to be put in a cool place, if possible in a cellar, in order to prevent the possible ulterior development of foreign organisms. As a rule, and whenever it is possible, fresh vaccines ought to be used, and used on the day or the day after they are received. When it is desired to keep vaccines for a long time89 incubator kept at 42°-43°C. At the end of twenty-four hours a drop of culture is taken from one of these flasks and sown into another flask of pure chicken broth; this latter is placed in an incubator at 30°- 35° C., whilst the original flask is again returned to the incubator at 42°-43° C. This operation is repeated every twenty-four hours, so that at the end of 15 to 20 days, we have obtained a series of more and more attenuated cultures. From among the latter day cultures, usually those of the tenth or twelfth day, a culture is chosen which makes the " pre- mier vaccin" and another, less attenuated, ordinarily that of the 7th or 8th days makes the "deuxieme" or second " vaccin." The filaments of these vaccines are cultivated in suitable media, and the resulting spores placed in glass vessels or tubes sealed by heat, and known as seed tubes. This process is conducted in the Pasteur institute. Manner of sowing the vaccines.90 ments, and the spores are capable of resisting for a longer period in the tubes, so that consequently, although the " ancient vaccine " is in reality more attenuated than the recent, it is capable of preserving its action for a far longer period of time. When a vaccine has to remain in tubes for a longer period than two days, we take advantage of the above peculiarities and mix the " ancient " with the " recent vaccine." It is necessary to do this, owing to the fact that if the spores only were put in in their thus attenuated form, the vaccine would be too greatly attenuated and have lost in some measure its properties. Both the first (premier) and second (deuxieme) vaccines are treated in the same way. From the flasks, vaccine tubes are filled by means of pipettes and are ready for despatch. The vaccines are distinguished by different labels; the vessels containing the first bear a red label marked " premier vaccin;" those holding the second blue, marked " deuxieme vaccin." Those containing " ancient vaccine " are marked with blue pencil on red label for the first, and with a red pencil on blue label for the second. The secret in the manufacture thus appears to consist in the manipulation of the " ancient vaccine." Proofs of the efficacy of preventive inoculation against Anthrax.91 a consequence of inoculation with the strong virus. The vaccination of 1,081 sheep and a number of large ruminants and horses by two success- sive inoculations were unaccompanied by any serious accident, exception the death of one sheep after the second inoculation; this might have been due to spontaneous charbon. The vaccination of ten sheep by a single inoculation with the virus No. 2 enabled them to resist the inoculation with strong virus; one non-vaccinated cow was very ill after inoculation with strong virus; whilst a vaccinated cow supported the inoculation with no ill effects. Experiment at Rossignal.92 Experiments at Nevers.93 Experiments in Germany.94 non-vaccinated; two vaccinated sheep died, and all the non-vaccinated animals with the exception of 1 ox. At the Congress of Geneva in 1882.95 than amongst the non-vaccinated. In fact, in certain flocks in which charbon had been severe, it was observed that the mortality had been nil, or nearly so in the vaccinated, whilst it had remained high amongst the non-vaccinated. In 1882 vaccination considerably diminished the mortality from charbon in flocks and herds. These results were improved upon during the following years; so that the mortality from charbon which had been 8 to 10 per cent. amongst sheep in flocks exposed to the disease, has fallen to 1 per cent. after vaccination; it has equally lowered the mortality amongst bovines. Vaccination against charbon in Hungary.96 to them more or less correctly the risks run. Vaccination has resulted in death following either the first or the second vaccine. At other times grave accidents, such as dangerous illness, 97 Indications for vaccination. Duration of the immunity. Precautions to be observed.98 yield of milk, and may, if charbon should accidentally follow the opera- tion, render the milk dangerous. Moreover, the milk of vaccinated cows should be rejected for fifteen days after the second inoculation. It is necessary to diminish the dose for individuals and races endowed with a more marked susceptibility, and also for animals placed under bad hygienic conditions, badly fed and housed, etc. We should vaccinate for preference in the spring time, when the disease is not so prevalent, so as to avoid the chance of increasing the risk of vaccination being accompanied by the spontaneous disease, and also for the reason that animals freshly vaccinated have greater resistance to the spontaneous disease at the end of spring and during summer when it is most generally prevalent. We should inoculate sheep at the inside of the thigh, as has been already pointed out. With regard to the larger ruminants, we may inoculate them behind the shoulder, on the flank, or on the tail and ear: we should pierce the skin with a strong needle and the injection should be made into the sub. cutaneous tissue. The 99 "Société centrale de medicine vétérinaire" on the question; the Société d'Agriculture de Melun have noted a lamb born of a vaccinated ewe die from inoculated charbon, and again it is generally recognized that lambs born of vaccinated ewes do not generally enjoy immunity (Chamber- land). The duration of the immunity conferred by vaccination varies much according to the strength of the virus inoculated, and according to the degree of receptivity of the animals; it may vary from some months to a year or more. It has been observed to last for 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 months, so it may even last 11 or 13 months, etc. Sheep may still remain protected in a proportion of 60 per cent. after the end of a year (Chamberland). However this may be, it may occur, as has been observed, that immunity does not last more than 2, 3, or 4 months, etc. The duration of the immunity seems, all other things being equal, to be in direct proportion to the intensity of the vaccine, and of the feeble- ness of the receptivity of the animal. To obtain lasting immunity, it is necessary then to employ the strongest safe vaccine for animals en- dowed with the greatest receptivity, but the dangers of vaccination are thus increased. In all cases the degrees and the probable duration of immunity may be gauged by the amount of re-action which follows vaccination. Cases have been observed of the duration of immunity for two or three years; but it is presumed either that the immunity had been con- ferred by the action of strong virus, or that it had been afterwards renewed by natural infection, which, although incapable of rendering the animal seriously ill, had contributed to perpetuate their refractory state. It has, however, been decided that in order to perpetuate the benefits of vaccin- ation in localities where charbon is prevalent, it is necessary to inoculate yearly. Chauveau's method of Vaccination.100 more complete immunity. We may remark that immunity may be conferred by a single inoculation with Pasteur's lymph by choosing a strength intermediate between that of the first and second vaccines gene- rally used. For the rest, the majority of the considerations mentioned à propos of vaccination Pasteur apply to M. Chauveau's method; the same rules for the mode of operating, the same precautions to be observed, the same indications for the operation, etc., etc. Means of conferring immunity against charbon.101 tained the contrary, it appears to have been demonstrated by others that the serum of either dog's or frog's blood is not prophylactic. It has, however, been found that the serum of rat's blood is endowed with bactericidal properties "in vitro," and that if it be mixed with the bacilli injected into the rat, it hinders or retards the development of charbon according as the germs are in the filamentous or the spore stage. The protection conferred by rat's serum has been made the subject of inves- tigation by Mr. Hankin, who states that it is due to particular substances which he has called albumoses. It appears satisfactorily demonstrated to-day that we may create immunity by means of chemical substances, and more especially with the soluble products resulting from the life of the microbes. Thus, according to Kasch, animals which have taken a sufficient quantity of sublimate will not be susceptible to charbon: Behring says that it is the same with those to which salts of silver have been given. According to Woolridge we may obtain immunity for the rabbit by inoculating him with a liquid taken from the bacilli, the liquid obtained by filtration of a culture developed in an alkaline solution of an albuminoid substance obtained from the thymus or the testicle. MM. Chamberland and Roux have demonstrated, as have also Chau- veau and Woolridge, that the bacillus secretes a material which possesses vaccinal properties. The following is a résumé of their researches on this subject: Toussaint had attributed the immunity to the action of chemical substances, although in reality he was vaccinating by his method with the attenuated microbe; MM. Chamberland and Roux have found that it is possible to confer immunity on sheep by the sub- cutaneous injection of charbonous blood deprived of living bacilli by heating for 40 minutes at 55.5º C.; there exist, then, in the blood of an animal dead of charbon, chemical substances capable of con- ferring immunity on sheep into which a sufficient quantity is injected. But long exposure to heat, or exposure at too elevated a degree, changes these substances at the same time as it kills the microbes. Thus, char- bonous blood heated for ten minutes at 100º or 115º C. loses its vaccinal properties. It is necessary to employ a less intense heat. In reality sheep vaccinted with decoctions of blood or of the spleen have not resisted inoculation with the strong virus, although they have been destroyed less quickly. One hour and a half's exposure to a temperature of 55º C. is not sufficient to destroy all the bacilli in the blood; thus this procedure is full of uncertainty, and it is better to have recourse to some other to combat the microbes. M. Pasteur has adopted the following method for the production of immunity in rabbits; he takes blood from an animal about to die, closes it in a tube which is quite filled, and then seals the ends; under these conditions the bacillus does not
102 multiply nor form spores, but is destroyed in 12 days at + 45º C. whilst it lives for more than a mouth below + 17º C. MM. Cham- berland and Roux have adopted the following method: aspirate char- bonous blood into two tubes, fill them completely, close the ends with the lamp, and then plunge them for an hour into a bath of water kept at 68º C.; then take them out and heat them a second time for an hour; repeat this operation for five consecutive days; the blood so heated has never given cultures when sown in suitable media, but its vaccinal properties are weakened, and hence it is necessary to employ it in large quantities. The liquid which flows from the clot from the tube is used for inoculating sheep. Sheep which have received charbonous blood which has been previously heated at 58º C. in sufficient quantity inoculated into the cellular tissue, have resisted inoculation with the strong virus; however, they have been rendered seriously ill by the inoculation of control, which demonstrates that immunity conferred by means of heated blood is less reliable than that brought about by the attenuated virus. The amount of blood required to produce immunity varies in different individuals; some have been protected by 8cc, and others have not, even after the injection of 16cc to 32cc. Sheep show themselves more refractory when they have received larger injec- tions of heated blood. The immunity conferred by these methods is not a lasting one, its duration being only for a few days; after a lapse of 24 days it has been found that two out of every three animals have lost the protection. Blood, prepared in the above manner and filtered, was injected by MM. Chamberland and Roux into the vein of a sheep in large doses. The sheep bore the injection of large quantities with- out any sign of intoxication, but the immunity conferred was very feeble, even less than that following subcutaneous inoculation, a fact which might lead us to the conclusion that the vaccinal substances were either eliminated by the kidneys or some other organ, or else partially destroyed by oxidation. The injection of charbonous blood previously filtered through porcelain has not succeeded in giving immunity to sheep when inoculated into the veins. Might it not, from a consideration of these facts, be inferred that the vaccinal material is a diastase, and hence its alteration by heat and its not passing through a porcelain filter. Although charbon does not readily lend itself to a decisive demon- stration of vaccination by chemical substances on account of the ease with which the vaccinal material is changed by heat and re-agents, still it remains certain that immunity can be conferred against charbon, by means of blood deprived of bacilli, and it is the modified method of Toussaint, by heating, which best shows it. Koch and Chamberland consider that it is preferable to kill the microbes by the use of essences,
103 which have no action on the albuminoids nor the diastase. Essence of mustard is recommended by Roux and Chamberland. Charbonous blood and the fresh pulp of a charbonous spleen treated with essence of mustard and evaporated in vacuo to eliminate the essence when its action is completed, gives a residue which contains fixed microbian products and which confers immunity on the rabbit with smaller doses than the same material filtered or heated to 58º C. We may also obtain similar results by the use of Eucalyptus (De Christmas). However, we must not lose sight of the facts that the bacillus which produces vaccinal substances in the organism and in the blood, produces but little in cultivations, and that the immunity conferred by these substances is of much shorter dura- tion than that resulting from the action of living vaccine. G. H. Roger has performed some new experiments which have equally demonstrated that the bacillus produces a vaccinal material. Cultivations heated for from 5 to 10 minutes at a temperature of 110° to 115º C. were then injected into the veins of rabbits, either before or after filtration; it appeared that it contained a vaccinal material which re- mained in the bacilli, and which when deposited in the tissues might be dissolved and re-absorbed in order to produce its effect. Lastly, M. Chau- veau's experiments have demonstrated that cultures destitute of all virulence confer immunity, which clearly proves the existence of a vaccinal substance. Mechanism of conferred immunity.104 which they contain. He attributes the destruction of microbes, partly to the action of phagocytes, and partly to the bactericidal action of the humors. He has observed that the bacillus inoculated into a well vacci- nated sheep provokes 105 vaccinated rabbit and a dog, we observe that in the non-protected rabbit the bacilli multiply, determine an 106 absolutely certain diagnosis, when we are enabled to find in the blood of the sick animal, in the ganglia, spleen, liver, kidneys, etc., of the cadaver, or in the meat the existence of immobile rods, straight or bent, cylindrical, in one, two or three segments, etc., when the blood globules are agglutined in irregular masses, separated by spaces in which bacilli are present, etc. We have already seen the various means of proceeding in the bac- teriological examination, with or without a clearing re-agent, such as acetic acid or formic acid, with or without staining. When we have to deal with an animal still living, we may make preparations of blood, or with the product of 107 glasses and taking care to prevent the blood being soiled with other matters or germs, sealing the ends of tubes or pipettes with the lamp, when they may be kept or sent for examination, serving for prepara- tions, cultures, or inoculation; we can also enclose a portion of a vessel between two ligatures for the same purpose: we may take blood clots, fragments of organs, liver, spleen, kidneys, etc., and even place them in glycerine, alcohol, etc., and send to the persons charged with their examination, etc., etc. However, we must never forget to make these preparations, as soon as possible after death; the autopsy should be performed as soon as possible after death, as charbonous cadavers rapidly putrefy, and in carcasses undergoing putrefaction more or less advanced the bacteria may be found mixed with putrefactive septic germs, or they may be destroyed, transformed into spores in products where they have been in contact with the air, and bacteriological examination practised under these conditions gives an uncertain result. The diagnosis of charbon becomes particularly important in the in- spection of meat destined for the alimentation of man. The sanitary law forbidding the consumption of charbonous meat is a very just one, since it is attended with double dangers, being dangerous to manipulate and liable to transmit malignant pustule to man; dangerous when in- gested, for when insufficiently or even passably cooked, it may cause charbon if spores have been formed in it. Cases of transmission to man by the manipulation of cadavers, meat, or charbonous debris are not rare. On the other hand, it is averred that the juice of charbonous meat in- completely cooked is inoculable (Boutet), and that charbon may result from eating such. Internal charbon without external manifestation has been observed occasionally in men who have ingested charbonous meat. Lorenz, in August 1884, observed three cases of death in persons who had eaten the incompletely cooked meat of a charbonous cow at Lauter- bourg. At Naschevo, near Wreschen, more than twenty persons fell ill after eating the meat of a charbonous cow. Treatment curative.108 much more easily killed, they being destroyed by two minutes' exposure to a one per cent. solution of carbolic acid in water, whilst the spores remain alive under similar circumstances for a week or longer. Taking these facts into consideration, it would appear to be futile to attempt to destroy the spores of the disease which have been introduced into the system of an animal, but it should not, I think, be presumed that nothing can be done to tide the animal over an attack of a moderate intensity. Taking advantage of our knowledge of the peculiarities of the different forms of the organism, we may perhaps accomplish something towards recovery. We know that spores are not developed in the organism of an animal suffering from the disease, but only rods. If, therefore, we are able to so interfere with the rods as to prevent their development and functions, we can overcome the disease, for we have no second crop of spores to deal with. If we cannot introduce those agents which from experiment have been found to have a lethal action upon the spores in sufficient quantity, we can at least endeavour by their adminis- tration to somewhat impede their development into bacilli, and to exercise such action upon the bacilli when formed as either to destroy them or at all events so interfere with their ordinary functions, development and growth as to prevent their inducing a mortal form of the malady; but in order to bring about this much to be desired result, it is necessary that we may have the earliest possible intimation of an impending attack, and I may here say that in the severer forms of the disease these measures are of little avail. It is only during the course of an outbreak in a regiment or battery, for instance, that we have the means and opportunities of applying the principles set forth. Under the circumstances attendant on outbreaks of this disease in regi- ments, etc., we are able by watchfulness and careful thermometric obser- vations to decide by logical inference whether it be advisable to subject an animal to antiseptic treatment before the appearance of diagnostic symptoms of anthrax, and in certain cases I am of opinion that such a proceeding is perfectly justifiable. No harm, or an infinite small amount, is done by this proceeding; and in the event of the inferences proving to be correct, we have at least gained an amount of time which is most valuable, the importance of which in fact can scarcely be over-estimated. We are not, as a general rule, long left in doubt as to the nature of the malady with which we have to deal, and if after a reasonable time symptoms definitely stamping the disease as anthrax have not shown themselves, we can discontinue our treatment and proceed in the manner indicated by the nature of the disease which has developed. I am aware that the views here set forth will be condemned by many as empirical, but when it is considered that if we await the development
109 of the pathognomonic signs, the disease has arrived at a stage when curative measures are of little avail in a great majority of cases, they would appear to be worthy of some slight consideration. In further support of this line of argument another point may be brought forward, and that is the action of strong sunlight upon the spores. We are told that the action of this physical agent upon the spores is such that "it appears to be fatal, or at any rate injurious to them; it appears to deprive them in whole or in part of their powers of further development in a most remarkable manner, always causing distinct attenuation of their pathogenic virulence before completely destroying them." On perusal of this statement it is brought forcibly before us that the conditions in India must in many cases lead to this attenuation of the virus, and thus a series of very much milder outbreaks of the disease result than is the case in some other countries. The fact that such a result is brought about has been impressed upon me during the course of my acquaintance with the disease in this country. I have had the opportunity of dealing with outbreaks in which the percentages of deaths have been so low as to lead to the supposition that the disease was not anthrax at all, and this despite the fact that at the commencement of the outbreak typical cases of a severe type, proving rapidly fatal, have occurred. It is in these outbreaks that the mode of treatment advocated has, I am assured, been the means of rescuing many horses from death. The method adopted may be briefly noted. During an outbreak of anthrax horses of a troop or troops in which cases have occurred are carefully watched, and temperatures are recorded at least thrice daily. Animals suddenly showing a rise of temperature of some degrees are at once removed as suspects, and precautions as regards isolation are taken. They are at once subjected to an antiseptic treatment, which is so applied that average and frequently repeated doses of an antiseptic agent are administered, so as to ensure a conti- nuous absorption of the drug and keep the system so far charged with it as is allowable. The choice of the antiseptic agent used may be left to the individual selection from the large numbers of these agents which are known. Under this system of treatment I have observed that the diagnostic symptoms of the disease, as we know it in India, have been slowly developed, and have been of far less inten- sity than in cases treated otherwise or not treated at all. The disease appears, in point of fact, to be more under control and to be of much shorter duration than under other circumstances. This appears, then, to be the direction in which it is advisable to work, and it must be left to the practitioner to adopt the treatment which he considers most necessary to combat symptoms. G. I. C. P. O.-No. 19 I. G. C. V. D.-25-7-94.-200.
CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT LEDGER SERIES No. III. MAIN HEAD . STOCK DISEASE. SUB-HEAD . CONTAGIOUS DISEASE. SUBJECT: CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE OF THE OX. 1894. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA, 1894.
CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT LEDGER SERIES No. III. MAIN HEAD . . STOCK DISEASE. SUB-HEAD . CONTAGIOUS DISEASE. SUBJECT : CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE OF THE OX. 1894. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894.
PREFACE. THE following article is a brief résumé of the facts connected with this disease. The following works have been consulted. Galtier's "Maladies contagieuses;" Arloing Cornevin and Thomas "Le charbon symptomatique du bCHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE. Nomenclature.2 age of the deaths attributed to Anthrax should be credited to this dis- order. The disease is common in Europe, Africa, America and Asia, in both hot and cold countries. It has been observed in North America United States, Central America, South America, Chili, India, South Africa, Algeria. In Europe it is more particularly prevalent in Swit- zerland, Germany, Austria, Italy, Spain, Belgium, Holland, and Eng- land. In France it is more or less general. It is not so common in Scotland as in England (Williams). It is prevalent at all seasons, but more particularly at the end of spring, in the summer, and at the begin- ning of Autumn; June, July, August and September are the worst months in France, Italy and Switzerland. Information as to the season at which it is most prevalent in the various parts of India is required. It is more frequently seen in bovines than is anthrax. It chiefly attacks young cattle, between the ages of six months and four or five years, and is most fatal in those which have rapidly come into condition. The greatest mortality occurs in animals aged between one and three years. Although sheep are not refractory, cases of the sponta- neous disease are seldom seen amongst them. Relative frequence of Charbon Symptomatique and Anthrax.3 tions have been made at the abbatoir at Limoges on this subject, and go to show that the disease is by no means so rare as is generally supposed :4 avant cæur, anticæur), of the croup and thigh (mal de cuisse), of the thigh (mal de jambe), of the genital organs (trousse-galant). In other cases it appears on the head, neck and trunk, on the masseters, in the sub- maxillary region (estranguillon), in the throat (esquinancie gangreneuse) along the jugular channel in the pectoral region on the sides of the chest, on the lumbar region or on the mammary gland. Hess has compiled a very valuable table showing in what parts the tumor most commonly appears, and from this we learn that the most frequent seats are :5 first symptoms. The oscillations of the temperature under the influence of this disease are very remarkable. The following gives a good idea of what occurs in the sheep :6 vaded by the tumor. Thus, on raising the skin, we observe that the subcutaneous connective tissue is the seat of emphysema, more particular- ly about the shoulder and back, but also at times extending to the croup, quarters and thighs. We occasionally meet with a serogelatinous infiltra- tion into the cellular tissue of various parts of the trunk. The muscles may be cribbled with hæmorrhagic effusion, and easy to tear ; but what is most striking is the presence of one or several characteristic tumors on them. These tumors vary as to their seat, as has been already stated; they may be confined to the deeper parts of large muscular masses, on the diaphragm, in the depth of the pelvic muscles or those of the thorax, under the scapula, etc., but more frequently they attack the superficial layers of the muscles of the regions where they exist. Besides these, we may meet with infarcts of black or claret color, of more or less consi- derable extent in certain of the muscles. We may observe one or several sanguinolent tumors more or less voluminous. The muscles invaded by the tumor are very dark colored, especially at their centres; but this coloration becomes modified as we leave the centre and approach the periphery passing successively from a very dark red to rose and yellow with black streaks. The dark color of the central portions be- comes modified by exposure to the air, turns brighter and brighter in color after a few moments exposure. When the tumor exists in a part very rich in loose connective tissue, it is surrounded by a more or less voluminous 7 with osmic acid; others present fractures and appear as hyaline, vitreous and refringent blocks. The characteristic pathogenic micro-organisms are abundant in the tumor; we find them around the fascia, in the lymph spaces of the intra muscular connective tissue. We find them just inside the sarcolemna of the muscular fibres, and more particularly at those spots where fracture of the fibres has occurred transversely. They are accompanied by migrated cellules and a certain quantity of fibrillated fibrin. The morbific agent of charbon symptomatique tends to provoke mortification of the muscular tissues in which it determines the evolution of a tumor. We may, in fact, cause localized mortification of the connective and muscular tissue by inoculating the virus of the disease into subjects which have been protected by inoculation or those which are refractory to the disease, which resist and allow the organisms to perform their work. In this way, by inoculating the virus into the muscle of a guinea pig, an ox, or a sheep, previously protected by inoculation, or into a soliped animal which has natural immunity, we give rise to a limited engorgement, which persists for a certain time, and which is nothing more nor less than a sequestrum composed of brown or yellow mortified fibres. This sequestrum becomes surrounded by a connective tissue capsule, the cellules of which progressively absorb its débris. When the tumor invades the vicinity of a bone, the periosteum becomes thickened, red, presents blood extravasations between its fibres; the marrow is vascularized, becomes redder, and presents micro-organisms. In the abdominal cavity of animals which have presented symptoms of colic, we find a more or less abundant deep colored serosity containing few blood globules, and some round micro-organisms as well as batonnets. When a tumor has extended to the abdominal walls, when a portion of the intestine is inflamed, we find clare t colored spots on the peritoneum on a level with the diseased points. In certain cases the peritoneum is marbled with sanguineous effusions. Sometimes the abdominal muscles are black and studded with extravasations or infarcts; at others they are pale, degenerated and friable, resembling cooked flesh. Sometimes the epiploon and the mesentery are studded with ecchy- motic patches (Delamotte). When glos anthrax is present in charbon symptomatique, that is to say when we have tumefaction of the throat and tongue in this disease the walls of the pharynx and 8 markedly differing from what they show in charbon bacteridien; this enables us to distinguish readily between these diseases as a rule, but there are cases when a microscopical examination of the spleen pulp is absolutely necessary to enable a certain diagnosis to be made. Both these organs contain a considerable number of the pathogenic micro-orga- nisms, which are also present in the bile. My own opinion is that we should seldom neglect to make a microscopical examination when it is practicable, as by doing so we demonstrate the " bacterium " if the disease be charbon symptomatique, and the " bacillus anthracis " if we are dealing with charbonous fever. The kidneys are often normal in appearance, sometimes infiltrated with blood, owing to the presence of a tumor in the neighbourhood; they may occasionally be found to be congested and surrounded by sero- sanguinolent infiltration, which may or may not be mixed with gas. The pathogenic microbes exist in the kidneys and urine. The scrotum is distended, and the testicles wine colored when the tumor is situated on the posterior extremities. The placenta is tumefied and gorged with microbes in the pregnant female. In the thorax we meet with changes similar to those seen in the abdominal cavity, red plaques and hæmorrhagic patches in the lungs, sero- sanguinolent effusion when the tumor has invaded the pectoral walls. The lung is often hyperæmic. The respiratory mucous membrane, principally that of the anterior passages, sometimes shows deep congestion, and may be even black. The pleura often contains a sanguinolent serosity; the thoracic muscles are dark when the tumor has made its appearance on the shoulder. The pericardium contains serosity, "the myocardium presents here and there hæmorrhagic patches; the endocardium is generally stained in both cavities, more particularly towards the summits. The blood which fills the cardiac cavities and the large vessels coagulates as in the healthy animal" (Arloing, Cornevin and Thomas). The blood appears to have undergone little if any change either in its physical or anatomical characters; it is ccagulable, and its globules are not deformed. It sometimes contains gas and organisms imme- diately before death. The majority of the lymphatic ganglia are altered, more especially those near the tumor, which are hyperæmic, red and infiltrated. They are generally rich in microbes. Etiology9 ing to a certain method. In practice the disease is almost exclusively observed affecting bovines, which become infected by introducing into their system with the food, drink or inhaling with the dust the patho- genic agents, which they get from external media. Seat of the virus.10 which contains the microbe in its various forms, and more particularly as bâtonnets. Lastly, the microbe taken from a sick animal and sown in artificial culture media, purified, isolated by successive cultures, repro- duces the disease on inoculation. The virus presents itself in several forms. As a bacillus, bâtonnet straight and mobile, formed of one or two articulated segments varying in length between 5u to 10u ; it multiplies by scissiparity or segment- ation, and also forms spores in the sick animal. In preparations made with the pulp of the tumor, for instance, we see many bâtonnets which contain spores in their interior. Those about to produce spores are irre- gularly swollen, sometimes in the whole of their length, assuming somewhat of a spindle shape, but more generally the spore appears at one of their extremities, causing a swelling, and giving to the microbe the appearance of a pendulum. The thickness varies from 1.1 to 1.3u, when they are spore-bearing. The same bâtonnet may sometimes produce two spores, one at each extremity, but this is not a common occurrence. We find very much longer bâtonnets in certain organs; it is not rare to meet with them in masses. In the tissue of the muscular tumor, the micro-organism assumes its most characteristic forms. We find it under the form of straight and regular bâtonnets ; in the form of clubs, pendulum-shaped, or racquet- shaped with one extremity bearing a spore and enlarged; spindle-shaped, swollen in their middle with or without apparent spore; lastly of a rounded or ovoid form. We find them as bâtonnets, pendulum-shaped, and more especially as entire regular rods more or less elongated, in the bile, spleen, liver, kidneys, urine, ganglia, lung, etc. In the blood we find them either as entire straight rods or rounded masses. To recapitulate, then, we may meet with the pathogenic micro- organism of this disease in three principal forms, viz., in the form of entire and homogenous rods; under the form of spore-bearing rods swollen in their middle or at one extremity; and as rounded or ovoid bodies. The virus may be cultivated in an artificial nutritive medium; it is an11 The cultivation of the microbe in vacuo has succeeded with others, in the presence of inert gases. Galtier has essayed cultivations and has drawn the following conclusions from his experiments :12 wash, dehydrate, clear and mount in balsam. In such preparations we distinguish easily the peculiarities of form assumed by the microbe; those which are in the form of rods appear uniformly colored throughout their extent, etc. Resistance of the microbe to physical and chemical agents.13 All these facts lead us to the conclusion that it may be preserved in the soil, and direct experiments have established the fact. Feser has caused the disease by injecting the microbes found on the plants from marshy pastures of the Alps, where the disease is rife. Gotti caused the disease by injecting the water, in which had been washed earth from San Arcangelo, where the disease had been prevalent, under the skin of young oxen. It is apparent, therefore, that the germs may be preserved in the soil or on its surface, and this explains how it is that animals which live in places where these germs exist, may ingest them. The virus offers great resistance to those chemical agents which we designate bactericides; it is only sterilized, especially when dry, by the most energetic of these. Solutions of potash, lime, sulphate of iron, sodium chloride, arsenious acid, chloride of zinc, turpentine, sulphurous acid, etc., are useless for purposes of disinfection. The agents which may be recommended for this purpose are: phenic acid in aqueous solution 2-4%; salicyiic acid 1-2% ; nitrate of silver 1-2% ; sulphate of copper 1-5; perchloiide of mercury 1-2 p. 1,000, etc. Animals susceptible to the disease.Charbon symptomatique is nearly entirely confined in its attacks to the bovine species; it has only exceptionally been witnessed in young sheep and solipeds. It is transmissable by inoculation to oxen, sheep, goat, and guinea pig. The carnivoia, pig, rabbit and bird are refractory. The disease does not appear to be transmitted to man. The large and small ruminants are the most susceptible to the disease, although, as has been stated, oxen do notexhibit the same receptivity at all ages. The spontaneous malady is very rare in calves before the age of six months, and it is rather a difficult matter to induce it in suckling calves. Well marked and characteristic cases have, however, been noted by veterinarians in young calves, which had already been submitted to a vegetable diet. This quasi-immunity which young calves enjoy appears to be due partly to heredity transmitted by an already immune mother, and more particularly to the mode of alimentation special to the age, as well as to the condition of the tissues and humors during that age. Experimenting with animals of various breeds, we have been able to inject six drops of fresh virus of a very active charac ter into the muscles of the young with impunity, whilst animals more advanced in age succumbed in the proportion of 90% under similar con ditions. These inoculations, however, sometimes give rise to lameness and elevation of temperature in certain of the calves; and by employ ing larger doses we cause death. Six or eight drops may destroy calves of less than sixteen days of age ; it requires from ten to twenty drops to kill calves aged from fifteen days to three months. The
14 feeble receptivity of the calf is very evident from its behaviour to the intravenous injection of strong virus and the subcutaneous injection of attenuated virus which give to the adult animal a mild attack and confer immunity, whilst the calf has no protection conferred upon it by the pro- ceeding. The receptivity of young calves increases as they become more entirely herbivorous. The influence of diet is still further shown by what occurs in the young guinea pig, which is very susceptible to the disease, because it becomes herbivorous very early after birth. Oxen from localities where charbon symptomatique is enzootic are not apt to contract the disease after they have passed the age of four years.15 Amongst the refractory animals, one may be rendered susceptible to the disease, and this is the rabbit. When we associate the virus of charbon symptomatique with another microbe, especially the micrococcus prodigiosus (Roger), we may induce the disease in this animal by inocu- lating the mixture. The " prodigiosus " favours infection by the action of its soluble products, which modify the general state of the animal, when they pass into the circulation. This is proved by the fact that the receptivity is more especially increased when the prodigiosus is injected directly into the circulation. The receptivity created is evanescent, dis- appearing in twenty-four hours. This fact is interesting, as it shows us that a microbe, inoffensive in itself, may create a passing receptivity to a morbific one in subjects ordinarily refractory; and that it is not im- possible that animals more or less refractory may in practice be rendered susceptible to a grave form of the disease. In addition to all this the microbe of charbon symptomatique, which is a ferment liable to induce butyric fermentation in the majority of sugars and of several neutral hydrocarbons (Arloing) secretes soluble mat- ters (Roger) which favour its development. Hence, when it is inoculated into the anterior chamber of the eye of a rabbit, it causes the disease and death, although this is not the case when it is inoculated into a muscle or under the skin. The soluble substances secreted in the eye modify the general health of the animal and create receptivity; the absence of pha- gocytes in the aqueous humour explains the development of the microbe in the eye. More than this, serosity obtained by filtration of virulent material injected in doses varying from 1 to 5 C C. into the vein of a rabbit, temporarily abolish its natural immunity and render an inocula- tion into the muscles successful; the predisposition so created does not last more than twenty-four hours. M. Roux has demonstrated, as we shall see later on, that such serosity has vaccinal properties If the prodigio- sus and the substances of bacillus chauv16 Modes of Contagion.17 sterilized water; bruise in a mortar or shake well in a flask; filter and spread the material on plates and place in a stove regulated to 35°C. After complete evaporation and dessication, a bright reddish layer of material remains, which is to be reduced to powder and may be kept in a flask dry and in a dark place. Virus so prepared may be kept for more than five years. When we desire to use this virus for inoculation, it is necessary to add a little sterilized water to it and triturate in a mortar and filter through calico; the virulent liquid thus obtained may be increased in virulence by adding a drop of lactic acid. Inoculation with a lancet, as has been already said, is not a satis- factory method with this virus; it does not produce any local lesion, or tumor when made in the ear of a guinea pig; although it may induce a fatal attack of the disease. When this occurs the animal dies in about three days; at the autopsy we find infarcts in the muscles of various regions, and congestion with tumefaction of the lymphatic ganglia. The most certain method of inoculation is the subcutaneous, the injection into the subcutaneous connective or the intra muscular tissue. The effects of the inoculation vary according to the dose employed and the region selected. The dose of the virus injected should generally be large; two or three drops injected under the skin of the quarter, shoulder, etc., suffice to in- duce fatal charbon in the sheep and oxen, whilst a similar quantity injected into a region rich in cellular tissue, such as the ear, extremity of the tail or limbs, is insufficient to do so. When the injection of virus has been made into the thigh of a guinea pig, the part becomes swollen and painful in a few hours; movement is impossible, and death ensues in from twenty-four to forty-eight hours. At the autopsy we find very extensive red coloured 18 lesions, a tumor more or less distant from the seat of inoculation, follow- ing the same course as those evolved during the course of the spontane- ous disease, makes its appearance and is followed by death. The injection of less active virus, or of a very small dose of active virus is followed either by no result, or by the appearance of slight symp- toms, such as fever, loss of appetite, and dulness, without any local lesion ; this slight derangement, however, gives immunity to the inoculat- ed animal. In certain cases, however, where the animal inoculated is more than ordinarily susceptible, which we are unable to foresee, a viru- lent and mortal attack of the disease may occur from a very minute dose of the virus. The introduction of relatively large doses of virus directly into the veins is usually well borne. The intravenous injection of doses varying from 3/10 to 5 drops up to 6 C. C. of filtered muscular juice induces in oxen, sheep and goats a mild form of the disease (unaccompanied by tumors) with dulness, elevation of temperature, etc., lasting for two or three days and followed by immunity. Whilst practising intravenous injection it is of the greatest importance to avoid inoculating the periven- ous tissue, as, should this accident occur, it will in all probability be follow- ed by a virulent form of the disease. Sometimes intravenous injection with large doses, or with active virus, or when the animal is a very suscep- tible one, may be followed by a virulent form of the disease with all its symptoms. Moreover, when very large doses are injected, the animal may suc- cumb before the appearance of the tumor and without muscular infarcts ; in these cases the ganglia are virulent. How are we to explain the reason why intravenous injection does not produce the disease with its characteristic tumor ? Beyond the fact that a certain dose of the virus may be destroyed by the blood, we have reason to believe that if the microbes multiply in that fluid, and we know they do since it becomes virulent, they are retained by the vascular endothelium, which prevents their extending into the connective tissue, and hence the tumors are not formed. It is certain that if we permit them to emigrate from the vessels, they give rise to a tumor and cause death. Thus it happens, if during the slight malady which follows intravenous injection, we provoke a small hæmorrhage in any region, a tumor develops and the animal perishes. It appears, then, that in order to cause a tumor and induce a grave form of the disease, the microbe must gain exit from the vessels and undergo certain changes in the connective tissues. It appears also that there are two phases in the evolution of the disease19 is evolved in the tissue, and is in part taken into the general circulation by the capillaries and lymphatics; if only a small quantity of it remains in the connective tissue the local accidents are insignificant; if much passes into the blood, a tumor here and there may result; if much virus remains in the subcutaneous tissue, a tumor is produced; when death does not occur too rapidly symptomatic tumors appear, due to extravasa- tions. Intertracheal injection may give a mild form of the disease and immunity. The microbes injected into the respiratory passages pass from the infundibula into the vessels, traversing the pulmonary epithe- lium and the vascular eudothelium. Attempts made to cause the disease by gastric ingestion are generally unsuccessful. Occasionally the injection of virus, intensified by methods which will be noted later on, has caused virulent charbon with tumors in the ox. It is certain, then, that animals may infect themselves by eating and drinking materials soiled with the virus. Charbon symptomatique may be transmitted by intra uterine conta- gion when it attacks the mother during gestation; the mother, which has gained immunity, appears capable of transmitting it to her off- spring. Animals which contract the spontaneous disease may infect themselves in various ways. The transmission occurs more particularly by germs derived from the sick or their cadavers, which have been distributed in external media and preserved intact. It may occur through the intermediary of soiled instruments, etc., which may be brought into contact with a wound on the skin or mucous membrane. We have seen bulls thus inoculated during castration. It may occur by the inhalation of dust mixed with germs. It may occur also by the in- gestion of food and drink soiled with the virus. When the microbes penetrate in sufficient quantity by a puncture or wound of the skin or mucous membrane, the disease begins with local lesions; a tumor forms. When the virus is introduced in small quanti- ty into the connective tissue; when they gain the blood after inhalation or ingestion, the disease commences with general symptoms, and sympto- matic tumors appear at a later date. In certain countries where charbon symptomatique is enzootic, it has appeared as though inundations favored infection. The air may be contaminated by dust bearing the virus. It is very fortunate, however, that animals which ingest, inhale or become inoculated with the virus of this disease only fall dangerously ill, in small percentage. This is because the microbes may be too weak, more or less attenuated, so that animals infected with them are only attacked by a mild form, and acquire immunity more or less complete. B 2
20 Immunity.21 cause a certain amount of attenuation, which is evidenced by its action on guinea pigs being lessened. By exposing it in a sealed tube to a temperature of 70°C., for an hour and forty-five minutes, we may trans- form it into a vaccine. Nuvoletti, by heating the virus in hermetically sealed flasks at 35 to 38°C., for several months, has produced attenuation, and rendered it vaccinal. Kitasato has conferred immunity on the guinea pig by injecting a culture of fifteen days, and by the injection of the virus which had been heated to 80°C., for thirty minutes. It is by the action of heat upon the dessicated virus, however, that we obtain the most uniform results. The temperature must be taken above 60°C. to obtain any certain attenuation, and experience has demonstrated that we should take it above 80°C. We obtain a very attenuated virus for premier vaccine by heating to 100 to 104°, and a deuxieme vaccine by heating to 90° to 94° ; leaving the virulent matter in the incubator for seven hours, placing the material so attenuated in blotting paper and in a dry dark case in the presence of some deliquescent material, under which circumstances it is preserved for a year. Each vaccine is pulver- ized in a special mortar, sifted and preserved as a powder. The virus attenuated by heat, as has been indicated, does not transmit it to that derived from it in the sick animal ; it regains noxious properties. Kitt demonstrates that it is possible to confer immunity by one ino- culation of dessicated virus which has been submitted to the action of steam at 100°C. Recuperation and augmentation of the virulence.22 a small quantity of water to which has been added some very fermentes- cible sugar and pour this into the virulent liquid thirty hours before inoculation, we obtain a virus of maximum intensity." We have, therefore, in lactic acid an agent which intensifies the viru- lence of the microbe, and which is useful in demonstrating the presence of the microbes in the soil. MM. Nocard and Roux have verified the above conclusions, and offer the following explanation of them: the virus attenuated by heat is not properly speaking a truly attenuated virus, for it cannot reproduce attenuated virus in culture ; dessication and heat in the preparation of attenuated powder only leave the spores alive, render their power of ger- mination and their action on the cells of the organism less; but anything which diminishes the vitality of the tissues renders the development of the virus easier, and seems to increase or restore its virulence. Lactic acid does not in reality exalt the virus ; but, being injected along with it, modifies the cells of the organism and so increases the receptivity by diminishing the resistance. Experiment has shown that " a prolonged contact of the acid with the virus is not necessary to regenerate its virulence; the virus inoculated soon after its admixture with lactic acid shows itself to be as active as the other. " Moreover, we may inject the virus and the lactic acid solution separately, and the effect is the same. Protective inoculation.23 sheep three to ten drops for the ox. The dessicated virus is prepared as for vaccines, which will be mentioned later on. We obtain the fresh virus by killing a guinea pig with the disease, take a certain quantity of the tumor, triturate in sterilized water, filter through calico, shake the emulsion so obtained each time that we use it. If it be suspected that the virus is mixed with septic microbes, we may treat it with sulphuric acid, which rapidly destroys the latter, but has no action on the virus. With regard to the method of inoculation, it is the same as that adopted for pleuro. We have mentioned above the method of attenuation by heat, which gives us two vaccines of unequal intensity, and which may be used successively with a few days interval, commencing of course with the weaker. The virus, attenuated by heat, gives a mild form of the disease on inoculation with a more or less considerable dose. To confer immunity on animals without exposing them to grave attacks, we make two successive inoculations24 ly animals aged from six months to three years. There seems to be no danger in inoculating pregnant females, but it is prudent to avoid it if possible. Cows vaccinated whilst in calf may transmit immunity to their calves; and the calves from mothers vaccinated sometime after conception are more resistant than others. The immunity resulting from inoculation appears to last about eighteen months, and it is advisable to re-inoculate young animals after a year's interval, whilst this is not necessary when the animals are vaccinated when aged about two years. In order to prove the efficacy of protective inoculations, we may in- oculate vaccinated and control animals with virulent virus, and compare the results. It will then be found that the vaccinated resist, whilst the non-vaccinated do not. It may occasionally happen that a tumor devo- lops in vaccinated animals, but it is seldom followed by death. The effects of the preventive inoculations are mild. There is some- times slight fever ; the local lesions consist of a hot, painful swelling, which soon disappears. Sometimes an abscess forms, which may either terminate simply or may lead to necrosis of the tip of the tail. Occasionally, though rarely, attenuated virus may lead to virulent charbon, but this fatal result does not occur more than once or twice in a thousand animals, however it shows us how necessary it is for the veterinarian to omit no precaution. Since the year 1881 numerous proofs have been accumulated which establish the economic value of preventive inoculation. The inoculations with virus attenuated by heat have been adopted in a number of coun- tries. They have given the most satisfactory results and have diminish- ed the mortality in the various departments of France, in Switzerland, the Tyrol, Germany, Belgium, Italy, Austria and America; everywhere, thanks to protective inoculation, we have seen the mortality almost com- pletely cease its ravages amongst the inoculated animals, whilst it has continued in the non-inoculated. M. Thomas has inaugurated a method of vaccination by the em- ployment of threads impregnated with virus and passed as a seton be- neath the skin of the tail. M. Darbot has thus described it.25 ly passing the threads through the tissue. The method bears favorable comparison with others, the accidents to which it gives rise are nil. It is therefore safe, and the security is due to the fact that the virus is re- generated in the frog, and does not become again exalted after attenuation. Inoculation in minimum doses is absolutely certain, the virus being deposited in a wound which cannot heal; owing to the presence of the thread its multiplication is assured. One inoculation is sufficient. " M. Eloire of Capelle adopted this method, but found seventeen animals out of fifty-eight died; he therefore abandoned it, and counsels others to do so. M. Roux has succeeded in conferring immunity by injecting the soluble substances secreted by the microbe. When we inject 40C.C daily of a culture of charbon symptomatique made in veal broth, and sterilized by heating for fifteen days at a tem- perature of 115°C., or by filtration through porcelain, into the peritoneum of a guinea pig, we confer immunity, even against 1/5th centimetre cube of intensified virus, whilst control animals die from this injection. The liquids filtered through porcelain appear more active than those heated to 115°C. The serosity taken from an animal dead of the disease, fil- tered through porcelain and injected into the guinea pig in doses of 20C.C., renders them ill, but does not kill them, moreover, we confer im- munity on the guinea pig by a daily injection of 1C.C. of filtered serosity for twelve days. According to Strebel, Professor Kitt of Munich, not liking the tail as a seat of the inoculation, made experimental inoculations into the shoulder behind the extensors of the arm, with an energetic vaccine, and noted that these were not followed by any untoward accidents. Seeing the good results obtained, Suchanka, Palla and Schwaiger of the Duchy of Salzbourg (1888) tried vaccination on forty-three animals with the second vaccine of Lyon. In the year 1889 they inoculated thirty-three animals in the shoulder ; in 1890, 1,176, one of which died four days afterwards. In 1891, 1,254 beasts were inoculated in the same way without any accident. Out of 2,506 vaccinations made with strong virus on the side of the thorax, one fatal case of charbon was noted, which result may be considered to be very favourable when we take into consideration the fact that the 2,505 animals were immune, although they had only undergone one in- oculation. Considering these encouraging results, and after consulting with M. Arloing, Strebel began vaccinating in the region of the shoulder in the spring of 1893, using a special syringe having a large bore needle. He remarks as follows :26 number of inoculations at the shoulder was 743. I vaccinated 729 animals in front of the articulation of the left shoulder, eight behind the articu- lation of the same side, and six in the skin covering the external face of the scapula. I had already vaccinated 370 subjects without the slightest accident, the only lesions being the formation in some cases of an 27 Switzerland.28 can be gained from the history of the case. In practice charbon symp- tomatique may be most commonly confounded with charbonous fever (anthrax) or septicæmia, notably gaseous septicæmia, and sometimes with gangrenous coryza. Despite its resemblance to these maladies, the above procedure enables us to distinguish it easily. With regard to septicæmia, if we inoculate a rabbit, an animal refractory to charbon symptomatique but susceptible to septicæmia, the differentiation is soon made. With regard to charbonous fever, we have a large choice of methods. The symptoms and lesions are markedly different; in the one we have crepitant tumors, in the other tumefactions which are non-crepitant. In charbon- ous fever the blood is very virulent, whilst in charbon symptomatique the tumor is more virulent. The first is inculable with very small doses, whereas the other is not. The one is easily inoculated with slight punc- tures with a lancet, the other is not. The subcutaneous inoculation with anthrax produces a more or less insignificant local lesion, whilst that with charbon symptomatique produces the large characteristic crepitant one of that disease. Charbonous fever is easily inoculable by intravenous injection, whilst C. Symptomatique is so induced with difficulty; the first has a longer period of incubation; its microbe is "ærobic,'' it does not form spores in the sick, and presents different characters to that of the latter, which does form spores in the sick and is anærobic. Again, anthrax is inoculable to the rabbit, whilst C. Symptomatique is not. Treatment.CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT LEDGER SERIES No. IV. MAIN HEAD . . STOCK DISEASE. SUB-READ . . SPECIFIC DISEASE. SUBJECT: HORSE SURRA. 1894. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894.
CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT LEDGER SERIES No. IV. MAIN HEAD . . STOCK DISEASE. SUB-HEAD . SPECIFIC DISEASE. SUBJECT: HORSE SURRA. 1894. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1894.
PREFACE. THESE notes on Surra, put together in a handy form for convenience of reference, are abstracted from the report of Dr. Lingard, the Imperial Bacteriologist, and contain a résumé of the observations of Evans, Steel, Gunn, and others, together with the results of the work which has been done by the Imperial Bacteriologist during the last three years. Dr. Lingard has very kindly corrected the proof and added the supplemental note at page 29. Information on all points connected with this disease is required, and should be given whenever possible. There is every reason to believe that Surra is a much more gener- ally widespread disease that it at present appears; informa- tion of new centres is constantly being received, and it is feared that we do not at present know the extent of the losses to which it gives rise. HENRY T. PEASE, A.V.D., Vety. Lieut., Assistant to the Inspector-General, Civil Vety. Dept. MEERUT, 1894.
HORSE SURRA. Definition.2 exhaustion, the result of anæmia, but it may occasionally be due to complications which arise in the course of the malady. After death no specific lesions are found on post-mortem examination. HISTORICAL ACCOUNTS OF SURRA. Our first knowledge of this disease was communicated by Evans, in a report dated November 1880, to the Government of India. The malady he designated "Surra," and defined it as a specific, parasitical, non-inflammatory, enzoötic blood disease, characterized by fever, jaundice, petechiæ of the mucous membrane, especially of the eye and vagina, dropsy, sometimes albumen in the urine, great prostration of strength and rapid wasting, and with a specific parasite in the blood during life; but no characteristic structural organic lesions are found after death. It may be transmitted by the subcutaneous injection of blood, and by drinking fresh blood containing the live parasites, but is not contagious or infectious in the ordinary way. The average duration of the disease is probably less than two months, but reliable statistics are wanting upon that point. Evans describes the invasion of the disease acquired in the ordinary way as that common to all low fevers. In a small major- ity of cases, the legs are swollen and 3 Evans noted a certain amount of clear serum in the peritoneal cavi- ty, but no sign of any inflammatory action. In one case the pericardial sac was distended with fluid. He says "that when he first saw the parasite, he thought for a mo- ment it was some form of spirillum, but rapidly changed his mind on that point. It has an apparently round body when it is fresh and active, which tapers in front, forming a neck, ending in a blunt head, and be- hind it has a tapering tail, from which there extends a long slender lash, so fine that it can seldom be seen. It had two fin-like papillæ on each side, one pair placed near the neck, and one near the tail. He only occasionally saw the four at once, and they always appeared to occupy the same relative positions." He describes the parasite as being wonderfully active, and presenting undulatory eel-like movements; it has the power of altering its shape, progressing almost always in the direction of the blunt end, though it is able to go in the reverse manner when pulling a corpuscle. He exa- mined the kidneys, liver, spleen, heart, lungs, and the mucous lining of the stomach and intestines throughout, with great care, and stated positively that this disease is not characterized by any structural organic change; it is purely a disease of the blood. Petechiæ were noticed on the mucous lining of the intestines in some cases, but in no case was the structure of the liver diseased. The disease is absolutely fatal to horses, mules, and camels. There is no evidence to show that the disease is either contagious or infectious in the ordinary sense; the weight of evidence is to the contrary. Seventy-seven horses of the 3rd Punjab Cavalry became affected at Jutta, and were taken to Edwardesabad, where all died, but did not communicate the disease to others. He considers that when horses are closely packed together, a large fly called "burra-dhang" may inoculate healthy animals with the blood of the diseased. Evans submitted a puppy, inoculated with surra parasites transferred from the horse, to Dr. Lewis for his opinion. Lewis reported that "the parasites appeared to be very closely allied to the flaggellated variety, which were detected by himself in a considerable number of apparently healthy rats, but he could not then venture to express an opinion as to whether they were specifically identical." Major Money, 4th Punjab Cavalry, stated that the disease was com- mon amongst the horses of the 3rd Punjab Cavalry, when they obtained the grass from inundated ground near the River Indus, but it ceased when they got grass from higher ground. The outbreak takes place usually in August, but more in September, and continues until January, when it suddenly ceases. A 2
4 Treatment.5 He noted the usual symptoms of surra in the four affected animals. On microscopical examination of the blood, he observed numerous minute parasites, somewhat like eels, which appeared to vigorously attack the red corpuscles; the parasite is not to his mind a spirilloid, nor does it resemble a nematode or round worm: the pseudopodia de- scribed by Evans are really the margin of the sides "waved." He estimates the total length at about .0003, and the greatest breadth at .00023, of an inch. He examined the urine of the four patients microscopically, and states that in three he found parasites, non-motile and probably dead. As to the mode of contagion, he thinks stagnant water was the source, for the following reasons: 6 Veterinary Surgeon Steel happened to be in Meerut at the time of the epidemic, and at once recognised the disease as surra, organisms having been discovered at a later date in the blood of 15 out of 20 animals examined. It is of interest to notice that seven other animals were discovered suffering from fever, with yellow and petechial condition of the conjunctivæ, and a more or less degree of constitutional disturbance (symptoms frequently recognised by us in Poona, and by G. H. Evans in Burma), but these animals were not affected with surra, and recovered after a few days. The outbreaks in Meerut, as in other localities, have occurred only at a special time of the year, i.e., from the rainy season well into the cold weather, and up to the present time there are no sporadic cases on record as having occurred at this station at other times of the year. The deaths during this period were in September, 10; October, 26; November, 7; December, 2; January, 2. The average number of days of disease in cases that died, being for horses 52, ponies 30, and mules 19. In this series of cases, the surra parasite was found in the blood at different periods of the disease in 43 out of the 47 attacked. Veterin- ary Surgeon Nuttall apparently experienced the same difficulty in deter- mining the exact commencement of the attacks in animals as has been found by other investigators. All attempts at curative treatment were negative. As regards the post-mortem appearances of the stomach, Mr. Nuttall states, that "it may be found in some instances replete with food, in others a little partly digested blood-stained material, fibrinous clots, etc., and the organ usually the seat of special lesions; which may be ulceration or erosion, either of the cuticular or villous portions, usually confined to the former, extending in some cases to perforation, the villous por- tion in places denuded of the epithelial lining, resulting from degenera- tive changes, and yellow pigmentation of varying intensity is constantly seen." In the appendix to the report, it is stated that gastric lesions were found in the case of 25 horses, 15 ponies, and 2 mules. Ranking published, in June 1891, a preliminary report, in which he states his opinion that surra is a disease of malarial origin com- parable to ague, and that this view of its pathology is borne out both by the period of prevalence of the disease, which corresponds with that of ague, and also by the results of treatment. Quinine in full doses appears to control the disease, supplemented by general measures to combat the anæmia and weakness, consequent on prolonged illness, chiefly by milk, iron, and arsenic. He believes that the facts put now on record will, if allowed as guides to diagnosis, enable the disease to
7 be detected in the earliest stages, when it may be rapidly cured. The reason why "Surra" has hitherto been so uniformly fatal he believes to be simply because its real nature was not apprehended, and the disease allowed to run on till the vital powers were sapped by the constantly recurring fever. Giles investigated several cases which occurred at the latter end of an outbreak in Shillong, which from first to last resulted in the loss of between sixty and seventy animals. The disease described by this observer was certainly not "Surra," but was due to the presence of the Sclerostomum tetracanthum. As early as 1865, Franck, and Fischer, working independently, published papers dealing with the anæmia, hæmorrhagic enteritis, and fatal colics produced by these nematodes. Lieutenant J. Baldwin, R.A., has given the following information re surra in Burma:8 The same officer also states that "from August 1890 to August 1891 the Chinese traders brought 6,500 mules to Bhamo from Yunnan. Fifteen hundred of these animals died of surra in Burma, and five thousand were left to make the return journey. On the return of the traders to Bhamo in the following year, and on their being questioned as to the condition of the animals which made the journey in the pre- vious year to Yunnan, it was elicited that all of the animals, 5,000 in number, succumbed to disease, either whilst on the march, or on their arrival in Chinese territory." The traders further stated that all mules brought by them from Yunnan on their last journey were entirely fresh animals, which had not been over the same ground in a previous expedition. G. H. Evans, in reply to certain queries, informed Mr. Pease that "the popular idea regarding immunity of the indigenous ponies in Burma is a fallacy, as they die equally with other breeds, as also do the Panthé mules, which are bred in the Northern and Chinese Shan States; so much so is this the case, that hardly a mule or pony escapes in the Upper Irrawaddy, Mogaung, and Myitchna, so that all hope in the direction of naturally acquired immunity in indigenous breeds is lost. "There is a form of bilious fever here exactly resembling many cases which we have had in the Poona Laboratory. Yellowness of the visible mucous membranes, and petechiæ on the conjunctivæ, with rapid loss of condition and occurrence of relapses; and this is no doubt very frequent- ly confounded with surra. Evans has often been asked to destroy cases of this description, but, from the experience gained in an outbreak in 1890, he was led to discard all other symptoms as a proof of the existence of surra, and base his diagnosis solely on the presence of the hæmatozoon in the blood. "In post-mortem examinations of surra subjects, ulcers, in various stages are present in the majority of cases, shallow, deep, or small as the case may be. They present the appearance which may perhaps be conveyed best by the effect produced by a cockroach eating the surface of a patent leather boot. "Spiroptera nests are by no means invariably found in the stomach; in fact they appear to be much rarer in Burma than in the Bombay Presidency." The Panthés, who are great mule-breeders across our frontiers, state that surra kills a great number of their mules every season, in the valleys between the frontier and Yunnan. The same people also state that surra prevails in certain parts of the North and South Shan States. In Burma the stations where the greatest mortality has occurred are as follows:9 In Lower Burma a few cases only have been observed,10 To sum up, the number of horses kept at Parel is less than, one- third of that kept at Colaba; the interior sanitary arrangements at the former are superior to those at the latter; the record of fever cases at the former has up to November last compared most favourably with that at the latter; the temperature at the former averages 2° lower than at the latter. Notwithstanding all these facts to the credit of Parel, 10 horses have been attacked there during the recent outbreak of surra, against 4 horses attacked at Colaba stables. Feed and water-supply.11 "Sediments.12 that it was since those winds had turned cold in the evening and at night that the outbreak of "Surra" had occurred. With a view to obtaining thorough ventilation in the hot weather, our stables at Parel are very open in their construction, and although the Venetians, with which the sides are fitted, are closed at night, it occurred to us that at certain places the horses were more exposed than they should be to the night winds. To provide against this, we effectually protected the horses from all apertures whence these winds could enter and blow upon them, and considerably increased the warmth of the stables at night, by the erection of bamboo and matting screens across the principal entrances. We also gave all the horses standing at Parel a light course of antiseptic medicine. For three days each horse had daily two drachms hyposulphite of soda, and one drachm nitrate of potash, mixed with his evening grain feed. These preventive measures were carried out the latter part of December. It was during the last week of that month that we set up the screens, etc., which effectually protected the horses at Parel from cold winds. Simultaneously we introduced stringent regu- lations at Colaba for the complete protection of the horses there, and maintenance of a more even temperature in the stables at night. Since the 1st January we have so far had no fresh case of surra. Possible causes of the outbreak.13 affect the horse's health, have been, to the best of our belief, precisely the same these last four months, as during the many past years when "Surra" was unknown to us. We, therefore, seem directed to seek in some special climatic and atmospheric conditions for the explanation of the outbreak. October and November last were notoriously exception- ally unhealthy months in Bombay. Malarial and typhoid fevers were prevalent, and many cases ended fatally. Unusually unhealthy months for human beings, they would appear to have been unusually unhealthy for horses also. The outbreak of "Surra" fever was not confined to the Company's stables. Several horses attacked with it were sent to the Government Veterinary Hospital, and others to the private veterinary establishment in the city. Probably, a far larger number died in their owners' stables. Amongst the cases observed, we have not heard of a single recovery. Taking all the above facts into consideration, the opinion we have been led to form is, that there was some specially unhealthy influence in the atmospheric conditions this last autumn, which predisposed horses to this particular blood-poisoning fever, and that the specific cause which developed the disease into activity, in the horses attacked with it, was getting chilled from exposure to the cold northerly winds, which during the latter half of November and the month of December blew in the evening and at night. This is the conclusion to which we have been led as the result of our own experience of the disease. In support of this opinion we have the following facts:14 when surra was unknown to us, or which can, in our opinion, in any way account for the outbreak. In connection with the exposure of the horses to cold winds, and our opinion that the chill to the system therefrom resulting was the imme- diate factor producing activity in the disease, we may mention that out of 8 horses working as "helping" horses on the Byculla Bridge, no less than 3 were attacked with 'Surra,' and of these, 2 were attacked upon the same day. Compared with the work most of our horses do, the work of these particular horses was light, and they were in specially good condition and of exceptionally fine physique. These horses are attached as additional horses to help in pulling cars up the inclines on the bridge. After pulling up a car, they return to the little waiting sheds provided for them at either end of the bridge, and stand usually about five minutes, until another car approaches. On examining these sheds, we found them a good deal exposed to the north wind. We have now protected them, but it is easy to under- stand how in the early morning, or between 7 P.M. and 11 P.M. at night, these horses, after getting warm at their work, would be specially liable to chill when standing waiting in sheds, until recently not very well protected from cold winds. In the plains of America it has been noticed that in certain thinly- populated districts, where fever was prevalent, the introduction of rail- way tracks and the passage of trains has modified the sanitary conditions. The theory in explanation of this fact is that the displacement of air caused by the rapid passage of the train creates a vacuum and consequent draught, and that a rush of fresh air is, in this way, introduced. In other words, the train produces a sort of artificial wind. The track of the Great Indian Peninsula Bailway passes immediately behind our Parel premises, distant only 75 feet from the stables. About 2,000 feet further to the north, the flats commence and are crossed by the trains. In this memorandum we are anxious to enumerate all possible influences which may have served in the production of the recent outbreak of surra. It is perhaps worthy of consideration whether the Great Indian Penin- sula Railway track, which very shortly after leaving the marshy land of the flats passes our Parel stables on their north-western side, does not act as an air-channel from the one to the other. The line of horses standing next to the railway was the line in which the "Surra" was by far the most prevalent. A conjecture has been put forward by some veterinary authorities in India that there is a connection between "Surra" and rats. A para- site has been found in the intestines of rats, which is similar to the para- site noticed in the blood of horses suffering from surra. It is suggested that where rats have access to grain, it becomes contaminated with their
15 excreta, and that when used for horses' feed, the parasite may in that way be conveyed into the horses' stomachs. In view of this theory we think it right to mention that although the greater portion of our grain is kept in paved godowns, and we do our best to exclude rats, yet we know that both before and after the grain is received by us, rats do fre- quently get at it. But before our grain is used for horses' feed, it is carefully cleaned, both by band and through a machine. We ourselves cannot, from our own observation, favour the rat infection theory. If the source of the disease is due to grain getting mixed with the excreta of rats, why is the appearance of fever limited to certain seasons, and whys hould it appear only in certain years? For the past fourteen years it has been unknown in our stables, and during those years our stocks of grain and hay have been less well protected from the incursions of rats than they have been during the past twelve months. We have now, we think, exhausted all we are in a position to state with regard to our own experience of "Surra" fever. We submit these few remarks on a veterinary subject as proceeding of course from a non- professional pen, and while we trust to be pardoned any mistakes into which we may in consequence have fallen, we hope that our experience may be of value to those who are making this disease a subject of special study. As a large owner of horses, this Company is deeply interested in researches which have for their object the discovery of a remedy for this most fatal form of equine fever. GEOGRAPHICAL RANGE. The geographical range of this disease is much wider than it was once imagined, and is one of the most important diseases affecting equines met with in India. According to Evans, the natives of Dera Ismail Khan on the North-Western Frontier, east of the Indus, have known this disease for several generations as an occasional scourge. It has now been recognised all along the low country bordering the Indus. In the seventies at Asin, near Rajanpore, one cavalry regiment (3rd Punjab Cavalry) lost 350 horses. In the late war it caused enormous mortality among horses, mules, and ponies, used in Upper Burma, and according to Steel ninety-eight per cent. died from it and Komree. Surra is endemic in the Island of Bombay, and has been frequently recognised in animals in the low districts lying below the Western Ghâts, called the Konkan, and less frequently in other parts of this vast continent, separated from each other by many hundreds of miles,16 out to Haig in Persia, which he was told was invariably fatal, the cause of which the natives ascribed to the animals drinking impure water. On Haig's return to India he became acquainted with surra, and then recognised that the Persian animals were affected with all the outward ymptoms of that disease. There are reasons for believing that animals have succumbed to this disease in Abyssinia, and probably also in Southern Europe, Nroth America, Brazil, East Africa, and Australia. Further information is wanted under this head. Symptoms of naturally-contracted Surra.17 so marked, during the early remissions, that were it not for the presence of the 18 tender on manipulation. These conditions continue to increase until the fourth day; the tumour may measure three or four inches in one direction by two or three in the other, and be raised to the extent of an inch or more above the surrounding tissues, from which it can be lifted. According to the amount and the nature of the inoculated blood, so will these symptoms rapidly develop themselves, until, after a period of from four to thirteen days in the majority of cases, the tumour will be found to have become less tense and tender; and when this is noticed a microscopical examination of the subject's blood reveals the presence of the infusorian. After this the tumour gradually disappears, and the symptoms of surra are present, and run through their ordinary course. Symptoms of Inoculated Surra in Bovines.19 mature form was absent from the blood, it is interesting to note that when blood was taken from a sheep 18 days after inoculation with Horse Surra; and guineapigs were inoculated with the same, it caused Surra. Guinea pigs.20 an animal exhibiting the appetite which we see throughout the course of this disease. The tongue and mucous membrane of the mouth become first pale and later yellow in colour. Small ulcers are often noted on the sides of the free portion. The bowels are, as a rule, constipated, and we have symptoms of hepatic disturbance in the colour of fæces, and the fact of their being coated with mucus. Diarrh21 to make daily observations for a few days, if the first examination is not satisfactory. The history of the case, the condition of the animal, the presence of the 22 of the disease, dividing it, as it does, into its various stages, viz., paroxysms and intermissions. It may be generally accepted that the appearance of the infusorian in the blood is quickly followed by a rise in the temperature, and, as a rule, its disappearance is soon followed by a corresponding fall. During the presence of the organism in the blood all the phenomena of a paroxysm of "Surra" appear, while after its disappearance there is a very marked diminution in the severity of the symptoms. And so much is this the case, that in some instances at the commencement of an attack, an animal has been sent to work after the first paroxysm, being apparently well. That the infusorian is the vera causa of surra is also rendered more probable by the fact that the disease is chiefly endemic in localities which are, at certain periods of the year, favourable to the development of low forms of animal life. This is believed to be due either to these places being subject to inundations, or to their being low-lying and swampy. In those cases where the infusorian gains access to the system by means of the digestive organs, we must take into consideration the influence which wounds and other lesions have in favouring its entrance. In this regard, we find that out of 19 horses spontaneously attacked with the disease, no less than 12 were the subjects of attacks of Spiroptera megastoma or other parasites, which cause lesions of the gut. The localities where surra is enzoötic belong to two distinct kinds of climates. The one with a heavy rainfall, high temperature, and humid, steamy, atmosphere; the other, a dry arid neighbourhood, presenting a great annual range of temperature. But in both these classes of localities, inundation of land during the rains leaves the fields covered with mud, and evaporation and concentration of the water in the tanks occurs during the hot season. Mode by which the infusorian gains access to the system in naturally-acquired cases.23 on sedgy vegetation, so that we are unable to state with certainty that these media really do convey the materies morbi. It is possible that the infusorian does not exist in its mature form in either of these media, but that there may exist an immature form which has not yet been recognised. The excreta of rats has been blamed by some as a possible medium, and no doubt on good grounds, for we know that an infusorian apparently identical with that found in Horse Surra is very frequently found in the blood of these animals, and that this being the case, should any of the blood be passed with the fæces or urine, it would be quite possible that surra might be induced in horses which consumed them with their forage. Be this as it may, in Poona it has been found impracticable to induce "Surra" by feeding horses with a considerable amount of dung obtained from rats, in whose blood the infusorian is present in large numbers (swarming). The infusorian can be absorbed into the circulation from the digestive system, as has been proved by giving small quantities of blood containing it in the drink- ing water. Contagion.24 soil buckets and forage, which may be used by healthy animals and serve to transmit the disease to them. Although the possibility of these methods of mediate contagion cannot be denied, it appears to be evident that they are not of common occurrence. Are the excreta of animals suffering from surra capable of transmit- ting the disease? This is a most important question, and one which we are so far inclined to answer in the negative. Gunn was of opinion that the infusorian was passed out of the system by the urine, and stated that he had seen it undergoing changes in that fluid. That this is possible in some cases we are not in a position to deny, when we take into consideration the fact that in those cases where nephritis occurs, we have a considerable quantity of blood passed in the form of "casts" from the kidney. In order to ascertain whether urine constituted a danger in the transmission of the disease, we undertook a series of experiments. The urine of animals, in whose blood the infusorian was numerous, and in cases where the disease had reached an advanced stage, was given by subcutaneous inoculation to guinea-pigs, but in every case the results were negative. It seems, therefore, that we cannot seriously consider the urine as a cause of danger. With regard to the fæces, we have had animals suffering from surra tied on either side of a healthy one for months, under such conditions that every opportunity was given for the soiling of hay with their excreta, but there has been no communication of the disease by this means; although the animal has been eventually inoculated, and has died from surra. Is the prevalence of surra in direct proportion to the degree of inter- course between the sick and healthy animals? We have abundant evidence to prove the contrary. Evans states that "seventy-seven horses of the 3rd Punjab Cavalry becoming affected with surra at Jutta, from which they all died at Edwardesabad, did not communicate the disease to other animals." Gunn found at Kohat that "the grass-cutters' ponies stood in the same lines as the other animals, but no mule belong- ing to the Mountain Battery nor horse belonging to the Punjab Cavalry became ill of the disease." Again, in the Bombay tramway outbreaks, with one exception, the animals attacked with surra were not found to be in close proximity to each other, but were dotted about over the large area which the stables cover, and surrounded by healthy animals which remained free from the disease. Again, we have the fact that on several occasions it has happened that Australian horses belonging to the Tramway Company, which had been under one year in this country, have been the first animals attacked
25 during the year with surra, so that contagion from horse to horse is out of the question in these cases. Beyond this, we have the fact that there is no record to be found of surra having been imported or become enzoötic in a locality, as the result of the introduction of animals suffering from the disease. With this evidence before us, can we consider the disease to be contagious, or are we to look upon animals suffering from the disease as a source of danger to healthy animals? The answer appears to be in the negative, and we are led to the opinion that surra is what, might be called an "accidental" disease of the horse, introduced from without, owing to the animal ingesting the infusorian; and not contagious in the ordinary acceptation of the term, but only under certain conditions. The disease can be transmitted from a sick to a healthy animal, (i) by subcutaneous inoculation with blood, whether it be taken during a paroxysm or intermission serum, fluid taken from the tunica vaginalis, the pericardial sac, and lateral ventricles. (ii) By the gastric inges- tion of such blood. (iii) By direct injection into the general circulation. Blood taken some hours post-mortem, and from which the infusorian has apparently disappeared, will also induce surra on inoculation. Experiments are necessary to show for what length of time the blood remains virulent after death. Period of Incubation.26 cat, rabbit, and guinea-pig, it resembles surra affecting the horse. Dogs and cats have 27 animals treated with them lived longer than ordinary. To one horse we gave 10,380 grains of the alkaloids and 373 grains of arsenic in 34 days; and in this case the toxic effects of the alkaloids were very pronounced, but we failed to destroy the infusorian. We now deemed it advisable to drop the cinchona alkaloids, and to pursue the treatment with arsenic alone. The amount of arsenic which was given in one case was 795 grains in 87 days. The infusorian was absent from the blood for 84 days, and the animal lived for 110 days: here the effect of the drug was well marked; the infusorian appears to have been destroyed, but before this happy result was arrived at, the disease had so far advanced that recovery was not possible. Other cases treated with arsenic were not so successful; indeed, the above was the most encouraging case we had. Other agents have been tried: Hydrarg perchlor, both by subcutaneous injection (2.60 grammes in six days) and by direct injection into the jugular (9 25 grains in one day), but the results were negative: iodine and iodide of potassium were also given. Iodoform in ether injected subcutancously (7 grains in two days); injected into the jugular vein, 44 grains, three days. Potassium bichromate injected into the jugular vein, 23.5 grains in four days, and by gastric ingestion 2,378 in 16 days. Quinine and arsenic by gastric ingestion, l,9s0 grains of the former and 72 of the latter in six days. With regard to quinine, Ranking bad stated that large doses would bring about recovery. In order to test the veracity of this statement, we gave in one case six drachms of quinine on one day, six on the next, and six on the following day; this produced no effect whatever. Oleum terebinthinæ was also tried. None of the medicinal agents above mentioned have given us any encouraging results with the exception of arsenic. Iodic Hydrarg has also been administered, but with negative results. Protective Inoculation.28 B received 6.0C.C., died in 22 days. C received 9.0C.C., survived 40 days. Guinea-pigs: X received 6.00C.C., lived 34 days Y received 6.00C.C., lived 66 days. In the second series of experiments, blood was withdrawn from a horse immediately after death, in which the infusorian had been swarming for some days, and immediately subjected to the method described by Ogata. Three guinea-pigs were subjected to daily injection with the fluid so obtained, in varying quantities. No. 1 received 5.5C.C., and afterwards was inoculated with virulent blood. The animal succumbed in 66 days. No. 2 received 8 5C.C., and died in 19 days. No. 3 received 11.0C.C., and died in 25 days. It is evident that there is little to be hoped for in this direction. Measures to be adopted to prevent introduction and spread.29 Attention to the purity of the water-supply and giving hay only from localities known to be free from surra should be scrupulously carried out. Measures to be adopted with regard to animals suffering.30 the question as to how rats could cause the disease in horses for the food would rarely, if ever, be soiled with the blood of these animals. It therefore only remained to be tried whether the excreta of ratsCIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT LEDGER SERIES No. VI. MAIN HEAD . STOCK DISEASE. SUB-HEAD . LEGISLATION, ETC., FOR- SUBJECT: REPRESSION AND PREVENTION OF CATTLE-DISEASES IN INDIA. 1894. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1894.
PREFACE. THIS small bulletin is issued for general in- formation. HENRY T. PEASE, A.V.D., Vety. Lieut., Assistant to Inspector-General, Civil Vety. Dept. Meerut, 1894.
LEGISLATION FOR THE REPRESSION OF CATTLE- DISEASES IN INDIA. The following note, which has been drawn up by the Revenue and Agricultural Department of the Government of India, is designed to show briefly the history and present position of proposals for legislation with the object of controlling cattle-disease. The measures which have been under consideration are of two descrip- tions, viz.,2 Views of Provin- cial Govern- ments and Government of India on cattle- disease legisla- tion. 4. In October 1884, the Punjab Government recommended that the isolation of cattle suffering from contagious diseases should be made compulsory by law. The Provincial Governments were asked for their views on the proposal, and their replies were reviewed by the Government of India in November, 1886, in the following terms:3 Madras Act abandoned. 5. In a Resolution No. 575 (Revenue), dated 4th July 1890, the Madras Government definitely abandoned the idea of exercising in any general way the powers conferred by the Act of 1866. It pointed out that the want of success in the past was due not only to the want of a trained staff, but to the passive resistance of stock-owners throughout the country. The conclusions of the Government were expressed as follows:4 vention of cruel- ty to animals. This Act, which can be extended to any local area by Local Govern- ments, contains the following section (No. 7):5 Transfer of the Bacteriological Laboratory to Almora. 11. The Bacteriological Laboratory will, with the concurrence of the North-Western Provinces Government, now be located at an eleva- tion of 7,000 feet in the Himálayas near Almora, and experiments will be shortly begun there in connection with vaccines for rinderpest and other diseases demanding bacteriological investigation. It is hoped that the researches of a worker so well qualified as Dr. Lingard in the field of bacteriology may lead not only to an extension in scientific know- ledge of animal-diseases, but also to the discovery of practical remedies. If vaccines can be discovered, the Laboratory will be maintained as a manufactory of vaccines, for distribution to local Veterinary Depart- ments. Collection of information re- garding cattle- disease. In the meantime full details are being collected and compiled by Veterinary Departments in each province regarding the occurrence and character of cattle-disease in India in accordance with Revenue and Agricultural Department Resolution No. 26/133, dated the 4th July 1893, and Circular No. 27/133 of the same date. No. 61 I. G. C. V. D.-17-4-94. -250,
