Indian Civil Veterinary Department Memoirs NO. 1 REPORT OF THE RESEARCH WORK OF THE IMPERIAL BACTERIOLOGICAL LABORATORY MUKTESAR, 1908-09 CAPTAIN J. D. E. HOLMES, M.A., D.SC Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK & CO., CALCUTTA FOR THE INDIAN CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT
INDIAN CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT MEMOIRS NO. 1 REPORT OF THE RESEARCH WORK OF THE IMPERIAL BACTERIOLOGICAL LABORATORY, MUKTESAR, 1908-09 CAPTAIN J. D. E. HOLMES, M.A., D.SC Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK & CO CALCUTTA
PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK AND CO., CALCUTTA.
PREFACE. IN previous years the whole work of this Laboratory has been annually briefly summarised in an official report to the Government of India. This report has of necessity been limited to a short state- ment of the administration of the Institute, amount of sera and vaccines prepared, and a mention of the diseases under investigation. While the information contained therein has been sufficient as an annual record of the management and the practical results of the work of the Laboratory, it has for some time been recognised that a more complete account of the research work engaged in during the year would be interesting and valuable. For this purpose the Government of India recently sanc- tioned the publication of a Scientific Memoir, in which the investigation work can be dealt with apart from the annual administration report (Rev. and Agr. Dept. letter No. 769-39-2, dated 9th March 1908). The present Memoir is the first of these publications and contains a statement of the research work of the Laboratory for the official year 1908-09. In submitting this report it is not out of place to briefly refer to the general conditions regulating the work of the Institute. The main object of the Laboratory is primarily to supply the demands of the Civil Veterinary Department for sera and vaccines used in treatment and control of infective diseases of animals throughout India. Secondly, the investi- gation of the diseases of animals, their etiology, treatment and methods of immunisation. For the first purpose the facilities of the Laboratory and the results obtained have been eminently satisfactory.
iv During the past year, however, the demand for anti-rin- derpest serum has increased to such an extent that in spite of all efforts it has been found impossible to prepare a sufficient supply of that serum. The following sera and vaccines were manufactured and issued during 1908-09 :SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS. PAGE. PART I.CORRECTIONS. For " Trypanosoma " read " Trypanosomes. " The Sodium Arsenite Solution referred to in Surra Treatment, was that of Loeffler and Rueh. Page 78, line 11 from bottom, for " saltfed " read " salted. " Page 101, line 3 from top, for " has " read " have."
INVESTIGATION OF AN OUTBREAK OF HORSE SURRA WITH RESULT OF TREATMENT WITH ATOXYL, TARTAR EMETIC, MERCURY AND OTHER DRUGS. DURING the latter months of 1907, the tonga and ekka ponies working on the Kathgodam-Naini Tal road, U. P., suffered heavy losses from Surra. The outbreak commenced, as is usually the case, soon after the appearance of the rains, in July. Unfortunately, no opportunity of studying the outbreak occurred until September. Early in that month, Mr. Cross, the Assistant Bacteriologist, was directed to carry out this work, but, owing to pressure of work at the Laboratory, he was recalled after ten days and Mr. Leese (Officer Investigating Camel Diseases) was deputed for this duty. SUMMARY OF REPORTS BY THE ABOVE OFFICERS. The tonga service runs from the Railway Station, Kath- godam, to Naini Tal Brewery, a distance of 12 miles. There are four halting stages where the ponies are changed and stab- led: Kathgodam, Bojiaghat, Dogaon and Amprao. About one hundred and thirty ponies are constantly employed on this work. Position of Stables.2 Surra. than at night ; and the sweepers throw the dung from this parao over the khud opposite the tonga stable. Bojiaghat new stable is over. 100 yards from the road and at a very considerable distance below its level; and about ½ mile from the old stable. Dogaon stable is almost surrounded by thick jungle, but is raised 20 or 30 feet above the road which it adjoins. A bullock parao is opposite the tonga stable. Amprao has jungle on three sides but of a more open kind ; and is raised above its level like Dogaon ; is close to the road but just below that level. Bullock parao adjoins. Naini Tal Brewery stable is not used at night. Previous outbreaks.Surra. 3 godam at the first onset died except one Kathgodam pony. Also an aged Arab, " a pensioner, " running about the tonga yard, was not affected. The Bojiaghat ponies were moved to the new stable about a fortnight after the onset. No losses occurred at Dogaon or Amprao except one at each place, and these ponies had both been transferred from Bojiaghat 8 or 9 days previously. The usual method of diagnosis appears to have been for the Veterinary Assistant to take tem- peratures daily of all ponies at Kathgodam and Bojiaghat stables, and any pony showing 101° F. or over, was tested by fresh blood films under 1-6th power, by the Tonga Inspector. The year is said to have been an exceptionally dry one with hardly any rain after 27th August, and it has also been a very bad autumn for malaria in Kathgodam. Before the outbreak there were 106 ponies distributed amongst the four lower stages (none stand at night at the brewery). To replace losses new purchases arrived as fol- lows :4 Surra. at the lower stages. After the rains commence these flies soon disappear, and the first case of Surra in 1907 is said to have been observed when they were becoming scarce. None of these flies were to be found at the time of investigation. A Stomoxys which sucks the blood of horses and bullocks is present throughout the hot weather and disappears towards the end of October, when, as a rule, no further cases of Surra occur. It is to be found at every stage on the line. At night they collect on the leaves of trees and seem to have a prefer- ence for a tree locally known as " Simal. " They bite all parts of the body but particularly the fore legs below the knee. A Hippoboscus is also present at every stage during the same period, but in much smaller numbers. It is to be seen at com- paratively high altitudes over 5,000 feet and is found on horses both during day and night. At Bojiaghat and Kathgodam, horses, bullocks and buffa- loes were observed to be severely bitten by some insect at night time. Late in the evening it is usual to find a few small fresh blood clots on the hairs of these animals. Early in the morning, before the Stomoxys commence to bite, nu- merous dry clots are found attached to the end of hairs on most parts of the body. Of the pony the withers and back are most attacked and even in the buffalo the thickest part of the hide is penetrated. These blood clots are very distinctly seen on a white or grey pony in the morning. That these clots were not caused by the Hippoboscus was concluded from the fact that few of these flies were found in the stables at nights. The bites occurred to a lesser extent when the ponies were rugged. The Hippoboscus was never found on cattle or buffalo. Many visits were made to the stables at night in order to discover the cause of these blood clots. An insect resem- bling a small mosquito* was found in large numbers on the ponies, but it did not appear to be a blood sucker, as no trace of blood was found in the stomach after many examinatinns. Other mosquitoes were present in small numbers, but none could be secured while biting either ponies or bulls. The syces * Classified by Dr. Austen as a Phlebotomus (new species) Flies Classified by Dr. Austen, see page 15.
Surra. 5 affirm that these blood clots are noticed in the morning on the ungroomed ponies after the rains each year but only in the stables at the Kathgodam and Bojiaghat stages. This fact was confirmed by night visits to these and other stables. The clots are not found after the commencement of the cold season. Mosquitoes are very prevalent around Kathgodam and for some miles beyond Bojiaghat, but the numbers become less as the altitude increases. REMARKS BY MR. LEESE. The longest time that actively moving trypanosomes were found in stomach of Stomoxys was ½ hour after sucking blood of a Surra pony. In stained preparations trypanosomes were found 3½ hours after it had sucked from a Surra pony. Exami- nation of blood of goats and buffaloes showed no parasite, neither did the sweat, tears or dung of Surra ponies. Intraperitoneal inoculations from bullocks, which had been on the road all the year, into rabbits and guinea-pigs gave trypanosomiasis in one case out of four ; the amount of blood inoculated being 3 c.c. That the cattle in the valley are sometimes affected with latent trypanosomiasis is proved by the inoculation experi- ment above mentioned, but the refusal of the natives to allow the withdrawal of blood from their bullocks prevented me from obtaining evidence as to the proportion affected. The evidence is against the probability of the disease in tonga ponies having been imported by new purchases, as no ponies were bought between 10th February and the beginning of the outbreak (15th July). The disease was first discovered at the old Bojiaghat stable at a time when Tabanus may have been absent, and it conti- nued to spread when Tabanus was certainly absent. My visit was too late in the season to make observations on flies in the early part of the outbreak, but at the time of my stay, Stomoxys was biting both horses and cattle, and the effects of what appears to be most likely a mosquito, were still to be seen on horses, cattle and buffaloes. After 11th October, I visited the horses every evening between 7 and 9 P.M., but the only mosquito-like insects which
6 Surra. I found was apparently a non-blood sucker, and at this time the blood-marks were much less numerous than in September. The ponies that were rugged up at night did not show so many blood-marks as those in the segregation shed which were not rugged up, but the segregation shed was situated on the edge of thick jungle. The cessation of the outbreak corresponds with the dimi- nution in number of these blood-marks, and also with the diminution in number of Stomoxys. In September, however, the Stomoxys was found at every stage on the road. The only two cases that occurred at Dogaon and Amprao are probably accounted for by their recent transfer from Bojia- ghat, and they may also have been overlooked for some days owing to the irregular testing which was carried out at the two former stages. At Amprao, the syces had not seen the blood- marks ; at Dogaon, they had, but my own night visits to these places were made too late to be able to entirely confirm either statement, and I can only say that on 15th October there were no such marks at night at either stage. The reappearance of the disease with the use of the old Bojiaghat stable may be more than a coincidence, for the marsh near it affords a good theoretical breeding ground for mosqui- toes or Tabanus, and the dung thrown over the khud from the bullock parao opposite the stable may be expected to aid the breeding of Stomoxys, and the close proximity of the bullocks when resting at the parao would give any insect, capable of transmitting Surra, an opportunity to bite both horses and bullocks within a short space of time. The appear- ance given by the trypanosomes in the stomach of the Stomoxys seemed to indicate that the organism was simply undergoing disintegration. SUMMARY. There appears to be a connection between the old Bojia- ghat stable and the cause of the outbreak, as on the three different occasions the disease commenced here. The close proximity to this stable of a cattle camping-ground on one side and the presence of marshy land and jungle within a short distance, are, in all probability, factors in the origin of
Surra. 7 the outbreak. It has been proved that cattle harbour for years the Surra parasite in their blood without showing any outward symptoms, and that, although blood examination fails to reveal the presence of the trypanosome, the blood is still infective. In the present instance, four apparently healthy cart bullocks were tested, and the blood from one of the four gave Surra to the inoculated rabbit. Unfortunately the native owners objected to their cattle being bled even in a small amount and no further tests could be made. The swampy land and jungle round the Bojiaghat stable harbour Tabanidæ in large numbers before the rains, and it is possible that these flies may have been the means of trans- mitting the disease from cattle, but the disease continued to spread rapidly after the disappearance of these flies. There are also grounds for concluding that the Stomoxys could not have been the sole agent in the transmission of the disease. The zone in which the cases spread was confined to Kath- godam and Bojiaghat ; the Stomoxys were of more general distribution. The Stomoxys attacks in the day time when the healthy horses were worked in contact with the affected ones. The horses exposed to this infection during the day but stabled apart from infected animals during the night, did not contract the disease. Within the infected zones the ponies as well as the bulls and buffaloes were badly bitten at night by some insects (presumably a mosquito) which could not be discovered at work. Recently Mr. Leese has informed me that camels are bitten in a similar manner at night, and that the Sarbans in the Dera Ghazi Khan district send away their camels during and after the rains to avoid the mosquitoes which are said to be a cause of " fever and death. " Among camels, Surra is following the extension of canal irrigation, another fact which points to the probability of the mosquito being concerned in the transmission of the disease. Unfortunately the investigation of this outbreak was com- menced at too late a date. It is proposed, if opportunity arises, to continue the observations on the biting flies and mosquitoes on this road during the present year.
8 Surra. RESULT OF TREATMENT WITH ATOXYL, MERCURY AND TARTAR EMETIC. Several of the ponies, immediately after they contracted Surra, were sent to Muktesar for experimental purposes. Treat- ment was commenced a few days after the disease had been diagnosed. The ponies were, as a rule, in poor condition as they had been doing double their ordinary work for some weeks. ATOXYL. The first injections of atoxyl were made subcutaneously, but these were not rapidly absorbed, and consequently the intravenous method was adopted. This was also the case with mercury, which, when injected subcutaneously, was not absorbed and caused pain and swelling and in one case necrosis of the subcutaneous tissue. The primary results of the atoxyl treatment appeared very promising. The animals improved rapidly in condition and the parasites disappeared from the blood. But whenever the treatment was stopped and even during a continuous treatment for a long period, the trypano- somes re-appeared and the condition of the animals became worse. ATOXYL ALONE. Pony 243, height about 14 hands, body-weight 678 lbs. Disease diagnosed 8th September. Treatment commenced 19th September. Quantity of Atoxyl received. c.c. gms. 800 of 2 % Atoxyl subcut. = 16 subcut. = 16 gms subcut 290 Surra. 9 Injections. Date. Quantity of a 2 per cent. solution of Atoxyl injected. How injected. Trypanosoma pre- sent or absent. c.c. September 19th ... 50 Subcut. Absent. 10 Surra. seems to have been carried direct to the kidneys and set up acute Nephritis. A guinea-pig inoculated intraperitoneally with 5 c.c. blood direct on October 10th, and a rabbit which received a similar inoculation, showed no symptoms of Surra. Pony 246.Surra. 11 and remained absent till the 12th. On 12th and 13th two more injections were made of 50 c.c. of 8 per cent. solution, but a few days after the parasites appeared, and as the pony was losing all the improvement which he showed under the early treatment, he was destroyed. A rabbit inoculated intraperitoneally with 5 c.c. of blood from this pony on October 17th, showed parasites in the blood four days after inoculation. ATOXYL AND MERCURY. Pony 249.12 Surra. Date. Quantity injected. Atoxyl sol. How injected. Trypanosoma present or absent. c.c. October 6th ... ... 50 2% Intrav. Absent. Surra. 13 Injections. Date. Quantity injected. Atoxyl or Hg. Cl2 sol. How injected. Trypanosoma present or absent. c.c. November 12th ... ... 25 Atoxyl 4% sol. Intrav. Present. 14 Surra. This injection produced great distress. The animal lay down and breathing was difficult. The following injections were not attended with any sign of inconvenience :Surra. 15 effect. When used alone, it lowered the condition of. the animal and hastened a fatal issue. When tried in combina- tion with other drugs such as atoxyl, tartar emetic and methylene blue, it evidently counteracted to an extent the beneficial effect of these drugs. FLIES CLASSIFIED BY DR. AUSTEN. Stomoxys calcitrans 16 Surra. Body weight. April 13th ... 50 c.c. of 4% Atoxyl Tryps. absent. 553 lbs. Surra. 17 In the following ten cases, 3 rabbits, 5 guinea-pigs and 2 ponies, the result of the treatment has been most successful. With the exception of Pony No. 260, the cases have been under observation for three months from the commencement of the treatment, and during this time no trypanosomes have been found in the blood which was carefully examined daily. All the animals have improved in condition and appear in com- plete health. Guinea-pig No. 270 received one dose of atoxyl and one dose of orpiment and a week after was inoculated with Surra. The inoculation was without effect. Pony No. 271 was inoculated with Surra and on the 6th day the temperature rose to 39.5°C., and the treatment was commenced before the trypanosomes were observed in blood. The Surra used in the experiments was of a very virulent strain and has infected a very large number of animals with- out a single negative result. The solutions of atoxyl were freshly prepared and given subcutaneously. The orpiment was administered in bolus. PONY 260. Body weight in lbs. June 25th ... Inoculated with Surra ... ... ... ... July 1st ... ... ... Tryps, appeared in blood. 254 18 Surra. Body weight in lbs. May 20th ... 0.5 gms. of Orp. Tryps. absent. ... ... Surra. 19 GUINEA-PIG NO. 268. Body weight in grammes. May 17th ... Inoculated with Surra ..... ... 20 Surra. Body weight in grammes. May 27th ... 3 c.c. of 1% Atoxyl Tryps. absent. 1,010 Surra. 21 In the nine cases, where the disease was in an early stage, the treatment has apparently effected a cure. Whether an equally good result can be obtained with animals in a later phase of the disease has yet to be proved. A large number of experiments have been made to decide on the requisite dose of atoxyl. Animal. Age. Body weight in lbs. Injections Subcut. Quantity of Atoxyl in gms. per 500 lbs. Result. Gms. Gms. Mare ... Aged 670 300 c.c. 2% = 6 4.47 Lived. No toxic effect. Pony ... 22 Surra. Animal. Weight in gms. Injections Subcut. Quantity of Atoxyl per 500 gms. Result. Gms. Gms. Cgms. Guinea-pig ... 500 3 c.c. 1% = .03 .030 = 3.0 Lived No toxic effect. Surra. 23 not broken up in the mouth and that the drug is well mixed with the other ingredients. Throughout the treatment and for some weeks following, the animal should receive a liberal diet and be protected from extremes of temperature or any lowering condition. (iii) FURTHER EXPERIMENTS ON THE TREATMENT OF SURRA WITH ATOXYL AND ORPIMENT AND OTHER PREPARATIONS OF ARSENIC. THE object of these experiments was to confirm the results of atoxyl and orpiment treatment published in a previous paper* and to test the effect of this treatment when commenced at an advanced stage of the disease. In the case of some rabbits and guinea-pigs the treatment was commenced about three weeks after the Surra inoculation and two weeks after the appearance of trypanosomes in the blood. Unfortunately, it was not possible to adopt the same course with the ponies. The only animals obtainable at the time for experiment were worn out and half starved village ponies which had no power of resistance to the disease and. succumbed in a very short period. With these animals the treatment was commenced, one to three and four days after the trypanosomes were observed in the blood. EXPERIMENTS WITH GUINEA-PIGS AND RABBITS. Seven guinea-pigs and two rabbits received the atoxyl and orpiment treatment and were kept under observation for three months. In no instance did the trypanosomes re- appear in the blood after the first injection of atoxyl. Four of the guinea-pigs died during the period of observation. These deaths were due to exposure to cold at night time and to improper feeding. In the case of guinea-pig No. 287 seven doses, in No. 288 six doses and in No. 289 four doses were sufficient. EXPERIMENTS WITH PONIES. Summary.24 Surra. In four cases Nos. 260, 245, 283 and 285 the treatment has been successful. In 263 the treatment failed and trypanosomes reappeared in the blood. Ponies 282, 280 (and four others not here recorded) died under the treatment. In the case of Pony 263 atoxyl and orpiment treatment had no good result. Following this, atoxyl, orpiment and tartar emetic were administered for 15 days and apparently effected a cure. Pony 287 was treated with tartar emetic and sodium arsenite. After the treatment ceased, the trypanosomes again appeared in the blood. A combination of atoxyl, orpiment and sodium arsenite was then tried with success. Pony 288 was treated with sodium arsenite (drench), tartar emetic (intrav.) and orpiment (ball). This treatment failed. When the pony was in an advanced stage of the disease, the combination of sodium arsenite, atoxyl and orpiment was administered with a successful result. The same combinaton, atoxyl, orpiment and sodium arsenite was administered to Pony 292. One injection of atoxyl, 2 doses of sodium arsenite and 2 doses of orpiment were given with a successful result. In cases Nos. 258 and 265 the atoxyl and orpiment were administered at the same time. The result was not good. Following this the alternate method was tried but did not succeed. Pony 289 was treated with tartar emetic and orpiment. He died under treatment. The results of these experiments show that Surra in rab- bits and guinea-pigs can be cured by a few doses of atoxyl and orpiment administered according to the method of Lave- ran and Thiroux even when the disease is well established and that the treatment is accompanied with little risk. That in ponies and horses the same treatment can effect a cure even in advanced cases (Horse 245), but that it does not succeed in all cases ; and that all animals cannot tolerate the drugs. It is probable that further experiments may
Surra. 25 establish a more correct dose of orpiment and better methods of administration. That a combination of tartar emetic, atoxyl and orpi- ment, and also a combination of atoxyl, orpiment and sodium arsenite, can be used with success. In the outbreak of Surra among the Native Cavalry two advanced cases were treated by Lieut. Anderson, A.V.C. In one case abscesses developed at the seat of the atoxyl inocula- tion and the horse was destroyed. The second case, Horse 245, had a relapse after treatment. Larger doses of atoxyl and orpiment were then administered with apparent success. In a new series of experiments at present under observa- tion, the combination of atoxyl, sodium arsenite and orpi- ment has given results superior to any other treatment. The drugs are administered on successive days and repeated twice after an interval of four and eight days. The animals showed no ill effects from the treatment and rapidly improved in con- dition. At the present time (six weeks) there has been no reappearance of the trypanosomes. GUINEA-PIG NO. 277. Body weight in grammes. July 23rd ... Inoculated with Surra ...... 550 Aug. 3rd ... ... Tryps. appeared in blood 520 26 Surra. Body weight in grammes. Aug.14th ... 1.5 c.c. of 1% Atoxyl Tryps. present 490 Surra. 27 GUINEA-PIG NO. 288. Body weight in grammes. Aug. 14th Inoculated with Surra ...... 390 28 Surra. Body weight in grammes. Aug. 14th ... 3 c.c. of 1% Atoxyl Tryps. present. 1520 Surra. 29 Body weight in lbs. Sept. 2nd ... ...... Tryps. reappeared Not weighed. 30 Surra. This pony was kept under daily observation for 3 months. No trypanosomes were found in the blood and the animal was kept at work after the first month and remains (January 31st, 1909) in apparent health and good condition. PONY 283. Body weight in lbs. Sept. 11th ... 50 c.c. of 4% Atoxyl ... 280 Surra. 31 Body weight in lbs. Oct. 7th ... 300 c.c. of Sodium Ar- senite in drench. Tryps. absent. 294 32 Surra. Body weight- in lbs. Oct. 29th ... 600 c.c. Sodium Arsen- ite in drench. Tryps. absent. 358 Surra. 33 PONY 258. Body weight. in lbs. Aug. 7th ... Inoculated with Surra ...... 535 34 Surra. Body weight in lbs. Oct. 1st ... Tryps. reappeared ...... Surra. 35 Body weight in lbs. Sept. 22nd ... 1.5 gm. of Orp Tryps. absent 265 36 Surra. of bright yellow color and of heavier specific gravity than the second which is of a brownish tinge. Dr. Hankin kindly analysed these specimens and informed me that the first contains 72 % of a substance soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid. This soluble substance consisted chiefly or entirely of white arsenic. No. 2 contains 2.6 % of substance soluble in dilute hydro- chloric acid. In our experiments we found that the second sample of orpiment was of no use in the treatment of Surra and in small doses caused colic.
PART II. IMMUNISATION AGAINST CHARBON SYMPTOMATIQUE BY MEANS OF A SINGLE VACCINE. The well-known system of vaccination against Charbon Symptomatique discovered by Arloing and Cornevin, has for many years been practised with so much success that any fur- ther attempts to improve on this method may appear from a practical point of view unnecessary. The immunity established by these vaccines is undoubtedly of a solid and durable nature. Statistics go to prove that in Black Quarter districts the mortality which ranged from 2 to 25% has by means of this vaccination been reduced to 1%. It is also recorded that vac- cinated animals were found to be protected the year following that in which they were treated. However, during recent years, this system of vaccination has not met with the same approval as it at first received. The main reason for this is that frequent accidents have occurred after the use of the vaccines. The average mortality after vac- cination is extremely small, being less than 1%, but this mor- tality is not evenly distributed. For some unexplained reasons a large number of deaths at times occur after the use of either the first or the second vaccine. In one instance, recorded in England, fifteen cattle were inoculated with quarter evil vaccine and within the next three days five of them died from inoculation quarter evil. The same vaccine was used in forty-eight other cattle in different herds without any accidents. In another case eight animals were inoculated. On the third day after the use of the second vaccine, two out of the eight, died with lesions at the point of inoculation. In Switzerland, in 1895, a mortality of 7.8 per 1,000 was ex- perienced. The same vaccine used in France and Holland gave a result of 0.72 per 1,000.
38 Charbon Symptomatique. Many similar instances of a heavy rate of mortality after the use of vaccines are on record and have induced a certain amount of prejudice against the system. JOURNAL OF COMPARA- TIVE PATHO- LOGY AND THERAPEU- TICS, 1895. There appears to be no satisfactory and accepted explana- tion of these accidents after vaccination. In discussing the mortality which occurred in Switzerland in 1895, Cornevin brings forward evidence that the casualties were not due to the use of vaccines of excessive virulence. He suggests a special and temporary susceptibility on the part of the cattle inoculated in this country. He states that a marked and altogether peculiar sensibility of certain animals and certain families of animals with reference to Black Quarter is not a new fact, as it has been previously observed at various places. It may be due to a gross condition of the animals or to the association of certain non-pathogenic microbes. OESTEREICH MONATS FUR THIER, 1895. In a review of the accidents resulting from the practice of Kitt's method of single vaccination it is concluded that " accidents cannot be avoided either by the system of vaccina- tion at one operation or by using two vaccines," as it is not known what are the circumstances that determine a change in the virulence of the inoculating material. Some of the fatal cases occurred in weakly or diseased animals or in animals which after the inoculation of the first vaccine were immediately overdriven. It is also known that death may be due to a special disposition of the animals; to traumatic injuries inflicted at the time of inoculation or after- wards ; to the injection of too large doses of the vaccine ; or to decomposition of the vaccine caused by heat, chemicals or other influences. Virulence of the vaccine is very variable and depends on whether the muscular tissue has been taken from an animal which has succumbed or from one that has been slaughtered. Also on other conditions, as whether the animal has been bled or not, how long it was ill, whether the bacilli were numerous in the material from which the vaccine was prepared and in the length of time in drying. ANNALES DE L' INSTITUT PASTEUR, 1902, 1903, 1908. Leclainche and Vallee who have devoted much time and labour to the elucidation of this subject in their earlier publica- tion of 1900, were inclined to the view that the impurities of the muscle vaccine was a factor in the accidents after vaccina-
Charbon Symptomatique. 39 tion. To eliminate this they recommended the use of pure vaccines prepared either from the heart blood immediately after death or from culture of the virus. Further experience proved that these pure vaccines, even when they are very attenuated, are not free from risk and that the results are not better than those obtained from the impure vaccines. In their latest publication on this subject they express their conviction, that the accidents are almost always due to latent infection at the time of inoculation and state that " we have been able to make a series of experimental and practical observations which do not leave any doubt regarding the rôle of latent infection in the production of accidents following vaccination. " In consequence they advise a method of con- ferring a passive immunity by means of a protective serum, to be followed after a short interval by an attenuated virus. MacFadyean, in reviewing this publication, expresses views in opposition to the theory of " latent infection " and to the sero-vaccination method of immunizing. He is of opinion that the individual susceptibility is the explanation most in accordance with observed facts. In recent years other systems of single vaccination have been largely advertised and practised with varying success. In 1903, Thomas introduced a single method of vaccination. This vaccine is termed " Blacklegines " and consists of a thread saturated with vaccine which is introduced under the skin in form of a seton. Another preparation " Blacklegoids " is sold in the form of pillules by Messrs. Parke Davis and Co. These are injected subcutaneously by means of a special syringe. They have this advantage that the method of operation is simple and rapid. Partly for this reason their use has met with the general approval of the officers engaged in combating infective diseases in India, and they are said to be the form of vaccine most applicable to the conditions of this country. For some years the double vaccines have been prepared at the Muktesar Bac- teriological Laboratory, but there has been little demand for them. The necessity of two operations at an interval of several days, combined with the danger of contamination of the vaccine
40 Charbon Symptomatique. during process of manipulation renders them little suitable for use in India. In every country the success of an anti-serum or vaccine depends upon simplicity of operation, freedom from accidents and period of immunity conferred. In India, the first two quali- fications have to be considered somewhat at the expense of the third. New methods are regarded with suspicion by the owners of cattle, and it requires the utmost tact and diplomacy to induce them to submit their animals for treatment. To the Hindoo, the life of the cow, as a rule, ranks higher than that of a human being. Consequently any measures of treatment adopted for their benefit must, above all considera- tions, be free from any risk of accidents. The following experiments were carried out in order to determine the method of vaccination safest and most easy of application to the cattle of this country. In all the following experiments the same virus was used. This consisted of the dried muscle juice taken from a bull dead of Black Quarter. The dried powder was diluted in proportion of 0.2 grammes in 5 c.c. of normal salt solution. Of this solution 1 c.c. was determined to be a reliable lethal dose for all susceptible bovines. Susceptibility of Indian Bovines to experimental Inoculation of Black Quarter. Effect of virus inoculated intramuscularly. Class of Animal. Lab. No. Age. Quantity of virus inocu- lated. Result. Plains Bull ... 79 1 c.c Died after 36 hours. Hill Bull ... 424 , Lived. Charbon Symptomatique. 41 The results show that young animals possess a very high degree of susceptibility to experimental intramuscular inocula- tion of this amount of virus and that death takes place in a very short interval after the inoculation. It was found that the addition of Lactic acid to the virus was unnecessary and did not in any way increase the virulence. Effect of virus inoculated subcutaneously with and without Lactic acid. Class of Animal. Lab. No. age. Quantity of virus inoculated. Result. Hill Bull. ... 360 2 1 c. c. mixed with a drop of Lac. acid. Died in 21 hours. 42 Charbon Symptomatique. (d) The first and second vaccine of Arloing and Cornevin. The latter three vaccines were prepared at this Laboratory. Testing Blacklegoid (a). No. of Bull. Age. Years. Quantity of vaccine used sabcutancously. No. of days tested after vaccine. Quantity of virus inoculat- ed intramus- cularly. Result. 7660 1 1 pillule 8 1 c. c. Died in 24 hrs. 370 2 1 Charbon Symptomatique. 43 Further, it appears that during this interval the animals inoculated with vaccine are in a state of hyper-susceptibility to the disease, as they succumb to a lethal dose of the virus in a much shorter time than the controls do. Some of the bulls, which died at this stage after receiving the virus, were dead in less than twenty hours after the inoculation, without showing any of the usual clinical symptoms of the disease. This nega- tive phase which results after vaccination and which varies in duration with the amount of vaccine used, is a very probable explanation of many of the accidents which occur in the field. Judging from the results of our experiments it is safe to conclude that the cattle of India can resist large doses of a strong vaccine injected either subcutaneously or intra- muscularly even with the addition of Lactic acid. A high percentage are also tolerant to the pure virus when inoculated subcutaneously, though they are very highly susceptible to the intramuscular inoculation of the virus. Consequently there is little danger of accident resulting from such causes as variation in the strength of the vaccine or individual susceptibility among these cattle. When animals which have been treated with vaccine are exposed to infection during the period of hyper-susceptibility following the vaccin- ation, there is undoubtedly a slight risk of accidents. Testing of single vaccine (c). No. of Bull. Age. Quantity of vaccine used subcutaneously. No. of days tested after vaccine. Quantity of virus inoculated intramuscularly. Result. Years. Gm. c.c. 417 3½ .005 14 1 Died. 420 2½ .005 14 1 Lived. 488 3 .005 14 1 44 Charbon Symptomatique. COMPARATIVE TEST OF BLACKLEGOID, VACCINE (b) AND VACCINE (c). Ten bulls were inoculated with one Blacklegoid each, ten with .005 gm. of single vaccine (b) and ten with .005 of mixed vaccine (c). These bulls were tested on the 26th day after the vaccination by the inoculation intramuscularly of 1 c.c. of a solution (0.2 gm. in 5 c.c. normal salt solution) of virulent muscle juice with the following result :Charbon Symptomatique. 45 VACCINE (c). No. of Ball. Age. Years. Quantity of vaccine used subcuta- neously. Quantity of vaccine inoculated intramus- cularly. Result. 9250 ... ... 1 .005 gm. 1 c.c. Lived. 9237 ... ... 1 .005 46 Charbon Symptomatique. is three to several days. In experimentally inoculated cases the mortality is over 65% and the animals die in 24 to 48 hours. It can, therefore, safely be concluded that a vaccine which protects against the above Laboratory test will afford a more complete and durable immunity against natural infection. The vaccines experimented with are entirely harmless. In no instance was any temperature reaction or other disturbance noticed after their use. Guinea-pigs and sheep inoculated with the same dose as used for cattle showed only a slight rise of temperature, and no other disturbance. The only danger attending vaccination is, when the animals are exposed to direct infections during the period of anaphylaxis following the inoculation of the vac- cine. Practical experience has proved that casualties resulting after vaccination are neither heavy nor of frequent occurrence. Vaccines in pillule form are safer and more easily mani- pulated than the powdered muscle. With the latter vaccines there is the danger of contamination, while dissolving the powder and the difficulty of injecting undissolved particles through a hypodermic needle. It is also conceivable that vaccines inoculated in the pill form produce a better result than those used in solution. The pillules, when inoculated subcutaneously, are not dissolved for 12 to 24 hours, and during this time the virus is partially protected from rapid phagocytosis and gets a better opportunity of exerting its effect on the system. DESCRIPTION OF AN AUTOMATIC PILLULE INJECTOR. This instrument was devised for the purpose of injecting the vaccines in pillule form. It is simple and easy of mani- pulation and does not readily break or get out of order. The parts of the injector are :[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] AN AUTOMATIC PILULE INJECTOR.
Charbon Symptomatique. 47 The rod A is provided with a button at the top. The lower end is hollow and is grooved for the hypodermic needle to be screwed on. Above this is a channel to accommodate the head of the ejector pin. Working on the head of the ejector pin is a spiral spring. The sheath fits over the steel rod, and the end of the head of the ejector pin is fastened into the lower end of the sheath. At the lower third the sheath is provided with a circular finger rest. By means of the spiral spring the sheath has a play of somewhat less than ¼ inch along the rod. Method of Use. By placing the button of A in the palm of the hand and the second finger on the rest of B, the rod is lowered in the sheath and the needle projects below the ejector pin. The pillule is dropped into the needle and the mouth cov- ered by the first finger (Fig. E). A fold of skin is seized by finger and thumb of the other hand and the needle is inserted about half an inch. The pressure on the button of A is relaxed by which the rod is raised on the sheath and the mouth of the needle brought to the level of the ejector pin. By this action the pillule is forced out of the needle and the ejector is with- drawn.
PART III. IMMUNISATION AGAINST HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTI- CÆMIA OF BOVINES. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia is a widespread and fatal disease of Bovines in India. Unfortunately, owing to the inadequacy of the Veterinary Staff, whose time is fully occupied in dealing with epizootics and who have neither the leisure nor the facilities for under- taking investigation work, there is very scanty information regarding the epidemiology of this disease. Several years ago Pease drew attention to the existence of Hæmorrhagic Septi- cæmia in the Punjab and described the disease among cattle and buffaloes. During recent years the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, have, from time to time, recorded heavy losses from the disease in certain districts and attempts have been made to combat outbreaks by means of an anti- serum prepared at the Muktesar Laboratory. Evans has observed mortality among elephants due to this disease in Burma. There is no doubt that in past years many deaths which were ascribed to Anthrax, Ludhiana disease, and even Rinderpest, were caused by Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia, and that as the methods of diagnosis improve and further facilities for accurate observation in the field are obtained, it will be found that the disease is more widespread and prevalent than is at present recognised. In India the disease is known under the following terms :Hæmorrhagic Septiæmia. 49 Buffaloes are said to be more susceptible than cattle, cattle of hill breed more than those of the plains, and young animals to a greater extent than older ones. I have not been able to observe any appreciable difference in susceptibility to the experimentally inoculated disease among buffaloes, cattle, young and old animals. The hill cattle are somewhat more susceptible than the plains, but working with a virus of uniform strength, all these animals succumb in much the same time, and none, which have once shown any symptoms of the disease further than a moderate temperature reaction, recover. About 20% were found to be resistant. Horses, donkeys and pigeons are also very susceptible. Sheep and mules have a slight susceptibility, while goats, dogs and fowl are immune. The virus, when kept in artificial medium, is very variable and loses its virulence. It frequently occurs that a sub- culture taken from a very virulent growth proves innocuous. Further, a culture which is fatal for rabbits and guinea- pigs may have no effect on cattle. In all the following experiments relating to immunity, the virus for each test was first passed through a rabbit or bull, and a fresh culture obtained from the dead animal was employed. This rarely failed in virulence. For all experiments, bulls were used as Controls. It was found that the organism was susceptible to variations of temperature. This fact was constantly observed. It was also noticed that Lemco, as a medium, was unsuitable for the growth of the organism. Animals inoculated with non-virulent cultures, showed no immunity when tested at short or long periods after the first inoculation. For this reason, and having regard to the unsuitability of living vaccines for use in India, no experiments with attenu- ated cultures were conducted. 4
50 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Experiments to determine a standard lethal dose of a broth culture 48 hours old, grown at 37°C., against which to test methods of immunising and to establish the susceptibility of different animals to the inoculated disease. CATTLE. Serial No. Breed. Quantity of culture injected. How injected. Result. c.c. 1 Hill ... 0.016 Subcut. Lived. Temp. 39° C. 2 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 51 RABBITS. Serial No. Quantity of cul- ture injected. How injected. Result. c.c. 1 1 Subcut. Died 20 hours. 2 0.1 52 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. MULES. Serial No. Age. Quantity of culture injected. How injected. Result. c.c. 1 aged 1 Subcut. Lived. No effect. 2 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 53 GOATS. Serial No. Quality of culture in- jected. How injected. Result. 1 0.5 Subcut. Lived. No reaction. 2 0.5 54 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. No. Dose. How prepared. How injected. Result. 6 0.8 Filtered ... Intrav. ... Died in 36 hrs. G. Pig 1 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 55 Subcutaneously. Intravenously. 0.500 c.c. 1.0 c.c. 1.000 c.c. 2.5 c.c. 5.0 c.c. 7.5 c.c. 10.0 c.c. 12.5 c.c. About 21 days after the last injection, the bulls were bled 2500 c. c. from the jugular vein. Twenty-four hours after they were bled a second time, a similar quantity. A period of over five months was necessary to prepare this serum. Frequently deaths occurred after an injection of culture. The sera preparing bulls appeared not to be immunised against the disease. As has been observed in the preparation of other anti-toxic sera, the repeated injections of the toxic products established in certain animals a condition of anaphylaxis. Among one batch of serum preparing bulls five deaths occurred. Bull (1) died 2 days after the injection of 0.2 c.c. subcut. 56 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 1 Control died in 3 days and 1 Control lived. Summary :Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 57 METHOD OF PREPARATION OF SERUM B. H. S. SERUM MAKING. Plains Bull No. 7350. 6th October 1907 ... Received 2 c.c. Serum. 28th 58 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 6th December Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 59 H. S. Testing on Rabbits. No. Dose of serum in- jected. Serum taken from Bull No. After in- jection of Tested with 0.00002 b.c. after Result. Remarks. Rabbit. c.c. c.c. 34 5 6356 200 Simultaneous Died. 35 5 6356 200 60 Hæmorrhagic Septiæmia. 2 Controls died. Remarks :Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 61 Injected with sediment of 4,000 c.c. culture 4 weeks old, in 250 c.c. saline solution. Interval 18 days. Bled 3,750 c.c. TESTING OF SERUM C. Serum followed by virus 48 hours after. Retested after 32 days. Bull No. 1. Dose c.c. Virus c.c. Result. Retested after Result. 1 0.1 0.1 died ... ... ... 2 1 0.1 lived 32 days. Lived. No reaction. 3 20 0.1 62 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Bull. Serum. Virus after 3 weeks c.c. Result. 15 5 0.1 Lived. No reaction. 16 5 0.1 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 63 Injected with 30 c.c. filtered culture 48 hrs. old. Interval 12 days. Injected with 200 c.c. filtered culture 48 hrs. old. Interval 14 days. Injected with 600 c.c. filtered culture 48 hrs. old. Interval 14 days. Injected with 2000 c.c. filtered culture 48 hrs. old. Interval 21 days. Bled 1850 c.c. Two other hill bulls were treated in a similar manner and the serum from all three mixed together. TESTS OF SERUM D. Serum plus virus 48 hours after. Re-tested after 8 weeks. Bull. Dose of serum in- jected c.c. Virus c.c. Result. Re-tested after inter- val of Result. 1 5 0.1 Lived. No reaction. 8 weeks. Lived. No reaction. 2 5 0.1 64 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. An injection of 5 to 10 c.c. followed by virus 48 hours after gave no reaction and afforded an active immunity which was tested after an interval of eight weeks with good results. The injection of serum (C & D) followed by the inoculation of virus confers an active immunity of long duration and gives rise to no thermal reaction or other symptoms. Similar results have been obtained in immunising against Rinderpest and Anthrax by the combination of serum and virus. Even when the amount of serum injected is sufficient to suppress all symptoms of disease, an active immunity follows which persists for several months. This serum had no curative effect. IMMUNISATION BY MEANS OF STERILE VACCINES. As it was frequently observed during this investigation that attenuated cultures produced no immunity against in- oculation of a virulent strain, and also for the reason that vac- cination by means of the living organism is always attended by considerable risk of fatalities, no experiments on this line were conducted. Vaccines were prepared in the following manner :Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 65 TESTS OF VACCINE A. Hill Bull. Vaccine. Tested after Result. 1 50 c.c. 16 days. Lived. No reaction. 2 1 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Hill Bull. Vaccine. Tested after Result. 24 5 c.c. 56 days. Lived. No reaction. 25 5 Hæmorrhagic Septicæma. 67 2 Controls died in 3 days. Hill Bull. Vaccine. Tested after Result. 13 5 c.c. 56 days. Lived. No reaction. 14 5 68 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. 1 Control died in 36 hours. Bulls 1, 2, 3, 4 were re-tested a month after the vaccine injection and inoculation of virus and were found immune. The investigation of this vaccine was not carried any fur- ther, as the difficulty in obtaining the pleural exudate proved that it was not a practical method of operation. IMMUNISATION BY MEANS OF TOXIN. The toxin was obtained by sterilizing and filtering broth cultures 48 hours old. The toxin was used fresh. Bull. Testin. Tested after Result. 1 5 c.c. 21 days Lived No reaction 2 5 PART IV. RINDERPEST. THE " SERUM ALONE " METHOD AS A MEANS OF COMBATING RINDERPEST IN INDIA. About ten years ago the method of preventive inoculation against Rinderpest by means of a single injection of serum alone was first practised in India. The introduction of the prophy- lactic treatment of Rinderpest in India, followed on the work done in South Africa by Koch, Kolle, Turner Danys, Bordet, Theiler, Edington and others. In 1897 Koch visited India and gave a demonstration of the bile and serum methods at the Muktesar Laboratory. These methods were subsequently thoroughly investigated by Rogers and Lingard, in relation to their practical applicability to existing conditions in India. The use of the bile was condemned principally on account of the difficulty in obtain- ing sufficient quantities and the fact that it failed to protect cattle of Hill breed which are recognized as being particularly susceptible to Rinderpest. After some years of work during which the " serum alone " and the " serum simultaneous " methods were submitted to repeated tests both in the Labora- tory and in the field, it was finally decided that the " serum alone" process was the only method capable of practical application in India. The peculiar conditions of the country in regard to all questions connected with cattle, the prejudices and supersti- tions of the people, the antipathy and suspicion with which they regard all innovations, are the first considerations which have to be reckoned with in all attempts to control epizootics among cattle in India. Whatever measures are attempted, they cannot be carried out without the full consent and appro- val of the cattle owners. No compulsion, segregation of animals, or police restrictions can be enforced. Consequently
70 Rinderpest. many methods of dealing with infective diseases, which have met with success and are in force in other countries, cannot be adopted for use in India. Lingard, by a long series of experiments, worked out the safest and most economical method of preparing an anti-Rin- derpest serum of high potency. This method is still in practice. The serum-preparing animal is immunised by a simultaneous injection of serum and virulent blood About 2 weeks after this, he receives a massive injection of virulent blood, about 8 c.c. for each pound body weight. When the reaction following this injection has subsided, another massive injection of about double the amount of the first is given. After an interval of three weeks from the last injection the animal is bled for serum Some animals receive a series of six or more bleedings at inter- vals of a week. The potency of the serum is maintained by mixing with the serial bleedings equal parts of the first bleedings from the more susceptible bulls of Hill breed, whose serum is stronger than that of Plains bulls. This method ensures a serum which in a dose of 4 to 5 c.c. per 600 lbs. body weight for animals of Plains breed and of 72 to 90 c.c. for Hill breeds protects against a simultaneous inoculation of virulent blood. Each brew of serum is carefully tested on Hill bulls and the dose fixed before issue from the Laboratory. In the early operations with serum much opposition was experienced from the owners of the cattle, who regarded the interference with suspicion and refused to allow their animals to be treated. It required unlimited tact and patience on the part of the operator to gain their confidence, and it speaks well for the zeal and perseverance of the Veterinary Department, and is a testi- mony to the intrinsic value of the serum method, that at the present time, in districts where serum has once been used, cattle owners of their own accord apply for help in outbreaks of Rinderpest. Among the Native States, also, the method has met with approval and there is a rapidly increasing demand for serum from this quarter. The figures of inoculations for the past nine years show how far the use of the serum is annually extendingRinderpest. 71 1902-03 ... ... ... .. ... 41,147 1903-04 ... ... ... ... ... 48,157 1904-05 ... .. ... ... ... 56,483 1905-06 .. ... ... . ... 1,24,015 1906-07 .. ... ... ... ... 1,97,259 1907-08 ... ... . ... ... 2,46,722 The demand would be much greater if there were a suffi- cient staff for field operations. The serum treatment is not allowed to be carried out except by graduates of a Veterinary College who have also been trained in inoculation work. The number of qualified Veterinary Assistants is far below the requirements and the colleges are unable to educate a suffi- cient number to meet the increasing demand for men for Gov- ernment and other posts. The popularity which the serum has, under the most diffi- cult circumstances, achieved among cattle owners in India, and the annual records of the Superintendents, Civil Veter- inary Department, and their staff, go to prove that the use of the "serum alone" method is one of real practical benefit, that it protects cattle through an outbreak of the disease, and that it affords a means of effectually checking the spread of Rinderpest. In field operations there are many difficulties in keeping treated animals under observation and in collecting accurate information. There is, however, little doubt that the number of cattle which succumb to Rinderpest, after serum treatment, is extremely small. If the percentage of deaths among animals after serum injections were at all appreciable, the owners would consider the treatment as the cause of death and would draw attention to the fact. Recently I had an opportunity of making some careful ob- servations of the results of serum injections in an outbreak of Rinderpest among the susceptible Hill cattle. In January 1908, Rinderpest broke out among cattle in a village a few miles from the Laboratory. Soon after the disease appeared, 35 cattle were injected with a single dose of serum. Among the untreated animals deaths occurred for over a month and a half. The inoculated animals were during * 6,27,349 doses were issued during 1908-09.
72 Rinderpest. this time in contact with the other cattle and escaped without any mortality. During July, August and September, Rinderpest was again prevalent in villages not far from the Laboratory. The following serum inoculations were made by one of our Veter- inary Inspectors in different villages:Rinderpest. 73 following these large doses lasted for several months. The experiments were not conclusive and are open to objection. Some of the animals treated were mixed daily with infected cattle and most probably contracted a mild form of the disease, thereby obtaining an active immunity. Most of the animals were subjected to repeated tests with virulent blood and the immunity discovered at later periods was probably due to the earlier injection of virulent blood. ANNALES DE L'INSTITUT PASTEUR, 1899. In Turkey, Nicolle and Adel Bey found that an injection of 25 c.c. serum afforded protection against virulent blood inocu- lated several days after. They expressed the opinion that the same dose protected bovines in epidemics for several weeks. In Russia, Nencki used fortified serum and considered that the immunity lasted several months. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE I. B. L., 1901-1902, PAGE 13. In India, in 1902-1903, experiments were made to test the dose of serum necessary to protect cattle of different breeds. The results arrived at were :74 Rinderpest. SELANGOR, 1903-04. 10 days after injection. No other cases resulted though animals were exposed to infection in the next two months. REPORT OF THE TRANSVAAL DEPART- MENT OF AGRICUL- TURE, 1904. The Siamese bullocks gave similar results. 39 out of 610 injected, developed the disease more than 10 days after the injection. Stockman from his experience of the working of the serum in the Transvaal concluded that serum alone can give immunity for ten days only and that it must be frequently repeated. About the 'serum alone' method his views are that "as the best method of cutting short an outbreak and preventing the further spread, its adoption is only justifiable if it be used in such a manner as will ensure absolute immunity to the 'in con- tact' animals for a time equal to the duration of the infection." Head, in a report on cattle plague in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, condemned the "serum alone" method as unsatisfactory owing to the impossibility of re-inoculating the cattle every three weeks. He found the great disadvantage to serum alone was that the immunity wore off and the animals got the disease often in a fatal form, and also prolonged the period of infection. These statements coming from experts who have studied the use of the serum both by Laboratory test and by the results of its practical application are very conflicting and difficult to reconcile. The conclusion of some authors appears to be based entirely on the reported results following field operation, while others seem to base their opinions of what is to be expected from the practical use of serum, on the result of an insufficient number of Laboratory tests. Experiments to determine the duration of immunity following a single dose of serum. All animals used for these tests were the susceptible bulls of hill breed. The dose of this serum sufficient to protect against a simultaneous inoculation of virulent blood was fixed at 72 c.c. for cattle of hill breed and 4 c.c. for plains cattle, per 600 lbs. body-weight.
Rinderpest. 75 Experiments to determine how long a single dose of serum protects against an inoculation of virulent blood. No. Body weight. Actual dose of serum. Test after an interval of Virus. Result. lbs. c.c. Days. c.c. 1 228 27.36 14 1 Slight attack. Lived. 2 225 27.00 14 1 Severe attack. Died. 3 165 19.80 14 1 76 Rinderpest. The following bulls received treble doses of serum and were tested after 28 days :Rinderpest. 77 THE NATURE OF THE IMMUNITY FOLLOWING A SIMULTANEOUS INOCULATION OF SERUM AND VIRULENT BLOOD WHERE NO CLINICAL SYMP- TOMS OF RINDERPEST ARE PRODUCED ZEITSCHRIFT FUR HY- GIENE, VOL. XXIX, 1898. Kolle and Turner carried out a number of experiments on this question. They published a table of 31 cases of simultaneous inocula- tion which produced no clinical symptoms of the disease and were accompanied by very slight or no temperature reactions. These animals were tested up to a period of five months after the treatment and proved to be absolutely immune. ANNALES DE L'INSTITUTE PASTEUR, 1899. Nicolle and Adil Bey found, as Kolle and Turner did, that animals which received simultaneous injections and failed to show any symptoms except in some cases a slight rise of tem- perature, were for long periods immune to large injections of virulent blood. THE AGRI- CULTURAL LEDGER OF INDIA, VOL. V. Pease, in his report on the experiments conducted by Koch at Muktesar, states: " Koch succeeded in immunising in a fort- night several animals by means of a mixture of serum and virulent blood to such a degree that they were enabled to with- stand an injection of 20 c.c. virulent blood. From this fact he judges that the immunity of these animals is of a much higher degree than that produced by serum alone. He believes it is an active immunity equal to that of a beast which has contracted Rinderpest and has recovered. " Koch also entertained the opinion that when cattle were inoculated with good bile or serum and were able ten or more days afterwards to resist an injection of 10 c.c. to 20 c.c. viru- lent blood, an active immunity had been conferred upon them although they had not given any fever reaction to the blood. REPORT ON AN EXPERI- MENTAL IN- VESTIGATION OF THE METHODS OF INOCULATION AGAINST RINDERPEST, 1900, BY ROGERS. Rogers gives a table of twenty-two experimental inocu- lations by the simultaneous method. The majority of these cases showed a slight temperature reaction; none contracted the disease. They were tested after periods varying from 2½ to 7 months, and all resisted the inoculation of virulent blood. " It appears that slight temperature reactions do produce long and active immunity and are really mild attacks of Rin- derpest. It is not necessary to aim at producing as severe an attack of the disease as possible, as was recommended in South
78 Rinderpest. Africa, but mild reactions will afford the necessary degree of immunity. " The cattle used for these tests were of Plains breed. In a second series of experiments with Hill cattle Rogers got bad results as most of his animals contracted Rinderpest in a severe form and died. From this he concluded that good results could not be obtained by the simultaneous method in Hill cattle. " It was evident that if no reaction was obtained, the resulting immunity did not last for as long as three weeks. If enough serum was given to be safe for nearly all the animals, the majority would not react and would get no immunity of any practical value. Rogers' experiments hardly warrant the conclusions he arrived at. In the first series of experiments Plains cattle of unknown susceptibility were used. In the second series, out of 42 cattle of Hill breed inoculated by the simultaneous method 20 died from Rinderpest, 10 had a severe attack and recovered, 9 had good temperature reactions and 2 had slight rise of tem- perature. Six only of those which showed good and slight temperature reactions were tested several months after and proved immune. It is evident that the dose of serum used was not sufficient to protect against a simultaneous inoculation of virulent blood and that as a test of this method the experiments are of no value. JOURNAL OF COMPARA- TIVE PATHOLOGY AND THERA- PEUTICS, 1902. Danys and Bordet state : " If animals are brought in contact with Rinderpest after the injection of defibrinated blood and serum, they contract the disease and become salt- fed. " They do not consider the serum treatment so suitable for dealing with clean herds, as with herds already infected or herds which can be exposed to infection immediately and con- tinuously after inoculation. " The injection of small quantities of Rinderpest blood into animals that have been previously inoculated with the blood of salted animals is not sufficient to infect a beast in such a degree as to secure for it a continuous salting. To obtain a good result, a carefully regulated quantity of blood must be injected, large enough to occasion a small degree of sickness and small enough to guard against serious sickness or death,
Rinderpest. 79 On the other hand, if healthy animals which have been inocu- lated with preventive blood or serum are exposed to infected cattle immediately and continuously afterwards, it is of little importance whether the dose of serum injected is unnecessarily strong or not, so long as it is sufficiently strong to give complete immunity at the time, because the subsequent infection being continuous, each animal contracts a mild form of the disease as the diminishing strength of the immunity conferred by the serum gradually admits. This cannot be accomplished satis- factorily by an injection of Rinderpest blood, because if the dose of serum is very strong, the majority of animals may resist the after-blood inoculation and manifest no signs of fever and consequently fail to become salted. While again should the dose of serum be comparatively weak and the after-blood in- oculation too long delayed, the animals inoculated would be liable to contract a virulent form of the disease from which many would die." REPORT OF THE SUPERINTEN- DENT GOVERNMENT LABORA- TORIES IN THE PHILIP- PINE ISLANDS, 1903. From the results of the simultaneous method in the Philippine Islands, the conclusion arrived at was that in animals showing a reaction the immunity conferred is very effective and lasts for years, while a temporary immunity probably lasting several months is conferred upon the ones having no reaction. Result of a single dose of serum and virulent blood. (Simultaneous method.) No. Body weight. Actual dose of serum. Virus. Reaction. Retested after Virus. Result. lbs. c.c. c.c. Days. c.c. 1 162 19.72 0.5 Good 97 0.5 No reaction. 2 257 46.26 0.5 Nil 97 0.5 80 Rinderpest. Result of a double dose of serum and virulent blood. (Simultaneous method.) No. Body weight. Actual dose of serum. Virus. Reaction. Retested after Virus. Result. lbs. c.c. c.c. Days. c.c. 1 252 60.48 0.5 Nil 42 0.5 No reaction. 2 254 60.96 0.5 Temp. reaction 42 0.5 Rinderpest. 81 Experiments to determine the nature of the immunity which results from an injection of a single dose of serum fol- lowed by immediate exposure to natural infection. No. Body weight. Actual dose of serum. Virus. Result. lbs. c.c. 1 211 25.32 Natural infection. Temperature reaction. Lived. 2 198 23.76 82 Rinderpest. The result of treble doses of serum followed by immediate exposure to natural infection. No. Body weight. Actual dose of serum. Virus. Result. lbs. c.c. 1 203 72.72 Natural infection. Temperature reaction, 9th to 14th clay. Lived. 2 204 73.44 Rinderpest. 83 The following animals received a single dose of serum and after 14 days were exposed to natural infection by placing them in a shed with infected cattle. No. Body weight. Actual dose of serum. Test after an interval of Virus. Result. lbs. c.c. Days. 1 198 23.76 14 Natural infection. Severe attack. Died. 2 178 21.36 14 Temperature reaction. Lived. 3 224 26.88 14 84 Rinderpest. These results are of particular interest, inasmuch as they further establish the correctness of the statistics recorded regarding the use of the " serum alone " method in the field and the value of the inoculation work being carried out by the Veterinary Department of India. They show, however, that the good results are not due simply to the protection afforded by the anti-serum alone. The immunity conferred by serum even in large doses is of so short duration as to be in itself useless in a country like India where Rinderpest is endemic and where cattle must necessarily be exposed to infection for many months following an outbreak. It is evident also that there is little advantage in administering serum in doses larger than the amount necessary to protect against a simultaneous inoculation of virus. In field operations the two conditions to be observed are that the dose is protective and that the animal is exposed to infection before the protective effect of the serum has worn off. If the first exposure to infection is at a period later than 10 days, the attack will be severe and in many cases fatal. Bordet's view is that the exposure must be immediate and continuous and that each animal contracts a mild form of the disease as the diminishing strength of the immunity conferred by the serum gradually admits. It appears to me that the infection can be taken into the system immediately after the serum injection and that it pro- duces its reaction at the time when the immunity is decreasing. Many cases which were treated with large doses of serum immediately placed in contact with infected cattle for four days and then removed to a non-infected area, acquired an active immunity. None of these animals showed any tempera- ture reactions. Also the results of the simultaneous use of serum and virus support this view. In these cases where thermal reactions or other clinical symptoms occur, they are manifested 10 to 14 days after the inoculation. It is most important also to recognize that the use of the serum combined with virus or followed by natural infection establishes an active and durable immunity even in cases where the dose of serum has been sufficient to suppress all clinical symptoms of disease. Whether this immunity persists for
Rinderpest. 85 the same length of time as that following a pronounced attack of the disease is open to question. Working on the subject of immunity against Anthrax and Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia, a similar result was observed in a large number of experiments. In both diseases animals treat- ed with serum and virus simultaneously and which showed no reaction to the injection, were immune when tested with virus three months after the first inoculation. The "serum simul- taneous" method undoubtedly confers a much more durable immunity than can be obtained by the use of serum alone or by the employment of dead vaccines. It is a safer method than that of " attenuated vaccines." Owing to the extremely contagious nature of Rinderpest and to the conditions under which cattle are kept in India, sick and healthy cattle being invariably brought in contact both at pastures and in the stalls, natural infection takes the place of the virus inoculation. Consequently the " serum alone " method as at present employed in this country produces the same results in a safer manner as the " serum simultaneous process."
PART V. A PECULIAR FORM OF STREPTOTRICHOSIS AMONG CATTLE. DURING the past year a disease bearing a resemblance in many clinical features to equine epizootic lymphangitis made its appearance among the Army Transport Bullocks in Calcutta. In October 1907, we were requested by the Senior Veterinary Officer of the Division to investigate the etiology of the disease. Captain Edwards, A.V.C., kindly supplied the material, clinical notes and photographs of the cases. The Laboratory work was carried out by Mr. Cross, Assistant Bacteriologist and my- self. HISTORY OF OUTBREAK. The first case occurred in November 1906, in the Transport Lines at Hastings (a suburb of Calcutta). No further cases were observed till April 1907, and between that time and the end of December 1907, eighty-five bullocks were affected. Of these eighty-five cases, eighteen were destroyed as incurable, thirty-eight have apparently recovered, and twenty-nine still remain under treatment. From the dates of the second cases in April, all Transport bullocks were kept under close observa- tion and at the first appearance of a sore or any enlargement of the gland, the animal was immediately segregated and placed under treatment. SYMPTOMS. The first symptom which attracted attention was usually the appearance of a small nodule under the skin in the region of the neck, shoulder, ribs or flank. This was followed after a period varying from a few days to some weeks by enlargement of the deeper seated glands, almost invariably the prescapular or precrural. This was accompanied by pain and inflammatory swell- ing in the affected part and generally marked lameness.
Streptotrichosis. 87 The affected subcutaneous lymphatic glands varied in size from a pea to a walnut. The precrural glands reached the size of a cricket ball, while the largest prescapular gland observed was more than six inches in diameter. The glandular abscesses showed no tendency to spon- taneous evacuation of their contents. In the early stage, the pulse, temperature and appetite remained normal. In those cases where the disease advanced and became more general, though the appetite was maintained, the pulse and temperature increased, the breathing was acceler- ated, the animal wasted rapidly, remained lying down, and could with difficulty be got on his feet. At this stage, these bullocks were destroyed as incurable. The course of the disease lasted in the severer cases from 2 to 3 months. In all cases except one, the disease followed a wound or sore in the region of the neck or hump. These sores are locally known as " Calcutta sores." They are indolent, spreading and very difficult of treatment. In one instance the popliteal gland became affected after a wound between the digits of the hind foot. TREATMENT. The glands were cut into as early as possible, the contents of the cavity emptied and irrigated with warm antiseptic solu- tion. In some cases this was sufficient and the animal recov- ered in a few weeks. Other cases required further operative measures; the affected gland showing several cavities filled with a thick pus and after the first incision numerous small abscesses formed in the subcutaneous tissue surrounding the gland. The majority of these cases did not recover. In several of the animals that had apparently recovered under treatment, the disease again made its appearance after six or eight weeks. The administration of Potassium Iodide internally and dressing with Iodine had no beneficial effect. GROSS PATHOLOGY. The affected glands were surrounded by an inflammatory 88 Streptotrichosis. The enlarged glands on incision were found to have a thick- ened fibrous capsule in some cases, half an inch thick. On section the appearance varied with the stage of the disease; in some, the whole of the glandular tissue had disappeared and the capsule contained a thick caseous yellow material, elastic and smooth to the touch. In others, parts of the normal tissue remained; there was extensive fibrous tissue formation surrounding one or many small abscesses defined by a thick white fibrous capsule. In several glands, where not much degenerative alterations had taken place, the substance was studded with hard gritty nod- ules of a yellowish colour, resembling the granules of actino- myces. The pus was invariably noticed to be gritty when rub- bed between the fingers or between slides. In the cases where the disease spread to more than one gland and where the animal wasted and was considered in- curable, the lungs were filled with abscesses similar to those found in the glands, from the size of a pea to that of a walnut. In the majority of these cases, the bronchial glands were not affected, but in four instances, these glands were enlarged, fibrous and the seat of abscesses. No other organs were affected. BACTERIOLOGY. Over three hundred smear preparations of pus from several cases were examined. Invariably the pus contained masses resembling the granules of Actinomyces bovis. Stained with Methylene-Blue, without decolorising, the masses showed no structure except at the periphery where individual small cocci-like bodies could be distinguished. By Gram and Gram Weigert method the details of the composition of these groups was brought in evidence. They consisted of a dense collection of small cocci identical in ap- pearance with the spores of actinomyces. Closely interwoven with these spores were thin branching filaments. The filaments were easily decolorised by the Gram method and were consequently difficult to clearly demonstrate. Un- like the ray fungus, there is no concentric arrangement of fila-
PLATE A. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Streptotrichosis. 89 ments and, as a rule, no peripheral club formation. Plate A (c). In some preparations a distinct striated arrangement of the filaments was evident. Plate A (e). In preparations obtained by scraping the fibrous capsule of the abscesses, groups showing peripheral clubs, Plate A (a), were found. Some of these groups were of a very peculiar wheel-shaped arrangement, the club-shaped branches radiating from a central mass of spores. Plate A (d) & (f). In sections of affected lymphatic glands, the same micros- copic appearances were seen as in the pus. There was exten- sive invasion of new connective tissue cells, Epitheloid and a few giant cells. In some sections, the glandular structure had been entirely replaced by this invasion. The capsules of the abscesses consisted of dense fibrous connective tissue. Stained by Gram, there appeared scattered throughout the new tissue the same characteristic dark masses as seen in the pus, showing a dark-stained amorphous centre with the cocci and traces of filaments at the periphery. In many sections masses of filaments alone were found. They were composed of very fine light-stained interlacing threads clearly defined. No cocci or club terminations were present in these latter groups. PHOTOGRAPHS of CASES. Photograph No. I shows enlarged prescapular gland and three small subcutaneous nodules round the shoulder joint. The abscesses were opened and the bullock recovered. A chain of enlarged lymphatic gland connected the higher abscess with a wound on the hump. Photograph No. II.90 Streptotrichosis. Photograph No. IV.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PHOTOGRAPH No. I.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PHOTOGRAPH No. II. A Bad Case. All over the animal contained abscesses. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PHOTOGRAPH No. III.Streptotrichosis. 91 the surface of the Agar. Following this, a thin dry skin forms of a dirty white colour. This pellicle gradually increases in depth, and becomes corrugated and of a brown colour. In the older growth masses of dry, brownish yellow material be- come heaped up on the surface of the ridges. Single colonies under a low magnification show a fringe of thread-like projec- tions round their edges. Agar stab.92 Streptotrichosis. was very variable. From potato and agar cultures they were much thicker than from growths in broth. Numerous rods were present with these filaments. Many of these rods did not take the stain well and in their centre one or more deep-stained, small, spore-like bodies were visible. These were of the same size and appearance as the mass of cocci-like bodies seen in preparations from the fresh material. In some old cultures filaments with club termination were found. In other preparations, no filaments were present and they consisted of rods and a large ovoid cell taking the stain at the periphery and at either end. ANIMAL EXPERIMENTS. Twenty guinea-pigs and the same number of rabbits were inoculated with an emulsion of pus from the affected glands. The pus was taken from three cases, and separate animals were inoculated from each. The pus was broken up in normal salt solution, and the amount used for injection varied from 0.5 c.c. to 1 c.c. Injections were made subcutaneously and intraperi- toneally. In the animals which received subcutaneous inoculations a nodule from the size of a pea to a marble appeared at the seat of injection after two to four weeks. The affection was not progressive and the abscess showed no signs of softening or of spontaneous evacuation. The nodule contained pus with the same macroscopic and microscopic characteristics as the original material, and from it pure cultures of the organism were recovered. From cultures obtained from the lesions in guinea-pig and rabbits inoculated from the fresh material, some 20 more rabbits and guinea-pigs were inocu- lated. These succumbed rapidly in from two to seven days without showing any outward symptoms. From the heart blood cultures similar to the original were recovered. The small animals inoculated intraperitoneally with emul- sions from the fresh pus from bullocks died after from two to six weeks. In the majority of these cases, no visible lesions could be found, but from the heart blood pure cultures were in several instances obtained. In two guinea-pigs and three rabbits, miliary abscesses were found post mortem. Some of these abscesses were adherent to the peritoneum and
PLATE B. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Streptotrichosis. 93 others scattered throughout the mesentery. The pus contain- ed was of the same color and appearance as the original and contained similar characteristic masses, and from it pure cul- tures were grown, which, when inoculated into rabbits and guinea-pigs, killed in a few days; and from the heart blood of some of these animals typical pure cultures were recovered. Inoculations of pus emulsion into two bulls subcutaneously and two intraperitoneally gave negative results. DESCRIPTION OF PLATES A AND B. PLATE A. Drawn with 2.0 mm. Apert. 1.30 Zeiss. Oc. 4. Stained by Gram. The material from which (a, h, e, f) were taken was forwarded by Captain Edwards from the cases among Transport Bullocks, (b & c) from rabbits inoculated with fresh material, (d & f) from rabbits inoculated from a pure culture isolated from fresh material and also recovered from the inoculated rabbitsPART VI. FLAGELLATE FORM OF PIROPLASMA BOVIS. Several authors have recorded flagellate bodies observed in the blood of animals suffering from Piroplasmosis. Bowhill and Le Doux (1) give a description of flagellate forms in the blood of a dog which had died of Piroplasmosis canis. The blood films were made at the post-mortem exam- ination. Several endoglobular parasites were observed which showed long flagella-like processes, some with two bulbs on the flagellum and some with only one at the end. Their illustrations also show free flagella-like bodies with a bulb at both or one end. In some instances, the authors thought they observed flagellated bodies entering infected corpuscles. In the same article mention is made of similar forms seen by Bowhill in the blood of cattle affected with Rhodesian Fever. Lignières (2) had previous to this described flagellate forms in the blood of cattle suffering from La Tristeza. He noted globules with flagella which he considers simple prolongations of the protoplasm of the cell. One observes them in blood recently taken. They form on a heated slide. Some of these flagella were seen free with a thickening at one end. They separate from the globule and traverse the field of the miscros- cope. He suggests that these flagella are the same as those described by Krogius, Von Hellens, San Felice and Lodovico, as prolongations of the parasite and analogous to the flagella of the spherical bodies of the hæmatozoa of Laveran. Lignières does not accept this view, as he has seen the flagella develop from the red cells and also because they stain with eosin. In equine Piroplasmosis, Bowhill (3) has seen free pear- shaped bodies with a long flagellum ending in a bulbous pro- tuberance. Flagellate forms were also observed where the body and flagellum were situated within a blood corpuscle.
Piroplasma Bovis. 95 Nuttall and Graham Smith (4) in their study of Canine Piroplasmosis met with flagellate forms in blood. Free para- sites with short processes protruding from the pointed extrem- ity were occasionally seen, but forms with long terminal flagella were seldom recorded. They apparently did not ob- serve free flagella as described by Lignières, Bowhill and others. Schaudinn (5) who studied specimens prepared by Weber from a cow, two hours before death, from Piroplasmosis, found typical examples of the Piroplasma Bovis and also trypanosome-like forms of smaller size than T. Evansi. He considered these forms related to the Piroplasma. Schaudinn, therefore, concluded that the P. Canis and P. Bovis multiply in the same way as the Hæmoproteus Noctuæ possessing trypanosome and spirochæte-like stages. Kossel and Weber found similar trypanosome-like bodies in the gut contents of ticks taken from cattle suffering from Piroplasmosis. Koch, Kleine, Kinoshita and Miyajima frequently observ- ed flagellate shapes of Piroplasma in cultivation forms and in developmental forms in the tick. In a recent publication, Breinl and Hindle (6) described fla- gellate forms of the P. Canis. These were repeatedly observed in the peripheral blood of dogs on the day before death. These authors are of opinion that these forms of P. Canis represent a very transient stage in its life-history. In the blood of cattle in India, I have on several occasions been able to observe flagellate forms in connection with Piroplasma Bovis. In this Laboratory where a very large amount of Rinderpest Anti- Serum is prepared, a small percentage of the serum-preparing cattle succumb during the process of hyper-immunizing to a complication of Trypanosomiasis or Piroplasmosis and fre- quently to a combination of both diseases. The massive injec- tions of Rinderpest blood have the effect of lowering the resis- tance of the system to these two diseases which exist in a latent form in the majority of cattle of this country. In such cases the animal may die suddenly without having shown any clinical symptom of illness or may be off feed, wasting and lying down for several days before death. It is often necessary to
96 Piroplasma Bovis. examine the blood repeatedly before finding the Trypanosomes or Piroplasma. In the blood of cattle suffering from Piroplasmosis one or two days before death or immediately after death, numerous free flagella are frequently to be found. These forms (Plate C a) are difficult to distinguish in the fresh blood, but can easily be studied in stained films. They very much resemble the free forms described by Bowhill and Lignières. They vary in length from less than half the diameter of a blood corpuscle to 3 times this length. At one or both ends, is a slight protuberance in which a cromatin staining body can often be detected. Numbers of these flagella can be seen free, moving in the field, others appear to be entering blood corpuscles, while others seem to be leaving or to be attached to degenerated and breaking down red cells A mononuclear leucocyte is shown (Plate C a) which has the appearance of having taken up several flagella, the ends of these bodies protruding from the margin of the cell. The shorter forms bear a strong resemblance to the bacil- lary bodies observed in the blood corpuscle of cattle suffering from a chronic or latent form of Piroplasmosis (Plate C a). This resemblance suggests a possible explanation of these bacillary forms of Piroplasmosis. In the same blood in which the flagella were found, the amPiroplasma Bovis. 97 shape comparable to the crescents of the malarial parasite. Doffein concluded that the large pyriform bodies represent gametocytes similar to malarial crescents, and that the flagel- late bodies described by Lignières represent male sexual forms comparable to those of the Hæmospovidia. Nuttall and Graham Smith describe a body strikingly suggestive of a gamete encountered in the blood of a dog affected with Piroplasmosis. " These bodies somewhat resemble the crescents of the human æstivo-autumnal malarial parasite. They are sausage- shaped, of fairly uniform width and rounded or tapering at their extremities. Some are markedly vacuolated. In some the chromatin is almost entirely concentrated in the middle of the body; in others the particles of chromatin are irregu- larly distributed." Similar crescent-shaped bodies were previous to this observed and described by me.(9) These forms were found in the blood of cattle in India suffering from a mixed infection of Piroplasmosis and Trypanosomiasis. Lingard (10) noted crescent-shaped bodies in connection with Trypanosomiasis of cattle in India. These cattle were also the subject of Trypanosomiasis. Up to the present, no direct proof can be adduced to establish the identity of these forms with gametes and micro- gametes. The supposition is based solely on the observation of forms similar to gametes and microgametes, and on the analogy of the life cycle of the malaria parasites in man, birds, batrachia and reptiles. It is significant that in most instances the flagellate forms have been encountered in the blood of animals in the last stage of the disease. In some cases the blood was taken one or two days before death and in others immediately after death. The production of these flagellate bodies is, in all probability, the result of an effort on the part of the parasite to resist the altered condition of the blood and to prolong its own existence. Swingle (11) in a recent article, calls attention to the similarity, between blood platelets and certain hæmatozoa. 7
98 Piroplasma Bovis. In Sodium citrate cultures of sheep, rabbit, dog and human blood, he obtained flagellated blood platelets which in appearance closely resemble the flagellate stage of Babesia and some other species. The platelets in culture show amPiroplasma Bovis. 99 and furnish a close resemblance to microgametes and gameto- cytes. Many other forms closely resemble parasites, elongated bodies with a flagellum at one end and tapering at the other extremity, simulate trypanosomes; others with oval bodies possessing flagellum; the free end pointed and containing fine chromatin granules, behind which a nuclear-like mass complete the similarity to what has been described as flagel- lated forms of the Leishman-Donovan bodies. The large bodies of this kind might well be mistaken for herpetomonas forms of developing trypanosomes. A very frequent form observed was that of a spindle with flagella at either end. While making examination of these flagellated bodies, I had an opportunity of comparing preparations from the blood of a patient suffering from a very severe attack of æstivo- autumnal fever. In these also flagellated bodies were found very similar to those met with in the blood of cattle suffer- ing from Piroplasmosis. These were the same round cells with membrane chromatin granules and flagella; trypano- some and herpetomonas forms. Following Swingle's experi- ments, on culture media, I was able to obtain similar flagellated bodies from both human and cattle normal blood kept in Sodium Citrate solution. From these observations it is appar- ent that many of the flagellate forms seen in the blood of cattle dying from Piroplasmosis are peculiar developments of the platelets and in no way connected with piroplasma. This, however, is not the case with the free flagella described earlier in this paper, which have no resemblance to any forms of platelets. There is the possibility that certain forms of platelets may have been described as parasites in blood preparations. Without careful examination such an error might easily occur. There is, however, no reason to doubt the accuracy of the observation and descriptions recorded of the flagellated form of the piroplasma. PLATE No. C. Drawn with 2.0 M.M., Apert. 1.30 Zeiss Comp. Oc. 8, Magnification 100, stained Leishman. A.100 Piroplasma Bovis. B.PLATE C. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
PART VII. NOTE ON A GIANT POLYNUCLEAR CELL. ZEITSCHRIFT FUR HY- GIENE, VOL. LIV. FOR some years, from time to time I have observed in preparations of horses' blood large granular cells which I think has not been previously described. These cells are usually to be found in the blood of horses in the last stage of Surra and is so constant a feature in blood preparations taken at this period, that even in the absence of trypanosomes it is almost diagnostic of this disease. During the past year, while examining smear preparations from Bursati sores, the same cells have been frequently found in large numbers. Some prepara- tions were almost entirely composed of these large cells, showing few of the usual microphages and macrophages. In fresh unstained blood the cell resembles a "mulberry." It is from two to three times larger than an ordinary polynuclear leuco- cyte, spherical in shape with the surface studded with large granules. In stained preparation (Leishman) the mulberry appearance is still maintained; the granules stain deep red. These granules appear to be attached to the surface. They are easily broken off and show beneath the lighter coloured body of the cell. In many of these cells no nucleus is visible. The external surface is closely covered with the large deeply stained granules. In some, where the granules have broken away, the under surface of the cells appears stained a lighter red, and at times a light blue. In some preparations a very distinct lobulated nucleus, stained purple, is to be seen, and between the granules the under surface stained light blue. R. Koch describes under the term of "Plasmakugeln" a cell which from the diagram appears to be somewhat similar to these " mulberry cells. " These he found in the blood lymph glands of cattle suffering from East Coast Fever. ZEITSCHRIFT HYGIENE UND INFECKTIONS Lichtenheld mentions the same Plasmakugeln as being found only in East Coast Fever.
102 Giant Polynuclear Cell. KRANKHEI- TEN, VOL. LXI. " Diese Plasmakugeln findet man bei allen küs-tenfieber- kranken Tieren und nur bei Solchen. " JOURNAL OF TROPICAL VETERINARY SCIENCE, VOL. II, No. I. Lingard in writing on cattle Trypanosomiasis in India refers to cells of a similar description. "A further fact connect- ing the two varieties of Trypanosomiasis occurring in the blood of cattle indigenous to countries so widely separated (S. Africa and India), is the presence of large ovoid cells 8.20 to 9.0µ in length which exhibit a hyaline structure and contain a con- siderable number of darkly stained bodies (dark purplish red after Romanowsky), single united in couples resembling large micrococci and diplococci which seem to multiply by genera- tion. The circular forms measure from 0.6 to 1.0µ. The cells burst and discharge their contents, and when the bodies become free, they appear in some instances to increase in size somewhat before respectively coming to rest in the red corpuscles where they undergo further changes. " His Plate (D) contains a diagram of cells said to be similar to those observed by Theiler in the peripheral blood of a South African bull." These "Plasmukgeln" appear to me to be of the same class of cells as the one now described which is probably a large granular polynuclear leucocyte.
PLATE D. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] HORSE No. 245. TAKEN 20TH JANUARY 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY No. 260. TAKEN 20TH JANUARY 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY No. 263. TAKEN 20TH JANUARY 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY No. 285. TAKEN 20TH JANUARY 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY No. 287. TAKEN 20TH JANUARY 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY No. 288. TAKEN 20TH JANUARY 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY No. 292. TAKEN 20TH JANUARY 1909.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Indian Civil Veterinary Department Memoirs NO. 2 COLLECTED NOTES [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK & CO., CALCUTTA FOR THE INDIAN CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT
INDIAN CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT MEMOIRS NO. 2 COLLECTED NOTES [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK & CO., CALCUTTA FOR THE INDIAN CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT
CALCUTTA: PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK AND CO.
ERRATA. Page 13, line 26, after "buffaloes" add the words "and camels". Page 22, line 38, for "Few" read "small."
EXPERIMENTS REGARDING THE NATURAL TRANSMISSION OF SURRA CARRIED OUT AT MOHAND IN 1908. BY A. S. LEESE, I.C.V.D. LAST winter it was decided that in the following hot weather and rains I should carry out an investigation in some well-known surra zone with the following principal objects:2 Mohand was chosen as the best situation in which to carry out the work; it is on the Saharanpur-Dehra Dun road, at the foot of the Siwalik Range and at the south end of the Mohand Pass. Some years ago, before Dehra Dun was connected by railway to Lhaksar, there was a large amount of traffic on this road and there was enormous loss from surra in tonga ponies working on the stages in the Pass in the months of July, August and September (during and after the rains); at the present time the traffic in this season is confined to a very few bullock carts per diem, horse traffic being practically nil, as the railway has completely superseded the tonga service. This fact enabled us to expose surra cases and create a limited outbreak of our own with the least possible danger of the disease being carried outside our stable, such as might well have occurred in such a situation as the Kathgodam-Naini Tal road. I arrived on 27th April; this left two months for observa- tions on the biting-flies before the onset of the surra season. The "surra season" in Mohand corresponds with that at Kathgodam; it is in fact the rainy season, and the month or so following it; the earliest recorded case in the Pass (Lingard's Surra Report, Vol. 2, Part I, page 23) was found on 15th July. There was no recorded case of surra in the Pass occurring in May or June. I remained at Mohand until 24th September; the experience of Dâk proprietors of former years shows this to be two or three weeks before the end of the normal surra season in the Pass. The present condition of Mohand in connection with surra is as follows:3 indicates that owing to the scarcity of "reservoirs of infection" (i.e., cattle and buffaloes working through Mohand), the danger to local animals has been largely removed. Camels always leave this road from about 15th May to October; none are kept anywhere in the neighbourhood between these dates. The country consists of first class jungle, full of game, but the latter evidently do not act to any great extent as dangerous reservoirs of infection to domesticated animals. I had a temporary stable put up a quarter of a mile from the village: until the rains there was no standing water near it. Ponies for experiment were purchased locally, but the camels which had been under observation for some time previously, were marched down by road from Lahore. The disease did not occur in the village and the outbreak was confined to our stable. Experiment 1.4 The following are the details of the conditions under which the animals were kept:PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 15 The disease spread so promptly and thoroughly to our controls that there can be no reasonable doubt that it did so by the same agency as that operating from horse to horse in entirely natural outbreaks. So that out of six ponies kept in contact with surra in a surra-zone and in the surra season, the only two which did not become affected were those protected from biting-flies. The gram, bran and bhoosa had no influence since the supply for all ponies was from the same source; but dry food cannot now be regarded as an agent worthy of consideration in surra transmission in practice, whether it contains the excrement of rats or not, in the face of the fact that camels which are resting and tree-grazing at this season, and not receiving any ration of dry food, suffer so severely from the ravages of surra. That grass grown on inundated land is not the agent of infection is shown by the fact that all the controls became affected with the disease, although only one out of the four had access to grass, the three others receiving bhoosa. The water-supply cannot be blamed since the water of control pony No. 1 was always boiled before use ; and further, the villagers' horses, which watered from the same source as my ponies, did not contract the disease. Inoculation through the agency of brushes, curry-combs, or syce's hands, and infection by means of buckets, etc., appa- rently is not the usual method of transmission of disease, because the two ponies in the nets were as much subject to this as the controls, but remained free from the disease. Inoculation by means of harness or through harness galls evidently also is an unimportant method of transmission in natural outbreaks, since all the exposed ponies in our experiments promptly contracted surra, although there was no harness and they had no galls. Transmission of trypanosomiasis by means of non-biting flies, acting by proceeding from a wound on a surra animal to a wound on a healthy one, had been proved by laboratory experiments (Musgrave and Clegg Report on Trypanosoma and Trypanosomiasis in Philippine Islands, 1903) to be possible, but our experiments indicate that this method of a6 infection is of minor importance in practice also, because our control ponies which were doing no work were kept absolutely free from visible wounds (with one exception a slight scratch), and moreover, the animal from which infection apparently took place (No. 3), was entirely free from such wounds. One must admit, however, the remote possibility of occasional transmission by non-biting flies, with the drop of blood exud- ing from the recent puncture made by a biting-fly as the source of infection. None of the ponies had lice. With regard to ticks, Hyalomma ægyptium was the only common one, but this (unlike the dog-tick) was nearly as numerous in the hot dry weather before the rains as it was afterwards (it was also very numerous on camels in Lahore district in March and April in spite of the previous drought). The time of its occurrence does not therefore agree with the seasonal occur- rence of surra, and this is the strongest possible argument against the existence of any cycle of development of T. evansi in the body of the tick Hyalomma ægyptium. The habits of ticks render them practically incapable of transmitting trypanosomes mechanically under natural conditions. Other ticks were found, but only occasional specimens of each (a Rhipicephalus and Hæmaphysalis bispinosa). The ponies had little chance in the rains of picking up speci- mens of ticks, except Hyalomma ægyptium, for they stood in the stable, so as to avoid them and were not exercised during the rains. OBSERVATIONS. In the hot weather (May and June), when many Hya- lomma ægyptium were present, I kept five ponies in the open jungle on the same ground as was used for a parao by our camels with surra (and infested also with this tick) for 45 days; and for 17 of these days they were also in contact with a pony affected with inoculated surra. Their blood was daily examined, but no case of surra occurred among them within 37 days of the completion of this observation. Note 1. The ponies used in Experiment 1 were of the pack or ekka types and were purchased in the district; none of them proved immune from surra.
7 Note 2. The evidence points to its being the camel "strain" of surra which spread amongst our ponies, because the only surra with which they were in contact seems to have been in our pony No. 3 (inoculated from a camel) and in our camels themselves. The villagers' cattle occasionally strayed near the stable, but I have already said that the villagers' horses remained healthy, which suggests that the cattle, which mixed freely with them, were also healthy. SEASONAL PREVALENCE OF BITING-FLIES IN MOHAND. During these observations I was much struck by the irregularity of the daily prevalence of some varieties of biting-flies; one cannot be certain of the absence of a given species at a given place without a more or less prolonged stay in that place. This remark applies especially to Tabanus and Hæmatopota. In these notes I have called the period from 1st May to 28th June, the "hot weather;" and the period from 28th June to 24th September, "the rains." The rains broke on 28th June. The biting-flies found in the hot weather were Tabanus Hæmatopota (a large new species), Stomoxys, Hippobosca, a "new fly" of new genus, Hæmatobia. As to mosquitoes, I believe they were sometimes present near water, but only one specimen (Stegomyia) was found at our parao during the hot weather. The biting-flies found in the rains were Tabanus, Hæmatopota (three or four varieties), Stomoxys, Hippobosca, the "new fly;" Hæmatobia, Lyperosia, sand-flies, and Chrysops, and mosquitoes (biting animals) of the genera Anopheles, Culex, Stegomyia and possibly others. One biting-fly was found in uniform numbers in the hot weather and in the rains; namely, Hippobosca maculata; this fly was very numerous all the time and is parasitic on cattle and horses. It is convenient here to consider the habits, etc., of this fly. As is well known, it does not readily change its host, but when horses are tied up in lines, it is likely that some interchange takes place.
8 When not feeding, it lives under the dock or in the perineal region. It will bite anywhere on the body and sometimes leaves a drop of blood at the seat of puncture. The fact that its occurrence is uniform in the hot weather and rains does not entirely preclude the possibility of its being sometimes a transmitting agent of surra; in the hot weather, its chances of acting in this way would be small, for it would have to be from an ox to a horse; in the rains, however, with surra once started in horses in a locality or stable, it might play some small part in trans- mitting from horse to horse. There is no species of Hippobosca in Mohand, special to the camel as occurs in North Africa. Hippobosca macu- lata was only seen occasionally biting on the camel, and it certainly does not live on him for long; it could not play any part in transferring surra from camel to camel in Mohand. Hippobosca does not live on the buffalo; the habits of that animal render it impossible. It may occasionally bite the buffalo. The above considerations show that if Hippobosca ever takes part in the transmission of surra in practice, it could not possibly be a specific agent and could, at the most, cause an occasional case by mechanical transmission. Further, its capability of transferring the surra trypanosome from one animal's blood to another has not been proved. In the hot weather, five healthy ponies and one with surra were exposed together to its frequent bites for 17 days, but no new case of surra occurred. One fly of a new genus was more numerous in the hot weather than in the rains and can, therefore, have no special influence on the spread of surra. It bites horses, camels and oxen. The following flies were always so scarce that they could hardly play any important part in the transmission of surra in Mohand:PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 59 first four were scanty in the hot weather, but their numbers increased enormously in the rains. The following chart shows the prevalence of the three former genera at Tunbara in the valley of Mohand Pass in the hot weather of 1908 before the surra season :10 The following chart shows the prevalence of the biting- flies under consideration in the surra season ("rains") in the valley generally:11 net-protected ponies. As has already been mentioned, trypanosomes first appeared in the controls on the following dates :12 the victim to dislodge it. When the camel is attacked by large numbers of small Hæmatopota ("andhimakhi"), he soon becomes exhausted by his efforts to defend himself from their bites and lies down, feebly kicking or rolling at intervals and giving rise to lugubrious moans. In these circumstances I have found the temperature of healthy camels to reach 104° F. in the evening. The fly chiefly bites on the body and head. Like Tabanus, it does not go far from water; its favourite times for biting are those of Tabanus, but it is often also seen biting in the evening after dark. It takes a long time to fill itself with blood and so is liable to be dislodged before finishing a meal, and may then seek a new victim. At Mohand, the occurrence of the larger varieties corresponded approximately in time and number with the occurrence of Tabanus; but the smaller varieties were only found for about two weeks in the rainy season, during which short period they were swarming. Stomoxys.PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 813 In connection with their work on El debab (trypano- somiasis of camels in North Africa), Drs. E. and E. Sergent found that in Algeria it was rarely found on camels. In Mohand, however, it was not only found in hundreds on all our camels, but it showed a marked preference for biting the camel rather than the horse. This was so pronounced that if a horse was taken into the proximity of a camel nearly all the flies worrying the horse would join those already on the camel; the probable reason is that the camel is an easier prey, for the panniculus is less developed and the tail is of no use for switching off flies excepting in the groin; when it is swarming on him, his only defence is by muscular exertion with head and feet or by rolling, and he soon tires of this and eventually lies prostrate on his side, blowing and occasionally kicking feebly, and, like the horse, his temperature rises considerably from the exertion and irritation. Sand-flies.14 and is therefore unlikely to have any specific action in spreading surra. Mosquitoes generally gorge themselves on one animal and do not move from one animal to another much during the meal. DOES TRANSMISSION OF SURRA IN NATURAL OUTBREAKS DEPEND UPON SOME CYCLE OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE TRYPANOSOME IN THE BODY OF ONE GENUS OR SPECIES OF BITING-FLY ? If so, that fly must have been present in fair numbers at least in Mohand in July and August; it must also have a seasonal occurrence corresponding on the whole with that of surra (i.e., it must be far more prevalent in the rains than in May and June), and it must freely bite horses, camels and cattle since all these animals frequently get surra. The biting diptera fulfilling these conditions are Tabanus, Hæmatopota, Stomoxys, mosquitoes and sand-flies. On the Kathgodam-Naini Tal Road in 1907, Mr. Cross and I found that fresh cases of surra in ponies were occurring in the absence of Tabanus, Hæmatopota and sand- flies (Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science, Vol. III, pp. 163 and 4); it would seem therefore that there can be nothing specific about these three genera. On the other hand, a good deal of circumstantial evidence was collected in favour of mosquitoes being involved in the natural trans- mission of surra; and Stomoxys was also under suspicion. At Mohand, therefore, a good deal of time was spent in the examination of the gut and contents of the gut of mosquitoes at different intervals after they had fed on a surra patient; the object being to search for any change in the form of the trypanosome suggesting the beginning of a cycle of development. The appearances of the organism in the mosquito, however, did not differ from those in Tabanus and other flies similarly treated. Some of the specimens were checked by the Imperial Bacteriologist. No change was observed in the trypanosome, excepting those attributable to degeneration ; and this applies to all the genera of biting-flies examined.
15 I have more reliance, however, on the result of the following transmission experiments as evidence against a cycle of development of the trypanosome in the mosquito. In these experiments mosquitoes were caught at night biting camels and horses which had trypanosomes in their blood at the time ; they were then kept in captivity and the survivors fed on healthy guinea-pigs or white rats after two days and thereafter every two days as long as the mosquitoes could be kept alive. The guinea-pigs and rats were kept in separate cages proof against the entry of any biting-fly (except sand- flies, which, however, were never found to enter the cages). Controls were kept under similar conditions. The blood of the guinea-pigs and rats was daily examined during the experiment and also for 50 days following the last bite if the animal lived that length of time (which it did except where otherwise stated). The mosquitoes were fed in tubes placed against the shaved damped skin of the guinea-pig or rat ; this method, though very laborious, has the advantage over others that each bite can be fully vouched for in every case, and therefore the negative results are of some value. Experiment II.16 Experiment V.PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1117 Microscopic examination of the gut and gut-contents proved negative as regards developmental forms. The following transmission experiments were carried out with the object of ascertaining whether the trypanosome undergoes any special development in the body of Stomoxys. (The experiments were carried out and protected exactly as in the case of the mosquito experiments, the flies being- caught feeding on surra horses or surra camels with trypanosomes in their blood at the time.) Experiment VII.18 of conveying T. brucei (E. and E. Sergent). Etudes sur les trypanosomiasis de Berberie en 1905 (Annals Inst. Pasteur, August 1906), and T. equiperdum (Laveran and Mesnil Trypanosomes and trypanosomiases. English translation, 1907, p. 219), although observations have hitherto indicated that transmission in natural outbreaks of Nagana and Dourine is not by the agency of Tabanus. I therefore carried out experiments with all the 5 genera of biting-flies which fulfilled the necessary conditions as regards seasonal occurrence, to try and ascertain how many of them are capable of withdrawing trypanosomes of surra from one animal and depositing them into the tissues of another by biting both animals within a short space of time. Strictly speaking, the flies used for such experiments should be bred in captivity, because in dealing with wild flies there is a possibility of their having bitten a surra animal some days before capture, and if a positive result subsequent- ly occurs by its bite, it does not absolutely prove that trans- mission was not by a cycle of development in the fly. In the case of Stomoxys, however, our experiments are to a great extent controlled by experiments VII, VIII and IX ; and in the case of Tabanus and Hæmatopota, by the Kathgodam outbreak which continued in their absence, indicating that there can be nothing specific about their power to transmit. In the circumstances we could not under- take the laboratory breeding of flies and had to catch them wild. All the small animals used were examined and protected against chance infection as in the experiments already quoted (II to IX), and the flies were made to bite in glass tubes held over the skin of the animals under experiment; each bite can therefore be vouched for. The flies were first allowed to bite and suck a little blood from animals showing trypanosomes in their blood at the time (excepting where it is otherwise stated); they were then conveyed as quickly as possible to the healthy animal and allowed to gorge them- selves on it. Every fly was only used once. When the trypanosome was subsequently found in the blood of an experi- mental animal, care was taken to see that its morphology was that of T. evansi. In the negative cases excepting
19 where it is otherwise stated, daily examinations of the blood of the animal under experiment were continued for 50 days from the last bite. First, it was necessary to prove that the local species of Tabanus were capable of acting as mechanical agents. Experiment X.20 Eight flies were used and transferred from a surra camel to a healthy guinea-pig (No. 4), thus :21 would act as simple mechanical agents in natural circum- stances. Both experiments were negative :22 The ease with which a positive result was obtained in the Tabanus experiment (in which the animal providing the infection was a camel) is noteworthy. Hæmatopota (the large variety) also seems to act with ease as a mechanical transmitter. With regard to Stomoxys, it will be noticed that at least 25 flies (those used in experiments XIII and XIV), biting under what appear to be more favourable conditions than usually occur in the natural state (the animals on which they took their first feed having very many trypanosomes in their blood at the time ; and the flies being transferred as quickly as possible and at a favourable stage of the feed) may fail to transmit the disease ; but the Stomoxys can transmit surra. The natural conclusion is that, a Tabanus has far more power of transmission than a Stomoxys. In Mohand, however, in the surra season of 1908 matters are balanced somewhat by the fact that there were quite 500 Stomoxys to every one Tabanus; and large Hæma- topota was about twice as numerous as Tabanus. It may be here noticed that although Stomoxys shows less ability to carry the disease mechanically than Tabanus, its powers compare favourably with those of the tse-tse fly, to carry T. gambiense according to the experiments of Dutton and Todd (Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasit- ology, Vol. 1, pp. 204-6). Mosquitoes and sand-flies show no tendency to trans- mit mechanically either by habit or by their properties (ascertained in experiments XVI, XVII and XVIII). Lice were not experimented with ; in camels they are chiefly winter parasites and are got rid of at the spring clip- ping ; but as plenty of " reservoirs of infection " are usually present, they must be suspected as possible, though very occasional, transmitters of the disease in the camel. Accord- ing to Neumann (Parasites of Domesticated Animals, 2nd edition, p. 58), lice only quit their host "accidentally ;" there is, however, plenty of opportunity of " accidental " change of host of the camel louse. The powers of Lyperosia are not known as mechanical surra transmitters; they were in very few numbers at Mohand, but at Ganjyal, Khushab tehsil, a very dry place, and one which all evidence shows not to be surra zone,
23 they were swarming on 14th October. So that circum- stantial evidence points to their share in mechanical trans- mission as being very insignificant, if any. I consider it well established, therefore, that Tabanus is the most dangerous transmitting fly; and that Hæmatopota (large species) is also dangerous. I believe too that Stomoxys is involved in a considerable degree in the transmission of surra, and it will be specially considered. There is, of course, no difficulty about the source of infec- tion. I do not think that surra camels are as dangerous to horses as they are to other camels, because I have found that the Tabanus and Stomoxys much prefer the camel and are not likely to leave him after a partial feed for a horse ; it is also a fact that in the case of many of the roads through the foot-hills where some of the worst horse-out- breaks occur, such as that from Kathgodam to Naini Tal, camels are taken off the road and out of the district by their owners from about 20th May until October. Oxen (and per- haps buffaloes) are, therefore, chiefly to blame for acting as reservoirs of infection for horses ; out of 4 apparently healthy bulls working on the Naini Tal Road in 1907 by inoculation experiments, one was found to have surra, and out of 51 carefully selected Indian cattle in 1906 at least 17 contained T. evansi (Report of Chief of Bureau of Animal Industry for 1907, U. S. A., Department of Agriculture, pp. 22 and 27). COMPARATIVE PRACTICAL IMPORTANCE OF STOMOXYS AS A SURRA TRANSMITTER. According to my observations, Stomoxys is a more generally distributed fly than Tabanus, probably as it is less dependent upon a water-supply. In the rains and autumn it is the commonest biting-fly by far at every stage on the Kathgodam and Naini Tal Road and on the Saharanpur to Dehra Dun Road. Kahan Singh, 2nd Veterinary Assistant, of this office, found it at every stage of the road march from Saharanpur to Jullunder (about 175 miles) in September. I have found it also in the Lahore Veterinary College on 27th September; in Rakh Pabbi, Gujrat district, on 30th September; and at Kharian, Gujrat district, on 14th October. Its general distribution is therefore an argument against its
24 being the first cause of an outbreak in horses, for surra in horses is not so generally distributed. In my opinion it is unlikely to act that way because the powers of the fly to transmit are never great, and as cattle usually have the trypanosomes so scanty in the blood or apparently absent from it, the chance of the fly transmitting from ox to horse are reduced to zero. But the case is quite different when, by Tabanus, surra is already started amongst a stud of horses from an ox. Trypanosomes are often numerous in the horse with surra, and Stomoxys is numerous and is often dis- lodged during a feed on these animals and seeks a new victim. The transmission is rendered easier since horses are often standing close together in lines, or working in double harness in tongas. In these circumstances (i.e., surra already started amongst a stud of horses), the Stomoxys is probably an active agent helping in the spread of the disease. The explanation therefore of the difficulty that, although in the 1907 Kathgodam outbreak it was found at every stage on the road, but surra only at Kathgodam and Bojia- ghat, seems to depend upon the foregoing facts. Local opinion insisted that Tabanus, when present, was confined to these two stages, and no doubt they may have been responsible for the occurrence of the outbreak (i.e., bringing the try- panosomes from the ox) and after they had disappeared, Stomoxys was only able to carry on the outbreak amongst the ponies in the stages in which surra was already rife. The close of the outbreak corresponded with the disappearance of the latter. I think, that in camels it may also be an agent for the spread of surra, although of much less importance than Tabanus. A Stomoxys, as I have said, more often finishes his feed on one camel than on one horse. Late in the surra season at Mohand I exposed a newly purchased healthy pony with the surra ponies to its bites for about an hour a day on 20 days with negative result; but as Tabanus was then still present, the exposure could only be made at times and places where biting-flies of all kinds were not very numerous, and I do not attach any importance to the negative result of the experiment,
PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A to D. HÆMATOPOTA FOUND IN MOHAND. E. CHRYSOPS FOUND IN MOHAND.
25 The Influence of a Dark Stable.26 quantity and quality of the milk and occurring in the first 3 months of life. The only record that I can find bearing on the subject is that of the Sergeants who found in Algeria a 6 months old camel whose blood contained trypanosomes of El Debab, but which showed no clinical signs of the disease. These facts suggested that the young camel might have enough resistance against the disease to recover from it, and if so, of course, this could be turned to great practical account. Therefore, the following observation was made to check the camelmen's statements. The result shows that the camel bacha at 6 months old (and this is about his age when he passes through his first surra season in the plains) is quite susceptible to surra and becomes infected by it under natural circumstances. On and after the 24th June (4 days before the break of the rains), a male camel bacha, 5 months old, and suckled by a dachi with chronic surra, was put to live and graze in the Mohand Pass with some adult camels, some of which had surra. Its blood was daily examined. On 10th August trypanosomes appeared for the first time ; death occurred after only 11 days of illness, during the whole of which time trypanosomes were easily found in the blood. A white rat inoculated with a little of its blood subcu- taneously on 15th August showed trypanosomes on the 3rd day and died 8 days afterwards. A foal 3 months old, placed in contact with surra ponies at Mohand on the 11th July, contracted the disease, trypanosomes first appearing on 17th August. The disease was of the chronic type, and the foal was destroyed on 23rd September, at which date it was in a greatly emaciated condition. Certain other Experiments in connection with surra failed on account of practical obstacles, which could not be overcome ; and the experiment recorded could not have been carried out had it not been for the way in which the native staff of the office, and especially Veterinary Assistant Ata Mohamed, willingly performed tasks of all kinds not usually included in the duties of their respective posts.
THE NORMAL AND ABNORMAL TEMPERA- TURES OF THE CAMEL WITH A NOTE ON NORMAL PULSE AND RESPIRATION. BY A. S. LEESE, I.C.V.D., Investigating Camel Diseases. THE following notes are the result of observation on baggage-camels of the one-humped variety in Northern India:28 them free from Surra, and I therefore took the opportunity of making systematic observations on their temperatures with a view to deciding what may be considered normal. The camels which eventually proved to be healthy were three in number, and the following tests were relied on for proof of freedom from Surra :29 extreme temperatures at this hour shown by the three camels were as follows :30 to cold ; the influence of cold brings the temperature of the camel down as I have often observed after heavy storms. The normal morning temperatures are highest after the stifling nights of June before the break of the rains. When flies, especially biting-flies, are numerous, as in some places in the rains, the temperature of the camel is of little use in diagnosing disease since the irritation caused by the attack of flies often causes it to rise to 103° and 104° F. Musth (rutting) in the male camel does not influence his temperature much, even when he is severely " upset" by the condition. The influence of watering in the camel's temperature probably varies according to the practice in vogue in different countries as regards frequency of watering, but it only makes a difference of a fraction of a degree in the cold weather. A camel-bacha of six months old (healthy as regards Surra, because it had not yet passed through a Surra season), examined for four days consecutively, registered a tempera- ture ranging from 99° F. to 100.8° F. at 6 A.M., and from 101° to 101.8° F. at 6 P.M. Its blood was examined daily for trypanosomes, but none were present. The Pulse of the camel can be felt when the animal is in a sitting position. The artery which is most suitable for the purpose is the posterior tibial artery at a point about 7 inches above the point of the hock and about 1 inch to the inner side of the " tendon of Achilles." As far as I am aware, the credit of finding a practicable situation for examining the camel's pulse is due to Khuda Baksh, Veterin- ary Daffadar, of 56th (Montgomery) Camel Corps. It is, however, difficult to feel unless the camel is sitting with his hind feet flat on the ground with his hocks raised ; there is sometimes great difficulty in finding it if the camel is sitting with heels and hocks on the ground, or in ascer- taining the strength and fulness of the pulse satisfactorily unless the camel is made to sit in the former position. As to the frequency of the pulse in the healthy adult camel at rest, in the early morning it varies from 32 to 44 per minute and in the evening from 36 to 50, averaging about 44 at about 6 P.M. It is common to find an irregular,
31 and sometimes even an irregularly intermittent, pulse in camels, temporarily, which show no sign of any heart disease. Respiration.NOTE ON TAPEWORMS IN PUNJAB CAMELS. BY A. S. LEESE, M.R.C.V.S., C.V.D., Investigating Camel Diseases. Two species of tapeworms have been found in the course of post-mortem examinations made on camels suffering from different diseases in the Punjab. No. 1 is undoubtedly Tænia expansa. It was found in one old camel on 28th September 1908 ; there were three or four individual specimens in the duodenum. They were not involved in any important degree in cause of death. The worm was over 3 yards long, the older segments being very thick and of a yellowish colour. The segments were broader than they were long at every part. The head was 0.8 mm. wide when lying slightly expanded on a glass slide ; it was unarmed and the four suckers were oval and had the slit-like opening of T. expansa. There was a short neck and the young part of the worm is very attenuated. The greatest breadth of mature segments was 13 mm. and greatest length 2 mm. Two genital pores in each segment. No. 2 is apparently undescribed in text-books of Veterin- ary Parasitology. It is a very delicate unarmed tapeworm, length up to 3 feet. Head is about ½ mm. wide and the width of the neck behind the head is ½ that of the head. The segments are thin, easily torn, and always much broader than long; the greatest length of mature segments was 0.3 mm. and the greatest breadth 2 to 3 mm. The opaque double uterus of each segment being later- ally situated, the worm is left transparent in the middle line.
33 There is one genital pore in each segment, and it is irregularly alternated. The worm is therefore near T. globipunctata of the sheep, but differs from it in having a very distinct neck; a specimen was sent to Professor Sir John M. Fadyean, who kindly confirmed this point. The worm is sometimes of pathogenic importance. I have found it in the duodenum of several adult camels suffering from coincident debilitating diseases, mainly due to other causes, but never in very large numbers. In two camel-bachas, however, six months old, suffering from " Gal Sujh, " the duodenum contained very large numbers of the tapeworms and in one case at least they acted to some extent in preventing recovery from this disease, which is a suppurative disease following severe cases of camel-pox. As regards tænifuges for the camel, I have experi- mented with Kamela, which is easily and cheaply obtained in India and found that 7 to 8 oz. thoroughly purges an adult camel.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. BY S. H. GAIGER, M.R.C.V.S., I.C.V.D., From the Punjab Veterinary College Laboratory. THIS disease has been known in India for about ten years, but it is only within the last four or five that the study of it, as it occurs in this country, has been seriously taken up. Only within the last few years, too, has it been realised how great the losses are from it, and that many deaths which ten years ago were returned as anthrax ought really to have been returned as Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. I only intend to deal here with the disease as it occurs in India, and most of the facts recorded are the results of my own observations and study of the disease here. The quantity of literature on the subject in India is extremely small, and is as follows :35 THE BACILLUS OF HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. I.36 drop of water of condensation in the tube, the bacillus first commences to lose its virulence and then dies altogether. Inoculation on too old dry agar tubes will produce no growth at all. The bacillus can be kept alive for months and the same pathogenicity maintained if it be grown at 30°C. and subcul- tured every time the water of condensation commences to dry up, i.e., every 5th or 6th day. After two months it should be passed through a rabbit to renew lease of virulence. In peptone bouillon the organism renders the medium slowly turbid and there is a quantity of thick growth at the bottom of the tube which rises up in clouds on shaking. The bottom growth is easily broken up during the first few days by shaking, but in older tubes it is almost impossible to break up the stringy growth, so firmly is it glued together by its mucoid substance. If the tube is incubated quite unshaken for a few days, a thin scum forms on the surface and climbs up the sides of the tube. The bacillus will not grow at all anærobically. Tubes of bouillon inoculated with the bacillus were put in Buch- ner's tubes and incubated three days without result. The tubes were then removed from Buchner's tubes and incu- bated ærobically, and in 24 hours an abundant growth took place. II.37 This appearance is never seen in the blood-stream where the bacilli are found singly or at most in pairs. In the tissues of the body when seen in section the bacilli are arranged in irregular clumps. Each bacillus is surrounded by a mucoid cortex. In old cultures, peculiar involution forms develop, oval, club-shaped, spindle-shaped and spherical being common. This change is especially well seen in dried-up agar cultures. The bacillus shows only very slight or no movement. Staining reactions. With all stains the bacillus stains better at the ends than in the centre, thus coming under the Pasteurella class of organism. It stains very easily with watery solutions of the Aniline dyes. L38 Direct sunlight kills it within half an hour. Ten minutes at a temperature of 70°C. destroys it. It is very easily killed by drying. The question of how the bacillus remains alive outside the animal body between the outbreaks of the disease is an important one. It is just possible that the Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia bacillus like the Plague bacillus has, under favourable condi- tions, greater powers of resistance outside the animal body than Laboratory experiments would lead one to expect. Reaction of Nutrient Media. Gelatine is not liquefied. No gas is produced in growing. A peculiar sour odour emanates from old cultures. Alkaline media become acid from the growth of the bacilli. Milk is neither coagulated nor acidified. Temperature. The best temperature for growth is below the temper- ature of the body, namely, 30°C. Agglutination. There is no relation between the agglutinating powers of an animal's serum and its natural powers of resistance against the disease. NORMAL SERUM OF HILL BULL 9501. EMULSION FROM AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/100. 1/500. 1/1000. Within 15 minutes ... + + + - - - NORMAL SERUM OF HILL BULL 9502. EMULSION FROM AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/100. 1/500. Within 15 minutes ... + + - -
39 NORMAL SERUM OF HILL BULL 9474. EMULSION FROM AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/100. 1/500. Within 15 minutes ... + + - - NORMAL SERUM OF HILL BULLS. EMULSION OF H. S. AGAR CULTURE. No. 9532. No. 9538. No. 95-19. No. 9550 Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. Pure scrum. 1/10 1/50. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. Within 15 minutes. - - - + - - - - - - - No. 9553. No. 9556 No. 9436. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. Pure serum 1/10. 1/50. Within 15 minutes. - - - - - - - - - NORMAL SERUM OF HORSE No. 1. EMULSION FROM AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. 1/100. Within 15 minutes ... - - - - In ¾ hour ... ... - - - - NORMAL SERUM OF HORSE No. 2. EMULSION OF AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. 1/100. Within 15 minutes ... - - - - In ¾ hour ... ... + - - - NORMAL SERUM OF SHEEP No. 1. EMULSION OF AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. 1/100. Within 15 minutes .. - - - - In ¾ hour ... ... + - - -
40 NORMAL SERUM OF SHEEP NO. 2. EMULSION OF AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. 1/100. Within 15 minutes ... - - + - In ¾ hour ... ... - - + - NORMAL SERUM OF PIGEON. EMULSION OF AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1 10. 1/50. 1/100. Within 15 minutes ... - - - - In ¾ hour ... ... - - - - NORMAL SERUM OF RABBITS Nos. 1 AND 2. EMULSION OF H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/50. 1/100. Within 15 minutes ... - - - - In ¾ hour ... ... - - - - The agglutinating power of an animal's serum increases during immunisation against H. S. SERUM FROM A HILL BULL IN PROCESS OF IMMUNISATION. EMULSION OF AN H. S. AGAR CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/100. 1/500. Within 15 minutes ... + + 4 + - SERUM FROM A HILL BULL IMMUNISED AGAINST H. S. EMULSION OF AN H. S. CULTURE. Pure serum. 1/10. 1/100. 1/500. 1/700. Within 15 minutes ... + + + + + + + - Although the agglutinins in an animal's serum increase with the immunising process, the immunising properties of the serum are not dependent on these agglutinins, e.g.,41 The agglutinins were removed from this serum in the following manner : 42 The temperature rises to 107°F. or 110°F., feeding and rumination cease, and great depression sets in. A pain- ful, hot and very hard swelling appears in the dewlap, throat and between the lower maxillæ. This swelling is so hard that pressure of the fingers makes no depression, but a neck rope on the animal will cause a deep cleft in it. The swellings vary in size, but usually fill up the whole of the loose dewlap which is so plentiful in Indian cattle. Saliva flows from the mouth and a thick mucous dis- charge from the nose. The pulse is frequent and respiration becomes increas- ingly difficult, the condition bordering on suffocation with the nose extended, the nostrils dilated, and the chest walls heaving. The mucous membranes are hæmorrhagic and of a deep-red colour. Colic and intestinal symptoms then set in. Constipa- tion gives place to diarrh43 The pericardial cavity contains an excess of fluid in which fibrin may be present. Myocarditis is generally found and endocarditis is an almost diagnostic post-mortem symp- tom. The spleen and blood are of normal appearance. The bladder is inflamed and the urine darker coloured than normal. On microscopical examination of the heart wall, micros- copic hæmorrhages are seen between the muscle fibres and under an oil immersion lens large clusters of bacilli are found. The former appearance is well seen when Weigert's Iron Hæmatoxylin followed by Van Gieson's stain are used, and the bacilli are best seen after 24 hours staining with L44 The mucous membranes were of a deep-red colour and the pulse was fast and weak. Temperature very high. Post-mortem. No external swellings. Pharynx and 45 No pleural fluid, but severe pleuritis without adhesions. Lungs healthy except for one lobe showing commencing pneumonia. In the heart were traces of extravasation on the endocardium. Peritoneal cavity contained no fluid. The chief lesions were in the abdomen. The 3rd and 4th stomachs were severely inflamed. The small intestines and especially Peyer's patches were bright scarlet. Large intestines showed patchy inflammation. The blood-vessels on the brain surface were very full and the meninges were much injected. Cultures were obtained from all the organs and fluids in the body, and especially good and abundant results were got from the urine. Many other buffaloes have been inoculated with similar results. CATTLE. A. cow calf was inoculated subcutaneously over the shoulder with 1 c.c. emulsion of H. S. culture on agar from a rabbit. He was inoculated in the afternoon and the follow- ing morning the temperature was 105°F. The calf was dull, off feed and had a quickened pulse. The mucous membranes were congested. Breathing was normal. A large 46 The 4th stomach was severely inflamed, especially near the pylorus. In the small and large intestines a severe blackish red inflammation. HORSES. A grey country-bred was inoculated subcutaneously with .5 c.c. H. S. emulsion from a 24 hours agar culture from a rabbit which died in 13½ hours. A large hot painful PLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA IN THE HORSE. A large swelling can be seen over the near shoulder. Death occurred the day following the taking of the above photo.
47 day the swelling had slightly decreased and she was feeding well. On the 4th day swelling still less but painful ; 6th day swelling disappeared and sheep well. On the 7th day was reinoculated with 1½ c.c. agar culture emulsion from a. rabbit which died in 22½ hours. A local swelling appeared, but the sheep's general health did not suffer. Two days later the swelling had gone. On the 13th day reinoculated with 3 c.c. culture emul- sion, and only a slight local reaction resulted. Three days later some blood was drawn off and clotted and the serum when injected into rabbits proved fatal. On the 22nd day sheep was reinoculated with 10 c.c. culture emulsion and again there was a local reaction. On the 39th day death resulted. Sheep No. 50 was inoculated subcutaneously with 2 c.c. H. S. bouillon culture. There was a severe local reaction and for a few days the sheep was dull and off feed. For about three weeks there was intermittent high fever, the temperature rising to 105°F. ; then the sheep became quite well again. The reaction to inoculation was very severe, but it left behind a powerful immunity as proved by subsequent inoculations with large doses of culture giving practically no reaction, whereas the control rabbits died. Sheep No. 53 was inoculated subcutaneously with 10 c.c. H. S. bouillon cult e and died in 40 hours. There was an extensive local reaction and the temperature rose to 106°F. The bacillus was obtained from the post-mortem examination. GOATS. Goat No. 19 was inoculated subcutaneously with .5 c.c. bouillon culture 24 hours old. The second day the temperature rose to 104°F. and on the 5th, 6th and 7th days nearly reached 105°F., then went
48 down to and remained normal. The local reaction was insignificant. On the 35th day from the 1st inoculation he was again inoculated subcutaneously with 2 c.c. H. S. bouillon culture 24 hours old. The control rabbit died in 12 hours. The goat showed neither local nor general reaction. CAMELS. Camel No. 1.49 This camel probably died from the effects of the toxin injected. Cultures could not be obtained from the tissues or blood, so the bacilli probably did not multiply in the body. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Camel No. 7 was inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. H. S. bouillon culture 24 hours old. There was no local reaction, but the temperature rose to 104°F. The control rabbit died in 18 hours. 21 days later he was again inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. H. S. bouillon culture four days old. The control rabbit died in 20 hours. There was no general or local reaction, yet 31 days later the camel died and the bacillus was obtained in culture from the internal organs. The bacillus was much attenuated in virulence.
50 GUINEA-PIGS. Guinea-pig No. 57 was inoculated with ½ c.c. emulsion of H. S. agar culture 24 hours old. The local swelling and inflammation gradually increased till the time of death, which occurred in 58 hours. Enteritis was the chief post-mortem lesion There was no tracheitis as in rabbits. The adrenal glands were much inflamed. Many guinea-pigs have been inoculated with similar results, death occurring in from 40 to 60 hours. HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. Guinea-pig. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RABBITS. Rabbits appear to be the most susceptible of all animals and the disease is invariably fatal in them. The organism increases in virulence by passage through rabbits till a standard virulence of eleven hours is reached,
51 From an ordinary culture obtained in the field, rabbits die in an average of 25 to 30 hours. The local reaction is extensive. From subcutaneous inoculation on the abdomen a swelling half an inch thick extends from pubes to throat. There is high fever. Intoxication symptoms prevail till death. Rabbit. Inoculated with H. S. bacilli attenuated by passage through the sheep. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] POST-MORTEM. Local swelling consists of a serous infiltration. A diagnostic lesion is hemorrhagic tracheitis generally very severe. In females the uterus is generally very much inflamed. The intestines are injected on the serous surface and the mucous surface is hæmorrhagic. PIGEONS. House pigeon No. I was inoculated subcutaneously with 5 c.c. H. S. emulsion from 24 hours' culture The only symp- tom shown was a slight, hard swelling, the size of a grain of wheat, at the seat of inoculation.
52 The never appeared ill. 19 days later it was again inoculated, and with double the former dose. This time there was not even a local reaction. On both occasions the control guinea-pig died in about 40 hours. 21 days later the same pigeon was again inoculated ; this time with 1 c.c. bouillon culture. Death occurred in 31 hours. A pure culture was obtained from the post-mortem and was used on Rabbit 134, which died in 28 hours of H. S. Wild pigeon No. I was inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. emulsion from H. S. agar culture 24 hours old. Death occurred in 20 hours. The crop was full of fluid and the bowels showed severe enteritis. Wild pigeon No. II was inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. emulsion of H. S. agar culture from Wild pigeon No. I. Next day there was a slight swelling at the seat of inoculation, and death occurred in 31 hours. Crop was full of fluid. Wild pigeon No. III was inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. emulsion of H. S. agar culture from Wild pigeon No. II. Death occurred in 22 hours and the crop was full of fluid as in the other cases. DOGS. A fox-terrier pup was inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. H. S. bouillon culture without result. A pariah dog was inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. H. S. bouillon culture without even a rise of temperature. 17 days later he was again inoculated intraperitoneally with H. S. agar culture emulsion 3.5 c.c. and his tempera- ture rose the same day 3° F. above his previous average temperature. Next day the temperature was normal and the dog in perfect health. On each occasion the control rabbits died.
53 RATS. Rat No. 104 was inoculated with a loopful of H. S. agar culture and died on the 6th day. Lesions were only very slight enteritis and a small swell- ing at the seat of inoculation. No tracheitis was present. By passage from rat to rat the bacillus increases in virulence for the rat. FOWLS. Hen No. 60 was inoculated subcutaneously with 1 c.c. emulsion of 24 hours old H. S. agar culture. There was no result, not even a local reaction, but the control rabbit died in 23 hours. 29 days later the fowl was reinoculated without result, but the control rabbit died in 22½ hours. Hen No. 61. was inoculated subcutaneously with ½ c.c. bouillon culture of H. S. There was a slight local 54 HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. Buffalo immunised by feeding on bouillon culture of H. S. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
55 The constant effect of feeding buffaloes on bouillon culture is to immunise the animal against the disease, so that 1 c.c. of virulent bouillon culture inoculated subcutaneously never causes more than a slight local swelling and a slight rise of temperature (103°F.). It was found that this immunity was present as long as three or four weeks after the last culture feeding. It is, therefore, very improbable that an animal would become affected from the comparatively few bacilli it would ingest from the soil water; in fact, this ingestion is probably the cause of the immunity against H. S. found in old animals in H. S. districts. Enormous numbers of bacilli are discharged from the bodies of infected animals in the urine, so that the soil water in H. S. places must be infected even if all carcases were unopened. It is very doubtful whether the bacilli actually multiply in the soil. The only method of infection is by inoculation, but exactly how this comes about is not known. It might, in some cases, occur from mouth injuries or skin wounds, but it seems far more likely that the disease is conveyed by the bites of blood-sucking insects. May it not be that the insects which spread the disease are only hatched out by rain and that this explains the relation of the disease to wet weather? Where would insects get the infection in the first instance before any large animals become visibly affected? It seems extremely likely that some species of animal may carry the disease in a chronic form, as in the case of Camel No. 7, previously mentioned. In one case where a sheep was inoculated subcutaneously without result, the bacillus of H. S. was found to be circulating in the blood, and the sheep's serum three days after inoculation proved fatal to the rabbit. May not some small animal keep the disease going in dry seasons till rain appears and the disease spreads to cattle and buffaloes. Observations on these points in the districts would be most interesting.
56 Till we are quite certain of the method of infection preventive measures are likely to prove somewhat ineffectual. ALTERATION IN VIRULENCE OF THE BACILLUS. Growing the bacillus at higher temperatures than 37°C. greatly alters its virulence for animals, but growing it at low temperatures does not alter its virulence in the slightest. Grown for long periods in vitro at 37°C. it loses its virulence sooner than when grown for the same length of time at 30°C. This was shown by cultivating the bacillus from a rabbit which died in 12 hours, and from one tube two sub- cultures were made. One subculture was kept at 30°C. and the other at 37°C. for six weeks, each being subcultured every few days. At the end of this period three rabbits were inoculated from the 30°C. culture, and three with similar doses from the 37°C. culture, with the result that the former died in 23, 14 and 10 hours respectively, whereas two of the latter recovered and the 3rd died in 36 hours, i.e., a distinct decrease in virulence in the cultures kept at the higher temperatures. Other conditions being favourable, mere length of time cultivated outside the living animal body decreases the virulence. A few hours' drying greatly alters the virulence. Bacilli minus their toxins have only feeble pathogenic powers. Passage through certain animals with a natural resist- ance to the disease greatly decreases the virulence. In Italy it is said that passage of the bacillus through pigeons so alters the virulence that the blood will protect buffaloes against the disease. Here in India, I tried to alter the virulence for rabbits by passage of the organism from pigeon to pigeon, and then cultivating on agar and inoculating into rabbits, but without success. Passage from sheep to sheep greatly alters the virulence for rabbits, one rabbit dying after 10 days. Passage through the camel does the same. In the case of Camel No. 7 previously mentioned, the bacillus of normal virulence for the rabbit took 31 days to kill the camel, and afterwards
57 was so weakened as to be unable to kill rabbits and buffaloes. Passage through certain species of animals increases the virulence up to a standard virulence for that species, for example, Rabbits, Rats and Buffaloes. This standard virulence is higher for rodents than for ruminants. IMMUNITY. Immunity may be conferred on animals against H. S.FILARIA OSLERI IN INDIA. BY S. H. GAIGER, I.C.V.D., Punjab Veterinary College Laboratory. THE extremely rare occurrence of this parasite and the absence of any drawing of it, or of the lesions it causes, are sufficient reasons for this short note. Neumann says: "There are five observations on record of verminous nodules of the trachea and bronchi of the dog, caused by the Nematodes that Blumberg and Rabe doubtfully place in the genus Filaria. Of these five obser- vations, one is due to Renault, two to Blumberg and the other two to Rabe. Body filiform, mouth surrounded by two or three prominences or concentric lips of variable height behind which are three unequal papillæ; pharynx dilated Male 5 mm. long with the posterior extremity rounded; two curved, unequal spicules. Female 9 mm. to 15 mm. long; vulva situated immediately in front of the anus. "Ovoviviparous.59 The lesions were just at the point of bifurcation of the trachea into the two bronchi and were most numerous in the commencement of the right bronchus. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FILARIA OSLERI. Magnified and Natural Size. From the Bronchus of an Indian Bred English Fox-Hound. Drawn by Ghulam Hussain. The tumours were all egg-shaped with their long diameter parallel to the lumen of the bronchus. They looked exactly like little pieces of tissue stuck on the mucous membrane; each however was firmly attached by a strong neck, slightly less in circumference than the tumour itself. The respiratory mucous membrane covered the surface of the tumours. The "tumours" consisted almost entirely of the coiled and intertwined tails of the worms, in between being a little connective tissue. The coiled-up tails could be easily seen through the mucous membrane covering. From an examination of the very minute "tumours" under the microscope it was clear that an adult worm had never protruded from the surface, yet one could be seen
60 inside. The worm must have reached its position in the sub- mucosa as an embryo either viâ the blood stream or by piercing the mucous membrane from the lumen of the bronchus. The probability is that the life-history is a simple one and that eggs or embryos are coughed out and then taken in with the food of another dog.
PLATE VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FILARIA OSLERI IN THE BRONCHI OF AN INDIAN-BRED ENGLISH FOXHOUND. NATURAL SIZE AND MAGNIFIED. Preparation prepared by S. H. Gaiger, Punjab Veterinary College. Drawn by Mahd. Hanif.
LINGUATULA TÆNIOIDES. BY S. H. GAIGER, I.C.V.D., Punjab Veterinary College Laboratory. THE extraordinary prevalence of this parasite amongst pariah dogs in India has only been noticed during the last six months. Several cases of excessive hæmorrhage from the nostrils of European dogs were met with and the absence of the Hæmopis sanguisuga noted. The fæces were examined and the eggs of the Anchylostomum trigonocephalum were in most cases present. The patients were treated for anchylos- tomiasis, but the periodical epistaxis continued. It was then that it occurred to me to search in pariah dogs for the Linguatula tænioides. The owners of the epis- taxis patients would not allow a post-mortem examination. Up to the present time over fifty pariah dogs have been destroyed and the meati of the turbinated bones examined, and in nearly every dog the Linguatula has been found. From one to six is the usual number present in each dog. I am very disinclined to attribute epistaxis in European dogs to the parasite. It may be from this cause in one or two isolated cases, but in by far the greater number of cases it can be put down to the Anchylostomum trigonocephalum which is present in almost every dog examined, sometimes only one or two being present and sometimes large numbers. When many are present, the dog's condition is generally very poor. I have never seen a case of epistaxis in pariah dogs yet, though for several years many have been kept for experimental inoculations, and on post-mortem examination anchylostomes have very commonly been found, and recently the Linguatula also.
62 This may be taken as a further proof that canine epis- taxis is due to anchylostomes, for one can conclude that the pariah possesses immunity to the poisons excreted by the anchylostomes in the same way as it acquires immunity to certain endemic diseases, such as contagious gastro-enteritis from continual association with the poison or virus, but immunity to what would be in the case of Linguatula a mechanical cause of hæmorrhage would be hardly possible. Symptoms common to European and pariah dogs, and which are no doubt due to the presence of the Linguatula, are:63 The eggs in mucus fall to the ground on to grass and are taken in by herbivorous animals with their food. The embryo is set free in the herbivore's stomach and from thence bores its way to the liver, lungs, or mesenteric glands and having encysted itself becomes a "pupa" and later develops into a "larva." The larvæ, attaining full development, migrate in their host to other organs, or some may escape from their host altogether and so gain entrance into their true host. Of those which migrate some accidentally find their way to the nasal cavities of the intermediate host and there develop into adults, but the majority of the larvæ encyst themselves in some suitable organ till the intermediate host is preyed upon by the true host; in other words, until the viscera of the herbivorous animal is eaten by the carnivorous animal. Now in what animal are the larval and pupal stage to be found in India? It must be in the organ of some animal which every pariah dog gets to eat. "The larval forms have been found in or on the liver of Capra sp., the Cat, Cavia cutleri, Equus caballus: in the lungs of Bos taurus, the Cat, Cavia cutleri, Hystrix cristata, Lepus cuniculus, and L. timidus: in the mesenteric glands of Bos taurus, Camelus, Capra sp., Ovis aries and Mus decumanus."64 I call the condition "common" chiefly because of what I have been told regarding its prevalence by those who have been several years in this country, but in my three years' experience I have only met with some half dozen cases in very old horses, for my opportunity of making post-mortems on equines has not been great. It appears to me extremely probable that these nodules are the larval stages of the Linguatula tænioides. I have heard it said that the condition of "nodular liver" was due to filaria, but on what ground, I am unable to state.
PLATE VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] LINGUATULA LACEOLATE. Natural size. [Drawn by Mahomed Hanif.] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] LUNGS OF A RABBIT SHOWING THE PUPAL STAGE OF THE LINGUATULA TÆNIODES. The rabbit was fed two months previously on the eggs of this parasite. [Drawn by Mahomed Hanif.] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] EGGS OF LINGUATULA TÆNIODES. [Drawn by Mahomed Hanif.]
I. TREATMENT OF CAMEL SURRA. II. AN EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF RESIS TANCE TO CAMEL SURRA IN THE DOG. III. SOME ATTEMPTS AT TREATMENT OF SURRA IN THE DOG. BY S. H. GAIGER, I.C.V.D., Punjab Veterinary College Laboratory. I.66 The method of giving was to make the camel lie down, then men caught the head and applied a twitch to the upper lip. The mouth was then opened, pointing upwards and bran mash in which the orpiment was evenly distributed was dropped in double handfuls into it. This was followed by a pint or two of water from a jug to wash the bran mash down. Never a morsel was wasted, and though the method looked very crude, no accidents resulted. Case I. Given red orpiment 6 grammes. Death next morning. Symptoms:67 ATOXYL AND ORPIMENT TREATMENT. Camel. Case No. V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
68 A dose of 25 grammes was reached in a month's time without the slightest effect on the appearance of the try- panosomes or the occurrence of fever. Treatment was discontinued. Case V. Was observed for one month before commencing treat- ment. Trypanosomes appeared during three different periods of a few days each. Atoxyl and yellow orpiment were given for about three weeks, a total of 40 grammes atoxyl. It was realised that if such a quantity combined with orpiment were ineffectual, the method was impracticable as the animals would hardly be worth the expense of treatment. The treatment was continued on the "yellow orpiment alone" method in gradually increasing doses every second day until 12 grammes was reached when the animal died from effects of the orpiment, of which a total of 118 grammes had been given. In spite of the treatment trypanosomes appeared in the blood three days before death. Parasites were not found during the period atoxyl was being administered. Case VI. Was observed one month before treatment was com- menced and trypanosomes were found on eleven days out of 31. Treatment was commenced with yellow orpiment, 7 grammes in gradually increasing doses every second day until in eight weeks a dose of 50 grammes was reached: the total orpiment given being 450 grammes. Treatment was discontinued as trypanosomes continued to appear regularly in the circulation. Case VII. Treatment was commenced after one week's observation during which time parasites were found every day.
69 The dose was gradually increased from 5 to 50 grammes till a total of 524 grammes had been given when the treat- ment was discontinued as parasites continued to be found in the blood. Case VIII. Was observed five weeks previous to commencing treat- ment and during this period trypanosomes were present on "ORPIMENT ALONE" TREATMENT. Camel. Case No. VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] eleven days, a preliminary dose of 6 grammes was given and in nine weeks this was increased to 75 grammes, making a total of 900 grammes. This enormous quantity had not the least effect on the trypanosomes, which continued to appear.
70 CONCLUSIONS. I. The atoxyl and orpiment combined treatment is too expensive to be practicable with camels. II. The "orpiment alone" treatment, if started in small doses, is quite useless for camel surra because the trypanosomes acquire a tolerance for the drug as soon as the camel itself does. III. Any methods of treating camels for surra must always be preceded by at least one month's observations to see the course the disease is taking, otherwise wrong impressions may be obtained as to the effects of the drugs. One camel, which was not treated, only showed trypano- somes for one day in three months and was practically a recovered case, would have entirely deceived me as to the effects of orpiment had he not been kept under observation before treating. II.71 The following blood tests, by subcutaneous inoculation, were made on other animals:72 disease, is quite typical of the course camel surra takes in the pariah dog. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] III.PLATE IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SURRA IN FOX-HOUNDS OF THE LAHORE HUNT. Showing nine Hounds suffering from Surra spontaneously contracted. Their condition of Exhaustion and Emaciation is well shown.
73 from hound to hound in the months of January and February. The only blood-sucking insects found were a few fleas and a few lice. House flies abounded in the kennels and swarmed all over the dogs, especially on their faces. Most probably all these insects helped to spread the disease. I have always noticed in any animal affected with surra, how the trypanosomes swarm in any wounds present, even when few in the blood. This would help house flies to play their part. All the hounds most likely became infected about the same time because they all died within three weeks of one another. Post-mortem examination showed patches of congestion in the lungs, liver enlarged and hyperæmic, spleen much enlarged and darker than normal, stomach, large and small intestines, all slightly inflamed. Treatment was carried out with atoxyl and quinine on alternate days in three dogs and with atoxyl alone in one dog. Orpiment was not used owing to the dog's extreme sensibility to this drug. Case I. Bitch No. 155 74 Case IV. Dog No. 157.SECOND SERIES OF EXPERIMENTS ON TREATMENT OF SURRA IN CAMELS. BY A. S. LEESE, I.C.V.D., Investigating Camel Diseases. THIS series of experiments was begun after news had been received of the success of MM. Thiroux and Teppaz in the treatment of Equine Trypanosomiasis in Senegal (1) by the method of MM. Laveran and Thiroux and by Orpiment alone; and the reports by the Imperial Bacteri- ologist of his good results in Equine Surra by treatment with Atoxyl, Orpiment and Sodium Arsenite, (2) or by Atoxyl, followed by carefully regulated doses of Arsenic (3) also came to hand. As a rule the Surra camels obtained for treatment this time were in very poor condition. The animals were all Northern Indian baggage camels, standing from 5¼ to 7½ feet at the withers. ATOXYL. The price of this drug has been greatly reduced of late. All experiments with Atoxyl were made intravenously. Solutions were made up immediately before use. Doses of 2.0 grammes generally failed to disperse try- panosomes. 2.4 or 2.8 grammes acted better, but if given when trypanosomes are absent, these doses do not prevent the appearance of the organism in the blood 36 hours after- wards. 4 grammes and 4.4 grammes are generally reliable as trypanosome dispersers, in camels in poor condition, the organism disappearing within 24 hours.
76 4.8 grammes make a more reliable dose for camels still retaining a good hump. These quantities are easily given in an 8 per cent. solution. Six grammes caused serious illness in one case out of two, so no attempt was made to find a fatal dose. Seven grammes caused an abnormal temperature for several days. ORPIMENT77 of the drug unaltered in the abomasum eight days after administration. When doses of 3, 4 and 5 ozs. were given every 3rd day over a long period, the trypanosomes were unaffected. Soamin78 Comparing the results of administration intravenously of the 2 drugs, there appears to be little to choose between atoxyl and soamin in their effects on camel or trypanosomes. WHITE ARSENIC. This drug was given in balls. Camels tolerate large quantities of white arsenic. Different camels, however, vary a good deal in the doses they can take, and this variation is independent of any difference in "condition" or in the time of day at which the drug is given; one camel may stand twice as much as another. It seems evident that when large quantities are given, much of it is not absorbed at all, because 3 grammes of the same salt given in solution will disperse trypanosomes, whilst 13 in solid form will not. As a result of 25 dosage experiments the following conclusions were arrived at:79 Trypanosomes remained absent during the treatment, but returned nine days after the last dose. (b)80 These unpromising results then decided me to turn attention to arsenical solutions. It appeared also from experiments that it makes little difference to the effect on the camel whether the arsenic be given in a ball or distributed in a feed. ARSENIC IN SOLUTION BY THE MOUTH. Five solutions of arsenic were experimented with to find out the most suitable. They were81 23 experiments were made to find the dose and the results may be summarised thus:82 450 c.c. caused severe diarrh83 ANTIMONY TARTRATE. The intravenous dose for trypanosomes in the camel is 25 c.c. of a 2% solution (8). Given by the mouth, symptoms of poisoning are caused by doses which do not affect trypanosomes. METHYLENE BLUE AND MERCURY BICHLORIDE. These drugs were tried on two spare camels and had no apparent effect whatever on trypanosomes. Eleven consecutive daily doses were given intravenously; the minimum doses used were 50 c c. of a 184 In a fortnight, however, it was in rapidly improving con- dition and soon began to put on a hump. Then, 41 days after the last dose, trypanosomes returned (8th December). SOAMIN AND ANTIMONY TARTRATE. Two camels were used:85 ATOXYL, SOAMIN AND SODIUM ARSENATE. Camel 789.86 Holmes, I.C.V.D., who, however, used Sodium Arsenite, not Sodium Arsenate. The Atoxyl and Antimony were always given intra- venously; the Sodium Arsenate was given in solution by the mouth. Camel 1143.87 This camel occasionally had diarrh88 LIST OF REFERENCES. 1. Thiroux and TeppazIndian Civil Veterinary Department Memoirs NO. 3 REPORT OF THE RESEARCH WORK OF THE IMPERIAL BACTERIOLOGICAL LABORATORY MUKTESAR, DURING 1910 & 1911 MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES, M.A., D.SC Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK & CO., CALCUTTA FOR THE INDIAN CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT
INDIAN CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT MEMOIRS NO. 3 REPORT OF THE RESEARCH WORK OF THE IMPERIAL BACTERIOLOGICAL LABORATORY, MUKTESAR DURING 1910 & 1911 MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES, M.A., D.SC Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK & CO CALCUTTA
PRINTED BY THACKER, SPINK AND CO., CALCUTTA.
SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS. PART IPREFACE. THE first Scientific Memoir of the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, Muktesar, was published in 1909 as a Memoir No. I of the Indian Civil Veterinary Department. Recently the Laboratory has come under the administration of the Imperial Agriculture Department, and in future the research work of the Laboratory will be published in a Veterinary Series of Memoirs and Bulletins in connection with that Depart- ment. In presenting this Report of the Research Work of the Laboratory for the years 1910 and 1911, I may mention that this work has been carried out with a very limited staff, con- sisting of an Assistant Bacteriologist and a Physiological Chemist, and amidst the pressure of innumerable duties con- nected with the preparation of large quantities of seras and vaccines. The time of the Assistant Bacteriologist is almost entirely occupied in this latter work. The Physiological Chemist is mainly engaged in research work on questions relative to his own subject. The popularity of the Laboratory products continues to grow throughout India, and the demand for seras and vaccines increases each year. In 1911 the manufacture of Rinderpest anti-Serum alone rose from 5¾ to 10½ lacs doses, and the output of Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia serum and vaccine has increased considerably. It is, however, satisfactory to record that work of undoubted scientific interest and of very considerable economic value has been accomplished. The subject-matter of this Memoir is arranged in five parts, four of which deal with the study of diseases common to stock in India. Since the publication of the last Memoir, experiments
iv PREFACE. on the treatment of Surra in equines have been continued and the results previously obtained, viz., that the administration of Arsenic by a certain system results in a complete cure in 75% of cases, have been repeatedly confirmed. Part II deals with the study of Rinderpest. On account of the increasing demand for Rinderpest anti-Serum and of the increasing difficulty in obtaining Hill bulls for the manufacture of the prophylactic, the discovery of some method of preparing the serum from animals other than Hill bulls became a question of the most urgent necessity. A large number of experiments have been carried out, and it is satisfactory to record that methods of pre- paring a potent serum from Plains bulls and buffaloes have been evolved. The methods have been adopted in the routine serum- making at Muktesar, with the result that the output of Rinderpest anti-Serum has risen from under six lacs of doses in 1909-1910 to over ten lacs of doses in the succeeding year, and, moreover, by the publication of these improved methods the output of this prophylactic has been nearly doubled, while the increase in expenditure involved is so small as to be almost negligible. Part III deals with further experiments on Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia, and Part IV contains a record of the work done on Anthrax. J. D. E. HOLMES, Imperial Bacteriologist.
THE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN HORSES BY MEANS OF ARSENIC AND ITS DERIVATIVES. THIRTY-TWO CASES OF SUCCESSFUL TREATMENT.* BY MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES, M.R.C.V.S., M.A., D.SC., I.C.V.D., Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India. THE value of arsenic in the treatment of trypanosomiasis is no new discovery. Evans, who described the first pathogenic trypanosome, recommended the administration of arsenic. Lingard for many years investigated Surra in India and treated twenty- one horses suffering from that disease with arsenious acid. One horse survived. His system of treatment was, the ad- ministration of arsenic in the form of Fowler's solution com- mencing with 5 grains twice daily and gradually increasing to 10 grains. Treatment extended over several months; the total amount of arsenic given, in some instances, amounted to over 2,000 grains. During the period of treatment inter- missions of 30 to 50 days were recorded, but all the animals, with one exception, finally succumbed to the disease. Bruce, treating Nagana in Zululand, gave 6 to 12 grains of arsenic in the form of arsenite of soda to horses and asses suffering from that disease. Trypanosomes remained absent during the period of treatment, but reappeared immediately treat- ment ceased. Trélut claims to have cured cases of Dourine by the daily administration of 3 to 6 grammes of arsenious acid. Archangeliky and Novikoff also record cases of Dourine cured by them with arsenite of sodium and cacodylic acid. * Reprint from the Journal of Tropical Vety, Science, Vol. V, No. 1, published during 1910. Also the Journal of Parasitology, Vol. III, No. 1, published during 1910. 1
2 SURRA. Maukal stated that he cured five stallions suffering from Dou- line by subcutaneous injections of 1 gramme of cacodylate of soda. Loeffler and Rueh record a number of successful experi- ments on animals affected with Nagana which they treated with a solution of arsenious acid. They consider this solution to be a specific cure and a prophylactic for Nagana. Laveran and Thiroux repeated these experiments and came to conclu- sions different from those of Loeffler and Rueh. At the present day the consensus of opinion regarding the value of the arsenic treatment in trypanosomiasis is in favour of the view that, though the drug exercises a marked influence on the course of most affections due to trypanosomes, it cannot be considered either a curative or a prophylactic agent. In 1905, Thomas brought to notice the value of atoxyl, a derivative of arsenic, which contains 24 per cent. of that drug and is said to be forty times less toxic than arsenious acid. It was supposed to owe its trypanocidal properties to the large amount of arsenic which could be administered without toxic effect in the form of atoxyl. The appearance of atoxyl has been followed by similar derivatives of arsenic, principally soamin, orsudan, kharsin prepared at the Messrs. Burroughs and Wellcome Laboratory, and arsacetin and arsenophenyl glycin, prepared and advocated by Professor Ehrlich. These arsanilates showed promise of the successful treatment of try- panosomiasis and gave a fresh stimulus to workers on the che- mo-therapy of trypanosomiasis. Many remarkable results have been recorded with arsani- lates used alone or in combination with arsenious acid, mer- cury and other drugs. In spite of the successes which, from time to time, have been recorded both in clinical practice and in laboratory experiments, following the use of these organic derivatives of arsenic in the treatment of trypanosomiasis, it is extremely doubtful whether any of these preparations can be regarded as a curative agent when used alone.
SURRA. 3 The most recent and what appears to be the most hopeful system of the chemo-therapy of trypanosomiasis is based on the combination of different trypanocides. The combined method is said to have the advantage that the therapeutic value of each drug can be united against the parasites and a curative effect can be obtained by using doses much below those which are poisonous. Among the most striking results of the combined therapy, Laveran and Thiroux cured guinea-pigs, which they had in- oculated with Surra, by using atoxyl and the trisulphide of arsenic. Thiroux and Teppaz treated horses, affected with Souma and Gambia horse-disease, with atoxyl and orpiment combined and with orpiment alone. Six months after the ces- sation of treatment the horses had not relapsed. The same authors failed to cure horses suffering from Surra by the atoxyl- orpiment treatment. Martin, Leboeuf and Ringerbuch conclude from their ex- perience of the treatment of human trypanosomiasis that the association of atoxyl and tartar emetic is the most effective of any which they have tried. Broden and Rodhain agree that the results of the com- bined use of atoxyl and tartar emetic are much better than those obtained with either drug alone. Moore, Breinl and Nierenstein assert the superiority of the association of atoxyl and a mercurial salt. Loeffler and Rueh advise the use of atoxyl with their arsenious acid solution. Friedberger used atoxyl and thioglycollic acid with good results. Mesnil, Nicolle and Aubert have tried atoxyl in asso- ciation with a benzidine colour. Cures were obtained. In the experiments which are dealt with in detail in another part of this paper, we have tested the value of atoxyl, arsenious acid, soamin, mercury and antimony salts alone, and in various combinations as curative agents in the treatment of Surra in horses.
4 SURRA. In the majority of the cases recorded, treatment was not commenced till the disease had become well established and at the period of the second paroxysm. The animals used for these experiments were worn out or lame pack ponies and a few aged army cast horses. Many of the ponies obtained for this purpose were in such poor condition that they succumbed to the disease in two to three weeks after inoculation and be- fore treatment was commenced. The cast horses were in good condition and with them treatment has been most successful. In all cases, where relapses occurred after treatment, the trypanosomes appeared in the circulation within a period of six weeks after the treatment had been discontinued. All the cases which are recorded in this paper have been under observation for periods varying from three to fourteen months after cessation of treatment. None have shewn a relapse. All have been, therefore, classed as "recoveries.'' The results of these experiments briefly summarised are as follows:SURRA. 5 SOAMIN. From the results of our experiments, I conclude that soa- min is about equal in value to atoxyl. It is equally toxic when injected subcutaneously, but, administered by the mouth, it appears to be much less toxic than atoxyl. In one case, Pony No. C. 31, where soamin was given in a single dose, which produced temporary paraplegia, the animal completely recovered and has shown no return of trypanosomes for eight and-a-half months. MERCURY. Mercury alone has little effect on the course of the disease. In combination with atoxyl the results were not so good as when Atoxyl alone was used. ANTIMONY SALTS. Tartar emetic in 1% solution, injected intravenously, has a rapid but temporary effect on the trypanosomes in the circulation. Administered by the mouth, it has no influence on the course of the disease. Injected subcutaneously in very dilute solutions it causes local irritation, frequently followed by necrosis of the skin, at the seat of inoculation. The sodium antimonyl tartrate and lithium antimonyl tartrate gave no better results than the potassium salt, and were equally irritant when injected subcutaneously in horses and rats. The combination of tartar emetic and mercury kept the circulation free from trypanosomes during the period of treatment only. A similar result followed the employment of tartar emetic and atoxyl, also of tartar emetic and arsenious acid solution. One pony, No. C. 32, was cured by the treat- ment with tartar emetic, atoxyl and arsenious acid. The cura- tive effect was probably due to the arsenious acid. ARSENIOUS ACID. Ten cases, treated with arsenious acid alone, are record- ed. In eight cases (C. 1 to C. 8) treatment has been success-
6 SURRA. ful. Five of these received ten doses, one eight, one five and one was cured by a single dose, of arsenious acid. Two re- ceived four doses only and had a relapse. The arsenious acid was given in full sub-toxic doses at an interval of one day between each dose. The amount of arsenic was gradually increased as the animals showed a tolerance to the drug. In addition to these cases here mentioned, a few animals, which were put under this treatment, showed an intolerance to the arsenic and each dose was followed by toxic symptoms. In these cases treatment was abandoned. The administration of arsenious acid had no prophylac- tic effect even when the Surra inoculation was made 24 hours after the dose of arsenic. ARSENIOUS ACID AND ATOXYL. Two systems of combining these drugs were tried. In the first, the atoxyl and arsenic were given alternately, five doses of each, with an interval of one day between each dose. In a former paper, some of these cases described here were stated to have been treated with atoxyl and orpiment. In this same paper I drew attention to the fact that the sample of orpiment used was a commercial one, obtained from a dis- pensing chemist. On analysis, this was found to contain 95 to 97% of free arsenious acid. Consequently, I have here includ- ed these cases as being treated with arsenious acid and atoxyl. In a number of experiments, some of which are not yet finished, we have tried treatment on the lines advised by Laver- an and Thiroux with atoxyl and "orpiment precipite." but the results up to the present have been negative. In the second system of treatment, the arsemous acid and atoxyl were given as follows. Arsenious acid solution (drench) (Loeffler and Rueh), atoxyl (subcutaneously) and arsenious acid (bolus) were administered on consecutive days. These three doses were repeated once or twice after an interval of four days, and finally after an interval of eight days. The object sought in
SURRA. 7 adopting this method of dosage was to bring the action of the arsenious acid solution and the atoxyl at the same time into the circulation, and also it was thought probable that, by adminis- tering arsenic at one time in the form of drench and at another time in the form of bolus, the gastric symptoms of arsenical poisoning would be less likely to occur and the drug would be better tolerated. In a number of experiments, we found that arsenious acid given in drench or bolus at a period of paroxysm freed the blood from trypanosomes in about 24 hours. Atoxyl, subcutaneously, cleared the circulation in six to eight hours. Consequently, in these experiments, the atoxyl was injected sixteen hours after the dose of arsenious acid. Out of sixteen cases treated on the first system, seven had a relapse, nine were cured. Sixteen ponies were treated on the second system, four had a relapse, twelve were cured. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS. (1) Exception may be taken to the practice of regarding as cured cases which have been under observation without relapse for a period of three to six months only. The fact that, among the animals treated, there has not been one case of re- lapse occurring after a period of six weeks from the cessation of treatment, and that the majority of cases quoted as cured have been under observation for three to fourteen months, establishes reasonable grounds for including all these animals under the head of "recoveries.'' (2) Arsenious acid is, undoubtedly, a specific for Surra in horses. It must be administered in full sub-toxic doses and at intervals; and not in continuous daily dosage. In the light of these results it is clear that, in the early experiments conducted by Lingard, Bruce, and others, arsenic was given in too small an amount, and in continuous treatment.
8 SURRA. Animals cannot tolerate the requisite amount of arsenic if the dose be too frequently repeated. There is also the ob- jection that by continuous small doses, not only does the animal body, but also the trypanosomes acquire a certain amount of tolerance to arsenic. (3) It is doubtful whether any advantage is gained by com- bining atoxyl with arsenious acid in the treatment of Surra. The results of treatment with arsenious acid alone, given in ten doses at an interval of one day, were superior to those where the arsenious acid was alternated with atoxyl. A single dose of arsenious acid alone keeps the blood free from trypanosomes for a period of 10 to 30 days and in some cases longer. When the same dose of arsenious acid is followed, 24 hours after, by an injection of a full amount of atoxyl, this period is not increased. (4) Much has been written on the therapeutic action of atoxyl. It was at first supposed that atoxyl owed its trypano- cidal properties to the fact that it contains a large proportion of arsenic and that it was simply a means of administering a large amount of that drug without producing toxic effect. Levaditi and Yamanouski consider that the curative power of atoxyl is due to its reduction and the formation of trypano- toxyl. Ehrlich assumes that "the arsanilate as such exercises no action at all in the organism, but that only the very small portion which undergoes a reduction in the living organism is the actual lethal agent." Some authors still believe that arsenic is split off in the body and that the action of atoxyl is due to this free arsenic. Breinl and Nierenstein repeated the experiments of Levaditi and Yamanouski, but only occasionally got positive results, and in these cases free arsenic was demonstrated in the solu- tion of atoxyl. They conclude that "the assumption that a complicated reduction product of atoxyl is formed, is super- fluous." According to their view, the atoxyl action may be regarded as the result of a simple oxidation, by means of which
SURRA. 9 arsenic is set free from the benzene ring. The finding of free arsenic in the urine, they say, also supports this view. Tendron, Wedemann, Nierenstein and others found arsenic in the urine after the administration of atoxyl. Uhlenhuth and Woithe are of opinion that the action of atoxyl is clearly not direct, but they repeated Levaditi and Yamanouski's trypanotoxyl experiments with negative results. They do not agree with Ehrlich on his reduction theory. They think that the atoxyl stimulates the cells to a heightened pro- duction of substances which injure the parasites and that there is no direct action of reduced atoxyl. All our observations on the action of atoxyl are in support of the view that a small amount of cleavage occurs and that the therapeutic effect is entirely due to the presence of free arse- nic. We were unable to get any positive trypanotoxyl results in repeated experiments. Atoxyl is a very convenient form with which to administer arsenic hypodermically or intrave- nously, but, even in this form, it is impossible to give arsenic, without toxic effect, in quantities sufficient to permanently sterilise the tissues. Both the toxic and therapeutic effect of arsenic and atoxyl administered intravenously and subcutaneously are much alike. Arsenic given hypodermically, from 0.25 to 0.5 grammes, while it produces sloughing, frees the blood from trypanosomes at the same time and keeps the circulation free from the parasites for about the same period as 2 grammes of atoxyl injected subcutaneously. When lethal doses are given subcutaneously or intraven- ously, the symptoms of poisoning are produced about the third day. With atoxyl the kidneys are the seat of the chief macros- copical lesions, death, as a rule, being due to acute nephritis. The same condition is observed when arsenic, in large doses, is administered subcutaneously or intravenously. Both atoxyl and arsenic, when given in bolus, produce death more rapidly than when administered hypodermically.
10 SURRA. The lesions, in this case, are found in the stomach and intes- tines. In several experiments, where atoxyl and arsenious acid were given at the same time, their toxic effects were undoubt- edly combined. Ponies, about 250lbs. weight, which could tolerate 1 gramme of arsenious acid and 50 c. c. of 4% atoxyl, when administered on separate days, showed symptoms of colic, dullness and loss of appetite, when 0.5 grammes of arse- nious acid was combined with the full dose of atoxyl. (5) Our imperfect knowledge of the life cycle of the try- panosomes in the body is one of the difficulties in the problem of the treatment of the disease. The periodic appearance and disappearance of the trypanosomes in the circulation and the existence and location of the parasite during the intermission period is, as yet, insufficiently explained. The more generally accepted theory, regarding the evolution of the trypanosomes in the body, appears to be that they multiply principally by longitudinal divisions, that a toxin, produced during the periods of paroxysm, is destructive to the majority of the mature para- sites and that during the period of intermission, the survivors multiply by division in the glands and organs. In a paper, dealing with the evolution of the Surra para- site (1904 Journal of Comparative Pathology and Therapeutics), I suggested that, after the breaking up of the parasites in the blood stream, the nucleus was capable of reforming into a new individual and depicted forms which appeared to be undergoing this process. Breinl and Salvin Moore described somewhat similar latent bodies which they found became encysted in the liver cells. This theory appears to be more in accordance with clinical observations and supplies a better explanation of the periods of paroxysm and intermission. At a paroxysm the parasites continue to increase in the blood for one, two or three days. If this increase was due to rapid division of the trypanosomes, one would expect this process to be most marked in the blood
SURRA. 11 during the early part of this period. This is not the case. The time when multiplication forms are most noticeable in the blood is when the paroxysm is at its height, and just preceding the downward curve. This, probably, indicates that the divi- sion process is an emergency method of multiplication called forth by products in the blood adverse to the life of the para- site. These new individuals, as well as the parent stock, be- come disintegrated to a certain extent and lose their flagellated form, but those destined to continue the species reform into a latent or cystic body which comes to rest in some internal organs, probably the liver or bone marrow, during the period of intermission, finally developing into flagellate forms, which again make their way into the blood streams. The mature trypanosome is easily destroyed by arsenic, antimony and other drugs. The action of arsenic is direct and takes place when it is being carried through the tissues in the circulation. The action of arsenic is of short duration as it is rapidly eliminated from the circulation. The rapidity of the destructive action of arsenic on the trypanosomes is in direct proportion to the dose. Consequently, it is possible, if the dose is sufficiently large, to sterilise the tissues before the arsenic is removed. With smaller doses numbers of the parasites are not destroyed and, entering into a latent state, remain to cause a relapse. This theory of the life stages of the trypanosomes would also explain the successful results of the treatment with arsenic given in full doses at intervals and the non-success of the continuous dosage with smaller amount. The toxic effect of arsenic on the system is cumulative, but the action on the trypanosomes is apparently not so. Arsenic in the circulation has, probably, little or no effect on the latent bodies, and the accumulated amount of the drug is stored up in the liver and other organs where it is not brought in contact with the mature parasites. I have to acknowledge the co-operation of Mr. Cross, Assistant Bacteriologist, in these experiments and the assistance
12 SURRA. of Dr. Hartley, Physiological Chemist, in questions connected with Chemistry. The Bulletin of the Bureau of Sleeping Sickness has been extensively used for purposes of reference to other works on trypanosomiasis. TOXIC DOSE OF ARSENIOUS ACID, SOAMIN AND ATOXYL. ARSENIOUS ACID. The toxic dose for the horse is said to be (Law) 140 grains in solution or 14 grammes in solid form; (Kaufmann) 3.4 grammes in solution or 45 grammes in solid form; Trélut administered 3 to 6 grammes daily in treatment for Dourine. In our experiments it was found that ponies of about 300 lbs. could tolerate repeated doses of 1 gramme without ill-effect; that a dose of 2 to 3 grammes was fatal for ponies of this weight; that horses weighing from 900 to 1,000 lbs. could not tolerate more than 3 grammes. The arsenious acid was administered after feeding. Toxic dose is 2 to 3 grammes for ponies, and 4 to 5 grammes for horses. Arsenious acid administered in solution (Loeffler and Rueh) has a more toxic effect than when given in bolus. One gramme in solution is fatal for ponies weighing 250 lbs. This is shewn in the following table:SURRA. 13 Arsenious Acid Injected Subcutaneously. The subcutaneous method of administering arsenious acid is not a suitable one. Even when highly diluted (1 in 1,000) the injected fluid does not readily become absorbed and causes a large 14 SURRA. SOAMIN. Soamin Administered by the Mouth. Pony No. 12 received at the rate of 6 gms. per 500 lbs. SURRA. 15 Atoxyl Injected Subcutaneously. Pony No. Weight. Actual dose. Dose per 500 lbs. Results. lbs. gms. gms. 24. 670 6 4.47 Lived. No toxic effect. 25 420 5 5.95 16 SURRA. (2) The influence on the health and general condition of the animal. (3) The comparison of the results produced by drugs administered by various channels (subcutaneous- ly, intravenously and by the mouth). (4) The effect of varying the interval between succes- sive doses. (5) The effect of combining various arsenic prepara- tions, also of using arsenic in conjunction with other drugs. The results are detailed in the data and tables following. Treatment with Atoxyl alone. The value of a single dose of atoxyl injected subcutaneously has been estimated by the period during which the peripheral circulation remained free from trypanosomes. The atoxyl was administered at a period of paroxysm when the trypano- somes were numerous in the blood. Pony No. Weight. Dose. Period during which blood remain- ed tree from trypanosomes. lbs. c.c. Per cent. sol. 45 250 30 4 9 days. 46 660 60 12 5 SURRA. 17 Pony No. 50.18 SURRA. Pony No. 55.SURRA. 19 ARSACETIN. (Sodium Salt of Acetyl-Amino-Phenyl Arsenic Acid.) This preparation is said to be much less toxic than the atoxyl. Pony No. 59.20 SURRA. Pony No. 64.PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1.PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3.SURRA. 21 Pony No. C. 4.22 SURRA. Horse No. C. 1.PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5.-C 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6.PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7.-C 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 8.-C 2.
SURRA. 23 Pony No. C. 7.24 SURRA. Pony No. 83.PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 9.PLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 11.SURRA. 25 The first seven cases detailed are experiments in which the treatment did not meet with success; the following nine are cases where the result has been successful. The atoxyl and arsenic were administered alternately, leaving one day interval between each dose. Pony No. 87.26 SURRA. Pony No. 89.PLATE VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 13.PLATE VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 15.SURRA. 27 Pony No. 93.28 SURRA. Horse No. C. 17.PLATE IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 17.PLATE X. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 19.SURRA. 29 Horse No. C. 16.30 SURRA. Pony No. C. 14.PLATE XI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 21.PLATE XII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 23.SURRA. 31 In some cases a dose of atoxyl subcutaneously was given first, which cleared the circulation of trypanosomes within 24 hours. This system of treatment has been the most successfu of any tried. Out of 16 animals treated by this method, 12 were cured. In four cases the treatment failed: in three instances, probably from insufficient doses and in one case the interval between the doses was increased to six and 12 days. All the animals stood the treatment well and rapidly improved in condition. Pony No. C. 18.32 SURRA. No return of trypanosomes. Kept under observation 7½ months. Pony No. C. 23.PLATE XIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 25.PLATE XIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 27.SURRA. 33 This pony had been treated by another method without success. 1st day . . 600 c.c. Ars. Ac. sol. 2nd 34 SURRA. Pony No. C. 25.SURRA. 35 Eight days interval. 21st day . . 300 c.c. Ars. Ac. sol. 22nd 36 SURRA. Three days interval. 7th day . . 400 c.c. Ars. Ac. sol. 8th PLATE XV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 29.SURRA. 37 Pony No. 95.38 SURRA. TREATMENT WITH SOAMIN. Effect of a single dose. Pony No. 98.SURRA. 39 TREATMENT WITH MERCURY. Mercury Alone. Pony No. 103.40 SURRA. Pony No. 106.SURRA. 41 6th day .. 20 c.c. (142 SURRA. A month after the treatment was discontinued the parasites reappeared in the circulation. TARTAR EMETIC AND ARSENIOUS ACID SOLUTION. Arsenious Acid (Loeffler and Rueh's solution) was given in drench, and Tartar Emetic 1% solution was given intra- venously. Pony No. 114.SURRA. 43 No reappearance of trypanosomes in the blood after the second day. Kept under observation for 12 months. The curative effect was probably due to the atoxyl and arsenious acid. TARTAR EMETIC, ARSENIOUS ACID SOLUTION AND ARSENIOUS. ACID. Arsenious acid (1 in 1,000) solution was given in drench, Arsenious acid in bolus and tartar emetic 1% solution intra- venously. Pony No. 115.44 SURRA. Animal was off feed for 2 days. Swelling and heat at the seat of inoculation for several days. Trypanosomes were absent for five days. Pony No. 120.SURRA. 45 Off feed. Swelling and pain at the seat of inoculation followed by necrosis of the skin. Trypanosomes were absent for nine days. LIST OF SURRA ANIMALS WHICH HAVE SHOWN NO RETURN OF THE DISEASE AFTER TREATMENT. The date of disease at which treatment was commenced is reckoned from the day on which trypanosomes appeared in the circulation. The period of observation is dated from the completion of the treatment. All the animals mentioned in the list are still alive, and in good condition and health, and no trypanosomes have been observed in their blood for the periods mentioned. Daily examinations of the blood were made. No. of Animal. Day of disease. Paroxysm. Drugs used. Period under observation. No. Horse C. 1 .. .. 17th 3rd Ars. Ac. alone. 6 months. 46 SURRA. (SECOND METHOD OF DOSAGE)SURRA. 47 SOAMIN. No. of Animal Weight in lbs. Amount of Drug. Method administered. Period. Mule 138 .. 550 100 c.c. of 10% .. Subcutaneous .. 12 days. 48 SURRA. (The above paper was completed for publication on Sep- tember 30th, 1909, and the periods of observation mentioned throughout were reckoned up to that date. All the animals classed as cured (32) are still being kept under observation, and further reports on their progress will be published in subsequent papers.)
THE CURE OF SURRA IN HORSES BY THE ADMINISTRATION OF ARSENIC.* BY J. D. E. HOLMES, M.A., D.Sc., Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India. (With Plates XVI-XXI to XXVII). IN a previous paper which appeared in Parasitology, Vol. III, pp. 7350 SURRA. clogs, rabbits and guinea-pigs were inoculated with blood from these animals. All gave negative results. In February 1910, I left India, on furlough, but arranged that a number of these Surra-recovered ponies will be available for examina- tion on my return, at the end of the present year. The period of observation for each of these thirty-two cases, dated to January 31st, 1910, is as follows:SURRA. 51 (2nd method of dosage.) A dose of arsenious acid in solution (Loeffler and Ruehs) followed on consecutive days by a dose of atoxyl (subcuta- neously) and a dose of arsenious acid in bolus. No. of animal. Day of disease. Paroxysm. Drugs used. Period under observation. Pony C 18 .. 4th 1st Atoxyl & ars. ac. 11½ months. 52 SURRA. Dog (6).SURRA. 53 TREATMENT WITH ATOXYL AND ARSENIC. A four per cent. solution of atoxyl freshly prepared was used. The solution of arsenic was made according to the method of Loeffler and Ruehs as follows: Take 1 gramme arsenious acid, 10 c.c. normal soda solution. Dissolve by boiling. Add 10 c.c. normal hydro- chloric acid and make up to 1000 c.c. Normal soda solution: 42 grammes pure caustic soda. Dissolve in 800 c.c. aq. dist. When dissolved make up to 1000 c.c. Normal hydrochloric acid solution: Take 181 grammes (weight) hydrochloric acid @ 1.1 sp. g. and make up to 1000 c.c. Mule C. 33.54 SURRA. Mule C. 35.SURRA. 55 No further treatment was given as the animal showed symptoms of arsenic poisoning after the last dose. No return of trypanosomes. Kept under observation 5 months. Mule C. 39.56 SURRA. Pony C. 40.SURRA. 57 No return of trypanosomes. Kept under observation 5 months. Pony B. 3.58 SURRA. No return of trypanosomes. Kept under observation 5 months. Pony C. 46.SURRA. 59 THE RESULT OF THE ARSENIC TREATMENT IN TWENTY CASES OF SURRA SPONTANEOUSLY CONTRACTED. In the Autumn of 1909 Surra broke out among the Army Transport ponies working on the Kathgodam road. Twenty of these cases were sent to the Laboratory for treatment. All these ponies were old, not less than sixteen years, worn out, and in the last stage of the disease. They were so debilitated that it required two days to march them from their camp to the Laboratory, a distance of about 18 miles. On blood examination trypanosomes varying in number from 5 to 100 in a field were detected in every case. The animals were not in a condition to tolerate the administra- tion of arsenic by the mouth. Consequently, an injection of atoxyl was first given which freed the blood from trypanosomes. The injection was repeated after an interval of three days. After a week the ponies had so far improved that it was considered safe to commence treatment. Out of these twenty cases, two died from tympanitis during the course of treatment. There were no symptoms, or post- mortem lesions of poisoning, and death was not attributed to arsenic. One pony died some weeks after the completion of treat- ment from injuries received by falling under the partition of his stall, at night. He had not shown any relapse. Seventeen recovered. Four of these had a relapse and received a second course of treatment. Sixteen ponies were returned to their corps after being kept under observation at the Laboratory for three months following their treatment. One pony which injured his hock and is unfit for work remains under observation at the Laboratory. Taking into consideration the age and condition of these animals, the fact that the disease was contracted spontaneously and had advanced to the last stage, it is evident, that, no more severe or practical test could be
60 SURRA. applied to the arsenic treatment of Surra. The results have been most successful. The recovered animals are being kept under further observation in the Transport Corps. Pony C. 48.SURRA. 61 No further treatment was given as the pony showed symptoms of poisoning after last dose. No return of trypanosomes. Kept under observation 3 months. Pony C. 52.62 SURRA. No return of trypanosomes. Kept under observation 3 months. Pony C. 56.SURRA. 63 Pony C. 59.64 SURRA. Trypanosomes reappeared 12 days after last dose. The animal was then put on treatment with atoxyl and arsenic in alternate doses. 1st day 60 c.c. atoxyl. 11th day 2 gms. ars. ac. 3rd SURRA. 65 Pony C 64. 580 lbs. 1st day 600 c.c. Ars. Ac. sol. 10th day 2 gms. Ars. Ac. 2nd 66 SURRA. About two hours after the dose of Ars. Ac. solution the pony had a severe attack of tympanitic colic and died in a few hours. The cause of these two fatalities is not known. The dose of arsenic was not sufficient to cause poisoning, nor did the symptoms or post-mortem appearances support this view. The arsenic solution had been made in a large quantity 10,000 c.c. It was several days old. Five other ponies which received relatively small doses of the same brew of arsenic solution showed similar symptoms of tympanitis but recovered on being treated by hypodermic injection of strychnia. The two cases which succumbed received the usual treatment with stimulants and carminatives which was of no avail. RULES FOR TREATMENT OF SURRA. The following instructions were issued in September 1909 as a guide to veterinary officers in India who proposed to apply the arsenic treatment to Surra cases in their district. As it was pointed out that the preparations and transport of arsenic solutions would be a difficulty in district work, the method of treatment with atoxyl and arsenic in bolus was advised. Rules for Surra Treatment. I. Solutions of Atoxyl should be freshly prepared before use in distilled or boiled water. The water should be allowed to cool before the solution is made. Carbolic Acid should not be used for sterilizing as it decomposes the Atoxyl. The solution is to be injected subcutaneously with the usual aseptic precautions. The Atoxyl by itself has no curative effect, but ex- ercises a rapid action in clearing the circulation of mature trypanosomes . It is, therefore, used only when trypano- somes are present in the circulation. The use is indicated
SURRA. 67 at the commencement of treatment. If the first dose does not result in the complete disappearance of trypanosomes from the blood on the following day, a second injection of Atoxyl should be given 24 hours after the first dose. Atoxyl should be kept in the dark. The Atoxyl and Arsenic should be given after feeding. II. The injection of Atoxyl has to be followed by ten doses of Arsenious Acid in ball. Care must be taken in making up the balls and in mixing the drug with other ingredients. The doses which have been determined for horses according to their weight are detailed in the three attached tables. An interval of one day is allowed between each dose. The amount of Arsenious Acid is gradually increased. If after any dose the animal is dull or off feed, the next dose must be suspended till the symptoms have passed off. If after any doses the animal is off feed and uneasy and showing symptoms of colic, this shows that the animal cannot tolerate the amount of Arsenious Acid in that dose, and treatment must be suspended till the animal has recovered and the next lower dose used and no further increase in the following doses to be made. Animals show- ing symptoms of colic are to be treated with opium, chlorodyne or other sedative. Should trypanosomes reappear in the blood during treatment with Arsenic, Atoxyl should again be used to clear the circulation of the parasites after which the Arsenic is to be continued. III. Daily examination of the blood should be made and the result recorded with the daily temperature in the observation charts. After the completion of the treatment the animal should be kept under observation, the blood being examined daily (or at least twice a week) for a period of two months.
68 SURRA. If a relapse occurs after the first course of treatment, a second similar course should be given with slightly increased doses of Arsenic. IV. Throughout the treatment the animal should receive a liberal diet and walking exercise. This treatment in our hands has given 75 per cent. of recoveries. V. If the animal is in a very advanced stage of Surra and in weak condition, it should be treated with Atoxyl injection alone at intervals of 3 to 4 days and receive care and full diet until it has sufficiently recovered to stand the doses of Arsenic. Cobs. Body weight from 300 to 500 lbs. 1st day 50 c.c. of 4 per cent. Atoxyl subcutaneously. 3rd SURRA. 69 Heavy Cavalry and Artillery Horses. Body weight from 800 to 1000 lbs., and upwards. 1st day 100 c.c. of 4 per cent. Atoxyl subeutaneously. 3rd 70 SURRA. The methods of dosage which have been found success- ful are:SURRA. 71 (c) If the animal is in a very debilitated condition, it is advisable to clear the circulation of trypanosomes by one or more injections of Atoxyl and feed carefully for several days before administering Arsenic by mouth. (d) Cases which relapse after treatment should be put on a second course with increased doses, either by the same or a different system of dosage. In cases of relapse, and also where treatment is not well tolerated, it is often advantageous to change the system of dosage. (e) Whenever possible, cases should be kept under observation for a period of two to three months after comple- tion of treatment. Relapses generally occur within a period of six weeks. (f) It is possible to cure Surra by a single dose of Arsenic. This is not a practical method, as the amount of Arsenic requisite produces severe symptoms of poisoning and a large percentage of cases end fatally. Pony C 7 recovered after a single dose of 1 gm. Arsenic in bolus. Mule C 44 recovered after a single dose of 3 gms. Arsenic in bolus. Pony C 30 recovered after a single subcutaneous injec- tion of 200 c.c. of a 4 per cent. solution of Arsacetin. Pony C 31 recovered after a single subcutaneous injec- tion of 100 c.c. of a 10 per cent. solution of Soamin.
PLATES XVI TO XXI. Photographs of the Transport Ponies which recovered after treatment for Surra. The first photographs were taken at the time of their arrival at the Laboratory. The second photographs were taken after the three months period of observation before the animals were returned to the Transport Corps.
PLATE XVI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 49. Before Treatment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 49. After Treatment.
PLATE XVII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 56. Before Treatment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 56. After Treatment.
PLATE XVIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 57. Before Treatment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 57. After Treatment.
PLATE XIX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 59. Before Treatment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 59. After Treatment.
PLATE XX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 63. Before Treatment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 63. After Treatment.
PLATE XXI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 64. Before Treatment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PONY C 64. After Treatment.
" A FURTHER NOTE ON THE CURE OF SURRA IN HORSES." BY MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES,M.R.C.V.S., M.A., D.SC., I.C.V.D., Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India. Many of the cases described as cured from Surra in the two preceding papers have been seen and examined on several oc- casions since the publication of this article. In no case has a relapse been noticed or reported. Pony No. C 32 is still at work on the Laboratory Farm. This pony has been under observation since his treatment in September 1908. Pony No. C 43 is in the possession of one of the Labo- ratory staff and is in daily work. He was treated for Surra in July 1909. Horse No. C 17 has been used in harness for the last two years and was seen recently. He was a spontaneous case treated in September 1908. The following ponies have been recently seen at work. They remain in good condition and free from relapse. Ponies Nos. C 42, C 43 and C 22. Regarding the Army Transport Ponies treated for Surra in the autumn of 1909, the Transport Officer in charge writes:74 SURRA. your inspection at any time after that date. I would, however, mention that, as they will shortly be sold owing to receipt of remounts, an early inspection is advisable. They have had no relapse of Surra, but, on the contrary, have kept much fitter while doing continuous hard work than they were before they underwent the cure at Muktesar. They have now been con- tinuously at work on the Kathgodam-Ranikhet road since September 1910, and before that were working at Bareilly." In September 1910, during my absence on leave in England, six mules which had contracted Surra on the Kathgodam road were sent to the Laboratory for treatment. These mules were treated by Mr. Cross, Assistant Bacteriologist. Mule No. 1. 425 lbs. Trypanosomas numerous in blood. 1st day 60 c.c. Atoxyl 4% 11th day 1.5 gms. Arsenious Acid. 3rd SURRA. 75 Trypanosomes reappeared in the circulation six weeks after the last close. A second course of treatment was adminis- tered. Arsenious Acid alone was given. 1st day 1 gm. Arsenious Acid. 3rd 76 SURRA. From the preceding record of cases it will be seen that the treatment of Surra by means of Atoxyl and Arsenious Acid has met with very marked success in our hands. From a few re- ports which I have received it appears that this system has not met with the same success at other places where it was given a trial. I regret that except in two instances details of the treatment have not been supplied to me. Where details were for- warded I found that the system as advised by me had not been strictly carried out, also that many of the animals placed under the system had been previously treated with small doses of Arsenic and by other methods. There appears to be a certain amount of confusion regarding the method recommended by me. In the earliest papers the term orpiment was used, when as explained we were working with impure Arsenious Acid. Consequently several experimenters have followed the method of using pure orpiment in place of Arsenious Acid. Three methods of dosage have been tried with success by us. The preparations used in these methods were, Arsenious Acid (in bolus), Arsenious Acid (in solution), and Atoxyl (sub- cutaneously). In the first method, Arsenious Acid (bolus) was used in conjunction with Atoxyl given alternately and with an interval of one day between each dose. In all ten doses are required. In the second method, Atoxyl and Arsenious Acid were administered as follows:SURRA. 77 convinced that any one of these methods is superior to the others. Very good results can be obtained by the use of Arsenious Acid alone in bolus form. The success of the treatment depends on two points (1) full subtoxic doses of Arsenic; (2) a short interval between each dose. The success which we are able to obtain at this Laboratory in the treatment of Surra cases, by these methods of dosage is no doubt largely due to the fact that a long experience has enabled us to accurately estimate the dose of Arsenic, which can be tolerated by each individual case. It must be borne in mind that the doses recommended by me are only approxi- mate and stated more as a guide than as a hard-and-fast rule. The dose of Arsenic which can be tolerated varies considerably according to individual idiosyncrasy. I have no doubt also that, climatic and other conditions, not understood, have a direct influence on the amount of Arsenic which can be administered without toxic effect. Each experimenter must of necessity study his cases and decide and regulate the doses of Arsenic according to his observations. The dose of Arsenic should be increased as rapidly as the animal will tolerate it. The action of the dose on the trypanosomes in the circulation and the effect on the animal itself gives a guide to the amount of Arsenic required. After a sufficient dose of the drug, if try- panosomes are present in the circulation at the time of adminis- tration, they should disappear within 24 hours or at most 48 hours. If this result is not achieved, the amount of Arsenic should be at once increased. The animal at some time of the treatment should show some effect of the drug, evincing symptoms, as dulness, want of appetite, slight uneasiness. The drug should not be pushed so as to give colic and pronounced toxic symptoms. If at any time this occurs the drug should be suspended till the animal has completely recovered. In cases of relapse, it is often of advantage to change the method of dosage and to commence with large doses.
"SOME EXPERIMENTS IN THE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN CAMELS." BY MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES, mM.R.C.V.S., M.A., D.SC, I.C.V.D., Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India. IN the following experiments, Arsenious Acid, Arsenic Tri-sulphide, Atoxyl, Soamin, Tartar Emetic and Lithium Antimony Tartrate were tried alone and in combination in the treatment of Surra in Camels. In the first instance, the effect of a single dose of varying amounts was observed in order to ascertain the amount of drug which could be tolerated, and the effect of the drug on the trypanosomes in the circulation. As the periods of intermission in Surra among camels are very irregular, the interval during which trypanosomes are ab- sent from the circulation after a dose of Arsenic or other drug gives only a relative indication of the effect of the dose. The camels experimented on had contracted Surra spontaneously and were in a fairly advanced stage of the disease. The treatment was carried out during the winter months on the plains at Bareilly 1909-1910. After March 1910 the survivors were moved up to the hills (Muktesar). At this latter place, suitable fodder was not obtainable. The animals were accommodated in a temporary chappar, where they were exposed to the rains. The exposure and lack of suitable food was most probably the cause of death in the case of camels Nos. 13, 18 and 21, in which animals no trypanosomes had reappeared from the date of cessation of treatment. A healthy
SURRA. 79 control camel died at the same time from climatic and dietetic causes. Camel Surra. The effect of a single dose of Arsenic. Camel No. 1. Arsenic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st S. 53 in f. 3000 c.c. Arsenic sol. (3 gms.) in a drench. No symptoms. 2nd A. Tryps. disappeared in 24 hrs. 3rd-9th A. 10th F. 1 in sp. Tryps. reappeared in 9 days. Arsenic80 SURRA. Camel No. 3. Arsenic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st F. 1 in 3 f. 2000 c.c. Arsenic sol. (Neutral) (3 gms.) in a drench. No symptoms. 2nd A. Tryps. disappeared in 24 hrs. 3rd-7th A. 8th Tryps. reappeared in 7 days. ArsenicSURRA. 81 hours. The trypanosomes reappeared 11 days after the treatment. Camel No. 6. Arsenic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st P. 1 in 4 f. 3000 c.c. Arsenic sol. (5 gms.)in a drench. No symptoms. 2nd F. 1 in f. 3rd A. Tryps. disappeared in 48 hours. Off feed. Diarrh82 SURRA. Camel No. 8. Arsenic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st A. 3000 c.c. Arsenic sol. Neutral (10 gms.)[in a drench. No symptoms. 2nd A. Feeds fairly. DiarrhSURRA. 83 Camel No. 10. Arsenic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st N. 10 in f. 3000 c.c. Arsenic sol. (6 gms.) in a drench. No symptoms. 2nd V.N. 34 in f. 3rd N. 8 in f. Off feed. Diarrh84 SURRA. Camel No. 11.SURRA. 85 Camel No. 13. Arsenic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st A. 1 gm. Arsenic in a ball. No symptoms. 2nd A. 3rd A. 1 86 SURRA. Trypanosomes were present five days before treat- ment commenced. They reappeared 91 days after last dose. Effect of a single dose of Tartar Emetic. Camel No. 15. Tartar Emetic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st F. 1 in f. 3000 c.c. Tartar Emetic sol. (50 gms.) in a drench. No symptoms. 2nd F. 5 in f. 3rd F. 1 in sp. 4th A. Tryps. disappeared in 3 days. 5th-14th A. Tryps. reappeared in 12 days. 15th F. 1 in sp. Tartar EmeticSURRA. 87 Effect of continuous treatment with Tartar Emetic. Camel No. 17. Tartar Emetic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st F. 1 in sp. 3000 c.c. sol. Tartar Emetic (100 gms.) in a drench. No symptoms. 2nd A. Tryps. disappeared in 24 hours. Diarrh88 SURRA. Camel No. 19. Tartar Emetic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st A. 75 gms. Tartar Emetic in 3000 c.c. sol. in drench. No symptoms. 3rd A. Off feed. DiarrhSURRA. 89 Trypanosomes were present in circulation five days before treatment. They reappeared 92 days after last dose. Camel No. 21. Tartar Emetic alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st A. 3000 c.c. Tartar Emetic sol. (80 gms.) in a drench. No symptoms. 3rd A. Feeds fairly. 5th A. 90 SURRA. Camel No. 22. Arsenic and Tartar Emetic. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 4th A. Off feed. DiarrhSURRA. 91 Camel No. 2492 SURRA. Camel No. 25SURRA. 93 Camel No. 27. Arsenic and Soamin. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st F. 1 in sp. 3000 c.c. neutral Arsenic sol. (10 gms.) plus 2 drachms Pulvis Opii in drench. No symptoms. 2nd F. 1 in 15 f. 200 c.c. of a 10% sol. of Soamin subcut. 94 SURRA. Camel No. 30. Arsenic Trisulphide Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st N. 15 in f. 5000 c.c. Arsenic Trisul- phide sol. (50 gms.) in a drench. No symptoms. 2nd A. Tryps. disappeared in 24 hours. DiarrhSURRA. 95 Camel No. 33. Soamin alone. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st F. 1 in f. 200 c.c. of a 10% sol. of Soamin subcut. No symptoms. 2nd A. Tryps. disappeared in 24 hours. 3rd A. Off feed. 5th A. Feeds fairly. 6th A. 96 SURRA. Camel No. 35. Lithium Antimony Tartrate. Day. Tryps. Treatment. Remarks. 1st F. 3 in f. 100 cc. of a 1% sol. of Lithium Antimony Tar- No symptoms. trate subcutaneously. 2nd A. Tryps. disappeared in 24 hours. Swelling at seat of inoculation. 3rd A. Swelling slightly increased and infiltrated. 4th A. Swelling decreasing. 5th A. SURRA. 97 and treatment with large doses cannot be continued for any length of time. The effect of small doses from 3 grammes to 5 grammes, on the trypanosomes in the circulation is slight. Full sub-toxic doses have a more marked effect, keeping the circulation free from parasites from four to five weeks. (2) In one case (Camel No. 13), twelve small doses of Arse- nic appear to have exercised a beneficial effect. The trypano- somes were absent from the blood from date of treatment to time of death, 182 days. Death was mainly due to exposure to rains and want of proper food. (3) Arsenic in form of Trisulphide, Atoxyl and Soamin were tried without success. 20 grammes of Trisulphide proved fatal. An injection of 10 grammes of Soamin was followed by death in 24 hours. After 20 grammes the animal died in nine days and after 30 grammes the camel showed symptoms on the second day and died after 24 days. (4) Arsenic in combination with Tartar Emetic gave no better result than Arsenic alone. (5) Tartar Emetic in single doses is better tolerated than Arsenic, but the effect on the trypanosomes in the circulation is not marked. In continuous treatment Tartar Emetic gave results superior to Arsenic. Camel No. 18 received six doses. Trypanosomes were absent from the circulation up to time of death, 196 days. Death was mainly due to exposure and want of suitable food. Camel No. 20 was given six doses. Trypanosomes were absent from the circulation for 118 days. (6) A subcutaneous injection of 125 c. c. of a 1% solution of trypanblau caused necrosis of the skin at seat of inoculation and had no effect on the trypanosomes in the circulation. (7) Subcutaneous injections of Lithium Antimony Tar- trate caused lesions at the seat of inoculation and had little effect on the trypanosomes. 7
98 RINDERPEST. PART II. RINDERPEST. Experiments carried out to test the susceptibility to Rinderpest of cattle from several districts in India and on improved methods of Rinderpest serum preparation.* BY MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES, M.R.C.V.S., M.A., D.Sc., I.C.V.D., Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India. INTRODUCTION. THE scheme for the establishment of a second Laboratory has been brought under consideration owing to the popularity which the anti-Rinderpest serum has achieved among cattle owners in most parts of India. The demand for this serum has been increasing each year, and at the present time, the Muktesar Laboratory is unable to meet anything like the amount required. The resources of this Laboratory have been strained to their utmost in regard to the preparation of this serum. Each brew of serum is being issued as soon as prepared; nevertheless, large demands from each province remain from time to time only partially complied with. The preparation of anti-Rinderpest serum was commenced at Muktesar in 1899-1900. In that year 9,700 doses were manufactured. In 1905-1906, the output of this serum had increased to 211,407 doses, and in the same year a scheme for the erection of a second Laboratory was sanctioned by the Government of India, owing to the rapidity with which the demands for the serum were increasing annually. In 1906, I was deputed to select in Southern India a site suitable for a second Laboratory. A tract of land on the Palni hills in the Madras District was decided upon as offering * A detailed report on the same subject submitted to the Government off India on the 18th April 1911.
RINDERPEST. 99 an almost ideal situation for a Laboratory of this kind, and it was expected that a supply of susceptible cattle would be ob- tained from surrounding districts. In the following year, however, these cattle were tested by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Madras, and found not to possess the required susceptibility. Consequently, the proposal to erect a Laboratory on this site was abandoned. In the meantime, further pressure was placed on the resources of Muktesar, and in 1906-1907 the output of sera reached 467,993 doses ; more than twice the amount prepared in the previous year. Dr. Lingard, then Imperial Bacteriologist, in reply to a question addressed by the Inspector-General, recorded his opinion that an average output of 400,000 doses was the maximum amount, it was possible to maintain and pointed out the inadvisability of straining to attain to a larger output. In 1908, after going into this question, I expressed a similar opinion. In the same year further endeavours were made to comply with the calls for serum, and 545,974 doses were prepared. In the following year, owing to the prevalence of Rinderpest and foot-and-mouth disease in the Kumaun District we were unable to obtain the requisite number of Hill bulls and the amount of serum pre- pared fell by about 36,000 doses compared with the previous year. During the past official year, the manufacture of sera was carried on under the greatest possible pressure both as regards the Laboratory staff and the supply of Hill bulls, and the quantity of serum prepared during this official year will amount to about 5¾ lacs doses. I attach a statement showing the number of bulls received by the Laboratory during the past four years. During the last two years a record has been kept of the animals which arrived suffering from foot-and-mouth disease. In 1909-10, 1,430 bulls arrived with lesions of foot-and-mouth disease. The treatment and segregation of these animals and the precautions against the spread of the disease among our serum preparing animals threw a large amount of extra work on our staff. The past year 1910-11 was particularly free from
100 RINDERPEST. the disease, only 199 affected animals were received and these arrived during the winter months. Year. Hill bulls started for Muktesar from Berinag or other centres of collec- tion. No. died on road to Muktesar. No. arrived at Muktesar. No. arrived affected with F. & M. No. died within a week of arrival from F. & M. 1907-08 ? ? 2,364 .. .. 1908-09 ? ? 2,838 .. .. 1909-10 2,522 395 2,127 1,430 188 1910-11 2,811 271 2,540 199 184 Since 1906, it has clearly been demonstrated that the de- mands for serum cannot be met from the Muktesar Laboratory alone. During the past three years it has repeatedly been brought to notice that the supply of Hill cattle is not sufficient to maintain the manufacture of serum in unlimited amounts. The source of supply has been overworked, with the result that the supply of bulls is each year becoming a more difficult question and will under present demands become practically exhausted before many years. The impossibility of continuing to meet the demands for serum from the Muktesar Laboratory alone and the danger that the output of that Laboratory may entirely fail if the supply of Hill bulls become exhausted has again forcibly brought to no- tice the necessity for some immediate action in order to provide for the future supply of this serum. On return from leave in October 1910, I was depu- ted to select a site for a Laboratory in the Hazara District and to test the susceptibility of the cattle of that part. Before proceeding on that duty, and after consultation with the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, I sub- mitted a statement of my views regarding the future supply of serum and made certain suggestions. I pointed out that the selection of a suitable site and the testing of cattle would not solve all the difficulties connected with the question of a permanent and larger supply of anti-
RINDERPEST. 101 Rinderpest serum, and that the difficulties which had arisen at Muktesar would, in all probability, arise after a few years at a second Laboratory established and worked on similar lines as at Muktesar. Here, again, there was the danger that the cattle supply would become exhausted, and also that Rin- derpest might break out and eliminate the susceptibility of the cattle in the selected district. I also expressed the opinion that unless some method of preparing a useful serum from Plains animals alone could be discovered the difficulty of meet- ing the demands for serum would increase. I consequently proposed that before any steps were taken regarding a second Laboratory, the whole question of the future supply of serum should be carefully considered more especially from the following points:102 RINDERPEST. and of curtailing the expenditure of virulent blood in the preparation of serum. From my experience of the serum preparation, I am con- vinced that any attempt to continue and extend the output of serum by means of the extensive employment of Hill bulls of high susceptibility will result in difficulties similar to what have already been experienced at Muktesar. Although a cer- tain number of animals of high susceptibility are necessary for the maintenance of the virulence of the infective material and for testing the potency of each brew of serum prepared, it appeared to me from the results of some experiments I had carried out on a small scale in 1909-10, that a serum of suffi- cient potency for all practical purposes could be prepared by the exclusive use of Plains animals alone, by making certain alterations in the time and method of injection of the virulent material. Our present system of serum preparation is based on the results of a long series of experiments carried out by Dr. Lingard, on the question of the most practical and economical means of preparing an anti-Rinderpest serum of high potency. The main conclusions arrived at from these experiments were in brief thatRINDERPEST. 103 (4) That the injection of Hill virus (virulent blood obtained from Hill bulls), to Hill bulls gave a serum of high potency; Hill virus to Plains bulls produced a serum of much less protec- tive power, and Plains virus to Plains bulls gave a weak serum of little or no practical value. (5) That the potency of the serum decreased in a variable and irregular scale in each successive bleedings from an hyper- immunized animal. The routine method of preparing each brew of Rinderpest anti-serum is based on the above conclusions. In the first instance, the serum preparing bulls are immunized by simul- taneous injection of virulent blood and a suitable injection of Anti-Rinderpest serum. After a period of about three weeks the Plains bulls receive a massive injection of from 3,000 to 6,000 c.c. of defibrinated V. B. according to their weight (about 10 c.c. per pound of body weight). Hill bulls receive, about three weeks after they are immunized, a first injection of from 1,000 to 1,500 c.c. V. B., and after a period of two to three weeks a second injection varying from 2,000 to 3,000 c.c. V. B. All these bulls are bled about three weeks after the last injection. From the hyper-immunized Hill bulls two to three successive bleedings are taken at intervals of two to three days. From Plains bulls six to twelve bleedings are taken at intervals of a week. The stronger serum taken from Hill cattle is mixed with the weaker serum obtained from Plains cattle in order to raise the potency of the brew to a certain standard. The standard of potency aimed at is a serum which will protect a Hill bull of 600 lbs. body weight, at a dose of 90 c.c. from a simultaneous injection of virulent blood. It appeared to me that working on the following lines superior results may be arrived at104 RINDERPEST. second and larger massive injection of virulent blood. Three weeks following the second injection, he is bled for serum. At both periods of injection the animal is at a positive phase in reference to the Rinderpest virus, that is to say, he has formed a large quantity of immune bodies. By the alternate method suggested, the serum preparing animal would be immunized as before. As soon as the critical period of about ten days has passed, he would receive one massive injection of virulent blood of a volume equal to that of the first injection under the routine method. No second injection would be given, and the animal would be bled about fourteen days after the injection. The serum preparing animal at the period when the single injection, is given would be in a negative phase in reference to the Rinderpest virus, that is to say, no immune bodies would have been formed at that time. (2) To use for massive injection virulent blood bled direct into a 0.5% solution of citrate of potash in place of defibrinated virulent blood. When blood is taken direct into this solution it does not clot. When blood is defibrinated there is a loss of from 10 to 15% fibrin clot, in which is included a large part of red cells. In a 0.5% solution of pot. cit. the red cells are hæmolysed, and the injection of the diluted virus is much more rapidly and completely absorbed than a similar volume of defibrinated blood. The advantages gained by this new method are:RINDERPEST. 105 and fourteen days is probably the best period at which to bleed. For some time past, I have had considerable doubts re- garding the correctness of all the conclusions on which our routine methods of serum preparation are based, and several experiments which I carried out from time to time, as oppor- tunity arose, convinced me that both theoretically and prac- tically the method is capable of improvement. When an ani- mal in the process of serum preparation is being immunized he passes through a phase of hyper-susceptibility to the disease106 RINDERPEST. as follows:RINDERPEST. 107 more rapidly and completely absorbed than in a similar volume of defibrinated blood. An injection of citrated blood is gene- rally completely absorbed within 24 to 48 hours. A massive injection of defibrinated blood is not completely absorbed for several days and many injections are never perfectly absorbed. It is doubtful whether the virus absorbed after 24 to 48 hours following the injection is of any utility in the formation of the antibodies. From a series of experiments not yet complete it appears probable that Citrate of Potash solution exercises some special action on virulent blood and virulent peritoneal fluid, by which it increases the value of the injection in the pre- paration of serum. If this view be found to be a correct explanation of the action of the injection of a quantity of Citrate of Potash solution into the peritoneal cavity, and of the value of the injection of peritoneal washings in the preparation of the Rinderpest serum, it would follow that a mixture of peritoneal fluid or of virulent blood in Citrate of Potash solution, incubated for one or two hours at body temperature would provide an antigen equal in value to peritoneal washings. This question has also been taken into consideration in the present experiments. IMPROVED METHODS OF RINDERPEST SERUM PREPARATION. Throughout this Report the letters V. B. express virulent Rinderpest blood. Pot. Cit. a 0.5% or 1.5% solution of Citrate of Potash. The virulent blood used for test purposes was invariably obtained from Hill bulls (Kumaun) taken at a height of an attack of Rinderpest. All experiments were controlled by simultaneous inocula- tions of Hill bulls which in all cases died from Rinderpest. SERUM PREPARATION-EXPERIMENT 2-A. Buffaloes108 RINDERPEST. In this experiment the virulent blood was taken from buffaloes which had been inoculated with Rinderpest blood from a Hill bull control. These control buffaloes had a mode- rately marked attack of the disease, evinced by temperature reaction, loss of appetite and wasting. No mouth lesions appeared, and all recovered. One buffalo died after being bled, probably from exhaustion. The serum making buffaloes were similarly inoculated and passed through a like attack of Rinder- pest. During the period of this attack they received a sub- cutaneous injection of 1,500 c.c. blood taken direct into 1,500 c.c. of 0.5% Pot. Cit. They were bled for serum sixteen days after the subcutaneous injection, and the serum of all the serum making buffaloes was mixed and tested. The serum tests show a remarkably potent serum. The serum was tested on Hill bulls and on Plains buffaloes. Six Hill bulls received a simultaneous injection of virulent blood and of serum, two with 2 c.c. of serum per 600 lbs. body weight (dose for Plains bulls). Two with 5 c.c. and two with 10 c.c. Two buffaloes received 5 c.c. and two 10 c.c. None of these ani- mals showed even the slightest temperature reaction. The virulence of the blood was controlled by the death of other test animals inoculated on the same date and also with the same virulent blood. This serum, judging from these tests, would probably have protected at a dose of less than 1 c.c. per 600 lbs. body weight (Plains). TABLE OF RESULTS-EXPERIMENT No. 2-A. SERUM 2-A. METHOD OF PREPARING.RINDERPEST. 109 Reaction of Controls from which Blood was taken. No. of Buffa- loes. Temperature reac- tion. LESIONS. Result. REMARKS. Vesicles. Ulcers. 18 High 41.0 Max. Nil. Nil. Recovery. 72 110 RINDERPEST. Two bulls with a dose of 2 c.c. per 600 lbs. body weight (Plains) showed temperature reaction and one mouth lesions. Two at a dose of 5 c.c. and two at a dose of 10 c.c. showed no reactions. Two buffaloes at 5 c.c. and two at 10 c.c. dose showed no re- action. This serum was protective at a dose of 2 c.c, per 600 lbs. TABLE OF RESULT-EXPERIMENT No. X. SERUM No. X. METHOD OF PREPARING.RINDERPEST. 111 SERUM PREPARATION-EXPERIMENT NO. Y. Buffaloes V. B. and Pot. Cit. Two injections at positive phases. The object of this experiment was to test the result of two injections of diluted virulent blood, the first injection being given at about six days after recovery from an attack, the second injection at about sixteen days after the first. Buffaloes were used, and the result of the test is comparable with both experiments 2-A and X, and is further confirmed by a similar series of experiments with Plains bulls No. 1-A, 1-B, 1-B2 and 1-D. Two bulls which received a dose of 2 c.c. per 600 lbs. body weight (Plains), both had severe attacks and died ; two with a dose of 5 c.c. and two with a dose of 10 c.c. slight rise of tem- perature only. This serum was protective at about 4 c.c. per 600 lbs. This result shows that serum prepared by two injections at positive phases produces a serum of about half the potency of that produced by a single injection at a positive phase, and of one-quarter the value of a serum prepared by one injection at a negative phase. The results obtained by a similar series of experiments in which Plains bulls were used in place of buffaloes gave the same results:112 RINDERPEST. TABLE OF RESULT-EXPERIMENT NO.Y. SERUM No. Y. METHOD OF PREPARING.RINDERPEST. 113 of 1,500 c.c. V. B. bled direct into an equal volume of 0.5% Pot. Cit. The Plains bulls, both controls and serum making animals, passed through an attack of the disease which was evinced by a slight rise in temperature, and in one case only by mouth lesions. The attacks were much milder than in the case of the buffaloes. Owing to a somewhat prolonged secondary temperature reaction after the injection the bleeding for serum was taken twenty-two days after the injection. The serum from the three serum making bulls was mixed and tested. Three bulls received a dose of 2 c.c., one died and two survived. Two bulls at a dose of 5 c.c., one showed a slight temperature reaction only. Two bulls, at a dose of 10 c.c., showed no reaction. The results show that the serum was protective at a dose of 4 c.c. per 600 lbs. body weight (Plains). The serum prepared from buffaloes by one injection dur- ing period of attack proved about four times more potent than serum prepared on similar lines from Plains bulls. TABLE OF RESULTS.-EXPERIMENT No. 1-A. SERUM No. 1-A. METHOD OF PREPARING.114 RINDERPEST. Reaction of Serum Making Bulls. No. of Bulls. Temperature reaction. LESIONS. Result. REMARKS. Vesicles. Ulcers. 102 High 40.6 Max. Nil. Nil. Recovery. 103 RINDERPEST. 115 The result of this experiment is further confirmed by experiments Nos. 1-D and 3-D. TABLE OF RESULTS.-EXPERIMENT NO. 3-A. SERUM No. 3-A. METHOD OF PREPARING.116 RINDERPEST. Two bulls at a dose of 2 c.c. died, two at a dose of 5 c.c., one had a slight attack, the other a severe attack and died on the 11th day ; two at a dose of 10 c.c., one had a slight attack and one severe, both recovered. This experiment was repeated with similar results, see 1-B2. The results of tests proved that the dose of this serum necessary to protect was about 10 c.c. per 600 lbs. body weight (Plains). The comparison of the results obtained with serum No. 2-A and No. X, and of serums Nos. 1-A and 1-B showed that serum prepared by an injection of V. B. and Pot. Cit. at a negative phase is more than twice as potent as serum prepared by one injection of V. B. and Pot. Cit. at a positive phase. TABLE OF RESULTS.-EXPERIMENT NO. 1-B. SERUM No. 1-B. METHOD OF PREPARING.RINDERPEST. 117 Reaction of Serum Testing Animals. No. of Bulls. Temperature reaction. LESIONS. Result. REMARKS. Vesicles. Ulcers. Dose per 600 lbs. body weight. 349 High 40.6 Max. Nil Nil Recovery. 10 c.c. ditto. 333 118 RINDERPEST. Reaction of Controls from which Blood was taken. No. of Bulls. Temperature reaction. LESIONS. Result. REMARKS. Vesicles. Ulcers. 123 High 40.6 Max. 8th day 9th day Recovery. 125 RINDERPEST 119 TABLE OF RESULT-EXPERIMENT NO. 1 -C. SERUM No. 1-C. METHOD OF PREPARING.120 RINDERPEST. SERUM PREPARATION-EXPERIMENT No. 1-D. Plains bulls V. B. and Pot. Cit. Two injections at positive phases. This serum was prepared by two injections of virulent blood drawn into 0.5% Pot. Cit., both given at positive phases. The first injection was given six days after attack, and the second after an interval of sixteen days. Two bulls which received 2 c.c. per 600 lbs. had severe attack and died, two bulls received 5 c.c., one had a slight re- action, the other a severe attack followed by death; two bulls with 10 c.c. both had a severe attack, one died, the other re- covered. The protective dose of this serum was about 12 c.c. per 600 lbs. body weight (Plains). This serum was not so potent as that prepared (experiment No. 1-B) by one injection at a positive phase. This gave a serum of a protective close of 10 c.c. per 600 lbs. It was also much inferior to serum obtained by one injection at a negative phase. (Experiment No. 1-A, which was protective at 4 c.c. per 600 lbs.). TABLE OF RESULTS.-EXPERIMENT NO. 1-D. SERUM No. 1-D. METHOD OF PREPARING.RINDERPEST. 121 Reaction of Controls from which Blood was taken. No. of Bulls. Temperature reaction. LESIONS. Result. REMARKS. Vesicles. Ulcers. 110 High 40.4 Max. Nil. Nil. Recovery. 111 40.0 122 RINDERPEST. TABLE OF RESULTS.-EXPERIMENT NO. 3-D. SERUM No. 3-D. METHOD OF PREPARING.RINDERPEST. 123 Serum No. How prepared. Animal used. Protective close. X One injection of V. B. plus Pot. Cit. 6 days after recovery from attack (1,500 c. c. V. B. plus 1.500 c.c. Pot. Cit. 0.5%). Buffaloes. 2 c.c. per weight. 600 lbs. body Plains animal. 1-B Ditto. Plains bulls. 10 c.c. ditto. 1-B2 One injection of V. B. plus Pot. Cit. 12 days after recovery from attack (1,500 c.c. V. B. plus 1,500 c.c. Pot. Cit. 0.5%). Ditto. 12 c.c. ditto. V Two injections of V. B. plus Pot. Cit. 1st, 6 days after recovery from attack (1,500 c.c. V. B. 1,500 c.c. Pot. Cit. 0.5%); 2nd, 16 days after 1st injection) 3,000 c.c. V. B. plus 1,000 c.c. Pot. Cit. 1.5%). Buffaloes. 4 c.c. ditto. 1-D Ditto. Plains bulls. 12 c.c. ditto. 3-D Two injections defibrinated blood alone, 1st, 6 days after recovery from attack (1,500 c.c. defibrinated V. B.); 2nd, 25 days after 1st injec- tion (3,000 c.c. defibrinated V. B.) Ditto. 12 c.c. ditto. 1-C Two injections of V. B. plus Pot, Cit. 1st, injection during period of at- tack (1,500 c.c. V. B. plus 1,500 c.c. Pot, Cit. 0.5%); 2nd, 16 days after 1st injection) 3,000 c.c. V. B. plus 1,500 cc. Pot. Cit. 1.5%). Ditto. 6 c.c. ditto. N.B.124 RINDERPEST. value of serum from individual animals before mixing them together. The method of standardising the serum by ascer- taining on a series of living animals the dose necessary to pro- tect a bull of Hill breed per 600 lbs. body weight, although a good practical test of the relative value of the serum is a very inaccurate measure of the immune units present in the serum. Unfortunately no other method for standardising Rinderpest serum has yet been discovered. (1) The serum resulting from a single massive injection of virulent blood is superior in potency to that prepared by two successive injections of virulent blood. All these sera were tested on Hill cattle of maximum sus- ceptibility and the dose stated for Plains cattle per 600 lbs. body weight is estimated on the supposition that these latter animals require for protection only an eighteenth of the dose necessary for Hill bulls :RINDERPEST. 125 method. At present the bulls used for serum preparation require a period of over 9 weeks before they, can be bled for serum. By using a single injection only a period of three weeks would be saved. It is proposed to apply this system tentatively in the routine work of serum preparation at Muktesar. (2) The serum resulting from a single massive injection of virulent blood given at a negative phase is superior to that prepared by a single massive injection at a positive phase.126 RINDERPEST. Citrate of Potash. This has several practical advantages over the defibrinated method. It effects a saving of 10 per cent. to 15 per cent. in volume, also in the expenditure of time, labour and glass, which is necessary in the defibrinating and straining process. By the action of the hypotonic saline solution the red blood cells are dissolved and the whole volume of the fluid rendered more suitable for injections and absorption. Theoretically the dissolution of the red cells liberates the antigen which is consequently presented in a form more readily acted on by the tissue cells. We have repeatedly observed that the injection of fluid (virulent blood and peritoneal fluid) mixed in Pot. Cit. solution is much more rapidly absorbed than an equal volume of defibrinated blood and is attended with less inconvenience to the injected animal. Rapidity of absorption is undoubtedly a favourable factor in the prepara- tion of a good serum. (4) A serum of very high potency can be prepared from Plains buffaloes by a single massive injection of virulent blood obtained from buffalo controls. The virulent blood is diluted in an equal volume of Pot. Cit. solution and is injected at a negative phase, namely, during the actual period of an attack of Rinderpest or immediately after. 1 injection at a negative phase (buffalo) serumRINDERPEST. 127 of Plains breed. The serum prepared in these experiments by the exclusive use of Plains buffaloes is equal in potency to serum derived from the exclusive use of cattle of Hill breed. Consequently, Plains buffaloes can be to a large extent used in the place of Hill cattle. They are cheap, and can be obtained in sufficient number, also few die during the process of bleeding and serum preparation. Owners do not object to selling buffaloes for Laboratory purposes. By the mixture of serum prepared by this method from Plains buffaloes with the serum prepared in like manner from Plains bulls, I consider that brews of Rinderpest anti- serum can be manufactured of a potency equal to that of the Muktesar serum. A serum of good practical value can be pre- pared from Plains bulls by a single massive injection of viru- lent blood obtained from Plains bull controls. The virulent blood is diluted in an equal volume of Pot. Cit. solution and is injected at a negative phase, namely, during the actual period of an attack of Rinderpest or immediately after. The serum prepared from Plains cattle is not so potent as that from Plains buffaloes. It is, however, as strong as that obtained from Plains cattle injected with virus from Hill bulls by our present routine method. The Plains cattle used for this experiment were inexpensive animals of ordinary vil- lage type. They were only slightly susceptible to Rinderpest and few died during the process of serum preparation. In all these experiments the bleedings for serum were made at a period of about fourteen days following the massive injection. The satisfactory results show that the anti-bodies are present at that time. Under our present routine a period of three weeks at least is allowed from last injection. In further operations this pe- riod can be curtailed to two weeks. If the practical application of these methods meets with the same success in the routine serum making preparation at Muktesar, a large number of Plains buffaloes can be used to supply virus and a lesser number of Hill bulls will be required.
128 RINDERPEST. This would enable the serum operations at Muktesar to continue to the same extent as in the past without danger of failure from lack of sufficient numbers of Hill cattle. At the Bareilly Branch Laboratory if the grounds were extended and more accommodation provided, serum preparation could be carried on for six months (October to March) each year, and about two to three lacs doses could be obtained from this source. SERUM NO. 2-A. CONTROLS. Buffalo No. 72.RINDERPEST. 129 SERUM MAKING. Buffalo No. 73.130 RINDERPEST. 7th day .. 40.6º C. 8th RINDERPEST. 131 Buffalo No. 155 @ 5 c.c.132 RINRERPEST. Buffalo No. 83.RINDERPEST. 133 Buffalo No. 156 @ 10 c.c.134 RINDERPEST. Buffalo No. 148.RINDERPEST. 135 SERUM TESTING. Bull No. 307 @ 10 c.c.136 RINDERPEST. "SERUM No. 1-A." CONTROLS. Bull No. 9.RINDERPEST, 137 15th day .. 40.7º C. 16th 138 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 284 @ 2 c.c.RINDERPEST. 139 SERUM MAKING. Bull No. 1.140 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 337 @ 5 c.c.RINDERPEST. 141 Bull No. 116.142 RINDERPEST. SERUM TESTING. Bull No. 349 @ 10 c.c.RINDERPEST. 143 Bull No. 318 @ 2 c.c.144 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 99.RINDERPEST. 145 Bull No. 306 @ 5 c.c.146 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 7.RINDERPEST. 147 18th day .. 40.2º C 24th 148 RINDERPEST. 9th day .. 39.8º C. Numerous vesicles and ulcers. DiarrhRINDERPEST. 149 "SERUM No. 1-D." CONTROLS. Bull No. 110.150 RINDERPEST. 19th day .. 40.0º C. Fæces soft. 20th RINDERPEST. 15l SERUM TESTING. Bull No. 325 @ 10 c.c.152 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 324 @ 2 c.c.RINDERPEST. 153 SERUM TESTING. Bull No. 362 @ 10 c.c.154 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 361 @ 2 c.c.RINDERPEST 155 which a supply of bulls could be obtained at a reasonable price. Hazara.156 RINDERPEST. (3) The places mentioned for a Laboratory in or near the Kangra District are all too lowly situated and have a very heavy rainfall. Darjeeling District.RINDERPEST. 157 more than 100 cattle should be purchased annually, and has passed orders to this effect." Summary of report on available sites suitable for a Laboratory from the Superintendent, C. V. D., Bengal (by Forest Officer). (1) There are two blocks of Forests which would suit the purpose. 1. Hoolagaon block comprising:158 RINDERPEST. from Rinderpest among the cattle around Fatehpur, than in any other part of his province. One of our Veterinary Inspectors was sent to assist a subordinate detailed by the Superintendent, C. V. D., U. P., in purchasing 20 bulls from this district. After three weeks' touring only eight bulls were purchased at an average price of Rs. 34-4. These bulls showed a very moderate susceptibility to Rinderpest. Tarai and Bhabar District.RINDERPEST. 159 preparing Laboratory. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North-Western Frontier Province, states that about 500 bulls only could be obtained each year from this District. This number is not sufficient for the working of a Laboratory. At Muktesar about 2,500 to 3,000 are required each year. A site for a Laboratory is suggested at Mongal, half-way between Abbottabad and Nowshera. (2) The Kangra bulls are equally susceptible and suitable for Laboratory requirements as the Hazara cattle. The Chief Superintendent, C. V. D., Punjab, is of opinion that owners would object to selling their cattle and that no suitable site for a Laboratory can be found in this District. (3) The cattle obtained from the Darjeeling District pos- sess a very remarkable susceptibility to Rinderpest and are very suitable for serum preparations. They are weighty bulls and would supply a large amount of virulent blood. Their cost is not excessive. The Superintendent, C. V. D., Bengal, supplies information from which it would appear that a requisite supply of cattle could be relied on, and that there are suitable sites in that Hill district. Susceptibility of Plains Bulls and Buffaloes. (1) The Terai and Bhabar bulls are resistant to Rinderpest and of no value for serum preparation. (2) The Plains bulls from Allahabad are expensive and difficult to obtain and are only slightly susceptible. (3) The bulls from the Bareilly district possess a mod- erate degree of susceptibility. A very useful serum has been prepared from these bulls. (See serum preparation experiments.) (4) The buffaloes from the Bareilly District are consider- ably more susceptible to Rinderpest than the bulls, and though the mortality is slight, the course of the disease is fairly severe. A very potent serum has been prepared from these buffaloes. (See serum preparation experiments.)
160 RINDERPEST. Detailed statement of Weights, Prices and Numbers of animals available, used in susceptibility and serum making experiments at Bareilly, during 1910-11. District. Average weight. Average cost at seat of collection. Numbers available. Remarks. Bulls. Buffs. Bulls. Buffs. Rs. As. Rs. As. BAREILLY Deochara BAREILLY 300 470 16 0 8 8 Fairly good. Poor condition. Kakora-Ghat HAZARA 350 470 18 6 12 0 Good. Abbotabad 300 .. 24 14 .. No information Kangra 300 .. 14 3 .. Do. DARJEELING Siliguri 450 .. 21 8 .. See Supdt. Ben- gal's report. TARAI & BHA- BAR Tarai 300 Bhabar Perm. 300 15 8 Good Supply. RINDERPEST. 161 Summary of 17 bulls tested:162 RINDERPEST. Summary of 30 bulls tested:RINDERPEST. 163 Susceptibility of Fatehpur Bulls:164 RINDERPEST. Summary of 18 bulls tested:RINDERPEST 166 Susceptibility of Tarai Bulls :166 RINDERPEST. Susceptibility of Abbotabad BullsRINDERPEST. 167 Summary of 20 bulls tested:168 RINDERPEST. Summary of 5 buffaloes tested:RINDERPEST. 169 Susceptibility of Deochara Buffaloes:170 RINDERPEST. SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF SUSCEPTIBILITY TESTS. Breed. District. Number. tested. Inoculated with 1 c.c. V. B. from Control. Reactions. Deaths from Rinder- pest. Recoveries from Rinderpest. REMARKS. Very severe. Severe. Moder- ate. Mild. Nil. Bulls Hill ... Darjeeling ... 17 No. 58 17 .. .. .. .. 17 .. Maximum susceptibility. Hill ... Kangra ... 20 RINDERPEST. 171 "Charts of Kakora Ghat Bulls." Bull No. 1.172 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 8.RINDERPEST. 173 Bull No. 14.174 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 92.RINDERPEST. 175 Bull No. 98.176 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 106.RINDERPEST. 177 Bull No. 113.178 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 139.RINDERPEST. 179 Bull No. 160.180 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 124.RINDERPEST. 181 Bull No. 129.182 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 187.RINDERPEST. 183 Bull No. 193.184 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 200.RINDERPEST. 185 Bull No. 206.186 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 214.RINDERPEST. 187 Bull No. 223.188 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 231.RINDERPEST. 189 Bull No. 165.190 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 171.RINDERPEST. 191 Bull No. 176.192 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 181.RINDERPEST. 193 Bull No. 247.194 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 252.RINDERPEST. 195 Bull No. 256.196 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 261.RINDERPEST. 197 " Charts of Siliguri Bulls." Bull No. 286.198 RINDERPEST. Bull No. 292.RINDERPEST. 199 Bull No. 299.200 RINDERPEST. Buffalo No. 20.RINDERPEST. 201 Bull No. 135.202 RINDERPEST. " Charts of Bareilly Buffaloes." Buffalo No. 72.RINDERPEST. 203 Buffalo No. 79.204 RINDERPEST. Buffalo No. 85.RINDERPEST. 205 Buffalo No. 119.THE PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM BY THE INJECTION OF VIRULENT ARTIFICIAL PERI- TONEAL FLUID.* BY H. E. CROSS, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.H., A.SC. (DUNELM), I.C.V.D., Assistant Bacteriologist, Muktesar Laboratory. ABDIL BEY and Nicolle during the course of some experi- ments on Rinderpest found that the peritoneal fluid was very virulent (Annales de l'Institut Pasteur, 1899). Ruediger on repeating their experiments confirmed this conclusion and in- augurated a new method for the preparation of Anti.Rinderpest serum. This method as described in the Philippine Journal of Science, November, 1908, consisted in the injection of 5,000 c.c. of a 0.5 per cent. solution of potassium citrate into the peritoneal cavity of the animals from which virulent blood was ordinarily obtained, to bleed them to death an hour later and to collect the artificial peritoneal fluid and use it in hyperimmunising the serum preparing animals. The animals from which virulent blood was obtained in the Philippines weighed from 400PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 207 of the serum from animals hyperimmunised by virulent blood and found that the potency of the serum from animals injected with artificial peritoneal fluid was greater than that of serum from animals injected with virulent blood. In all laboratories in which Anti-Rinderpest Serum is made the cost and the difficulties of getting animals from which viru- lent material can be obtained for the injection of serum prepar- ing animals is always a serious problem, and in this laboratory where over 500,000 doses are annually prepared, the difficulty of obtaining such animals has been very great and every year becomes more so. It was, therefore, decided in June 1909 to hyperimmunise a certain number of animals by artificial fluid on the lines laid down by Ruediger and to test the result- ing serum. THE PREPARATION OF ARTIFICIAL PERITONEAL FLUID. The animals from which the virulent blood is obtained are small Himalayan hill bulls208 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. injection the skin is sutured. One hour later the animals were bled and the artificial peritoneal fluid collected into sterile flasks by pipettes. The average quantity collected was only ¾ of the amount of blood obtainedPREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 209 CLINICAL SYMPTOMS OF BULLS THAT DIED AFTER THE LARGE INJECTIONS OF ARTIFICIAL PERITONEAL FLUID. In many cases the animals died very quickly and in others they lingered on for some days. In the former cases the morn- ing after injection the animals were off feed, lying down, hur- ried breathing, small rapid pulse, extremities cold, running down temperature, finally they became comatose and died in 36 to 40 hours (Charts 1 and 3). Amongst those in which death occurred after some days, except gradual debility, no very pro- nounced symptoms occurred, the animals fed only fairly, the respiration was hurried, the pulse somewhat rapid, rumination was very suspended, and they fell off rapidly in condition and died on the 10th or 11th day after injection (Chart 2). TREATMENT. Various stimulants and hypodermic injections of strych- nine were tried, but treatment was of little avail. Small and repeated doses of ammonium carbonate and Nux vomica gave the best results. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. The pharynx and trachæ presented congestions and petechiæ. The rumen, reticulum and omasum appeared normal. The abomasum was the seat of the most marked lesions, presenting acute inflammation, the folds varied from a red to a deep portwine colour, and in some cases necrotic areas were seen. The small intestines showed congestions to a greater or less amount in different cases, but Peyer's patches showed very little alteration. The large intestines were normal. The rectum presented slight congestion. The kidneys showed congestions and petechiæ. The liver was soft and friable. The spleen appeared normal. 14
210 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. The lungs showed extravasation. The heart presented petechiæ on the endocardium. The blood was dark and did not coagulate readily. CAUSE OF DEATH. Ruediger does not mention having had any fatal results after the injection of artificial peritoneal fluid. Baldrey in the Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science, Vol. VI, No. 1, 1911, attributes the deaths to Rinderpest toxin, but in our present state of knowledge regarding Rinderpest, this theory cannot be accepted until further proof is forthcom- ing, especially as under certain circumstances, the injection of normal blood produces somewhat similar results. The matter is at present being investigated by the Imperial Bacterio- logist, and the result of his experiments will shortly be pub- lished. PREPARATION OF SERUM BY ARTIFICIAL PERITONEAL FLUID FOR COMPARISON WITH SERUM PREPARED BY VIRULENT BLOOD INJECTION. The amounts of artificial peritoneal fluid that could be safely injected having been determined by the previous experi- ments, several animals were immunised by the simultaneous method, of these animals half were hyperimmunised by artifi- cial peritoneal fluid and the other half by the injection of viru- lent blood. The animals were a very fair sample of the bulls usually obtainable for the preparation of serum, and both lots were kept under like conditions. Those hyperimmunised by artificial peritoneal fluid receiv- ed injections at the rate of 700 c.c. per every 100lbs. body weight, and those hyperimmunised by virulent blood receiv- ed injections at the rate of 1,000 c.c. per 100lbs. body weight. All injections were well borne and rapidly absorbed. The animals were bled for serum 21 days after in- jection.
PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 211 THE POTENCY OF THE SERUM PREPARED BY INJECTIONS OF ARTIFICIAL PERITONEAL FLUID (SERUM A), COMPARED WITH THAT OF THE SERUM PREPARED BY INJECTIONS OF BLOOD (SERUM B) Serum A. 2 Bulls were injected at the rate of 36 c.c. per 600lbs. body weight. 2 212 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. The tests were controlled by 2 animals which died on the 6th and 7th day respectively. By reference to the table it is evident that the serum A is much weaker than serum B. This is the reverse of what Ruediger found. Had the serum preparing animals been able to stand larger injections of artificial peritoneal fluid, it is very probable that the serum would have been very much stronger as undoubtedly the potency of Anti-Rinderpest Serum depends to a certain extent upon the quantity of antigen injected. The artificial peritoneal fluid is not simply a dilution of peritoneal fluid with the potassium citrate solution. If the peritoneal fluid be collected from an animal showing a high temperature and vesicles and diluted down with potassium citrate solution to give an amount of fluid equal to the quantity of artificial peritoneal fluid that could be collected from such an animal, and this diluted peritoneal fluid were used for hyperimmunising, the potency of the resulting serum would be very low. Such experiments have been carried out as have also dilutions of blood and only under certain circumstances can a serum of any prac- tical value be produced by simple dilutions. During the time the potassium citrate solution is in the peri- toneal cavity, vital processes (osmosis effusion of lymph) are taking place, and the resulting artificial peritoneal fluid contains a large quantity of antigen and can be used for the preparation of a serum of practical use. Conclusions. 1. By using artificial peritoneal fluid the amount of viru- lent material for hyperimmunising purposes is considerably increased, and a marked saving in the cost of serum preparation effected. 2. The serum from animals injected with artificial perito- neal fluid is usually weaker than the serum prepared by the injection of blood. 3. Artificial peritoneal fluid injections are well absorbed and do not produce sloughing.
PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 213 BULL NO. I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] BULL NO. II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
214 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. BULL NO. III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] BULL NO. IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 215 BULL NO. V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] BULL NO. VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ON THE IMMUNE BODIES OCCURRING IN RINDER- PEST IMMUNE-SERUM.* PART I. THE PRECIPITATION OF THE RINDERPEST IMMUNE BODIES BY DIALYSIS OF THE IMMUNE SERUM. BY PERCIVAL HARTLEY, D.Sc. (LONDON), I.C.V.D., Physiological Chemist, Muktesar Laboratory. In recent years numerous experiments have been carried out with the object of isolating the immune bodies occurring in the serum of immunised animals and of studying their che- mical and physical properties. Attempts have been made to separate these immune bodies from the other constituents of the serum in which they occur, the question of their protein character has been studied, comparisons have been made be- tween the composition of the serum of normal and immune ani- mals, and certain changes occurring in the serum of animals during immunisation have been observed. Up to the present a complete separation of the immune bodies from the other constituents of the serum has not been effected. The greater portion of the experiments have dealt with the study of diphtheria anti-toxin. As far as our knowledge extends at present it appears that diphtheria anti-toxin is a protein having the char- acters of a globulin.PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 217 These globulins may be precipitated from serum either by dia- lysis, by means of carbon dioxide and acetic acid or by the addition of neutral salts. The earlier workers on this subject adopted one or other of the above methods and discordant re- sults were obtained; but later investigations on the protein constituents of normal and immune serum provided an expla- nation of the varying results obtained by different observers. Dieudonné (1897), found that the globulins precipitated by means of carbon dioxide and acetic acid contained no anti- toxin, that the globulins precipitated by dialysis contained but little, and that all the anti-toxin was contained in the glo- bulin precipitate produced by saturation of the serum with magnesium sulphate. Similar results were obtained by Bel- fanti and Carbone (1898), and by Seng (1899). Brieger and Boer (1893), and Astros and Rietsch (1900), precipitated the globulins and anti-toxin by means of the chlorides of sodium and potassium. Hiss and Atkinson (1901), saturated the serum with magnesium sulphate and showed that the anti-toxin was carried down with the precipitate. Ammonium sulphate has been widely used for precipitating anti-toxins from serum. Brieger and Ehrlich (1893), and Wassermann (1894), obtained precipitates containing anti-toxin from the milk of immunised animals, and this salt was used by Brodie (1897), Seng (1899), Pick (1902), Gibson (1906), Ledingham (1907), and others in studying diphtheria anti-serum Freund and Sternberg (1899), first precipitated the albumins of the serum by means of potash alum, and showed that the albumin precipitate contained no anti-toxin but remained in solution with the globulins. Marcus (1899), showed that the serum contained two forms of globulin; one is precipitated by means of carbon dioxide and acetic acid and by dialysis (insoluble globulin), and the other is not preci- pitated under these conditions but only on saturation of the serum with magnesium sulphate, or half saturation with ammo- nium sulphate (soluble globulin). Seng (1899), showed that the diphtheria anti-toxin is either associated with, or possesses similar properties to the soluble globulins, and was thus able to
218 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. explain the absence of anti-toxin in the precipitates obtained by Dieudonné and by Belfanti and Carbone. Fuld and Spiro (1900), divided the globulins occurring in horse serum into three classesPREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 219 (1907), found that an anti-leucoprotease occurs in serum albumin. The experiments described below were begun with the object of discovering to which fraction of the proteins of Rinder- pest Immune Serum the Rinderpest Immune Bodies are asso- ciated, and to see if an economical process could be evolved for the preparation of the Rinderpest prophylactic in a stable and convenient form. In this study of the distribution of the Rin- derpest Immune Bodies in Rinderpest Serum numerous diffi- culties have been encountered. The methods available are not so simple as those available for the similar study of diphtheria anti-toxin. The amount of diphtheria anti-toxin in a given fluid can be estimated easily and with a considerable degree of accu- racy. Guinea-pigs serve as excellent biological indicators and they are cheap and the results are obtained very quickly. In the case of Rinderpest the amount of Immune Bodies in a given fluid is determined by balancing220 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. Anti-Rinderpest Serum issued for use in field operations. Samples from four ''brews'' of serum (69, 73, 76 and 78) were studied. THE EFFECT OF DIALYSIS OF THE SERUM ON THE RINDERPEST IMMUNE BODIES. Experiment 1.PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 221 Injected subcutaneously with 36 c.c. of emulsion (one protective dose) on one side and with 1 c.c. of virulent Rinder- pest blood on the other. Result.222 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. injected with the filtrate from the dialysed serum were not protected. In the case of Bull 5322 (Experiment 2) the amount of serum originally taken (200 c.c.) contained for this animal about 7½ protective doses. The filtrate from this volume of serum after dialysis did not protect; that is, it contained less than one protective dose. On the other hand, the test on Bulls 5323, 5320 and 5321 show that practically all the Immune Bodies are present in the precipitate produced by dialysis, that the emulsion protects in the same way as the original serum, and that little or no loss of Immune Bodies has occur- red. Experiment 3.PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 223 Result.224 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. Injected subcutaneously with 0.9 gramme of powder, emul- sified in salt solution on one side and 0.5 c.c. virulent Rinder- pest blood on the other. Result.PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 225 all the Immune Bodies had been precipitated, died of rinder- pest. Bull 102 which received 1¼ doses on the same assump- tion showed no symptoms of rinderpest and was subsequently found to be immune. Experiment 5.226 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. level until the ninth day when mouth lesions appeared and the animal died of rinderpest on the tenth day. The results of Experiment 5 are in agreement with those obtained in the four previous experiments; the rinderpest immune bodies are completely precipitated when the Immune serum is subjected to dialysis. The results obtained in the above experiments suggest that the rinderpest immune bodies differ in one important respect from diphtheria and tetanus anti-toxins. It has been shewn repeatedly that the anti-toxins are associated with, or similar to, the so-called soluble globulins or pseudo-globulins, that is, those globulins which are not precipitated on dialysis. As shown above, when rinderpest immune serum is dialysed, the filtrate from the dialysed serum, which contains albumin and pseudo-globulin, contains no rinderpest immune bodies. The rinderpest immune bodies appear to be associated with, or similar to, the so-called insoluble globulins or euglobulinsPREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 227 precipitated with an equal volume of saturated ammonium sulphate solution, filtered, and the pseudo-globulin dialysed. The three fractions thus obtained were tested as follows :228 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. against diphtheria-toxin. On the other hand, there is little similarity between the preparation of diphtheria and tetanus anti-toxins and rinderpest immune serum. The anti-toxins are prepared by the repeated injection of gradually increasing doses of toxin; rinderpest immune serum is prepared by the injection of one massive quantity of virulent material into ani- mals which have been previously immunised against the disease. In the former case the response of the cells involved is to a toxin stimulus ; in the latter the response is to a stimulus of the nature of a living organism. And it is conceivable that in the two cases different mechanisms are involved resulting in the production of immune bodies which, though possessing many common characteristics, possess also points of difference which are manifested in such a property as that of solubility. It has been shown that the rinderpest prophylactic can be prepared in the dry condition. Up to the present the opera- tions have been carried out on a small scale, experimentally, and experiments are now in progress the object of which is to discover, if possible, other methods for the preparation of the rinderpest prophylactic in a dry condition. By the method described above, about 50 per cent. of the protein constituents of rinderpest immune serum, consisting of the albumin and soluble globulin which take no part in the immunising process, are elim- inated. The residue containing the active principle is obtained finally in the dry condition. The preparation of the rinderpest prophylactic in the dry state has many practical advantages. It is well known that immune sera deteriorate on exposure to light and increased temperature and with age, and even when preserved under the most favourable conditions a diminution in potency always takes place. In the tropics immune sera tend to deteriorate more rapidly than in cooler regions, and Lingard has shown that rinderpest immune serum when ex- posed to the temperatures experienced in the Plains of India, loses from 40 to 66.6 per cent. of its protective power. Serum in the dried condition, however, is much more resistant to such adverse influences as age, light and increased temperature, and
PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 229 if preserved in this condition it retains its original potency almost indefinitely. There are occasions when the use of the prophylactic in some such form as the dried globulin described above would be preferable to the use of the fluid serum, as, for example, during military operations when questions of trans- port are of prime importance, and other practical applications for such a product would doubtless be found by officers in charge of field operations. CONCLUSIONS. 1. When rinderpest immune serum is dialysed, the immune bodies are precipitated. The filtrate from the dialysed serum fails to protect susceptible animals from the disease. 2. By this process the rinderpest prophylactic can be prepared in the dry condition. 3. The tests of the dried powder which have been carried out show that the loss of immune bodies is inappreciable and that the dried powder, when dissolved or emulsified, and inject- ed into susceptible animals, protects from a simultaneous inoculation of virulent rinderpest blood. 4. By this method about half of the total proteids, which take no part in the immunising process, are eliminated. 5. The rinderpest immune bodies differ from diphtheria and tetanus anti-toxins. The former appear to be similar to the insoluble globulins (euglobulins) ; the latter are similar to the soluble globulins (pseudo-globulins).
230 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. REFERENCES Dieudonne.REPORT ON THE PREPARATION OF RINDER- PEST ANTI-SERUM BY MEANS OF DILUTED VIRULENT FLUIDS.* BY PERCIVAL HARTLEY, D.Sc. (LONDON), I.C.V.D., Physiological Chemist, Muktesar Laboratory. The experiments described in the following notes were carried out according to instructions issued by the Imperial Bacteriologist. The various seras described were prepared at Muktesar in November and December 1910 and January 1911. The serum tests were carried out at Bareilly in February and March 1911. The experiments were designed to investigate several different points, one of the chief of these being to study the nature of the serum produced by the injection of diluted virulent fluids. In a series of experiments carried out at Bareilly in the cold weather of 1909-10 by the Imperial Bacteriologist it was noticed that subcutaneous injections of virulent blood, diluted with potassium citrate solution 0.5 per cent. were very rapidly absorbed. On the other hand, massive injections of defi- brinated virulent blood are absorbed relatively slowly, and in many cases the swellings created by the injection often persist for many days. It was considered, on theoretical grounds, that rapid absorption of the injected virulent material is proba- bly a favourable factor in the production of seras of high potency and the experiments were designed to investigate this point. Another subject which was studied at the same time deals with the question of the potency of the serum prepared by the injection of virulent peritoneal washings. It has been stated that the peritoneal washings taken from an animal at the height * Results arrived at in July 1911.
232 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. of an attack of rinderpest are as virulentPREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 233 In the course of the preparation of these seras it was noticed that the fluids diluted with potassium citrate were, without exception, exceedingly rapidly absorbed. Twenty-four hours after injection only a thickening remained and this disappeared after another 24 hours. Hill Bulls were used throughout, both for providing the virulent material and for making the seras. Four bulls were used for making each of the seras B, D and E ; three were used for making Serum C and two bulls for preparing Serum A. Serum A.234 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. Second Series of Testings. (A).PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 235 Result of Serum Testings. (B). First Series.236 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. Definite volumes of peritoneal fluid added to a definite volume of potassium citrate 0.5% solution. Three Bulls used. 5359PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 237 Result of Serum Testing. D.238 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. Result of Testing Serum E.PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 239 shewn that the P. F. serum has about half the potency of V. B. serum. 3. By comparing the potency of Serum A and Serum C, it will be seen that C is only one-quarter, or perhaps one-fifth, as potent as Serum A, and these results suggest that some other process than simple dilution of the pre-existent Peritoneal Fluid occurs, when a control is injected with Potassium Citrate Solution and the Peritoneal Washings subsequently withdrawn. That is. the Peritoneal Washings prepared in vivo are more virulent, or contain more virus than those prepared in vitro, and a greater production of Rinderpest Immune Bodies follows the injection of the former than the latter. 4. Seras D and E are practically the same. In the case of Serum D, the V. B. was defibrinated. In the case of Serum E, the V. B. was not defibrinated, but ran straight from the vein into Pot. Cit. Solution. In both cases seras of low potency were obtained, the strength of the seras being comparable to the strength of Serum C, also prepared by a dilution method. It may be noted here that the injection of the above volumes of. diluted virulent material into the serum-making bulls caused no rise in temperature, and it would appear that the result of the two injections (1,500 c.c. and 2,000 c.c.) was mere- ly to neutralise the Immune Bodies formed in the blood as a result of immunisation. The amount of virus injected (always at a positive phase) was not sufficient to stimulate the produc- tion of more immune bodies. From the result of the tests of Seras C, D and E it may be concluded that the injection of virulent fluids, diluted in the proportion of (300 : 1,200) and 500 : 1,500) the injections being made at a positive phase, has a deleterious effect on the resulting serum. In another part of this Memoir experiments are described by the Imperial Bacteriologist on the preparation of Rinder- pest Anti-Serum by means of the injection of diluted virulent blood. The only point of similarity between these two series of experiments is that the virulent blood was diluted with
240 PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. Potassium Citrate prior to injection. In the experiments described above it is to be noted :PREPARATION OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM. 241 Recently, serum from hill bulls has been prepared on the lines indicated in (1), (2) and (3) above with most encourag- ing results. As far as can be seen at present serum prepared on these lines is superior in potency to that prepared by the older methods, viz., by repeated massive injections of defibrin- ated virulent blood at positive phases. 16
PART III. HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. FURTHER TESTINGS OF THE HÆMORRHAGIC SEP- TICÆMIA ANTI-SERUM AND VACCINE.* BY MAJOR J, D. E. HOLMES, M.R.C.V.S., M.A., D.Sc., I.C.V.D., Imperial Bacteriologist to the Govt. of India. In a previous publication (C. V. D. Memoirs, No. 1), I described the methods of preparation of a serum and dead vaccine against Hæmorrhagie Septicæmia of Bovines. The results of the experimental tests carried out in the Laboratory shewed that the serum in a dose of 5 to 10 c.c. protects cattle against a lethal dose of virus inoculated 24 to 48 hours after the serum and that an injection of 25 c.c. serum gives a pro- tection for a period of about four weeks. The vaccine in a dose of 5 c.c. protects against a lethal dose of virus inoculated four days after the injection of the vaccine. The immunity following a dose of vaccine in amounts of 5 to 10 c.c. persists for a period of about six weeks. During the past two years, 1,825 doses of this Anti-Serum and 63,810 doses of the Vaccine have been issued for use in the field, and as far as it was possible to trace, the results have been satisfactory. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, C. P., in his letter No. 343-20, dated 11th February * Results arrived at in July 1911.
HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. 243 1910, to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, stated :244 HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. BULLS. Serum and virus after 48 hours. No. Dose of Serum. Dose of Virus. Results. Plains Bulls 1 5 c.c. 0.1 c.c. Died in 50 hours. HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. 245 BUFFALOES. Vaccine, plus virus after four weeks. No. Dose of Vaccine. J)ose of Virus. Results. Buffaloes 1 5 c.c. 0.1 c.c. Died 30 hours. 246 HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. PONIES. Vaccine, plus virus after four weeks. No. Dose of Vaccine. Dose of Virus. Results. Pony 1 5 c.c. 1 c.c. Lived. High temperature reaction for 3 days. HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTIOÆMIA. 247 CONCLUSIONS. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Anti-Serum:PART IV. ANTHRAX. THE PRACTICAL VALUE OF ANTHRAX ANTI-SERUM AND VACCINES. PRELIMINARY REPORT.* BY MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES, M.R.C.V.S., M.A.. D.Sc., I.C.V.D., Imperial Bacteriologist to the Govt. of India. IN almost all infective diseases it is a well established fact that an animal which has recovered from one attack enjoys an immunity against subsequent attacks of the disease. In most instances this refractory state is of comparatively long duration, lasting from some years to a life time. In anthrax, however, the protection conferred by one at- tack persists for a shorter period, probably never longer than nine or twelve months. Certain animals, such as Algerian sheep and white rats, possess a natural immunity to anthrax, but this immunity is not complete. Algerian sheep may suc- cumb to repeated inoculation of the virus and the immunity of the white rat can be overcome by fatigue. Frequently, a species is refractory to the inoculated virus but very susceptible to the spontaneous evolution of the dis- ease. Thus, cattle are susceptible to the disease by inges- tion but resistant to inoculation. The horse is more susceptible than cattle to subcutaneous inoculation but more rarely con- tracts the intestinal form. In India cattle are extremely re- sistant to the inoculated virus but susceptible to natural * Results arrived at in July 1911.
ANTHRAX. 249 infection ; the sheep dies in two to three days from inoculation, but no marked mortality among these animals from natural infection has been recorded in this country. The Indian coun- try-bred horse is more resistant to inoculation than the imported English or Australian horse, and both breeds contract the in- testinal and cutaneous form by natural infection. In France the sheep is most attacked while it generally escapes in Germany and England. Horses resist fairly well in France and Central Europe, while they are most attacked in Russia. Cattle are the usual victims in Germany and Eng- land. IMMUNISATION. I. By means of attenuated cultures. Pasteur (1) was the first to use weakened cultures for the purpose of immunising against anthrax. He prepared his ' first vaccine ' by growing a culture in oxygen at a tempera- ture of 107.6°F. to 109.4°F. for 24 days. A quantity of this culture, the virulence of which is considerably reduced, is first injected and after an interval of 10 to 14 days a culture of con- siderably greater virulence is injected. Many modifications of Pasteur's method of attenuating cultures for the preparation of vaccines have since been prac- tised. Chamberland and Roux (2) weakened the bacilli by chemical agents, such as carbolic acid and bichromate of potash. The Pasteur method of vaccination has been practised for many years in Europe and America with varying success. In France, Austria and Russia, where the vaccines have been most extensively used, the inoculations are said to have produced a marked reduction in the mortality from anthrax and to have been attended with few accidents. From Italy the reports are less favourable. In England McFadyean (3) concluded from a number of inoculation experiments that it would be inadvis- able to introduce the Pasteur method into that country. In America the results of these vaccines have not been
250 ANTHRAX. successful and the method has given place to the use of anti- serum. The principal objections to the use of the Pasteur vaccines are:ANTHRAX. 251 " The germs, reinforced in potency in any such way, are liable to be the starting points for dangerous infections in animals and permanent contamination of soils and water. " Fortunately, an occurrence of this kind is rare, yet, with a wide application of the Pasteurean inoculation, the opportuni- ties also are great, and, with the free sale and distribution of the mitigated virus (Anthrax vaccine), the evil may grow in- definitely. The method departs from the ideal one, aimed at a final extinction of the disease, and accepts, in place, a mere temporary protection of the herd or flock, and, though in this affection eradication cannot always be secured, every effort should be made to gain it and, above all, to prevent an increase of the area of infection." In India the vaccines have not been used, nor is this method of immunisation to be recommended as suitable for this country. The risk of a large mortality following inoculation, of spreading infection and of accidents to man and animals are too serious to be accepted in a country in which the cattle are regarded as sacred and all innovations viewed with suspicion. II. By means of Serum. An anti-anthrax serum can be prepared by immunising animals by means of Pasteur's vaccines and subsequently in- jecting them with large quantities of virulent cultures. Sclavo (7) was the first to prepare an anti-anthrax serum. He made use of sheep for this purpose and obtained a serum which, when tested on rabbits, shewed both prophylactic and curative properties. At a later period he found that the ass yielded a serum of higher potency. From this source he obtain- ed a serum which, in doses of 10 c.c. injected intravenously into rabbits, protected against a simultaneous inoculation of 0.5 c.c. virulent anthrax culture. Marchaux (8) obtained a serum from sheep by injection of cultures up to 300 c.c. at a time, and when the sheep had received in all 1,400 c.c. the serum protected rabbits in doses of 1 c.c. and 2 c.c. from a simultane- ous inoculation of virulent anthrax culture. Active immunity
252 ANTHRAX. in rabbits was not produced by simultaneous inoculation of serum and virus ; but when the serum was injected 10 to 24 hours after the virus the animals survived and were actively immunised. Sclavo recommends subcutaneous injections of the virulent culture ; they are safer and result in the formation of more potent serum than that produced by intravenous in- jections. It is necessary to use virulent strains of anthrax, and cultures should be obtained from different sources. The in- jection of mass cultures from agar, emulsified in a small amount of fluid, is preferable to bouillon cultures. The use of one day old cultures gives results as good as those obtained by the use of older cultures. Sobernheim (9) uses a mixed serum from the horse, cattle and sheep. He recommends the combined use of serum and an attenuated vaccine of about the same strength as Pasteur's second vaccine, injected at the same time, in different parts of the body. Sobernheim claims that this serum protects against both inoculated and ingested anthrax, and that it has slightly curative powers. This method has been practically tested in recent years in several countries with successful results. In South America alone it is recorded that several thousand animals have been treated by this serum and virus without any inoculation mortality and with the result that the disease has disappeared from districts where it formerly was endemic. Carini (10) obtains serum from sheep and the ass and recom- mends as a practical method for protecting cattle, the injection of 20 c.c. of serum followed by active immunisation by means of the Pasteur vaccine. Mendez (11) hyperimmunised horses and prepared a powerful serum, which in doses of 0.5 to 1.0 c.c. protected cattle and sheep and moreover possessed curative properties. The properties on which the value of anti-anthrax serum depends and its mode of action are unknown. Marchaux (8) considers that the serum stimulates phagocytosis. Sobern- heim (9) states that the bactericidal power of the serum of an animal is not increased by immunisation or infection and the
ANTHRAX. 253 existence of an anti-toxin is not recognized. Deutsch (12) found that anthrax anti-serum agglutinates the bacilli strongly and contains an immune body capable of destroying the bacilli in presence of a suitable complement. In the preparation of anthrax anti-serum the animals are bled 14 to 16 days after the last injection. Cattle are bled 6 to 8 litres, horses a similar amount, and sheep 1 to 1½ litres. Two days later a second bleeding of smaller amount can be taken. The serum for use among animals is prepared by centri- fugalisation ; for human use by the clotting method, the serum subsequently being filtered. Carbolic acid 0.5 per cent, is added to preserve the serum. Sobernheim (9) gives the following as his method of test- ing the serum :254 ANTHRAX. of anthrax blood, sterilised by heating for an hour daily for four or five consecutive days at 58° C. The animals which re- ceived subcutaneous injections of this heated blood, survived an injection of virulent anthrax given 14 days later. The in- jection of filtered blood produced no immunity. Law (16) recommends the method of heating the blood from an animal dead from anthrax to 100° C. for half an hour, and then dissolv- ing out the soluble toxins in boiling water. The extracted substance is said to confer a passive immunity after injection of doses of 2 to 4 c.c. Roux and Chamberland (15) used essence of mustard in order to obtain sterilisation without altering the soluble products. They took the heart blood and spleen pulp of an animal dead from the injection of a non-sporulating strain of anthrax and mixed it with a small quantity of water saturated with essence of mustard. After two or three days of contact in a closed vessel, the mixture was submitted to the action of a mercury pump to evaporate all traces of mustard. All the bacilli were killed by this process, and the mixture, inoculated in graduated doses, immunised. Numerous attempts have been made to isolate a toxin from cultures of anthrax. Arloing (17) by decanting the fluid from old cultures obtained a germ-free fluid which immunised sheep. Marmier (18) obtained a toxin from anthrax cultures grown on a special peptone-glycerin medium. Hankin (19), Westbrook (20), Brieger and Frankel (21), Sidney Martin (22), Landi (23), Petermann (24), and others have worked at the same subject and have obtained varying results. Bail (25) immunised animals by means of aggressins obtained from peritoneal exudates caused by the injection of anthrax cultures. SUSCEPTIBILITY OF ANIMALS IN INDIA TO INOCULATED ANTHRAX. The virus used for this experiment was a forty-eight hours culture of a broth growth of anthrax. The original culture
ANTHRAX. 255 was obtained from a bull dead of anthrax. The subcutaneous inoculation of 0.01 c.c. killed the rabbit in from 24 to 48 hours and the same dose was fatal for the guinea-pig in 18 to 24 hours. These statistics have been collected during the past three years from animals used as controls to experiments with anthrax. CATTLE. Bulls of both Plains and Hill breed were used ; also Buffa- loes of Plains breed were tested. Plains Bulls.256 ANTHRAX. No. Age. Virus c.c. Method of In- oculation. Result. 24 4 1 c.c. culture & 3 oz. sodium cinnamate on opposite aide Subcutaneous. Lived. Temperature reaction. 25 3 1 c.c. do. ANTHRAX. 257 Hill Bulls.-(Contd.) No. Age. Virus c.c. Method of In- oculation. Result. 24 5 1 c.c. culture & 3 oz. Sod. cinnamate on opposite side Subcutaneous Died 2nd clay. 25 4 1 c.c. do. 258 ANTHRAX. SUSCEPTIBILITY OF HORSES. Country-bred PoniesANTHRAX. 259 GOATS. 10 6 0.5 c.c. 48 hours old Died 4 days. 9 1 0.5 260 ANTHRAX. The donkey and mule appear to have a high degree of sus- ceptibility. PREPARATION OF ANTI-ANTHRAX SERUM A. The Anti-Anthrax Serum was prepared by injecting bulls subcutaneonsly with increasing amount of. broth cultures of Anthrax incubated at 37° C. for 48 hours. Bull No. 6613. Inoculated with 0.1 c.c. culture 14 days interval. Inoculated with 1 c.c. culture 14 days interval. inoculated with 5 c.c. culture 10 days interval. Inoculated with 100 c.c. culture 10 days interval. Inoculated with 1,000 c.c. culture 15 days interval. Bled 1,000 c.c. for serum. Bull No. 6384. Inoculated with 0.1 c.c. culture 14 days interval. Inoculated with 1 c.c. culture 14 days interval. Inoculated with 500 c.c. culture 10 days interval. Inoculated with 1,000 c.c. culture 14 days interval. Inoculated with 1,500 c.c. culture 15 days interval. Bled 1,000 c.c. for serum 10 days interval. Inoculated with 5,000 c.c. serum 14 days interval. Bled 1,000 c.c. for serum Bull No. 6375. Inoculated with 0.1 c.c. culture 14 days interval. Inoculated with 1 c.c. culture 14 days interval. Inoculated with 500 c.c. culture 10 days interval.
ANTHRAX. 261 Bull No. 6375.262 ANTHRAX. TESTING ANTI-ANTHRAX SERUM A . Sheep. No. Dose of Serum c.c. From Bull No. After injection of c.c. Virus inoc. after hours. Result. Re-tested after days. Result. 1 50 6,613 1,000 24 Lived 30 Lived. 2 50 6,613 1,000 24 Died .. .... 3 50 6,613 1,000 24 Lived 30 Lived. 4 50 6,613 1,000 24 ANTHRAX. 263 The serums tested in these experiments were of low potency. An injection of about 50 c.c. protected against the virus inocu- lated twenty-four hours after the serum. The animals which survived the first inoculation proved to be still resistant when re-tested up to 40 days. In the following experiments the virus was given 24 hours before the serum. Bulls. No. Dose of Serum c.c. From Bull No. After injection of c.c. Virus inoe. before hours. Result. Re-tested after days. Result. 1 50 6,375 4,000 24 Died .. .... 2 50 6,613 1,000 24 No reaction 33 No reaction. 3 25 6,613 1,000 24 33 264 ANTHRAX. Bulls Nos. 7373 & 7374. Inoculated 0.5 c.c. broth culture. Interval 14 days. Inoculated 500 c.c. broth culture. Interval 14 days. Inoculated 500 c.c. broth culture and an emulsion of bacilli from 2 agar flasks (Roux bottles). Interval 14 days. Inoculated 500 c.c. broth culture and an emulsion of bacilli from 4 agar flasks. Interval 14 days. Inoculated 500 c.c. broth culture and an emulsion of bacilli from 8 agar flasks. Interval 15 days. Bled 1,000 c.c. for serum. TESTING OF ANTI-ANTHRAX SERUM B. Serum, plus Virus 24 hours after. Sheep No. Doses. Virus. Result. Re-testcd after days. Result. c.c. c.c. 1 5 0.025 Died 2nd day .. .. 2 5 0.025 ANTHRAX. 265 An injection of 5 c.c. protected bulls against an inoculation of Anthrax 48 hours after the serum. Re-tested a month after the inoculation none shewed any reaction. SERUM, PLUS VIRUS 14 DAYS AFTER. Sheep c.c. 1 25 0.025 Lived. 2 25 0.025 266 ANTHRAX. Sheep I. Immunised. 14 days interval. Inoculated 0.25 c.c. broth culture. 14 days interval. Inoculated 1 c.c. broth culture. 10 days interval. Inoculated 5 c.c. broth culture. 10 days interval. Inoculated 20 c.c. broth culture. 14 days interval. Inoculated 50 c.c. broth culture. 10 days interval. Inoculated 75 c.c. broth culture. 14 days interval. Inoculated 100 c.c. broth culture. 14 days interval. Bled for serum. TESTING OF ANTI-SERUM C. Serum, plns Virus 24 hours alter. No. Serum. Virus. Result. Sheep 1 10 c.c. 0.025 Lived. No reaction. ANTHRAX. 267 An injection of 25 c.c. scrum protected seven sheep out of eight against the virus inoculated 24 hours after. These seven sheep were re-tested 42 days after the first inoculation. Two out of the seven died. TEST OF HORSES, MULES AND DONKEYS. Serum, plus Virus simultaneously. The serum was injected on right side and the virus inocu- lated on the left. The ponies, mules and donkeys were country-bred and varying in weight from 300 to 500lbs. No. Serum. Virus. Result. Pony 1 25 c.c. 0.5 c.c. Lived. No reaction. 268 ANTHRAX. SERUM, PLUS VIRUS AFTER FIVE WEEKS. No. Scrum. Virus. Result. Pony 1 25 c.c. 0.5 c.c Lived. Temperature reaction. ANTHRAX. 269 SERUM, PLUS VIRUS 24 HOURS AFTER. RE-TESTED AFTER SIX WEEKS. No. Serum. Virus. Result. Re-tested after days. Result. c. c. c.c. Sheep 1 10 0.025 Lived. Temp. re- action. 42 Lived. No reaction. 270 ANTHRAX. The serum in doses from 25 to 100 c.c. protects country- bred ponies, mules and donkeys against the virus inoculated simultaneously on the opposite side. An injection of 100 c.c. protected two Australian horses out of three. SERUM, PLUS VIRUS 24 HOURS AFTER. RE-TESTED AFTER SIX WEEKS. No. Serum. Virus. Result, Re-tested after days. Result. c.c. c.c. Pony 1 25 0.5 Lived. Temp. re- action. 42 Lived. No reaction. ANTHRAX. 271 III. The serum protects sheep in a dose of 10 c.c. 25 c.c. gives protection to Country-bred Ponies, Mules and Donkeys. 100 c.c. is necessary for Australian Horses. These doses protect against the virus inoculated 24 to 48 hours before or after the serum, also against simultaneous in- oculation of the virus. As cattle are little susceptible to the inoculated virus, it is difficult to determine the protective dose against natural infection. In the field operations, doses of from 5 c.c. to 20 c.c. have given good results. IV. The immunity following an injection of 25 c.c. serum persists for at least three weeks, in some cases longer. V. The immunity resulting from the combined use of serum and virus, was tested up to six weeks. It probably lasts for some months. RIEFERENCES. (1) Pasteur.PART V. MISCELLANEOUS. " A NOTE ON ELEMENTS RESEMBLING SPIRO- CHÆTES FOUND IN BLOOD PREPARATIONS FROM MAN AND ANIMALS."* BY MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES, M.R C.V S., M.A., D.Sc., I.C.V.D., Imperial Bacteriologist to the Govt. of India. Frequently, on examining blood preparations from animals, cattle, horses, dogs and camels, suffering from Trypanosomiasis, Piroplasmosis and other diseases in which extensive blood al- terations occur, forms very suggestive of spirochætes are met with. These figures are found both in the cytoplasm of the red corpuscles and also free in the plasma. When they are situated within the corpuscle, the red cell stains faintly and the forms are coloured deeply. The corpuscle may be in- tact or partly broken up. Some corpuscles are Poly-chro- matophile. The intracorpuscular figures are of various shapes. Many resemble a loop of ribbon or string, it may be in form of a small circle of 1 to 2µ diameter occupying the centre of the corpuscle. The size of the circle at times attains to the full circumference of the red cell. The contour may be even or irregular. At times the edges of the circle are broken. When this takes place and the broken ends of the circle have reached the periphery of the corpuscle, the whole cell presents a crescent shape appearance with the inner rim of curvature stained deeply. In a few cases I have observed deeply stained spindle- shaped bodies within the corpuscle. I have never seen more * Results arrived at in July 1911.
MISCELLANEOUS. 273 than one figure occupying the same red cell. Many of the forms appear to be leaving the red cell and occupy a position partly in the cell and partly in the plasma. These same figures are seen free in the plasma, Some forms not so frequently seen are very fine thread-like loops in figure of 8, with at times one or more small nodules of deeper colour. The forms usually seen free in the plasma resemble a loop of ribbon or string, lying in the shape of a pessary, sometimes round or oval, frequently the loop is folded irregularly on itself. Other forms which are those most suggestive of spirochætes are seen lying free in the plasma or with one end attached to or lying inside a corpuscle. The body is tapered at both ends, the thicker part of the body lies evenly or in spirals. Many appear like two spirochætes lying closely together and joined at both tapering ends. A few are in form of spindles. All these forms I have frequently observed from blood prep- arations from certain animals. Some of the figures, more especially those contained within the corpuscle did not give the impression that they were connected with any form of para- site. They appeared devoid of structure, or organization. The irregularity of their size, shape, outline, and their general appearance inclined one to the belief that they were due to some alteration in the cytoplasm of the red blood corpuscle. On the question of the forms seen free in the plasma, it was more diffi- cult to arrive at a decision. Their morphology bears a very striking resemblance to that of spirochætes. I made several attempts to study them in hanging drop and fresh preparations, but only twice I was able to find these figures in the fresh state, and their appearance did not assist in coming to a conclusion. They were floating in the serum, with a rolling motion and shewed no spontaneous movements. They might have been dead spirochætes. Lingard(l) in an article on Spirochætosis met with in animals in India describes many similar forms. His plates depict many of the intracorpuscular thread-like figures met with. He considers them distinct endoglobular forms of spirochætes. 18
274 MISCELLANEOUS. During the winter of 1909, when examining blood smears from human patients suffering from a very severe type of malaria, I found occasionally many of these figures to be free in the plasma and in the red cells. Fig. 1 A. shows the forms observed in the blood preparation from an English patient who died from malaria a few days after the blood smear was examined. Fig. 1 B. shows similar figures found in the blood smears from a native suffering from malaria. The malarial Plasmo- dium and flagellate blood platelet are also depicted. From the blood of both these patients guinea-pigs were inoculated with 2 c.c. of blood in 2 c.c. of 1 per cent. Pot. Citrate subcuta- neously. A few days after the inoculation the charts showed a slight rise of temperature. Smear preparations from the blood were made each day. On the third and fourth day and once at a later period of 8th and 10th day forms described in Fig. 1 C. and D. were observed in their blood preparations. The fact that similar figures observed in the blood from human patients were reproduced in guinea-pigs inoculated from human blood, appeared to me to be further evidence that some of these forms were parasitic organisms. I am indebted to Professor Laveran and to Professor Von Prowazek who informed me that they considered all these figures due to a peculiar degeneration of the red corpuscle. In 1905(2) MM. Edm. and Et. Sergent described two kinds of elements, hitherto undescribed, in the blood of a certain number of malarial patients observed by them when studying malaria in Algiers in 1904. The first of these were in forms of rings frequently in figures of eight. They appeared to con- sist of a soft substance and to be devoid of structure. They took on a deep rose tint when stained by the mixture of blue and silver eosin. The maximum length is 10 to 12µ, diameter 8µ, and thickness 0.75µ. These figures they termed " Corps en anneau." The second elements have a same semi-lunar form. They possess no structure and they colour more feebly than the
PLATE XXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A. Figures found in blood smears from an English Patient who died from Malaria, B. Forms observed in blood from a Native suffering from Malaria. C. & D. Forms observed in smears from Guinea-pigs which had been inoculated with blood from a Malaria Patient.
MISCELLANEOUS. 275 "Corps en anneau." Both are met with in the same preparation. The authors found them only in the blood of malarial patients and in certain animals suffering from anæmia-producing diseases. Brumpt(3) calls attention to somewhat similar elements which he observed in blood preparations from malarial patients. These figures stain deep violet by the mixture of Blue Borrel Eosin. They are contained within the red cells in form generally of a ring about 0?5µ thick, without double contour. The ring may be folded on itself in. figure of eight or in irregular loops. A single blood cell may contain several. The author thought at first that these bodies were identical with the '' Corps en pessaire " described by the Brothers Sergent. But these " Corps en pessaire " have a double contour and are often free in the plasma. Brumpt considers these figures to have the same significance as the basophilic granulations probably pro- duced by the specific toxins of the Plasmodium præcox and the Plasmodium falciparum. Instead of remaining isolated these granules become grouped and take the form of a ring which the author terms " Anneaux basophiles." Brumpt also des- cribes the giant cells noted by Stephens and Christopher ; also '' Corps en demi-lune '' described by Ed. and Et. Sergent. Certain red cells present in their cytoplasm one or more vacuoles ; these vacuoles are generally at the pole, they increase in size and compress the cytoplasm which takes the form of a " demi- lune," of which the corners are still united by a fine band. Sometimes this fine band is broken in the preparation of the blood smear. Brumpt agrees with the opinion expressed by Stephens and Christopher that the forms of " demi-lune " are produced by modifications in the red cells. He does not consider that they are artefacts of preparation. Laveran(4) observed the " Corps en pessaire " in bovine blood. He does not consider that these bodies are special to malaria blood. He is inclined to believe that they are mechani- cal deformations of the blood cells from anæmic patients. They are often found in one preparation and absent in several other
276 MISCELLANEOUS. preparations from the same blood, and also they are much more numerous in certain parts of the preparation than in others. C. Nicolle and Comte(5) also attribute the formation of these bodies to an artefact of preparation and to excessive pres- sure while drawing the blood smear. MM. Edm. et Et. Sergent(6) do not agree with this view. They have found these bodies in preparation made with the greatest possible precautions and where the blood smear was drawn over the slide by means of cigarette paper. Brumpt holds the opinion that these figures are due to blood modifi- cations caused by toxic secretions and the destruction of the red blood corpuscles by the parasites of malaria. It appears to me to be without doubt that the figures des- cribed by the Sergents, Brumpt and those noted in this paper- are produced by modifications in the red blood corpuscles, under the influence of certain diseases, such as malaria, trypano- somiasis, piroplasmosis, and other anæmic producing affections and also by hæmolytic agents. It is not, however, clear that the figures do not exist in the circulating blood, and that they are produced from the altered corpuscles by mechanical destruc- tion during the process of the preparation of blood smears. On two occasions I was able to find when examining blood in a hanging drop and other fresh preparations, ribbon-like bodies floating in the plasma, which were undoubtedly the same as the figure of eight and " Corps en anneaux '' seen in stained preparations. LITERATURE. (1). Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science, Vol. II, 1907. (2). Société de Biologie, 14th June 1905. Annales de L'Institut Pasteur, 1905. (3). Société de Pathologic Exotique, 8th April 1905. (4). Loco Citato. (5). Loco Citato. (6). Société de Biologie, 29th July 1905.
