REPORT ON THE METROPOLITAN HORSE FAIRS AND DISTRICT HORSE SHOWS OF 1892-93.
REPORT ON THE METROPOLITAN HORSE FAIRS AND DISTRICT HORSE SHOWS OF 1892-93. Following the lines of the reports of former years, the fairs and shows held in each province during 1892-93 have been reviewed in alphabetical order, and appendices are attached showing2 Batesar Horse Fair. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, in reporting on this fair, notes: " The fair was advertised in our list to commence on the 1st and end on the 10th Novem- ber 1892, but owing to instructions contained in Revenue Department Notification No. 2354/1-490, dated the 12th September, paragraph 7, ordering the prizes to be awarded on the day before bathing day, the fair was practically over on the 7th, the day of my arrival. I was not aware of this order, and had written to the Collector of Agra informing him that, having been ordered to attend the Garhmuktesar Fair till the 5th, I could not arrive at Batesar till the 7th, and suggesting that the Judging Committee should commence work on the 8th. He, of course, under the circumstances, was unable to accede to my wishes. In my experience of these fairs, the bathing and other religious ceremonies have little, if anything, to do with business transactions, and as a rule much more buying and selling is done after bathing day than before. Thus, if the prizes are awarded at an early date, many horses are purchased as remounts afterwards and stand no chance of a prize. I would respectfully suggest that on future occasions the date for the judging and awarding of prizes be left to the Collector of the district or officer in charge of the fair. " This subject has been placed before the authorities, and it has now been decided that No. VII of the " Rules for the guidance of Judging Committees of Metropolitan Horse Fairs " be altered as suggested above. The number of remounts purchased at the fair, as given by the Collector in his report returns received from purchasing officers, was 145. Bulandshahr Horse Show. The show commenced on the 25th of February and terminated on the 2nd March, when the Collector, Mr. Porter, presented the prizes to successful competitors in open Darbar. The total number of stock present was 1,055, of which 453 belonged to zemindars and 602 to dealers. Last year's total was 1,073, consisting of 668 the property of zemindars and 405 of dealers. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department (Veterinary-Major Rayment), states : " In last year's report I noted that the show had been exhibiting symptoms of decadence, but that owing to the interest shown by Mr. Punnett, the Collector, and other district officials, it appeared to have recovered some of its lost ground. Since then we have to regret the loss of a zealous encourager of horse-breeding in the death of Mr. Punnett. His successor, I am glad to state, quite appreciates the import- ance of horse-breeding and the great stimulus given to it by the annual show. " And in paragraph 5 of his report he states: " The names of the members of the Judging Com- mittee and the roll of stock awarded prizes will be found in the usual appendices. It will be noticed that owing to the accidental presence of such good judges of horse flesh as Captain Gordon, Military Department, Surgeon-Colonel Blennethassett, and the kind co-operation of Captain Westlake and Veterinary-Lieutenant Walker of the Remount Department, we had a very strong Committee. But I must again earnestly reiterate my request for a properly constituted Committee of cavalry and artillery officers, with an officer of experience from the Army Veterinary Department, to attend Aligarh, Buland- shahr, and Muzaffarnagar shows. At present the Committees at these places are com- posed of any one obtainable, frequently of gentlemen with little, if any, experience, and it is only by chance and the courtesy of officers attending shows on leave or to purchase horses that a really competent Committee can be formed." In paragraph 6 of his report, Veterinary-Major Rayment notes that the 31 head of stock purchased by the Remount Agent for Government were, in his opinion, a very pro- mising lot of young horses; and the two by " Jala," a country-bred stallion (the produce of a Government Norfolk Trotter stallion out of a branded mare by another Norfolk Trotter stallion) were very good, adding: " If country-bred stallions can produce stock showing as such quality and substance as these, and one other I noticed in the show, we shall be justi- fied in employing them very largely in our future operations." The remounts purchased for Bengal Cavalry and Imperial State troops are reported by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department as of a serviceable stamp, and well adapted for the services for which they were purchased. Captain Westlake, Army Remount Department, notes on the young stock purchased by him thus: " An improvement on those purchased last year. A most excellent lot of young stock, the best I have purchased this year, and the largest number at any fair. Those brought for my inspection with a view to purchase were a very fair lot, and those actually bought are, in my opinion, taking them all round, a good lot." Of the several classes, the branded mares and fillies, the yearling colts, and two-year old fillies were, in his opinion, " perhaps the best." At the ploughing competition, as at Aligarh, mares with ploughs from the Govern- ment Instruction Farm, Babugarh, competed with much success.
3 The following prize winners were awarded bridles :4 The British Cavalry and Native Cavalry remount prize winners are reported as hav- ing been of good stamp, the two-year old geldings as moderate, and the one-year old geldings as very fair. Only three mules competed, and all obtained prizes; and two pony mares out of eight competing obtained awards. Bridles were awarded to the undermentioned prize winners :5 " For the 8th Bengal Cavalry, nine horses were bought at an average price of Rs. 260 ; highest price Rs. 292, lowest Rs. 222. No remarks are offered by the purchasing officer. "The horse fair of 1893 was a bigger fair than for many years past. More horses attended and better prices were obtained. Average of five years, 18886 Adverting to Mr. White's suggestion "that one and the same Committee of selected officers be appointed to judge at all the horse fairs in the provinces, their reports would then possess considerable value to Government, as they would have opportunities of comparison which they do not enjoy at present." I have suggested on more than one occasion to the Government of India that a committee of officers and gentlemen selected for their well known sound judgment of horse stock generally, and not of one breed of class of stock, should be chosen and appointed as judges to attend at all horse fairs and shows where Imperial prizes are offered and distributed. The verdict of such a Com- mittee would be of great value, as it would enable the Government to obtain a sound opinion as to the comparative merits of the several classes of horse stock found in the different horse-breeding districts of India. This subject I will again refer to in the summary at the end of this report. Muzaffarnagar Horse Show. This show began on the 23rd and ended on the 28th of March 1893. Seven hundred and ninety-four head of stock were present against 739 in 1892, showing an increase of 55. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, in his report on the show, notes: "A special Judging Committee selected from officers of the Meerut garrison attended. I am much pleased to find that Government has decided to send independent Committees of military officers to the shows, and trust that next year similar Committees may be detailed to attend the Aligarh and Bulandshahr Shows. I would, however, recommend that a Veterinary Officer be sent as a fourth member. As it is, I have on these occasions to judge for soundness, and would much prefer to have an independent professional man to do so." The prizes were distributed by the Collector on the last day of the show, and in addressing the Native gentlemen and zemindars in Darbar, he explained the advantages of employing brood mares and other horse stock in agriculture, and announced that district stallions were shortly to be provided for unbranded mares, and that good effects would be produced on horse stock of the district by the infusion of Arab blood thus rendered available. Bridles were awarded to successful competitors as follows:7 " It is to be regretted that no rolls of the remounts purchased have been received in this office from the district authorities. The Secretary, Municipal Committee, Amritsar, reports that the remount purchasing officers had left the fair before the lists could reach. In future officers attending the fair will be requested by advertisement to intimate to me particulars of their purchases before they leave Amritsar. " The statement showing the competition, the names of the sires of prize winners, and tabulated form are herewith enclosed. Out of Rs. 683 shown as prizes awarded, Rs. 448 were paid by this Department and the balance by the Local Board. " As a rule the classes did not fill well, and many of the animals which competed were in low condition. The class for mules of any age was decidedly the best. It was surprising that nearly all were two years old. " A few young branded mares were purchased by officers for remount purposes. This is greatly to be regretted. It is, I believe, also strictly against regulations8 " The Waziris also came in greater numbers than last year, the number of animals brought in by them being 105. Some cavalry sowars joined in the sports. Among the official visitors may be included the names of Mr. F. B. Drage, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, and Lieutenant Wake, 10th Bengal Lancers. "As was to be expected, the number of animals brought in has nearly trebled, and it is believed the fair will gain still more popularity in future years. The number of animals selected for competition is a little above 42 per cent. of the total number brought in. A much larger number might have been fairly admitted to the competition, so far as soundness is concerned ; but as the prizes were comparatively few, it was desirable to keep down the number of selected competitors. "Of the animals exhibited, the branded mares in foal formed a very large class. Class I B was also a useful class of branded mares with well developed foals at foot. Class II (branded fillies) was a very useful class of well grown fillies. Class II A was a fair class. Class III B was an extremely good class. Yearlings formed a very nice class, were well grown and cared for. Class III C (unbranded mares and fillies) was the largest in the show. These were included in the prize competition, as horse breeding operations have hitherto been confined to the Isakhel and Mianwali tahsils alone, and people from the other tahsils had brought in the greater number of animals. "A stallion for the Bannu tahsil of the district was much wanted, and one Govern- ment stallion was received in December 1892, and accommodated in the stable built for the purpose by the Municipal Committee of Edwardesabad. The Superintend- ent, Civil Veterinary Department, has promised to send a zilladar to the district, and this additional encouragement will, it is believed, help to increase the branded stock. "The Waziri class contained a good many nice horses. Seventy-four mares were presented for branding, and of these 31 were branded and the rest rejected, being under age or unfit for branding. "Of the 96 prizes, 27 worth Rs. 254 in all were won by Malik Yar Mahomed Khan of Kalabagh, and 11 prizes worth Rs. 112 fell to the lot of Abdul Rahman Khan and Mahomed Newaz Khan, the two brothers of Isakhel. These gentlemen brought in a great number of animals at considerable expense and trouble; but it must be borne in mind that they have the free services of a stallion maintained at Government expense, while their brethren in the upper part of the district have hitherto not had this privilege. "Five horses and 3 geldings were sold to the Cavalry for remounts, the average price realized being Rs. 194. The highest price realized was Rs. 262 and the lowest Rs. 149. In addition to these, 10 animals were sold to the public at an average price of Rs. 93, the highest and lowest rates being respectively Rs. 310 and Rs. 50. "The management of the horse show was placed in the hands of Mr. Bridges, Dis- trict Judge, and to the interest which he took in it is due much of the success. Mr. Close, District Superintendent of Police, gave much assistance and made excellent police arrangements. I desire to thank Captain Murray and the other officers of the garrison who acted as Judges, and Mr. Drage, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, who gave all possible help in judging and in persuading the owners to have their mares branded. "Mr. Drage expressed himself well pleased with the show of horses, and considered that the amount of prize money awarded was very small considering the quality and number of horses exhibited. I trust that for next year's horse show the Government will be able to largely increase the grant. In this year, the second of the show, the number of horses brought for exhibition has grown from 405 to 1,150. This increase promises well for the future, and I think that the Bannu Horse Show may now be considered as well deserving of encouragement." The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department (Veterinary-Lieutenant Drage), in his report on the show, notes: " Remembering that this is the second horse show held in Bannu, it is impossible to speak too highly of it. There was an immense increase in the number of animals attending over last year, and all the zemindars seemed very keen, and took the greatest interest in everything connected with the show. " All the classes filled well, especially so when it is remembered that this is the first year Government money has been given in prizes. " The extra class for unbranded mares was an enormous one, and the judges had the greatest difficulty in selecting the 12 best animals. They were chiefly large roomy mares, with lots of bone, and, considering the numbers, remarkably sound. Thorough-breds and Arabs should nick well with these mares, the Norfolk Trotters being kept for those districts where the mares are smaller. " I was able to brand several of these mares in the afternoon after the judging. " No British Remount Officer attended the show, but I believe several animals were purchased after the judging for the Punjab Cavalry. " I would strongly urge that more Government money be given in prizes another year, as I consider it has a great future before it in horse-breeding if properly encour- aged by Government. In fact, although it is the first year that the show has been
9 recognised by Government, I consider it far better, from a horse-breeding point of view, than many of the older shows. " In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity of thanking the Deputy Commis- sioner, Mr. Anderson, for the great interest he is taking in horse-breeding; also Mr. Bridges, Assistant Commissioner, who had the arranging and management of the whole show. In fact the great success achieved, I consider, was due to the last mentioned officer." It is very gratifying to find that this show promises to become very important in re- gard to the development of horse-breeding and the affording of a market to the owners of horse stock. The sum of Rs. 400 has been sanctioned by the Government of India for the next show to be held from 26th to 28th February 1894. Delhi Horse Show. This show was opened on the 7th and terminated on the 11th February 1893. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, notes: " Five hundred and forty- one (541) head of stock were present against 534 last year. Of these 84 were the pro- perty of zemindars, the balance belonging to dealers. Last year 96 were of the former class. "No remounts were purchased for Government. Seven were purchased for the 5th Bengal Cavalry, which I considered quite up to the average. "As was the case last year, many of the zemindar stock was from Meerut, Gurgaon, Bulandshahr, &c. "I do not think this show is sufficiently promising to warrant any further grant of money from Government. The district is a bad one for breeding, and at present the people do not take much interest in horses." The Deputy Commissioner, R. Clarke, Esq., C. S., reports : " The whole of the arrange- ments in connection with the fair were most satisfactory, more so than on previous occasions, and Sheikh Nujmuddin, Tehsildar of Delhi, is deserving of the greatest credit for the arrangements made. He was ably assisted by Rai Bahadur Rughnath Singh." The Municipal Committee contributed Rs. 1,400 for the expense of the fair. The District Board sanctioned Rs. 1,500, and the Imperial Government granted Rs. 225. The total thus amounted to Rs. 3,125. The money allotted as prizes for horse stock was Rs. 1,300. The Deputy Commissioner in his report states: "Five hundred and forty-one horses attended the fair against 534 in the previous year, an increase of 7. These figures show an advance on those of the years 1888-89 and 1889-90. Also of the 541 animals exhibited, 84 belonged to agriculturists, 180 to native horse dealers, and 277 to horse dealers of foreign countries. "One hundred horses were sold for Rs. 20,199 as against 85 horses sold for Rs. 16,042 in the previous year10 " During the show, the Remount Officers, the Officer Commanding the 2nd Punjab Cavalry, and a purchasing officer for Native State Cavalry purchased many extremely well grown animals. Those obtained by the first mentioned officer were chiefly two years old by the Thorough-bred English stallion 'Gerald.' This horse seems to get remarkably fine stock, many of the prize winners being by him. " Arrangements had been made during the show days for the accommodation and treat- ment of sick animals, a tent having been pitched at some considerable distance from the show ground and an enclosure made to prevent other horses from mixing with those under treatment. " It would be advisable when framing the rules for horse shows in the future to define what is meant by a yearling, a two-year old, &c., as at the show under report one of the Committee maintained that a yearling meant any animal between 1 and 12 months; another between 6 and 18 months ; another 12 and 24 months." It has been explained in the rules for the guidance of Judging Committees issued this year how to classify yearlings and other young stock. The classes of branded mares and fillies are reported by Mr. Drage to have been a very large and good class ; the other fillies all very useful and well grown. The British remounts purchased " should make excellent remounts, chiefly those by Thorough-bred English " Gerald." All the other classes were considered by him good, except the pony mares for mule-breeding; and with regard to the satisfactory show of geldings, Mr. Drage remarks: " Great credit is due to the salutri. Hardly an entire horse in the show. " A few years ago it was the custom of all horse-breeders in this district to destroy their young entire horse stock a few days after birth, as they found the keeping of entire colts irksome; it was suggested by Special Stud Commissioners in 1874 that a salutri should be provided them, so that their colts might be castrated, and thus the profits arising from the sale of geldings might be secured to breeders. The results in this direction, as noted in this report, are most satisfactory, and the chiefs at the recent Dera Ghazi Khan fair expressed their gratitude to the authorities for having pointed out the benefits arising from castrating young colts. More are now castrated in this than in any other district in the Punjab, and great credit is due to the head salutri (Mahomed Suleman) (originally provided by Special Stud Commissioners) and his assistants for the zealous manner in which they performed their duties. In the remarks by purchasing officers on the show with regard to the class of re- mounts obtained, Captain R. Broome, Army Remount Department, notes: "Quite up to the average," and with regard to the horses exhibited for sale as compared with other fairs and with former years, he records: "Undoubtedly the best in the Punjab, and per- haps superior to former years." He also suggests "that a suitable spot be roped off for Remount Agents to examine stock in, and that a measuring place be built therein." Mr. Drage, in concluding his report on the fair, states: "It is greatly to be regretted that the Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Younghusband, is shortly leaving the district, as he has done an immense amount of good towards horse-breeding." In Mr. Dames, C.S., who has, since Mr. Drage wrote the above remarks, been appointed Deputy Commissioner of Dera Ghazi Khan District, the Civil Veterinary Depart- ment will secure a most hearty co-operator in horse and mule-breeding industries. Dera Ismail Khan. This horse show took place from the 26th February to 1st March 1893. This being the first at which Government have given money toward the prizes, the number of animals attending was small. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, states: " I think it would be advisable to continue the same amount towards the prizes, viz., Rs. 250 for one more year, when it will be seen if any improvement has been made in horse-breeding in the district." He adds : " It is to be regretted that breeders did not seem to understand the rules of the show, many leaving their young stock produce certificates at home. I am therefore unable to give the names of sires of prize winners." The Director of Land Records and Agriculture (E. B. Francis, Esq., C.S.), in his letter No. 676 of 20th April 1893 to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, kindly notes: " I will request the Deputy Commissioner to arrange, so that next year the zemindars may bring their certificates, so that the names of sires of prize winners may be known." The Deputy Commissioner, L. W. King, Esq., C.S., who takes great interest in horse- breeding, and is most desirous to develop the industry in the district, in his report No. 430-148 of 4th April 1893, notes as follows :11 " Owing to the great inconvenience experienced last year from the heat, it was decid- ed to hold the show earlier this year; but there is no doubt that the attendance in 1892 was increased owing to the fact that the Baisakhi mêla was going on at the time. Consequently there has been a decrease this year in the number of animals attending the show, the actual number of all animals being 205 (a decrease of 55 on last year), and the total number of competitors 105. " There is considerable apathy among the zemindars of this district in the matter of bringing in their horses, and one reason given by them this year was that their animals were being fattened on khasil, and that people did not care to bring them to the fair, and so interrupt the process of fattening. " I hope that this ridiculous prejudice may in time be overcome, but it may be advisable to hold the fair a little later next year as a concession to them. There was a marked absence of horses from Tank and Kulachi, though these tahsils certainly contain some stock worth showing, and I think the reason was that sufficient pressure was not put on the leading men to set the example and come in ; " and adds : " The old practice of allowing unbranded mares to be covered by a Government stallion, with practically no check on their soundness or fitness for breeding, has now been put a stop to. The number of branded mares has been raised from 99 to 140 during the past year, and it is now proposed by the District Board to purchase a district stallion, for which Rs. 800 have been allotted, for the use of mares which are not large enough to be branded. There has been some correspondence with the Civil Veterinary Department about these measures, and it does not seem necessary to discuss them further in this report." I am enquiring for a stallion of the kind required by the District Board, and hope to select one suitable for the mares of the district. Two remounts only were purchased, both under three years of age, at prices of Rs. 200 and Rs. 165. The entries generally were very small and wanting in quality and substance, but branded mares' class was good. With regard to the mare stock, Mr. Drage reports : "During the time I attended the show, I was able to brand 16 fairly useful mares; but, as may be seen from my report upon horse-breeding in the district submitted to you under cover of this office No. 273-G. S., dated 22nd December 1892, zemindars still have the greatest objection to branding. As long as this feeling prevails, I am afraid very little good will be done for horse-breeding." It may be hoped and expected that in time owners will cease hesitating to have their mares branded. In the Dera Ghazi Khan Dis- trict at first objection was raised; but when owners found the advantage of having their good mares branded, so as to become eligible for Government sires, they were very glad to accept of the brand, and are now clamorous to have their mares branded for Government sires. Mr. Drage, in concluding his report on the show, states: " I would like to remark the great interest Mr. H. W. Gee, District Judge, takes in horse-breeding. This officer throughout the whole show worked indefatigably, and was of the greatest possible assist- ance to me in getting zemindars to allow me to brand their mares." Mr. E. B Francis notes: " Horse-breeding in Dera Ismail Khan is in an early stage, and requires fostering. I beg to support the recommendations of the local officers and of the Civil Veterinary Superintendent for the continuance of the Government grant of Rs. 250 for prizes." The sum of Rs. 250 has been granted by the Imperial Government for prizes at the next show. Gujrat Horse Show. This horse show came off on the 26th and 27th of March 1893. The Deputy Commissioner reports as follows :12 " Veterinary assistants were in charge of the space allotted for the isolation and treatment of sick animals, and an assistant in charge of the temporary hospital opened on the fair ground; but fortunately the health of the animals was good, and no admission took place. " The ground on which the fair is held affords ample space, is well wooded, and has a large tank with easy slopes leading into it. " The principal causes leading to the small number of animals that changed hands, viz., 175, and the prices realized, amounting in the aggregate to Rs. 21,706-8-0, are ( 1 ), as the figures themselves indicate, cheapness when compared with the sales and amount realized in the previous year ; (2) the non-presence of a large number of traders, who, satisfied with, or having completed their requirements from, fairs held at the Sialkot and Jhelum districts, did not come in13 " Only 30 animals changed hands; but of these 15 were purchased as remounts for British and Native Cavalry. " There was very little private business done. But as Rs. 300 were given in prizes by Government, Rs. 938 by the District Board, and as good prices were given for remounts, and as some 25 mares were branded, the fair was classed as successful. " The liberality of the prizes astonished the zemindars, and I confidently believe that next year, and in subsequent ones, there will be good horse shows at Hansi if the spirit of horse-breeding is carefully fostered by local officers." The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Veterinary-Major G. J. R. Rayment, records his opinion thus: "The number of animals attending was 414. The classification and numeration of stock were imperfectly carried out, as the show being a new one, the Native officials in charge were unacquainted with the method of taking the number entering for sale or competition. " I have much pleasure in reporting that I consider the show to be an unqualified success. The number attending for a first attempt was large, and the interest taken by all classes, European and Native officials, private individuals and zemindars, was most gratifying. " A considerable amount of prejudice has always existed in the Hissar District against branding mares. It was pleasing to find that a reward of Rs. 5 for every mare branded in the show so far overcame this that 61 animals were brought forward, of which I branded 24. " The liberality, too, of the District Board in allotting Rs. 1,000 for prizes, which, sup- plemented by Rs. 300 from Government, brought the total of money for prizes up to Rs. 1,300, had an extremely good effect. It enabled the Judging Committee to award large amounts and several prizes to a class deemed worthy of encouragement, and I feel convinced that this liberality will result in a much larger attendance and a still keener competition next year. " The branded mares were a fair class, not, of course, comparable to those seen in the judging ring at Nauchandi or Aligarh, but still an useful stamp, which, mated to Arabs or Thorough-bred English, should produce good stock. " The stock, chiefly by 'Seoni' Arab, were also good, though the majority were, as might be anticipated, too small for British remounts. " During the show, I found a country-bred Chestnut stallion 14-1, of unusually good stamp, which, I am pleased to say, was purchased for a district stallion by the Deputy Commissioner. " Three bridles were distributed to successful competitors. " The prizes were distributed by the Deputy Commissioner in Darbar on the after- noon of the 15th October, who addressed the assembled zemindars, pointing out to them the profits to be made from horse and mule-breeding, and the erroneousness of their belief that, by having their mares branded, they rendered them liable to seizure by Government. " The arrangements of the show were satisfactory, and, considering that it was the first held at Hansi, every detail worked with wonderful smoothness. " In conclusion, I beg to thank Captain Parsons, the Deputy Commissioner, for the keen interest he takes in horse and mule-breeding, and his unfailing courteousness and readiness to accept professional advice and assistance in veterinary matters connected with the show." The unqualified success of this first exhibition is doubtless due to the great interest shown by Captain Parsons in the horse and mule-breeding industries; and I fully concur in his remark that next year, and in subsequent ones, there will be good horse shows at Hansi if the spirit of horse-breeding is carefully fostered by local officers. The thanks of the Civil Veterinary Department to Captain Parsons are here recorded for his hearty co-operation in inaugurating the Hansi show, and proving that it will be supported and considered a boon to horse-breeders by affording them a market for their young stock. Jallalabad Show. This show was held from the 16th to the 18th of January 1893. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department (Mr. Drage), in his report, notes : " The show may be considered a great success in every way, the classes filling well, espe- cially the class for branded mares and fillies. All the animals were in very good condi- tion, and gave me the idea of being well cared for." The Deputy Commissioner (M. L. Dames, Esq.), remarks that the fair was a very successful one, is extremely popular, and is doing a great deal to spread horse-breed- ing in the Ferozepore District.
14 The Commissioner (G. Smyth, Esq.), states that he is again glad to note that the fair has been a success; also that the Government contribution has, as recommended by Colonel Hutchinson last year, been raised to Rs. 1,000, and that Rai. Maya Das has endea- voured to maintain the popularity of the fair on the side of the Nawab of Mamdote. Mr. Drage adds : " I would like to remark that the great success of the show was chiefly due to Rai Maya Das, Extra Assistant Commissioner, who takes the greatest possible interest in everything connected with horse-breeding. The brood mares were remarkably fine animals, and it will be seen from the statement attached that a great num- ber competed." I was present at the show, and I can fully endorse all that has been recorded with regard to the success of the gathering, and the zealous manner in which Rai Maya Das used his best endeavours in managing the show arrangements, and in furthering horse- breeding interests in the district. The remounts purchased were of good stamp. Mr. Dames remarks: "Although there were very few purchases for military purposes, yet private dealers came to the show, and the amount that changed hands in buying and selling animals at the fair was no less than Rs. 1,00,643 against 78,842 of last year." In addition to Rs. 1,000 awarded in Imperial prizes, the Nawab's contributions of Rs. 400 for horses and Rs. 200 for cattle were likewise awarded by the same Committee that were judges of the Government horse show, and who were assisted by Native members in selecting prize winners in the cattle. The usual horse and other races were held to popularize the fair, as was the custom during the time of the late Nawab, who always took keen interest in such matters, and prizes were awarded out of the Mamdote contribution. The sheds erected on the show ground last year were again made available for shelter for the animals, and the estate sold fodder to the horse-breeders and others who brought animals to the show at a considerably cheaper rate than was current in the bazar. Thus every proper effort was made to popularise the show. Jhang Horse Show. This show was held on the 22nd and 23rd February 1893. The following remarks by the Deputy Commissioner (Kazi Mohamed Aslam Khan, C.M.G.) are extracted verbatim from his very full report on the show: " The number of animals that attended this show was 836 as compared with 642 in the preceding year, an increase of 149 animals. This increase may rightly be attributed to the fact that the zemindars of the Jhang District have now realized the benefits of the horse-breeding operations, and are beginning to take greater interest than on previous occasions. Besides, the zemindars were induced to bring in more animals on the promise of liberal prizes, which, to some extent, I managed to have from the District Funds. The zemindars in this district, though, have great love to improve their stock of horses, yet abstain from attending the shows, and, if given hopes of prizes, will come readily. " The number in class I A, branded mares, served by Government stallions within 12 months of show, has considerably increased, viz., from 19 in the last year to 43 in the year under report. This remarkable increase is due to the larger number of mares branded at the last horse show, which were served by both Government and District Board stallions. " The number in class I B, branded mares with foal at foot, fell from 3 in the last year to one in the year under review, and this may be attributed to the fact that the zemin- dars had not their mares served by heavy horses before, and now that an Arab horse has been received many mares have been covered, and the exhibit under this class next year may be anticipated more. " The number in class II, branded fillies not in foal, has increased from 5 in last year to 9 in the year under report, and also in class VII, geldings two years old, from 4 to 7 and is satisfactory. " The number in class V has decreased from 14 yearling colts and 7 yearling fillies in the previous year to 7 and 2 respectively in the year under report. " There is a great falling off in the number of donkey stallions from 8 to 3 and donkey mares from 6 to 2 as compared with the year under report, and no proper reason for this decrease is forthcoming. The fluctuation is ordinary. " The other classes do not show any important variations. " Generally speaking, the stock presented was as good as reported last year, especially the mares in class I. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, will report in detail as to the quality of the stock exhibited in each class. " With reference to Rule 13 of the rules for the guidance of Judging Committee of district horse shows, the Committee exercised discretion in making certain alterations in
15 the prizes allotted for each class, and the total sum of Rs. 400 sanctioned by Government, together with Rs. 271 granted by the District Board, Jhang, was awarded. Thus a total sum of Rs. 671 was awarded in this year against Rs. 441 distributed in the previous year. It is hoped that the grant of prizes more freely, which has been done in the present as well as in the previous year, will make the horse show more popular than it has hitherto been. " Though a very large number of mares was present for branding, only 17 were select- ed and branded by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. The number branded last year was 34. " The two snaffle bridles sent by the Inspector-General of Civil Veterinary Depart- ment were given to those horse-breeders who brought a larger number of animals and received prizes in several classes. " No remounts were purchased this year by the Government officer, as the remount officers arrived at a time when a large number of animals was removed from the fair ground : 29 horses, 1 mare, and 3 mules were purchased by dealers at the show at a cost of Rs. 31,78-8-0. Last year the dealers purchased 4 horses, 3 mares, and I mule for Rs. 1,173. The highest price paid this year was Rs. 255, the lowest Rs. 38 ; the average is Rs. 111. Last year the figures were Rs. 4,00,65 and 147 respectively. The fees realized on the sales amounted to Rs. 73-10-3 as compared with Rs. 23-7-9 recovered in the last year. Thus there was an increase of Rs. 50-2-6 over the receipts of the previous year, which is very satisfactory. " The statement showing the income and expenditure of the horse show referred to in the Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab's circular letter No. 2, dated 23rd February 1892, will be sent hereafter direct to that officer as soon as accounts are receive- ed from Tahsil Jhang. " As usual, the prizes were distributed to the winners in open Darbar, which was well attended by the Darbaris, Kursi Nashins, and other gentry and public of the district. Before the prizes were awarded, the Deputy Commissioner made a speech, in which the advantages of horse-breeding were fully explained to the audience. Complimentary ' parwanas ' were also given to the zemindars who had assisted in bringing more animals at the show. The show ended with horse and camel races, tent-pegging, lemon- cutting, tilting the ring, tug of war, and other sports, of which the people of the district are very glad. " If a complete success of the show is desired, I beg to suggest that prizes should be awarded freely for several years to come, after which the horse-owner will, I am sure, learn to appreciate the objects in view. "In conclusion, I record my thanks to Resaldar Partab Singh, Extra Assistant Com- missioner, who acted as Secretary at the show, and gave prompt assistance in the manage- ment." The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department (Mr. Drage), notes : " Not having attended the show before, I am unable to compare it with previous ones ; but, considering the small number competing in each class (with the exception of branded mares), I can hardly report favorably on it. " The class for branded mares filled well, 45 competing. Many of these were useful animals and should mate well with an Arab, as the majority were lacking in quality; all the remaining classes were very poorly represented. In the class "for branded mares with foal at foot" only one competed. "The District Board gave Rs. 205 towards the prizes, but with such poor competition it was found difficult to distribute the money. " I was able to brand 17 mares during the two days I attended the show, all of which were useful animals with plenty of bone and substance, but possibly lacking in quality. " In conclusion, I would beg to recommend that the same amount be given by Govern- ment in prize money for the year 1893-94." I have attended this show in former years, and regret to have to report that, compared with other district horse shows, that of Jhang has failed to develop, as it might have been expected to. In the district are very good horse stock and good brood mares; but the owners generally have shown apathy with regard to attending the gathering; moreover, stallions of the district have not been duly utilized, and owners, when enjoined to send their branded mares to the Government stallions, have raised objections to the class of horse supplied. To meet their wishes, other stallions have been provided; but still there has been manifest want of appreciation of the Government sires ; and on one occasion when I attended this show, 1 was informed that many of the branded mare-owners prefer- red to employ country-bred stallions. When Colonel Harcourt was Deputy Commission- er of this district, the Jhang show was a success, and horse-breeding was rapidly developing. Since that period it has been on the wane, and for the last few years the question has arisen whether it be advisable to continue granting Imperial prizes here, or to send such monies to other more successful districts. Judging from the report on the last show above quoted, it is evident that the present Deputy Commissioner
16 (Kazi Mohamed Aslam Khan, C.M.G.) is very desirous of fostering and developing horse and mule breeding industries, and it may be hoped that under this officer the district will show improvement. The sum of Rs. 250 has been again sanctioned by the Government of India for Impe- rial prizes, and local and district funds have subscribed Rs. 300 for prizes to be awarded at the next show. The Director of Land Records and Agriculture, Punjab (E. B. Francis, Esq., C.S.), in forwarding the report on the Jhang Horse Show, states: "The Deputy Commissioner recommends that Rs. 700 maybe granted as prizes at the next show. The landholders of the Jhang District are unadvanced in their ideas on horse-breeding, and require much practical instruction to enable them to appreciate the superiority of the Government sires over their country-bred animals. I would therefore recommend a liberal allowance of prizes for some years." Kurnal Horse Show. This show commenced on the 1st and ended on the 4th February 1893. The number of stock present was 442 against 936 at the show of 1892. The Deputy Commissioner reports: "The decrease is due mainly to three causes17 officer also records that the animals in class I A and B were not up to the average of other shows. With the exception of one or two mares, I consider both sub-sections A and B decidedly bad. "Very few officers were purchasing for Native Cavalry; but the Superintendent, Karnal Remount Depot, was able to buy a few very useful animals. "I was able to brand 37 mares during the show days, all useful mares with quality, but lacking in substance." The Deputy Commissioner adds: "Nine remounts were purchased for British Cavalry purposes, and 4 of these received prizes. Three were purchased for Native Cavalry, all of which received prizes. I regret that for two remounts purchased no statement has been received from the purchasing officer. He bought them apparently for the Imperial Service Troops on the 24th March, and then left for Rawal Pindi before furnishing the necessary statement. No mules were purchased for Government." There is much in the statement made by Mr. Drage regarding horse dealers of Lahore ever being on the look-out in the districts to purchase likely young stock, and doubtless the exhibits in the young stock class at the show is always kept down by purchases made by dealers, and the animals purchased are not brought to this show for exhibition. Of the Rs. 1,000 sanctioned for Imperial prizes, Rs. 975 were awarded, and in addition the sum of Rs. 102 was given in prizes as consolation to some of the poorer breeders. Multan Horse Show. This horse show took place from the 12th to 14th March 1893. The Deputy Commissioner (A. Meredith, Esq., C.S.) reports as follows: "There was again a slight falling off in numbers both in those competing for prizes and in the total number of animals brought to the show, the figures being respectively 261 and 782 as com- pared with 328 and 897 of last year. But the Committee were of opinion that there has been a marked improvement in quality and in the general turn-out and condition of the animals exhibited. As an instance of this may be mentioned the fact that among branded mares, the animal which won the 1st prize last year was this year placed fourth. And it appears that several animals are brought for sale to Multan at the time of the fair which are not entered in the show in order to escape payment of the fees which are levied on all sales, so that it is probable that the total number of animals collected were not far short of that of last year. "The zemindars generally appear to take more interest in horse-breeding than for- merly, and I have hopes that in a year or two the popularity of the show may be revived. But it must be rememberd, as stated by my predecessor in last year's report, that in previous years a considerable amount of pressure was brought to bear to induce owners to send their animals, and that this is not exercised at present. Every inducement is offered to make the show a popular one and to get the people to improve the breed of their horses; but no compulsion used, as I am led to believe, was formerly the custom. So that if an owner has no animal to enter for competition or for sale, he does not now attend the show, as the bringing in a long string of animals, often from a considerable distance, which have little chance of being sold or of winning a prize, entails a con- siderable amount of expense. "To show that the interest in improving the breed does not flag in this district, I may mention that on a recent visit of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, to Mailsi, 50 owners of mares came forward and pledged themselves to have their mares covered by a Government stallion if one were sent there, and this has since been done. A stallion used to be kept at Mailsi in former years, but had to be removed, as the prescribed number of mares were not forthcoming during the year. The stallion that has been sent is a Norfolk Trotter, and in this connection 1 wish to record my opinion, that the produce of a country-bred mare by a Norfolk Trotter is not satisfactory. The progeny is usually coarse and of a sluggish disposition, and the bone which has hitherto been consi- dered a speciality of the produce of a Norfolk Trotter is of a soft and spongy nature, and not calculated to stand hard work. The people generally prefer an Arab or English half- bred, and I shall be glad if the Horse-Breeding Department can see their way to send none but stallions of these classes, the Arab for preference, to this district in future." With regard to the above remarks relative to the stated difference between a Norfolk Trotter and English half-bred, it does not appear known to the breeders of the Multan District that a Norfolk Trotter comes under the class English half-bred, but, as a rule, is of a better pedigree, and promises harder and more compact bone than the ordinary so- called English half-bred. For some years past the stallions of the Norfolk Trotter class have been employed and much appreciated in this district, and the best of the brood mares found in the different tahsils are, as a rule, the produce of Norfolk Trotters. At the present time both Norfolk Trotters and Arabs are furnished to this district by the Imperial Government, and in addition there are two other Arab stallions kept for stud purposes, the one belonging to the District Board and the other to the Ward's Estates.
18 The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department (Mr. Drage), reports. "From what I could gather, the show was an improvement on last year, although possibly not so many animals attended. The animals attending are said to be of a better class; also in much better condition and cleaner than last year. "Like last year, with the exception of class VIII, class I A and B and class II filled the best. Of the 61 branded mares in foal to Government stallions, many were extremely useful animals. In class II there were some very pretty fillies, one or two of which 1 was able to brand before the judging began. These fillies should grow up into excellent brood mares, as many of them are out of mares that have one or two strains of English blood, and, of course, the fillies themselves are chiefly by Government stallions. "The mule class was a very large one. Many would do very well for transport animals, and a few are quite good enough for mountain batteries. "The Deputy Commissioner is anxious that money may be granted another year as prizes for horse runs. Several zemindars are willing, in fact anxious, to open out some land for horse runs. If subsequently it is found that these runs have been started, and are really used for the benefit of young horse stock, I would recommend that Rs. 100 be given in prizes to one or two of the best of them." Referring to the proposal to give prizes for horse runs, it has to be noted that formerly such Government prizes were given in this district to zemindars who fenced in land as runs for their horse stock; but it was found that these so-called runs were gene- rally used for the cultivation of crops, and so prizes of this class were no longer awarded. In the event of zemindars really having runs to allow liberty to their young stock and not for cultivation purposes, it will be a good plan to award again for the best of these runs. Rawal Pindi Horse Fair. This metropolitan horse fair was held from the 30th of March to the 1st of April 1893. In the Secretary's report it is noted: "The attendance of animals was considerably below the average. The holding of fairs and shows at Shahpur, Gujrat, and Lahore on dates immediately before the Rawal Pindi Fair accounts to some extent for the falling off in numbers at the latter. The heavy and late winter rains also interfered with the Rawal Pindi Fair. The total number of animals present at the fair was 1898. "The attendance for the previous five years was as follows:19 "Of the Rs. 1,700 sanctioned for Imperial prizes, Rs. 1,685 were distributed in awards to the several classes of stock; also the following breeders obtained prizes for runs in which they allow their young stock full liberty:20 "During the show days, I was able to brand 49 mares, all of which were strong, useful animals, and should mate well with the stallions now located in the district. I take thus opportunity of recommending that, as the covering returns are so exceptionally good, the stallions now in the district remain there for a period of five years each horse. This arrangement, I know, would please not only the large zemindars of the district, but also Mr. Wilson, the Deputy Commissioner, who takes the greatest possible interest in horse- breeding." Mr. Lewis mentions: "Altogether 34 remounts were purchased at the fair. No mules were purchased actually by Government officers, but some were purchased by dealers with the intention of re-selling to Government, Ten ponies were also bought for the Imperial Service Troops. Many more remounts and mules would have been sold at the fair but for the number of purchases made just previously in the district. Also, as far as the mules are concerned, the price offered by the Commissariat Officer was insufficient. Breeders can obtain more than Rs. 150 from grain dealers in the district. "The Veterinary Officers present had no complaints to make about the arrangement and general management of the fair. "For the future three days should be allotted for this fair, and, if possible, arrange- ments should be made for its being held either before or after the Ramzan, as nearly all the breeders are Mahomedans. This fair should be put at least on the same level as those of Multan and Dera Ghazi Khan in the matter of prizes. "In this district, where there is a good breed of country-bred, it might be worth while to offer prizes for stock by stallions other than those belonging to Government." It is now in the proceedings that District Board prizes for country-breds only may be awarded. I was present at this show, and can fully endorse all that has been noted by the Deputy Commissioner, Assistant Commissioner, and Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. The horses of this district are generally very superior, and the Deputy Commissioner (Mr. Wilson) and his assistants, and most of the maliks in the district, take a great interest in horse and mule-breeding, and are rightly proud of the excellent brood stock that they possess. The Civil Veterinary Department can always depend on receiving thorough co- operation and all help from Mr Wilson, his assistants, and the breeders in furthering the horse-breeding interests of Shahpur. Sialkot Horse how. This exhibition, called the "Balaki Ber Horse Show," took place at Sialkot on the 16th and 17th of March 1893. The Deputy Commissioner (Major J. A. L. Montgomery), in his full report, records as follows: "The number of animals that were brought to the show and those that competed for prizes during the year 1893 as compared with 1891 are as follows:21 "Class I A, branded mares22 Umballa is entirely due, his successor, Captain Parsons, I am glad to say, takes the greatest interest in the industry. This officer, while Deputy Commissioner in Hissar, did more to forward the interests of horse-breeding in that district in a year than had been done in the whole of my former experience of the district, so I can speak from per- sonal knowledge. "In addition to the stock out of branded mares by Imperial stallions, a large number of colts and fillies by district stallions competed for prizes awarded from Local Funds. A large proportion of these were, of course, too young to form a reliable opinion on their merits, but a large number were most promising. I noticed with regret that many of the dams and stock looked thin and unthrifty, having been evidently insufficiently fed. This, of course, is fatal. To produce good horses, good and plentiful diet is a sine quá non. These remarks apply more particularly to the colts, which were much worse than the fillies. I was much pleased to notice amongst the stock purchased for the Kurnal Depôt one by 'Teeture' Arab, a district stallion. "The Judging Committee was composed entirely of officers from the Umballa garri- son. The thanks of the Department are due to the president and members for the great interest and trouble they took throughout the three days during which the judging lasted." Prizes were awarded in Darbar on the evening of the 13th. Colonel J. J. H. Grey, C.S.I., Commissioner, was present, and Mrs. Grey was kind enough to present the prizes. In addition to the many prizes, the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, offered two watches as prizes23 "The following is a detail of the animals sent to the fair this year, and those regis- tered as sold:24 "Thus it will be seen that out of the Rs. 150 sanctioned by the Government for Imperial prizes, only Rs. 79 was awarded. "Class I25 "The Judging Committee this year was composed of the following officers:26 10th respectively. The certificates and prizes for the horses and mares of classes I, II, and III were distributed by Mr. A Forbes, the Commissioner of Patna, on the 8th, and those for the Bengal Cavalry by the Collector on the 10th. "Altogether there were about 12,000 animals present in the fair, of which 245 only competed for prizes against 168 in the previous year. Of these 81 only obtained prizes. "Out of 245 animals, 237 were 14 hands and over, and the rest under 14 hands, and all of these belonged to dealers and none to breeders. "The number of remounts purchased by Major Webb for the British Service was 11, of which 6 were over 3 years and 5 under 3 years. The total price paid for these was Rs. 4,140. The number purchased by Captain Gunn for the Native Cavalry is not known. "A statement is appended showing in each class and series the number of animals exhibited, the marks awarded to the winners, and the quality of the class. Of the animals that won prizes, 47 were from the Shahabad District, 28 from Ballia, 5 from Sarun, and 1 from Patna. The order in respect of the number of animals brought to the fair is the same. A vast majority came from Shahabad and Ballia. "The Committee gave every satisfaction. "A statement showing the cost of the whole operations is given in Statement B. The total expenditure came to Rs. 888-7-6, as detailed below:27 " During my inspections I found that crowds of people were always round the wells: that in pouring water into their chatties a considerable waste occurred which made the surrounding ground into a perfect puddle. The mud dripped from the feet again into the well, rendering the water quite discoloured and dirty. To rectify this state of things, I would suggest that, after cleaning the wells out, they should be-entirely covered in. A plentiful supply of water could then be obtained by means of small suction-pumps. These pumps are very inexpensive (they are advertised by Messrs. Leslie & Co. at Rs. 25-8 each), and do not readily get out of order. Two or more pumps could be placed in those wells which are mostly frequented. The cattle in the large majority of cases are watered in the river which runs close by and borders the cattle fair ground. It can therefore be readily imagined what the state of the water in which thousands of cattle are led for drinking and washing purposes becomes. As a remedy for this, I would suggest that wooden watering troughs be erected at regular distances close to the river, and constantly kept filled by means of pumps. It would be advis- able that bricks be laid down temporarily for a distance of two yards round the troughs. This would prevent the ground becoming puddled. Troughs would not be suitable for horses, the present system of watering by buckets or chatties being considered less likely to propagate glanders. Moreover, the meeting of stallions with mares would probably lead to serious accidents. "Although the cattle were small in size, they were in very good condition. I was particularly struck with the enormous number of cattle together, and with their sleek rounded appearance. Some remarkably well-bred cattle were in the fair, which on enquiry I found to come from Sitamarhi. "There were only a few of sufficient size suitable for military purposes, and these were of the Gujerati strain. For ploughing purposes a small sturdy bullock is preferable, as a higher and more leggy animal is said to pull the point of the native plough out of the ground. The horses were a very fair lot, and a very large proportion changed hands. The majority of these animals were under 14 hands high and not suitable for military purposes. From enquiries it was ascertained that nearly all the young horses were brought from the Punjab and North-Western Provinces and taken to Arrah, where they were kept for a year or two previous to sale. This would indicate that that part of the coun- try was suitable for rearing purposes, and it would be worth as an experiment stationing two suitable stallions under the charge of a responsible person in the Arrah district. "The judging of the horses was held on the 5th and 6th November. "Class I28 October 1890, 235 horses were exhibited, and in the 3rd held in October 1891 the num- ber exhibited was 438. Rs. 750 were awarded as prizes for horse classes. The first prize of Rs. 50 for brood mares was won by one Sharbat Khan with a mare by the Thorough-bred English horse 'Songster' with a foal at foot by the Arab 'Koheilan.' This mare was 15-2 high, and had the appearance of a thorough-bred English mare. All of the prize winners in the brood mare class were of exceptional excellence, showing size, bone, power, and breeding. The mare that took the first prize in two preceding years was this year only awarded fifth prize, which shows the improvement going on. Most of the mares were by Government stallions. "This year the Remount Agent purchased 16 young stock for the Karnal Depôt against only six last year. He pronounced the colts and fillies to be well developed and with large bone. He was precluded from purchasing several more owing to their being just too young. These will be available next year, when, I trust, he will be able to buy at least 30. "The highest price realized was Rs. 600 for a 4-year old grey filly bred in Bora Shah in Peshin. She was served by the Norfolk Trotter "Bruno," and was an excep- tionally well-grown mare. "But the great feature, of this year's show was the number of northern horses brought in by Syad dealers of Peshin. All these were of an age suited for immediate work, and no fewer than 176 were purchased by the Native Cavalry and 90 by the Punjab dealer, Aslam. In all probability several of these latter will find their way into Government service. "This large number of sales raises the Quetta Show into one of the first importance. But the Syads tell me they will next year bring at least 700 horses, and if they find ready purchases, still more in 1894. They say they can buy horses in practically unlimited numbers in the vicinity of Herat, and are prepared to get as many as are wanted. This is a fact which, I would suggest, might be prominently brought to the notice of the Gov- ernment of India, as I believe there is a difficulty in procuring remounts for some Native corps. Although northern horses are not tall enough or fast enough to please some, yet it must be remembered they are weight-carriers with excellent constitutions and the best of feet and legs. They are probably better suited than any other breed for service in Afghanistan, as it is their Native country, and both the climate and food suit them. "But useful as these horses are, there is no doubt they might easily be improved. As far as I can learn, there is absolutely no selection of sires or any careful mating of the mares. The latter are turned loose in droves of from 30 to 300, and with them are a few stallions of sorts and young colts. The latter are caught up and stabled at about two years old, and the best are always sold. Thus the mares are served by either worthless horses or immature colts. Could His Highness the Amir be only induced to interest himself in this industry, he would not hesitate to order compulsory gelding of all colts. "This measure and the furnishing of good Arab, English, or selected Kadaghan stal- lions would soon work a vast improvement, and, I believe, would result in our getting horses with the bone, size, and power of walers at one third of their price. Another advan- tage of gelding would be that the dealers who now employ one syce for every two horses would be able to do with far fewer servants, and so be able to sell their horses cheaper. And I think His Highness might be also addressed on the enormous tax he now imposes on all horses exported. This amounts to no less than Rs. 50 per animal, half of which is realized at Herat and half at Kandahar. One-fifth of the present tax would be ample " The following number of cattle were exhibited this year:29 "The usual Statements A, B and C are attached. The show was attended by Veterinary-Lieutenant-Colonel Hallen, Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, and Veterinary-Captain Morgan, Superintendent of the Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay Presidency. Major-General Sir George White, K. C. B., K. C. S. I., V. C., very kindly agreed to be President of the Judging Committee for horse classes. The prizes were distributed to the winners by Major-General Sir James Browne, K. C. S. I., C. B., Chief Commissioner in Baluchistan." The Extra Assistant Commissioner, Quetta, in his letter No. 4360, dated 10th October 1892, to the Deputy Commissioner of Quetta, states:" I have the honor to submit the following report on the poultry and agricultural produce in connection with the Quetta District Show, which took place on the 3rd and 4th instant. "As advertised, all exhibits began to arrive on the 3rd instant from 10 A.M., and were all registered and ticketed by 3 P.M., when the Committtee marginally noted sat to judge them, Colonel Jeffreys and myself not voting on the classes in which we were exhibitors. Colonel Jeffreys. Mr. Ingle. Mr. C. F. Elliott. Seth Blick Chand. Corporal Payne. "The Committee finished their labours by 5 P.M., and all articles which had obtained prizes were ticketed, showing the prize obtained. The public were then admitted to see the show, which was crowded with visitors till dark. The articles continued on view the whole of the next day, and were seen by several thousand people both from the town and district. "The exhibits of poultry were 14 against 2 of last year. The specimens exhibited by Major Gaisford were very good "The exhibits under sundries nearly doubled those of last year. "The potatoes were of several varieties, both from English and country seed, and the exhibits exceedingly good. "A collection of garden seeds was exhibited by Sir James Browne, C.B., the Governor-General's Agent and Chief Commissioner. "The exhibts under wheat and barley were very few. Some good exhibits of sweet and Indian corn were shown." I have much pleasure in recording that this horse fair and show promises to be most successful in furthering and developing horse and mule breeding in Baluchistan. The young stock exhibited out of branded mares by the Government stallions were most pro- mising, and augur most favorably for results which will surely be obtained by Government fostering the industries in the providing of the best sires obtainable for branded mares. Moreover, mare owners are thorough horsemen, and are keen on producing superior horse stock. The best thanks of the Civil Veterinary Department are due to the officers of the Agency, especially Major G. Gaisford, who are most thorough co-operators in their en- deavours to develop horse-breeding. The stamp of northern horses brought to the fair was very good. Most of them were admirably suited for Native cavalry and a few for British cavalry, and it may be hoped by the ready sales of this class of stock and the good prices realized that the northern dealers will year by year be induced to increase the number of importation. Sibi Horse Show. This horse show took place on the 13th of February 1893 and three following days. The following interesting report from the Deputy Commissioner, Thal Chotiali, to the Agent to the Governor-General, Baluchistan, gives a full account of the number of stock present and remounts obtained, &c. : "A long continuance of exceptional wet weather during the few weeks immediately preceding and up to the date of the show rendered it impossible for many horse-breeders to bring their horses into Sibi, and others detained on the road arrived too late for the show. But for this the number of animals at the show would have reached an unprecedented high figure. "Notwithstanding this, however, it is satisfactory to note that the number present exceeded that of last year. The number of animals exhibited last year amounted to 1,284, while this year it amounted to 1,332, thus showing an increase of 48. "The General Committee was composed as follows:30 "I attach a copy of the remarks made by the Judging Committee on the several classes of animals exhibited. The quality of the animals exhibited was on the whole, in the opinion of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay, very superior. "I attach also for your information Appendices A, B, and C, giving the returns of the fair supplied to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department. "Appendix D shows the number of animals exhibited in each class, and the number and value of the prizes awarded. Ninety-one mares were branded at the fair. "Appendix E shows the number of animals purchased at the fair and the prices paid. The total number of animals purchased amounts to 134, and the purchase-money to Rs. 25,359. "Appendix F is a copy of the prospectus of the Sibi Horse Show of 1893. "Seventeen young stock were purchased by Captain Broome of the Army Remount Department at an average price of Rs. 232-0-11 ? each. "Sixty-seven remounts were purchased for Native cavalry at an average cost of Rs. 227-12-25/6 viz., for31 from Imperial Revenues. I understand that Government grants Rs. 2,000 yearly to the Jacobabad and Shikarpur Horse Shows, and I see no reason why the same amount should not be granted towards the Sibi Horse Show, which is one of almost equal importance. The opinion of the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, might be obtained on this point, and, if he concurs in the desirability of increasing the prizes given here, I trust that you will give the question your support. "Before concluding, I would invite your attention to paragraph 12 of the report made of the Sibi Fair of 1892 in this office No. 246 F. C., dated 23rd March 1892. "One hundred and twelve bulls and bullocks were exhibited this year. They showed excellent quality. Sanction was not, however, given to the Commissariat Officers present to purchase bullocks until after the animals had been exhibited and many had left Sibi. The Commissariat Officer was then only able to purchase six." It is reported that the remounts obtained were of very good stamp, and this horse fair and show will, if duly supported, doubtless become a good local market for breeders to bring their young stock to for sale. Both this fair and that of Quetta ought in due time to provide a large number of excellent remounts for the army, more especially for the cavalry. The facilities rendered by the railway communication from Quetta to Sibi and all parts of India are a great boon to sellers and purchasers.
32 SUMMARY. The total number of animals present was 56,466 against 54,648 last year, and the number competing for prizes was 6,955 against 6,883 in the previous year. It is satis- factory to note that there was a considerable increase in the number of horse stock (not in- cluding branded mares), the property of breeders, viz., 15,846 against 14,485. Most of the fairs are said to have been an improvement on those of last year, and although at a few of them there was a small decrease in the number of animals, it is reported that the quality was superior to that of those present in former years. The slight decrease in numbers at some of the fairs is accounted for by some unavoidable occurrence, such as bad weather, sickness, or other fairs in the immediate vicinity, &c. The fairs held at Meerut (Nauchandi), Dera Ghazi Khan, Shahpur, Sibi, Multan, Quetta, and Jallalabad are reported to have been very successful indeed, the improvement in the quality of the stock being very marked, especially at Dera Ghazi Khan and Shahpur. The number of mules purchased for Government was somewhat in excess of last year, 195 against 161. The number of Indian remounts purchased for the army and police is in excess of last year, and it appears that more might have been secured if purchasers had been present at all the fairs. The following is a statement of remounts purchased during the last five years:APPENDICES.
2 Appen Abstract of particulars regarding each Horse Fair and Show held in the North-Western DATE WHEN FAIR OR SHOW WAS HELD. NAME OF OFFICERS ON THE JUDGING COMMITTEE. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUM- BER COM- PETNG FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. Fair and Show. From To Resident. Members. In 1891-02. In 1892-93. In 1981-92 In 1892-93. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. North- Western Provinces. Aligarh Show ... 13th February 1893. 20th February 1893. J. H. Harrison, Esq., C S. Veterinary-Major G. J. R. Rayment, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department; Captain A. P West- lake, Remount Department; Raja Ghansham Singh; Kunwar Laikh Raj Singh; and Munshi Razendin, Tahsildar, Secretary. 918 684 142 146 351 245 Batesar Fair ... 1st November 1892. 10th Novem- ber 1892. Major Fawcett, 5th Royal Irish Lancers W. E. Neal, Esq., Commissioner; A. W. Cruickshank, Esq., District Magistrate; Captain Watkins, Royal Horse Artillery; Captain Shakespear, Bengal Cavalry; P. Harrison, Esq., Joint Magistrate, Secretary. 14,753 16,264 ... ... ... Bulandshahr Show. 25th February 1893. 2nd March 1893. L. A. S. Porter, Esq., C.S., Collector. Surgeon-Colonel Blennerhassett; Veterinary-Major G. J R. Rayment, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department; Captain Gordon; Captain Westlake, D.S O, Army Remount Department; G. Hoskins, Esq., District Superintendent of Police; Veterinary Lieutenant Walker, Army Remount Depart- ment; and Nawab Mahomed Ali Khan, Secretary. 1,073 1,055 289 348 336 602 Etawah Show ... 14th Novem- ber 1892. 21st November 1892. E. B. Alexander. Esq., c.s., Collector. Major Lamb, 4th Bengal Cavalry; Veennary-Major G. J. R. Rayment, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department; P. Bramley, Esq., District Superintendent of Police; Tiwari Gandard Singh, Rais Hardoi Choubey Jowala Pershad, Rais An- dar, Secretary. 350 244 186 40 74 154 Hurdwar Fair ... 3rd April 1893 10th April 1893 Major Cordon, 6th Bengal Cavalry. Veterinary-Major G. J R. Rayment, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary ... 928 ... 57 447 465 Meerut (Nau- chandi) Fair. 12th March 1893. 19th March 1893. Major Scott, Chis- holme, 5th Royal Irish Lancers. Major Gordon, 6th Bengal Cavalry; Veterinary Lieutenant Tibaldi, Army Veterinary Department; Veterinary Lieutenant Seath, Army Veterinary Department; Lieutenant Parker, 5th Royal Irish Lancers; and P. N. Allen, 1,292 1,405 491 407 398 845 Muzaffarnagar Show. 23rd March 1893. 28th March 1893. Major Wheler, 6th Bengal Cavalry. Veterinary-Major G. J R. Payment Superintendent, Civil Veterinary De- partment; Captain C. G. Neish, Royal Horse Artillery; Lieutenant A. S. Maxwell, 6th Bengal Cavalry; and Munshi Mahomed Kazim, Tah- sildar, Secretary. 739 794 275 243 314 317 Punjab. Amritsar (Dewa- li) Show. 15th October 1892. 24th October 1892. Colonel C. F. Massey Deputy Commis- sioner. Veterinary Lieutenant. L. J. Blenkin- sop, Army Veterinary Department ; Veterinary Lieutnant F. B. Drage, Superintendent Civil Veterinary De- partment; and Mr. E. Nicholl, Secre- tary. 4,181 3,478 161 89 2,059 511 Bannu Fair ... 15th March 1893. 18th March H. A. Anderson, Esq. Deputy Commis- sioner, Bhannu. Captain Murray, 3rd Punjab Cavalry Lioutenant Johnson 3rd Punhjab Artillery; Lieutnant Hudson, Royal Artillary; Veterinary Lieutnant F. B. Drage, Superindent, Civil Bridges, Esq., c.s. Secretary. 405 1,150 118 485 8 34 Delhi Show ... 4th February 1893. 11th February 1893. R. Clarke, Esq., c.s., Deputy Commis- sioner. Major Ryan, Royal Artillery; Vete- rinary-Major G. J. R. Rayment, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department; Rai Bahadur Ram Kishen Dass ; Lala Sri Kishen Dass; Hakim Abdul Majid Khan; and Tehsildar of Delhi, Secretary. 534 541 27 70 54 457
3 dix A. Provinces, Punjab, Rajputana, Tirhoot, and Baluchistan during the year 1892-93. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR REMOUNTS NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR MULES. TOTAL NUMBER OF SALES EFFECTED. PRIZES FOR 1892-93. For Remount Department For Native ca- valry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. Total number sold. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. Sanctioned by Imperial Gov- ernment. Local subscrip- tions, &c. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of Eng- lish bridles given away. Amount of prizes sanctioned by the Government of India for 1893-94 13 .. 14 27 505 170 337 ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 505 170 337 1,000 500 1,50 1,500 4 22 89 34 145 650 150 400 ... ... ... ... ... ... 145 650 150 400 300 300 600 600 ... 31 14 ... 45 480 170 325 ... ... ... ... ... ... 45 480 170 325 1,250 1,000 2,230 2,123 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 550 800 645 3 10 6 ... 16 425 251 320 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 425 251 320 400 ... 400 400 3 19 13 20 52 625 210 358 ... ... ... ... ... ... 52 625 210 358 1,700 800 2,500 2,310 5 2 7 ... 9 345 150 267 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 343 150 267 1,000 300 1,300 1,300 5 15 197 3 213 393 45 225 19 326 345 350 10 55 3, 140 393 10 62 550 500 1,050 683 3 ... 8 ... 8 262 149 194 ... 1 1 120 120 120 18 310 50 132 250 540 790 835 ... ... 7 ... 7 253 220 236 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 255 220 236 250 1,050 1,300 942 3
4 Abstract of particulars regarding each Horse Fair and Show held in the North-Western Fair and Show. DATE WHEN FAIR OR SHOW WAS HELD. NAME OF OFFICERS ON THE JUDGING COMMITTEE. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUM- BER COM- ETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOCK NOT INCLUDING RANDED MARES) PRESENT. From To President. Members. In 1891-92. In 1892-93. In 1891-92. In 1892-93. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. Punjab5 Provinces, Punjab, Rajputana, Tirhoot, and Baluchistan during the year 1892-93. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR MULES. TOTAL NUMBER OF SALES EFFECTED. PRIZES FOR 1892-93. Amount of prizes sanctioned by the Government of India for 1893-94. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest pries. Average price. Total number sold. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. Sanctioned by Imperial Gov- ment. Local subscrip- tions, &c. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of Eng- lish bridles given away. 28 14 ... 42 500 160 251 ... 20 20 275 36 97 371 500 16 128 1,800 30 1,830 1,830 4 2 ... ... 2 200 165 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 200 150 166 250 280 530 530 2 5 20 ... 25 320 120 209 6 10 16 135 110 123 175 400 12 124 1,250 175 1,425 1,250 5 10 4 ... 14 400 180 286 ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 400 180 296 300 1,000 1,300 1,098 3 9 ... ... 9 400 205 288 ... 32 32 227 26 78 1,030 430 8 73 1,000 470 1,470 1,470 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 255 55 127 33 255 38 111 400 271 671 671 2 1 5 ... 6 600 230 307 ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 600 60 186 650 1,042 1,692 1,229 4 9 3 ... 12 350 240 291 ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 500 34 267 1,000 ... 1,000 975 4 4 2 35 41 350 220 285 ... 25 25 330 24 177 223 350 11 180 1,800 ... 1,800 1,800 4 ... 62 ... 62 500 145 323 170 759 929 390 5 197 1,853 500 2 80 1,700 100 1,800 1,785 4 16 16 ... 32 500 150 284 ... 14 14 400 75 290 102 500 7 93 1,600 385 1,985 1,975 4 2 ... ... 2 315 310 312 ... 1 1 208 208 208 47 360 3 108 350 500 850 571 2
6 Abstract of particulars regarding each Horse Fair and Show held in the North-Western DATE WHEN FAIR OR SHOW WAS HELD. NAME OF OFFICERS ON THE JUDGING TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUM- BER COM- PETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING RRANDED MARES) PRESENT. Fair and Show. From To Resident. Members. In 1891-92. In 1892-93. In 1892-93. In 1891-92. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. Punjab7 Provinces, Punjab, Rajputana, Tirhoot, and Baluchistan during the year 1893. NUMBER OF DEMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICES PAID FOR MULES. TOTAL NUMBER OF SALES EFFECTED. PRIZES FOR 1892-93. Amount of prizes sanctioned by the Government of India for 1893-94. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average Price. By Govenment. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price Total number sold. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. Sanctioned by Imperial Gov- ernment. Local subscrip- tions, &c. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of Eng- lish bridles given away. 3 1 ... 4 400 180 266 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 400 180 266 250 1,212 1,462 1,462 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 500 500 1,000 830 ... ... 16 176 91 283 600 175 254 ... ... ... ... ... ... 283 600 175 254 500 911 1,411 1,411 6 ... 17 67 14 98 350 120 217 ... 5 5 150 150 150 134 350 30 189 1,000 2,000 3,000 2,515 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100 ... 100 100 ... 245 711 211 1,167 9,325 4,115 6,235 195 1,196 1,391 2,890 819 1,622 7,800 10,333 2,287 4,953 21,400 14,416 35,816 32,840 81 ...
APPENDIX B. List of names of owners of Horse-Runs in the Rawal Pindi District to whom prizes were awarded during 1892-93. No. Tehsil. Village. Names of owners of runs or paddocks. Area. Prizes awarded. 1 Pindigheb ... ... Khunda ... ... Malik Jalian Khan ... ... ... ... ... 70 50 2 Fatejang ... ... Moqam ... ... Karam Khan ... ... ... ... ... 80 25 3 Rawal Pindi ... Sangjani ... ... Amir Haidar Shah ... ... ... ... ... 13 25
APPENDIX C. Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-93. NAMES OF SIRES. Number of first prizes. Number of second prizes. Number of third prizes. Number of other prizes Total number of prizes. Thorough-bred English. Alaric ... ... ... ... 2 2 1 4 9 Alarm ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Antartic ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Atlas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Bardolph ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 4 6 Brocken ... ... ... ... 3 3 2 2 10 Brother to Althotas ... ... ... ... 4 1 2 2 9 Canvas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Champion II ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 Chively ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Clarion ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 4 8 Cobra ... ... ... ... 4 4 1 8 17 Docteur ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Doctor ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Duke of Normandy ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 3 Duncan ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Dun Robin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 East Indian ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 Egotist ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 Extravagance ... ... ... ... 2 4 2 12 20 Falmouth ... ... ... 2 ... ... 4 6 Football ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Forgery ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Gerald ... ... ... ... 3 1 4 12 20 Glenstral ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 Grand Vezir ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Great Carle ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Grendon ... ... ... ... 4 1 2 3 10 Growler ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Carried over ... 28 22 24 73 147
2 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-933 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-934 Statement showing the stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-93- contd. NAMES OF SIRES. Number of first prizes. Number of second prizes. Number of third prizes. Number of other prizes. Total number of prizes. Brought forward ... 10 11 12 45 78 Half-bred English and Norfolk Trotters5 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-936 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-937 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-938 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-939 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-9310 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-9311 Statement showing the Stallions whose produce won prizes at the Horse Fairs and Shows of 1892-93