ARMY REGULATIONS, INDIA. VOLUME VIII. VETERINARY. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Government of India Military Department, 1904. CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price Ten Annas, or One Shilling.
PREFACE. THIS volume contains the orders of the Government of India on veterinary matters and is intended principally for the use of officers of the veterinary service. Such subsidiary instructions as may be necessary will be issued in pursuance of these orders under the orders of the Commander-in-Chief. Officers are expected to interpret these regulations reasonably and intelligently with due regard to the interests of the service. No attempt has been made to prescribe for necessary and self-evident exceptions, nor for such matters of detail as should be provided for by local authorities. The other volumes of regulations with which the veterinary service is con- cerned areCONTENTS. PARAS. Establishments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1Abbreviations. A. F. .... Army Form. A. G. India... Adjutant General in India. Appx. .... Appendix. A. R. I. . .. . Army Regulations, India. A.V.D. . .. . Army Veterinary Department. C-in-C. .... Commander-in-Chief. D. A. A. G.... Deputy Assistant Adjutant General. G. O. C.... General Officer Commanding the district. G. S. .... General service. grs. .... Grains. Hd. Qrs.... Head-quarters. I. A. F. .... India Army Form. I. G.... Inspector-General. I. P. .... Indian pattern. I. V. O. .... Inspecting veterinary officer, or, except in paras. 5 and 10, senior veterinary officer, Burma district. lbs.... Pounds. L. G. C... Lieutenant-General of the Command concerned. M. S. Dept.... Medical Store Department. M. W. S.... Military Works Services. N. C. O.... Non-commissioned officer. N. P.. . . . New pattern. O. C. .... Officer commanding. ozs. .... Ounces. P. M. E.... Post mortem examination. pr. .... Pair. P. V. O., India... Principal veterinary officer in India. P. W. D.... Public Works Department. qr. .... Quire. R. P. .... Roorkee pattern. S. and T.... Supply and Transport. S. of S. .... Secretary of State. S. V. O. .... Senior veterinary officer. (see also I. V. O.) U. L. .... Unattached list.
A. R. I., VOL. VIII. Errata. Page 3ARMY REGULATIONS, INDIA. VOLUME VIII.Officers. 2 Exceutive officers. 6. Executive officers of the A. V. D. are detailed by the War Office for a tour of five years' service abroad which commences from the date of em- barkation. This period is subject to extension in the interests of the service. Exchanges. 7. Exchanges between executive officers in India and at home or in the colonies are permitted without expense to the State if the officer exchang- ing to India is pronounced medically fit for service in that country. Duties of P. V. O. 8. The P. V. O., India, is the staff officer of the C-in-C. and will, under his orders, administer the veterinary service of the army. He will direct and superintend the professional and departmental duties of all officers of the A. V. D. in military employ in India and exercise a general control over veterinary schools and stores. He will issue such departmental instructions as may be necessary. All correspondence, returns and reports for transmission to the Director-General, A. V. D., will be submitted through him. He will correspond direct with the I. G. civil veterinary department on professional subjects. Duties of I. V. O. and S. V. O., Burma district. 9. The I. V. O. is the staff officer of the L. G. C. He will, subject to the orders of superior authority, administer the veterinary service of the Command and direct and superintend the duties of the departmental establishment. He is responsible for the economical expen- diture of medicines and stores. He will keep the P. V. O., India informed on all matters connected with the military veterinary service. Inspection. 10. The I. V. O. will, under the orders of the L. G. C., inspect all public animals employed in the military service in the Command at least once yearly, and enquire into all matters relating to the preservation of their health. He will satisfy himself that hospitals, including those of remount depots, are efficiently managed; that instruments and stores are properly looked after; that the latter are economically expended; that poisons are locked up ; and that books, registers, and records are correctly kept. He will see that the mobilisation veterinary equipment is complete, serviceable, and properly arranged. He will satisfy himself that the forge and appliances are in good order. He will inspect the shoeing, ascertain that the regimental farrier establishment is efficient, and that instruction is given in the treatment of minor cases of sickness and in shoe and nail making. He will state his opinion as to the suitability, soundness, and Condition of the remounts. He will submit reports (I. A. F. I 1137) on individual corps and station veterinary and remount depot hospitals, and an administration report, for the information of the C-in-C., which will embody all important points (see I. A. F. Z 2000). The inspec- tion of animals in the Burma district will be carried out by an officer detailed by the P. V. O., India. Duties of S. V. O. 11. The S. V. O. in a station is on the staff of the O. C. the station and issues the orders of the latter on veterinary matters. He is respon- sible for the efficient performance of the veterinary duties of the station, or stations, under his charge and that prompt measures are taken for the suppression of an outbreak of contagious or infectious disease among horses, mules, or cattle used in the military service. He is responsible for the hospital stores. He corresponds direct with Os. C. corps on subjects concerning the health of animals. Departmental correspondence, reports and returns from a branch hospital will be submitted to the I. V. O. through the officer in charge of the chief hospital. Bi-monthly, inspection. 12. The S. V. O. will inspect bi-monthly all the public animals of the units under his professional supervision. His report, I. A. F. V 1759, will be submitted to the O. C. the station in which the hospital is situated for transmission, through the proper channel, to the I. V. O. Weekly inspection. 13. Veterinary officers will, in communication with Os. C. corps, inspect, at least once weekly, all animals under their professional charge at the station at which they are quartered. They will carefully look into matters connected with the health of the animals and will see that the principles of shoeing are observed. They will satisfy themselves that the veterinary wallets are fit for immediate use. Treatment of govt. stallions. 14. Veterinary officers will, when requested, professionally assist purchasing officers of the remount department. They will, if their services can be spared, treat without extra remuneration, government stallions"
3 Hospitals. located on the line of railway and animals of the civil department when called on to do so. P. M. examina- tion. 15. Veterinary officers will be afforded an opportunity of making a post mortem examination of any horse which dies, or is destroyed, while on the strength of a corps under their professional charge. Pocket cases. 16. Every veterinary officer will provide, and keep up at his own expense, a pocket-case of instruments of the sealed pattern. Veterinary universal chests to be kept ready for use. 17. The veterinary officer in charge of a hospital is responsible that the veterinary universal chests which, though forming regimental mobil- ization equipment, are kept in station hospitals in order to admit of the turn-over of perishable articles, are at all times complete and ready for use. These chests may, under the orders of the I. V. O., be used for manContagious diseases. 4 Hospital buildings. 24. The buildings, fixtures and furniture of a chief hospital are in charge of the S. V. O., those of branch hospitals are in regimental charge. Visitors. 25. No person will be admitted to a hospital except on duty. The visits of officers in connection with the sick horses of their corps should ordinarily be made when the veterinary officer is at the hospital. Cleanliness of hospital. 26. Great attention should be paid to the cleanliness of a hospital and its surroundings. Permanent floors should not be washed. Dry earth should be used to absorb urine. Petty repairs to standings, the cleaning of surface-drains, and the removal of rank vegetation in the vicinity of a hospital will be effected by the conservancy establishment of corps under the orders of the O. C. the station. Contagious and infectious diseases. Outbreak of disease to be reported. 27. The detection of contagious disease in its early stages is most important and demands the utmost vigilance on the part of veterinary officers. The duties of an S. V. O. on the outbreak of disease are laid down in para. 11. He will keep the I. V. O. informed of the course of the disease and of the measures adopted for its suppression and will also submit a fortnightly report (I. A. F. V 1756) or oftener, if necessary, as directed in I. A. F. Z 2000. Report by civil author- ities. 28. When a contagious or infectious disease appears among animals at a fair, or in the neighbourhood of a cantonment, or of a road used by troops, the civil officer of the locality is enjoined to report the matter at once to the nearest military officer who will inform any concerned. Dealers' camps pro- hibited. 29. As infectious disease is frequently introduced into a station by horse-dealers, they should not be allowed into a cantonment till their horses have been inspected. Inspection of animals joining. 30. Horses joining a unit should not be admitted into the lines until passed by the officer in veterinary charge. Isolation, disinfection, etc. 31. Instructions regarding the isolation of animals shewing symptoms of any contagious or infectious disease, their destruction in order to prevent the spread of disease, the disinfection of stalls, stable appliances and gear, and attendants' clothing, and the disposal of carcasses of infected animals are laid down in A. R. I., Vol. II. Confirma- tion of anthrax. 32. The diagnosis of a case of anthrax should be confirmed by microscopical examination and, in exceptional circumstances, by inocu- lation. Destruction of animals; glanders, farcy. 33. Animals shewing clinical symptoms of glanders or farcy should be destroyed. Those not shewing clinical symptoms but reacting to mallein should be re-inoculated at intervals of one month until they shew clinical symptoms or fail to react. In the latter case they may be con- sidered free from disease. The results of all mallein inoculations will be reported to the I. V. O. Mallein will be supplied, when required, by the P. V. O. Rindorpest lymphan- gitis. 34. A diagnosed case of rinderpest and an incurable case of epizootic lymphangitis should, as a rule, be destroyed. Precautions after glanders. 35. A detachment cannot be considered free from glanders or farcy until all animals in contact have been tested with mallein, or until four months have elapsed since the last animal was destroyed. Precaution after lym- phangitis. 36. As epizootic lymphangitis is liable to recur, an animal must be regarded with suspicion and treated accordingly for a year after recover- ing from, an attack. Inspectors under the Glanders and Farcy Act. 37. The operations of an officer of the A. V. D. as an inspector under the provisions of the Glanders and Farcy Act (see Appx. I) are confined to the area within a radius of five miles from the station or stations in his charge. Movements of troops. Marching reports. 38. When a British or non-silladar mounted corps or detachment, the Viceroy's bodyguard, a mountain or heavy battery or a party of mounted infantry leaves its station, and on arrival at its destination, the O. C. will furnish the I. V. O. with a marching-out (marching-in) report (I. A. F. V 1755). If a veterinary officer accompanies the troops he will furnish the reports.
5 Instruction. Marching inspections. 39. The S. V. O. in a station will, under the orders of the O. C. the station, inspect and report (see I. A. F. V 1755) on the animals of British and non-silladar mounted corps and heavy batteries on their leaving, passing through if unaccompanied by a veterinary officer, and arrival at a station by route march. Instruments, etc., march- ing scale. 40. The scale of instruments and necessaries for units on the march is laid down in Appx. V. The veterinary officer in charge of a chief hospital is responsible that any body of British or non-silladar mounted troops leaving a station in his charge is supplied with a proper propor- tion of instruments and medicines, and, if necessary, with written instructions for the use of the latter. They will be packed in veterinary camp boxes which will be handed over to the S. V. O. of the station of destination, who will bring them on charge together with unexpended medicines and consumable necessaries. Sick returns. 41. The office copies of monthly sick returns for the current year will be given to a corps on quitting a station and will be handed over by the latter to the veterinary hospital of the station of destination. Animals left behind on the march. 42. All horses of a unit should, if possible, accompany it on the march. The officer handing over an animal which is left behind as unable to march, is responsible that its veterinary history sheet is given to the receiving officer for transmission to the officer in charge of the station veterinary hospital who will, fortnightly, report its condition to the officer in veterinary charge of the corps to which the animal belongs. Veterinary report on conclusion of a march. 43. On the termination of a march the veterinary officer accompany- ing the troops, will submit a report to the I. V. O. with remarks on the quality of the forage and water on the march, and as to any improvements that may be desirable in the horse and veterinary equipments, and in the shoeing appliances. Attendance on chargers. Free at- tendance on chargers. 44. If a veterinary officer is present at a station on duty he will, within the limits of the station, when requested, treat, supply medicine to, and advise regarding sick chargers of officers of any corps or branch of the service. It rests with him to decide whether an animal should be sent to the station veterinary hospital. He will only attend a charger outside the station in a case of urgency and if his travelling expenses are defrayed by the owner. No animal, the property of an officer, other than a charger, shall be admitted into a station veterinary hospital or supplied with government medicines. Veterinary opinion with- out fee on proposed charger. 45. The officer in veterinary charge of a remount depot will furnish an officer selecting a charger therefrom, with a written opinion on its soundness. In other cases the officer purchasing a horse for use as a charger may send it to a station veterinary hospital for the written opinion of the veterinary officer in charge. Instruction. Training of regimental establishments. Qualifica- tion, of shoeing- smiths and farrier- sergcauts. 46. The rules for the selection, training, and examination of men for the appointment of shoeing-smith are laid down in the King's Regulations. For advancement to farrier-sergeant a shoeing-smith must be able to make a pattern shoe, compound medicines, diagnose and treat minor cases of sickness and impart instruction. The proceedings of boards of examination for the appointments of shoeing-smith and farrier-sergeant will be approved by the I. V. O. The instruction of farriers and shoeing-smiths in shoeing will be supervised by veterinary officers who should frequently visit forges during working hours. Cold-shoers, non-silladar cavalry. 47. The O. C. a non-silladar cavalry regiment is responsible that, in addition to the squadron shoeing-smith, there are always two sowars in each half-squadron who have qualified as cold-shoers and are kept in prac- tice as such. Veterinary training of farriers. 48. In order that the farriers of British mounted corps may be in- structed and practised in practical veterinary matters, the O. C. a station at which there is a veterinary officer will bring them on a roster for
Instruction. c weekly duty in the station veterinary hospital as orderly farriers During a tour of duty a farrier will be under the orders of the S. V. O. Voterinary instruction of officers and others. 49. The officers (including attached officers) and farrier establish- ments of corps in charge of a veterinary officer will receive instruction from the latter in elementary veterinary duties. The O. C. the station will arrange for the assembly of a class once a week, or as often as practicable. Veterinary pupils. 50. Four European or East Indian lads, preferably the sons of soldiers, who are between fifteen and seventeen years of age, medically fit, able to read and write English, speak Hindustani, and work simple sums will be enrolled as veterinary pupils in the 26th, 27th, and 28th light cavalry, respectively. They will, for the first two years, be placed under the orders of the veterinary officer who will instruct and examine them half yearly. A pupil of undesirable character will be brought before the G. O. C. for dis- charge at any time during the first two years. Similar measures will be taken for the discharge of a pupil who, on completion of two years' service, is not competent to perform the duties of a farrier. Army Veterinary Schools. Organisa- tion. 51. Poona school. Managing committee. The G.O.C. Poona district. . . . . President. (Officer supervising school).7 Instruction. Selection of candidates. 57. Soldiers recommended to attend a class must be of good character and have a taste for veterinary work. A British soldier must have a third class certificate of education; a native candidate must be able to read and write and possess a fair knowledge of arithmetic. Fees. 58. British officers attending a class will, on joining the class, pay the following fees:Books, reports, and returns. 8 Third year. 9 Books, reports, and returns. Arrival reports horses'. 77. Arrival and departure reports of animals will be sent by the O. C. the corps to the officer in charge of the station veterinary hospital. Record of service. 78. On first arrival in India a veterinary officer will furnish the I. V. O. with a record of service on A. F. B 199. Transfer certificate 79. A veterinary officer on handing over charge of a hospital will send the transfer certificate, I. A. F. Z 2081, to the I. V. O. Record of leave. 80. The I. V. O. or D. G. A. R., as the case may be, will keep a record of the leave taken by an executive veterinary officer during his term of service in India. If the officer is permanently transferred the record will be sent to the officer responsible for keeping it.
Appendix I.11 Nomenclature of diseases.Appendix II.13 Nomenclature of diseases.Appendix III.15 Fees and allowances.Appendix V.17 S. and T. corps supplies.Appendix V.19 M. S. Dept. supplies,Appendix V.21 M. S. Dept. supplies.Appendix V.INDEX. Paras, etc. A Accounts of Poona school submitted to L. G. C. . . . . . 5 Administrative veterinary offi- cers. (See Officers.) Allotment of officers, A. V. D. and N. C. Os. (U. L.) . . . . 1, 2 AllowancesIndex. 24 Paras, etc. Duties25 Index. Paras, etc. Instructors, veterinary schools . 61, 55 InstrumentsIndex. 26 Paras, etc. Reports