VETERINARY REGULATIONS INDIA 1939 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
DRAFT AMENDMENT TO BOOKS, REGULATIONS AND FORMS. Veterinary Regulations, India, 1939. No. 1 of 1941. Pages 28, 29 and 30. Appendix D2 No. 4 of 1941. Page 15, Section 5, Para. 52VETERINARY REGULATIONS INDIA 1939 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATION, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI. 1939.
List of Agents in India from whom Government of India Publications are available. (a) PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT BOOK DEPOTS. MADRAS :[ii] List of AgentsREGISTER OF CORRECTIONS. Year. Authority for correction. Initials of individual by whom correct- ed and date of correction. Year. Authority for correction. Initials of individual by whom correct. ed and date of correction.
PREFACE. This volume contains the orders of the Government of India in regard to the organization, administration and functions of the Veterinary Service of the Army in India. Commanders are responsible that these regulations and orders are strictly observed and that any local instructions which may be issued are guided by their spirit and intention. Officers are expected to interpret these regulations reasonably and intelligently and with due regard to the interests of the service, bearing in mind that no attempt has been made to provide for necessary and self-evident exceptions. All previous orders on the subjects with which these regula- tions deal, are hereby cancelled. C. MACI. G. OGILVIE, Secretary to Government of India, Defence Department. NEW DELHI, 1st January 1939.
(i) CONTENTS. PAGE. Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . iii CHAPTER I.-ORGANIZATION, ADMINISTRATION AND FUNCTIONS. SECTION 1.(iii) ABBREVIATIONS. A. D. V. S. ... Assistant Director of Veterinary Services. A. H. Q. ... Army Headquarters, India. A. B. D. ... Army Remount Department. A. V. O. ... Administrative Veterinary Officer. C.-in-C. ... Commander-in-Chief. C. M. A. ... Controller of Military Accounts. D. A. D. V. S... Deputy Assistant Director of Veterinary Services. D. D.V. S. ... Deputy Director of Veterinary Services. D. V. S. ... Director of Veterinary Services in India. E. V. O. ... Executive Veterinary Officer. G. O. C.-in-C... General Officer Commanding-in-Chief. G. of I. ... Government of India. H. Q. ... Headquarters. I. A. F... India Army Form. I. A. V. C. ... Indian Army Veterinary Corps. I. C. O. ... Indian Commissioned Officer. I. D. P... Intradermal Palpebral. M. E. S. ... Military Engineer Services. M. S. ... Military Secretary, A. H. Q. M. V. H. ... Military Veterinary Hospital. M. V. L. ... Military Veterinary Laboratory. N. C. O. ... Non-commissioned Officer. O. C. ... Officer Commanding. O. i/c. ... Officer-in-charge (of). Q. M. G. ... Quartermaster-General in India. R. A. I... Regulations for the Army in Indin. R. A. V. C. ... Royal Army Veterinary Corps. R. I. A. S. C... Royal Indian Army Service Corp . V. A. S... Veterinary Assistant Surgeon V. C. O. ... Viceroy's Commissioned Office . V. O. . ... Veterinary Officer.
VETERINARY REGULATIONS, INDIA. CHAPTER I.Section 1. 2 3. Administrative and Executive V. Os. attached to Command and District H. Q.3 Section 1 (d) Inspection at regular intervals as prescribed in R. A. I. and in communication with the O. C. unit of all animals on the autho- rized establishment of the unit, including the registered chargers of officers. (e) Careful investigation of all matters connected with the health welfare and efficiency of the animals of the unit and action to ensure observance of the principles of shoeing. (f) Inspection to ensure that the veterinary equipment, including mobilization equipment of units, is serviceable and fit for imme- diate use and for the periodical turnover of perishable articles. (g) Communication to the D. A. D. V. S. of the district of reports or suggestions submitted by them to Os. C. units relative to the health, welfare and efficiency of the animals of units or to the sanitary condition of the accommodation provided for these animals. (h) Submission of the reports and returns prescribed in Appendix B. When there are two or more V. Os. in the same station, the senior will command the military veterinary hospital and will be responsible to the O. C. station for the efficient performance of the veterinary duties in the station. The O. C. a military veterinary hospital in which mobilization veterinary equipment is stored is responsible that such equipment is maintained complete and in serviceable condition, and for the periodical turnover of articles of a perishable nature. 5. Executive Veterinary Officers and Veterinary Assistant Surgeons attached to the A. R. D. (i) Executive V. Os. and veterinary assistant surgeons detailed for duty in remount depots (except Mona and Sargodha) are under the D. A. D. V. S. district in which the depot is located for purposes of administration and professional supervision and will render the reports and returns pres- cribed in Appendix B. The veterinary personnel detailed for duty in remount depots, Mona and Sargodha will be under the professional supervision of the D. V. S. in India to whom reports and returns on technical subjects, vide Appendix B, will be submitted direct. (ii) V. Os. and other veterinary personnel, R. A. V. C./I. A. V. C. specially attached to the Army Remount Department in connection with breeding operations will be under the D. V. S. for the purpose of administration and professional supervision. (iii) Other veterinary personnel employed by the Army remount depart- ment in connection with breeding operations will be under the control of that department and will be under the professional supervision only of the Veter- inary Officer in charge of the area. 6. Military veterinary hospitals.Section 1. 4 (iii) Instructions regarding the assistance to be rendered by personnel of units in the performance of veterinary duties in hospitals and the respon. sibility for the charge of hospitals in the absence of veterinary personnel are contained in R. A. I. (iv) The functions of military veterinary hospitals comprise the reception and treatment of military animals including the authorized chargers of officers. 7. Army Veterinary Schools.5 Section 2. SECTION 2.Section 2. 6 A copy of the approved programme of study will be forwarded by the D. V. S. to the Under Secretary of State, Military Department, India Office. If it is not possible for an officer to give full details, as above, in his original application, or if, after arrival in England, he wishes to make any changes in the programme which has been approved by the D. V. S., he should immediate- ly on arrival in England apply to the Under Secretary of State, Military De- partment, India Office, for a form on which to submit the required particulars. In such cases the officer should not, unless prepared to do so at his own risk, commence his course, nor incur any expenses in connection therewith, until he receives approval to the course through the Under Secretary of State, Military Department. (8) Officers on leave who wish to have part of their leave converted into study leave or to undertake a course of study during leave, should, before commencing study and before incurring any expenses in connection there- with, submit a programme of their proposed course of study to the Under Secretary of State, Military Department, India Office, on a form which can be obtained on application to that Department. The programme should be accompanied by an official syllabus of the course, if one is available, and by any documentary evidence that the particular course or examination has the approval of the authorities in India. In the absence of such evidence the programme may, if approved, be proceeded with, but no study allowance will be admissible until the concurrence of the authority concerned in India has been received. Similarly, officers on leave who desire to have it extended for purposes of study should address the Under Secretary of State, but in addition to fur- nishing a statement of the proposed study, they must support their applica- tions with documentary evidence of their having obtained the approval of the authorities concerned in India to their applying for an extension of leave. Such concurrence will not be necessary to the conversion of ordinary leave into study leave or for the issue of study leave allowance. (9) An officer who is at home on combined leave may be permitted to commence a course of study before the end of his privilege leave and to draw for such period the study allowance admissible under Rule 10 without forfeit- ing his privilege leave allowance. For all purposes of record and subsequent calculation of leave, the full amount of study leave taken shall in such cases be post-dated as if it had commenced at the end of the privilege leave. (10) For the course of study, a study allowance, at present fixed at 12s. a day in the United Kingdom, £1 a day on the Continent of Europe and £1-10s. in the United States of America, will be admissible. These rates are liable to revision. No payment in respect of study allowances will be made until satisfactory certificates as required by Rule 12, are furnished on the comple- tion of the course of study. It is to be understood that in order to qualify for the grant of study leave or for the receipt of study allowance, a definite course of post-graduate study must be taken at a recognised institution, or of study ordinarily associated with post-graduate work, which must be approved as suitable by the D. V. S. in India. This allowance will not be admissible to an officer who retires from the service without returning to duty in India after a period of study leave, and is liable to be refunded under Rule 3 above in the case of retirement, otherwise than on account of ill-health, within 3 years of return to India. Periods not exceeding 14 days of vacation or interval between two courses of study may, at an officer's option, be treated as study leave, in which case the study allowance will be issued. Alternatively such periods may be taken as ordinary leave, in which case study allowance will not be issued. If such period exceeds 14 days, the excess will be treated as ordinary leave with- out study allowance.
7 Section 2. Study allowance may be given at the discretion of the Under Secretary of State, Military Department, India Office, for any period up to fourteen days at one time during which the officer is prevented by sickness duly certified by a medical practitioner from pursuing the sanctioned course of study. No course of study will be recognised as study leave for the purpose of the allowance or for any other purpose unless the course of study has been approved in accordance with paragraphs 7 and 8 above. (11) The rates of pay admissible during study leave are the rates of leave pay laid down in Pay and Allowance Regulations. (12) On completion of a course of study, a certificate on the proper form (which may be obtained from the India Office), together with any certificate of special study, should be forwarded to the Under Secretary of State, Mili- tary Department, who will arrange for the transmission of the copies of the documents to the D. V. S. in India. (13) Study leave will count as service for promotion and pension, but not for leave. It will not affect any leave which may already be due to an officer, and will not be taken into account in reckoning the aggregate amount of leave admissible under Regulations. (14) Entitled passages will not be admissible to officers proceeding on study leave. Officers for whom passage accounts are maintained may avail themselves of certificate " A " (Appendix " A ", Passage Regulations, India, refers). 15. Moves and Transfers.Section 2. 8 the march from one district or independent brigade to another, it will be forwarded to the D. A. D. V. S. of the district or independent brigade to which they are proceeding. 21. Technical advice regarding slaughter stock and forage.9 Section 2. 24. Supply of Sera to Military Farms Department.Section 3. 10 (ii) Training11 Section 3. The examination, will be held annually under District arrangements in the first week of May. The names of veterinary assistant surgeons desir- ous of attending the examination will be forwarded to reach Record Office by the 1st April each year. The Board of Examiners will consist of an officer of the Army Educational Corps to be detailed by the District Commander and D. A. D. V. S., District. Successful condidates will be given a certi- ficate signed by the Board, a copy being kept in the Record Office and a copy sent to the C. M. A. concerned. Veterinary assistant surgeons who are in possession of Matriculation or Intermediate certificate of education, or who have obtained their diploma from a Veterinary College where the medium of instruction is English, are exempted from the English qualification examination. (v) Veterinary assistant surgeons are allowed free rations on the com- batant scale. (vi) Veterinary assistant surgeons are entitled to the free use of Govern- ment ponies or bicycles in peace and war. (vii) Postings and appointments.Section 4. 12 CHAPTER II13 Section 4. (iii) When it is necessary to alter a diagnosis, the original entry is to be crossed out and the new diagnosis inserted in red ink. When another disease which is not a complication or a recognised sequel of the original disease, supervenes upon the disease for which an animal was originally admitted and persists after the animal has recovered from the original disease, the animal will be admitted afresh as suffering from the second disease and a remark to this effect inserted in the monthly return. 42. Private Practice.Section 5. 14 46. Anthrax.15 Section 5 49. Rinderpest.Section 6. 16 CHAPTER III17 Section 6. 63. Unpacking equipment.Section 7. 18 Expendable and non-expendable articles lost or damaged will be written- off on loss statements. Loss statements where necessary will be prepared by the O. C. unit to which the equipment belongs and after being priced will be submitted to the competent financial authority for orders, the officer commanding the unit sending a copy of the sanctioned loss statement to the officer commanding the hospital responsible for the storage of the equip- ment. Indents for replacement supported where applicable by a copy of the sanctioned loss statement will then be prepared by the officer commanding the hospital and preferred on the medical store depot of supply.
19 Appendix A. APPENDIX A. Fees and allowances. An officer of the A. V. S. on duty :20 Appendix B. APPENDIX B. (Referred to in paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 12, 18, 23, 33, 40, 44, 45 and 47.) Special reports and returns to be rendered by the Army Veterinary Service. NOTE I.21 Appendix B 5 Distribution list of veterinary assistant surgeons, I. A. V. O. On I. A. F. V-1772-F. First day of each month. D. A. D. V. S. dis- trict, officer i/c, Military Veteri- nary Laboratory, and V. Os., Re- mount Depots, Mona and Sar- godha. ... Officer in charge, I.A.V.C. Records, 6 Nominal roll of vete- rinary officers. A. F. B.-158 . 1st of each month D. D. V. S. and A. D. V. S. Comd. D. A. D. V. S. Dist. V. O. In- dependent Bde. Officer i/c, Military Veterinary Labo- ratory. ... Under Secretary of State, The War Office, London. (b) Quarterly returns. 7 Strength of I. A. V. C. Personnel. On I. A. F. V-1772-L. 1st January, 1st April, 1st July and 1st October. O. C. Sections I. A. V. C., O. C., I. A. V. C. Depot and Officer i/c Military Vete- rinary Laboratory. ... Officer i/c I. A. V. C. Records. (c) Half-yearly returns. 8 Requisition on the R. I. A. S. C., for stores, etc. On I. A. F. Z-2098. 15th March, 15th September. Os. C. Military ve- terinary hospitals including those in remount depots and officer i/c, Mili- tary Veterinary Laboratory. ... Supply officers con- cerned. (d) Annual returns. 9 Confidential reports on N. C. Os. and men, I. A. V. C. On 1. A. F. V-1772-A. 2nd January . . (1) O. C. Section I. A. V. C. and officer i/c, Military Vete- nary Laboratory. (2) O. C, I. A. V. C. Depot. D. A. D. V. S. dis- trict. Officer-in-charge I. A. V. C. Records.
22 Appendix B. Special reports and returns to be rendered by the Army Veterinary Service23 Appendix B. 13 Statistical and genera report on the army veterinary service. On I. A. F. V-1702. 7th May . . D. A. D. V. S. dis- trict. ... D. D. V. S. or A. D. V. S. of the com- mand. D. D. V. S. or A. D. V. S. of the command/ Westers (I) Dist. will sub- mit a consoli- dated report for the com- mand (I) Dist. to D. V. S. by 15th June. 14 Annual medical indent. On I. A. F. V-17C5. Medical store depot, Bombay, on 1st April, other medi- cal store depots on 15th November. Os. C. military vete- rinary hospitals, in- cluding those in re- mount depots (ex- cept Mona and Sar- godha) and Os. C. units with veteri- nary equipment on charge. Officer i/c, Military Veterinary Labo- ratory, and V. Os. Remount Depots Mona and Sargodha. D. A. D. V. S. dis- trict and D. D. V. S. or A. D. V. S. of the com- maud/Western (I) Dist. D. V. S. in India . Officer in charge medical store depots. Do. 15 Tour notes by D. D. V. S. or A. D. V. S. of a command/West- ern (I) Dist. and D. A. D. V. S. Dist. On I. A. F. V-1772-K. After inspection . D. D. V. S. or A. D. V. S. of command/ Western (I) Dist. D. A. D. V. S. District Command/West- ern (I) Dist. H. Q. District H. Q. Q. M. G. Copy to District or Indepen- dent Brigade Head- quarters. Command H. Q. 16 Report on outbreak or suspected out- break of contagious or infectious disease, or on the occurrence of any unusual sick- ness amongst ani- mals. In manus- cript, by telegram in the case of anthrax, in- fluenza epi- zootic ly- mphangitis, encepha- lomy elitis, surra (in the case of hors- es, mules or cattle) or glanders. On occurrence . V. O. or veterinary assistant surgeon in charge. ... District or indepen- dent brigade H. Q. Copies to O. C. station. Command H. Q. and D. V. S. also to Q. M. G., Delhi, during the period when Q. M. G.'s Camp office is in Delhi.
Appendix B. 24 Special reports and returns to be rendered by the Army Veterinary Service25 Appendix B. 22 Report on epizootic lymphangitis in animals. Manuscript, vide Appen- dix E. On occurrence . Os. C. military ve- terinary hospitals, including those in remount depots. D. A. D. V. S. dis- trict and D. D. V. S. or A. D. V. S. of the command/ Western (I) Dist. D. V. S. India. 23 Admission. Certifl- cate for animals. On I. A. F. V-1772-J. Ditto . . O. C. military vete- rinary hospital. ... O. C. unit, copy to local audit officer. Discharge. Death. Destruction. 24 Casualty report . A.F.B-151 . Ditto . . D. D. V. S. and A. D. V. S. Comd./ Western (I) Dist., D. A. D. V. S. Dis- trict, V. O. Inde- pendent Bde. Officer i/c, Military Veterinary Labo- ratory and O. C., Remount Depot, Mona/Sargodha & D. R. Os., Breeding Areas in respect of V. Os. thereto at- tached. ... For R. A. V. C. Officers:Appendix C. 26 APPENDIX C. (Referred to in para. 19.) Forms authorized for the exclusive use of the Army Veterinary Service. NOTE.27 Appendix C. Forms authorized for the exclusive use of the Army Veterinary Service.Appendix D. 28 APPENDIX D. (Referred to in para. 19.) Books to be maintained by Veterinary units and offices. Books. Office of a D. D. V. S. or A. D. V. S. of a Command. O. i/c., I. A. V. C. Records. O. i/c., Military Veterinary Laboratory. Military Veterinary Hospital, Class I. Military Veterinary Hospital, Class II. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Veterinary Regula- tions, India. 1 1 1 1 1 Regulations for the equipment of the Army (India), Part 2, Section IV-A, I. A. V. C. 1 .. 1 1 1 Standing Orders, I. A. V. C. 1 1 1 1 1 Standing Orders, I. A. V. C. (Record Office) 1 1 1 1 1 Field Service Manuals :- (a) Mobile Veteri- nary Section. 1 2 .. 1 1 (b) Veterinary Eva- cuating Station. 1 1 .. 1 1 War Equipment Tables: 29 Appendix D. Books to be maintained by Veterinary units and officesAppendix D. 30 Books to be maintained by Veterinary units and offices31 Appendix E. APPENDIX E. (Referred to in para. 47.) Epizootic Lymphangitis. To be rendered by all Veterinary Officers i/c units and Remount depots in duplicate through the usual channels to D. Ds. V. S. or A. Ds. V. S. Com- mands/Western (I) Dist., with a copy to D. V. S. in India. 1. Unit. 2. Class and description of animal. 3. History. (a) Date of discovery. ..................................................................................... (b) Probable date clinically affected. ..................................................................................... (c) Nature of lesion and seat. ..................................................................................... (d) If confirmed by microscope and by whom. ..................................................................................... (e) Date destroyed. ..................................................................................... (f) Date joined unit and wherefrom. ..................................................................................... (g) Where located during past 3 months and period of time in each case. ..................................................................................... (h) If suffered from a wound or ulcerative lymphangitis during that time and date. ..................................................................................... (i) Opinion as to most likely source of in- fection. ..................................................................................... 4. Number of wound contacts since date shown at (b) and disposal of each. 5. Description and position of stables or standings where ease occurred. 6. Action taken in respect of the outbreak. 7. Remarks by the D. A. D. V. S. District. 8. Remarks by the D. D. V. S. or A. D. V. S. Command/Western (I) Dist.
Appendix F-1. 32 APPENDIX F-1. Application for appointment as Veterinary Assistant Surgeons in the I. A. V. C. Name Date of birth Caste or community and religion Occupation Province and District Home address Medical fitness (To be supported by a certificate from medical officer). Age Height College (Veterinary) where graduated Year of graduation Special honours, if any, at the Veterinary College Educational qualifications Language qualifications Riding ability Games played Previous service. Veterinary assistant surgeons or any other experience up to date, giving period and nature of work, station de- partment, or name of firm and nature of business War services, if any Station Signature of the Candidate. Date NOTE 1.33 Appendix F-2. APPENDIX F-2. (Referred to in para. 31.) Syllabus of examination for promotion of Veterinary Assistant Surgeons (Warrant Officers) to Commissioned rank. (i) SubjectsAppendix G. 34 APPENDIX G. (Referred to in para. 41.) Classification and Nomenclature of Diseases. NOTES.35 Appendix G. Classification and Nomenclature of DiseasesAppendix G. 36 Classification and Nomenclature of Diseases37 Appendix G Classification and Nomenclature of DiseasesAppendix G. 38 Classification and Nomenclature of Diseases39 Appendix H. APPENDIX H. (Referred to in paragraph 48.) Glanders and Farcy Act (No. XIII of 1899). Whereas it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to glanders and farcy: It is hereby enacted as follows:Appendix H. 40 Horse to be examined by Veterinary Practitioner. 7. (1) On any such seizure as aforesaid, the Inspector shall cause the horse seized to be examined as soon as possible by such Veterinary Practitioner as the Local Government may appoint in this behalf: Provided that, when the Inspector is also a Veterinary Prac- titioner so appointed, he may make the examination himself Horse to be destroyed if found diseased, otherwise restored. (2) For the purposes of the examination the Veterinary Practitioner may submit the horse to any test or tests which the local Government may prescribe. 8. (1) If the Veterinary Practitioner certifies in writing that the horse is diseased, the Inspector shall cause the same to be immediately destroyed : Provided that, in the case of any disease other than glanders or farcy, horses certified to be diseased as aforesaid may, subject to any rules which the Local Government may make in this be- half, be either destroyed or otherwise treated or dealt with as the Veterinary Practitioner may deem necessary. (2) If after completing the examination, the Veterinary Practitioner does not certify that the horse is diseased, the Inspector shall at once deliver the same to the person entitled to the possession thereof. When horse diseased, place where it has been to be disinfected, etc. 9. (1) When any diseased horse has been in any building, shed or other enclosed place, or in any open lines, the Inspector may issue a notice to the owner of the building, shed, place or lines, or to the person in charge thereof directing him to have the same disinfected and the internal fittings thereof or such other things found therein or near thereto, as the Local Government may by rule prescribe, destroyed. (2) On the failure or neglect of such owner or other person as aforesaid to comply with the notice within a reasonable time, the Inspector shall cause the building, shed, place or lines to be disinfected and the fittings or other things to be destroyed and, the expense (if any) thereby incurred may be recovered from the owner or other person as if it were a fine. Owner or person in charge of diseased horse to give notice. 10. The owner or any person in charge of a diseased horse shall give immediate information of the horse being diseased to the inspector or to such authority as the Local Government may appoint in this behalf. Prohibition against re- moval without licence of horse which has been with diseased horse. 11. No person in charge of any horse which has been in the same field, building or place as, or in contact with, a diseased horse, shall remove such horse except in good faith for the pur- pose of preventing infection, or under a license to be granted by the Inspector and subject to the conditions of the license. Vexatious entries, searches and seizures. 12. (1) Whoever, being an Inspector appointed under this Act, vexatiously and unnecessarily enters or searches any field, building or other place, or seizes or details any horse on the pretence that it is diseased, shall be punishable with imprison- ment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. (2) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted after the expiry of three months from the date on which the offence has been committed.
41 Appendix H Penalty for refusing to comply with notice under section 9 or for moving horse contrary to section 11. 13. Whoever refuses or neglects to comply with any notice issued by the Inspector under section 9, or removes any horse in contravention of section 11 shall be punishable with imprison- ment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both. Power to make rules. 14. (1) The Local Government may make rules to carry out the purposes and objects of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules as aforesaid may (a) regulate entries, searches and seizures by Inspectors under this Act; (b) regulate the use of tests and the isolation of horses subjected thereto, and provide for recovering the ex- pense of detaining, isolating and testing horses from the owners or persons in charge thereof as if it were a fine; (c) regulate the destruction or treatment as the case may be of horses certified under section 8 to be diseased, and the disposal of the carcasses of diseased horses; (d) regulate the disinfecting of buildings and places in which diseased horses have been and prescribe what things found therein or near thereto shall be destroyed ; and (e) regulate the grant of licenses under section 11 and the conditions on which those licenses shall be granted. (3) All rules under this section shall be published in the local official Gazette, and, on such publication, shall have effect as if enacted by this Act. (4) In making any rule under this section, the Local Gov- ernment may direct that a breach of it shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees or with both. Appointment of same person to be both Inspector and Veterinary Practitioner. 15. Any Veterinary Practitioner may be appointed by the Local Government to be both Inspector and Veterinary Prac- titioner for all or any of the purposes of this Act or of any rule thereunder. Protection to persons acting under Act. 16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is, in good faith, done or intended to be done under this Act. No. 2069Appendix H. 42 Circular No. 18, dated Simla, the 22nd September 1910. FROM The Under-Secretary to the Government of India, Department of Revenue and Agriculture, To All Local Governments and Administrations. I am directed to forward a copy of a notification No. 2069, dated 22nd September 1910, in which surra and lymphangitis epizootica have been specified as dangerous epidemic diseases within the meaning of section 2, sub-section (7), of the Glanders and Farcy Act, 1899 (XIII of 1899), as amended by the Glanders and Farcy Law Amendment Act, 1910 (XII of 1910). Under section 3 of the above Act Local Governments and Administra- tions may now, by notification in the local official Gazette, apply this Act, or any provision of it, to anyl ocal area so far as these two diseases are concerned. 2. I am at the same time to invite attention to Government of India Circular No. 843 Appendix I. APPENDIX I. (Referred to in paragraph 51). Dourine Act. ACT No. V of 1910. Passed by the Governor General of India in Council. (Received the assent of the Governor General on the 25th February 1910.) An act to provide for the prevention of the spread of dourine. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the prevention of the spread of dourine ; It is hereby enacted as follows :Appendix I. 44 Duties of Inspector. 6. An Inspector issuing an order under section 5, shall forth- with forward a copy of such order to the veterinary practitioner. Inspection of horses. 7. A veterinary practitioner receiving a copy of an order forwarded under section 6 shall, as soon as possible after receipt of such copy, examine the horse mentioned therein, and may for such purpose enter any building, field or other place. Powers of Veterinary Practitioner. 8. A veterinary practitioner may45 Appendix I. 14. (1) The Local Government may make rules for the pur- Rules. pose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules as aforesaid mayAppendix J. 46 APPENDIX J. Rules for admission of Indians to Commissioned rank in the Indian Army Veterinary Corps. [Referred to in paragraph 30 (i).] SECTION 1. QUALIFICATIONS . 1. Candidates for commissions must be over 21 and under 28 years of age. They will not be accepted unless, in the opinion of His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, they are in all respects suitable to hold commissions in the Army. 2. Every candidate must be either47 Appendix J. 10. All Indian Commissioned Officers of the Indian Army Veterinary Corps are exempted from passing the prescribed language test, viz.. Higher Standard Urdu. They will not be eligible to sit for the Lower and Higher Standard examinations in Urdu. As an exception to this ruling, the names of any Indian Commissioned Officers of the Indian Army Veterinary Corps who are not sufficiently acquaint- ed with Urdu to enable them to carry out their duties efficiently shall be reported to the Quartermaster General in India, Army Headquarters (through the usual channels) during the officers first year of service in the Indian Army Veterinary Corps. Such officers will be required to pass the Lower and Higher Standard examinations in Urdu within three years from their date of appointment to the Indian Army Veterinary Corps, for which they will draw the rewards admissible under the regulations. If an officer fails to pass the prescribed tests, viz., Lower and Higher Standard in Urdu within three years from the date of his appointment to the Indian Army Veterinary Corps, he will be permitted to resign and, if he declines to do so, will be gazetted out of the service and will cease to hold a commission. An extension of the term can only be justified on special grounds beyond the officer's control, and an application for extension must be submitted six months before the period expires. SECTION II. EXAMINATIONS. Subjects for the entrance examination. 1. Candidates will be examined in the following subjects by a board of veterinary officers convened by the Director of Veterinary Services in India :Appendix J. 48 2. A candidate on appointment as Lieutenant on probation will be re- quired to undergo such courses of Instruction as His Excellency the Com- mander-in-Chief may direct and will be examined approximately six months after appointment in the subjects taught. After he has passed these exa- minations and has satisfied the Director of Veterinary Services in India that he is suitable for permanent appointment to the Indian Army Veterinary Corps, his commission as Lieutenant will be confirmed and will bear the date of his appointment on probation. If, at the end of his probationary period an Indian Commissioned Officer fails to pass his retention examination or is not considered suitable for a permanent Commission he will be permitted to resign and, if he declines to do so, will be gazetted out of the service. SECTION III. PROMOTION. 1. Subject to the conditions which may be prescribed from time to time in the Regulations for the Army in India, a Lieutenant after 3½ years' com- missioned service may be promoted to the rank of Captain. A Captain may be promoted to the rank of Major after having served 8½ years in that rank, provided he has passed a post graduate course in or ex-India. 2. Promotion to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel will be made by selection from Majors of the Corps of not less than 20 years service, who have previously qualified as prescribed by the regulations in force at the time. 3. Promotion to the rank of Colonel will be made by selection from Lieu- tenant-Colonels of the Corps. SECTION IV. PAY AND ALLOWANCES. 1. The rates of pay for the Indian Commissioned Officers in the Indian Army Veterinary Corps upto the rank of Captain shall be as follows :49 Appendix J. 2. The retirement of officers is compulsory as follows :Appendix J. 50 Give the names, professions and present addresses of two referees. They should not be your school 1. masters, tutors, relatives or near connections, but responsible persons of mature age and of standing in their own districts who have been well acquainted with you in private life during 2. the four years immediately preceding your application. If you have had any occupation of any kind since leaving school or college, give particulars. Are you or have you been a member of a University Training Corps unit. If so, name your unit, and the period during which you served in it. Have you been vaccinated successfully (or twice unsuccessfully) within the last five years ? (Medical certificate to this effect should be pinned to this page). I declare, on my honour, that the foregoing is, to the best of my belief, complete and correct. Signature of candidate.
51 Appendix K. APPENDIX K. Syllabus of training of I. C. Os. during probationary period. [Referred to in paragraph 30 (ii).] A.Appendix K. 52 B. II. Pay and Allowances, stores, etc. 1. Pay and Allowances all ranks, I. A. V. C. 2. Stores and equipment. 3. Mobilization stores. 4. Medicines. 5. Supplies, ration and forage. 6. Clothing. B. III. Discipline including53 Appendix L. APPENDIX L. Authorities empowered to sanction moves. (Referred to in paragraph 15.) Designation. Nature of move. Sanctioning authority. Officers55 Index INDEX. Paras., etc. A AllowancesIndex. 56 Paras., etc. Discharge and dismissal57 Index Paras., etc. Equipment, Stores and SuppliesIndex. 58 Paras., etc. I India Army Forms59 Index. Paras., etc. Movement of troopsIndex. 60 Paras., etc R Rabies61 Index. Paras., etc. S Schools, Army Veterinary . . . . . 7 Section, I. A. V. C. . . . . . 29 Sera