ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR 1908-09. Published by Authority. Price: Annas 6 or 7d. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Labore: PRINTED AT THE "CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE" PRESS Sole Contractors for Printing to the Punjab Government. 1909.
PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT REPORT FOR 1908-09.
Agents for the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN LONDON. E.A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S. W. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, S. W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, W. B. QUARITCH, 11 Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, W. C. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. ON THE CONTINENT. FRIEDLANDER & SCHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ Leipzig. CARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST REROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. RUDOLF HAUPT, 1, Dorrienstrasse, Leipzig, Germany. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta & Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHEM& Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore [for Vernacular Publications, only]. MANAGER, The Aryan Printing, Publish- ing and General Trading Co., Limited, Lahore.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR 1908-09. Published by Authority. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE "CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE" PRESS. Sole Contractors for Printing to the Punjab Government. 1909.
CONTENTS OF REPORT. [Maximum limit of text, 12 pages.] Para. Subject. Page. PREFACE.ii Para. Subject. Page. PART IINO. 1757 S. (Rev. & Agri.ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY ADMINISTRATION IN THE PUNJAB, For the year 1908-09. Preface. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. The Punjab Veterinary College. 1. Major Smith was Principal of the Punjab Veterinary College throughout the year. Captain Dawson and Mr Gaiger held the other two Professorships. Mr. Gaiger was transferred to the Muktesar Laboratory during the summer vacation to study and work at various cattle diseases. In accordance with a recommendation of the Veterinary Conference held at Calcutta in February, 1908, a proposal was submitted to improve the pay of the Senior Assistant Professors at the Veterinary College, placing them on an equality with officers in the grade of Deputy Superintendent. It is understood that this scheme has been sanctioned. The new scale is a well merited reward for the present incumbents, and it will also tend to ensure a higher standard among their successors. New buildings. 2. Great difficulties are still being experienced in securing land for the extension of the dissecting room, and for the hostel As regards the dissecting room, acquisition proceedings are in train. The site first selected for the hostel had to be abandoned on account of the prohibitive price which was placed on it. A cheaper site has now been selected behind the office of the Director of Land Records, and, on receipt from the Principal, the necessary papers were forwarded to Government in May, with a view to the issue of a fresh notification under the Acquisition of Land Act. Certain urgently needed buildings which have been sanctioned these including additions to the present laboratory in the Contagious Diseases Ward, a 'destructor', and some out-houses, are being delayed, as funds are not available. It is to be hoped that it will soon be possible to carry out these extensions, as well as to complete the dissecting room, as delay is occasioning real incon- venience. Civil Veterinary Depart- ment. 3. Captain G. K. Walker held the appointment of Chief Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, from the 1st to the 23rd April, 1908, and from the 27th October, 1908 to the end of the year, the interval being spent by him on combined leave. During his absence, Mr. Woodley, Superintendent of the North Punjab Circle and North-West Frontier Province, acted in his place, while Mr. Carless, officer under training, officiated for Mr. Woodley. The Southern Punjab Circle was held by Captain Walker until the 23rd April, when it was taken over by Mr. Taylor who had been attached for training since the previous July Mr. Taylor's head-quarters have been established at Ferozepore. On reverting from the charge of the North Punjab Circle, Mr. Carles remained attached to the Province for training. Extent and duration of tours of officers. 4. Captain Walker was on tour for 59 days and travelled 2,975 miles by rail and 449 miles by road. Mr. Woodley, as officiating Chief Superintendent, was on tour for 54 days and travelled 2,428 miles by rail and 523 miles by road. As Superintendent, Civil Veterinary
2 Department, North Punjab and North-West Frontier Province, Mr. Woodley spent 95 days on tour, of which 49 were in the Frontier Province. He travel- led 3,469 miles by rail and 1,130 by road. Mr. Carless, when officiating for Mr. Woodley, spent 69 days on tour, of which 28 were in the Frontier Province. He travelled 1,594 miles by rail and 1,152 miles by road. Mr. Taylor was 138 days on tour, and travelled 6,035 miles by rail and 1,173 miles by road. Mr. Carless, while under training, was on tour for 47 days, and travelled 1,445 miles by rail and 448 miles by road. The number of days spent in tents on tour were as follows:3 Rules for the recruit- ment of compounders. 9. Draft rules under the District Board and Municipal Acts regulating the employment of compounders and ensuring their effici- ency have been submitted to Government and have been published in the Punjab Gazette for the information of the public preliminary to being made final. Urgent need of a stronger and better qualified super- vising staff, and of ar- rangements for it's educa- tion and training. 10. The perusal of Parts II to IV of this report on the Provincial Veter- inary Department brings out the point very strongly that, while the field of work continues to extend, and the staff of veterinary assistants is increasing every year, the super- vising staff remains practically the same, and is fast becoming unequal to the task imposed upon it. The present inspectors are not competent to discharge all the duties which one would legitimately expect from the inter- mediate grade of supervising officers. The veterinary assistants have to receive continual technical training, and the time of the Superintendents is largely devoted to this instead of being freely available for such important work as the investigation of disease and the supervision of inoculation operations in the field. It is of vital importance to the future of the Department that this matter should be taken up without delay. Captain Walker and I are practically agreed as to what should be done, and our general proposals are now before Government. Briefly, we recommend:4 Admission examination. 13. The number of students admitted in April, 1908, was 67, including 25 from Indian Cavalry, 2 from the Army Remount Depart- ment, 1 from Imperial Service Troops, 1 from a Native State, 4 from the Central Provinces and 14 from the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. The balance is made up of 29 civilian students who were selected from about 200 candidates assembled for the competitive examination on the 20th April, 1908. Educational qualifications. 14. The educational qualifications of the 67 men admitted during the year were as follows:5 The results would undoubtedly have been better but for the many compul- sory absences of students from malaria last autumn, and the very large size of the final year class. The Transport Dressers class. 21. In addition to the ordinary classes held during the year, a class of 62 men from the Transport Department received three months' training as dressers. Nalbands. 22. Sixteen men received a nine months' course of instruction in shoeing. At the examination held in January, 1909, nine men passed successfully. Of the seven failures, four men were examined by me in April last after four months' further tuition, and passed successfully. Caste of students. 23. The students in the College at the close of the year comprised:6 and is taught in the Segregation Ward. In addition, instruction is given in the methods of preparing and using black-quarter vaccine and hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum and in the application of the mallein and tuberculine tests. A separate scientific report is now annually submitted by the officer in charge through the Principal and Director of Agriculture, to the Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, on the work done and the contagious diseases met with during the year. New buildings. 29. During the year, no progress has been made in certain sanctioned buildings, viz., additions to Dissecting Room and Laboratory, etc. With our large classes, it is easily understandable how we are working at considerable inconvenience for the want of this extra accom- modation, and it is hoped that another year will not be allowed to pass before these urgent wants are supplied. The question of a hostel7 Examination and collec- tion of specimens. 36. During the year, 77 specimens were submitted for examination and, of these, 52 were examined by officers of the department and 25 were sent to the Punjab Veterinary College. Certain material was called for from the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory for experi- mental purposes and this was obtained and submitted. Some specimens of reput- ed poisonous plants have been received for classification and record. Collection of biting flies, etc. 37. A certain number of equipments for collecting blood-sucking insects were received from the Imperial Entomologist and a begin- ning has been made towards making a collection. It will be very useful to have the indigenous varieties correctly identified with a view to determining eventually the particular diseases for the spread of which many are no doubt responsible. Maps showing distribu- tion of disease. 38. Maps showing the distribution of certain epidemic diseases in the Punjab were prepared and submitted to the Inspector-Gene- ral, Civil Veterinary Department. SECTION 1 (a).8 Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia, Table II. 46. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia was reported from every district in the Province except two. As usual, it was most severe in the irrigated districts of the Central Punjab. The disease is always more prevalent in wet seasons and the year under report was no exception. The total number of deaths reported was 20,822 out of 26,082 animals attacked against 8,133 cases and 7,351 deaths last year. No satisfactory treatment has yet been discovered for this disease. As stated last year, it would be less frequent if cattle were kept under better hygienic conditions. Preventive inoculation, Table III. 47. The issue of preventive serum for hæmorrhagic septicæmia was suspended last year by the Inspector-General as it was of doubtful efficacy. A certain amount of serum, however, that was in hand, was utilised, as in many cases the people have faith in it. 6,075 contact animals in 40 outbreaks were inoculated, of which 13 died after inoculation. A few doses of a new vaccine for this disease have been issued from the Laboratory and the method is under trial in the field. A good preventive agent would fulfil a great want as it causes great losses among cattle in this Province. If it could be absolutely proved in what manner and by what agency it was spread a great step in advance would have been made. Foot and mouth disease, Table II. 48. Foot and mouth disease was reported from every district. 70,606 cases were reported, of which 1,241 died, against 38,683 and 673, respectively, last year. It was normally prevalent and the mortality not excessive. The veterinary staff does good service in treat- ing animals suffering from this disease. Black-quarter, Table II. 49. Black-quarter was reported from 18 districts. There were 965 cases and 721 deaths against 678 cases and 632 deaths last year. Preventive vaccination, Table III. 50. 2,606 vaccinations were performed in infected places with most satis- factory results. In future, the vaccine for this disease will be obtained from the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory. Anthrax, Table II. 51. 688 deaths were reported from anthrax in 15 districts. I have pre- viously pointed out that anthrax in cattle is rare in the Punjab and I become more convinced of this every year. It appears likely that the local cattle possess a very strong natural immunity. Other contagions disease, Table II. 52. The large number of deaths in bovines under the head of "other con- tagious disease," viz. 8,895, is due mainly to the existence of 'gillar' or parasitic disease in the Lahore and Sialkot districts. The Montgomery, Amritsar and Gujranwala districts also suffered severely. I was able to give this disease some attention whilst in the Amritsar District. Wet seasons favour the development of internal parasites. In years when fodder is scarce animals have not sufficient strength to withstand the attacks of these parasites and they die in large numbers of semi-starvation complicated with para- sitism. After further investigation, the principal parasites which cause the dis- ease will be specified. The remedy is a liberal and nutritious diet. Consequently, when fodder becomes available, the surviving animals usually recover. It is a question if 'gillar' should be regarded as an epidemic disease. It is regarded as such by many agriculturists, but the mortality is more strictly due to malnutri- tion. SECTION 1 (c).9 itinerates in each district and the remainder visit outbreaks of epidemic disease only when called upon. The number of animals treated in villages depends mainly on the incidence of foot and mouth disease during the year as nearly all the cases treated on tour by the men who are normally stationary come under this category. SECTION 3.-VETERINARY HOSPITALS. Veterinary hospitals, Ta- ble V. 55. During the year under report, there were 86 veterinary hospitals in the province, and the total number of cases treated in them amounted to 144,882. Last year, the number of cases was 96,630 in 77 hospitals. This is a very satisfactory increase and demonstrates the popularity of these institutions. The average daily attendance at each hospital works out at 9.8 and the average daily admittance of fresh cases at 4.6. These figures would certainly be larger if many of the smaller hospitals had not to be closed during the temporary absence of the veterinary assistants in charge. As there was an abnormal amount of epidemic disease during the year veterinary hospitals had to be left more than they would be ordinarily and the attendance was consequently less. Where intelligent compounders are employed the temporary absence of the veterinary assistant is not felt so much. Buildings. 56. The work of providing suitable accommodation is progressing satis- factorily. Out of 86 veterinary hospitals, 54 are built according to the standard plan, though 9 of these are incom- plete. Of the remainder, 7 are accommodated in suitable buildings and the others are in temporary quarters. With the help of the Government grant, supplemented in some cases from local funds, it is hoped that suitable accommodation will in time be provided for all. The veterinary hospital at Amritsar is very unsatisfactorily accommodated, and although a scheme for a new hospital was started some years ago and plans have been drawn up, no progress has been made. A new hospital is required at Murree also and, as the present one is very profitable, the Municipal- ity might be expected to provide a suitable place. Income and expenditure at veterinary hospitals, Table VI. 57. The income and expenditure in the respective districts of the veteri- nary hospitals is shown in Table VI. Rupees 12,444 were realised from fees against Rs. 7,198 in the previous year. The fees in the district veterinary hospitals are very small and are only levied from income tax-payers. Simla Veterinary Hos- pital. 58. The statement of the receipts and expenditure of the veterinary hos- pital at Simla received from the Municipal Committee shows that the institution pays its way satisfactorily with a mar- gin of profit. The receipts, excluding the balance carried from last year, amount to Rs. 5,905 and the total expenditure to Rs. 3,093. This leaves a balance of Rs. 2,812 to be credited to provincial funds or Rs. 1,266 more than is required to cover the salary of the verterinary assistant and the interest on the capital cost of the buildings. Some more dog kennels are required at this institution and when the plans, which are awaited from the Executive Engineer, are received sanction will be applied for. The cost of their construction will be justified no doubt by the increased income that they will bring in. Part III10 Supply and care of bulls. 60. The grant for veterinary improvements enabled districts to buy more bulls than they would otherwise have been able to afford. We are fortunate in being able to get good bulls, suitable for a great many districts, from the Government Cattle Farm at Hissar at moderate price. Indents for 81 Hissar bulls were received from 16 districts and these were fully complied with. A number of bulls of the Dhunni breed were ob- tained privately from the Jhelum District, with the assistance of the Superintend- ent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab, and a few others were purchas- ed locally. One that had gone astray was recovered. During the year, District Boards were reminded that they are practically in entire charge of cattle breeding and that the arrangements for seeing that studs bulls are properly looked after are purely a district concern. This Department has laid down certain general principles, but local conditions vary and the subject should be very interesting to rural members. In localities where bulls are appreciated and used intelligently, the young stock show signs of great improvement since selected bulls have been more liberally supplied. With the rise of price of bullocks, cattle breeding on intelligent lines requires to be fostered by local interest. The larger questions of provision of grazing grounds and increased production of forage crops will require to be dealt with probably by special measures. Sargodha Bull Farm. 61. The scheme for a bull farm in the Jhelum Colony has not progress- ed owing to the difficulty experienced in obtaining the neces- sary grazing rights. If sufficient grazing cannot be obtain- ed the scheme will probably have to be dropped. SECTION 2.11 Horse shows, Table XIII. 67. The horse shows held in the Delhi, Karnal, Ambala, and Gurdaspur districts received grants and medals from Imperial funds. They were all attended by officers of this department. Cattle shows, Table XIV. 68. Medals from provincial funds were given at the Gurdaspur, Chakwal, Lyallpur, and Gujrat cattle shows. Most of the shows were visited by an officer of the department who assisted the Judging Committee. All shows are attended by one or more of the veterinary staff to deal with disease and assist generally. SECTION 4.-OTHER BREEDING OPERATIONS. Merino rams. 69. It was not found possible to import the 25 Merino rams sanctioned for the Kangra District as the purchasing agents could not obtain them at the time of the year they were ordered. Arrangements are being made to obtain the rams in the autumn, however. Part IV.12 Director of Agriculture's Circular No. 4. Appoint- ment of visitors for veteri- nary hospitals. 74. A reference to Director of Agriculture's Circular No. 4, dated 25th May, 1908, is desirable to show that an attempt was made during the year to arouse greater interest on the part of District Officers and members of local bodies in the work of the department. In some districts visitors have been appointed for veterinary hospitals, and they occasionally record their remarks. Part V.13 the Province being absolutely free from this disease during the year. The staff was busily occupied in many districts in coping with rinderpest, and as the efficacy of the preventive serum is well established, the inoculation of 60,258 contact animals must represent a great saving of capital to agriculturists. It is regrettable that so many animals died in Mianwali after inoculation, but the case was investigated by the Superintendent, and there is no reasonable doubt but that the mortality was due to a parasitic disease. In spite of the departmental orders that cattle exposed to infection from some other disease should not be inoculated, there must, with a subordinate staff like ours, always be a danger of incidents of this kind. There is, however, no question as regards the growing faith of the people in anti-rinderpest serum. We are still without a reliable vaccine against hæmorrhagic septicæmia, the most deadly of all cattle diseases in the Punjab. The results obtained with the vaccine which is under trial will be awaited with great interest. Black-quarter vaccine is now obtainable from the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory. As above. Veterinary hospitals. 80. The working of the hospitals is improving, and there is a substantial increase in the number of cases treated. The attendance would certainly be much better if veterinary assistants were not compelled to leave their hospitals to deal with outbreaks of epidemic disease. It is to be hoped that good buildings in convenient situations will soon be provided at Amritsar and Murree where the existing hospitals are already doing remarkably good work. The accounts of the Simla Hospital show a clear profit of Rs. 1,266 to Government. This is a very creditable result. As above. Breeding operations. 81. The number of bulls in districts has advanced from 379 to 437. The number varies greatly from district to district, but this is due to differences in local condition. It is unfortu- nate that the Sargodha bull farm scheme has been delayed for so many years owing to the difficulty in securing Rakhs Drema and Risala which have been selected for the run. Negotiations are still proceeding with the Military Depart- ment. Much more attention is being taken in horse breeding in the non-select- ed districts. The recent stock census shows that there has been a marked in- crease under the head "horses and ponies". There is a keener demand for good stallions, which I consider that we should make every endeavour to meet. A general improvement in the number and quality of the horses and ponies in the Province would be a valuable asset to the Military Department, and the breeding of good animals at present prices would be an additional source of profit to the agricultural population. Mule breeding is now on a much sounder basis, as a large number of effete and useless donkey stallions have been cast and re- placed by young animals. As above. Publications in vernacular. 82. Captain Walker has contributed a series of articles on veterinary subject to the "Zemindar," and it is understood that these have been much appreciated. The question of issuing pam- phlets on approved subjects is under consideration. With the marked rise in the value of cattle, useful information connected with the management of cattle and their protection against disease would probably be well received. As above. Notice of officers. 83. There have been no changes in the administration of the Department during the year. Captain Walker has, therefore, devoted his attention to the training of his staff and to the development of the scheme of working introduced in the autumn of 1907. I consider that every effort is being made to make the department of direct and practical use to the agricultural community, and that the year may be regarded as one of continued and gratifying progress. Mr. Woodley had a particularly arduous year and his health suffered from the strain. He worked zealously and assiduously. Mr. Taylor did very well throughout. Both these officers deserve credit for their work. Mr. Carless has been gaining experience and he should become a useful officer. W. RENOUF, Director of Agriculture, Punjab. The 30th June, 1909.
TABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab Veterinary College ... i II Ditto the number of deaths from contagious disease among animals ... ... ... ... ii III Ditto the results of preventive inoculation ... ... iii IV Ditto the number of animals treated and castrated by veteri- nary assistants on tour ... ... ... iv V Ditto the number of animals treated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries ... ... ... v VI Abstract showing receipts and expenditure of veterinary hospitals ... vi VII Showing total strength of subordinate veterinary staff employed ... ib. VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ... ... vii IX Showing main results of provincial cattle-farms ... ... viii X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ix XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallion under local bodies ... ... ... ... ... ... x XII Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ... ... ib. XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-select- ed districts ... ... ... ... ... ... xi XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... ... xii XIV A Statement showing cost of the Civil Veterinary Department ... ... xiii
TABLE No. 1.i TABLE II.iii TABLE III. (See Paragraphs 44, 47 and 50) SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1008-09. DISTRICT. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNIN- OCULATED IN COURSE OF OUTBREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... ... Rinderpest. Serum alone. 5 ... 43 ... ... 744 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... ... 2 ... 15 ... ... 150 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... ... 5 ... 78 ... ... 293 ... ... 1 ... Delhi ... ... 4 ... 90 ... ... 531 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... ... 3 ... 44 ... ... 375 ... ... ... .. Ambala ... ... 5 ... 96 ... ... 1,010 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... 1 ... 7 ... ... 78 ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 1 ... 21 .. ... 356 ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... 1 ... 12 ... ... 104 ... ... 1 ... Ludhiana ... ... 8 ... 132 ... ... 1,655 ... ... 3 ... Ferozepore ... 33 ... 617 ... ... ::: 7,078 ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... Montgomery ... 1 ... 45 318 Lahore ... ... 19 ... 661 ... ... 6,548 ... ... 8 ... Amritsar ... ... 4 ... 54 ... ... 660 ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... ... 2 ... 308 ... ... 497 ... ... ... ... Sialkot ... ... 1 ... 13 ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... Gujranwala ... 23 ... 463 ... ... 4,695 ... ... 5 ... Gujrat ... ... 2 ... 46 ... ... 1,428 ... ... ... Shahpur ... ... 1 ... 39 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi ... 41 ... 186 ... ... 6,429 ... ... 11 ... Attock ... ... 4 ... 29 ... ... 1,067 ... ... ... ... Minwali ... ... 67 ... 1,122 ... ... 12,671 ... ... 567 ... Lyllpur ... ... 5 ... 56 ... ... 1,195 ... ... ... ... Jhang .. ... 9 ... 79 ... ... 2,254 ... ... ... ... Multan ... ... 17 ... 236 ... ... 7,952 ... ... 1 ... Muzaffargarh ... 5 ... 33 ... ... 1,713 ... ... 4 ... Dera Ghazi Khan... 1 ... 10 ... ... 445 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... 270 4,535 ... ... 60,258 ... ... 613 ... Hoshiarpur ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Serum alone. 3 ... 29 ... ... 644 ... ... ... ... Jullundur... ... 3 ... 33 ... ... 547 ... ... 2 ... Ludhiana ... ... 9 ... 85 ... ... 1,543 ... 1 ... Ferozepore ... 3 ... 27 ... ... 396 ... ... 1 ... Lahore ... ... 4 ... 51 ... ... 837 ... ... 1 ... Amritsar ... ... 1 ... 5 ... ... 87 ... ... ... ... Gujranwala ... 6 ... 75 ... ... 1,205 .. ... 8 ... Shahpur ... ... 1 ... 10 ... ... 164 ... ... ... ... Jhang ... ... 10 ... 65 ... ... 652 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... 40 ... 380 ... ... 6,075 ... ... 13 ... Lahore ...... H. S. Vaccine. 2 130 Total ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 130 ... ... ... ... Hissar ... ... Black-quar- ter. Vaccine. 1 ... 40 ... ... 1,437 1 Ferozepore ... 1 ... ... ... 19 ... ... Jhelum ... ... 14 ... ... ... ... 1,150 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 16 40 .... ... 2,606 ... ... 1 ... GRAND TOTAL ... ... ... 328 ... 4,955 ... ... 69,069 ... ... 627 ...
iv TABLE IV.V TABLE V.vi TABLE VI.vii TABLE VIII.TABLE IX. SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF PROVINCIAL CATTLE FARMS DURING THE YEAR 1908-09. Blank.
xi TABLE X.x TABLE XI.xi TABLE XIII.xii TABLE XIVxiii TABLE XIV A.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB For the year 1909-10. Published by Authority. Price : Annas 5 or 5d. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE "CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE" PRESS BY SAMUEL T. WESTON. (Sole Contractors for Printing to the Punjab Government.) 1910.
PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPART- MENT REPORTS FOR 1909-10.
Agents for the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN LONDON. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S. W. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, S. W. KEGAN, PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, W. B. QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, W. C. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. ON THE CONTINENT. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. CABL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. RUDOLF HAUTT, 1, Dorrienstrasse, Leipzig, Germany. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta & Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Espla- nade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anárkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore [for Vernacular Publications only]. MANAGER, The Aryan Printing, Publish- ing and General Trading Co., Limited, Lahore.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB For the year 1909-10. Published by Authority. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE "CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE" PRESS BY SAMUEL T. WESTON. (Sole Contractors for Printing to the Punjab Government.) 1910.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 12 pages). Para. Subject. Page. Review of the Director of Agriculture ... ... ... ... ... 1 REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE. 1 General administration ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 Sessions ... ... ... ... ... ib. 3 Veterinary graduates' course ... ... ... ... ... ib. 4 Admission examination. First year class ... ... ... ... ... ib. 5 Educational qualifications ... ... ... ... ... ib. 6 Second year class ... ... ... ... ... ib. 7 Third year class 2 Para. Subject. Page. 18 Preventive inoculation No. 1972 S. (Rev. & Agri.ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY ADMINISTRATION IN THE PUNJAB For the year 1909-10. Review by the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, of the reports of the Punjab Veterinary College, and of the Punjab Civil Veterinary Department for the year 1909-10. PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE. Examination results. 1. The examination results are very slightly better than last year for the third year class, while they are not so good for the first and second year classes. The examiners have again reported that the number of students is too large to admit of satisfactory teaching and the matter has been brought by the Punjab Government to the notice of the Govern ment of India. The overcrowding of classes is due to the large number of men who have to be trained for the Army and for other Provinces. It is understood that the question of providing additional facilities for vernacular veterinary instruction in Upper India is under consideration. General. 2. A report on the valuable and interesting work done in the segregation ward during the year by Mr. Gaiger has been submitted to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department It is hoped that the difficulties of the College as regards buildings will soon be removed. The site for the hostel has been acquired. Having regard to the unmanageable size of the classes, the results achieved by Major Smith and his assistants are very satisfactory. THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB. Tours. 3. The tours of the officers of the department have been of the usual ex- tensive character. It is satisfactory to note that each officer spent some time in tents, but it will be well to de- vote a longer period each year to camping in tents as there is no better, and in- deed no other way, of ascertaining the real requirements of the people and how far these are being met. Disease. 4. With a heavy and prolonged monsoon rainfall, the year was an unhealthy one, although the mortality was not quite as heavy as in 1908-09. The progress made in simplifying the arsenical treatment of surra so as to make it generally applicable will be followed with great interest. The increase in the number of deaths from rinderpest from 8,739 to 18,055 is remarkable, and is doubtless connected with the short supply of serum. Steps are being taken to apply the vaccine against hæmorrhagic septi- caemia in villages in which the disease has appeared for the last two or three years in succession. Foot and mouth disease was extraordinarily prevalent and veteri- nary assistants were in great request in this connection. There is a very satis- factory increase in the number of cases treated on tour by veterinary assistants as well as in hospitals.
2 Veterinary hospitals. 5. Steady progress is being made in providing suitable buildings for veterinary hospitals. The gift of a hospital at Bhiwani by Lala Tara Chand deserves acknowledgment, and is a gratify- ing indication of the growth of popular interest. Further efforts will be made to remove the difficulties in the way of providing better hospitals at Amritsar and Murree. The Simla veterinary hospital again shows a net profit. The equipment of all the hospitals is excellent. Cattle-breeding. 6. The number of public bulls has advanced in 6 years from 242 to 472 but varies greatly from district to district. This is due partly to differences in the keenness of District Boards, and partly to variations in the demand for bulls. In some districts it is easy to arrange for the free maintenance of stud bulls. In others, this is practically impossible. The subject of cattle breeding and of the cattle trade is one that has hitherto never been investigated thoroughly, but, last year, a systematic enquiry was initiated in every district, and Mr. Stow, C. S., was placed on special duty to co-ordinate the district reports and prepare a provincial report. His preliminary conclusions were discussed with me and with officers of the Veterinary Department at an informal meeting held in Lahore last April. His report is expected in the autumn and it should have far reaching results on cattle-breeding in the Province. Other breeding. 7. The last cattle census showed a substantial increase of 26 per cent. in the number of horses and ponies in the quinquennium. This has led to the addition of a few stallions to the Pro- vincial scale. The shortage in the supply of donkey stallions at the Hissar Cattle Farm is to be regretted. Mule-breeding is of such importance in the Punjab that every effort should be made to complete our cadre. Two camel stallions were presented by Government to the Townsend Agricultural Society in Hissar which is interesting itself in cattle and camel breeding. The course of the experiment with merino rams in Kangra will be watched carefully by the Department. The introduction of camel shows in four districts should be noticed. District cattle surveys. 8. Major Walker completed his cattle survey of the Amritsar District and his interesting and valuable report has just been pub- lished. The cattle surveys of Hissar and Jhelum will be finished next winter. General. 9. There is ample outside evidence that the Department is gaining steadily in popularity. The efficiency of the subordinate staff is increasing. With the recent advance in the prices of all stock, the people are compelled to give more thought to the breeding and care of their cattle, and they are accordingly evincing more readiness to invoke skilled assistance. The established success of the serum against rinderpest has made a very favourable impression. When a veterinary assistant is capable, keen and obliging, he has usually no difficulty in filling his hospital. It follows that cases in which veterinary assistants do not succeed in making their hospitals popular should be made the subject of close enquiry. One of the most important matters at present is the training of veterinary inspectors to relieve the superintendents of much routine supervision and give them more freedom. for work in the field. Special grant to District Boards for veterinary matters. 10. The continuance by the Provincial Government of the annual grant of a lakh to District Boards for veterinary development for another five years is gratefully acknowledged. This will permit of the completion of the building programme and will provide funds for giving effect to Mr. Stow's recommendations for the im- provement of cattle breeding. Notice of officers. 11. The year has been mainly devoted to the training of the staff, and Major Walker is to be congratulated on the continued steady advance. He has been ably assisted by Messrs Woodley, Taylor and Carless, all of whom show the greatest keenness in their work. I am particularly indebted to Major Walker for his interesting section at the Industrial and Agricultural Exhibition. W. C. RENOUF, July 14th, 1910. Director of Agriculture, Punjab.
REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE For the year 1909-10. BY MAJOR A. SMITH, I. C. V. D, PRINCIPAL. General administration. 1. The administration of the institution has, throughout the year, been in my hands. The following changes in the staff have taken place during the year. Mr. E. Burke, Deputy Superintendent, Hissar, took over charge of the office of Professor of Surgery, on the 13th December last, vice Captain Dawson transferred to Madras, on the 1st December, 1909. Mr. R. Branford was deputed in May, 1909, for training at the College. On the 20th July last he proceeded to Dacca and officiated as Superin- tendent, C. V. D., Eastern Bengal and Assam, for three months, whilst the regular incumbent was on leave. Sessions. 2. The summer session commenced on the 21st April, 1909, closing on the 30th June, 1909, The winter session commenced on the 1st October, 1909, closing on the 31st March, 1910. Veterinary graduate's course. 3. The numbers undergoing instruction in the three classes, for the Graduate's course, were as follows:4 Re-examination. 8. Towards the end of June, 1909, 8 final class and 6 students of the junior classes, who had failed in one subject only, at the previous annual examination in 1909, having pursued their studies for another 3 months, were again examined in the subject in which they had failed. Of the 8 final class students 6 succeeded in passing and 2 failed. The latter two were in consequence remanded for another year. Of the six men of the junior classes, who were examined, all passed succesfully. Examination results. 9. The result of the annual examination is as follows:5 Income. 14. The sum paid into the Government Treasury was Rs. 12,454-8-0 as against Rs. 14,223-2-0 during the previous year, or a de- crease of Rs. 1,768-10-0. The decrease is distributed as follows:ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB For the year 1909-10. BY V. DE V. H. WOODLEY, ESQUIRE, M.R.C.V.S. Offg. Chief Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab. Part I.7 Mr. Carless inspected all the hospitals in the North Punjab circle. He inspected the tonga lines in the circle and dealt with an outbreak of glanders on the Rawalpindi-Kohala tonga line. He purchased 20 Dhanni bulls from the Chakwal and Talagang tahsils for eight districts. He attended and judged at the Talagang cattle show. He commenced a cattle survey of the Jhelum district, and in the course of his tours he interviewed district officers and inspected district board bulls. Mr. Taylor toured in all the districts in his circle, inspected 39 hospitals and attended outbreaks of contagious diseases. He attended and judged at 4 cattle shows, and visited the Hissar Government cattle farm to select bulls for the various districts. He acted as a member of the Board of Examiners for the nalband class at the Punjab Veterinary College in January, 1910. He inspected the Simla-Kalka tonga line twice during the year. He made special journeys to the Ludhiana and Karnal districts in connection with outbreaks of surra. Mr. Cattell, while under training, judged at 4 horse and cattle shows and inspected three veterinary hospitals. He accompanied Major Walker in his tour with tents in the Gurdaspur district. Part II.8 disease in the field. The arsenical treatment prescribed by Captain Holmes, Imperial Bacteriologist, is not yet simple enough to be made applicable in the districts generally. It is hoped that the treatment will be further simplified so that every Veterinary Assistant can readily apply it. If this can be done it will be of enormous economic benefit. Dourine.9 Preventive inoculation. 21. One thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine vaccinations were per- formed in 48 villages against 2,606 vaccinations in 16 villages in the previous year. Since December, by the order of the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, vaccination with pillules as supplied from the Imperial Laboratory has been discontinued owing to some fatal accidents which occurred in the North Punjab Circle. Anthrax.10 factory; apparently there is a great difficulty in obtaining a suitable site. At Bhawani, a hospital will be built next year by the beneficence of Lala Tara Chand, Rais of Bhawani, Hissar district, who has presented the District Board with a sum of Rs. 7,000 for the purpose. Income and expenditure at veterinary hospitals.11 Services of stallions.12 There is an increase of 8 veterinary assistants over the last year. The department is now short of the full complement by 14 men. These will be obtained by gradual annual recruitment in the course of the next two years. Work of the subordinate staff. 45. The subordinate staff continues to improve in efficiency. Much depends upon the degree and quality of supervision of the inspectors who generally have worked well. As annual increases are being made to the number of veterinary assistants a proportionate increase is urgently required in the ranks of the veterinary inspectors, and pro- posals have accordingly been submitted. An application has also been made for an increase in the reserve staff. This now stands at 5 per cent. on the number of veterinary assistants and this has been found to be quite inadequate. Training in inoculation. 46. During the year, two veterinary assistants were sent to Muktesar or Bareilly (U. P.) for training in inoculation work. Part V.TABLES. Number. Subject Page. I Statement Showing the main results of the Punjab Veterinary College i II Ditto the number of deaths from contagious disease among animals... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ii III Ditto the results of preventive inoculation TABLE I. (See Punjab Veterinary College Report.) STATEMENT SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1909-10. Name of the Institution. Name of Course of Instruction if more than one course followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. STUDENTS ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR CLASSED BY EDU- CATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATE WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE 3 YEARS PRECEDING. REMARKS. Admitted during the year 20th April, 1909. Passed final examination during the year ending April, 1910. Failed to pass final examination in 1910. Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of the year. Scholarship-holders. Military students and others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. Matriculated or with higher qualifications. Knowing some Eng- lish but not Matri- culated. Knowing no English or very little Eng- lish. From fees. From other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing stall. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Govern- ment or local bodies. In service of other States, bodies and institutions, etc. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs, Rs. Rs. Rs. Punjab Veterinary College. Diploma or 3 years' course in Urdu. 27 48 *68 ii TABLE II. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 4, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 19, 22, 23 and 24.) SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1909-10. District. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other contagious diseases. Total Rinderpest Foot and mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and mouth. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Hissár iii TABLE III. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 15, 17, 18 and 20.) SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1909-10. District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which, inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals. which died uninocu- lated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of animals which died after inoculation. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissár iv TABLE IV. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 25.) SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1909-10. DISTRICT. Number of villages visited. Number of Veteri- nary Assistants employed. Castrations performed. Treated for contagious diseases. Treated for non-contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissár v TABLE V. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 26.) SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR 1909-10. DISTRICT. Number of Veterinary Dis- pensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed at Dispensaries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF IN AND OUT- PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expenditure. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 HOSPITALS (a) Hissár vi TABLE VI. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 30.) ABSTRACT SHOWING RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE OF VETERINARY HOSPITALS DURING 1909-10. DISTRICT. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Balance. REMARKS. Last year's balance. By Local Fund grants By Govern- ment grants. By Municipal contribution. By fees. By other sources. Total. Pay. Travelling Allowances. Medicines, instruments, etc. Furniture, etc. Contingen- cies. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Hissár vii TABLE VII. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 44.) SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1909-10. PROVINCE. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate Staff not in- cluded in previous columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. In Schools and Colleges... ... viii TABLE IX. SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF PROVINCIAL CATTLE FARMS DURING THE YEAR 1909-10. Nil. TABLE X. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 34 and 35.) RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1909-10. DETAILS. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total Horses and Ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicilian. TOTAL. Arab. Persian. Country- bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country- bred. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1909 ix TABLE XI. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 36.) SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STAL- LIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES, DURING 1909-10. Horse, Pony or Donkey. District. Stallions on Register on 31st March 1910. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average number of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse X TABLE XIII. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 38 and 39.) ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1909-10. NAME OF FAIR. Number of horse fairs and shows held. Total number of animals present. Total number competing for prizes. Total number of horse stock (not including branded) mares present. Number of remounts purchased. Price paid for remounts. Number of mules purchased. Price paid for mules by Government. Total number of animals sold. Prize-money provided. Amount sanctioned by Govern ment of India fop next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Hissar TABLE XIV. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 38, 40 and 41.) ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YAER 1909-10. Name of Fair. Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Total number of stock present. Average price of animals sold. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Prize-money provided. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Hissár xii TABLE XIV A. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 47.) STATEMENT SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1909-10 IN THE PROVINCE OF THE PUNJAB. MAJOR HEADS. Amount. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, For the year 1910-11. Price: Re. 0-5-0 or 5 d. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1911.
PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT REPORTS FOR 1910-11.
Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN LONDON. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S. W. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, S. W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, W. B. QUARITCH, II Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, I, Adelphi Terrace, W. C. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. ON THE CONTINENT. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, II, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. CARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta & Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anárkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore [for Vernacular publications only]. MANAGER, " The Aryan Printing, Publishing and General Trading Co., Limited Lahore." N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Pro- prietor, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., Bombay.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, For the year 1910-11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1911.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limits of text, 10 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. NOTE BY THE DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE. PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE. 1 Future of the College 2 Para. Subject. Page. 16 Preventive inoculation.NO. 503 (Rev. & Agri.2 5. The question of cattle-breeding has been brought into greater pro- minence by Mr. Stow's monograph on the subject, and His Honour trusts that the Civil Veterinary Department will devote all the attention they can spare to a subject of such vital importance to the population at large. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, H. P. TOLLINTON, Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab. Punjab Government Press, Lahore-26-8-11ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPART- MENT IN THE PUNJAB DURING 1910-11. NOTE BY THE DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE. PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE. Future of the College. 1. The year has been one of expectation and disappointment. The Government of India has decided that the college must be enlarged so as to serve as the sole veterinary college for the whole of Northern India. This means more professors, more laboratories and more space. Schemes have been drawn up to provide all these, and have been, or will be, submitted to Government. But dis- appointment will continue so long as the selection of a site for the enlarged college is barred by difficulties, born not of any special fastidiousness on the part of the Veterinary Department, but of the prevalent uncertainty as to the scope of the King Edward Memorial Scheme. As the greater part of the present site of the college will almost certainly be handed over to the Medical College, the cost of the new site will presumably fall for the most part on the Medical Budget or on the Memorial Fund. Report on standard of College. 2. As to the details of the work of the college, I need not do more than quote from the report of the examiners :2 and the decision of Government not at present to charge fees for inoculation rescues the treatment from threatened collapse. There is a reduction shew in equine disease, but the Chief Superintendent doubts the accuracy of the figures. The veterinary assistants have treated 24,000 less cases on tour, but nearly 24,000 more cases have been treated in hospitals. The popularity of the hospitals is undoubtedly rapidly extending. Cattle in breeding dis- tricts. 5. It is to be hoped that cattle-breeding receives a larger share of the superintendents' attention than the meagre proportion of the report devoted to the subject would indicate. Mr. Stow's model report has laid down the lines to be followed in future. It is useless to summarize it ; everyone interested in cattle- breeding should read it. Perhaps the most important lesson is that different problems have to be solved in breeding and in importing tracts. In breeding tracts the bull is the pivot. The number of stud bulls at work is more than last year, but there are no statistics available as to their produce. I hope it will be possible in future to obtain fuller information 3 8. The question of the merino rams in Kulu must be reserved at present. More money will have to be spent on importations, if the experiment is not to be dropped4 Contagious ward. 6. Provision has been made, as in previous years, for the demonstration of all available cases of contagious diseases to students. I regret to say that nothing has yet been done to remedy the deplorable lack of accommodation which is now severely felt as work in- creases. A separate report will be sent in, as usual, to the Inspector-General on the work done in the contagious ward. The report will largely be taken up with research work on trypanosomiasis and piroplasmosis. A new form of trypanosomiasis for India has been discovered in the blood of Punjab cattle, a form which can only be demonstrated by laboratory cultural methods. The trypanosome cannot be demonstrated in the blood of living animals by the microscope, but on mixing some blood with bouillon and incubating, large numbers of active flagellates come into existence. The parasite is quite differ- ent biologically from the trypanosome of surra. Treatment of surra has been continued with disappointing results. It is a great advance to be able to cure cases at all, but it becomes more and more evident that surra must be tackled from the preventative, and not, except in rare cases, from the curative point of view. There is every reason to hope that before long some methods may be found of dealing with surra in the animals which act as "reservoirs" of the disease during the non-surra seasons, and a stamping out policy adopted during these seasons. An account will be given of canine piroplasmosis, which has been found to exist here in an unexpected form. Cases have only been suspected to be piroplasmosis when they have shown symptoms of jaundice, as in South Africa, where the disease is known as malignant jaundice, but we have found this year that the disease can occur without the commonly understood symptoms, and that in all probability most cases here never show malignant jaundice at all, the term being a wrong one for the disease in this country. Trypanblau, the new specific for this disease, has been found to have no effect on this form of piroplasmosis, and it is therefore possible the parasite may be new to science. It is interesting to note the prevalence of certain very rare parasites in this part of the world, particularly the filaria osleri, which outside Lahore has only been seen on three occasions. Income. 7. The sum paid into the treasury was Rs. 12,046-11-1 as against Rs. 12,454-8-0 last year, the decrease being due to our reduction of the number of students. The income of the dog hospital was Rs. 1,340-8-0 as compared with Rs. 1,094-4-0 of last year, and the expenditure this year was Rs. 1,361-11-7 against 1,433-2-8 last year. General, 8. The demand for our graduates continues to exceed the supply. Each year now, until our college is enlarged or re-built, the supply of graduates will become less, as we are being compelled to reduce our numbers so as to gain in efficiency. I have sent, for Government's consideration, a revision of the whole college staff, giving our requirements for an enlarged college to meet the great demand for graduates and to provide for a post-graduate training. I am now preparing plans showing our requirements in the way of buildings and space. The question of a site must be regarded as most important, because if we are not in a place which is convenient for the Civil Station and the Anarkali side of the city, we lose the necessary practice for our students. The practice is none too large for the requirements of an enlarged college, and the only place suitable to obtain this practice is our present site or its immediate neighbourhood. To remove us very far from here will mean that before many years the college will automatically close for want of practice for teaching students, as in the case of the Ajmere institution,
5 REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BY MR. V. DE V. H. WOODLEY, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I. 1. As it has been ordered that the text of the annual provincial report has to be reduced by one-third the information usually contained in Part I is now condensed into tabular form as given below:6 SECTION I (a).-EQUINE CONTAGIOUS DISEASE. Mortality.7 SECTION 1 (c).8 SECTION 2.9 Part IV.10 50. During the year the Government of India decided that a charge must be made for anti-rinderpest serum issued to districts. It was left to Local Governments to decide who should defray the cost. The Punjab Government decided that the owners of the inoculated animals should pay at the rate of 3 annas per head, but the Chief Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, then pointed out the difficulty in realizing these charges by the Veterinary De- partment as the procedure proposed would be open to very great abuse. The previous orders have been suspended pending further enquiries. 51. The famous Montgomery breed of cattle now undergoing sever trials of extinction, has fortunately received consideration during the year which in all probability is an outcome of Mr. Stow's report; the Kaliana Stud Farm in Montgomery district should do much to preserve the breed. The Chiefs' College, Lahore, are also endeavouring to keep a pure herd, and the Chief Superintendent was able to purchase a very fine bull for that body. The Salvation Army in Lahore have also risen to the occasion and are selecting a nice herd of cows and have asked the Civil Veterinary Department to assist them. The Chief Superintendent has visited both these herds and offered advice on several occasions and has also procured a bull for the latter herd. 52. The work of the department continues to expand in every direction, and its popularity is daily becoming more evident; the superintendents and subordinates when on tour are welcomed by the agricultural classes, while only some years back they were looked on with suspicion. The Chief Superintendent is pleased with the progress of the year's work.
TABLES. Number. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab Veterinary College ... i II Statement showing the number of deaths from contagious disease among animals ... ... ... ... a III Statement showing the results of preventive inoculation ... ... iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veteri- nary assistants on tour ... ... ... ... iv V Statement showing the number of animals treated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries ... ... ... ... ... v VI Abstract showing receipts and expenditure of veterinary hospitals ... vi VII Statement showing total strength of subordinate veterinary staff employed vii VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ... ... ib. IX Statement showing main results of Provincial Cattle Farms ... ... viii X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under Local Bodies ... ib. XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallion under Local Bodies ... ... ... ... ... ix XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts ... ... ... ... ... x XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... ... xi XIV A Statement showing cost of the Civil Veterinary Department ... ... xii
TABLE I. (See Punjab Veterinary College Report.) SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1910-11. Name of the institation. Course of instruction. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. STUDENT ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR CLASSED BY EDUCATIONAL QUALI- FICATIONS. RECEIPTS. EXPEDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE THREE YEARS PRECEDING. REMARKS. Admitted dur- ing the year April 1910. Passed final examination during the year (April 1911). Failed to pass final examination. Remaining under instruc- tions at the end of the year. Scholarship holders. Military Students and others. In ordinary course. Instructions prolonged by reason of failure to pass. Matriculated or with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English. From fees. From other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Govern- ment or Local Bodies. In service of other States, bodies and in- stitutions, etc. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Punjab Veterinary College. Diploma or three years' course, Urdu. 14 46 *62 ii TABLE II. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, and 22.) SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1910-11. District. EQUINES. BOVINES. OTHERS. Total. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth. disease. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,648 51 426 57 ... ... 2,182 180 4 ... ... ... ... 184 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,186 97 115 526 ... ... 3,924 28 ... ... ... ... ... 28 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,546 62 77 242 ... ... 1,927 2 ... ... ... ... 126 128 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,134 16 117 6 ... ... 1,273 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Karnal ... ... ... 12 ... 5 17 7,032 99 1,691 56 ... ... 8,878 22 ... ... ... ... ... 22 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,383 155 561 48 ... 7 2,154 1 20 ... ... ... ... 21 Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,417 27 102 ... 3 ... 1,549 60 4 2 ... ... ... 66 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 40 ... 1 41 923 37 539 ... 1 1 1,501 66 ... 5 ... ... ... 71 Jullundur ... ... ... 45 ... 1 46 2,331 175 734 ... ... ... 3,240 141 ... 19 ... ... ... 160 Ludhiana ... ... ... 4 ... ... 4 1,174 45 243 ... ... ... 1,462 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,324 65 814 49 ... ... 2,252 45 10 ... ... ... ... 55 Lahore ... 13 ... 7 ... ... 20 3,068 32 1,222 ... ... 50 4,372 169 ... ... ... ... 31 200 Amritsar ... ... ... 6 ... ... 6 2,071 13 1,208 ... ... ... 3,292 9 ... ... ... ... ... 9 Gurdaspur ... 5 ... 20 ... ... 25 1,216 26 309 ... 7 ... 1,558 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 3,497 15 2,126 ...... ... 16 5,654 37 ... 14 ... ... ... 51 Gujranwala ... ... ... 33 ... ... 33 5,971 25 2,717 ... ... ... 8,713 88 ... 79 ... ... ... 167 Gujrab ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 4,347 10 1,307 4 6 29 5,703 55 ... 28 ... ... ... 83 Shahpur ... 1 1 ... ... 2 1,243 43 1,181 165 ... 47 2,679 12 142 29 ... ... 675 858 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 447 18 137 332 ... 30 964 70 ... ... ... ... 201 271 Rawalpindi ... 2 1 ... ... ... 3 495 19 72 238 2 4 830 11 4 1 ... ... 143 159 Attock ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 22 37 146 337 ... ... 542 ... 63 ... ... ... 1,466 1,529 Mianwali ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 226 16 270 5 ... ... 517 10 ... 6 ... ... 234 250 Montgomery ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 756 ... 229 2 ... ... 987 88 ... ... ... ... ... 88 Lyallpur ... ... 1 ... 4 5 626 33 393 ... ... ... 1,052 ... ... 6 ... ... ... 6 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 312 5 411 ... ... ... 728 1 2 ... ... ... ... 3 Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... 125 7 116 28 ... ... 276 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... ... 551 ... 50 9 ... ... 610 12 ... ... ... ... ... 12 DeraGhazi Khan... ... ... ... 3 3 1,072 ... 119 12 ... ... 1,203 10 ... ... ... ... ... 10 Total ... 25 2 171 27 225 49,134 1,128 I 17,432 2,116 19 184 70,033 1,124 249 189 ... ... 2,876 4,438 NOTE.iii TABLE III. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19.) SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1910-11. District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died unin- oculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. REMARKS Eqnines. Bovines Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest Serum alone. 13 ... 681 ... ... 1,244 ... ... 1 ... Rohtak ... 24 ... 657 ... ... 2,971 10 ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 18 ... 632 ... ... 2,675 ... ... 6 ... Delhi ... 29 ... 849 ... ... 2,970 ... ... 1 ... Karnal ... 24 ... 1,652 ... ... 3,442 ... ... 5 ... Ambala ... 19 ... 230 20 ... 2,664 ... ... 4 ... Simla ... 2 ... 11 ... ... 99 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 23 ... 368 ... ... 1,746 ... ... 1 ... Hoshiarpur ... 33 ... 328 ... ... 3,329 ... ... 11 ... Jullundur ... 68 ... 1.298 ... ... 11,956 ... ... 121 ... Ludhiana ... 42 ... 1,084 ... ... 4,487 ... ... 9 ... Ferozepore ... 30 ... 437 ... ... 3,893 ... ... 6 ... Lahore 39 ... 762 ... ... 6,182 ... ... 1 ... Amritsar ... 27 ... 613 ... ... 3,147 ... ... 10 ... Gurdaspur ... 39 ... 431 ... ... 3,749 ... ... 13 ... Sialkot ... 40 ... 491 ... ... 4,154 ... ... 49 ... Gujranwala ... 74 ... 1,724 ... ... 11,511 ... ... 31 ... Gujrat ... 33 ... 1,072 ... ... 3,442 ... ... 9 ... Shahpur ... 13 ... 220 ... ... 2,646 ... ... 7 ... Jhelum ... 13 ... 196 ... ... 1,163 ... ... 8 ... Rawalpindi ... 12 ... 201 ... ... 1,810 ... ... 6 ... Attock ... 5 ... 30 ... ... 1,239 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 14 ... 183 ... ... 3,354 ... ... ... ... Montgomery ... 13 ... 230 ... ... 3,359 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 12 ... 348 ... ... 1,035 ... ... ... ... Jhang ... 3 ... 21 ... ... 402 ... ... ... ... Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 32 ... 456 ... ... 10,053 ... ... ... ... Dera Ghazi Khan 10 ... 284 ... ... 3,709 ... ... ... ... Pat audi State ... 1 ... 47 ... ... 162 ... ... ... ... Total... 705 ... 15,536 20 ... 102,593 10 ... 300 ... Gujranwala ... Black Vaccine alone. *2 ... ... ... ... 40 ... ... ... ... Jhelum ... 9 ... ... ... ... 434 ... ... 3 ... Lyallpur ... quarter 1 ... ... ... ... 49 ... ... ... ... Total ... *12 ... ... ... ... 523 ... ... 3 ... Lahore ... H. S. vaccine alone. 6 ... ... ... ... 598 ... ... ... ... Total ... *6 ... ... ... 598 ... ... ... ... Total ... 723 ... 15,536 20 ... 103,714 10 ... 303 ... * Villages.
iv TABLE IV. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 23.) SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1910-11. DISTRICT. Number of villages visited. Number of veteri- nary assistants employed. CASTRATION PERFORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of rases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Fquines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ............ 441 6 ... ... ... ... 11 1,401 109 1,521 123 582 236 971 2,492 Rohtak ............ 421 4 ... 110 6 116 17 2,290 4 2,311 69 575 14 658 3,085 Gurgaon ............ 364 5 16 21 7 44 8 2,029 33 2,070 226 1,105 30 1,361 3,475 Delhi ............ 457 4 5 18 ... 23 3 1,249 3 1,255 101 1,643 38 1,782 3,060 Karnal ............ 569 4 7 ... 1 8 171 977 1 1,149 353 2,307 80 2,740 3,897 Ambala ............ 796 6 14 ... ... 14 8 4,231 32 4,271 205 1,523 78 1,806 6,091 Simla ............ ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ............ 490 6 19 ... 1 20 10 3,614 119 3,743 355 588 88 1,031 4,794 Hoshiarpur ............ 444 5 13 12 1 26 11 1,118 ... 1,129 165 378 12 555 1,710 Jullundur ............ 571 5 3 8 2 13 17 2,738 1 2,756 69 138 3 210 2,979 Ludhiana ............ 601 4 4 ... ... 4 28 2,998 2 3,028 133 557 8 698 3,730 Ferozepore ............ 531 6 10 26 36 41 4,512 6 4,559 257 780 23 1,060 5,655 Lahore ............ 294 3 10 4 1 15 79 569 2 650 86 235 10 331 996 Amritsar ............ 332 4 8 11 ... 19 13 186 ... 199 317 678 6 1,001 1,219 Gurdaspur ............ 701 5 13 17 1 31 16 2,416 ... 2,432 157 650 43 850 3,313 Sialkot ............ 668 6 2 ... ... 2 3 1,902 1 1,906 125 374 12 511 2,419 Gujranwala ........... 662 6 1 ... ... 1 14 1,506 13 1,533 135 511 24 670 2,204 Gujrat ............ 468 4 22 15 1 38 18 2,344 2 2,364 156 206 16 378 2,780 Shahpur ............ 344 4 12 1 1 14 1 1,122 9 1.132 94 213 22 329 1,475 Jhelum ............ 373 4 11 15 1 27 4 432 8 444 69 94 97 260 731 Rawalpindi ............ 402 4 6 2 ... 8 15 538 58 611 23 60 5 88 707 Attock ............ 319 4 8 8 1 17 8 2,777 463 3,248 131 177 47 355 3,620 Mianwali ............ 202 4 9 8 1 18 4 1,386 5 1,395 131 191 9 331 1,744 Montgomery ............ 420 3 18 86 9 63 48 1,078 100 1,226 462 320 95 877 2,166 Lyallpur ............ 198 4 ... ... ... ... 1 106 ... 107 54 180 4 238 345 Jhang ............ 276 4 5 7 ... 12 12 1,007 43 1,062 328 519 102 949 2,023 Multan ............ 269 6 ... 40 ... 40 33 713 103 849 611 983 97 1,691 2,580 Muzaffargarh ............ 268 5 3 24 3 30 73 611 59 743 313 824 310 1,447 2,220 Dera Ghazi Khan......... 260 4 ... 5 ... 5 74 257 11 342 402 457 64 923 1,270 Total... 12,141 130 219 388 37 644 741 46,107 1,187 48,035 5,650 16,848 1,603 24,101 72,780
v TABLE V. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 24.) SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR 1910-11. DISTRICT. Number of veterinary dis- pensaries. Number of veterinary assistants employed at dispensaries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF IN AND OUT PATIENTS TREATRD DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expenditure. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Total. Discharged during the gear. Balance on 31st March. Number treated during the gear. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 5 5 9 2 1 73 40 6 82 42 7 74 38 5 8 4 2 1,638 4,054 1,628 12.75 20.75 10.27 1,712 4,092 1,633 7,437 16,654 16,654 Rohtak ... 3 3 4 6 ... 116 186 10 120 192 10 116 187 5 4 5 5 1,942 4,836 908 15.15 33.87 6.7 2;058 5,023 913 7,994 4,768 4,768 Gurgaon ... 4 4 2 1 ... 76 73 13 78 74 13 78 72 13 ... 2 ... 1,251 3,270 1,572 11.46 2312 11.30 1,329 3,342 1,585 6,256 8,229 6,229 Delhi ... 3 3 8 2 3 118 39 75 126 41 78 125 41 78 1 ... ... 1,321 3,724 731 18.93 27.7 7.96 1,446 3,765 809 6,020 5,405 5,405 Karnal ... 3 3 1 6 ... 117 102 10 118 108 10 103 108 7 15 ... 3 1,078 2,962 452 10.48 18.7 3.44 1,181 3,070 459 4,710 9,987 9,987 Ambala... 5 5 4 2 1 144 134 9 148 136 10 147 130 10 1 6 ... 2,652 6,591 1,511 20.96 41.30 8.89 2,799 6,721 1,521 11,041 8,737 8,737 Simla ... 1 1 ... ... ... 108 4 105 108 4 105 104 2 102 4 2 3 225 6 374 2.80 .45 2.97 329 8 476 813 9,077 6,916 Kangra ... 4 4 ... ... ... 112 29 4 112 29 4 111 29 4 1 ... ... 1,486 5,519 579 14.19 24.52 3.33 1,597 5,548 583 7,728 6,507 6,507 Hoshiarpur... 4 4 ... ... ... 125 179 32 125 179 32 125 179 32 ... ... ... 2,765 4,964 1,059 17.81 29.17 5.51 2,890 5,143 1,091 9,124 6,410 6,188 Jullundur ... 4 4 4 5 ... 246 487 17 250 492 17 246 489 16 4 3 1 4,674 11,628 1,637 25.31 60.4 8.78 4,920 12,117 1,653 18,690 5,050 4,353 Ludhiana ... 3 3 8 8 3 298 364 19 306 372 22 302 370 21 4 2 1 1,852 7,110 1,522 14.0 33.7 12.78 2,154 7,480 1,543 11,177 7,993 7,993 Ferozepore ... 5 5 13 4 5 384 193 101 307 197 196 386 193 101 11 4 5 3,525 7,420 1,495 30.18 42.25 7.84 3,511 7,613 1,596 13,120 9,379 9,379 Lahore ... 2 2 1 ... ... 192 57 11 193 57 11 193 57 11 ... ... ... 2,416 1,732 998 18.14 14.20 6.5 2,609 1,789 1,009 5,407 4,378 4,378 Amritsar ... 3 3 6 1 ... 174 33 58 180 34 58 177 34 58 3 ... ... 2,912 4,053 1,164 16.16 19.16 6.94 3,989 4,087 1,222 8,398 4,867 4,424 Gurdaspur ... 4 4 4 1 ... 337 166 24 341 167 24 337 165 24 4 2 ... 6,342 10,102 1,252 23.55 36.37 5.17 6,679 10,267 1,276 18,222 4,804 4,804 Sialkot ... 5 5 2 ... ... 129 72 27 131 72 27 131 72 27 ... ... ... 3,952 9,017 2,100 24.28 45 59 10.13 4,083 9,089 2,127 15,299 9,324 9,090 Gujranwala ... 5 5 1 1 ... 224 113 43 225 114 43 222 114 40 3 ... 3 3,542 6,805 1,544 25.66 3771 10.32 3,764 6,919 1,584 12,267 7,311 7,035 Gujrat ... 3 3 ... ... ... 72 47 7 72 47 7 71 47 7 1 ... ... 2,556 4,348 904 16.0 24.41 5.64 2,627 4,395 911 7,933 6,723 4,783 Shahpur ... 3 3 1 1 1 94 26 20 95 27 21 94 27 21 1 ... ... 1,308 2,061 950 14.7 1335 8.91 1,402 2,088 981 4,471 6,893 3,521 Jhelum ... 3 3 1 ... ... 36 4 12 37 4 12 36 4 11 1 ... 1 1,212 1,444 759 12.31 11.2 7.58 1,248 1,448 770 3,466 7,727 7,266 Rawalpindi ... 4 3 6 ... ... 168 15 104 174 15 104 171 15 103 3 ... 1 1,772 820 913 22.4 6.37 9.17 1,943 835 1,016 3,794 9,381 6,027 Attock ... 3 3 ... ... ... 22 6 4 22 6 4 22 6 4 ... ... ... 1,113 1,478 944 9.94 10.6 6.74 1,135 1,484 948 3,567 6,766 5,050 Mianwali ... 3 3 ... ... ... 46 12 2 46 12 2 46 12 2 ... ... ... 975 1,132 472 11.43 9.89 4.37 1,021 1,144 474 2,639 7,305 5,375 Montgomery ... 2 2 1 ... ... 18 7 3 19 7 3 18 7 3 1 ... ... 1,286 1,046 256 8.69 7.77 1.62 1,304 1,053 259 2,616 10,713 10,713 Lyailpur ... 3 3 6 1 ... 193 65 2 199 66 2 194 65 2 5 1 ... 2,951 2,742 745 18.16 17.87 6.4 3,145 2,807 747 6,699 6,082 5,321 Jhang ... 3 3 ... ... ... 109 33 1 109 33 1 102 33 1 7 ... ... 1,651 1,188 418 12.47 9.2 3.21 1,753 1,221 419 3,393 6,415 6,415 Multan ... 5 5 2 4 3 224 83 23 226 87 26 224 84 24 2 3 2 3,457 3,544 1,361 18.74 16.72 7.39 3,681 3,628 1,388 8,697 7,182 7,182 Muzaffargarh ... 4 4 6 ... 1 90 23 12 96 23 13 89 22 13 7 1 ... 2,612 2,244 2,432 16.58 11.59 10.11 2,701 2,266 2,445 7,412 7,405 7,405 Dera Ghazi Khan 3 3 4 ... 1 86 17 2 90 17 3 87 15 3 3 2 ... 2,843 872 519 30.12 10.83 5.84 2,930 887 522 4,339 4,035 4,035 Total ... 102* 101* 94 45 19 4,131 2,609 756 4,225 2,654 775 4,131 2,617 748 94 37 27 67,309 116,712 31,212 ... ... ... 71,440 119,329 31,960 222,729 213,597 1,97,940 *In the Rawalpindi district one of the plains hospital is closed in the summer, when the veterinary assistant takes charge of the Marres hospital
vi TABLE VI. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 29.) ABSTRACT SHOWING RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE OF VETERINARY HOSPITALS DURING 1910-11. DISTRICT. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. REMARKS. Last year's balance. By Local Fund grants. By Govern- ment grants. By Municipal contribu - tion. By fees. By other sources. Total. Pay. Travelling al- lowances. Medicines, in- struments, etc. Furniture, etc. Conting en- cies. Total. Balance. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... 3,560 6,022 ... 72 7,000 16,654 2,292 217 1,090 41 13,014 16,654 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... 576 4,037 ... 155 ... 4,768 1,825 148 831 224 1,740 4,768 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,175 ... 54 ... 8,229 2,266 161 662 123 5,017 8,229 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,076 ... 1,679 650 5,405 2,067 78 757 ... 2,503 5,405 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,108 4,524 ... 354 1 9.987 1,654 204 698 138 7,293 9,987 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... ... 515 7,933 ... 289 ... 8,737 2,481 330 1,205 247 4,474 8,737 Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,228 ... 4,849 ... 9,077 506 15 258 ... 6,137 6,916 Kangra ... ... ... ... ... ... 274 6,179 ... 54 ... 6,507 2,908 534 1,320 89 1,656 6,507 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,380 ... 28 2 6,410 2,366 323 647 81 2,771 6,188 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,878 2,976 ... 196 ... 5,050 2,865 373 990 ... 125 4 353 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,190 3,547 ... 256 ... 7,993 2,150 117 696 42 4,988 7,993 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,357 3,210 ... 812 ... 9,379 3,042 275 1,297 138 4,627 9,379 Lahore ... ... ... ... ... ... 821 3,459 ... ... 88 4,378 2,222 635 1,117 14 390 4,378 Amritsar ... ... ... ... ... ... 997 2,737 267 866 ...... 4,867 2,727 329 962 213 193 4,424 Gurdaspur... ... ... ... ... ... 1,195 3.252 ... 357 ...... 4,804 3,103 454 1,212 ... 35 4,804 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,726 3,364 ... 176 58 9,324 3,890 404 1,050 10 3,736 9,090 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,386 5,538 138 249 ... 7,311 3,927 356 809 118 1,825 7,035 Gujrat ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,350 4 247 ... 126 ... 5,723 1,821 144 353 8 2,457 4,783 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,450 4,409 ... 34 ... 5,893 1,536 228 426 53 1,278 3,521 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... 1,350 6,209 ... 168 ... 7,727 1,652 170 453 4 4,987 7,266 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,433 5,254 617 2,077 ... 9,381 2,224 109 859 285 2,550 6,027 Attock ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,150 5,598 ... 18 ... 6,766 1,430 84 496 42 2,998 5,050 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,050 6,213 ... 42 ... 7,305 1,377 182 579 237 3,000 5,375 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... ... 10,711 ... 2 ... 10,713 790 101 251 116 9,455 10,713 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,114 4,265 ... 703 ... 6,082 2,760 239 751 38 1,533 5,321 Jhang... ... ... ... ... ... 2,675 3,714 ... 26 ... 6,415 1,548 67 449 18 4,333 6,415 Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,372 600 200 10 7,182 2,650 100 1,199 112 3,121 7,182 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... ... 666 6,648 ... ... 91 7,405 2,022 153 1,247 132 8,851 7,405 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,002 ... 33 ... 4,035 1,648 49 557 33 1,748 4,035 Total ... ... 43,821 1,46,289 1,622 13,875 7,900 2,13,507 63,749 6,579 23,221 2,556 1,01,835 1,97,940
vii TABLE VII. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 43.) SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1910-11. PROVINCE. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate staff not in- cluded in previous columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. In Schools and Colleges... ... ... ... (a) 6 (a) 2 Professors. 1 Assistant Professor 2 Lecturers. 1 Demonstrator. In Dispensaries ... ... ... 101 ... On other work ... ... 12 (b) 43 ... (b) 29 Itinerating Veteri- nary Assistants. 5 Office Veterinary Assistants. 2 Tonga Line. 7 Reserve. 43 Total ... 12 144 ... TABLE VIII. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 31.) RETURN OF STUD BULLS FOR THE YEAR 1910-11. DISTRICT. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BODIES. REMARKS. Number on 1st April 1910. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March 1911. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Hissar ... ... ... 46 5 200 5 46 Rohtak ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... 8 Gurgaon... ... ... 23 ... ... 3 20 Delhi ... 18 ... ... 1 17 Karnal ... ... ... 19 5 200 2 22 Ambala ... ... ... 11 4 200 2 13 Kangra ... ... ... 10 1 ... ... 11 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 26 4 200 ... 30 Jullundur ... ... ... 20 4 200 3 21 Ludhiana ... ... ... 16 3 232 3 16 Ferozepore ... ... 45 9 156 2 52 Lahore ... ... ... 22 10 200 *7 25 *Includes 4 transfer. red with Sharakpur tahsil to Gujranwala district. Amritsar... ... ... 12 3 206 4 11 Gurdaspur ... ... 28 7 143 5 30 Sialkot ... ... ... 12 ... ... 2 10 Gujranwala ... ... 28 viii TABLE IX. SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF PROVINCIAL CATTLE FARMS DURING THE YEAR 1910-11. Nil. TABLE X. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 33, 34.) RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1910-11. DETAILS. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total Horses and Ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicilian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1910 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... 5 60 ... 4 ... ... 64 69 4 13 25 ... 21 7 70 Increase Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... 8 ... ... ... 8 Received from ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 5 ... ... ... ... 5 62 ... 4 ... ... 66 71 4 13 33 ... 21 7 78 Decrease Sold ... ... ... Died ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... ... 3 4 ... 1 1 ... 1 ... 3 Sold ... .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 3 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Transferred to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total decrease ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 5 ... ... ... ... 5 6 1 1 2 ... 2 ... 6 Balance on 31 March 1911 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 57 ... 4 ... ... 61 65 3 12 31 ... 19 7 72 Total ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 57 ... 4 ... ... 61 65 3 12 31 ... 19 7 72
ix TABLE XI. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 35.) SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES DURING 1910-11. Horse, pony or donkey. District. Stallions on register on 31st March 1911. STALLION ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re- port. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... ... Punjab ... ... 4 5 5 257 236 51 47 Total ... 4 5 5 257 236 51 47 Pony ... ... Punjab ... ... 61 63 62 3,558 3,384 56 54 Total ... 61 63 62 3,558 3,384 56 54 Donkey ... ... Punjab ... 72 67 70 3,066 3,171 45 45 Total ... 72 67 70 3,066 3,171 45 45 TABLE XII. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 36.) SHOWING AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, ETC., OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS DURING THE YEAR 1910-11. DISTRICT. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... 386 406 198 207 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... 298 331 165 176 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... 274 302 267 173 149 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... ... 327 353 160 100 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... ... 313 344 220 205 Ambala ... ... ... ... 271 353 286 346 200 215 Kangra ... ... ... ... ... ... 109 362 ... ... Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 302 332 293 327 125 156 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... 303 338 184 204 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... 251 294 170 192 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... ... 296 444 143 225 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... ... 312 330 201 207 Mianwali... ... ... ... ... 329 342 174 213 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... 283 297 164 168 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... 300 302 300 302 220 228 Total ... 873 1,261 4,388 5,083 2,497 2,645 Average ... 291 315 293 339 178 189
x TABLE XIII. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 37, 38.) ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1910-11. NAME OF FAIR. Number of Horse Fairs and Shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUM- BER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZES-MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. ... Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 1 200 100 21 7 200 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71 ... ... 310 ... 310 140 ... ... Delhi ... 1 334 ... 167 ... 308 26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 300 ... 485 30 815 481 1 ... Karnal ... 1 197 196 85 59 197 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 300 ... 76 ... 376 217 ... ... Ambala ... 1 482 527 130 169 482 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 68 600 ... 264 ... 864 721 1 600 Jullundur ... 1 1,358 1,150 15 20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34 34 ... ... ... 849 ... ... 137 ... 137 137 ... ... Gurdaspur ... 1 728 1,338 112 97 728 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 5 ... ... ... ... 300 ... ... ... 300 289 1 ... Sialkot ... 1 639 510 110 104 639 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55 55 ... ... ... 452 ... ... 350 ... 350 211 ... ... Montgomery ... 1 1,271 ... 66 ... 500 771 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... 29 ... ... 348 ... 348 184 ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 308 355 175 183 308 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 440 ... 440 361 ... ... Total ... 9 5,517 4,176 881 639 3,362 797 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 97 97 ... ... ... 1,476 1,500 ... 2,410 30 3,940 2,741 3 600
xi TABLE XIV. (See Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 37 and 39 ) ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR 1910-11. NAME OF FAIR. Number of Cattle Fairs and Shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMAL SOLD Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually award- ed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 6 2,378 37,855 1,192 14,091 1,690 2,841 2,652 ... ... ... ... ... 40,312 461 ... ... 1,914 ... 1,914 1,492 4 Rohtak ... ... 2 ... 28,940 2,746 ... 6,243 8 437 ... 57 25 70 74 30,593 197 ... ... 800 ... 800 556 ... Gurgaon ... ... 2 ... 15,474 806 5,624 306 60 257 ... ... ... ... ... 3,311 62 ... ... 504 ... 504 302 ... Delhi ... ... 1 1 117 21 41 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 133 ... ... 300 55 355 290 ... Karnal ... ... 1 ... 7 3 ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... ... 170 ... 170 40 ... Jullundur ... ... 1 ... 2,614 2,146 10,113 1,920 12 5,543 ... 28 24 16 100 4,908 25 ... ... 254 ... 254 254 ... Ludhiana ... ... 1 ... 3,384 1,410 2,101 1,311 80 976 ... 26 20 27 49 1,804 171 ... ... 672 ... 672 666 ... Ferozepore ... ... 4 102 3,417 1,781 1,808 3,197 2,523 4,679 ... ... ... ... ... 5,075 559 ... ... 1,294 700 1,994 1,695 ... Lahore ... ... 1 ... 690 192 357 418 34 623 ... 41 28 43 90 ... 294 ... ... 500 ... 500 430 ... Amritsar ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36 47 37 70 308 31,844 681 ... ... 2,900 ... 2,900 2,586 1 Gurdaspur ... ... 1 10 1,223 1,483 1,006 5,481 6 224 ... 12 13 22 ... 1,263 95 ... ... 500 ... 500 454 2 Sialkot ... ... 2 117 6,076 6,071 3,650 28,461 39 3,005 ... 57 28 62 71 14,398 158 ... ... 600 ... 600 544 ... Gujranwala... ... 2 144 3,135 2,476 1,328 8,695 22 294 ... 86 45 79 180 1,773 241 ... ... 555 ... 555 555 ... Gujrat ... ... 1 170 136 113 37 139 ... ... 187 13 46 84 ... 16 478 ... ... 500 ... 500 500 ... Shahpur ... ... 1 13 37 10 5 11 ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 77 ... ... 312 ... 312 312 ... Jhelum ... ... 1 405 212 80 15 ... ... ... ... 72 ... ... ... 7 712 ... ... 648 ... 648 648 2 Rawalpindi ... ... 1 120 152 27 ... 33 ... 27 ... 53 ... ... ... 21 122 ... ... 200 ... 200 180 ... Montgomery ... 1 4 180 159 93 228 357 ... ... 72 41 61 83 11 142 200 ... 320 ... 520 330 ... Lyallpur ... ... 1 53 211 2,835 2,615 3,281 1,225 ... ... 21 20 20 87 4,009 280 ... ... 875 ... 875 875 2 Multan ... ... 1 7 36 19 5 ... 14 ... ... ... 80 ... ... 2 28 ... ... 200 ... 200 200 ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 6 39 20 3 12 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... 92 200 ... 212 ... 412 202 ... Total ... 34 3,530 1,03,935 23,590 42,892 61,429 7,233 18,730 223 585 407 554 1,042 1,39,347 5,018 400 ... 14,230 755 15,385 13,111 11
xii TABLE XIV-A. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 46.) SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT PUNJAB DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1910-11. MAJOR HEADS. AMOUNT. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... ... 32,621 32,568 2,847 68,036 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 35,480 35,108 3,421 74,009 Subordinate Establishment ... ... ... 99,272 20,890 1,20,162 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... ... 9,579 64,642 74,221 Breeding Operations ... ... ... 3,720 89,016 92,736 Prizes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,732 6,732 Fairs and Shows ... ... ... 3,325 61,011 64,336 Total ... 68,101 1,83,572 2,48,559 5,00,232
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, For the year 1911-12. Price: Re. 0-4-3 or 4d. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1912.
PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT REPORTS FOR 1911-12.
Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN LONDON. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S. W. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, S. W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C. B. QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, W. C. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. ON THE CONTINENT. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta & Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anárkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore [for Vernacular publications only]. MANAGER, "The Aryan Printing, Publishing and General Trading Co., Limited, Lahore." N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Pro- prietor, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co.. Bombay.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT PUNJAB, For the year 1911-12. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1912.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 10 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. NOTE BY THE DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE ON VETERINARY PROGRESS IN THE PUNJAB. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, BY COLONEL H. T. PEASE, PRINCIPAL. 1 Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 a. Sessions... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 3 Students ... ... ... ... ... ib. 4 5 Examination results ... ... ... ... 2, 3 6 7 Other classes ... ... ... ... ... ib. 7 8 Hospital ... ... ... ... ... ib. 10 Contagious ward ... ... ... ... ... ib. 11 Income ... ... ... ... ... ib. 13 General ... ... ... ... ... ib. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1912, BY MAJOR G. K. WALKER, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I. 1 General administration ... ... ... ... 4 Part II.ii Para. Subject. Page. Part IIINo. 772 (Rev. & Agri-Genl.). FROM THE HON'BLE MR. H. P. TOLLINTON, I.C.S., Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab and its Dependencies, To THE SECRETARY TO THEGOVERNMENT OF INDIA, DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE AND AGRICULTURE. Dated Lahore, 26th August 1912. Revenue and Agriculture. General. SIR, I AM directed to submit, for the information of the Government of India, a copy of the annual report of the Civil Veterinary Department for the year 1911-12, and to convey the following remarks of the Lieutenant-Governor. 2. The regrettable continued falling off of cases treated at the College, which totalled only 3,384 in the year under report as against 5,597 in the previous year, is probably to be ascribed to the frequent changes in the teaching staff, due to Major Smith having been on leave, the sickness of Mr. Gaiger, and the death of Mr. Carless. It may also be due to the fact that, owing to the continued growth of the city round the present site, this is not now so suitable for practice as it was. At any rate it is now much too confined for the expansion of the College desired by the Government of India, and a fresh site has been selected which is much more commodious and capable of free expansion, and is also found, as the result of inquiries made by the Deputy Commissioner, to be much nearer to the portions of the city where animals are kept than the present site. In a few years it will be impossible to keep any animals in the quarters mentioned in the report owing to the great crowding of houses. The Lieutenant-Governor therefore does not share the forebodings of the Director of Agriculture and Colonel Pease. The present site is no doubt nearer the residential quarters of the city and station, but that, though a convenience to the officers, is not an advantage for a large Veterinary Hospital and College, where highly infectious disorders are examined and treated. If, however, the difficulty experienced at the present site in giving practical training at Lahore does not decrease, the Lieutenant-Governor will be prepared to consider proposals to make additional arrangements for practical instruction at the Agricultural Stations at Lyallpur and Gurdaspur, at both of which places the attendance of patients will probably be very satisfactory. 3. The difficulty in obtaining suitable recruits for the Department is, Sir Louis Dane understands, also being felt in the United Provinces, and it may eventually be necessary to improve the prospects of the subordinate staff by the creation of a new grade of Deputy Superintendent. The Department is daily growing in popularity and usefulness, and it would be a pity if this progress were hampered by any incapacity or paucity in the matter of staff. It may also be necessary to restrict the number of paid students from the Army and other provinces at Lahore, in order to encourage the indigenous unpaid students to come forward in larger numbers. 4. The number of dispensaries has now been raised to 109, and it is satisfactory to be able to record that by next year every tahsil in the province will be equipped with a veterinary dispensary. The number of cases treated
2 at dispensaries continues to show a steady increase. The province has been remarkably free from serious disease during the past year, and this has resulted in a decrease in the number of cases treated on tour; that this is not due to any falling off in the popularity of skilled veterinary treatment is shown by an increase of 34 per cent, in the number of non-contagious cases so treated. It is too early to lay down what the effect of the charging of fees for rinder- pest inoculation will be, but a special report on the working of the system will be called for at the end of the present year. It will possibly be found necessary to make arrangements for free inoculations in the case of a wide- spread outbreak of the disease. 5. While welcoming the return of Colonel Pease to his old sphere of activities, His Honour would also wish to express his sense of obligation to Major Smith and Major Walker for the high state of efficiency in which they have left their respective charges. Major Walker's charge of the district work was an exceptionally lengthy one, and His Honour fully agrees with the remarks of the Director of Agriculture in this connection. At the same time His Honour has every confidence that Colonel Farmer will maintain this high standard of efficiency, and in his position as Chief Superintendent will ensure that the excellent work that he has done at the Hissar Cattle Farm will be efficiently carried on. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, H. P. TOLLINTON, Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab. Punjab Government Press, LahoreANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN THE PUNJAB DURING 1911-12. Note by the Director of Agriculture on veterinary progress in the Punjab. THE future of the Punjab Veterinary College is in the balance. The policy of Government is to enlarge the classes and to introduce a post-graduate course. To this end an increase in the number of the European professors has been sanctioned. But on the other hand practice has fallen off and is not suffi- cient even for the present numbers; and the college is to be moved from its present excellent site to some other, which, at the best, cannot be so favour- able. Whether on the old site or on a new, enlarged buildings are required, if full advantage is to be taken of the increased staff. To the Punjab it is of the utmost importance that the conditions of an enlarged college2 ing bulls in villages where good cows are most numerous, by stall feeding and charging a fee for service and by recognition of the fact that a calf by a good bull requires little more pasture than one sired by a nondescript three years old of the village herd. When we are told that in a certain zail a bull is not wanted, I am inclined to think that this is more often the view of the zaildar, who will be made responsible for the safety of the bull than of the people who own most of the cows there. 4. Personal history has been specially interesting during the year. Colonel Pease has returned to the Principalship of the college after several years in a larger sphere; to make room for him Major Smith has been promoted to Calcutta: Major Walker has ceased to control the district work after an unusually long rule, and he leaves a popular and active department as a living and growing witness to his tact and energy: the Hissar cattle farm has been placed under the Punjab Government; so Lieutenant-Colonel Farmer closes a 10 year tenure of the post of superintendent of the farm to succeed Major Walker as Chief Superintendent. Mr. Gaiger's illness closes, I fear, a career which zeal would have crowned with distinction and adds another sacrifice to the victims of science, ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE BY COLONEL H. T. PEASE, PRINCIPAL. Staff. 1. Major A. Smith, Principal of the College, was on six months' com- bined leave from 1st April 1911, when Mr. S. H. Gaiger, Professor, Sanitary Science, officiated for him. Mr. Gaiger went on sick leave out of India and Mr. S. Carless officiated as Professor, Sanitary Science, from October to December 1911, when he died. Mr. Branford, who was then under training here, was appointed, from Jan- uary 1912, officiating Professor of Sanitary Science, vice Mr. S. H. Gaiger, granted further extension of sick leave by the Secretary of State for India. Mr. D. Meadows has been under training here since October last. Sessions. 2. The summer session commenced on the 24th April and closed on the 30th June 1911. The winter session commenced on the 3rd October and closed on the 31st March 1912. Students. 3. There were 64 students in the first year; 59 admitted on the 20th April and 5 remanded: 61 formed the second and 71 the third year classes. The new students came from3 5. As will be seen from the report of the board of examiners, the results, though somewhat better than last year, are not yet satisfactory. The standard is still far too low, as evidenced by the percentage of marks ob- tained. Five of the failures in the first year and one in the second have left the college. Three students of the first, six of the second and six of the third year class are eligible for examination in June 1912. Other classes. 6. A special class for dressers from the Transport Department was held during the summer vacation and 30 men were train- ed. Eight farriers completed a nine months' practical course in the forge and passed the examination. Hospital. 7. The number of patients treated in hospital were as follows:4 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1912 BY MAJOR G. K. WALKER, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I. General administration. 1. The following statement shows the names of the officers who held charge of the several appointments and the amount of touring work performed by them:5 Five cases occurred on the Rawalpindi-Kohala tonga line and were des- troyed. A representation to the Kashmir Darbar has been made in this con- nection. All the important tonga lines in the province were inspected. Surra6 of the Kangra people towards the inoculation of cattle has altered since the method was introduced. In 1902 the writer had considerable difficulty in that district (vide the annual report for 1902-03). Foot-and-mouth disease7 Specimens of blood sucking flies and ticks have been collected and forwarded to Pusa. The usual maps showing the. distribution of epidemic disease were prepared and submitted to the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment. These are to be discontinued in future. It is almost impossible to expect any original investigation work from the superior staff, as their time is more than fully occupied by routine. The need for it is not lost sight of, however, and, if relief in routine work is brought about, much can be done. A certain amount has been accomplished under difficulties, and has been or will be published separately. (2) OTHER DISEASE. Treatment of disease in villages8 last year. In 1902-03 the income from fees at veterinary hospitals was Rs. 116-6-0. The large increase at the Delhi hospital is worthy of notice. It is accounted for to a great extent by the Darbar. The Simla veterinary hospital continues to flourish. A balance of Rs. 2,473 on the year's working was credited to provincial funds, which is Rs. 637 more than is required by the terms of transfer to the Simla municipality. It has been decided that this hospital shall be carried on by the municipality for a further period of five years on the same terms as before. Part III.9 There is no doubt that an improvement in the fleece of the indigenous sheep can be brought about by judicious crossing with Merino or other selected breeds. Continued effort and patience are indicated with a view to enlist keenness on the part of the owners. Once the economic value of the scheme can be brought properly home to them, much will have been gained. Llamas. 25. The scheme for importing Llamas has been dropped. There were many difficulties in the way, and it is doubtful if they would be much use as baggage animals in view of the fact that they are not capable of carrying heavy loads. (4) FAIRS AND SHOWS. Tables XIII and XIV. 26. Statistical information in regard to fairs and shows is obtained from the districts concerned,10 Kotu Ram's work has been of exceptional merit, and he has done good work both at head-quarters and in the field. Of the other veterinary inspectors Nabi Bakhsh, Jaithu Mal and Talib Khan are deserving of mention. Apart from a few cases of turpitudinous conduct, almost inevitable in a large department, the veterinary assistants have worked well. Veterinary Assistant Ghulam Hussain deserves credit for the way he manages the Simla veterinary hospital, the popularity of which may be ascribed to a great extent to his efforts. The question of placing the veterinary assistants under local bodies has been referred to districts. Being under consideration, it is not suitable for discussion in this report. Training in inoculation. 32. During the year one veterinary inspector and four veterinary assis- tants were sent to Muktesar or Bareilly (U. P.) for training in inoculation work. Part V.-Expenditure of the department. ExpenditureTABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab Veterinary College ... i II Statement showing the number of deaths from contagious disease among animals ... ... ... ... ... ii III Statement showing the results of preventive inoculation ... ... iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veteri- nary assistants on tour ... ... ... ... iv V Statement showing the number of animals treated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries ... ... ... v VI Abstract showing receipts and expenditure of veterinary hospitals vi VII Statement showing total strength of subordinate veterinary staff employed vii VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ib. IX Statement showing main results of Provincial Cattle Farms... viii X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ib. XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ... ... ... ... ix XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ... ib. XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts ... ... ... x XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... ... xi XIV A Statement showing cost of the Civil Veterinary Department... ... xii
TABLE I STATEMENT SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Punjab Veterinary College Report.) Name of the institution. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. STUDENT ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR CLASSED BY EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE THREE YEARS PRECEDING. REMARKS. Admitted during the year (April 1911.) Passed final examination during the year (April 1012). Failed to pass final examination. Remaining un- der instructions at. the end of the year. Scholorship-holders. Military students and others. In ordinary course. Instructions prolonged by reason of failure to pass. Matriculated or with higher qualifications. Knowing some English but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English. From fees. From other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of other States bodies and institutions. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Punjab Veterinary College. Diploma or three years course in Urdu. 11 48 *54 ii TABLE II SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 2-11.) DISTRICT. EQUINES. BOVINES. OTHERS. REMARKS. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic sep- ticæmia. Blackquarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic sep- ticæmia. Other contagious disease. Anthrax. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 132 ... ... 121 ... ... 253 ... ... ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 124 ... 613 403 ... ... 1,140 ... ... ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 207 18 911 242 ... 12 1,390 ... ... ... ... ... ... Delhi ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 563 3 308 63 ... 15 952 4 ... ... ... ... 4 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 470 4 537 30 ... ... 1,041 56 ... ... ... ... 56 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 576 1 290 ... ... ... 867 ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... 1 7 905 440 133 ... ... 3 1,481 ... 124 ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... ... 10 59 22 537 ... ... ... 618 ... ... 6 ... ... 6 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 301 29 515 ... ... ... 845 10 1 13 ... ... 24 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 185 5 186 ... ... ... 376 ... ... ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 473 ... 279 ... ... 5 757 ... ... ... 6 ... 6 Lahore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 545 2 603 ... ... 1 1,151 11 ... 5 22 ... 38 Amristar ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 49 11 927 ... ... 9 996 6 ... 4 ... ... 10 Gurdaspur ... ... ... 19 ... ... ... 2 21 146 3 283 ... ... 2 434 2 ... 41 ... ... 43 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 203 3 541 ... ... ... 747 10 ... 1 ... ... 11 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 980 20 575 ... ... 8 1,583 27 ... ... 8 ... 35 Gujrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 263 4 206 ... ... ... 473 20 ... ... ... ... 20 Shalpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 975 ... 685 168 ... 32 1,860 ... ... ... 682 ... 682 Jhelum .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 185 26 92 206 ... 32 541 ... 12 ... 93 ... 105 Bawalpindi ... ... ... 5 ... ... ...... 1 6 96 6 182 492 ... 12 738 58 ... ... 23 ... 81 Attock ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 19 98 114 ... 26 288 ... 21 ... 675 ... 696 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 145 9 184 12 4 62 416 174 ... ... ... ... 174 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 889 7 147 8 ... ... 1,051 50 ... ... ... ... 50 Lyallpur ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 360 22 1,090 ... ... ... 1,472 ... ... 4 18 ... 22 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 266 30 361 ... ... 13 670 ... 6 ... 83 ... 89 Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50 ... 231 ... ... ... 281 ... ... ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 132 ... 186 12 ... ... 330 ... ... ... ... ... ... Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... 244 43 ... ... 294 ... ... ... 75 ... 75 Total ... 32 ... 16 ... 11 59 9,317 684 10,894 1,914 4 232 23,045 428 164 74 1,685 ... 2,351 NOTE.iii TABLE III SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report paragraphs 6 and 9). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was. carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNIN- OCULATED IN COURSE OF OUTBREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. REMARKS. Equines, Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest. Serum alone. 3 ... 45 ... ... 193 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 4 ... 26 ... ... 807 ... ... ... ... Delhi ... 6 ... 246 ... ... 269 ... ... 1 ... Karnal ... 1 ... 6 ... ... 77 ... ... ... ... Ambala ... 21 ... 293 ... ... 2,080 ... ... 11 ... Ludhiana ... 3 ... 16 ... ... 389 ... ... ... ... Simla .. 1 ... 1 ... ... 122 ... ... 3 ... Kangra ... 22 ... 339 ... ... 1,833 ... ... 2 ... Jullundur . 21 ... 275 ... ... 2,813 ... ... 6 ... Lahore ... 15 ... 293 ... ... 2,829 ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... 9 ... 152 ... ... 1,025 ... ... 9 ... Sialkot ... 3 ... 118 ... ... 1,656 ... ... 1 ... Gujranwala ... 14 ... 182 ... ... 1,622 ... ... 3 ... Gujrat ... 4 ... 79 ... ... 424 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 20 ... 415 ... ... 2344 ... ... 2 ... Jhelum ... 1 ... 7 ... ... 78 ... ... ... ... Attock ... 3 ... 18 ... ... 1,942 ... ... 2 ... Montgomery ... 5 ... 27 ... ... 1,207 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 5 ... 200 ... ... 1,229 ...... ... ... ... Jhang ... 1 ... 3 ... ... 104 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 1 ... 20 ... ... 1,675 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 16 ... 129 ... ... 6,703 ... ... ... ... Dara Ghazi Khan 1 ... 6 ... ... 675 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 180 ... 2,890 ... ... 32,096 ... ...... 40 ... Lahore ... Hæmorrhagic scpticæmia. Vaccination. 6 ... ... ... ... 498 ... ... ... ... Silahpur ... 9 ... ... ... ... 273 ... ... ... ... Jhelum ... 2 ... ... ... ... 20 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi ... 4 ... ... ... ... 56 ... ... ... ... Attock ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 17 ... ... ... ... 141 ... ... ... ... Total ... 41 ... ... ... ... 991 ... ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL... ... ... 221 ... 2,896 ... ... 33,087 ... ... 40 ...
iv TABLE IV SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 14.) District. Nmber of villages visited. Number of Veteri- nary Assistants employed. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-COTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ... ... ... ... 439 6 ... ... ... ... 13 82 362 457 206 623 305 1,134 1,591 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 287 4 20 104 17 l41 23 105 43 171 173 1.084 39 1,296 1,608 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 402 6 22 67 8 97 16 174 1 191 155 1,319 24 1,498 1,786 Delhi ... ... ... ... 448 4 19 28 ... 47 20 185 1 206 150 1,953 12 2,115 2,368 Karnal ... ... ... ... 345 5 13 11 ... 24 51 239 9 299 373 1,702 94 2,169 2.492 Ambala ... ... ... ... 429 6 33 58 2 93 24 1,087 7 1,118 253 2,470 17 2,740 3,951 Simla ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... ... 507 7 5 ... ... 5 14 7,440 1,045 8,499 304 623 122 1,049 9,553 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 363 5 31 7 5 43 15 876 25 916 146 273 9 428 1,387 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 362 5 6 25 1 32 6 799 11 816 49 327 5 381 1,229 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 514 4 2 4 ... 6 30 510 12 552 101 943 8 1,052 1,610 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... 387 6 11 21 2 34 4 1,241 8 1,253 292 438 189 919 2,206 Lahore ... ... ... ... 305 4 15 31 ... 46 2 638 ... 640 148 402 18 568 1,254 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 412 4 8 17 1 26 23 406 1 430 278 1,205 136 1,619 2,075 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 466 5 27 39 1 67 21 659 24 704 280 760 64 1,044 1,815 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 322 6 ... ... ... ... ... 250 ... 250 125 403 13 541 791 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 422 6 ... ... ... ... 3 758 52 813 311 1,065 32 1,408 2,221 Gujrat ... ... ... 259 4 2 6 ... 8 5 195 ... 200 244 406 6 656 864 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 325 5 23 7 5 35 8 381 9 398 80 118 44 242 675 Jhelum ... ... ... ... 336 4 10 37 ... 47 11 461 16 488 103 75 57 235 770 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... 576 4 11 7 3 21 7 254 6 267 174 233 27 434 722 Attock ... ... ... ... 328 5 5 7 ... 12 6 1,451 54 1,511 85 163 43 291 1,814 Mianwali ... ... ... ... 211 4 32 6 ... 38 2 986 67 1,055 129 373 30 532 1,625 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 381 4 26 46 14 86 81 843 79 1,003 400 482 206 1,088 2,177 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... 335 4 6 2 ... 8 2 960 74 1,036 176 564 12 752 1,796 Jhang ... ... ... ... 276 4 3 9 ... 12 28 1,301 144 1,473 404 801 127 1,332 2,817 Multan ... ... ... ... 274 6 8 26 ... 34 15 288 1 304 599 1,302 138 2,039 2.377 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... 263 5 6 39 ... 45 91 436 87 614 242 1,362 1,154 2,758 3,417 Dora Ghazi Khan ... ... ... 235 5 4 27 21 52 140 120 62 322 711 1,120 232 2,063 2,437 Total ... 10,209 138 348 631 80 1,059 661 23,125 2,200 25,986 6,691 22,529 3,163 32,383 59,428
v TABLE V SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 15). DISTRICT. Number of veterinary dis- pensaries. Number of veterinary assistants employed at Dispensaries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF IN AND OUT PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expenditure. Remaining on 1st April 1911. Admitted during the year. Total. Lischarged during the year. Balance on 31st March 1912. Number treated during the year. Average daily attrendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals, Equiues. Bovines. Other animals. Equiues. Bovines. Other animals. Equiues. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 5 5 8 4 2 128 117 14 136 121 16 134 117 14 2 4 2 1,830 3,462 1,964 19.7 24.8 14.0 1,964 3,579 1,978 7,521 9,572 9,572 Rohtak ... 3 3 4 5 5 207 176 3 211 181 8 208 179 8 3 2 ... 2,499 4,584 944 21.6 23.6 7.5 2,707 4,763 952 8,422 6,399 6,399 Gurgaon ... 5 5 ... 2 ... 193 104 17 193 106 17 189 106 16 4 ... 1 3,336 4,165 1,679 19.9 30.5 12.3 2,525 4,271 1,695 8,491 12,069 12,069 Delhi ... 3 3 1 ... ... 210 79 31 211 79 32 209 79 32 2 ... ... 2,544 2,573 741 43.7 20 1 8.6 2,753 2,652 773 6,178 6,367 6,367 Karnal ... 4 4 15 ... 3 130 76 2 145 76 5 145 75 5 ... 1 ... 2,110 4,802 675 16.0 37.4 7.0 2,255 4,877 680 7,812 7,576 7,576 Ambala ... 5 5 1 6 ... 238 142 5 239 148 5 238 147 5 1 1 ... 3,257 6,756 1,796 26.2 41.9 10.8 3,495 6,903 1.801 12,199 11,086 11,086 Simla ... 1 1 4 2 3 133 2 84 137 4 87 137 4 87 ... ... ... 301 139 345 2.9 .5 2.8 438 143 432 1,013 5,893 3,426 Kangra ... 5 5 1 ... ... 114 39 2 115 39 2 110 39 2 5 ... ... 1,926 7,277 1,360 15.1 33.5 4.5 2,036 7,316 1,362 10,714 6,754 6,206 Hoshiarpur ... 4 4 ... ... ... 181 187 27 181 187 27 180 185 27 1 2 ... 3,775 5,176 1,090 20.2 25.0 5.0 3,955 5,361 1,117 10,433 11,117 11,878 Jullundur ... 4 4 4 3 1 290 498 51 294 501 52 289 496 52 5 5 ... 5,045 11,237 1.930 27.3 58.3 12.6 5,334 11,733 1,982 19,049 5,702 4,762 Ludhiana ... 3 3 4 2 1 286 392 28 290 394 29 288 392 29 2 2 ... 1,893 4,886 1,616 15.9 33.8 14.2 2,181 5,278 1,645 9,104 5,166 5,166 Ferozepore ... 5 5 11 4 5 325 211 70 336 215 75 330 213 74 6 2 1 3,703 6,027 1,184 24.0 102.4 6.4 4,033 6,240 1,258 11,531 5,942 4,952 Lahore ... 3 3 ... ... ... 192 56 3 192 56 3 190 56 3 2 ... ... 2,518 2,085 696 13.9 10.6 4.4 2,708 2,141 699 5,548 3,958 3,958 Amritsar ... 3 3 3 ... 250 68 11 253 68 11 250 68 11 3 ... ... 3,250 5,045 1,183 15.9 19.1 6.46 3,500 5,113 1,194 9,807 5,269 5,089 Gurdaspur ... 4 4 4 2 ... 418 146 11 422 148 11 416 148 10 6 ... 1 6,612 8,067 1,920 26.8 25.9 6.9 7,028 8,215 1,930 17,173 4,965 4,965 Sialkot ... 5 5 ... ... ... 174 69 20 174 69 20 171 68 19 3 1 1 4,130 8,375 1,842 25.2 35.3 9.5 4,301 8,443 1,861 14,605 6,237 5,929 Gujranwala ... 5 5 3 ... 3 358 184 51 361 184 54 356 182 54 5 2 ... 4,208 5,807 1,297 27.3 30.6 8.7 4,564 5,989 1,351 11,904 8,844 5,962 Gujrat ... 3 3 1 ... ... 144 79 1 145 79 1 145 79 1 ... ... ... 4,241 3,667 645 24.2 22.4 4.6 4.386 3,746 646 8,778 5,919 2,954 Shahpur ... 4 4 1 ... ... 194 71 38 195 71 38 190 7l 38 5 ... ... 2,006 1,819 1,028 21.1 11.5 11.1 2,196 1,890 1,066 5,152 6,201 4,961 Jhelum ... 3 3 1 ... 1 61 12 5 62 12 6 61 12 5 1 ... 1 1,629 1,023 288 15.5 7.5 3.0 1,69/ill/ 1,035 293 3,018 6,442 3,516 Rawalpindi ... 3 3 3 ... 1 186 21 93 189 21 94 189 20 93 ... 1 1 2,049 1,196 1,046 25.3 8.9 10.5 2,238 1,216 1,139 4,593 9,012 6,057 Attock ... 4 4 ... ... ... 42 5 8 42 5 8 42 5 8 ... ... ... 1,715 1,712 680 16.5 12.7 5.5 1,757 1,717 688 4,162 10,702 10,702 Mianwali ... 3 3 ... ... ... 60 10 4 60 10 4 56 9 4 4 1 ... 1,315 1,577 676 13.9 138 5.9 1,371 1,586 680 3,637 7.604 7,604 Montgomery ... 3 3 1 ... ... 92 24 7 93 24 7 ... 24 7 ... ... ... 1,779 1,001 492 12.1 53 3.1 1,872 1,025 499 3,396 2,765 2,765 Lyallpur ... 3 3 5 1 ... 213 113 2 248 114 2 243 112 2 5 2 ... 3,496 2,814 665 19.7 17.9 7.3 3,739 2,926 667 7,332 4,937 4,399 Jhang ... 3 3 7 ... ... 111 28 8 118 28 8 118 28 7 ... ... 1 2,115 1,322 412 18.4 93 3.4 2,233 1,350 419 4,002 4,829 2,772 Multan ... 5 5 2 3 2 182 83 17 184 86 19 181 86 19 3 ... ... 3,024 3,253 1,454 19.2 16.9 7.7 3,205 3,339 1,473 8,017 4,117 4,117 Muzaffargarh ... 4 4 7 1 ... 129 79 13 136 80 13 136 80 13 ... ... ... 3,455 3,995 3,513 21.5 19.0 14.8 3,591 4,075 3,526 11,192 5,131 5,131 D. G. Khan ... 4 4 3 ... ... 83 14 9 86 16 9 86 16 9 ... ... ... 3,828 1,411 1,158 42 6 15.4 13.4 3,914 1,427 1,167 6,508 5,098 5,098 TOTAL ... 109 109 94 37 27 5,354 3,085 636 5,448 3,122 663 5,380 3,096 654 68 26 9 83,589 115,253 34,319 ... ... ... 87,969 118,349 34,973 241,291 1,95,673 1,76,422
vi TABLE VI. ABSTRACT SHOWING RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE OF VETERINARY HOSPITALS DURING 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 17.) DISTRICT. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Balance REMARKS. Last year's balance. By Local Fund grants. By Govern- ment grants. By Municipal contribu- tion. By fees. By other sources. Total. Pay (a). Travelling al- lowance. Medicines, in- struments, etc. Furuiture, etc. Contingen- cies. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13* 14 15 16 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... 3,963 5,446 ... 163 .. 9,572 2,699 96 1,020 4 5,754 9,573 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 935 5,302 ... 162 ... 6,399 1,951 53 1,034 25 3,231 6,284 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... 4,470 7,544 ... 53 213 12,280 2,912 185 1,386 163 7,424 12,070 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... 200 1,608 ... 3,702 1,057 6,567 2,214 72 735 ... 3,352 6,373 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... 2,751 4,519 ... 305 1 7,576 2,096 155 955 94 4,276 7,576 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... 5,008 5,688 ... 390 ... 11,086 3,099 211 1,130 413 6,233 11,086 Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... 720 ... 5,173 ... 5,893 473 ... 132 ... 2,095 2,700 Kangra ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,668 ... ... 86 6,754 3,344 600 964 35 1,098 6,041 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... 2,733 8,277 ... 97 10 11,117 2,939 301 801 86 7,750 11,877 Jullundur ... ... ... 2,254 3,260 ... 188 ... 5,702 3,291 330 1,141 ... 193 4,955 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... 1,571 3,181 ... 414 ... 5,166 2,516 121 1,145 52 1,192 5,026 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... 1,245 3,635 ... 1,057 5 5,942 3,119 276 1,316 40 1,191 5,942 Lahore ... ... ... ... ... 700 3,173 ... 85 ... 3.958 2,500 431 624 159 244 3,958 Amritsar ... ... ... ... ... 832 2,808 673 1,098 ... 5,411 3,248 279 1,107 65 570 5,269 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... ... 1,151 3,294 ... 520 ... 4,965 3,234 334 1,277 ... 120 4,965 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 2,607 3,322 ... 208 100 6,237 4,040 295 913 20 661 5,929 Gujranwala ... ... ... 981 1,816 5,670 138 239 ... 8,844 4,148 393 974 196 251 5,962 Gujrat ... ... 2,129 1,573 2,178 ... 28 11 5,919 2,212 200 441 28 3,364 6,245 Shahpur ... ... ... 1,150 4,994 ... 57 ... 6,201 2,296 152 621 139 2,417 5,625 Jhelum ... ... ... 1,350 4,924 ... 168 ... 6,442 1,724 127 641 1 1,023 3,516 Rawalpindi ... ... ... 1,233 5,516 617 1,646 ... 9,012 2,585 132 828 17 1,957 5,519 Attock ... ... ... ... ... 1,150 9,525 ... 25 ... 10,700 1,673 109 620 34 6,217 8,653 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... 1,250 6,308 ... 46 ... 7,604 1,805 200 521 75 5,095 7,696 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... 2,749 ... ... 16 2,765 1,249 151 775 162 428 2,765 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,552 ... 385 ... 4,937 2,893 334 584 25 1,891 5,727 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... 726 4,054 ... 49 ... 4,829 1,836 214 278 96 348 2,772 Multan ... ... ... ... ... 3,683 300 130 4 4,117 2,883 88 718 209 219 4,117 Muzaffargarh ... . . ... ... ... ... 5,059 ... ... 72 5,131 2,249 187 1,093 51 1,551 5,131 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,036 .. 62 ... 5,098 2,015 99 869 183 1,932 5,098 Total 3,110 40,668 1,32,693 1,728 16,450 1,575 1,96,224 73,243 6,125 24,643 2,372 72,067 1,78,450 *NOTEvii TABLE VII. SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, Paragraph 30.) Province. How occupied. Whether paid from provincial or local funds. Veterinary inspectors. Veterinary assistants. Subordinate staff not in- cluded in previous columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No In schools and colleges ... ... ... ... ... In dispensaries ... ... ... 109 ... On other work ... ... 15 (a) 60 ... (a) 29 Itinerating veteri- nary assistants. 5 Office veterinary assistants. 2 Tonga line. 24 Reserve. 60 Total ... ... 15 169 TABLE VIII. RETURN OF STUD BULLS FOR THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, Paragraph 18.) District. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BODIES. REMARKS. Number on 1st April 1911. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March 1912. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Hissar ... ... 46 8 200 3 51 Rohtak ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... 8 Gurgaon ... ... ... 20 ... ... 5 15 Delhi ... ... ... 17 ... ... ... 17 Karnal ... ... ... 22 5 3 24 Ambala ... ... ... 13 10 200 1 22 Kangra ... ... ... 11 1 ... ... 12 Hoshiarpur ... ... 30 4 200 ... 34 Jullundur ... ... 21 4 200 1 24 Ludhiana ... ... 16 3 221 ... 19 Ferozepore ... ... 52 11 154 8 55 Lahore ... ... ... 25 16 200 3 38 Amritsar ... ... 11 ... ... 2 9 Gurdaspur 30 6 200 3 33 Sialkot... ... ... 10 ... ... 5 5 Gujranwala ... ... 32 3 200 2 33 Gujrat ... ... ... 16 ... ... 1 15 Shahpur ... ... 6 ... ... 1 5 Jhelum ... ... ... 3 ... ... 2 1 Rawalpindi 6 ... ... 2 4 Attock ... ... ... 5 ... ... 3 2 Mianwali ... ... 17 ... ... 3 14 Montgomery 10 8 200 .... 18 Lyallpur ... ... 45 6 32 2 49 Jhang ... ... ... 3 ... ... 1 2 Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... ... 8 ... ... ... 8 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... 2 ... ... 2 ... Total 485 85 ... 53 517
viii TABLE IX. SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF PROVINCIAL CATTLE FARMS DURING THE YEAR 1911-12. Nil. TABLE X. RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 21.) DETAILS. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicilian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country- bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country- bred. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1911 ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 57 ... 4 ... ... 61 65 3 12 31 ... 19 7 72 Increase Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... ... 8 8 ... ... 9 ... ... ... 9 Received from ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... .... ... Total 4 ... ... ... ... 4 65 ... 4 ... ... 69 73 3 12 40 ... 19 7 81 Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 ... 3 Sold ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... ... 3 4 1 2 1 ... ... ... 4 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Transferred to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total Decrease ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 6 ... ... ... ... 6 7 2 3 2 ... 1 ... 8 Balance on 31st March 1912 ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 59 ... 4 ... ... 63 66 1 9 38 ... 18 7 73
ix TABLE XI SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES, DURING 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 22.) Horse, pony or donkey. District. Stallions on register on 31st March 1912. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EM- PLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... Punjab ... 3 4 5 228 257 57 51 Total ... 3 4 5 228 257 57 51 Pony ... Punjab ... 63 59 63 3,400 3,558 58 56 Total ... 63 59 63 3,400 3,558 58 56 Donkey ... Punjab ... 73 72 67 3,453 3,066 48 45 Total ... 73 72 67 55,453 3,066 48 45 TABLE XII SHOWING AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, ETC., OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS DURING THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 23.) DISTRICT. HORSE. PONT. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... 420 386 210 198 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... 329 298 196 165 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 290 302 154 173 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... 331 327 183 160 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... 314 313 178 220 Ambala ... ... ... 328 271 310 286 195 200 Kangra ... ... ... Information not received. 109 ... ... Hoshiarpur ... ... 312 302 331 293 168 125 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 282 303 182 184 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 324 251 189 170 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 314 296 170 143 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 306 312 193 201 Mianwali ... ... ... ... 324 329 184 174 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 325 283 178 164 Muzaffargarh ... ... 330 300 330 300 225 220 Total 970 873 4,530 4,388 2,605 2,497 Average 323 291 323 293 186 178
x TABLE XIII ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1911-12, See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 26 and 27. Name of Fair. Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUM- BER OF HORS STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF RE- MOUNTS PUR- CHASED. PRICE PAID FOR RE- MOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PUR- CHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERN- MENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price Average price. From imperial funds. From provincial funds. From local funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs Rs Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. ... Rs. Rs Rs Rs. Rs. Rs Hissar ... ... 1 215 200 32 21 215 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 84 ... ... 310 ... 310 161 ... Delhi ... ... 1 136 334 96 167 136 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 300 ... 485 ... 785 368 1 Ambala ... ... 1 569 432 160 130 569 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36 600 ... 264 ... 864 712 1 Gurdaspur ... 1 839 728 113 112 839 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 300 ... ... ... 300 279 1 Sialkot ... ... 1 492 639 73 110 492 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45 45 ... ... ... 381 ... ... 350 ... 350 255 ... Montgomery ... 1 411 1,271 106 66 125 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 18 ... ... 351 ... 351 275 ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 431 308 400 175 431 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 440 ... 440 388 ... Jullundur ... 1 1,819 1,358 23 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Information not available ... ... 193 ... 193 193 ... Total ... 8 4,912 5,320 1,003 796 2,807 ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45 45 ... ... ... 520 1,200 ... 2,393 ... 3,593 2,631 3
xi TABLE XIV. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR 1911-12. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 28.) Name of Fair. Number of Cattle Fairs and Shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMAL SOLD. Amount realized in fees.. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZE MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually award- ed. 14 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 5 ... 26,100 1,301 17,963 1,527 3,399 1,844 ... ... ... ... ... 33,651 232 ... ... 1,448 ... 1,448 990 1 Rohtak ... 2 ... 59,249 3,584 ... 10,824 81 903 ... 55 22 36 1,447 42,241 247 ... ... 1,000 ... 1,000 757 ... Gurgaon ... 2 ... 12,322 2,018 7,725 1,221 11 1,096 ... 1,052 11 17 105 4,683 43 ... ... 504 ... 504 459 ... Delhi ... 1 2 48 23 26 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 105 ... ... 300 ... 300 245 ... Jullundur ... 1 15 2,311 2,049 3,096 960 9 3,121 ... ... ... ... ... 3,774 34 ... ... 359 ... 359 359 ... Ludhiana ... 1 3 3,461 1,714 2,560 1,432 67 632 ... 35 ... ... ... 4,116 225 ... ... 650 ... 650 627 ... Ferozepore ... 4 76 4,311 1,598 3,643 3,312 4,241 1,993 ... 24 ... ... ... 5,649 557 ... ... 1,747 450 2,197 2,007 ... Lahore ... 1 ... 167 320 330 601 63 1,035 ... 28 20 43 74 911 340 ... ... 500 500 375 ... Amritsar ... 2| ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 23 19 45 108 43,048 706 ... ... 2,900 ... 2,900 2,745 ... Gurdaspur ... 1 24 1,216 1,372 813 3,752 2 150 ... 12 12 19 ... 1,015 142 ... ... 500 ... 500 422 ... Sialkot ... 2 113 506 5,346 3,462 26,774 30 2,826 ... 47 26 60 65 8,846 158 ... 600 ... 600 575 ... Gujranwala ... 2 127 3,339 2,602 1,658 8,614 10 765 81 48 39 66 92 2,287 252 ... ... 700 ... 700 632 ... Gujrat ... 1 109 133 97 23 93 ... ... 20 ... 32 34 ... 4 425 ... ... 500 ... 500 500 2 Shahpur ... 3 174 350 120 29 195 13 43 ... 19 18 19 131 69 627 ... ... 850 50 900 859 ... Attock ... 1 190 150 50 48 ... ... ... ... 148 ... ... ... 3,243 420 ... ... 307 ... 307 307 2 Rawalpindi ... 1 422 89 18 ... 24 ... 35 58 ... 43 50 ... 108 118 ... ... 200 ... 200 200 ... Montgomery ... 1 6 62 203 32 63 116 658 ... 41 ... ... ... 4 143 ... ... 406 ... 406 397 2 Lyallpur ... 1 393 3,916 3,164 1,846 4,470 1,497 20 ... 20 16 22 69 4,984 313 ... 900 ... 900 900 2 Multan ... 1 7 15 12 ... ... 38 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 132 ... ... 200 ... 200 200 ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 9 23 12 4 8 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 80 ... ... 200 ... 200 170 ... Total .. 34 1,670 117,798 25,603 43,258 63.926 9,601 15,121 177 1,552 258 411 2,091 1,58,633 5,299 ... ... 14,771 500 15,271 13,726 9
xii TABLE XIV-A. STATEMENT SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR viz. 1911-12, IN THE PROVINCE OF PUNJAB. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 33.) MAJOR HEADS. AMOUNT. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... ... 28,956 35,361 3,627 67,944 Veterinary instruction ... ... ... 27,219 32,987 3,573 63,779 Subordinate establishment ... ... ... ... 1,15,429 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM HISSAR For the year 1912-13. Price: Re. 0-6-0 or 6d. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1913.
REPORTS ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPART- MENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERN- MENT CATTLE FARM HISSAR FOR 1912-13.
Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN LONDON. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. GRINKLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S. W. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, S. W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C. B. QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, W.C. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Crafton Street, Dublin. ON THE CONTINET. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28. Rue Bonaparte, Paris, MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta & Simla, NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta, THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTEDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon, A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anárkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore [for Vernacular publications only]. MESSRS. RAMA KRISHNA AND SONS, Book- sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Pro- prietor, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., Bom- bay.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM HISSAR For the year 1912-13. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1913.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 15 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERN- MENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture 1 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, BY COLONEL H. T. PEASE, PRINCIPAL. 1 Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Sessions ... ... ... ... ... 3 ib. 4 5 Examination results ... ... ... ib. 6 Other classes ib. 7 Hospital ... ... ... ... 3 8 Contagious ward ... ... ... ib. 9 Income ib. 10 General ... ... ... ... ib. 11 Text-books ib. 12 Prospects of Veterinary Assistants in the Transport Department ib. 13 Site for new College ... ... ... ib. 14 Veterinary Association ... ... ... ib. 15 Notice of the staff ib. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPART- MENT, BY LIEUTENANT-COLO MEL J. FARMER, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I. 1 General administration ... ... ... ... 4 Part II.ii Para. Subject. Page. (2) Other diseases. 21 Other diseases.iii Para Subject. Page. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR. (A) No. 2465 S. (Rev. & Agri.2 Even when increased accommodation becomes available, it will be neces- sary to limit the number of admissions, for even now the size of the classes is too large for efficient instruction. The facts appear to demonstrate the need of another Veterinary College in Northern India. His Honour is glad to observe that the number of cases treated in the hospital has increased, though the Princi- pal is not hopeful of any further improvement in this direction. The Lieutenant- Governor recently inspected the site of the new College, and the location of the various buildings has now been finally decided. 4. The experiment of demanding fees for inoculation has not proved a success, only 18,335 inoculations against rinderpest being performed as against 32,096 during the previous year, and, the number of deaths from contagious disease, especially rinderpest, having materially increased, the practice has now been discontinued. The experiment was clearly in advance of popular ideas on the subject, for, as the Chief Superintendent remarks, people who are accus- tomed to have themselves and their children vaccinated and inoculated free cannot understand why their cattle should not also receive free treatment. In spite of the falling-off in the number of inoculations the number of cases treated in villages is well up to the average, and the number of castrations is double that of last year. His Honour agrees with the Chief Superintendent as to the importance of castration if cattle-breeding is to be improved, and has recently taken the views of district officers as to possibility of provincial or local legis- lation for the control of immature and wandering bulls. The general opinion, in which the Lieutenant-Governor concurs, is that private rights of property and religious sentiment make effective legislation impracticable, and that the difficulty can best be met by encouraging District boards to provide good bulls. Once the zamindar can obtain the services of a good bull without difficulty, it may be left to his commonsense to protect his stock from immature and degenerate animals. In the Central Punjab, where greatly increased interest in cattle- breeding has been shown during the last few years, matters are already moving in this direction, and His Honour is glad to observe that the Director of Agriculture is investigating the possibility of providing the west and north-west portion of the Province with a sufficient supply of good stock-getters. The Veterinary Hospitals continued to do good work, their number having risen to 113, at which 270,889 cases were treated. The increased interest in sheep- breeding is a hopeful sign, and the results of introducing the Merino breed are beginning to make themselves felt. 5. The Hissar Cattle Farm is now under the full control and manage- ment of the Punjab Government. The year has not been a very satisfactory one for the farm, the expenditure being largely in excess of the receipts. The deficit may be partly due to two bad seasons in succession and to the fact that animals have hitherto been sold for less than their market value. The full price is now being recovered, and it may be expected that the financial results will be better, but even so it would appear doubtful whether the farm can ever be a source of profit. The value of the farm as a provincial asset is somewhat discounted if it is to be run at a loss financially, and His Honour is of the opinion that the strictest economy must be observed in its management. 6. In conclusion, the Lieutenant-Governor wishes to express his appreci- ation of the good work done by the officers of the department, which has conti- nued to maintain its high level of efficiency. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, J. P. THOMPSON, Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab. Punjab Government Press, LahoreANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture. THE future of the Veterinary College is still undecided. Proposals for extending the course to four years and for starting post-graduate classes have been submitted to government, and the additional professorships can now be filled up, but everything waits for the new buildings, regarding which no final decision has been arrived at. District work is being carried on as in past years, and in the centre of the province the popularity of the hospitals is growing rapidly. Cattle-breeding is receiving special attention from district boards, and in the east and middle of the province, for which Hissar-bred bulls are suitable, considerable progress is being made. Even now in a few districts2 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, BY COLONEL H. T. PEASE, PRINCIPAL. Staff. COLONEL H. T. PEASE, C.I.E, was in charge of the office of Principal and Professor of Medicine during the year. Mr. S. H. Gaiger, the Professor of Sanitary Science, was granted an extension of leave on medical certificate, and was absent during the whole year. Mr. R. Branford was transferred to Hissar. Major G. K. Walker was appointed Professor of Sanitary Science in June 1912. In May 1912 sanction was accorded to the entertainment of extra veterinary establishment. Two European Professorsin imperial service have been recruited. They are at present under training in the Punjab Provincial Veterinary department until accommodation is provided in the new college and the future classes are definitely decided on. The remainder of the sanctioned establishment will be recruited as required. Session. 2. The summer session commenced on the 23rd April and closed at the end of June 1912. The winter session commenced at the beginning of October and closed at the end of March 1913. Fifty-two students were admitted on the 20th April 1912, and with 5 remanded formed the first year's class of 57. There were 59 students in the second and 66 in the third year classes. 3. The newly-admitted students came from3 A class for the training of farriers was also held and 12 men were trained practically and passed the examination. Hospital. 7. The number of patients treated in the hospital was as follows:4 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BY LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. FARMER, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I. General administration. 1. The following statement shows the names of the officers who held charge of the several appointments and the amount of touring done by them:5 Patwaris undoubtedly help the Department greatly, but cases occur where reports should be sent in more punctually by them. This of course again hinders the Department in dealing with disease at its commencement, which is a very important matter. Equines. Table II. 3. Deaths from equine contagious disease number 71 against 59 last year. The increase is accounted for in paragraph 5 below. 4. Glanders has again been prevalent on the Pathankot, Palampur and Dalhousie tonga lines. Very energetic measures have been taken to put a stop to it. During the year, at the Chief Superintendent's suggestion, veterinary assistants have been appointed by the Indian Horse Dâk Company. A special veterinary assistant has been appointed for detecting glanders in Kangra and Dalhousie. There are now two veterinary assistants, one for the Dalhousie line and one for the Palampur line. The disease is not confined to the Indian Horse Dâk Company's horses, as other cases have been found in the district. His Highness the Raja of Chamba and the Superintendent of Mandi State have been advised regarding the prevalence of the disease, and orders have been issued to veterinary assistants at Palampur, Dehra, Hamirpur, Kangra and Pathankot to keep a sharp look-out, as large numbers of animals from and to these states pass along these routes. All stands (tonga and ekka) at the different halting stages have been cleared and disinfected. Should the disease still continue, two more veterinary assistants will be appointed to detect cases. In the past tahsildars have been passing animals as fit for work in ekkas, etc. This is unsatisfactory. The Chief Superintendent considers it very necessary that all licensed ekka and tonga animals in all the districts in the Punjab should be examined and passed by veterinary assistants and some responsible officer before licenses are issued. Deputy Commissioners have been advised to have this done and again to have a quarterly inspection of the animals. This will not only keep a check on disease, but will make owners look after their animals more carefully and will prevent cruelty cases. Table II. 5. Surra.6 actually saw sick animals being fed on dry joar (Sorghum vulgare) and bajra (Pennisetum typhoideum). This gave him an opportunity of explaining to the different gatherings the bad results of such feeding. It is only by dealing with the people in this way that they get to understand the elements of practical hygiene and so improve the conditions under which cattle are reared. The disease in a famine year is generally worse, as the animals are so debilitated that they are unable to withstand an attack of the disease, and there is no reserve of good fodder with which to feed sick animals during convalescence. Preventive inocula- tion,7 this done. At what depth the organism survives he is unable to say. In large infected tracts besides rivers he recommends that cattle be kept away until the ground becomes dry on the surface and the grass is fully ripe. To expect a grazier to prevent cattle going to these areas before they are dried, is a great deal. Until the people thoroughly understand the benefit of the system, vaccination will have to be done. This method will be carried out experimentally next year in as many places as possible. Veterinary Assistants have been informed by lectures and circular of this method. He thinks from his experience that it is not fly transmitted. Table III. 14. Preventive inoculation 8 20. One hundred and sixty specimens were received and examined by the Chief Superintendent, and 85 and 269 by the Superintendents, North and South Punjab, respectively. Specimens of blood-sucking flies and ticks were collected and forwarded to Pusa. The Chief Superintendent hopes that in the future veterinary assistants will know more about the flies and ticks in the province than they do at present. After the inspection of hospitals short lectures have been given to the men, and they are becoming acquainted with the different species It is hoped that next year the areas showing the different species of flies will be mapped out. All the important tonga lines in the province were inspected. (2) OTHER DISEASES. Table IV. 21. During the year 9,948 villages were visited by the veterinary staff on tour, and 63,416 animals were treated. 22. Two thousand two hundred and sixty-eight castrations were per- formed against 1,059 last year. Although there is a marked increase, but yet it is insufficient. Cattle-breeding will never improve until a large number of castrations are performed 23. The Chief Superintendent has observed during his tour that cows are being served by imperfectly emasculated bulls and by immature young stock. He has also observed these animals preventing a good bull from cover- ing. Itinerating veterinary assistants have been told to explain to the people how all this causes harm and losses to owners. They have been informed that a much larger number of animals not up to bull standard must be castrated, VETERINARY HOSPITALS. Table V. 24. At the close of the year there were 113 hospitals in the province at which 270,889 cases were treated against 109 hospi- tals and 241,291 cases in past year. This is very satisfac- tory increase, and indicates the growing popularity of the institution, 25. At present there are 86 veterinary hospitals on approved plans. The Chief Superintendent is glad to say that after a little persuasion a new veterinary hospital is being built at Amritsar. He has to thank Mr. J. Addison for his kind help in the matter. 26. A well has been sunk by contributions collected by the district board and zaildars in the compound of the Phillaur hospital. Applications from zamindars for veterinary hospitals are being continually received. The Chief Superintendent's intention is to get more help by persuading people to subscribe towards the buildings of veterinary hospitals. 27. Goushalas have been visited by the department and advice given. 28. The only income is from fees which amounts to Rs. 18,489 against Rs. 16,450 last year. This is a satisfactory increase. The Department is not a commercial one, and what should be remembered is the amount of good done to the sick and lame animals, belonging to the poor, free of charge. 29. All cruelty cases arrested by the Inspector, R S. P. C. A., on the Pathankot-Dalhousie line are treated at the veterinary hospitals. A great number were also seized and sent to hospitals by the Superintendents of the De- partment for treatment. This Department has done a great deal more during the year to alleviate the suffering of the dumb animals than the outside public can imagine. 30. The Simla veterinary hospital is doing good work, and is self- supporting. Veterinary Assistant Ghulam Hussain deserves great praise for his work. During the year the income was Rs. 5,644. After deducting all expenses, Rs. 3,250 were credited to the provincial revenues.
9 31. Owing to Delhi being made an Imperial City in October 1912, the management of the hospital there was taken over by the imperial govern- ment. The Superintendent and the Inspector continue their usual super- vision. Part III.10 Table XII. 39. The expenditure on feed and keep of stallions has increased, which is due to the extra cost of fodder. FAIRS AND SHOWS. Tables XIII and XIV. 40. The statistical informations regarding fairs and shows is supplied by the districts concerned,11 Part V.12 The object of the farm is to produce the best bulls and jacks and there- by to improve the breeding in the districts. If it were not for this, Govern- ment would be unable to procure the number of bulls required for the districts and the jacks would have to be purchased in Europe. Outbreaks of contagious diseases have occurred during the year, and owing to careful supervision and treatment the mortality has been small. The present quasi-commercial system, of charging a nominal price for an animal issued to the district boards in the Punjab, and a higher price for one supplied to another province, prevents the farm from being self-supporting, and the idea of running the farm on commercial lines should therefore be abandon- ed. The number of jacks issued is very creditable, and the indents for the Punjab have been fully complied with. Mules issued to the service during the year were a very fine lot. Mule- breeding in Hissar is a great success, and the mules are admittedly the best bred in India, The foalings during the year have been satisfactory. Sheep breeding has progressed satisfactorily. The revision of the farm establishment is now before the Government. Mr. Branford has worked hard and deserves credit for his labours. (B)13 The military department have asked for 200 siege train bullocks to be supplied yearly, but with the increased demand for stud bulls it is not possible at present to meet this indent fully. The difficulty of obtaining suitable mules for mountain batteries is, I believe, as great as ever, and no doubt the military department would take as many animals as the farm can produce, but with the present establishment it is impossible to increase the number of mares for mule-breeding. The demand for mules creates a similar demand for donkey stallions, and last year a record number of these animals were issued, and the indents for this year are likely to exceed largely the number of animals available. 6. The years of scarcity have resulted in comparatively cheap labour and many improvements, especially as regards the cultivation, have been carried out, and provided there is a normal supply of canal water and the rains do not again fail, it is hoped to save sufficient fodder to put the farm into a safe position as regards the next period of scarcity. 7. As regards contagious disease, during the past year the farm has been unusually fortunate except for foot and mouth disease which invaded the herds twice during the cold weather. The following contagious diseases occurred :14 The committee came to the conclusion that the following animals in their prime had increased in value since the committee of 1907, viz.15 One of the stallions "Calcutta" is now 20 years of age, and it is feared that he will soon become past work. Donkey colts. Donkey colts.TABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab Veterinary College i II Statement showing the number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals ... ... ... ... ... ii III Statement showing results of preventive inoculation ... ... iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veteri- nary assistants on tour ... ... ... ... iv V Statement showing the number of animals treated at veterinary hospi- tals and dispensaries ... ... ... ... V VII Statement showing total strength of subordinate veterinary staff employed vi VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ... ... ib. X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... vii XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ... ... ... viii XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ... ib. XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts ... ... ... ... ix XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... ... x XIV A Statement showing cost of the Civil Veterinary Department ... xi VI A Expenditure by local bodies ... ... ... ... xii VI B ResourcesTABLE I. STATEMENT SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Punjab Veterinary College 'Report) Name of the institution. Name of the course of instruc- tion if more than one followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS STUDENTS ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR, CLASSED BY EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE THREE YEARS PRECEDING. REMARKS. Admitted dur- ing the year, beginning April 1912. Passed final examination during the year ending April 1913. Failed to pass the final examination. Remaining un- der instructions at the end of the year. Scholarship-holders. Military students and others. In ordinary course. Instructions prolonged by reason of failure to pass. Matriculated or with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English. From fees. From other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of other States, bodies and institutions. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Punjab Veterinary College. Diploma or three years' course in Urdu. 12 40 *62 ii TABLE II SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 2iii TABLE III. SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 10, 14 and 15). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was rried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was udertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNIN- OCULATED IN COURSE OF OUTBREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines Others. Equines. Bovines Others Equines Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest. Serum alone. 2 ... 26 ... ... 165 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 1 ... ... ... ... 24 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 4 ... 99 ... ... 212 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... 6 ... 155 ... ... 663 ... ... ... ... Ambala ... 2 ... 28 ... ... 61 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 28 ... 162 ... ... 733 ... ...... 1 ... Hoshiarpur ... 21 ... 462 ... ... 2,491 ... ... 6 ... Jullundur ... 20 ... 366 ... ... 1,290 ... ... 4 ... Ferozepore ... 3 ... 13 ... ... 280 ... ... 3 ... Lahore ... 1 ... 30 ... ... 57 ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... 6 ... 381 ... ... 437 ... ... 4 ... Gurdaspur ... 14 ... 418 ... ... 1,983 ... ... 1 ... Sialkot ... 26 ... 672 ... ... 2,374 ... ... 8 ... Gujranwala ... 10 ... 93 ... 1,507 ... ... 5 Mianwali ... 1 ... 15 ... 195 ... ... Lyallpur ... 2 ... 15 ... 63 ... ... ... ... Jhang ... 4 ... 155 ... 418 ... ... 2 ... Multan ... 21 ... 195 ... 609 ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 25 ... 366 ... 4,773 ... ... 33 ... Total ... ... 197 ... 3,651 ... ... 18,335 ... ... 67 ... Rohtak ... Hæinorrhagic septicæmia. Serum alone. 1 ... 29 ... 169 ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 1 ... 19 ... 10 ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... 2 ... 6 ... 240 ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 3 ... 11 ... 355 ... ... ...... ... Lahore ... 1 ... 35 ... 130 ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... 1 ... 40 ... ... 139 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 9 ... 140 ... ... 1,043 ... ... ... ... Lahore Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Vaccine alone. 1 ... ... ... ... 47 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 6 ... ... ... ... 100 ... ... ... ... Jhelum ... 3 ... ... ... ... 322 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi 1 ... ... ... ... 186 ... ... ... ... Attock ... 2 ... ... ... ... 213 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 14 ... ... ... ... 464 ... ... .... ... Total ... ... 27 ... ... ... ... 1,332 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi Black- quarter. Blacklegoid vaccine. 8 ... ... ... ... 299 ... ... ... ... Attock ... 1 ... ... ... ... 82 ... ... ... Total ... ... 9 ... ... ... 381 ... ... ... ... Government Cattle Farm, Hissar... Hackquarter. Blacklegoid vaccine. ... ... ... ... ... 712 ... ... 12 ..
iv TABLE IV SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 21 and 22.) District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veteri- nary Assistants employed. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equities. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ... ... ... ... 463 6 3 2 ... 5 31 2,278 447 2,756 166 937 578 1,681 4,442 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 291 5 10 125 3 13S 44 971 101 1,116 143 916 126 1,185 2,439 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 623 7 13 79 ... 92 60 3,102 8 3,170 117 1,307 36 1,460 4,722 Delhi ... ... ... ... 332 2 17 70 10 97 25 407 19 451 130 1,226 22 1,378 1,926 Karnal ... ... ... ... 373 5 30 65 ... 95 30 1,001 ... 1,031 358 1,735 52 2,145 3,271 Ambala ... ... ... ... 424 6 37 134 9 180 44 585 44 673 210 1,201 70 1,481 2,334 Simla ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... ... 385 7 7 ... ... 7 38 761 300 1,099 377 1,434 394 2,205 3,311 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 391 5 10 62 16 88 4 394 ... 398 140 360 6 506 992 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 275 5 ... 41 1 42 ... 714 ... 714 72 309 12 393 1,149 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 555 4 9 65 7 75 20 403 6 429 180 1,204 17 1,401 1,905 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... 297 6 15 68 2 85 1 1,122 60 1,183 327 797 159 1,283 2,551 Lahore ... ... ... ... 420 4 23 416 ... 439 1 220 2 223 201 868 29 1,098 1,760 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 408 5 4 114 ... 118 21 571 4 596 275 1,348 81 1,704 2,418 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 506 5 32 150 12 194 21 497 19 537 287 942 90 1,319 2,050 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 422 6 1 ... ... 1 1 483 1 485 142 646 16 804 1,290 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 399 6 1 33 ... 39 28 340 4 372 223 741 52 1,016 1,427 Gujrat ... ... ... ... 323 4 7 24 ... 31 3 1,533 4 1,590 266 388 7 661 2,282 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 377 5 19 14 6 39 4 547 26 577 115 146 75 336 952 Jhelum ... ... ... ... 261 4 14 37 1 52 16 393 1,069 1,478 197 218 92 507 2,037 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... 370 5 8 5 1 14 ... 672 15 6S7 204 168 43 415 1,116 Attock ... ... ... ... 318 5 5 13 ... 18 ... 979 475 1,454 132 237 61 430 1,902 Mianwali ... ... ... 170 4 55 90 5 150 5 190 24 219 229 438 119 786 1,155 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 319 5 4 54 ... 58 22 444 2 468 271 868 41 1,180 1,706 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... 214 4 11 26 1 38 23 179 ... 202 174 418 3 595 835 Jhang ... ... ... ... 263 4 1 19 ... 20 6 664 49 719 334 540 96 970 1,709 Multan ... ... ... ... 301 6 ... 45 ... 45 7 3,721 50 3,778 399 1,321 198 1,918 5,741 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... 253 5 2 90 ..... 92 76 456 25 557 114 566 516 1,196 1,845 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... 215 5 11 5 ... 16 56 1,700 850 2,606 630 752 145 1,527 4,149 Total ... 9,948 142 349 1,851 68 2,268 587 25,377 3,604 29,568 6,413 22,031 3,136 31,580 63,416
v TABLE V SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR, 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 24.) District. Number of veterinary dis- pensaries. Number of Veterinary Assist- ants employed at dispensa- ries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF IN OUT PATI- ENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expenditure. Remaining on 1st April 1912. Admitted during the year. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 5 5 2 4 2 221 235 29 223 239 31 217 237 31 6 2 ... 1,787 5,244 2,998 18.92 42.38 9.8 2,004 5,481 3,029 10,514 170 8,215 Rohtak ... 4 4 3 2 ... 269 247 6 272 249 6 272 247 6 2 ... 2,789 6,379 895 12.69 42 49 7.51 3,061 6,623 901 10,588 152 6,666 Gurgaon ... 6 6 4 ... 1 1G5 124 29 169 124 30 166 123 30 3 1 ... 2,737 6,733 2,484 20.9 35 64 15.51 2,903 6,856 2,514 12,273 307 16,768 Delhi ... 1 1 2 ... ... 175 107 65 177 107 65 174 104 60 3 3 5 2,631 2,703 1,244 24.56 1614 11.52 2,805 2,807 1,304 6,916 D.B 33 M. C. 4,306 459 2,204 Karnal ... 4 4 ... 1 ... 151 67 6 151 68 6 143 67 6 8 1 ... 1,835 2,582 643 22.83 26.00 8.76 1,978 2,649 649 5,276 444 7,070 Ambala ... 5 5 1 1 ... 254 213 16 255 244 16 255 241 16 ... 3 ... 8 283 7,696 1,944 24.1 48.35 12.83 3,538 7,937 1,960 13,435 332 5,114 Simla ... 2 2 ... ... ... 68 2 108 68 2 108 64 2 106 4 ... 2 338 32 448 35.8 .19 3.69 402 34 554 990 M. C. 5,644 2,294 Kangra ... 5 5 5 ... ... 129 28 4 134 28 4 134 28 4 ... ... ... 2,046 7,010 2,033 13.54 27.29 8.18 2,180 7,038 2,037 11,255 361 4,486 Hoshiarpur ... 4 4 1 ... ... 236 225 24 237 225 24 234 224 24 3 1 ... 4,799 5,546 1,405 24.82 28.99 8.59 5,033 5,770 1,429 12,232 159 4,288 Jullundur ... 4 4 5 ... ... 355 555 42 360 565 42 354 565 41 6 ... 1 5,484 10,933 2,789 27.01 65.84 16.36 5,838 11,503 2,830 20,171 409 3,232 Ludhiana ... 3 3 2 2 ... 275 427 24 277 429 24 274 422 23 3 7 1 1,784 4,779 2,308 15.02 34.76 17.92 2,055 5,201 2,331 9,587 825 2,707 Ferozepore ... 5 5 6 2 1 236 207 100 242 209 101 241 207 100 1 2 1 3,274 6,730 1,680 21.18 40.37 8.16 3,515 6,937 1,780 12,232 2,338 3,580 Lahore 3 3 2 ... ... 285 98 16 287 98 16 285 97 16 2 1 ... 2,644 2,709 859 16.31 17.0 5.71 2,929 2,806 875 6,610 111 1,882 Amritsar ... 4 4 3 ... ... 300 99 18 303 99 18 301 97 18 2 2 ... 4,077 5,015 1,364 15 36 19.0 4.15 4,378 5,112 1,382 10,872 D. B. 144 M. C. 799 1,716 7,128 Gurdaspur ... 4 4 6 ... 1 374 194 15 380 194 16 376 194 16 4 ... ... 6,305 7,647 1,724 29 26 28.4 8.3 6,681 7,841 1,740 16,262 291 4,483 Sialkot ... 5 5 3 1 1 177 89 26 180 90 27 175 90 27 5 ... ... 4 407 8,542 1,775 24 59 38.4 9.39 4,582 8,632 1,802 15,016 207 3,608 Gujranwala ... 5 5 5 2 ... 293 185 46 298 187 46 296 186 46 2 1 ... 3,782 6,037 1,648 25.2 32.63 10.3 4,078 6,223 1,/ill/ 94 11,995 357 4,897 Gujrat ... 3 3 ... ... ... 165 52 4 165 52 4 165 52 4 ... ... ... 3,826 3,269 759 23.77 20.31 5.08 3,991 3,321 763 8,075 33 1,491 Shahpur ... 4 4 5 ... ... 203 66 32 208 65 32 207 65 31 1 1 1 2,473 1,779 1,352 24.39 14.12 12.19 2,680 1,844 1,383 5,907 90 4,416 Jhelum ... 3 3 1 ... 1 95 11 8 96 11 9 95 11 9 1 ... ... 1,556 1,335 546 15.71 10.37 5.81 1,651 1,346 555 3,552 112 2,500 Rawalpindi 4 4 ... 1 1 254 50 70 254 51 71 253 50 71 1 1 ... 2,390 1,407 1,135 30.79 13.07 11.04 2,643 1,457 1,206 5,306 D. B. 207 Murree M.C 1,062 4,861 712 Attock ... 4 4 ... ... ... 45 18 5 45 18 5 45 18 5 ... ... ... 2,048 2,347 822 18.21 19.18 599 2,093 2,365 827 5,285 8 2,405 Mianwali ... 3 3 4 1 ... 113 31 8 117 32 8 115 31 8 2 1 ... 1,695 2,274 715 16.18 19.59 6.90 1,810 2,305 723 4,838 31 2,153 Montgomery ... 4 4 ... ... ... 166 34 11 166 34 11 166 34 11 ... ... ... 2,925 1,695 1,030 21.87 10.12 6 15 3,091 1,729 1,041 5,861 5 4,030 Lyallpur ... 3 3 5 2 ... 274 172 5 279 174 5 272 171 5 7 3 ... 3,468 3,050 947 22.29 23.03 6.22 3,740 3,221 952 7,913 432 7,271 Jhang ... 3 3 ... ... ... 124 41 8 124 41 8 124 41 8 ... ... ... 2,032 1,434 512 16.04 11.12 3.99 2,156 1,475 520 4,151 69 3,882 Multan .. 6 5 3 ... ... 216 80 29 219 80 29 214 77 29 5 3 ... 3,803 3,865 1,703 23.94 21.59 11.48 4,017 3,942 1,732 9,691 371 11,067 Muzaffargarh ... 4 4 ... ... ... 282 147 47 282 147 47 281 147 47 1 ... ... 4,472 5,628 3,825 30.26 25.7 12 32 4,753 5,775 3,872 14,400 90 6,027 D. G. Khan ... 4 4 ... ... ... 106 31 7 106 31 7 105 31 7 1 ... ... 5,202 2,643 1,698 50.62 23.76 14.68 5,307 2,674 1,705 9,686 42 1,575 Total 113 113 68 19 8 6,006 3,875 808 6,074 3,894 816 6,003 3,859 805 71 35 11 89,889 127,048 43,285 ... ... ... 95,892 130,907 44,090 270,889 19,551 1,38,277 Government Cattle Farm, Hissar 1 2 4 28 1 147 425 63 151 453 64 139 431 61 12 22 3 203 89 75 6 2 4 354 542 139 1,035
vi TABLE VII SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 42.) Province. How occupied. Whether paid from provincial or local funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordi- nate staff not includ- ed in pre- vious columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. In Schools and Colleges... ... ... ... ... In Dispensaries ... ... 15 115 ... On other work ... ... ... *60 ... * 29 Itinerating Veteri- nary Assistants, 5 Office Veterinary Assistants. 2 Tonga line. 24 Reserve. 60 Total ... ... 15 175 ... TABLE VIII. RETURN OF STUD BULLS FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 32.) District. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BODIES. REMARKS. Number on 1st April 1912. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March 1913. Number. Averag price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Hissar ... ... 51 10 200 4 57 *Includes 3 transfer- red from Delhi. Rohtak ... ... *11 1 ... 1 11 Gurgaon ... ... 21 6 200 2 25 vii TABLE X. RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraphs 36 and 37). Details. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicilian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1912 ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 59 ... 4 ... ... 69 66 1 9 38 ... 18 7 73 Increase Purchased in India ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 4 1 ... ... ... ... 5 ... 6 ... ... 8 ... ... ... 8 Received from ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 4 ... ... ... ... 4 63 ... 5 ... 68 72 1 9 46 ... 18 7 81 Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... 2 ... ... ... 3 Sold ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 3 .... 1 3 ... ... ... 4 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Transferred to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total Decrease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 4 1 1 5 ... ... ... 7 Balance on 31st March 1913 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 59 ... 5 ... ... 64 68 ... 8 41 ... 18 7 74 Total 4 ... ... ... ... 4 59 ... 5 ... ... 64 68 ... 8 41 ... 18 7 74
viii TABLE XI. SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES, DURING 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 88.) Horse, pony or donkey. District. Stallions on register on 31st March 1913. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Pievious year Year under report. Previous year Year under report Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... Punjab ... 4 3 4 156 228 52 57 Total ... 4 3 4 156 228 52 57 Pony ... Punjab ... 64 64 59 3,586 3,400 56.9 58 Total ... 64 64 59 3,586 3,400 56.9 58 Donkey ... Punjab ... 74 72 72 3,278 3,453 46 7 48 Total ... 74 72 72 3,278 3,453 46.7 48 TABLE XII SHOWING AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, ETC., OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS DURING THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 39.) District. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 5 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... 380 420 223 210 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... 310 329 195 196 Gurgaon... ... ... ... ... 231 290 140 154 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... 375 314 200 178 Ambala ... ... ... ... 328 356 310 219 195 Kangra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 225 ... Hoshiarpur ... .. 328 312 349 331 171 168 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 318 282 193 182 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 343 324 208 189 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 351 314 199 170 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... 339 306 192 193 Mianwali ... ... ... ... 269 324 232 184 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 317 325 147 178 Muzaffargarh ... ... 383 330 355 330 338 225 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... ... 331 ... 183 Total 711 970 4,293 4,530 2,882 2,605 Average ... 355 323 330 323 206 186
ix TABLE XIII. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 41.) Name of fair. Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUM- BER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF RE- MOUNTS PUR- CHASED. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZE MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 1 160 215 19 32 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60 ... ... 310 ... 310 134 ... ... Ambala ... 1 894 569 230 160 894 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 ... 850 264 ... 1,114 713 5 ... Jullundur ... 1 1,668 1,819 75 65 590 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 30 ... ... ... 802 ... ... 157 ... 157 157 ... ... Gurdaspur ... 1 1,108 839 129 113 1,108 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 300 ... 300 287 ... ... Montgomery ... 1 566 411 143 106 225 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 73 ... 73 23 ... ... 351 ... 351 311 ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 349 431 349 431 349 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 440 ... 440 366 ... ... Total ... 6 4,745 4,284 948 907 3,166 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 31 73 ... 73 914 ... 850 1,822 ... 2,672 1,968 5 ...
x TABLE XIV. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR 1912-13. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 41) Name of fair. Number of cattle fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMALS SOLD. Amount realized in fees on sales of cattle. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullooks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. Prom Imperial Funds. From Provicial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually award- ed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 * 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 6 ... 55,182 2,418 13,891 3,713 3,058 1,939 ...... ... ... ... ... 48,671 364 ... ... 1,538 ... 1,538 839 3 Rohtak ... 1 ... 63,097 4,647 ... 10,827 472 2,264 ... 59 33 33 61 32,678 42 ... ... 524 ... 524 519 ... Gurgaon ... 2 ... 11,755 1,043 6,140 294 7 220 ... ... ... ... 6,676 104 ... ... 504 ... 504 437 ... Ambala ... 1 3 57 17 5 34 ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 ... ... 270 ... 270 188 ... Jullundur ... 1 ... 1,581 2,101 3,924 6,184 35 1,099 ... 16 16 33 75 3,719 90 ... ... 425 ... 425 425 ... Ferozepore ... 4 151 5,682 2,097 4,982 3,859 3,073 1,320 ... ... ... ... ... 10,331 743 ... ... 1,921 ... 1,921 1,880 1 Lahore ... 1 ... 474 319 426 535 49 824 ... 31 21 32 69 1,392 70 ... ... 500 ... 500 267 ... Amritsar ... 2 ... ... Not reported. 18 22 17 26 92 34,312 711 ... 2,900 ... 2,900 2,879 ... Gurdaspur ... 1 16 4,166 2,550 1,139 4,750 6 177 ... 11 9 20 ... 1,387 79 ... ... 500 ... 500 286 1 Sialkot ... 1 77 1,345 7,377 3,677 6,216 13 380 ... 26 18 30 ... 5,315 69 ... ... 300 ... 300 289 ... Gujranwala ... 2 129 3,258 2,451 1,502 7,176 15 843 39 31 59 67 1,277 189 ... ... 700 ... 700 540 ... Gujrat ... 1 103 132 106 32 119 ... ... 51 ... 20 48 ... 4 439 ... ... 650 ... 650 650 2 Shahpur ... 2 132 258 104 30 167 21 77 165 32 22 38 50 105 591 ... ... 600 ... 600 600 ... Rawalpindi ... 2 ... 1,824 41 ... 18 24 877 ... 163 47 91 ... 777 419 ... ... 457 100 557 446 2 Attock ... 3 412 294 125 120 ... ... 304 140 61 ... ... ... 20 1,042 ... ... 1,097 ... 1,097 1,080 4 Montgomery ... 1 19 84 190 38 83 56 1,295 94 48 48 11 71 4 260 ... ... 406 ... 406 376 2 Lyallpur ... 1 11 1,685 2,403 2,426 3,059 761 55 ... 20 14 19 65 4,331 115 ... ... 920 ... 920 760 ... Multan ... 1 12 23 10 ... ... 32 ... ... ... ... ... ... 77 ... ... 200 ... 200 200 ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 5 30 14 ... 12 34 254 ... ... .... ... ... ... 349 ... ... 200 ... 200 195 ... Total 34 1,070 1,42,897 28,013 38,332 47,046 7,656 11,941 442 528 296 530 550 1,50,999 5,819 ... ... 14,612 100 14,712 12,856 15
xi TABLE XIVxii TABLE VI-A. EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES. District. Stipendo. HOSPITAL CHARGES. BREEDING OPERATIONS. FAIRS AND SHOWS. Grand Total of columns 2, 8, 15 and 20. REMARKS. Pay of compounders and menials. Cost of medicines and Expenditure on build- ings and repairs. Furniture. Contingencies. Total. Buils. Horses and ponies. Donkeys. Total. Hoese fairs. Cattle fairs. Total. Purchase. Upke p. Purchase. Upkeep. Purchase. Upkeep. Prizes. Contingencies. Prizes. Contingencies. 1 2 3 4 5 0 7 3 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... 120 793 1,370 5,094 8 348 8,215 2,000 ... 2,950 1,900 1,116 7,956 134 ... 839 19,462* 20,435 30,736 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 96 847 1,114 4,405 ... ... 6,666 45 ... ... 1,802 ... 780 2,687 ... ... 519 4,312 5,331 14,780 Contribution of Rs. 9,000 is still to be paid to Government. Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 232 1,040 1,245 14,031 259 184 16,763 1,277 105 ... 1,431 ... 421 3,23 ... ... 437 279 716 20,950 Delhi ... ... ... ... 199 192 62 ... 6 459 ... ... ... 763 ... 213 970 ... ... ... ... ... 1,435 Delhi Municipal Committee ... 493 368 320 ... 1,017 2,294 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,204 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... 429 412 971 212 251 214 2,070 1,009 82 ... 3,621 ... 1,393 5,104 ... ... ... ... ... 7,594 Ambala ... ... ... ... 951 1,517 2,491 143 69 5,114 800 50 1,317 2,150 ... 1,145 5,402 713 1,804 188 260 2,965 13,541 Simla ... ... ... ... 396 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 396 Simla Municipal Committee 507 150 286 ... 1,351 3,35 5,644 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,644 Kongra ... ... ... ... ... ... 96 326 1,271 2.889 ... ... 4,488 ... 2 1,500 ... ... 225 1,727 ... ... ... ... ... 6,309 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 819 877 2,307 199 80 4,288 800 85 ... 1,376 ... 1,308 3.029 ... ... ... ... ... 7,917 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... 1,002 1,649 521 ... ... 3,232 800 ... ... 955 ... 771 2,520 ... ... ... ... ... 5,758 Jullundur Municipal Com- mittee. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 157 ... 425 1,439 2,021 2,021 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 108 1,014 784 701 61 57 2,707 600 147 ... 1,372 ... 2,492 4, 611 ... ... ... ... ... 7,426 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... 72 903 1,353 1,020 58 186 3,580 1,355 ... 2,469 ... ... 3,804 ... ... 703 1,723 2,426 9,882 Muktsar Municipal Com- mittee. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 599 313 559 1,329 2,799 2,799 Abohar Municipal Committee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 618 800 1,418 1,418 Lahore ... ... ... ... 96 602 800 229 102 98 1,882 4,000 368 ... ... ... ... 4,308 90 ... 267 924 1,280 7,537 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 192 512 833 288 ... 53 1,716 800 128 650 3,263 ... ... 4,851 ... ... ... ... ... 6,759 Amritsar Municipal Com- mittee. 210 732 464 5,180 133 620 7,128 330 ... ... 308 ... ... 638 100 ... 2,879 17,591xiii RESOURCES-LOCAL BODIES. District. By that part of Imperial grant of 1/4th of local rate which has been specially set apart by the Local Government lor Veterinary ob- jects. Receipt from fees for medicines, Fees at horse fairs. Fees at cattle fairs. FOR PRIZES. Total receipt of local bodies sar- marked and a EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES. Amount by which column 12 ex- ceeds column 8, i.e., out-of-pocket expenditure by local bodies on Veterinary objects. REMARKS. Horse fair. Cattle fair. By contribution to Pro- vinicial funds for pay of Veterinary Assistants. By contribution to other local bodies. By direct payment. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 10 11 12 13 14 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hisar ... ... ... 4,800 170 ... 48,671 ... ... 53,641 1,788 ... 36,733 38,524 xiv TABLE XVI. RETURN OF ANIMALS ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. Detail. Hera balls. Supernumerary bulls. Cows. Male produce. Female produce. Castrated produce. Ordnance bullocks. Cultivation bullocks. Mules. Pony mares for mule breeding. Pony stallion. Camels. Donkey stallions. Donkey colts. Donkey mares. Donkey fillies. Rams. Ewes. Male lambs. Female lambs. Female goats. Female kids. Male goats and kids. Pony fillies. Total. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Balance on 1st April 1912 21 1 1,353 935 921 133 ... 261 133 50 1 7 5 70 94 51 10 347 153 210 14 18 3 1 4,710 Increase By birth ... ... 1 ... ... 326 207 ... ... ... 24 ... ... ... ... 82 ... 31 ... ... 165 173 ... 19 11 2 1,074 By purchase ... ... ... 13 8 3 ... ... 42 80 25 ... 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 123 By transfer ... 13 141 132 4 ... 20 128 45 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... 1 127 ... 2 ... ... ... 620 Total ... 84 142 1,397 1,273 1,221 153 128 348 187 84 1 10 5 102 101 82 11 474 823 392 16 26 14 8 6,627 Decrease Died ... ... ... 21 51 28 4 ... 5 ... ... ... 2 ... 4 1 1 17 86 29 ... 4 ... ... 203 Destroyed ... ... ... 8 1 ... ... 1 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 10 Sold ... 1 108 81 12 36 ... 125 24 29 2 ... ... ... 18 5 4 6 03 120 21 6 9 6 ... 718 Transferred ... 8 31 ... 148 132 140 2 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... 1 127 ... 2 ... ... 620 Total ... 4 180 105 212 196 153 128 48 30 3 ... 2 ... 22 6 13 5 112 166 177 5 15 6 ... 1,546 Balance on 31st March 1918 30 3 1,292 1,061 1,025 ... ... 300 157 81 1 8 5 80 05 70 6 862 167 215 11 11 8 8 4,081 Value, Rs. ... 9,970 1,200 1,40,542 1,30,055 50,490 ... ... 42,215 23,130 17,690 50 1,371 2,800 11,060 13,080 3,960 405 1,627 550 1,133 78 27 20 310 4,61,672
xv TABLE XVI-A. DETAILS OF SHEEP FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. DETAIL. RAMS. EWES. MALE LAMBS. FEMALE LAMBS. Total. REMARKS. Country-bred. Cross-bred. Merino. Total. Country-bred. Cross-bred. Merino. Total. Country-bred. Cross-bred. Merino. Total. Country-bred. Crossbred. Merino. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 18 14 15 16 17 18 19 Balance on 1st April 1912 ... ... ... ... 2 3 5 10 251 85 11 847 31 123 4 158 52 158 9 219 734 Increase By birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 164 1 165 1 168 4 173 338 By purchase ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... By transfer ... ... ... 1 1 40 86 1 127 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 128 Total ... 2 3 6 11 291 171 12 474 31 287 5 823 53 326 13 392 1,200 Decrease ... Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 2 5 17 5 29 2 36 2 24 3 29 82 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Sold ... 2 3 ... 5 92 1 ... 93 26 103 ... 129 1 20 ... 21 248 Transferred ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 40 86 1 127 128 Total ... 2 3 ... 5 103 4 5 112 31 132 3 166 43 130 4 177 460 Balance on 31st March 1913 ... ... ... 6 6 188 ... 167 7 362 ... 155 2 157 10 196 9 215 740 Value, Rs. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 405 405 1,525 102 1,627 ... 349 210 559 593 540 1,133 3,724
xvi TABLE XVII. HISSAR FARM. RESULTS OF DONKEY AND MULE BREEDING IN THE YEAR 1912-13. xvii TABLE XVIII. ABSTRACT SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF THE HISSAR FARM DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1912-13. Rs. A. P. Receipts paid into Treasury. Sale of animals (a) ... ... 72,344 8 0 Sale of produce 36 0 0 Other heads ... ... ... ... ... ... 13,985 18 8 Total 86,366 5 8 Expenditure. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers ... ... ... 13,018 12 10 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1913-14 Price: Re. 0-7-0 or 7d. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1914.
REPORTS ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPART- MENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERN- MENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR 1913-14.
Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IS LONDON. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S. W. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, S. W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C. B. QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAO & Co., 46, Groat Russell Street, London, W. C. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONDY, Limited, 116, Crafton Street, Duolin. MR. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. 0. ON THE CONTINENT. FRIRDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NWHOFF, The Hague, IN INDIA THACKER, SPINR & Co., Calcutta & Simla, NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta, R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta, THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras, T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 183, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINDENT, AMERICAN BAPIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anárkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAJ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore [ for Vernacular publications only]. MESSRS. RAMA KRISHNA AND SONS, Book- sellers and News Agents, Anárkali Street, Lahore. N. B . MATHUR, Superintendent and Pro- prietor, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALLA SONS & Co., Bom- bay.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1913-14 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1914.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 15 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERN- MENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR THE YEAR 1913-14. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture ... 1-2 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1913-14. 1 Staff ... ... ... ... 3 2 3 Sessions ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 4 Admission ... ... ... ... ib. 5 6 7 ib. 8 Examination results ... ... ... ... 9 10 Other classes ... ... ... ... ... ib. 11 Hospital ... ... ... 4 12 13 Income ... ... ... ... ... ib. 14 Allotment for Civil admission ... ... ... ... ... ib. 15 Demand for graduates ... ... ... ... ib. 16 Another Vernacular Veterinary College ... ib. 17 New College ... ... ... ib. 18 Punjab Veterinary Association ... ... ... ... ib. 19 Text-books ... ... ... ... ... ib. 20 Work of staff. ... ... ... ... ... ib. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1914, BY LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. FARMER, CHIEF SUPER- INTENDENT, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB. Part I. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1 General administration ... ... ... ... 5 2 3 4 VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. 5 Veterinary instruction ... ... ... ... 5 6 7 Part II.ii Para. Subject. Page. Bovines. 18 Table II ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 19 Rinderpestiii Para. Subject. Page. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR, 1913-14. A.No. 2949 S. (Rev. & Agri.2 7. The number of Veterinary Hospitals has risen to 114. His Honour is glad to observe that several private persons have come forward to build hospitals at their own expense and his acknowledgments are due to them. Wherever a properly equipped hospital is provided by local bodies or private individuals, an addition to the staff of Veterinary Assistants will be sanctioned and the cost met by Government. There is no ground for the fear expressed by the Director of Agriculture that the legitimate expansion of the department will be checked. Indeed an increase of ten Veterinary Assistants including three for the reserve has recently been sanctioned. What the Lieutenant- Governor has felt compelled to take exception to is the mere inflation of the cadre where the necessity was not established. 8. The Hissar Cattle Farm has suffered from a partial failure of the rains for the third year in succession. This means increased expenditure on the keep of animals, and also, as the Superintendent shows, involves risks to the stock. Financially, the position of the Farm shows an improvement. The value of the stock has risen from 4.62 lakhs to 5.28, and the income from Rs. 86,366 to Rs. 97,389. The number of bulls issued (637) is the highest on record, and the Director of Agriculture mentions a case in which Rs. 1,300 was paid for a single animal. The increasing interest in the improvement of the breed of cattle is a very healthy symptom, and the steady distribution of well-bred bulls from the Farm must in time raise the standard over most of the Province. To secure this result, it is, however, necessary that the supply should be equal to the in- creasing demand. The Lieutenant-Governor visited the Farm in February last, and was much struck with the quantity and quality of the work which is being carried on there, which reflects great credit on Lieutenant-Colonel Farmer and his successor. 9. His Honour desires to acknowledge the good work done by the officers of the Department. He is particularly gratified to notice the steady progress being made in winning the confidence of the people which is an indis- pensable condition of success. No better proof of such confidence could be forthcoming than the fact that many private individuals have come forward to establish Veterinary Hospitals. 1508 CSANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY ADMINISTRATION IN THE PUNJAB For the year 1913-14. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture. Three annual reports are here brought together2 the cadre by 8 men annually; but now each individual case has to be reported to government for orders. This has resulted in checking the expansion of the department. The actual increase of veterinary assistants has been as follows:3 REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE For the year 1913-14 BY COLONEL PEASE, C.I.E., PRINCIPAL. Staff. 1 The only changes in the teaching staff during the year were that Mr. S. H. Graiger returned from sick leave and took over charge of the contagious disease ward from Major G. K. Walker, C.I.E., who was posted as post-graduate professor. Mr. Pool, one of the officers under training, was transfereel to Behar and Orissa in January 1914. 2. None of the extra veterinary establishment, sanctioned in May 1912, has been entertained so far, as there is no work for them at present. Sessions. 3. The summer session commenced on the 20th April 1913, and closed on 20th June 1913. The winter session commenced at the beginning of October 1913, and closed at the end of March 1914. Admission. 4. Fifty-five students were admitted on the 20th April 1913, and formed the first year class. There were 60 students in the second and 57 in the third year classes. The newly-admitted students came from 4 Hospital. 11. The numbers of patients treated in the hospital are as follows:5 REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BY LIEUTENANT- COLONEL J. FARMER, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I. General administration. 1. The following statement shows the names of the officers who held charge of the several appointments and the amount of touring work performed by them:6 good work by lecturing in the villages, which to a great extent is the cause of the decrease of contagious disease. The importance of isolation and the neces- sity for intimation when disease first appears have been pointed out to the people. In a country like India, where pariah dogs and jackals are numerous, it is almost impossible to have strict isolation, as these animals invariably get into the village enlcosures at night. The chief superintendent would like to see a great reduction made in the number of pariahs and jackals as he feels sure that the harm done by them is enormous. Birds such as mainas, crows, kites and vultures also spread contagion. 9. If inoculations are to be carried out to the greatest advantage, prompt action is essential. A great deal is to be desired in this respect, not due to any fault of the veterinary staff, but owing to the dilatoriness in reporting outbreaks of disease on the part of the patwaris and people. The Importance and urgency of this work do not seem to have been fully realized. Many outbreaks are not reported at all. It is hoped that the system of lectures and demonstrations of those facts adopted during the year will improve matters. Equines. Table II. 10. Glanders7 16. Mange.8 II.9 IV.10 Stud bulls11 Sheep 46. A separate report on sheep breeding has already been submitted, and special endeavours are being made to improve this industry. As recommended in the chief superintendent's separate report more merinos are required. Fairs and shows. 47. The statistical information regarding fairs and shows is incor- porated in Tables XIII and XIV. Horse shows were held in 5 districts during the year, and cattle fairs in 17 districts. The important fairs were attended by the officers of the department. Part IV.12 REPORT ON THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR. A.13 carcity, stock cannot develop so rapidly as in good years, and a certain number remain permanently stunt ed, and have to be cast and sold at very unremunerative prices. Up to the present amongst the male stock, upon which the farm depends, for its main source of revenue, it has been possible to keep the losses due to this cause at a low figure, but I have not been able to feed the heifers on the same generous scale, and I fear a number will never attain full development. 4. Except for the famine the year has been a successful one. The number of bulls issued to district boards easily beat all previous records as regards number, and the quality of the animals issued was well up to that of previous years. The actual receipts for the year amounted to Rs. 97,388-14-6 and would have exceeded one lac of rupees, except for the fact that the money due for several animals sold during the year was not received till after 31st March. Had these sums been received in time, and had the bulls issued to district boards been charged for at the valuation committee's figure of Rs. 400 each, the receipts would have amounted to 1,28,000 rupees. 5. In August the farm was visited by some cattle-breeders from Brazil who purchased 16 young male stock at the rate laid down by the valua- tion committee, and one 6 year old herd bull for Rs. 1,000. In view of their willingness to pay Rs. 1,000 for the bull, which was not a very exceptional animal, and of the high prices which south American and other importers of pedigree stock are in the habit of paying, I do not doubt that the above gentlemen would have been pleased to pay much higher prices than were asked, especially as they were anxious to obtain 80 young bulls, and were very disappointed at being only allowed to purchase 17. The above was the second occasion on which these same Brazilian breeders have visited India, and made purchases from the farm; and, were there stock to spare, I have no doubt an excellent market for them could be found in south America. By order of the Punjab government one other bull was sold to go abroad, viz., to Perak. Contagious diseases. 6. As regards contagious diseases the farm has again been very fortunate. The following occurred:14 At the close of the outbreak a small number of doses of anti-strangles serum from Muktesar were used both as a preventative and curative. The serum did not seem to be of much use as a preventative, but the cases occurring after inoculation as well as those inoculated after onset of symptoms all ran a mild course This may have been due to the serum or possibly to diminution in the virulence of the virus. (c) Foot and Mouth Disease15 Buttocks.16 Cultivation.17 The strangles cases were isolated at the "stables buildings," about 3/4 of a mile distant from the home farm. Tracheotomy tubes had to be inserted in several cases and the outbreak involved the performance of a minor oper- ation of some sort almost daily between the dates mentioned above. During the year six veterinary assistants on the Punjab cadre were attached for periods of three months each to the farm for training in the handling, casting and preparation of stock for operations, methods of segre- gation against contagious disease, etc. In view of the fact that there are only two veterinary assistants attach- ed to the farm, and that most of the time of one of them is taken up by the supervision of healthy mules and donkeys in the paddocks, I think the work done by them has been highly creditable. Workshop and Machinery.TABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab veterinary college i II Statement showing the number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals ... ... ... ... ii III Statement showing results of preventive inoculation ... iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veteri- nary assistants on tour ... iv V Statement showing the number of animals treated at veterinary hospi- tals and dispensaries ... ... V VII Statement showing total strength of subordinate veterinary staff employ- ed ... ... ... ... ... ... vi VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ib X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies vii XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ... ... viii XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ib XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non- selected districts ... ... ... ix XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... x XIV-A Statement showing cost of the civil veterinary department xi VIA Expenditure by local bodies ... ... ... xii VI-B ResourcesTABLE I. SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1913-14. Name of the institution. Name of course of instruction, if mure than one followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS STUDENTS ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR, CLASSED BY EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATION. RECEIPT EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE THREE YEARS FRECHDING. REMARKS. Admitted dur- ing the year beginning April 1913. Passed final examination during the year ending April 1914. Failed to pass the final examination. Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of the year Scholarship-holders. Military students and others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. Matriculated or with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English. From fees. From other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed In service of government or local bodies. In service of states, bodies or institutions. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Punjab veteri- nary college. Diploma or three years' course in Urdu- 14 41 *53 5 107 13 4 21 30 8,357 5,942 14,299 65,108 35,000 1,00,108 170 165 5 ... ... *1 passed in June 1913.
ii TABLE II. SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1913-14. DISTRICT. EQIUNE BOVINES. OTHERS REMARKS. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other contagions diseases. Total. Rinderpest Foot and mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic sep- Black quarter. Anthrax. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic sep- ticæmia. Black quarter. Other contagious diseases. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 532 28 277 69 ... ... 906 55 ... ... ... 35 90 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,339 29 267 132 ... ... 1,767 15 7 ... ... ... 22 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,326 124 3S2 55 ... 1 1,888 52 ... ... ... 3 55 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,660 48 610 7 ... ... 4,325 90 ... ... ... ... 90 Ambala ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 144 8 239 9 ... ... 400 23 10 ... ... ... 33 Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra .. ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 125 36 214 14 ... 19 408 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 203 12 388 ... ... ... 603 ... ... ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 3 234 41 761 ... ... ... 1,036 9 ... 14 ... ... 23 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 170 64 390 5 ... 113 742 10 ... ... ... ... 10 Ferozepore ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 170 5 ... ... 183 ... 4 ... ... 50 54 Lahore ... ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... 1 11 23 23 326 ... ... ... 372 ... 25 10 10 1 46 Amritsar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 16 959 ... ... ... 1,041 ... 3 12 ... ... 15 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 228 11 285 ... ... ... 524 6 ... 1 ... 10 17 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 273 7 356 ... ... ... 636 ... ... 6 ... ... 6 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 894 45 1,288 ... ... 18 2,245 12 ... 37 ... 45 94 Gujrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 130 24 309 ... ... ... 463 ... ... ... ... 4 4 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 855 49 1,786 22 ... ... 2,712 5 115 73 ... 244 437 Jhelum ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 319 3 59 125 ... 13 519 ... 10 ... ... 11 21 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 622 9 74 38 ... 23 766 ... 6 ... ... 102 108 Attock ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 16 23 116 ... 26 242 ... 36 ... ... 9 45 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 ... 34 8 2 ... 110 38 ... ... ... 49 87 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 5 13 ... ... ... 29 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 4 54 531 ... ... ... 589 ... ... ... ... 82 82 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 775 15 562 3 ... ... 1,355 70 76 ... ... 1 147 Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 200 13 93 54 ... ... 360 ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 ... ... 19 437 18 202 29 ... ... 686 ... ... ... ... 228 228 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 ... 65 42 ... ... 123 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Total ... ... ... ... ... 10 42 2,713 706 10,663 733 2 213 25,030 386 297 153 10 874 1,720 Government cattle farm, Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 29 ... ... 29 ... ... ... ... ... ... NOTE.iii TABLE III. SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1913-14. District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inocula- tion was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNIN- OCULATED IN COURSE OF OUTBREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION.. REMARKS Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest. Serum alone. 7 ... 146 ... ... 794 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 10 ... 226 ... ... 1,475 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 15 ... 284 ... ... 1,782 ... ... 8 ... Karnal ... 11 ... 331 ... ... 1,816 ... ... 8 ... Ambala ... 4 ... 45 ... ... 321 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 9 ... 100 ... ... 663 ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 7 ... 54 ... ... 1,011 ... ... 1 ... Jullundur ... 16 ... 182 ... ... 8,421 ... ... 5 ... Ferozepore ... 2 ... 3 ... ... 166 ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... 18 ... 223 ... 2,195 ... ... 4 ... Sialkot ... 3 ... 45 ... ... 203 ... ... 1 ... Gujranwala ... 6 ... 239 ... ... 619 ... ... 4 ... Shahpur ... 5 ... 21 ... 481 ... ... ... ... Jhelum ... 10 ... 144 ... ... 938 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi 32 ... 211 ... ... 6,253 ... ... 6 ... Mianwali ... 2 ... 8 ... ... 174 ... ... 4 ... Jhang ... 1 ... 80 ... 700 ... ... 1 ... Multan ... 7 ... 46 ... 844 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 24 393 ... ... 5,398 ... ... 4 ... Total ... ... ... 189 ... 2,781 ... ... 29,254 ... ... 40 ... Rohtak ... Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Scrum alone. 8 ... 20 ... ... 163 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 5 ... 2 ... ... 285 ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 6 ... 33 ... 500 ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... 11 ... 117 ... ... 3,153 ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 6 ... 38 ... 776 ... ... 1 ... Lahore ... 4 ... 66 ... ... 348 ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... 7 ... 85 ... 1,233 ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... 5 ... 85 ... ... 836 ... ... ... ... Sialkot ... 4 ... 37 ... ... 293 ... ... 1 ... Gujranwala ... 8 ... 144 ... ... 1,131 ... ... 1 ... Lyallpur ... 7 ... 125 ... ... 1,647 ... ... ... ... Jhang ... 7 ... 84 ... ... 1,426 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 11 ... 72 ... ... 2,678 ... ... 9 ... Muzaffargarh ... 11 ... 117 ... ... 4,842 ... ... 1 ... Total ... ... | 94 ... 1,025 ... 19,311 ... ... 13 ... Ferozepore ... Hæmorrhagic septicaæmia. Vaccine. 2 164 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 7 ... ... ... 162 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi 1 ... ... ... 47 ... ... ... ... Attock ... 1 ... ... ... 224 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 10 ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 1 ... ... ... ... 266 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 ... ... ... ... 292 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... 23 ... ... ... 1,166 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi ... Black- quarter. Vaccine. 8 ... ... ... ... 371 ... ... ... ... Attock ... 1 ... ... ... ... 75 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 1 100 ... Muzaffargarh ... 7 ... ... ... 848 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 17 ... ... ... ... 1,394 ... ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL ... ... ... 323 ... 3,806 ... ... 51,125 ... ... 53 ... Government cattle farm, Hissar. Stran- gle. Serum alone. 1 2 ... ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... Ditto Black quarter Vaccine. ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,176 ... ... ... ...
iv TABLE IV. SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1913-14. District. Number of villages visited. Number of veteri- nary assistants employed. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ... ... ... ... 504 6 4 137 74 215 10 1,778 242 2,030 172 954 637 1,763 4,008 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 439 5 11 280 3 294 30 1,254 101 1,385 200 1,847 79 2,126 3,805 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 598 7 14 291 13 318 160 2,429 17 2,606 161 951 20 1,132 4,056 Karnal ... ... ... ... 527 5 22 411 3 436 14 1,102 ... 1,116 301 2175 31 2,507 4,059 Ambala ... ... ... ... 335 6 37 1,007 16 1,060 24 709 7 740 193 1,504 52 1,749 3,549 Simla ... ... ... ... 10 3 .. ... ... ... ... 60 3 63 ... ... ... ... 63 Kangra ... ... ... ... 694 7 35 14 22 71 18 13,040 629 13,687 508 2,365 883 3,756 17,514 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 417 5 33 312 33 378 10 ... 643 653 150 373 7 530 1,561 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 508 5 22 620 27 669 21 1,424 1 1,446 1 9 433 22 574 2,689 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 431 5 4 405 18 427 17 1,264 3 1,284 98 1,034 46 1,178 2,889 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... 564 6 33 920 74 1,027 30 2,399 40 2,469 201 2,359 131 2,691 6,187 Lahore ... ... ... ... 462 4 83 1,418 20 1,521 6 598 ... 604 289 1,325 85 1,699 3,824 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 590 5 11 933 5 949 25 613 7 645 363 1,071 230 1,664 3,258 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 379 5 16 309 15 340 3 1,780 6 1,789 138 563 4 705 2,834 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 351 6 8 165 5 178 9 509 ... 518 186 902 10 1,098 1,794 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 418 6 20 372 14 406 10 1,320 4 1,334 112 418 17 547 2,287 Gujrat ... ... ... ... 403 4 16 3,014 ... 3,030 19 3,099 82 3,200 292 609 35 936 7,166 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 476 5 28 67 4 99 4 1,814 138 1,956 106 202 21 329 2,384 Jhelum ... ... ... ... 365 4 8 101 ... 109 1 851 37 889 201 369 58 628 1,626 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... 642 5 10 33 1 44 8 1,524 317 1,849 176 204 28 408 2,301 Attock ... ... ... ... 260 5 11 12 1 24 ... 2,366 10 2,376 98 S6 80 264 2,664 Mianwali ... ... ... ... 188 4 47 74 3 124 2 1,592 111 1,705 152 316 34 502 2,331 Montgomery ... ... ... 348 5 43 1,090 29 1,153 28 1,221 30 1,279 158 457 35 650 3,082 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... 243 4 15 517 13 545 9 394 ... 403 134 444 14 592 1,540 Jhang ... ... ... ... 320 4 ... 319 ... 319 26 1,472 179 1,677 170 465 213 848 2,844 Multan ... ... ... ... 379 6 8 561 3 572 29 2,683 168 2,880 259 851 121 1,231 4,683 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... 385 5 13 791 ... 804 559 1,510 47 2,116 184 528 275 987 3,907 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... 286 5 12 28 2 42 57 1,919 108 2,084 586 629 201 1,416 3,542 Total ... 11,522 142 564 14,201 389 15,154 1,129 50,724 2,930 54,783 5,707 23,434 3,369 32,510 1,02,447
v TABLE V. SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR 1913.14. DISTRICT. Number of veterinary dis- pensaries, Number of veterinary assist- ants employed at dispens- aries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF IN AND OUT PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expeuditure. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st Marsh. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines, Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Rqumes, Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 ... 174 Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 5 5 6 2 293 42 180 295 42 179 288 40 1 7 2 1,867 5,201 3,854 20.52 45.03 25.93 2,047 5,496 3,896 11,439 151 11,965 Rohtak ... 4 4 ... 2 ... 311 367 5 311 369 5 308 365 5 3 4 ... 3,695 6,787 1,169 28.3 43.66 21.68 4,006 7,156 1,174 12,336 157 4,489 Gurgaon ... 6 6 3 1 ... 254 184 19 257 385 19 234 180 19 3 5 ... 2,599 6,639 1,870 20.11 29.42 10.08 2,856 6,824 1.889 11,569 221 16,266 Karnal ... 4 4 8 1 ... 193 90 2 201 91 2 201 88 2 ... 3 ... 2,092 3,488 737 23.54 31.09 8.42 2,293 3,577 739 6,609 352 2,348 Ambala ... 5 5 ... 3 ... 269 290 2 269 293 2 265 292 2 4 1 ... 8,772 8,456 1,794 30.71 50.57 10.46 9,041 8,749 1,796 19,586 363 5,854 Simla ... 3 3 4 ... 2 172 20 141 176 20 143 175 20 141 1 ... 2 415 235 825 4.14 2.44 5.82 591 255 968 1,814 5,717 6,683 Kangra ... 5 5 ... ... ... 141 27 10 141 27 10 141 27 10 ... ... ... 1,719 9,610 1,847 13.35 49.89 10.04 1,860 9,637 1,857 13,354 54 5,539 Hoshiarpur ... 4 4 3 1 ... 257 235 10 250 236 10 259 236 10 1 ... ... 4,553 5,810 1,377 23.42 20.73 7.26 4,823 6,046 1,387 12,256 125 5,163 Jullundur ... 4 4 6 ... 1 314 518 44 320 518 45 319 517 45 1 1 ... 5,557 10,751 2,925 28.32 68.0 16.55 5,877 11,269 2,970 20,116 247 3,082 Ludhiana ... 4 4 8 7 1 343 423 38 346 430 39 338 424 37 8 6 2 2,042 5,660 2,376 22.10 41.09 18.27 2,388 6,090 2,415 10,893 266 3,806 Ferozepore ... 5 5 1 2 1 248 193 86 249 195 87 243 194 77 6 1 10 2,633 5,082 1,194 18.94 31.13 6.95 2,882 5,277 1,281 9,440 2,871 3,333 Lahore ... 3 3 2 1 ... 304 93 7 366 94 7 305 92 7 1 2 ... 2,670 3,174 798 16.70 16.92 5.01 2,976 3,288 805 7,019 125 8,182 Amritsar ... 4 4 2 2 ... 364 148 21 366 150 21 361 150 21 5 ... ... 4,041 5,566 1,594 27.52 23.70 7.71 5,310 5,716 1,615 12,641 934 14,756 Gurdaspur ... 4 4 4 ... ... 419 269 18 423 269 18 420 269 18 8 ... ... 7,169 9,228 1,952 42.28 37.81 15.86 7,592 9,497 1,970 19,059 285 6,686 Sialkot ... 5 5 5 ... ... 230 87 19 235 87 19 231 87 18 4 ... 1 5,708 9,675 1,776 30.71 42.43 7.96 5,943 9,762 1,795 17,500 337 2,699 Gujranwala ... 5 5 2 1 ... 425 181 60 427 182 60 422 178 60 5 6 ... 4,632 7,284 1,965 30.78 39.34 12.84 5,059 7,466 2,025 14,550 523 4,480 Gujrat .. 3 3 ... ... ... 176 65 5 176 65 5 172 64 4 4 1 1 3,716 4,736 942 20.22 23.74 5.59 3,892 4.801 947 9.640 24 3,816 Shahpur ... 4 4 1 1 1 214 74 21 215 75 22 213 75 22 2 ... ... 3,008 2,211 1,781 29.37 15.86 14.73 3,223 2,286 1,803 7,312 103 4,578 Jhelum ... 3 3 1 ... ... 117 27 18 118 27 18 116 27 18 9 ... ... 1,934 1,597 743 20.93 13.08 8.43 2,052 1,624 761 4,437 149 6,746 Rawaipindi ... 4 4 1 1 ... 284 89 103 285 90 103 285 90 102 ... ... 1 2,511 1,602 1,406 37.69 21.28 17.3 2,796 1,692 1,509 5,997 395 5,149 Attock ... 4 4 ... ... ... 64 20 4 64 20 4 63 20 4 1 ... ... 2,646 2,940 1,068 23.37 22.2 7.27 2,410 2,960 1,072 6,412 24 3,494 Mianwali ... 8 3 2 1 ... 196 47 6 198 48 6 197 46 6 1 2 ... 1,804 2,534 1,128 16.99 21.61 9.7 2,002 2,632 1,134 5,768 113 8,676 Montgomery ... 4 4 ... ... ... 199 44 20 199 44 20 197 44 20 2 ... ... 3,894 4,006 1,902 22.77 17.93 9.63 4,093 4,050 1,922 10,065 137 2,284 Lynllpur ... 8 3 7 3 ... 343 231 9 350 234 9 345 233 9 5 1 ... 3,902 4,234 1,341 24.02 24.30 9.11 4,252 4,438 1,350 10,070 375 2,933 Jhang ... 3 3 ... ... ... 188 39 5 188 39 5 187 39 5 1 .. ... 2,630 1,988 977 20.44 13.14 6.70 2,818 2,027 982 5,827 201 4,304 Multan ... 5 5 5 3 ... 233 152 48 238 155 48 236 146 45 2 9 8 3,494 4121 1,606 26.49 25.74 27.9 3,732 4,276 1,654 9,662 348 2,216 Muzaffargarh ... 4 4 1 ... ... 321 178 85 322 178 85 318 177 81 4 1 4 4,197 6,157 4,611 25.15 66.58 17.89 4,519 6,335 4,696 15,550 299 4,842 Dera Ghazi Khan 4 4 1 ... ... 154 33 9 155 33 9 151 32 8 4 1 1 4,898 3,070 2,701 40.68 25.84 20.72 5,053 3,103 2,710 10,866 76 2,093 Total ... 114 114 68 32 6 6,907 4,417 857 6,975 4,449 863 6,901 4,398 836 74 51 27 99,411 141,890 48,259 ... ... ... 108,386 146,339 49,122 301,847 14,862 1,50,962 Government cattle farm, Hissar. 1 2 12 22 3 192 443 104 204 465 107 198 442 105 6 23 2 263 93 77 9.76 3.03 3.39 467 557 184 1,208 ...
vi TABLE VII. SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1913-14. Province. How occupied. Whether paid from provincial or local funds. Veterinary inspectors. Veterinary assistants. Subordi- nate staff not includ- ed in pre- vious columns. REMARKS. 1 2 8 4. 6 6 7 No. No. In schools and colleges ... ... ... ... ... In dispensaries ... ... ... 116 ... On other work ... ... 15 60 ... *29 Itinerating veteri- nary assistants. 5 Office veterinary assistants. 2 on tonga lines. 24 reserve. 60 Total ... ... 15 176 ... TABLE VIII. RETURN OF STUD BULLS FOR THE YEAR 1913-14. DISTRICT. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BODIES. REMARKS. Number on 1st April 1913. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balances remaining on 31st March 1914. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... 57 6 200 2 61 Rohtak ... ... ... 11 ... ... 1 10 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 5 200 ... 30 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 5 200 3 31 Ambala ... ... ... ... 24 4 200 2 26 Kangra ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... 11 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... 36 10 200 *5 41 *3 were sold to the villagers. Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... 28 5 200 6 25 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... 21 3 200 ... 24 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... 52 9 200 1 60 Lahore ... ... ... 43 16 200 vii TABLE X. RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1913-14. DETAILS. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicilian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country bred. Total. 1 3 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1913 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 59 ... 5 ... ... 64 68 ... 8 41 ... 18 7 74 Increase Received Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 1 ... ... 5 5 ... 6 ... ... ... 6 Received ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 63 ... 6 ... ... 69 73 ... 8 47 ... 18 7 80 Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 4 Sold ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Transferred ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total decrease ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... 1 1 ... 1 2 5 Balance on 31st March 1914... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 59 ... 6 ... ... 65 69 ... 7 46 ... 17 5 75 Total 4 ... ... ... ... 4 59 ... 6 ... ... 65 69 ... 7 46 ... 17 5 75
viii TABLE XI. SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES, DURING 1913-14. Horse, pony District. Stallions on register on 31st March 1914. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year, Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 `3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... Punjab ... 4 4 3 166 156 41 52 Total ... 4 4 3 166 156 41 52 Pony ... Punjab ... 65 64 64 3,959 3,586 61.8 56.9 Total 65 64 64 3,959 3,586 61.8 56.9 Donkey ... Punjab ... 75 72 72 3,926 3,278 531 46.7 Total 75 72 72 3,926 3,278 53.1 46.7 TABLE XII. SHOWING AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, etc., OF HORSE PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS DURING THE YEAR 1913-14. DISTRICT. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... 390 380 250 223 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 359 310 270 195 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 376 231 218 140 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... 398 375 194 200 Ambala ... ... ... ... 339 356 218 219 Kangra ... ... ... ... 335 ... 258 225 Hoshiarpur ... ... 350 328 341 349 162 171 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 358 318 214 193 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 317 343 190 208 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 335 351 176 199 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 370 339 211 192 Mianwali ... ... 372 ... 352 269 198 232 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 377 317 184 147 Muzaffargarh ... ... 322 383 322 355 183 338 Total ... 1,044 711 4,969 4,293 2,926 2,882 Average ... ... 348 355 355 330 209 206
ix TABLE XIII. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1913-14. District Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF PRESENT. TOTAL COMPETING TOTAL NUM- BER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF RE- MOUNTS PUR- CHASED. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For remount department. For native cavalry. For police. Total Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price From imperial funds. From provincial funds. From local funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Ambala... 1 868 894 222 230 868 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 64 ... ... 600 ... 600 484 5 ... Hoshiarpur... 2 174 ... 83 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... 86 ... ... 527 ... 527 387 ... ... Jullundur ... 1 1,417 1,668 104 75 1,353 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41 41 ... ... ... 785 ... ... 215 ... 216 215 ... ... Guidaspur... 1 1,142 1,108 75 129 1,142 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 11 ... ... ... 279 ... ... 250 ... 250 164 ... ... Montgomery... 1 475 566 175 146 240 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55 ... ... 351 ... 351 323 ... ... Sialkot... 1 350 343 ... 50 15 10 ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 111 15 ... ... ... ... 200 ... 200 155 ... ...... Total... 6 4,426 4,579 659 630 3,618 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 61 ... ... ... 1,269 ... ... 2,143 ... 2,143 1,728 5 ...
x TABLE XIV. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR 1913-14. District. Number of cattle fairs and shows hold. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMAL SOLD. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camals. From imperial funds. From provincial funds. From local funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 6 8 48,064 3,763 ... 8,702 2,536 803 ... ... ... ... ... 41,115 56 ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... Rohtak ... ... 3 ... 205,769 10,426 ... 22,834 1,321 5,908 ... 61 18 26 87 56,831 602 ... ... 1,602 ... 1,602 1,498 ... Gurgaon ... ... 2 ... 10,631 1,389 7,387 380 12 335 ... 67 30 32 78 4,498 55 ... ... 504 ... 504 494 ... Hoshiarpur ... ... 2 ... 313 122 219 235 29 45 ... 35 36 39 ... 418 67 ... ... 504 ... 504 423 ... Jullundur ... ... 1 ... 1,488 1,824 1,555 5,252 25 990 ... 20 15 45 87 4,748 143 ... ... 354 ... 354 354 ... Ludhiann ... ... 2 22 15,156 9,217 20,046 13,254 325 5,653 ... 40 23 35 56 5,576 444 ... ... 1,300 10 1,310 1,813 ... Ferozepore... ... 9 19 12,134 6,970 17,025 22,663 5,522 5,201 ... 32 23 45 75 5,707 1,006 ... ... 2,057 ... 2,057 1,955 1 Lahore ... ... 2 ... 1,065 1,422 776 1,860 80 1,334 ... 47 45 79 69 2,633 192 ... ... 932 ... 932 573 ... Amritsar ... ... 2 ... ... Record not kept. 7 19 22 18 29 97 38,619 710 ... ... 2,900 ... 2,900 1,704 ... Gurdaspur... ... 1 31 1,442 1,797 ... 2,729 1 266 ... 10 12 25 ... 1,026 69 ... ... 250 ... 250 174 1 Sialkot ... ... 2 21 2,235 2,112 1,295 4,036 2 1,189 14 71 35 79 70 4,135 164 ... ... 698 ... 698 439 ... Gujranwala ... ... 2 121 1,797 1,212 47 3,602 10 471 ... 19 20 30 102 1,821 195 ... ... 700 ... 700 441 ... Shahpur ... ... 1 74 174 68 9 153 ... 178 ... 30 26 43 99 180 428 ... ... 600 ... 600 556 ... Rawalpindi ... ... 1 527 ...... 6 ...... 17 ... 18 63 ... 58 66 ...... 126 103 ... ... 200 ... 200 190 ... Attock ... ... 2 239 418 108 27 ... ... 301 189 114 16 ... ... 39 760 ... ... 892 ... 892 873 2 Montgomery ... ... 1 40 205 358 97 109 45 929 ... 71 41 41 76 4 176 ... ... 406 ... 406 398 2 Lyallpur ... ... 1 52 2,496 3,337 4,488 5,391 1,939 66 ... 28 23 30 62 5,641 210 ... ... 1,000 ... 1,000 855 1 Multan ... ... 1 7 32 22 8 ... 40 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109 ... ... 200 ... 200 190 ... Muzaffargarh ... ... 1 30 28 20 ... 15 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... 381 101 ... ... 150 ... 150 109 ... Total... 42 1,191 803,447 44,173 52,979 91,182 11,895 23,687 ... ... ... ... 173,498 5,590 ... ... 15,249 10 15,259 13,039 7
xi TABLE XIV- A. SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1913-14 IN THE PROVINCE OF PUNJAB. (See civil veterinary department report, paragraph 50.) MAJOR HEADS. AMOUNT. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... 49,910 32,857 3,627 86,394 Veterinary instruction ... ... 52,045 45,283 3,489 1,00,817 Subordinate establishment ... ... ... *2,27,507 28,011 2,55,518 *Includes Rs. 1,01,200 on account of contribution to local bodies for veterinary charges. Hospitals and dispensaries ... ... 32,971 84,447 97,418 Breeding operations ... ... xii TABLE VI-A. SHOWING EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES ON VETIRINARY OBJECTS DURING 1913-14. District. Stipends. HOSPITAL CHARGES. BREEDING OPERATIONS. FAIRS AND SHOWS. Grand total of columns 2, 8, 15 and 20. Pay of compounders and urenials. Cost of medicines and instru- ments. Expenditure on buildings and repairs. Furniture. Contingencies. Total. Bulls. Horses and ponies. Donkeys. Total. Horse fair. Cattle fair. Total. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Prizes. Contingencies, Prizes. Contingencies. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 ,16 17 18 19 20 21 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... 120 994 1,064 9,517 14 376 11,965 1,200 ... 1,500 2,340 ... 998 6,038 ... ... ... (a)19,280 19,280 37,403 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... 1,618 1,499 1,372 ... ... 4,489 ... 252 ... 2,152 ... 1,081 3,485 ... ... 1,498 (b)24,118 25,616 33,500 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 197 1,486 1,254 18,290 181 75 16,266 1,000 78 ... 2,156 ... 655 3,889 ... ... 494 321 815 21,167 Karnal ... ... ... ... 473 643 691 690 99 226 2,348 1,000 110 ... 2,791 ... 1,357 5,258 ... ... ... ... ... 8,079 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... 997 1,123 3,543 106 95 5,854 800 271 1,494 2,186 ... 1,189 5,940 484 2,299 ... ... 2,783 14,577 Simla ... ... ... ... ... 163 625 100 93 179 1,160 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,160 Simla municipal committee ... ... ... 396 52l 200 303 ... (c)4,439 5,523 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,919 Kangra ... ... ... ... ... 425 ... 4,024 ... 1,099 5,539 ... 20 ... 235 ... 516 871 ... ... ... ... ... 6,410 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... 891 864 3,053 296 59 5,163 1,700 190 ... 1,374 ... 1,298 4,560 387 902 423 902 2,614 12,337 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 84 1,090 1,690 302 ... ... 3,082 1,000 162 ... 1,075 ... 856 3,093 ... ... ... ... ... 6,259 Jullundur municipal committee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... 215 ... 354 2,430 2,989 2,989 Ludhiana ... ... 96 1,047 1,616 1,420 195 128 3,806 600 74 ... 1,269 ... 2,282 4,225 ... ... 1,803 6,388 5,191 13,318 Ferozepore ... ... 72 1,094 1,338 749 93 59 3,333 2,034 ... ... 2,442 ... ... 4,476 ... ... 701 1,435 2,136 10,017 Muktesar municipal committee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 690 1,725 858 ... 2,773 2,773 Abohar municipal committee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 896 556 1,452 1,452 Lahore ... ... ... 80 612 527 6,956 26 61 8,182 3,000 356 1,000 4,478 ... ... 8,834 364 2,687 573 ... 3,624 20,720 Amritsar municipal committee ... ... 240 1,013 389 8,697 147 850 11,096 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87 (d)19,263 1,704 ... 21,054 32,390 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 192 690 954 1,799 ... 217 3,680 5,000 516 1,600 3,571 ... ... 10,087 ... ... ... ... ... 14,539 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 96 963 1.306 4,417 ... ... 6,686 1,407 146 ... 2,679 ... 1,235 5,467 164 714 174 20 1,072 13,321 Sialkot ... ... ... 120 1,046 1,040 325 112 176 2,699 2,400 812 1,600 2,223 ... 1,477 8,512 155 ... 439 407 1,001 18,882 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 216 1,305 1,283 1,595 119 178 4,480 800 302 1,200 3,077 ... ... 5,379 300 1,438 441 927 3,106 13,181 Gujrat ... ... ... 240 611 560 1,758 63 324 3,3l6 1,000 66 1,035 1,491 ... ... 3,592 200 400 ... ... 600 7,748 Shahpur ... ... ... 84 858 1,325 2,395 ... ... 4,578 1,400 150 2,114 3,585 ... ... 7,249 243 1,232 556 ... 2,031 13,942 Jhelum ... ... ... 96 656 882 4,957 ... 251 6,746 625 46 ... 1,094 ... ... 1,765 ... ... ... 4 4 8,611 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... 491 1,053 8,579 ... 26 5,149 ... 535 1,035 2,465 ... ... 4,035 400 (e)3,454 190 41 4,085 13,269 Attock ... ... ... ... 435 695 1,759 95 510 3,494 600 138 ... 2,066 ... 120 2.024 ... ... 873 343 1,216 7,634 Mianwali ... ... ... ... 677 714 1,863 340 82 3,676 705 672 ... 1,077 ... 592 2,946 ... ... ... ... ... 6,622 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 757 1,011 180 184 152 2,284 548 ... ... 754 ... 369 1,671 323 147 398 941 1,809 5,764 Lyallpur ... ... ... 450 1,011 1,100 573 31 218 2,933 1,027 57 544 6,750 ... ... 8,378 225 1,000 855 5,765 7,845 19,606 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... 672 553 2,980 45 54 4,304 550 342 1,200 2,806 ... ... 4,308 454 1,846 ... ... 1,700 10,402 Multan ... ... ... ... ... 626 833 554 166 37 2,216 ... 6 2,934 2,841 ... ... 5,781 652 1,058 190 ... 1,900 9,897 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... 188 1,092 1,109 2,215 215 211 4,842 1,395 40 850 1,928 ... 1,096 5,300 ... ... 109 387 496 10,835 Dera Ghasi Khan ... ... ... ... 600 824 200 149 320 2,093 ... ... 2,051 1,795 ... ... 3,846 600 700 ... ... 1,300 7,239 Total ... 3,440 25,063 27,522 85,155 2,769 10,453 1,50,932 29,791 5,241 20,157 62,800 ... 15,119 ,32,608 5,943 38,265 13,029 61,255 1,18,492 4,05,502 (a) Include Rs. 13,000 credited to provincial revenues on account of management of fairs. (b) Include Rs. 18,000 credited to provincial revenues on account of management of fairs during 1912-13 and 1913-14.
xiii TABLE VI-B. SHOWING RESOURCES OF LOCAL BODIES EARMARKED FOR VETERINARY OBJECTS DURING 1913-14. District. By that part of imperial grant of ¼th of local rate which has been specially set apart by the local government for veterinary ob- ject. Receipts from fees for medicines, etc. Fees at horse fairs. Fees at cattle fairs. GOVERNMENT GRANT FOR PRIZES. Total receipt of local bodies ear- marked and available for ve- terinary expenditure. EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES. Amount by which column 12 ex- ceeds column 8, i. e., out-of- pocket expenditure by local bodies on veterinary objects. Horse fair. Cattle fair. By contribution to provin- cial funds for pay of veterinary assistants. By contribution to other local bodies. By direct payment. Total. 1 2 3 5 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,800 151 ... 47,531 ... ... 52,482 1,788 ... 37,403 39,191 xiv TABLE XVI. RETURN OF ANIMALS OF THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1913-14. Detail. Herd bulls. Supernumerary bulls. Cows. Male produce. Female produce. Castrated produce. Ordnance builocks. Cultivation bullocks. Mules. Pony mares for mule breeding. Pony stallions. Camels. Donkey stallions. Donkey colts. Donkey mares. Donkey fillies. Rams. Ewes. Male lambs. Female lambs. Female goats. Female kids. Male goats and kids. Pony fillies. Pony colts. Total. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 Balance on 1st April 1913... 30 8 1.202 1,061 1,025 ... ... 300 157 81 1 8 5 60 95 70 6 862 157 215 11 11 8 3 ... 4,981 Increase By birth ... ... ... ... 376 407 ... ... ... 28 ... ... ... ... 21 ... 29 ... ... 162 183 ... 13 23 2 3 1,247 By purchase ... ... ... 8 1 ... ... ... 9 ... 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 12 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 51 By transfer ... 6 154 281 ... ... 270 102 24 ... 1 ... ... 2 ... 5 ... ... 112 ... ... 14 ... ... ... ... 971 Total ... 86 157 1,679 1,438 1,432 270 102 333 185 96 1 9 7 101 100 99 12 486 321 398 25 24 31 5 3 7,250 Decrease Died ... 1 1 15 57 85 1 ... 2 8 2 ... 1 ... 1 2 8 ... 32 68 51 ... 4 7 ... 1 277 Destroyed ... ... ... 9 1 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 Sold ... 9 146 48 32 28 ... 100 18 35 2 ... 1 1 16 3 7 ... 14 79 18 ... ... 11 ... 2 554 Transferred ... 1 10 ... 418 281 114 2 11 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 5 ... ... ... 112 ... 14 ... 1 ... 971 Total ... 5 157 72 498 344 115 102 33 88 4 ... 2 1 19 5 15 ... 46 137 181 ... 18 18 1 3 1,814 Balance on 31st March 1914 31 ... 1,507 940 1,088 155 ... 800 147 02 1 7 (a) 6 82 95 84 12 440 184 217 25 6 13 4 ... 5,436 Value in Rs. ... 10,220 ... 1,64,635 1,35,655 62,535 20,820 ... 42,420 28,020 20,130 50 1,243 3,200 14,120 12,010 5,680 1,500 3,003 1,543 1,036 111 12 31 260 ... 5,28,234 Rupees five hundred and twenty-eight thousand, two hundred and thirty four only. (a) Does not include one American donkey stallion, received on loan from the army remount department.
xv TABLE XVI-A. RETURN OF SHEEP ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR, 1913-14. DETAIL. RAMS. EWES. MALE LAMBS. FEMALE LAMBS. Total. REMARKS. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred Merino. Total. ½ bred merino. 3/4 bred merino. ½ bred merino. 3/4 bred merino. ½ bred merino. 3/4 bred merino. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Balance on 1st April 1913 ... ... ... 6 6 188 165 2 7 362 ... 123 32 2 157 10 143 53 9 215 740 Increase ... By birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 81 81 ... 162 ... 81 99 3 183 345 By purchase ... ... ... 6 6 ... ... ... 12 12 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 20 By transfer ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 82 15 5 112 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112 Total ... ... ... 12 12 198 247 17 24 486 2 204 113 2 321 10 224 152 12 398 1,217 Decrease ... Died ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 9 1 1 32 ... 33 25 ... 58 ... 27 24 ... 51 141 Sold by auction ... ... ... ... ... 12 2 ... ... 14 ... 27 ... ... 27 ... 15 3 ... 18 59 Sold to breeders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 46 4 ... 52 ... ... ... ... ... 52 Transferred ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 82 15 5 112 112 Total ... ... ... ... ... 33 11 1 1 46 2 106 29 ... 137 10 124 42 5 181 364 Balance on 31st March 1914 ... ...... ... 12 12 165 236 16 23 440 ... 98 84 2 184 ... 100 110 7 217 853 Value, Rs. ... ... ... ... ... 1,500 1,500 1,743 1,260 3,003 ... 479 664 400 1,543 ... 566 470 1,036 7,082
xvi TABLE XVII. HISSAR FARM. RESULTS OF DONKEY AND MULE-BREEDING ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM IN THE YEAR 1913-14. xvii TABLE XVIII. ABSTRACT SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF THE HISSAR FARM DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1913-14. Receipts paid into treasury. Rs. A. P. Sale of animals (a) ... ... ... ... 83,187 1 0 Sale of produce ... ... ... ... 647 0 0 Other heads ... ... ... ... 18,554 13 6 Total...... 97,388 14 6 Expenditure. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers ... ... ... ... 10,242 9 0 Do. do. do, of subordinate staff ... 36,598 4 9 Cultivation expenses (Rs. 820 included for Sally Minor main- tenance) ... ... ... ... ... ... 20,337 3 10 Feed of animals, including reserve fodder ... ... ... ... 35,678 13 7 Purchase of animals ... ... ... ... 9,035 4 0 Other heads (b) ... ... ... ... 21,747 10 5 Total ... 1,33,689 13 7 Valuation of animals issued on book credit. Siege train bullocks ... ... ... ... 20,000 0 0 Army transport bullocks ... Bulls ... ... ... ... ... Mules and donkeys ... ... ... ... 16,175 0 0 Total... 86,175 0 0 Valuation of animals, grain and fodder, etc., on hand at end of year. Valuation of animals as per table XVI attached ... 5,28,234 0 0 Do. of grain ... ... ... ... 4,813 13 11 Do. of fodder ... ... ... ... 36,310 2 1 Do. of machinery and dead stock articles ... ... 51,338 13 2 Total... ... 6,20,696 13 2 (a) Includes valuation of animals issued on book credit. (b) Includes also the following items adjusted by book debit system:ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1914-15. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1915. Price: Re. 0-4-0 or 4 d.
REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPART MENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERN- MENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR 1914-15.
Revised list of Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London W. C. KRGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C., and 25, Museum Street, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W.THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON,BELL, & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD,Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Boot Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH &SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore (for Vernacular public cations only). RAMA KIRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. N. B.MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., Bom- bay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A . NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, RANGOON.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1914-15. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Labore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1915.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 15 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR THE YEAR 1914-15. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture ... 1, 2 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1914-15. 1 2 3 Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 4 5 Sessions... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 6 7 Admission ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 8 9 10 Course ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 11 ]2 13 14 Examination results ... ... ... ... 3, 4 15 Other classes ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 16 17 Hospital ... ... ... ... ib. 18 19 Income... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 20 Demand for graduates ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ib 21 Veterinary Association ... ... ... ... ib 22 Text-books ... ... ... ... ... ib 23 Work of staff ... ... ... ib ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31 ST MARCH 1915 BY LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J FARMER, CHIEF SUPER- INTENDENT, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB. Part I. GENERLL ADMINISTRATION. 1 2 3 4 General administration ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... 5 VETERINARY INSTRUCTION.. 5 6 Veterinary instruction ... ... ... ... ... 5, 6 Part II.ii Para. Subject. Page. Equities. 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Glandersiii Para. Subject. Page. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR, 1914-15. A.No 2840 S. (Rev. & Agri.2 6. Owing to the excellent monsoon rains, the working of the Hissar Farm has been very satisfactory in spite of severe outbreaks of Rinderpest and Hæmor- rhagic Septicæmia. The total receipts rose from Rs. 97,388 to Rs. 1,09,374, and the value of stock from Rs. 5,28,234 to Rs. 6,56,776. Eight hundred and forty- five animals of all sorts were sold during the year as compared with 554 sold in 1913-14, and the Farm was able to supply as many as 171 bulls to District Boards in the Province. These results are very creditable to the Superintend- entANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY ADMINISTRATION IN THE PUNJAB For the year 1914-15. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture. 1. The first of the three annual reports which are here brought together relates to the Punjab Veterinary College: which continues under the experienc- ed control of Colonel Pease. The most noticeable point in connection with it is that the College is now in its new and commodious buildings. The move has had a harmful effect on the number of patients brought for treatment to the College: this doubtless is only temporary. Considering this point, and the other inconveniences inseparable from the transfer, the results of the exami- nations are very satisfactory, 2. The Chief Superintendent's report on the work of the Civil Veterinary Department during the year, which is the second of those sent herewith, is encouraging. Despite the fact that the Department had to control the glanders outbreak in Lahore and Amritsar (work which would have been done by the Army Remount Department had it not been for the war), an increase in contagious disease among both equines and bovines on the figures of the previous year, and a shortage of staff owing to the war2 3. Mr. Branford continues to do most valuable work at the Hissar Farm. That the contagious diseases the farm unfortunately suffered from during the year under report did not do more damage reflects, I consider, the greatest credit on him and his staff. I am directing the attention of the Assistant Professor of Entomology to the damage caused by the jowar borer, and I hope it may be possible to lessen it. It has been impossible this year to get, as recently ordered by Government, the farm accounts audited in time to allow the audit statement to be submitted to Government at the same time as this report. C. A. H. TOWNSEND, The 29th July 1915, Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab.
3 REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE For the year 1914-15, BY COLONEL PEASE, C.I.E., PRINCIPAL. Staff. 1. Major G. K. Walker was transferred to the Bombay Presidency on the 6th April last, and Mr. S. H. Gaiger was on sick leave during the year, so that the work of Professor of Sanitary Science had to be carrried out, in addition to his own duties, by the Principal, whose teaching work was in consequence doubled. 2. Mr. W. Taylor was posted for training in October and gave consider- able assistance in the hospital, and Mr. Pool joined in February under training. 3. None of the extra establishment sanctioned in May 1912 has so far been entertained, partly because there was little work for them, and partly on account of the difficulty in obtaining suitable men. Session. 4. The summer session commenced on the 20th April 1914 and ended on the 20th June. The winter session commenced on the 5th October and closed at the end of March 1915. Admission. 5. Sixty-seven new students were admitted on the 20th April 1914 and 3 were remanded to the first year class, making a total of 70. Of these, 5 left the College for various reasons immediately after joining, and one military student was recalled for active service, so that 64 remained at the close of the year. 6. There were 55 students in the second year class, and all completed the course. 7. There were 61 students in the final class in April 1914 Four civilians passed out at a special examination held in January, 2 died of phthisis and 2 military students were recalled to their regiments4 One military student was returned to his regiment and one Central Provinces student withdrawn. The remainder were remanded for a year. 12. Fifty-five were examined in the second year class, and 47 or 85.45 per cent. passed. Three failed in one subject only. One of the students having failed for the second time was removed from college. The remaining 4 were remanded for another year. 13. Fifty-seven students were examined in the final class, and 50 or 87.71 per cent. obtained the diploma: of the rejected men 3 failed in one subject only, and will be re-examined in June. Four students were remanded for a year. 14. Considering the extraordinary difficulties under which the College worked during the year, the results are very good. Most of the teaching work, lectures, etc., had to be done in the open air, the classes being surrounded by workmen demolishing buildings. Half the hospital was in ruins, and the clinic shed unroofed; there was no dissecting room and no laboratory; in fact the maximum of discomfort possible. In these circumstances, it is but natural that the final year's students suffered considerably. Other classes. 15. Besides the ordinary teaching work, 16 transport dressers were trained during the summer vacation. Fourteen farriers were also trained. Hospital. 16. Most of the hospital stables were demolished during the year and the accommodation was very limited. The contagious ward was practically closed. The dog hospital was closed alto- gether. This state of affairs arose partly because from motives of economy old material was used in the new college buildings, so that until the old buildings were dismantled the new ones could not be completed; partly also as I under- stood that the new college would be ready for occupation last October. The effect on the hospital practice has been bad; equine and bovine cases being 600 and 1,000 fewer than last year, whilst canine practice fell to 311. 17. The number of patients treated is as follows:5 REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT. BY LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. FARMER, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I. 1. The following statement shows the names of the officers who held charge of the several appointments and the amount of touring work performed by them:6 meetings were held at Lahore, Gurdaspur, Amritsar, Lyallpur and Ferozepore. The Chief Superintendent has observed a distinct improvement in professional knowledge amongst the old Veterinary Assistants. The following men were sent from Bengal to learn Punjab methods of working. 1. B. N. Dass Gupta. 2. S. K. Mitra. 3. M. S. Chowdri. 6. As during the past year the Department has been giving lectures and demonstrations on veterinary matters in villages, the people are now awakening to the fact that it can and will do a great deal for their cattle if they" will only report outbreaks of contagious diseases more punctually, and also take their animals to the hospital for treatment before they get beyond the hope of recovery. Part II.7 The serious nature of the disease is explained to owners of horses, mules and donkeys, and that it can be communicated to man. Mr. Gaiger's case has been brought to their notice. In Amritsar the result of these lectures is that keepers of serais in which horses are kept do not allow strange horses to enter unless they have been tested. 11. During the Amritsar Dewali and Baisakhi Horse Fairs special arrangements were made for the detection and prevention of glanders. Three Veterinary Inspectors and 14 Veterinary Assistants were posted on all the roads entering the fair ground to examine animals. Each owner was given a printed slip showing that his animal had been examined. These slips were checked in the fair ground by the Chief Superintendent and Veterinary Inspectors. One case of glanders was detected before entering the fair ground. If this case had been allowed to enter the fair ground (which was very crowded) it would have infected several animals. All purchasers were supplied with a notice warning them to keep every animal purchased at the fair ground isolated for a month after purchase. 12. The Chief Superintendent cannot speak too highly of the staff who has so ably assisted him in this troublesome and dangerous work. The following members of the department deserve mention in this connection. Mr. W. Taylor, Veterinary Inspector Ghulam Hassan, Veterinary Inspector Kadir Bakhsh (Army Remount Department attached to Civil Veterinary Department for glanders duty) and Veterinary Assistant Sazawar. 13. As to the outbreak at Delhi and Gurgaon, it is being successfully dealt with by Deputy Superintendent, Lala Kotu Ram. It may be noted that though Delhi is not now in the Punjab, the Department is still dealing with cattle disease there. 14. The work of detection of, and testing for this disease requires a great deal of tact : as ignorant owners are only too keen on hiding cases. The Chief Superintendent's orders have been carefully carried out with the result that there has been no friction of any kind. The outbreaks in Lahore and Amritsar have been thoroughly dealt with, and beyond a few sporadic cases which are bound to occur the disease has been checked. The total number of animals destroyed as suffering from glanders was :8 18. Tetanus.9 29. Mirza Shuja Beg of Patti, Lahore District, is going to build a hospital at Patti, and is also going to supply the necessary instruments and medicines. Offers of free land for Veterinary Hospitals have been given at Attari in Amrit- sar District and at Samburial in Sialkot District. 30. In the Jullundur District a hospital will be built by public subscrip- tion at Alawalpur during the coming year; the land for the hospital has been given by Sardar Ichhru Singh. 31. In Gujranwala District Chowdri Hussain Khan is prepared to build a hospital at Kolutarar. 82. The best Veterinary Hospital in the Province has been built during the year at Sialkot. The Chief Superintendent has to thank Mr. Abbott, Deputy Commissioner of Sialkot, for the great interest he takes in the work of the Department, and the help he has afforded the Chief Superintendent. Table V. 33. Cases 317,802 in number were treated at the Veterinary Hospitals against 301,847 during the past year. Considering the shortage of Veterinary Assistants owing to the war the work done is very satisfactory. Part III.10 breeders in the method of rearing young stock. Unless they are constantly supervised and everything necessary is pointed out to them, young stock do not develop in the way they ought to. The Chief Superintendent and the Superintendents have observed promising young stock ruined through mis- management. Youngsters are either ruined through over feeding and no exercise, or by too much exercise (being worked too early), and insufficient fodder. 39. The Department is doing its best, and very trying work it is, to improve matters. The Chief Superintendent has endeavoured to copy the working of the great pioneer of the Department Colonel Hallen. Colonel Pease, who was a student of his, very kindly pointed out to the Chief Superintendent some years ago his methods of working with the people, and every endeavour is being made to copy his practical example with the establishment available. Cattle-breeding. Table VIII. 40. At the close of the year there were 765 District Board bulls at work in the Province against 637 last year : 91 were cast as old and useless. The Hissar Farm supplied 171 on indent; while 48 were purchased by the Department for District Boards. 41. Although the remarks on horse-breeding are not cheerful, cattle- breeding shows a different aspect. A very great improvement is observable in the young stock in the districts which is due to the reduction of undesirable bulls on the one hand and the introduction of good bulls and better methods of rearing the young stock on the other. These changes are due to the lectures and demonstrations given by the Department in villages. 42. The zamindars and owners of cattle are awakening to the fact that, unless cattle-breeding is improved in the districts, the demand will become greater than the supply, and in consequence prices will become so great that they will be unable to purchase decent bullocks. Dealers during the past have been doing very well at the expense of the zamindars. The classes of bullocks taken to villages for sale by dealers are Hissaries, Dhannis and Bhag- naris. At villages in which these animals are sold there are a fair number of cows, and yet very little endeavour was made to breed good calves because there was not a mature well formed bull. In the final result weeds were pro- duced. 43. Regarding lectures and demonstrations in villages the Chief Super- intendent would like to mention the names of the following Veterinary Inspec- tors who have done good work:11 Part IV.12 The September rain interfered a good deal with hay-making operations: on two occasions a number of nearly completed stacks had to be pulled down and spread out to dry, but eventually over 10,000 maunds of hay was saved. From April 1st to the middle of July practically the whole head of stock on the Farm had to be stall-fed. Nearly all the fodder used was grown on the Farm. 4. The issues of stud bulls to District Boards was again a record in point of numbers. The actual receipts for the year amounted to Rs. 1,09,374-10-8. Had all stock been issued at the rates fixed by the Quin- quennial Committee, the receipts would have totalled Rs. 1,48,574. 5. In July the Farm was visited by a Brazilian breeder. My first instructions were to sell him no cattle at all, but eventually I was given per- mission to sell him 1 bull, 1 cow with a male calf at heel at Rs. 300, and 4 young male produce. He agreed to pay Rs. 1,200 for the bull and Rs. 500 each for the young males, but the outbreak of the war and consequent embargo on Indian cattle prevented him exporting, and he was allowed to withdraw from the bargain. 6. As regards contagious diseases the year has not been fortunate, and the following outbreaks occurred during the year:13 although several had severe typical attacks of the dis- ease. The weather throughout June was excessively hot. (b) Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia.14 The merino sheep, probably owing to the unusual quantity of fatty matter in its wool, is specially liable to scab, and probably the merino element in the farm sheep was responsible for the difficulty experienced in eradi- cating it. The sheep have now all been dipped four times, and at present there is no sign of any return of the disease. (h) Equine Contagious Abortion.15 Pony Mares.16 9. Hospital.TABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab veterinary college ... i II Statement showing the number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals ... ... ... ... ... ii III Statement showing results of preventive inoculation ... ... iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veteri- nary assistants on tour ... ... ... ... iv V Statement showing the number of animals treated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries ... ... ... ... ... v VII Statement showing the total st gth of subordinate veterinary staff em- ployed ... ... ren ... ... ... ... vi VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ... ib X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... vii XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ... ... ... ... viii XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ... ib XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non- selected districts ... ... ... ... ix XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... ... x XIV-A Statement showing cost of the civil veterinary department ... ... xi VI-A Expenditure by local bodies ... ... ... ... xii VI-B Resourcesi TABLE I. STATEMENT SHOWI NG THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1914-15. Name of the institution. Name of course of instruction, if more than one followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS STUDENTS ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR CLASSED BY EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE 3 YEARS PRECEDING. REMARKS. Admitted dur- ing the year beginning April 1914. Passed final examination during the year ending April 1915. Failed to passed the final examination. Remaining under instruc- tions at the end of the year. Scholarship-holders. Military students and others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. Matriculated or with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, hut not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English. From fees. From other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of States, bodies or institutions. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Punjab Veteri- nary College, Lahore. Diploma or three years' course in Urdu. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 17 50 50 7 105 21 3 28 36 8,850 3,983 12,833 52,658 51,089 1,03,747 161 142 19 ... ...
ii TABLE II. SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1914-15. DISTRICT. EQUINES. BOVINES. OTHERS REMARKS. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious dis- eases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and mouth dis- ease. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthrax. Other conta- gions dis- eases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and mouth dis- ease. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Other conta- gious dis- eases. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 75 30 469 77 ... 1 652 21 ... ... ... 18 39 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 632 4 709 37 ... ... 1,382 1 ... 4 ... ... 5 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 3 ... 1 ... 1 5 589 37 212 7 11 ... 856 16 ... ... ... 30 46 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 ... ... 5 1,438 6 276 ... 2 ... 1,722 14 ... ... ... 13 26 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 768 9 267 ... ... ... 1,044 ... ... ... ... ... ... Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52 ... ... ... 52 ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 295 92 200 ... ... ... 587 ... 60 ... ... 577 637 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 646 37 480 ... ... ... 1,163 ... 35 ... ... ... 35 Jullundur 1 ... ... ... ... 1 96 24 761 8 ... ... 889 ... ... 6 ... ... 6 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 70 393 16 ... ... 506 5 2 ... ... ... 7 Ferozepore ... ... 1 ... 6 ... ... 7 191 13 359 9 ... ... 572 78 ... 11 ... 3 92 Lahore ... ... ... 58 ... ... ... ... 58 29 5 325 ... ... ... 359 ... ... 5 ... ... 5 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 42 ... ... ... ... 42 550 15 1,275 ... ... ... 1,840 ... ... 2 ... 2 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 613 21 772 ... ... ... 1,406 ... ... ... ... ... ... Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 ... ... 19 135 ... 1,776 ... ... 9 1,920 ... ... 103 ... ... 103 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 187 ... ... 187 258 19 1,503 109 ... 97 1,986 7 1 8 ... ... 16 Gujrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 21 2,779 44 ... 2 2,846 ... ... 27 ... 2 29 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 377 1 3,063 136 ... 1 3,578 ... ... 20 ... 133 153 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... 5 152 7 472 407 18 1 1,057 ... ... ... ... 66 66 Rawalpindi ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 83 31 123 203 ... 17 457 ... ... ... ... 500 500 Attock ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 7 401 738 ... 287 1,457 ... 42 ... ... 1,416 1,458 Mianwali... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 18 6 341 17 ... 4 386 194 ... ... ... 255 449 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 326 ... ... ... 326 ... ... 17 ... ... 17 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35 3 556 84 ... ... 678 ... ... ... ... ... ... Jhang ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 26 1,284 22 39 5 1,404 ... ... 175 ... ... 175 Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 146 14 28 ... ... ... 188 ... ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34 6 244 9 ... 3 296 ... 10 ... ... 45 55 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55 17 85 84 ... ... 241 ... ... ... ... 20 20 Total ... 109 6 218 ... 5 338 7,294 521 19,531 2,007 70 427 29,850 336 150 378 ... 3,077 3,941 Government Cattle Farm, Kissar... ... ... ... ... 1 1 14 ... 57 7 ... ... 78 ... 27 ... ... ... 27 NOTE.iii TABLE III. SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1914-15. District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inocula- tion was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNINO- CULATED IN COURSE OF OUTBREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest. Serum alone. 5 ... 77 ... ... 863 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 6 ... 82 ... ... 503 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 6 ... 78 ... ... 734 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... 9 ... 428 ... ... 3,169 ... ... 24 ... Ambala ... 18 ... 286 ... ... 5,062 ... ... 10 ... Kangra ... 22 ... 409 ... ... 1,300 ... ... 7 ... Hoshiarpur ... 27 ... 249 ... ... 3,070 ... ... 8 ... Jullundur... 7 ... 70 ... ... 1,966 ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 10 ... 213 ... ... 1,630 ... ... 3 ... Lahore ... 2 ... 40 ... ... 117 ... ... ... ... Amritsar... 7 ... 159 ... ... 1,339 ... ... 3 ... Gurdaspur ... 6 ... 46 ... ... 895 ... ... 1 ... Sialkot... 4 ... 33 ... ... 338 ... ... 8 ... Gujranwala... 1 ... 12 .... ... 155 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 5 ... 140 ... ... 2,438 ... ... 8 ... Jhelum ... 1 ... 13 ... ... 26 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi 2 ... 13 ... ... 497 ... ... 1 ... Mianwali ... 1 ... ... 32 ... ... 476 ... ... ... Multan ... 12 ... 218 ... ... 3,281 ... ... 1 ... Muzaffargarh ... 7 ... 190 ... ... 2,363 ... ... 1 ... Dera Ghazi Khan 1 ... 60 ... ... 95 ... ... ... ... Total ... 159 ... 2,816 32 ... 29,891 476 ... 75 ... Hissar ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Serum alone. 2 ... 15 ... ... 512 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... 1 ... 13 ... ... 64 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 4 ... 22 ... ... 94 ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 1 ... 3 ... ... 100 ... ... ... ... Jullundur 19 ... 215 ... ... 4,789 ... ... ... ... Forozepore ... 6 ... 49 ... 429 ... ... ... ... Lahore Amritsar 6 ... 150 ... ... 1,276 ... ... 1 ... 4 52 656 Gurdaspur ... 8 ... 72 ... ... 1,142 ... ... ... ... Sialkot 5 ... 24 ... ... 651 ... ... ... ... Gujranwala 3 ... 36 ... ... 642 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 4 ... 141 ... ... 2,582 ... ... 4 ... Jhelum ... 1 ... 7 ... ... 45 ... ... ... ... Montgomery 5 ... 103 ... ... 1,189 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 6 ... 134 ... ... 1,116 ... ... ... ... Jhang ... 11 ... 129 ... ... 3,664 ... ... 5 ... Multan ... Muzaffargarh ... 4 11 58 1,429 ... ... ... ... 98 ... ... 3,685 ... Total ... 101 ... 1,321 ... ... 24,065 ... ... 10 ... Shahpur ... Sapticæmia. Vaccine. 17 ... ... ... ... 590 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 14 ... ... ... ... 17 ... ... ... ... Montgomery ... 4 ... ... ... ... 688 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 7 ... ... ... ... 1,517 ... ... ... ... Dera Ghazi Khan 1 ... ... ... ... 191 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 43 ... ... ... ... 3,003 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi ... Black quarter. Vaccine. 8 ... ... ... ... 360 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 6 ... ... ... ... 291 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 ... ... ... ... 112 ... ... ... ... Dera Ghazi Khan 1 ... ... ... ... 218 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 16 ... ... ... ... 981 ... ... ... ... GRAND TOTAL ... ... ... 319 ... 4,137 32 ... 57,940 476 ... 85 ... Government Cattle farm, Hissar. Rind- erpest. Serum alone. 1 ... 9 ... ... 435 ... ... 5 ... Ditto H. S. Ditto 1 1 52 ... ... 297 ... ... 5 ...
iv TABLE IV. SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1914-15. District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ... ... 499 6 6 677 103 786 14 597 166 777 162 1,170 803 2,135 3,698 Rohtak ... ... 396 5 55 1,240 24 1,319 50 339 51 440 148 1,537 86 1,771 3,530 Gurgaon ... ... 426 6 16 538 20 574 19 1,291 38 1,348 90 1,624 18 1,732 3,654 Karnal ... ... 327 5 15 645 8 668 1 627 7 635 144 1,208 15 1,367 2,670 Ambala ... ... 321 5 28 426 7 461 4 836 17 857 104 721 42 867 2,185 Simla 138 2 4 ... ... 4 ... 429 149 578 25 259 17 301 883 Kangra ... ... 549 7 39 79 34 152 11 5,313 1,480 6,804 486 1,485 1,017 2,988 9,944 Hoshiarpur ... 421 5 27 594 62 683 5 672 19 696 206 559 20 785 2,164 Jullundur... ... 425 5 11 1,185 7 1,203 1 736 2 739 81 964 7 1,052 2,994 Ludhiana ... ... 315 4 ... 167 12 179 13 1,019 12 1,044 61 1,103 49 1,213 2,436 Ferozepore ... 420 6 ... 993 ... 993 9 1,029 57 1,095 185 821 45 1,051 3,139 Lahore ... ... 312 4 32 554 6 592 9 56 1 66 154 607 8 769 1,427 Amritsar ... ... 472 6 16 1,727 2 1,745 6 409 15 430 295 1,030 294 1,619 3,794 Gurdaspur .. .... 284 6 7 241 7 255 20 431 1 452 280 456 25 761 1,468 Sialkot ... ... 386 6 3 653 ... 656 2 174 1 177 225 618 13 856 1,689 Gujranwala ... ... 436 6 36 647 48 731 12 705 9 726 99 361 47 507 1,964 Gujrat ... ... 618 4 79 1,992 ... 2,071 16 187 38 241 223 735 121 1,079 3,391 Shahpur ... ... 520 5 87 553 30 670 5 1,132 ... 1,137 255 302 58 615 2,422 Jhelum ... ... 412 3 25 253 3 281 8 608 4 620 198 223 38 459 1,360 Rawalpindi ... ... 480 5 26 389 5 420 ... 890 70 960 78 194 38 310 1,690 Attack ... ... 440 4 20 47 1 68 4 1,418 36 1,458 155 287 62 504 2,030 Mianwali ... ... 125 3 108 62 14 184 1 1,280 61 1,342 86 184 45 315 1,841 Montgomery ... ... 301 5 84 1,119 53 1,256 8 392 103 503 122 457 95 674 2,433 Lyallpur ... ... 384 4 31 764 297 1,092 22 309 60 391 213 787 68 1,068 2,551 Jhang ... ... 397 3 2 1,065 ... 1,067 6 973 144 1,123 202 1,284 101 1,587 3,777 Multan ... ... 361 6 9 423 166 598 34 589 21 644 236 762 139 1,137 2,379 Muzaffargarh ... 343 6 15 1,014 88 1,117 33 720 154 907 234 1,434 335 2,003 4,027 Dera Ghazi Khan ... 259 5 13 144 9 166 38 1,708 72 1,818 455 965 224 1,644 3,628 Total ... 10,767 137 794 18,191 1,006 19,991 351 24,869 2,788 28,008 5,202 22,137 3,830 31,169 79,168
v TABLE V. SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR 191445. District. Number of veterinary dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed at dispensaries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. TOTAL, NUMBER OF IN AND OUT- PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expenditure. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Hissar ... ... ... 5 5 1 7 2 263 313 23 264 320 30 260 315 30 4 ... ... 2,273 5,616 3,497 24.3 41.7 22.8 2,537 5,836 3,627 12,000 363 9,642 Kohtak ... ... ... 4 4 3 4 ... 315 446 15 318 450 15 315 440 15 3 10 ... 3,392 7,021 1,755 25.6 41.0 13.8 3,710 7,471 1,770 12,951 112 8,150 Gurgaon ... ... ... 6 6 3 5 ... 195 229 21 198 234 21 198 231 21 ... 3 ... 2,868 6,808 1,749 17.8 28.8 93 3,066 7,042 1,770 11,878 149 6,103 Karoal ... ... ... 4 4 ... 3 ... 190 101 ... 190 104 ... 1S7 103 ... 3 1 ... 1,068 4,110 864 17.9 33.3 10.4 2,158 4,214 864 7,236 362 10,809 Ambala ... ... ... 5 5 4 1 ... 317 315 16 321 316 16 320 315 16 1 1 ... 3,047 9,494 1,964 27.8 53.9 12.6 3,968 9,610 1,970 16,748 364 9,406 Simla ... ... ... 3 3 1 2 ... 93 15 146 94 17 146 92 17 140 2 ... 6 109 268 877 1.9 1.5 24 503 285 1,023 1,811 5,067 5,698 Kangra ... ... ... 6 6 ... ... ... 159 26 6 159 26 6 144 23 5 15 3 1 2,349 8,093 2,840 15.9 29.8 11.9 2,508 8,119 2,846 13,473 126 3,486 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 4 4 1 ... ... 200 225 37 291 225 37 279 224 37 12 1 ... 4,368 5,886 1,478 22.1 28.2 7.3 4,659 6,111 1,515 13,285 182 4,435 Jullundur ... ... ... 4 4 1 1 ... 289 492 39 290 493 39 268 488 39 32 5 ... 5,226 10,304 2,823 341 59.8 17.0 5,516 0,797 2,862 19,175 270 6,578 Ludhiana ... ... ... 4 4 8 6 2 322 496 32 330 501 34 328 499 32 2 2 2 2,521 6,495 2,506 20.5 31.5 18.6 2,851 6,996 2,540 12,387 198 4,398 Ferozepore ... ... ... 5 5 6 1 10 310 140 105 316 150 116 311 146 111 5 4 4 3,115 4,703 1,803 33.2 29.1 11.1 3,431 4,853 1,917 10,201 3,056 5,753 Lahore ... ... ... 3 3 1 2 ... 311 113 8 312 115 8 305 110 8 7 5 ... 2,804 2,940 1,207 163 14.6 6.1 3,116 3,056 1,215 7,386 926 9,638 Amritsar ... ... ... 5 5 5 ... ... 511 151 9 516 151 9 483 148 8 33 3 1 5,453 6,215 1,461 303 31.6 6.6 5,969 6,366 1,470 13,805 1,009 11,840 Gurdaspur ... ... ... 7 7 3 ... ... 386 259 75 389 259 75 376 358 66 13 1 9! 6,641 9,032 1,842 30.2 35.6 10.6 7,030 9,291 1,917 18,238 234 6,241 Sialkot ... ... ... 5 5 4 ... 1 256 114 16 260 114 17 254 100 15 6 ... 2 6,880 9,858 1,520 34.0 40.7 8.0 7,140 9,972 1,537 18,649 344 19,908 Gujranwala ... ... ... 5 6 5 8 ... 522 187 127 627 178 127 513 165 126 14 8 1 5,405 7,158 1,631 36.4 41.6 10.3 5,932 7,331 1,758 15,021 667 4,322 Gujrat ... ... ... 3 3 4 1 1 213 99 17 219 100 18 249 100 18 ... ... ... 5,846 5,983 1,365 19.9 18.0 6.4 6,096 6,083 1,683 13,761 34 3,115 Shahpar ... ... ... 4 4 2 ... ... 182 84 18 184 81 18 181 84 18 3 ... ... 3,099 1,953 1,241 28.8 14.3 11.8 3,283 2,037 1,259 6,579 168 4,103 Jhelum ... ... ... 3 3 2 ... ... 187 40 19 189 40 19 187 39 18 ... 1 1 2,547 2,003 902 21.5 14.1 6.8 2,736 2,043 921 5,700 158 3,430 Rawalpindi ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... 1 344 128 118 344 128 119 342 128 119 2 ... .. 2,968 1,851 1,595 328 16.2 14.0 3,312 1,079 1,714 7,005 488 4,434 Attock ... ... ... 4 4 1 ... ... 44 29 1 45 29 1 45 28 1 ... 1 ... 2,72l 3,195 1,220 24.9 25.3 10.6 2,766 3,224 1,221 7,211 33 2,923 Mianwali ... ... ... 3 3 1 2 ... 164 71 21 165 73 21 164 73 21 1 ... ... 1,477 2,194 1,211 12.2 17.7 10.0 1,642 2,267 1,233 5,141 174 3,316 Montgomery ... ... ... 4 4 3 ... ... 237 41 7 239 41 7 238 41 7 1 ... ... 4,083 3,713 2,595 29.1 18.5 12.0 4,322 3,764 2,603 10,678 148 6,411 Lyallpur ... ... ... 3 3 5 1 ... 369 298 27 374 299 27 369 290 26 5 9 1 4,115 6,355 2,189 21.4 26.3 11.6 4,489 6,654 2,216 13,359 407 3,460 Jhang ... ... ... 3 3 1 ... ... 220 34 11 221 34 11 221 34 11 ... ... ... 4,266 2,384 1,7J8 20.0 12.7 9.3 4,487 2.418 1,789 8,695 169 4,330 Multan ... ... ... 5 5 2 9 3 364 133 70 366 142 73 360 140 72 6 2 1 3,651 3,224 2,454 30.4 23.6 13.7 4,017 3,366 2,527 9,910 345 2,323 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... 5 5 4 1 4 392 205 52 396 206 56 393 245 55 3 ... 1 5,937 5,018 4,292 40.3 38.4 27.5 6,333 6,124 4,348 16,805 241 3,930 Dera Ghazt Khan ... ... ... 4 4 4 1 1 168 47 25 172 48 26 170 46 24 2 2 2 5,358 3,068 2,043 47.4 25.1 18.6 5,530 3,116 2,069 10,715 109 4,592 Total ... 130 120 74 63 25 7,646 4,819 1,066 7,719 ... 1,091 7,552 4,799 1,059 167 73 32 105,387 145,843 52,891 ... ... ... 113,106 150,714 53,982 317,802 15,884 170,776 Government Cattle farm, Hissar 1 2 6 23 2 217 472 280 223 495 283 216 476 277 7 19 5 235 237 705 8.7 8.7 8.2 458 732 987 2,177 ... ...
vi TABLE VII. SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1914-15. Province. How occupied. Whether paid from provincial or local funds. Veterinary inspectors. Veterinary assistants. Subordi- nate staff not in- included in previous columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. In school and colleges ... ... ... ... ... In dispensaries ... ... ... 121 ... On other work ... ... 18 *66 ... *29 Itinerating veteri- nary assistants. 5 Office Veterinary assistants. 2 on tonga line. 30 Reserve. 66 Total ... ... 18 187 ... TABLE VIII. RETURN OF STUD BULLS FOR THE YEAR 1914-15. DISTRICT. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BODIES.. REMARKS. Number on 1st April 1914. Obtained during the year. Casualties- during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March 1915. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Hissar ... ... 61 14 200 2 73 Rohtak ... ... 10 2 200 ... 12 Gurgaon ... ... 30 5 200 2 33 Karnal ... ... 31 9 200 5 35 Ambala ... ... 26 9 200 2 33 Kangra ... ... 11 6 87 4 13 Hoshiarpur ... ... 41 8 200 6 43 Jullundur ... ... 25 24 200 5 44 Ludhiana ... ... 24 6 200 1 29 Ferozepore ... ... 60 *16 208 6 70 Includes four Dhanni bulls. Lahore ... ... 42 15 200 vii TABLE X. RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1914-15. DETAILS. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicillian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. English. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1914 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 59 ... 6 ... ... 65 69 ... 7 46 ... 17 5 75 Increase ... ... Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 2 2 ... ... 6 ... ... ... 6 Received ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... Total ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 60 ... 6 1 ... 67 71 ... 7 52 ... 17 5 81 Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Sold ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Transferred ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total decrease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... 2 ... 1 ... 3 Balance on 31st March 1915 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 56 ... 6 1 ... 63 67 ... 7 50 ... 16 5 78 Total ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 56 ... 6 1 ... 63 67 ... 7 50 ... 16 5 78
viii TABLE XI. SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES, DURING 1914-15. Horse, pony or donkey. District. Stallions on Register on 31st March 1915. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUM- BER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... Punjab ... 4 4 4 214 166 57 41 Total ... 4 4 4 214 166 57 41 Pony ... Punjab ... 63 63 64 3,844 3,959 59 61 Total ... 63 63 64 3,844 3,959 59 61 Donkey ... Punjab ... 78 78 72 3,976 3,926 54 53 Total ... 78 78 72 3,976 3,926 54 53 TABLE XII. SHOWING AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, ETC., OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, DURING THE YEAR 1914-15. DISTRICT. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... 500 390 280 250 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... 427 359 280 270 Gurgaon... ... ... ... ... 410 376 240 218 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... 422 398 232 194 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... 355 339 276 218 Kangra ... ... ... ... ... 347 335 414 258 Hoshiarpur ... ... 427 350 371 341 184 162 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 304 358 158 214 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 378 317 236 190 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 409 335 253 176 Sialkot... ... ... ... ... 406 370 230 211 Mianwali ... ... 380 372 346 352 212 198 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 275 377 116 184 Muzaffargarh ... ... 363 322 363 322 217 183 Total ... 1,170 1,044 5,313 4,969 3,828 2,926 Average ... 390 348 379 355 238 209
ix TABLE XIII. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE PAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1914-15. District. Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUM- BER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PPIOR PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRICE-MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belongining to dealers. For remount department. For native cavalry. For police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From imperial funds. From provincial funds. From local funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Ambala ... 1 490 868 153 222 490 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42 .... ... 600 ... 600 430 4 ... Hoshiarpur ... 1 208 174 60 83 208 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... 12 ... ... 205 ... 205 203 ... ... Jullundur ... 1 1,103 1,417 56 104 1,103 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 18 ... ... ... 529 ... ... 236 ... 236 236 ... ... Gurdaspur ... 2 1,236 1,142 97 75 1,235 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... 7 7 120 10 67 ... ... ... 250 ... 250 163 ... ... Sailkot ... 1 682 ... 61 ... 617 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 14 286 ... ... ... ... ... 399 ... 399 213 ... ... Total ... 6 3,719 3,601 427 484 3,653 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41 41 406 10 67 583 ... ... 1,690 ... 1,690 1,245 4 ...
x TABLE XIV. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR 1914-15. District Number of Cattle Fairs and Shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMALS SOLD. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes, PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial funds. From Provincial funds. From Local Fund. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 5 3 30,028 1,961 14,366 2,229 4,567 1,238 ... 47 18 19 83 (a) 20,253 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Rohtak ... ... 2 ... 102,663 4,051 2,089 10,837 546 1,819 ... 52 25 41 46 23,328 583 ... ... 962 .... 962 962 ... Gurgaon ... ... 2 ... 10,534 1,095 3,986 461 18 355 ... 48 17 30 85 (b) 2,255 51 ... ... 896 ... 896 437 ... Hoshiarpur ... ... 1 6 306 144 93 220 16 97 .... 19 20 37 ... 103 40 ... ... 263 ... 263 204 ... Jullundur ... ... 1 ... 1,180 1,624 1,501 4,362 21 949 1 25 20 40 82 3,243 115 ... ... 388 ... 388 388 ... Ludhiana ... ... 1 8 4,021 3,183 4,965 5,302 14 3,229 ... 108 35 59 85 (c) 1,464 245 ... ... 650 ... 650 945 ... Ferozepore ... ... 9 44 7,043 5,084 5,981 13,647 4,366 6,029 .... 32 21 31 85 (i) 8,378 715 ... ... 1,725 ... 1,725 1,725 ... Lahore ... ... 3 ... 1,628 1,260 1,141 2,754 122 1,786 ... 91 58 111 ... (d) 2,977 413 ... ... 854 ... 854 854 1 Amritaar ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... .... ... .... 18 24 20 .34 88 33,152 567 ... ... 2,594 ... 2,594 1,313 ... Gurdaspur ... ... 2 49 1,997 2,694 1,173 5,218 1 567 .... 21 21 45 ... (e) 1750 59 ... ... 250 .... 250 202 ... Sialkot ... ... 3 40 5,985 6,115 3,212 18,544 35 1,885 ... 32 15 33 50 (f) 10,140 211 ... ... 1,404 ... 1,404 741 ... Gujranwala ... 2 ... 3,598 2,629 245 1,347 11 187 ... 29 19 29 120 (g) 2,048 117 ... ... 700 ... 700 483 ... Shahpur ... ... 1 81 167 86 12 126 ... 135 ... 26 27 40 67 71 361 ... ... 600 ... 600 596 ... Rawalpindi 2 380 1,300 83 100 40 23 668 82 80 30 50 38 (h) 323 303 ... ... 485 100 585 431 ... Attock .. ... 1 83 56 61 31 ... ... 113 192 ... 90 38 ... 35 264 ... ... 385 ... 385 375 2 Lyallpur ... ... 1 47 1,270 2,230 2,789 3,464 1,872 36 ... 26 15 19 70 5,550 210 ... ... 910 ... 910 755 ... Multan ... ... 1 6 17 10 3 ... 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 ... ... 200 ... 200 194 ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 ... 75 34 24 20 40 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 163 ... ... 150 ... 150 90 ... Dera Ghazi Khan ... 1 557 105 20 11 1 ... ... 120 90 ... ... ... 32 25 ... ... 500 ... 500 194 .... Total 41 1,304 171,973 32,364 41,722 68,572 11,661 19,093 413 750 451 656 399 1,15,102 4,472 ... ... 13,916 100 14,016 10,889 4 (a) Excludes Rs. 2,400 on account of fees from brokers, rent of shops and miscellaneous receipts. (b) Excludes Rs. 2,950 on accouat of Nuh fair. (c) Excludes Rs. 1,724 on account of fees from brokers, etc. (d) Includes fee from horse fair. (e) Excludes Rs.257 on account of miscellaneous income at the fair. (f) Excludes Rs. 2,322 on account of miscellaneous income at the fair. (g) Excludes Rs. 199 on account of miscellaneous income at the fair. (h) Excludes Rs. 378 on account of the unauthorized fairs (i) Excludes Rs. 168 on account of brokers' fee, etc.
xi TABLE XIV A. SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1914-15 IN THE PROVINCE OF PUNJAB. (See Civil Veterinary Department Report, paragraph 56.) MAJOR HEADS. AMOUNT. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... 44,438 82,225 8,909 80,566 Veterinary instruction ... 40,086 61,586 4,011 105,683 Subordinate establishment ... ... A193.764 + 30,820 26,199 2,50,783 AIncludes Rs. 1,02,900 on account of contribution to local bodies for veterinary charges. Hospitals and dispensaries ... ... ... 20,188 1,14,427 1,34,615 Breeding operations ... ... *41,212 1,23,173 1,45,178 3,09,563 Rs. Hissar Cattle Farm 13,374 Camel Specialist... 27,838 41,212 Prizes ... ... ... ... ... 9,462 9,462 Fairs and shows ... ... ... xii TABLE VI-A. SHOWING EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES ON VETERINARY OBJECTS DURING 1914-15. District. Stipends. HOSPITAL CHARGES. BREEDING OPERATIONS. FAIRS AND SHOWS. Grand total of columns 2, 8,15 and 20. Pay of compounders and menials. Cost of medicines and in- struments Expenditure on buildings and repairs. Furniture. Contingencies. Total. Bulls. Horses and ponies. Donkeys. Total. Horse fair Cattle fair. Total. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase Up-keep. Prizes. Contingencies. Prizes. Contingencies. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 120 1,290 1,242 6,733 60 317 9,642 2,800 17 1,500 2,500 ... 1,400 8,217 ... ... ... 4,934 4,934 22,913 Rohtak ... ... ... 1,172 767 6,211 ... ... 8,150 400 46 ... 2,565 ... 1,121 4,132 ... ... 962 7,807 8,769 21,051 Gurgaon ... ... 211 1,528 1,253 3,079 148 95 6,103 1,092 76 1,200 2,199 ... 721 5,288 ... ... 437 1,109 1,546 13,148 Karnal ... ... 381 861 894 8,798 56 200 10,809 1,800 227 ... 2,951 ... 1,624 6,602 ... ... ... ... ... 17,792 Ambala ... ... ... 1,208 1,313 6,463 227 195 9,406 1,800 79 500 2,486 ... 1,381 6,246 430 1,408 ... ... 1,838 17,490 Simla ... ... ... 322 268 183 115 127 1,015 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,015 Simla municipal com- mittee. 396 527 148 256 ... (a) 3,752 4,683 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,079 Kangra ... ... 179 919 ... 389 ... 2,178 3,486 626 115 ... 347 ... 414 1,502 ... ... ... ... ... 5,167 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 1,056 1,046 2,000 149 184 4,435 1,400 114 ... 1,541 ... 1,476 4,531 203 151 204 150 706 9,674 Jullundur ... ... 324 1,289 2,194 3,095 ... ... 6,578 4,800 472 1,200 1,505 ... 792 8,769 ... ... ... ... ... 15,671 Jullundur municipal com- mittee. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 236 ... 388 2,190 2,814 2,814 Ludhiana ... ... 117 1,283 1,364 1,443 185 123 4,398 1,200 119 1,200 1,889 ... 2,884 7,242 ... ... 945 2,108 3,053 14,810 Forozepore ... ... 8 1,322 1,545 2,231 48 607 5,753 3,722 ... ... 2,774 ... ... 6,496 ... ... ... 1,975 1,975 14,232 Muktear municipal com- mittee. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 160 ... 660 1,559 2,379 2,879 Abohar notified area ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 765 601 1,366 1,966 Lahore ... ... 96 822 1,448 7,362 ... 6 9.638 3,000 620 ... 4,915 ... ... 8,535 ... ... 1,513 1,835 3,348 21,617 Amritsar ... ... 192 901 1,844 4,755 ... 94 7,594 4,400 1,036 ... 3,540 ... ... 8,976 ... ... ... ... ... 16,762 Amritsar municipal com- roittec. 240 1,061 493 178 28 2,486 4,246 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 410 13,494 1,313 ... 15,217 19,703 Gurdaspur ... ... 88 1,078 2,576 2,587 ... ... 6,241 1,200 216 ... 3,273 ... 1,768 6,457 192 1,889 202 6 2,289 15,075 Sialkot ... ... 120 1,101 1,591 16,802 108 306 19,908 1,400 1,325 ... 2,843 ... 1,612 7,180 213 ... 741 5,639 6,593 83,601 Gujranwala... ... 216 1,364 1,433 699 74 552 4,322 1,600 488 200 3,560 ... ... 5,848 300 1,123 483 994 2,900 13,266 Gujrat ... ... 240 593 861 1,142 57 462 3,115 955 155 1,000 1,339 ... ... 3,449 200 1,519 ... ... 1,719 8,523 Shahpur ... ... 14 999 1,418 1,686 ... ... 4,103 800 9 1,200 3,706 ... ... 5,715 153 1,915 596 23 2,687 12,519 Jhelum ... ... 88 745 647 1,519 ... 519 3,430 180 8 ... 1,142 ... ... 1,330 ... ... ... ... ... 4,848 Rawalpindi ... ... 563 1,470 2,401 ... ... 4,434 393 415 ... 1,954 ... ... 2,762 410 1,619 431 199 2,659 9,855 Attock ... ... ... 704 1,431 409 ... 379 2,923 490 100 ... 2,126 ... 180 2,896 175 ... 375 108 658 6,477 Mianwali ... ... ... 749 1,275 1,108 101 83 3,316 1,733 1,017 ... 1,073 ... 634 4,457 ... ... ... ... ... 7,773 Montgomory ... ... ... 1,207 982 3,085 61 83 5,418 900 ... ... 551 ... 233 1,684 ... ... ... ... ... 7,102 Lyallpur ... ... 750 1,078 1,498 590 48 236 3,450 2,400 347 ... 6,740 ... ... 9,487 255 1,245 755 6,720 8,975 22,662 Jhang ... ... ... 813 654 2,698 127 38 4,330 ... 684 ... 2,415 ... ... 3,099 401 1,199 ... ... 1,600 9,029 Multan ... ... ... 636 718 433 322 214 2,828 1,000 129 706 3,620 ... ... 5,455 460 1,020 194 ... 1,674 9,467 Murzaffargarh ... 209 1,392 1,058 217 93 170 2,930 1,547 121 ... 2.179 ... 1,285 5,132 ... ... 90 468 558 8,829 Dora Ghazi Khan ... 72 684 1,194 2,714 ... ... 4,592 ... ... 73 3,082 ... ... 3,155 600 700 194 ... 1,494 9,313 Total ... 4,061 29,467 31,625 91,271 2,007 13,406 1,70,776 41,638 7,935 8,779 68,815 ... 17,475 1,44,643 4,708 27,362 11,840 38,425 81,753 4,01,233
xiii TABLE VI-B. SHOWING RESOURCES OF LOCAL BODIES EAR-MARKED FOR VETERINARY OBJECTS DURING 1914-15. District. By that part of Imperial grant of 4th of local rate which has been specially set apart by the Local Government lor veterinary object. Receipts from fees for medicines, etc. Fees at horse fairs. Fees at cattle fairs. GRANT BY THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT FOR PRIZES. Total receipt of local bodies car- marked and available fer ve- terinary expenditure. EXPENDITUBE BY LOCAL BODIES. Amount by which column 12, ex- ceeds column 8, i. e., out-of pecket expenditure by local bodies on veterinary objects. Horse fair. Cattle fair. By contribution to pro- vincial funds for pay of veterinary assist- ants. By contribution to other local bodies. By direct payment. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 4,800 362 ... 22,653 .. ... 27,815 1,788 ... 22,913 24,701 xiv TABLE XVI. RETURN OF ANIMALS ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1914-1915. Detail. Herd bulls. Sapornumorary bulls. Cows. Malc produce. Female produce Castratel produce Ordnance bullocks. Cultivation bullocks. Mules. Pony marcs for malo breeding. Pony stallions. Camels. Donkey stallions. Donkey colts. Donkey marcs. Donkey Fllies. Rams. Ewes. Male lambs. Female lambs. Female goats. Female kids. Male goats and kids. Pony fillies. Pony coits. Total. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 36 26 27 23 Balance on 1st April 1014... 31 .. 1,507 940 1,088 155 ... 300 147 92 1 7 6 82 95 84 12 440 184 317 25 6 13 4 ... 6,436 Increase By birth ... ... ... ... 446 398 ... ... ... 33 .. ... ... 30 ... 23 ... ... 161 171 ... 27 23 .. ... 1,313 XV TABLE XVI-A. RETURNS OF SHEEP ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1914-15. DETAIL. RAMS. EWES. MALE LAMBS. FEMALES LAMBS. Total. REMARKS Country bred. Cross bred ( brod merino.) Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. xvi TABLE XVII. HISSAR FARM. RESULTS OF DONKEY AND MULE-BREEDING ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM IN THE YEAR 1914-15. Stallions on register at close of year. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARKS COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULTS OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS TER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Average of produce. Average of not held. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Donkey Breeding ... (a) 7 7 6 101 94 14.43 15.66 (b) 60 34 10 5.66 Mule Breeding ... (a) 7 9 7 94 95 10.44 13.57 (e) 36 59 5.14 8.43 (a) Includes one American Donkey stallion lent by the Army Remount Department. (b) Includes 4 slips and 3 still born. (c) Includes 3 slips. (The total number of slips during the year under report, i.e., 1914-15 comes to 14, but 11 of the mares which were covered in the year 1914-15 slipped in the same year (1914-15). Hence they have been excluded from the result of the previous year's covering).
xvii TABLE XVIII. ABSTRACT SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF THE HISSAR FARM DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1914-15. Receipts paid into treasury. Rs. A. P. Sale of animals (a)............ 98,764 15 0 Sale of produce............ 238 0 0 Other heads ...... ....... 10,371 11 8 Total... 1,09,374 10 8 Expenditure. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers 13,601 3 1 Do. do. do. of subordinate staff 41,202 12 4 Cultivation expenses, including maintenance of Sally Minor 21,544 11 11 Feed of animals, including reserve fodder 29,875 6 4 Purchase of animals 8,016 4 0 Other beads (b)... ... ... ... 39,830 0 1 Total 1,54,070 5 9 Valuation of animals issued on book credit. Siege train bullocks .. ... ... ...... 24,200 0 0 Array transport bullocks ... ... ...... ... Bull to Saharanpur Remount Depôt .. ... ...... 200 0 0 Mules and donkeys ... ... ... ... 25,250 0 0 Pony mares to Army Remount Department, Lahore Circle ... 1,100 0 0 Bullocks to Karnal ... ... ...... 400 0 0 Total ... 51,150 0 0 Valuation of animals, grain and fodder, etc., on hand at end of year. Valuation of animals as per table XVI attached...... 5,56,776 0 0 Do. of grain ... ... ... ... 6,516 8 7 Do. of fodder ... ... ... ... 30,872 9 4 Do. of machinery and dead stock articles... ... 60,578 10 3 Total ... 6,54,743 12 2 (a) Includes valuation of animals issued on book credit. (b) Includes also the item adjusted by book debit system on account of " 30ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1915-16. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1916. Price: Re. 0-8-0 or 9 d.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERI- NARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DE- PARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOV- ERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, FOR 1915-16.
Revised list of Agents for the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C., and 25, Museum Street, London, W. C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BQYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depst Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depst, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore, S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore (for vernacular publi- cations only). RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-Sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun. Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta, V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESA & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMRICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, RANGOON.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1915-16. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1916.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 15 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture 1-2 REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1915-16. 1 Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 Conrses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 3 Admissions ... ... ... ... ... ib. 4 Post graduate course... ... ... ... 4 5 Examination results ... ... ... ... ... ib. 6 Other classes ... ... ... .. ... ib. 7 Hospital ... ... ... ib. 8 Income ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 9 Outstandings ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 10 Demand for graduates ... ... ... ... ... ib. 11 Laboratory ib. 12 Anti-rabic inoculation of dogs ... .. ... ... ib. 13 Othor oxperiments ... ... ... ib. 14 Buildings 6 15 Text-books ... ... ... ib. 1C Punjab Veterinary Association ... ib. 17 Staff ... ... ... ... ... ib. 18 Outsido assistance ... ... ... ... ib. REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1910, BY LIEUTENANT. COLONEL J. FARMEK, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I. ADMINISTRATION. 1 2 3 4 5 General administration ... ... ... ... 7 Part II.ii Para. Subject. Page Dogs. 21 Rabies ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 II.No. 1320 S. (Rev. & Agri.2 Punjab may fairly claim to be the most advanced Province of the Empire. In past years the Lieutenant-Governor has recorded his opinion that this satisfactory result is due to the close touch which the Department maintains with the people. One indication of this is the fact that in the college the instruction is given in the students' own vernacular and is therefore more practical and more readily assimilated Another is the admirable system of informal lectures to villagers on veterinary work which Colonel Farmer has developed. The Lieutenant-Governor thinks that it would help towards the same end if the Veterinary Department were brought into touch with the Agricultural Associations which have now been established in many districts and if Veterinary Officers attended their periodical meetings. He believes that the Punjab zamin- dar is only too willing to listen to and act upon expert advice once he is con- vinced that the expert is speaking from practical knowledge of local conditions and not merely by the book. 4. Owing to the failure of the monsoon the year was financially a disas- trous one for the Hissar Farm. Fodder had to be imported in large quantities and the stock suffered considerably, the number of casualties being greater than in the previous year in spite of the fact that the farm was unusually free from con- tagious disease. Expenditure rose from Rs. 1,54,070 to Rs. 1,85,416, while re- ceipts declined by over Rs. 8,000 to Rs. 1,01,024. The number of animals of all sorts sold was only 613 as compared with 845 in 1914-15, though 181 bulls were issued to district boards, a number which again beat all previous records. The year was in fact most trying to the staff, and great credit is due to Mr. Branford, the Superintendent, and his Bailiff and other assistants for the manner in which they met their difficulties. The great fluctuations in the results of the farm's working turns almost entirely on the fodder supply, and the fact that 60,000 maunds of fodder had to be purchased from outsideANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY ADMINISTRATION IN THE PUNJAB For the year 1915-16. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture. 1. Three annual reports are here brought together:2 In cattle breeding the year showed much good work done. The tours I made convinced me that Hissar bulls are generally much appreciated, and that many of the people themselves now realize the harm done by a bad bull. The cattle-breeding grants in the Lower Bari Doab Colony mentioned in para- graph 28 of the report have generally made a good start. Cross bred merino sheep are increasing considerably in popularity. The energy and zeal displayed by Colonel Farmer deserve all praise. As I said last year, his practice of lecturing, when on tour, to assembled villagers on veterinary work, is, in particular, most laudable. 3. At the Hissar Farm the year under report was remarkable as being the worst, so far as rain was concerned, that it had experienced for over 20 years. Added to this calamity was a plague of insects which destroyed much young fodder. As a result very large quantities of jowar and hay had to be imported by rail at considerable expense. Fortunately the year was other- wise healthy, and the oat crop that matured last spring particularly good: so the number of cattle that died on the farm in the year was actually less than in 1914-15 when epidemic-disease was prevalent. Slowly but steadily the area placed under cultivation at the farm in- creases each year, but the canal supply is the limiting factor, and a very powerful one. I am reminding the Chief Superintendent regarding the scheme to breed Arab stallions at the farm, mentioned in paragraph 5 of the Government review of last year's report. Mr. Branford and his staff deserve the greatest possible credit for their excellent work during a most trying year. C. A. H. TOWNSEND, The 17th July 1916. Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab.
3 REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE For the year 1915-16, BY COLONEL H. T. PEASE, C.I.E., PRINCIPAL. Staff. 1. I remained in charge of the College during the year. Mr. Pool was Post Graduate Professor, and Mr. Taylor was in charge of the out-patient clinic, dog hospital, and the duties of Pro- fessor of Pathology and Parasitology. Mr. E. Burke was Professor of Surgery and in charge of the in-door clinic. Mr. Gaiger, Professor of Sanitary Science, who was on sick leave, has, I much regret to say, been obliged, owing to continued ill health, to retire from the service during the year. This is a great loss to the College and to the Department. I have continued to perform the duties of Professor of Sanitary Science in addition to my own. Khan Bahadur Syed Mahtab Shah, Gilani, was Professor of Anatomy, Khan Sahib Syed Sirdar Shah, Professor of Cattle Pathology, and Khan Sahib Raja Ghulam Hussain Khan, House Surgeon. Some changes have been made in Lecturers: Mool Singh has been promoted Assistant to the Professor of Equine Medicine, Haq Nawaz Khan has been appointed, on probation to the post of Assistant to the Professor of Pathology, Mushtaq Ahmad to that of Assistant to the Professor of Surgery, and Karam Ilahi as Assistant to the Post Graduate Professor. As the three latter are not yet fully qualified for the posts, they have been appointed on probation on reduced pay, and will only be con- firmed and brought on to full pay when they have made themselves efficient. There are still some posts on the regular establishment which I have not yet been able to fill. Courses. 2. There are now two separate courses at the College, vis., (a) the old three years' course for Military students and those from other provinces; and (b) a four years' course for Punjab and North-West Frontier Province students. This four years' course will give the Punjab about 20 more highly trained men a year to select from. Seventy- new students were admitted; of these 38 came for the three years' course and 32 for the new four years' course There were two remanded students in the three years' course: so that the total number in the first year class was 72. The demand for admission was, as usual, very great, but, owing to the war, Indian Cavalry Regiments only sent 11 men, so we were able to take more civilians. Admissions. 3. There were 65 students in the second year class at the commence- ment of the term: of these 2 were removed from the rolls for irregular attendance. There were 57 students in the final class: of these one man died of pthisis and I remanded man passed out in June, leaving 55 to complete the course. The newly admitted students came from4 Of these 50 had passed the Anglo-Vernacular Middle School Examination, and three the Matriculation of the Punjab University. The Military stu- dents and the nominees of the Imperial Service Troops are admitted under paragraph 68 et seq. of Army Regulations, India, Volume VIII. Post graduate course. 4. A Post Graduate course was started in October last with a class of 4 Veterinary Graduates, 1 from the Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Punjab and Baluchistan respectively, and one each from the Kapurthala and Kashmir States. Two of the Assistant Professors also attended. The subjects were divided; Mr. Pool taking the class in Laboratory work and contagious diseases, Mr. Taylor in Parasitology and the Principal in Clinical Diagnostics. The teaching in this class has been greatly hampered by want of experience of the capabilities of the men, by their imperfect knowledge of English and by the lack of suitable text-books. The ordinary English text- books are unsuitable for our students, who consequently have spent many hours in copying out notes, a task which their limited knowledge of English made all the more irksome and laborious. It is highly desirable that a text-book should be prepared for this class at once. I consider also from the experience gained that a vernacular post graduate course will become advisable for Punjabi Veterinary Graduates when Inspectors have to take the course. They could take the practical course with the other, but the text-book would be trans- lated into Urdu for them. The experience so far gained shows that it is desirable to subject the candidates to an examination before admission so as to have some sort of assurance that they have sufficient knowledge of Anatomy, Physiology and general practice to enable them to benefit by the course. Examination results. 5. In the first year's examination there were altogether 71 candidates, and of these 31 were four years' and 40 three years' course men. Twenty seven of the former and 34 of the latter passed. Of the failures, 2 failed only in one subject and obtained 50 per cent. of marks, and are eligible for examination in June. Of the 3 years' course men, two United Provinces, one Military, and one Army Remount Department students, who failed badly, and one who had twice failed, were removed from the College. In the 4 years' class two students were removed and one was remanded for a year. The percentage of passes was 85.9 per cent. Sixty three students were examined in the second year class and 56 passed. Five having failed in one subject only will be re-examined in June next. Two students were remanded for the year. The percentage of passes was 88.8 per cent. Fifty five students appeared for the final examination and 49 obtained the diploma. Of the 6 rejected students 4 failed in one subject only, and will be re-examined in June next, and 2 were remanded for the year. The percentage of passes was 89.09 per cent. The increased facilities for teaching have led to very great im- provement in the training of the students and the standard of examination was very considerably higher than last year. I consider that the results are very good indeed. Other classes 6. Besides the ordinary teaching work 20 transport dressers were trained during the summer vacation. One man absented himself at the end of September; the remainder passed the examination, Two farriers were trained during the year; and two men came for a three months' " Refresher" course. Hospital. 7. Notwithstanding the fact that there are facilities of all sorts in the hospital of the new College, the change of site to a con- siderable distance from the civil station and the city has
5 necessarily affected the out-patient practice to a very considerable extent. The number of patients treated during the last three years is as follows:6 relapse. Colonel Farmer very kindly sent in some horses for the Mallein test and the test was further carried out on suspicious cases sent into hospital. The tuberculin test was applied in a few cases. Practically all the contagious disea- ses were shown to the students in the contagious ward. The Jail and Vaccine Depôt animals, as well as the Post Office dâk horses, were inspected at intervals. Buildings. 14. The new College was formally opened in December last by His Excellency the Viceroy. The new buildings are now near- ly all ready, and it is hoped that the furnishing will be completed during the year. They are proving most convenient and well- arranged. The scheme for the new hostel is at present held up, and we are making use of the old Press building to accommodate some of the students. The buildings are not very suitable for the purpose, but we have done what we can to make them habitable. We are much handicapped by the want of a play- ground for our students who find it very difficult to get sufficient exercise. I think we are worse off than any other college in Lahore in this respect. It is probable that more stables will have to be provided to accommodate the " Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals " cases, which have increased considerably in number of late. Temporary accommodation has been provided for these at present. Text-books 15. A new addition of the text book on "Soundness and Age " has been brought out during the year by the Principal. Punjab Veterinary Asso- ciation. 16. This association has had a successful year and is in a flourishing condition. The journal has appeared regularly and has been much appreciated. Staff. 17. The staff have, as usual, done excellent work during the year. The new Imperial officers have both passed the language exa- mination, and have neglected no opportunity to improve their knowledge of the diseases met within the country and of the college work. Mr. Taylor was deputed to the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, for study during the last summer vacation and benefitted greatly by the experi- ence gained there. As the result of his deputation, the anti-rabic treatment of dogs has been started experimentally here, and Mr. Taylor is again spending his vacation at Kasauli to further discuss and study the subject there. The study of rabies in animals is of considerable importance both to us and to the medi- cal profession, so that mutual co-operation between us is very desirable. There are, no doubt, many matters in which we can co-operate to our mutual advantage. Mr. Pool spent the last summer vacation at the Imperial Bacterio- logical Laboratory at Muktesar, and also derived much benefit from the opportu- nities for study available there. It was hoped that the diagnosis of dourine might have been worked out by the complement fixation test which has been well reported on in America. As is well known the microscopical demonstra- tion of the tryponosoma equiperdum in affected horses is very frequently un- successful so that the disease is difficult to stamp out. This is of importance as dourine is now very prevalent in Baluchistan and some cases have occurred in the Punjab. Of the remainder of the European staff Mr. E. Burke, Profes- sor of Surgery, has, I am glad to say, been granted an extension of service. The old Indian Professors have continued to do excellent work, and the younger teachers have shown themselves to be very keen and give promise of becoming successful teachers. The Translator, Lala Prabhu Lal, has been kept busy and has added con- siderably to veterinary vernacular literature. My thanks are due to the whole of the staff for their cordial co-operation in the work during the year. Outside assistance. 18. We have received assistance from the Chief Superintendent of the Civil Veterinary Department, Colonel Farmer, from Mr. R. Branford, Superintendent of the Government Cattle Farm at Hissar, and from Mr. Cross, the Camel Specialist, to whom our best thanks are tendered.
1 REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT. By LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. FARMER, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I.8 septicæmis, owing to a very dry season. A large number of blood smears and morbid specimens were examined. Equines. Table II. 7. Glanders.9 Table II and III. 14. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia.10 (II)11 The following were the changes during the year:12 indents for these bulls larger every year, but more people are prepared to pay half the price of a bull. The scarcity of fodder in the province prevented some from taking bulls. Sheep breeding. 29. Every endeavour is being made to improve sheep breeding. The demand for ¾ and ½ bred merinos is on the increase. The following were taken from the Hissar Farm during the year :13 Part IV.14 B.15 6. His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab while at Hissar on October 31st inspected the stock and machinery at the Home Farm. 7. Table XVI shows the changes in farm stock during the year. The following details are of interest : 16 Donkey stock on this farm do well, and are undoubtedly still improving, and the farm colts will soon, so far as make, shape and size are concerned, compare very favourably with the best imported jacks. Donkey mares.17 Losses due to the absence of grazing would have been far heavier but for the large quantities of green oats supplied to the stock during the cold months. The Farm Bailiff, Mr. MacCutchan, deserves credit for hard work throughout the year. 9, Hospital.-The average number of cases dressed daily was 58. 15 mules were castrated. 78 cattle were castrated. 614 calves were inoculated against black-quarter, 2,543 sheep were dipped for scab. During the latter part of the year work in the hospital was unusually heavy. Several changes have again occurred in the Hospital staff, but Ve- terinary Assistants Ata Muhammad and Abdul Haq have been in charge for most of the year. Veterinary Assistant Ata Muhammad, who joined in June, has proved a valuable acquisition to the Farm staff. 10. General.TABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab veterinary college... i II Statement showing the number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals ... ii III Statement showing results of preventive inoculation iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veterinary assistants on tour ... ... ... iv V. Statement showing the number of animals treated at veterinary hospi- tals and dispensaries ... .... v VII Statement showing the total strength of subordinate veterinary staff employed ... .... ... ... ... vi VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ... id. X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... vii XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ... ... viii XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ib. XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non- selected districts ... ... ... ... ... ix XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... ... x XIV-A Statement showing cost of the civil veterinary department ... xi VI-A Expenditure by local bodies ... ... ... xii VI-B Resourcesi TABLE I. STATEMENT SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1915-16. Name of the institution. Name of course of instructions, if more than one followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. DURING THE YEAR, CLASSED BY EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS. RECEIPTS FROM EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE 3 YEARS PRECEDING. REMARKS. Admitted during the year (April 1915). Passed final examination during the year (April 1916). Failed to pass the fira1 examination. Remaining under instruc- tions at the end of the year. Scholarship-holders. Military students and others. In ordinary course. Instructions prolonged by reason of failure. Matriculation or with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, hut not matriculated. Knowing no English or Very little English. Fees. Other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of States, bodies or institutions. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 3 years' course 13 25 50* 6ii TABLE II. SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1915-16. DISTRICT. EQUINES. BOVINES. OTHERS. REMARKS. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious di- seases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and mouth di- sease. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other conta- gious di- seases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot a n d mouth disease. Hæmorhagic septicæmia. Anthrax. Other conta- gious di- seases. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 434 13 244 273 ... ... 964 ... 4 ... ... 2 6 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 117 88 828 434 ... ... 1,467 ... ... ... ... 12 12 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 170 48 ... ... 226 ... ... ... ... 13 13 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 340 103 725 5 ... ... 1,178 ... ... ... ... ... ... Ambala ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 119 12 175 ... ... ... 308 6 ... ... ... 40 46 Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... 11 92 121 43 ... ... ... 258 ... 18 11 ... ... 29 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... 7 39 49 257 ... ... ... 345 ... 7 ... ... 35 42 Jallundur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 193 ... ... ... 193 ... 12 3 ... ... 15 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 64 53 155 2 ... ... 285 ... 12 ... ... 2 14 Ferozepore ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... 6 627 25 139 7 ... ... 798 ... ... ... ... ... ... Lahore ... ... ... 20 ... 2 ... ... 22 73 6 272 ... ... ... 351 ... ... ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... ... ... 12 ... 1 ... ... 13 19 1 259 ... ... ... 279 ... ... ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 71 40 407 ... ... ... 518 10 ... ... ... ... 10 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 77 5 300 ... ... ... 382 .. ... ... ... ... .. Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 124 6 109 ... ... 3 242 ... ... ... ... 20 20 Gujrat ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 240 18 ... ... 254 ... 4 3 ... 26 33 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 79 1 260 28 ... 12 380 ... ... ... ... 640 640 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 55 197 119 ... 19 414 ... 22 ... ... 599 621 Rawalpindi ... ... ... 4 ... ... 1 5 ... 40 249 61 ... 71 421 ... 289 20 ... 345 645 Attock ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 14 179 124 ... 41 358 ... 12 ... ... 971 983 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 257 6 ... ... 273 ... ... ... ... 5,683 5,683 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 ... ... 47 ... ... ... 47 ... ... ... ... 35 35 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 449 139 ... ... 595 ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 75 33 ... ... 111 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 214 67 ... ... 281 ... ... ... ... ... 25 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 254 ... ... ... 254 ... ... ... 4 64 68 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55 30 343 56 ... ... 484 ... ... ... ... 222 222 Total ... 32 11 28 ... 2 73 2,366 675 7,063 1,415 ... 146 11,665 16 373 37 5 8,784 9,165 Government Cattle Farm, Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 ... ... 19 4 ... ... ... ... 1
iii TABLE III. SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1915-16. District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inocula- tion was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DEED UNINO- CULATED IN COURSE OF OUTBREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest Serum alone. 38 ... 528 ... ... 9,868 .. ... 2 ... Rohtak ... 3 ... 121 ... ... 911 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... 6 ... 308 ..... ... 1,602 ... ... 3 ... Ambala ... 2 ... 29 ... ... 984 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 7 ... 48 ... ... 403 ... ... 2 ... Hoshiarpur ... 4 33 ... ... 326 ... ... ... Ludhiana ... 1 81 81 ...... ... 216 ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 49 ... 905 ... ... 6,583 ... ... 4 ... Amritsar ... ... ... 5 ..... ... 154 ... ... ... ... Gnrdaspur ... 3 ... 26 .. ... 380 ... ... 1 ... Sialkot ... 5 ... 45 ... ... 1,125 ...... .. ... .... Gujranwala ... 1 ... 8 ... ... 150 .... ... 1 .... Gujrat ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 250 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 1 ... 88 ... ... 1,514 ... ... ... .... Montgomery ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 372 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 1 ... 4 ... ... 300 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 432 .... .. ... .. Total 125 81 2,203 ... ... 25,580 ... ... 13 ... Hissar ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Serum alone. 3 ... 24 ... ... 450 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 1 ... 16 ... ... 18 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 12 ... 56 ... ... 1,900 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... 1 ... 5 ... ... 150 ... ... ... ... Ambala .. 1 ... 18 ... ... 719 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 5 ... 24 ... ... 143 ... ... 4 ... Hoshiarpur ... 4 ... 17 ... ... 354 ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... 4 ... 38 ... ... 1,233 ... ... 7 ... Ferozepore ... 2 ... 22 ... ... 74 ... ... ... ... Lahore .... 2 ... 44 ... ... 533 ...... ... ... ... Amritsar .. 6 ... 42 ... ... 699 ..... ... 1 Gurdaspur ... 12 ... 58 ... ... 1,063 ... ... 2 ... Sialkot ... 2 ... 2 ... ... 48 ... ... ... ... Gujranwala ... 1 ... 8 ... ... 90 ... ... ... ... Gujrat ... 1 ... 20 ... ... 176 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 1 ... 4 ... ... 398 ... ... ... ... Jhelum .. 2 ... 10 ... ... 305 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi 2 ... 24 ... ... 179 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 4 ... 66 ... ... 1.332 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 6 ... 91 ... ... 2.364 ... ... ... ... Jhang ... 2 ... 6 ... ... 1,760 ... ... 1 ... Multan ... 16 ... 178 ... ... 4,998 ... .... ... ... Muzaffargarb ... 10 ... 78 ... ... 3,563 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 100 ... 851 .... ... 22,494 .... ... 15 ... Hissar ... Hæmorrhagic Septicamia. Vaccination. 4 ... ... ... ... 374 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 3 ... ... ... ... 500 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... 8 ... ... ... ... 736 ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 8 ... ... ... ... 1,525 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 13 ... ... ... ... 313 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 20 ... ... ... ... 20 ... ... ... ... Montgomery 6 .... ... ... ... 1,724 ... ... ... ... Mukan ... S7 ... ... ... ... 15,176 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 15 ... ... ... ... 5,674 ... ... .. ... Dera Ghazi Khan 2 ... ... ... ... 186 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 116 ... ... ... ... 26,228 ... ... ... ... Hissar ... Black quarter. Vaccination. 14 ... ... ... .. 612 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 8 ... ... ... ... 316 ... ... 1 ... Gurgaon ... 4 ... .... ... ... 267 ... ... 1 Karnal .. 1 ... ... ... ... 42 ... ... ... ... Mulian 4 ... ... ... ... 247 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 16 ... ... ... ... 1,231 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 47 ... ... .... ... 2,745 ... ... 2 ...
iv TABLE IV. SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED- BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1915-16. District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases. treated and castrations performed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ... ... 887 6 26 1,129 248 1,403 24 984 284 1,292 214 1,392 562 2,168 4,863 Rohtak ... ... 537 5 27 1,618 67 1,712 39 684 55 778 247 2,019 127 2,393 4,883 Gugaon ... ... 1,079 7 26 1,251 24 1,301 28 1,320 30 1,378 232 1,997 102 2,331 5,010 Karnal ... .. 524 5 72 1,180 21 1,273 10 1,605 15 1,630 100 1,154 11 1,265 4,168 Ambala ... ... 580 6 115 2,392 22 2,529 7 1,310 19 1,336 121 1,072 16 1,209 8,074 Simla ... ... 138 3 ... ... ... ... ... 190 42 282 14 165 13 192 424 Kangra ... ... 872 6 18 142 23 183 343 22,518 11,042 33,903 179 1,463 900 2,542 36,628 Hoshiarpur ... 489 5 12 563 68 643 56 1,692 9 1,757 168 493 19 680 2,080 Jullundur ... ... 326 5 7 515 16 538 12 1,108 1 1,121 92 246 8 346 2,005 Ludhiana ... ... 459 5 20 1,269 10 1,299 ... 494 6 500 71 741 15 827 2,626 Ferozepore ... ... 601 7 58 2,222 44 2,324 50 2,272 723 3,045 454 962 39 1,455 6,824 Lahore ... 348 4 67 489 28 584 17 175 15 207 242 361 36 639 1,430 Amritsar ... ... 429 6 23 972 2 997 14 464 18 496 320 801 299 1,420 2,913 Gurdaspur ... 327 7 7 122 8 137 1 1,308 ... 1,309 41 190 6 237 1,683 Sialkot ... ... 481 6 24 533 7 564 28 853 138 1,019 387 1,039 42 1,468 3,051 Gujranwala ... 222 5 33 416 10 459 6 1,014 92 1,112 46 138 25 209 1,780 Gujrat ... ... 387 4 52 1,028 2 1,082 ... 787 83 870 146 293 66 505 2,457 Shahpur ... ... 815 5 42 493 18 553 1 605 128 729 167 227 225 619 1,901 Jhelum ... ... 270 4 13 170 4 187 ... 1,185 124 11,309 131 166 47 344 1,840 Rawalpindi ... 447 5 29 385 2 416 2 1,344 829 2,175 185 426 65 676 3,267 Attock ... ... 207 5 7 47 1 55 3 774 111 888 55 88 87 230 1,173 Mianwali ... ... 139 4 46 226 4 276 ... 210 343 553 64 114 7 185 1,014 Montgomery 456 5 76 2,964 169 3,209 45 865 64 974 196 438 64 698 4,881 Lyallpur ... ... 350 5 14 733 33 780 12 1,300 17 1,329 215 871 67 1,153 3,262 Jhang ... ... 200 4 10 1,640 5 1,655 1 133 1 135 53 446 27 526 2,316 Multan ... ... 882 6 24 10,483 121 10,628 9 207 119 335 260 705 70 1,035 11,998 Muzaffargarh ... 462 5 61 2,222 38 2,321 19 423 384 826 242 1,030 170 1,442 4,589 Dera Ghazi Khan ... 414 4 21 932 31 984 36 718 90 844 698 664 151 1,513 3,341 Total 12,828 144. 930 36,136 1,026 38,092 763 46,542 14,777 62,082 5,340 19,701 3,266 28,307 128,481
v TABLE V. SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR 1915-16. District. Number of Veterinary dispenearies. Number of Vetorinary Assistants employed at dispeneäries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF IN AND OUT- PATIENTS TERATED DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expenditure. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals- Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines, Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Othor animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 13 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... 5 5 4 5 ... 279 300 51 286 305 54 282 303 53 1 2 1 2,505 5,682 2,563 21.32 35.42 15.13 2,788 5,987 2,617 11,392 424 4,342 Rohtak ... ... ... 4 4 3 9 ... 425 511 29 428 520 29 424 5 6 29 4 4 ... 3.266 6,548 1,494 22.66 26.02 9.91 3,694 7,068 1,433 12,195 92 3,916 Gurgaon ... ... ... 6 6 ... 3 ... 220 281 24 220 284 24 220 2 0 24 ... 4 ... 3,418 7,151 2.921 22.93 28.80 11.83 3,633 7,435 2,945 14,018 291 3,639 Karnal ... ... ... 4 4 3 1 ... 335 250 7 333 251 7 336 250 .. 2 1 ... 2,408 4,054 1,039 20.05 29.76 8.31 2,746 4,315 1,037 8,098 427 4,465 Ambala ... 5 6 2 ... 1 379 351 8 381 351 9 377 347 9 4 4 .. 4,103 9,310 1,788 26.28 47.88 10.5 4,434 9,691 1,797 15,972 381 5,560 Simla ... ... 2 2 2 ... 6 81 2 ... 83 2 170 81 2 164 2 ... 6 298 339 652 42.2 2.4 5.6 381 341 822 1,544 5,398 6,705 Kangra ... ... 6 6 15 3 1 102 47 7 117 50 8 116 48 8 1 2 ... 2,641 23,010 3,438 16.22 88.5 12.93 2,758 28,060 3,446 31,264 179 2,639 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 4 4 12 1 ... 2 5 279 44 227 280 44 226 280 44 1 .... ... 3,911 6,434 1,405 19.49 30.57 7.13 4,133 6,711 1,449 12,298 221 4,451 Jullundar ... ... ... 4 4 22 5 330 487 41 352 492 41 348 490 44 4 2 .... 4,917 8,389 2,502 33.5 53.61 14.37 5,269 8,881 2,546 16,696 382 3,982 Ludhiana ... ... 4 4 2 2 2 280 497 33 282 490 35 279 490 35 3 9 .... 2,260 5,734 2,316 17.15 44.64 14.77 2,543 6,233 2 351 11,127 150 2,421 Ferozepore ... ... ... 6 6 5 3 4 443 231 94 448 234 98 433 233 95 15 1 3 4,519 5,481 1,853 33.46 34.29 11.95 4,997 5,715 2,051 12,763 1,825 8,545 Lahore ... ... 3 3 7 5 ... 308 104 9 315 169 9 313 109 9 2 ... ... 2,539 2,725 955 16.82 14.0 5.69 3,151 2,834 964 6,949 803 5,296 Amritsar ... ... ... 5 5 33 3 1 377 132 14 410 135 15 410 133 15 ..... 2 .... 5,829 6,416 1,398 30.26 32.38 8.68 5,738 6,551 1,413 13,702 790 18,605 Gurdaspur ... ... 7 6 13 1 9 612 218 17 625 219 26 622 216 26 3 3 ... 7,719 7,482 1,515 6.94 35.47 7.35 8,344 7,704 1,541 7,586 237 4,294 Sialkot ... ... ... 5 5 6 5 2 222 98 16 223 103 18 228 101 18 ...... 2 .... 7,253 10,680 1,496 39.08 45.31 8.26 7,481 10,783 1,514 19,778 264 11,617 Gujranwala ... ... ... 5 5 14 5 1 482 181 59 496 189 60 493 187 60 3 ... ... 5,321 6,480 1,401 37.07 36.92 17.59 5,817 6,669 1,461 13,947 570 4,337 Gujrat ... ... .. 3 3 ... .. ... 164 40 4 164 40 4 160 39 4 4 1 ... 3,865 3,585 702 7.3 5.5 1.26 4,029 3,625 706 8,360 231 1,890 Shahpur ... ... ... 4 4 3 ... ... 171 25 14 174 25 14 174 ...... 12 ...... ... 2 2,897 1,342 1,136 6.63 2.77 2.49 3,071 1,367 1,150 5,588 51 2,752 Jhelum ... 3 3 2 1 1 127 33 16 129 34 17 128 34 16 1 ... 1 2,745 2,238 779 7.53 5.19 1.83 2,874 2,272 796 5,942 286 2,628 Rawalpindi ... 4 4 2 ... ... 472 142 164 474 142 164 461 138 163 13 4 1 2,883 2,124 1,465 7.40 4.06 2.98 3,360 2,266 1,629 7,255 472 2,9 Attock ... ... ... 4 4 ... 1 ... 71 19 6 71 20 6 70 20 6 1 ... ... 2,818 3,285 1,084 6.25 6.49 1.97 2,889 3,305 1,090 7,234 42 2,360 Mianwali ... ... ... 3 2 1 ... ... 165 39 4 166 30 4 164 29 3 2 1 1 1,659 1,918 765 5.4 5.89 2.38 1,816 1,918 759 4,523 136 1,900 Montgomery ... 4 4 1 ... 255 58 6 256 56 6 253 56 6 3 .. .. 4,336 2,455 1,419 31.6 16.5 8.14 4,592 2,512 1,425 8,529 96 6,818 Lyallpur ... ... ... 4 4 3 5 ... 238 266 13 239 271 13 234 260 12 5 2 1 3,623 5,142 1,480 81.2 20.2 8.95 3,862 5,413 1,502 10,777 274 19,415 Jhang ... ... ... 3 3 13 2 ... 147 23 10 160 25 10 160 24 10 .. 1 ... 2,822 1,667 885 19.84 10.71 4.51 2,982 1.692 895 5,569 267 3,683 Multan ... ... ... 5 5 6 2 1 293 127 74 299 129 75 295 127 74 4 2 1 3,871 2,821 1,640 31.61 17.14 9.57 4,170 2,955 1,715 8,840 448 1,918 Muzaffargarh ... ... 5 5 3 1 ... 331 151 35 334 152 35 332 152 34 2 ... 1 5,141 2,915 2,632 33.62 27.6 15.63 5,475 5,067 2,667 13,209 213 4,144 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... 4 4 2 2 1 124 21 13 126 26 14 125 23 14 1 ... .... 4,480 2,291 1,547 37.97 18.83 11.68 4,606 2,314 1,581 8,481 63 4,228 Total ... 121 120 179 68 30 7,646 4,902 982 7,825 4,970 1,042 7,744 4,921 994 81 49 18 103,868 151,741 41,270 ... ... 111,693 159,711 45,282 3,16,686 14,923 143,878 Government Cattle Farm, Hiasar ... 1 2 7 19 5 178 492 89 185 511 94 186 474 85 2 97 9 190 239 77 8.8 8.4 2.3 375 750 171 1,296 ... ...
vi TABLE VII. SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1915-16. Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordi- nate staff not inclu- ded in previous columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. In schools and colleges ... ... ... ... ... In dispensaries ... ... ... 120 ... *24 Itinerating Veteri- nary Assistants. On other work ... ... 18 *70 .. 5 Office Veterinary Assistants. 1 Kohala inspection post. 37 Vacancies (1 post to take effect from October 1916). 3 Cattle Farm Vetevi- nary Assistants. 70 Total ... ... 18 100 ... TABLE VIII. RETURN OF STUD BULLS FOR THE YEAR 1915-16. DISTRICT. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BODIES. REMARKS. Number on 1st April. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Hissar ... ... 73 18 290 4 87 Rohtak ... ... 12 6 200 2 16 Gurgaon ... ... 33 7 ... 6 34 Karnal ... ... 35 10 ... ... 45 Ambala ... ... 33 10 .... 6 37 Simla ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Kangra ... ... 13 4 200 4 13 Hoshiarpur ... ... 43 10 200 1 52 Jullundur ... ... 44 15 200 3 56 Ludhiana ... ... 29 6 ... 1 34 Ferozepore ... ... 70 6 ... 6 70 Lahore 42 13 200 13 42 Amritsar ... ... 55 4 200 5 54 Gurdaspur ... ... 57 7 200 2 62 Sialkot ... ... 22 9 200 ... 31 Gujranwala ... ... 39 15 200 1 53 Gujrat ... ... 19 ... ... 3 16 Shahpur ... ... 13 8 200 1 20 Jhelum ... ... 4 1 140 ... 5 Rawalpindi ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 Attock ... ... 8 4 157 2 10 Mianwali ... ... 21 ... ... 4 17 Montgomery ... ... 31 7 ... ... 38 Lyallpur ... ... 36 12 200 7 41 Jhang ... ... 3 8 181 1 10 Multan ... ... 8 11 195 1 18 Muzaffargarh ... ... 18 8 194 1 25 Total ... 765 201 ... 74 892
vii TABLE X. RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1915-16. DETAILS. HORSR AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicillian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. English. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1925 4 ... ... ... .. 4 53 ... 6 1 ... 63 67 ... 7 50 ... 16 5 78 Increase Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 .. ... ... ... 9 9 ... ... 7 ... ... ... 7 Received ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 4 ... ... ... ... 4 65 ... 6 1 ... 72 76 ... 7 57 ... 16 5 85 Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 1 ... ... 5 5 ... ... 5 ... ... ... 5 Sold ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... 1 3 ... ... ... 4 Destroyed ... .. ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... .. ... ... Transferred ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total decrease ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... 1 .. ... 8 8 ... 1 8 ... ... ... 9 Balance on 31st March 1916 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 58 .. 5 1 ... 6 68 ... 6 49 ... 16 5 76 TOTAL 4 ... .... ... ... 4 53 ... 5 1 ... 64 68 ... 6 49 ... 16 5 76
viii TABLE XI. SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES, DURING 1915-16. Horse, pony of donkey. Dirtrict. Stallions on register on 31st March 1916. STALLION ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUM- BER OF MAKES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Provious year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse .... Punjab ... 4 4 4 164 214 41 57 Total ... 4 4 4 164 214 41 57 Pony ... Punjab ... 64 66 63 3,633 3,844 55 59 Total ... 64 66 63 3,633 3,844 55 59 Donkey ... Punjab ... 76 75 78 4,057 3,976 54 54 Total ... 76 75 78 4,057 3,976 54 54 TABLE XII SHOWING-AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, ETC., OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS DURING THE YEAR 1915-16. DISTRICT. HORSE. POXY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... 437 500 292 280 Rohtak ... ... ... 427 427 247 280 Gurgaon ... ... ... .... 434 410 221 240 Karnal ... ... ... ... 473 422 226 232 Ambala ... ... ... ... 376 355 262 276 Kangra ... ... ... ... 377 347 215 414 Hoshiarpur ... 392 427 358 371 170 184 Jullundur ... ... 334 304 180 458 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 338 378 264 236 Gurdaspur ... ... ... 332 409 234 253 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... 436 406 232 230 Mianwali ... 499 380 279 346 221 212 Montgomery ... ... ... 269 275 134 116 Muzaffargarh ... ... 350 363 350 363 206 217 Total 1,241 1,170 5,220 5,313 3,054 3,328 Average ... 414 390 373 379 218 238
ix TABLE XIII. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1915-16. DISTRICT. Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES . TOTAL NUM- ber OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Fends. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Gurdaspur ... 2 823 1,236 60 97 823 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 55 8 34 ... ... .. 250 ... 250 146 ... ... .. Hoshiarpur ... 1 100 208 30 60 102 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 12 ... ... 450 ... 450 287 ... ... ... Jullundur ... 1 1,357 1,103 74 56 1,357 ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 31 31 ... ... ... 600 ... ... 222 ... 222 222 ... ... ... Montgomery ... 1 314 ... 107 ... 249 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 351 ... 351 308 ... ... ... Total ... 5 2,594 2,547 271 213 2,531 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35 35 55 8 34 612 ... ... 1,273 ... 1,273 963 ... ... ...
I TABLE XIV. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR 1915-16. District. Number of Cattle Fairs and Shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT.. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMALS SOLD. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffalces. Camels. From Imperial funds, From Provincial funds. From Local fund. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 6 ... 69,629 4,985 34,444 8,135 6,172 1,318 ... 35 12 15 59 (a) 40,001 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... ... 2 242 125,731 4,072 488 3,538 110 5,298 69 46 15 30 81 22,383 358 ... ... (b)663 ... 663 (b)663 ... Gurgson ... ... 1 ... 5,564 429 1,643 118 16 189 ... 60 11 33 69 1,254 22 ... ... 448 ... 448 209 ... Hoshiarpur ... ... 1 ... 290 118 52 165 4 79 ... 25 23 37 ... 63 60 ... ... 415 ... 415 322 ... Jullundur ... ... 1 ... 1,125 1,776 1,889 4,605 20 856 ... 21 14 39 66 3,541 137 ... ... 257 ... 257 257 ... Ludhiana ... ... 1 9 3,740 3,460 4,400 5,890 32 2,966 ... 104 31 52 87 2,672 200 ... ... 808 ... 808 796 ... Ferozepore ... ... 11 8 6,963 6,427 7,636 3,995 4,558 4,738 ... 31 18 35 66 9,302 572 ... ... 1,676 ... 1,676 (e) 1,571 ... Lahore... ... 3 ... 2,075 1,974 1,098 2,369 34 3,661 ... ... ... ... ... 2,422 431 ... ... 676 ... 676 676 ... Amritsar ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39 54 39 77 188 33,620 396 ... ... 2,594 75 2,669 1,477 ... Gurdaspar ... ... 2 58 2,810 2,932 1,146 3,699 1 412 ... 18 8 41 (c)l,771 110 ... ... 250 ... 250 125 1 Sialkot ... ... 3 55 6,709 7,931 4,285 19,563 11 1,773 ... 14 13 33 58 (d)11,041 301 ... ... 1,404 ... 1,404 778 ... Gujranwala ... ... 2 68 3.088 2,403 223 1,148 9 179 ... 20 19 31 70 2,347 178 ... ... 788 ... 788 557 ... Shahpur ... ... 2 128 236 108 17 129 ... 34 ... 31 23 40 66 141 483 ... ... 600 ... 600 570 2 Rawalpindi ... ... 1 49 ... 14 ... 22 1 1 52 ... 17 41 122 43 65 ... ... 200 ... 200 190 ... Attock ... ... 1 45 64 23 33 ... ... 105 ... 54 ... ... ... 5 53 ... ... 317 ... 317 202 ... Lyallpur ... ... 1 27 1,661 3,494 1,942 4,877 1,720 54 ... 30 14 31 58 5,484 157 ... ... 1,250 ... 1,250 686 ... Montgomery 2 140 761 731 197 250 20 1,616 ... 61 22 22 50 186 493 ... ... 865 ... 865 865 2 Multan ... ... 1 8 33 20 16 ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 73 ... ... 194 ... 194 194 ... Jhang ... ... 1 9 6 20 3 12 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 74 ... ... 430 ... 400 343 ... Total ... 44 846 230,585 40,965 59,512 58,515 12,745 23,280 160 604 279 357 1,040 1,36,306 4,163 ... ... 13,805 75 13,880 10,481 5 (a) Excludes Rs. 4,798 on account of tees from brokers, rent of shops and miscellaneous receipts. (b) Includes Rs. 204 on account of combined horse and cattle fair. (c) Excludes Rs. 336 on account of miscellaneous income at the fair. (d) Excludes Rs. 2,998 ditto ditto ditto. (e) Includes Rs. 346 on account of prizes for Jalalabad and Bhuchcho cattle fairs.
xi TABLE XIV A. STATEMENT SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1915-16 IN THE PROVINCE OF PUNJAB. MAJOR HEADS. AMOUNT. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... 10,732 85,100 6,543 91,643 + 10,732 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 9,846 92,815 4,315 97,130 + 9,846 Subordinate Establishment ... ... ... 1,92,525 26,107 2,18,632 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 20,226 1,09,477 1,29,703 Breeding Oparations ... ... 6,600 1,78,270 1,57,206 3,35,476 + 6,600 Prizes ... ... ... ... 2,000 8,974 10,974 Fairs and Shows ... ... ... 1,233 65,771 67,004 Total ... 27,178 5,72,169 3,78,393 9,77,740 NOTE.xii TABLE VI-A. SHOWING EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES ON VETERINARY OBJECTS DURING 1915-16. District. Stipends. HOSPITAL CHARGES. BREEBING OPERATIONS. FAIRS AND SHOWS. Grand total of columns 2, 8, 15 and 20. Pay of compounders and menials. Cost of medicines and in- struments. Expenditure on buildings and repairs. Furniture. Contingencies. Total. Bulls. Horses and ponies. Donkeys. Total. Horse fair. Cattle fair. total. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep Prizes. Contingencies. Prizes; Contingencies. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 120 1,386 882 1,659 328 87 4,342 2,000 50 ... 2,186 ... 1,457 5,693 ... ... ... 9,268 9,268 19,423 Rohtak ... ... ... 1,119 1,506 1,005 83 203 3,916 1,200 355 ... 2 136 ... 989 4,680 204 344 459 7,962 8 969 17,565 Gurgaon ... ... 233 1,470 1,160 797 125 87 3,639 1,400 282 ... 2,436 ... 590 4,708 ... ... 209 892 1,101 9,681 Karnal ... ... 343 1,014 802 2,378 79 192 4,465 2,000 253 507 2,841 ... 1,649 7,250 ... ... ... ... ... 12,058 Ambala ... ... ... 1,212 742 3,453 60 93 5,560 2,000 123 ... 2,256 ... 1,124 5,503 ... 487 ... ... 487 11,550 Simla ... ... ... 427 120 130 38 612 1,327 400 69 ... ... ... ... 469 ... ... ... ... ... 1,796 Simla Municipal Com- mittee. 396 499 201 250 ... (a)4,427 5,377 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,773 Kangra ... ... 16 1,115 ... 575 ... 949 2,639 600 248 ... 377 ... 431 1,656 ... ... ... ... ... 4,311 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 1,242 448 2,515 149 97 4,451 2,148 ... ... 1,464 1,496 5,108 287 212 322 211 1,032 10,591 Jullundar ... ... 370 1,570 1,013 1,378 ... 21 3,982 3,000 442 ... 1,338 ... 904 5,684 ... ... ... ... ... 10,036 Jallundur Municipal Com- mittee. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 222 ... 257 2,894 3,373 3,373 Ladhiana ... ... 90 1,356 508 372 58 127 2,421 1,200 50 1,205 1,691 ... 2,446 6,592 ... ... 796 3,006 3,802 12,905 Ferozepore ... ... ... 1,570 1,183 453 ... 340 3,546 2,037 10 ... 2,413 ... ... 4,460 ... ... ... 2,025 2,025 10,031 Muktsar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 216 ... 657 1,966 2,839 2,839 Abohar Notified Area ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 568 629 1,197 1,197 Lahore ... ... 104 993 304 3,951 ... 48 5,296 2,600 282 1,000 4,824 ... ... 8,706 (b)1,027 2,140 ... ... 3,167 17,273 Amritsar ... ... 192 1,222 746 14,470 ... 145 16,583 800 238 953 3,702 ... ... 5,693 ... ... ... ... ... 22,468 Amritsar Municipal Com- mittee. 240 1,093 196 17 97 619 2,022 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 548 ... 1,477 11,622 13,647 15,909 Gurdaspur ... ... 96 1,354 1,002 1,938 ... ... 4,294 1,400 426 ... 2,655 ... 1,781 6,262 146 1,272 125 ... 1,543 12,195 Sialkot ... ... 120 1,257 668 9,614 35 43 11,617 1,800 1,546 .. 2,183 ... 1,633 7,162 ... 778 5,344 6,122 25,021 Gujranwala ... 216 1,749 583 1,257 44 704 4,337 3,390 702 2,250 4,320 ... ... 10,662 300 1,069 557 717 2,643 17,858 Gujrat ... ... 240 657 823 161 122 127 1,890 ... ... 633 1,306 ... ... 1,939 200 394 ... ... 594 4,663 Shahpur 84 1,112 850 790 ... ... 2,752 1,600 126 ... 3,498 ... 1016 6,240 160 2,025 570 47 2,802 11,878 Jhelum ... ... 96 758 530 429 ... 309 2,026 140 10 1,000 1,125 ... ... 2,275 ... ... ... ... 4,397 Rawalpindi ... ... 767 1,169 992 ... ... 2,928 ... 773 ... 2,545 ... ... 3,318 345 3,266 190 ... 3,801 10,047 Attock ... ... 706 701 549 120 284 2,360 630 230 ... 2,457 120 3,437 ... ... 202 141 343 6,140 Mianwali ... ... ... 813 441 540 67 39 1,900 64 984 772 1,336 140 883 4,179 ... ... ... ... 6,079 Montgomery ... ... 1,428 597 4,607 153 33 6,818 1,620 . 2,250 1,077 ... 538 5,485 308 699 65 1,500 3,372 15,675 Lyallpur ... ... 1,054 1,066 732 16,900 191 526 19,415 2,423 598 1,715 7,365 ... ... 12,101 275 3 753 686 4,225 8,939 41,509 Jhang ... ... ... 929 310 2,325 52 67 3,683 1,926 1,132 2,267 2,623 ... ... 7,948 453 1,027 343 ... 1,823 13,454 Maltan ... 712 415 485 144 162 1,918 2,145 88 2,639 3,742 ... ... 8,614 449 1,457 194 ... 2,100 12,632 Muzaffargarh ... 186 1,296 680 1,678 111 381 4,146 1,550 98 ... 2,450 461 1,030 5,589 ... ... ... ... ... 9,921 Dera Dhazi-Khan. ... 144 616 570 3,042 ... ... 4,228 ... ... ... 1,380 ... ... 1,380 600 676 ... ... 1,276 7,028 TOTAL ... 4,340 32,508 19,882 78.710 2,056 10,722 1,43,878 40,073 9.115 17.191 67.726 601 18,087 ....................................... l,52,793 5,740 18,821 9,255 52.449 86,265 3,87,276
xiii DISTRICT. By that rart of Imperial grant of ¼ of local rate which has j been specially set apart by the Lockl Government for veterinary object. Receipts from fees for medicines, etc. Fees at horse fairs. Fees at cattle fairs. GRAXT BY THE Local Government FOR PRIZES. Total receipt of local bodies ear- marked and available for ve- terinary expenditure. EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES. Amount by which column 12 ex- ceeds column 8, i.e., out-of- pocket expenditure by local bodies on veterinary objects. Horse fair. Cattle fair. By contribution to Provincial Funds for pay of Veterinary Assistants. By contribution to other local bodies. By direct payment. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... 3,700 424 ... 44,709 ... ... 48,923 1,738 ... 19,423 21,211 -27,712 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 8,950 92 ... 22,383 ... ... 20,425 849 ... 17,565 18,414 -8,011 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 6,350 201 ... (a) 1,652 ... ... 8,203 899 ... 9,681 10,680 + 2,477 Karnal... ... ... ... 3,660 427 ... ... ... ... 4,027 780 ... 12,058 12,838 + 8,811 Ambala ... ... ... ... 5,000 381 ... ... ... ... 5 381 900 ... 11,550 12,450 + 7,069 Simla ... ... ... ... 3,000 21 ... ... ... ... 3,021 ... ... 1,795 1,793 -1,225 Simla Municipal Committes ... ... ... 5,377 ... ... ... ... 5.377 ... ... 5,773 5,773 + 396 Kangra ... ... ... ... 3,000 179 ... ... ... ... 3.179 1,020 ... 4,311 5,331 + 2,153 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 4,500 221 13 63 ... ... 4,797 1,092 ... 10,591 11,683 + 6,886 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 4,000 382 ... ... ... ... 4,382 996 800 10,036 11,832 + 7,450 Jullundhar Municipal Committee ... ... ... ... 458 3,541 (e) 300 (e) 500 4,799 ... ... 3,373 3,373 -1,425 Ludhians ... ... ... ... 3,700 l50 ... 2,672 ... ... 6,522 1,200 ... 12,905 14,105 + 7,583 Pero epcre ... ... ... ... 4,300 1,825 ... 5,682 ... ... 11 807 1,740 ... 10,031 11,771 -36 Muktsar Municipal Committee ... ... ... ... 3,341 (b) 3,192 ... ... 6,533 ... ... 2,839 2,839 -3,694 Abohar Notified Area ... ... ... ... ... ... 979 ... ... 979 .. ... 1,197 1,197 4 218 Lahore ... ... ... ... 3,200 803 ... 2,422 ... ... 6,425 1,131 ... 17,273 18,404 + 11,979 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 2,400 146 ... ... ... ... 2,540 1,164 75 22 468 23,707 + 21,16L Amritsar Municipal Committee ... ... ... 644 ... 33,625 (e) 75 ... 34,339 480 ... 15,909 16,389 -17,950 Guzdeaspur ... ... ... ... 3,000 237 ... 2,107 ... ... 5,344 1,440 ... 12,195 13,635 + 8,291 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... 4,500 264 ... 14,039 ... ... 18,803 2,124 ... 25,021 27,145 + 8,342 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 2,900 570 230 2,347 ... ... 6,047 1,359 ... 17,858 19,217 +13,170 Gujrat ... ... ... ... 3,484 221 600 ... ... ... 4,315 1,320 ... 4,663 5,983 + 1,668 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 2,989 51 1,425 l41 ... ... 4,603 1,380 (f) 485 11,878 13,743 + 9,140 Jhelum ... ... ... ... 3,484 236 ... ... ... ... 3,770 885 ... 4,397 5,282 +1,512 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... 8,434 472 6,067 (c) 949 ... ... 10,972 856 ... 10,047 10,903 -69 Attock ... ... ... ... 3,932 42 ... (d) 6,697 ... ... 10,721 723 ... 6,140 6,863 -3,858 Mianwali ... ... ... ... 4,480 156 ... ... ... ... 4,616 350 ... 6,079 6,429 + 1,813 Montgomery ... ... ... 3,500 93 ... l86 ... ... 3,782 408 ... 15,675 16,083 +12,301 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... 3,500 274 2,784 5,434 ... ... 12,042 1,863 ... 41,509 43,377 + 31,335 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... 2,300 207 42 ... ... ... 2,609 1,400 ... 13,454 14,854 +12,245 Multan ... ... ... ... ... 3,500 443 ... ... ... ... 3,948 1,224 ... 12,632 13,856 + 9,908 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... 3,500 213 ... ... ... ... 3,713 540 ... 9,921 10,461 + 6,748 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... 4,400 63 ... ... ... ... 4,463 1,284 ... 7,028 8,312 + 3,849 Total ... 1,03,700 14,923 14,960 1,52,955 375 500 2,87,413 31,300 1,360 3,87,276 4,19,936 + 1,32,523 (a) Includes Rs. 368 on account of fair of weekly Haliifax fair at Nuh. (b) Includes, 551 on account of rent for shops, brokerage, &c. (c) Includes the amount realized at unauthorised fairs held in the district. (d) Includes the lease money of Gondal and Hassanabdal weekly cattle fair. (e) Contributed by the district board. (f) Contribution paid to the Army Remount Department for the upkeep of the Sargodha Veterinary Hospital.
xiv TABLE XVI. RETURN OF ANIMALS ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1915-16. Detail. Herd Bulls. Supernumerary Buils Cows. Male produce. Female produce. Castrated produce. Ordnance bullocks. Cultivation bullocks. Mules. Pony mares for mule breeding. Pony stallions. Camels. Donkey etallions. Donkey colts. Donkey mares. Donkey fillies. Rams. Ewes. Male lambs. Female la.i.bs. Female goats. Female kids. Male goats and kids. Pony fillies. Pony colts. Total. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 13 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 21 25 26 27 28 Balance on 1st April 1915... 20 1 1,614 1,072 1,137 111 313 127 89 1 8 6 93 93 73 7 476 161 206 27 31 6 3 ... 5,581 Incresse By birth ... ... .. ... 683 621 ... ... ... 26 ... ... ... ... 31 ... 31 ... ... 209 208 ... 19 18 ... ... 1,616 purchase ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 ... ... 25 transfor ... 10 215 209 23 ... 73 75 2 ... ... ... ... 2 1 7 ... 2 108 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 739 Total... 39 216 1,723 1,684 1,653 189 75 329 153 89 1 8 8 125 105 109 35 681 370 414 31 40 26 3 ... 7,991 Deezease Died ... 1 1 106 73 73 1 ... 6 3 3 ... ... ... 1 2 2 6 30 90 29 3 3 3 ... ... 393 Destroyed ... ... ... 37 2 2 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 46 Sold... 2 184 84 15 284 2 75 8 37 3 ... 1 1 27 6 34 ... 67 70 10 8 21 9 ... ... 938 Transferred... ... 31 ... 300 209 45 ... 32 ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 7 ... ... 2 108 ... 2 ... ... ... 739 Total... 3 216 227 385 663 51 75 40 40 6 ... 1 2 30 8 41 6 92 111 148 31 24 12 ... ... 2,116 Balance on 31st March. 19l6. 36 ... 1,496 1,239 3,030 128 ... 283 113 83 3 7 6 95 97 65 9 492 259 266 20 16 14 3 ... 5,878 Value, Rs. ... ... 10,460 ... 1,59,509 ,76,300 66,710 20,940 ... 33,555 23,760 13,200 40 1,017 2,450 22,000 12,970 3,740 1,090 2,385 2,335 870 143 24 33 890 ... 5,48,421 Does not includo the and Amarican Dookoy stallion received on loan from the Army Remount Department.
XV TABLE XVI-A. RETURNS OF SHEEP ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1915-16. DETAIL. RAMS EWES MALE LAMBS. FEMALE LAMBS. Total. REMARKS. Country bred. Cross bred (f bred merino). Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Count y bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. ½ bred merino. 3/4 bred merino. ½ bred merino. 3/4 bred merino. ½ bred merine. 3/4 bred merino. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Balance on 1st April 1915 ... ... 1 6 7 125 270 64 17 476 7 38 111 5 161 8 64 129 5 206 850 Increase ... By birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 48 158 3 269 ... 40 166 2 208 417 By purchase ... ... ... 6 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 By transfer ... ... ... 2 2 1 41 65 1 108 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 110 Total ... ... 1 14 15 126 311 129 18 584 7 86 269 8 370 8 104 295 7 414 1,383 Decrease ... Died ... ... ... 6 6 9 8 11 7 35 ... 9 28 2 39 ... 6 18 5 29 109 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 Sold by auction ... ... ... ... ... 28 28 1 ... 57 ... 2 1 ... 3 ... 1 9 ... 10 70 Sold to breeders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 42 ... 67 ... ... ... ... ... 67 Transferred ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 1 41 65 1 108 110 Total ... ... ... 6 6 37 30 12 7 92 ... 35 71 4 111 1 49 92 6 148 357 Balance on 31st March 1916 ... ... 1 8 9 89 275 117 11 492 7 50 193 4 259 7 55 203 1 266 1,026 Value, Rs .... ... ... ... 25 1,665 1,090 ... 1,995 ... 890 2,385 35 168 1,822 310 2,335 ... 820 ... 50 870 6,680
xvi TABLE XVII. HISSAR FARM. RESULTS OF DONKEY AND MULE-BREEDING ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM IN THE YEAR 1915-16. Stallions on register at close or year. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE of MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of produce. Number not held. Average of produce. Average of not held. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Donkey-breeding ... *7 8 7 92 101 11.5 14.43 62 39 8.85 5.57 Mule breeding ... *7 8 9 87 94 10.87 10.44 xvii TABLE XVIII. ABSTRACT SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF THE HISSAR FARM DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1915-16. Receipts paid into treasury. Rs. A. P. Sale of animals (a) ... ... ... ... 92,582 9 0 Sale of garden produce ... ... ... ... 318 0 0 Other heads (b) ... ... ... ... 8,124 2 8 Total ... 1,01,024 11 8 Expenditure. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers ... ... 15,179 6 4 Do. do. do. of subordinate staff ... 41,231 4 9 Cultivation expenses, including maintenance of Sally Minor ... 20,878 3 8 Feed of animals, including reserve fodder ... ... 79,741 9 5 Purchase of animals ... ... ... ... 2,672 1 6 Other heads (c) ... ... ... ... 25,713 8 0 Total ... 1,85,416 1 8 Valuation of animals issued on book credit. Siege train bullocks ... ... ... ... 15,000 0 0 Mules and donkeys ... ... ... ... 20,750 0 0 Total ... 35,750 0 0 Valuation of animals, grain and fodder, etc., on hand at end of year. Valuation of animals as per table XVI attached ... 5,46,421 0 0 Do. of grain ... ... ... ... 7,768 15 2 Do. of fooder ... ... ... ... 10,750 5 7 Do. of machinery and dead stock articles, etc. ... ... 65,398 5 7 Total ... 6,30,338 10 4 (a) Includes valuation of animals issued on book credit. (b) Includes valuation of unserviceable guns issued on book credit. (c) Includes items adjusted by book debit system on account of foreign stores, etc., as intimated by the Account ant-General, Punjab. Note.ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1916-17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore, PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1917. Price: Re. 0-8-0 or 9d
Annual Report on the Punjab Veterinary College, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, and the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, for 1916-17.
Revised List of Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. KRGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C., and 25, Museum Street, London, W. C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Croed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. WILLIAM WESLEY & SON, 28, Essex Street, Strand, London. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depot Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depot, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book Sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. HONORARY SECRETARY, Punjab Reli- gious Book Society, Anarkali, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYRR & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, RANGOON.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1916-17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore, PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1917.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 15 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1916-17. 1 Gazetted staff ... ... ... ... 2 2 Non-Gazetted staff... ... ... ... ib. 3 Admissions ... ... ... ... ib. 4 Post-Graduate Course ... ... ... ... 3 5 Examination results ... ... ... ... ib. 6 Other classes... ... ... ... ib. 7 Hospital ... ... ... ... ib. 8 Income ... ... ... ... 4 9 Demand for graduates ... ... ... ... ... ib. 10 Laboratory ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 11 Buildings ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 12 Text-books ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 13 Punjab Veterinary Association... ... ... ... ib. 14 Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1917, BY LIEUT- ENANT-COLONEL J. FARMER, C.I.E., CHIEF SUPERIN- TENDENT. Part I.ii Para. Subject. Page. Part III.No. 3864 S. (Rev. & Agri.2 Among bovines rinderpest and hemorrhagic septicæmia were responsi- ble for 25,750 deaths as compared with 9,429 in the previous year. All that was possible with the shortage of staff was done to check these epidemics and the number of animals inoculated against both diseases was substantially larger than in 1915-16. 5. Mirza Shuja Beg's generosity in presenting and partly equipping a veterinary hospital at Patti has been suitably recognized by Government. The Lieutenant-Governor has noticed with pleasure the other instances of similar public spirit on the part of individuals mentioned in paragraph 21 of the Chief Superintendent's report. The utility and popularity of veterinary hospitals throughout the province are illustrated by the steady rise in the number of patients treated at them. In the year under report the figure was 334,577 which the Lieutenant-Governor believes is more than double that of any other province in India. 6. In cattle breeding the work of the Civil Veterinary Department has been eminently successful. The number of Hissar bulls supplied to Dis- trict Boards continues to increase year by year : there are now nearly 1,000 distributed over the province, and there can be no doubt that as the result of the department's teaching the Punjabi zamindar now thoroughly appreciates the advantages of breeding from a good sire and that the standard of plough and well cattle is steadily rising. When the treatment of young stock and the suitable feeding of cattle when in work is more generally understood a further improvement may be expected. 7. The year was on the whole a prosperous one for the Hissar farm and Mr. Branford is to be congratulated on his successful management. The receipts rose from Rs. 1,01,000 to Rs. 1,25,000, while the expenditure fell from Rs. 1,85,000 to Rs. 1,55,000 mainly in consequence of improved fodder conditions. The Lieutenant-Governor would be glad if in future reports the Director of Agriculture would briefly sum up the financial working of the farm. Though hæmorrhagic septicæmia accounted for 18 deaths among the stock, casualties on the whole amounted to only 372 as compared with 439 in the previous year. Stall feeding of the cattle had to be resorted to in the opening months of the year, but the excellent monsoon rains relieved the situation and by the end of the year a reserve stock of 70,000 maunds of fodder had been collected. This result is highly satisfactory, and His Honour hopes that it may eventually be possible to build up a reserve which will not only meet all the requirements of the farm but provide a surplus for distribution in the surrounding tracts in times of scarcity. An interesting experiment in the breeding of Arab stallions has been started on the farm, which, if successful, should make the province self-support- ing as regards the provision of Arab stallions for local bodies. 8. Colonel Farmer, whose enthusiasm and success in extending the practical operations of the department have been recognised by the grant of the Order of Companion of the Indian Empire, and the other officers of the department deserve the highest praise for the manner in which they have discharged their duties in a particularly trying year. In addition to their own work they materially assisted the Army Remount Department particularly in connection with the dourine outbreak. 22 DA-352Annual Report ON THE Civil Veterinary Administration IN THE Punjab For the year 1916-17. Note on veterinary progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture. 1. The report on the Punjab Veterinary College is the first of the three reports forwarded herewith. As usual, the college could not comply with all the demands for admission made on it, though 85 new students were admitted, in place of 70 the year before. Fifty men completed the three years' course. The Post-Graduate course was attended by only two students. On account of the war the Veterinary Department all through India are considerably under- manned, and could not spare men for the course. I am asking the Principal to now push on the proposal for a Branch Veterinary Hospital at Aitchisongunj. Handicapped as he was by shortage of staff, the year's work reflects as usual much credit on Colonel Pease, the Principal. He received whole- hearted support in his work by the other professors at the College. 2. The report of the Chief Superintendent of the Civil Veterinary Department on the year's work in the province is the second of those sent here- with. Handicapped by serious outbreaks of infectious disease among the animals of the province 2 Report ON THE Punjab Veterinary College, For the year 1916-17, BY Colonel H. T. Pease, C.I.E., Principal. Gazetted staff. 1. I remained in charge of the college during the year, and in addition to my own work carried out the duties of Professor of Sanitary Science. Mr. Pool was Post- Graduate Professor until February 27th, when he joined the Indian Army Reserve of Officers. Mr. W. Taylor acted as Professor of Pathology and Parasitology and took charge of the Canine Ward in addition to the out- patient clinic. Mr. E. Burke, I.S.O., continued to be Professor of Surgery and in charge of the hospital. Khan Bahadur Sayad Mahtab Shah, Gilani, was Professor of Anatomy and Physiology : and Khan Sahib Sayad Sardar Shah, Professor of Bovine Pathology. Khan Sahib Ghulam Hussain Khan, House Surgeon, proceeded on furlough pending retirement on the 1st October 1916, when M. Ghulam Rasul Khan was appointed to officiate for him. Non-gazetted staff. 2. The following officers on probation were confirmed in their appointments on the 1st of December :3 Of these among the 27 Punjabi civilians, one had studied to F. A., four were matriculates and nine had studied for Matriculation, but had failed to pass. The rest, with the exception of the military students and nominees of the Imperial Service Troops, who are admitted under paragraph 68 et seq. of Army Regulations, India, Volume VIII, had passed the Anglo- Vernacular Middle School Examination. Post-Graduate Course. 4. Owing to the war only two students were deputed for the Post- Graduate course, one from Madras and the other from Bombay. An English text-book is being prepared and printed for the students of this class ; part has already been printed, but the work has now been interrupted owing to Mr. Pool's absence on military duty. Examination results. 5. At the examinations held in June 1916, two students of the first year class, who had failed in one subject in April 1916, passed, and were promoted to the second year class. Three out of four students of the second year class, who failed in one subject, passed and were promoted to the third year class. One, having failed a second time, was remanded for another year. Two out of four students, who failed in one subject in the third year class, passed in June 1916, and two were remanded. At the annual examinations held in March 1917, the following were the results: 4 work at the present time, I have not yet made out the scheme required. The necessity for the hospital will not be marked until next year when the first four years' class of the four years' course comes into being. The matter will now be taken up and proposals submitted. Income. 8. Rupees 18,040-4-3 were realized as income against Rs. 16,603-2 last year. The outstandings on 31st March 1917 were only Rs. 1,521-8. Notwithstanding monthly reminders and final notices being issued, from time to time, many of the debts remained still outstanding. Those irrecoverable are cancelled as bad debts and others are being reported to Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab, for realization. Demand for graduates. 9. The demand for graduates has continued to be as great as ever, and as usual, the supply is totally inadequate to meet it. I feel it my duty to once again advocate the establish- ment of a second vernacular veterinary college. No province can be expected to find all the funds necessary for this purpose, but the matter is really to a very large extent an Imperial one. Laboratory 10. Work in the laboratory is making good progress, and a considerable amount of material has been sent in for examination during the year. Anti-rabic inoculation of dogs and horses bitten by rabid animals has been continued during the winter with good results, and some experimental work has also been carried out in this direction. A number of horses have been sent in to be kept under observation for the diagnosis of dourine. The treatment of surra in the horse has been continued experimentally, and larger doses of arsenious acid than those prescribed by Holmes have been found to be indicated. The results of the treatment with these large doses have been very good indeed. Much greater use than in previous years has been made of the labora- tories for the training of students. The class for practical histology was held during the winter session for the second years' class of the four years' course. The third year class of the three year's course was given practical training in the use of the microscope, the examination of fresh and stained specimens from common contagious diseases, as well as in the preparation of smears and the collection of material for examination. Animals were subjected to ordinary test inoculations where opportunity offered. The Jail and Vaccine Depôt animals were examined at intervals during the year. Buildings. 11. The scheme for the new hostel is at present hung up for want of funds, but we have done what is possible to render the old Press Building's more comfortable by partitioning them off and furnishing them. The accommodation is, however, not satisfactory, and I am looking forward to the time when a proper hostel can be provided and the students can be kept under better control. We are still much handicapped by the want of a play ground for the students who find it difficult to get sufficient exercise. Taxt books. 12. I have written and published a text book on the contagious diseases of animals with a catechism in Urdu for students and passed men, and Mr. Pool has taken in hand the prepara- tion of a text-book on contagious diseases and laboratory methods in English for the Post-Graduate Class. Punjab Veterinary As- sociation. 13. The Punjab Veterinary Association has had a successful year, and is in a flourishing condition. The Journal has appeared regularly and has been much appreciated. Staff. 14. The staff has, as usual, done excellent work during the year. Mr. Taylor was again deputed to the Central Research Institute at Kasauli for study during the summer vacation, and had the opportunity of further benefitting by the experience he was able to gain there. Mr. E. Burke, I.S.O., has, I am glad to say, been granted an
5 extension of service and the Imperial Service Order has been conferred upon him for good service rendered. The old Indian Professors have continued to do excellent work, and the younger teachers have made excellent progress during the year and should prove valuable teachers. A heavy loss has been sustained by the departure of Khan Sahib Ghulam Hussain Khan, House Surgeon, on furlough, pending retirement, after a service of some 30 years. He has been a faithful servant of Government, and I have found him a reliable and loyal colleague during the many years we have served together. I much regret that it has been necessary for him to sever his connection with the institution. The Translator Lala Prabhu Lal, has been exceedingly hard worked on the text-book on contagious diseases. My best thanks are due to him, and to the whole of the staff for their cordial co-operation in the work during the year. We have received help from several officers of the Civil Veterinary and Re- mount Departments, and to them also our best thanks are tendered. REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT. BY LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. PARMER, C.I.E., CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I.6 3. The system of instructing Veterinary Inspectors and Veterinary Assistants has continued as in past years : it has certainly improved the standard of work generally. During the inspection of Hospitals Veterinary Assistants are examined on the cases treated and the latest methods of treat- ment are explained to them. As before, lectures and practical demonstra- tions on veterinary matters have been given in villages. Part II.Strangles.8 Dogs. Rabies. 20. Rabies has been prevalent during the year as usual, and will con- tinue to spread until a dog-tax is levied throughout the country. The outbreaks can very often be traced to owners of bitches allowing them to run loose when in season, which causes a large number of dogs to collect and follow them ; the dogs in their ambition to serve the bitches fight with each other : and in this way the disease is spread. The levying of a tax on dogs, and the destruction of ownerless dogs which wander about in cities, villages, and railway stations seems necessary. This would not only reduce the number of rabies cases, but would prevent the spread of various other diseases Veterinary Hospitals. Number of hospitals.9 Cattle breeding. Stud bulls.-Table VIII. 3. At the close of the year there were 993 bulls at work in the Province, against 893 in the preceding year. There were 116 casualties (cast and died) and 216 additions during the year. The Hissar Farm supplied 201 bulls during the year, and three Dhanni bulls were purchased and supplied to Ferozepore District. The demand for Hissar bulls is yearly increasing, and the people show their appreciation of this animal by subscribing one-quarter or one-half of the price. The Hissar Farm this year complied with the indent in full. The stock produced by these bulls is generally very good, but in a few cases some of the calves are not up to the standard expected. This is generally due to careless supervision by the owner. The Department is doing its utmost to explain to the people the necessity of careful supervision of young animals. The Chief Superintendent is writing a pamphlet in which every point will be explained in as simple and practical a form as possible to enable zamindars to thoroughly understand what is necessary. Regarding the four cattle-breeding farms in the Lower Bari Doab Colony a separate note will be written later. Castrations.10 At the close of the year 40 men (2 Veterinary Inspectors and 38 Veteri nary Assistants) of this Department were working in the Military Department. There were four dismissals and one casualty during the year under report. Out of 46 vacancies on 31st March 1917, 9 have since been filled up, and the re- maining will also be filled up as soon as more recruits are available. Part V.11 (2) A violent hailstorm on the 10th of May completely destroyed what green jowar crop there was on 3 of the 5 cultivation blocks. The storm was something altogether out of the common, and destroyed almost every living unsheltered thing in its tract, including some livestock and human beings. 3. The storm was not an unmixed evil, as in lowlying places where the storm water collected a little grass sprouted, and sufficient grazing became available to induce the cattle to move about in the Bir, and not spend their time lying outside their lines waiting for the next feed. The total amount of fodder purchased was 22,037 maunds (maund =82 lbs.). Six thousand maunds over my estimate had to be obtained to replace green jowar destroyed by hail. 4. The rainfall during August, September and the first half of October was unusually heavy. Nearly 10 inches fell between the 6th and 10th August causing considerable floods and some damage to crops. From August to the end of the year there was ample grazing and from then on stock did well. On the whole the year has been a prosperous one, receipts amounting to Rs. 1,24,853. 5. The year was a good one for fodder crops and bay, and 71,760 maunds of farm-grown fodder and hay were carried forward to reserve at the end of the year. In spite of the good rains, however, the growth of grass over large areas of the Bir was disappointing ; some of the areas where hay can generally be made produced nothing but weeds. The growth of weeds was everywhere unusually luxuriant especially in August and the first half of September. Of the fodder saved during the year 24,122 maunds was hay. Probably this amount could have been increased to about 30,000 maunds without unduly encroaching on areas reserved for grazing, had it been possible to obtain suffici- ent labour in the autumn. But a combination of circumstances aggravated the labour difficulty, which is always acute in the autumn after good rains. (a) Late rain in September and October postponed the main hay making season till Kharif harvesting and Rabi sowing had become general in the district, attracting labour away from the farm. (b) The farm itself had an unusually large area of cultivated fodder crop to harvest. (c) Malarial fever, as usual, was very prevalent. At any time in the autumn after good rains a considerable proportion of men will be found down with fever. Some are prevented from work altogether. (d) Recruiting for the army has been heavy in this district and has diminished the supply of labour. Still 70,000 maunds over and above fodder consumed during the year is a respectable figure, considerably more than the total fodder purchased last year, which was probably the worst year for fodder on record. If normal conditions prevail during 1917-18 reserve fodder at the end of the year should amount to over one lakh of maunds. Contagious diseases. 6. On the whole the year was fortunate, the farm remaining free from sheep-scab, rinderpest and strangles. The following diseases occurred :12 (c) Equine contagious abortion13 Four cows were sold to Nepal State (two of the Sahiwal breed) and three to the United Provinces. Heifers.14 After the rains the sheep did well and casualties have been much under the average of recent years. Forty-one ram lambs were sold for breeding as against 67 last year. Enquiries for rams have recently been more numerous and it is hoped more will be sold next year. In any case the flock is a source of profit ; Rs. 2,136 were realized for .wool, and cast animals sold by auction always realise good prices. Cultivation. 8. During the year the following quantities of grain and fodder were received from the five cultivation blocks : Lbs. Value. Rs. Green jowar (Sorghum vulgare) ... ... 1,594,770 8,078 Kurby (Sorghum vulgare) ... ... 3,254,302 31,746 Oats ... ... ... ... 590,4,62 28,183 Oats bhoosa ... ... ... ... ... 1,332,154 20,475 Green oats ... ... ... ... 334,697 2,494 Oats in straw ... ... ... ... ... 49,371 1,200 Ensilage ... ... ... ... ... 1,133,667 9,185 Green grass ... ... ... ... ... 509,071 2,662 Green Gowar (Cyampsis psoralioides) ... 379,757 2,308 Gowar grain (Cyampsis psoralioides) ... 3,548 96 Gowar fodder (ensilage) ... 39,497 320 Green lucerne (Medicago sativa) ... ... 165,5l7 1,215 Lucerne seed (Medicago sativa) ... ... 35 34 Green birseem (Trifolium alexandrinum) ... 8,105 49 Of the above birseem is a new crop for the Farm. The small area sown did badly, possibly owing to its being sown too late, seed not being available till October. It is proposed to again sow a small area in Septem- ber 1917. Jowar as usual suffered a great deal from the ravages of the borer worm. Damage by this pest was general throughout the district. On the farm the loss of fodder due to it was about 30 per cent. The year has been one of excep- tional difficulty as regards efficient cultivation, mainly owing to shortage of labour combined with extra work. Years of good rainfall always involve this combination ; on this occasion the late rains increased the extra work Owing to the rapid growth of weeds and jungle after each fall of rain areas under preparation for Rabi crops had to be repeatedly ploughed at a time when labour was urgently required for harvesting jowar and hay-making. In addition, irrigation channels had to be repeatedly cleaned. Hospital. 9. The average number of cases dressed daily was 46. Eight mules were castrated and one pony stallion. 183 cattle were castrated. 555 calves were inoculated against blackquarter. 228 heifers were inoculated against Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. 2,731 sheep were drenched owing to infection by " Hæmonchus Contortus." The existing hospital is very inadequate for the number and value of cases treated. Plans and estimates for a new building have been submitted to the Chief Superintendent, which, if provided, will give the veterinary staff better chances to save cases.
15 Hospital work was particularly heavy for the first six months of the year, mainly owing to sheep diseases, and the outbreak of contagious pneu- monia. Veterinary Assistant Muhammad Ashfaq rejoined as first Veterinary Assistant in October. Veterinary Assistant Ata Muhammad was attached to the farm throughout the year ; their work has been very satisfactory. Post-Graduate Course, 10. The farm Overseer, S. Ghulam Hussain, completed a Post- Graduate Course at the Punjab Veterinary College and returned to the farm on 1st July 1916. The other members of the class consisting of three men, were sent to the farm for the three months, July, August and September. The men, as far as the exigencies.of farm work allowed, were put through a course of practical train- ing in breeding, rearing, feeding, and handling of live-stock ; the growing and saving of fodder crops, etc. The course should be of great value to men of the type sent ; but with the existing farm staff it will not always be possible to devote sufficient time to them. Most of the extra work involved in the instruc- tion of the men fell on myself and farm Overseer. Camel grazirig. 11. The 6th Government Camel Corps was formed at Hissar in Janu- ary. During February and March most of the camels were grazed in the Bir at the rate of rupee one per month per animal. After the end of March the grazing was stopped owing to the fear that the camels should communicate surra to susceptible farm-stock. Grazing for camels in the Bir is very good, and the Army Department made a large saving by the above arrangement. In normal times in the Bir the grazing of cattle and camels is quite distinct, the camels confining themselves to grazing off the various forms of scrub jungle and from weeds, and the cattle to grasses. In times of scarcity cattle do to some extent graze off the scrub jungle, and camel grazing on a large scale at such time could not be allowed. General. 12. The work of the farm staff, outdoor and indoor, has been very satisfactory. The Bir Darogha Jamadar, Ghulam Muhammad, did especially well at hay-making. The farm Overseer, S. Ghulam. Hussain, has worked well and as usual the Deputy Superintendent, Captain Morris, has been of the greatest assistance to me in all branches of the farm work throughout the year. The farm bailiff, Mr. MacCutcheon, worked hard through the year.
TABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab Veterinary College i II Statement showing the number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals ... ... ... ... ii III Statement showing results of preventive inoculation ... ... iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by Veteri- nary Assistants on tour ... ... ... ... V V Statement showing the number of animals treated at veterinary hospi- tals and dispensaries ... ... ... ... Vi VII Statement showing the total strength of subordinate veterinary staff employed... ... ... ... ... ... vii VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ... ... ib. X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... viii XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ... ... ... ... ix XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ... ... ib. XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non- selected districts ... ... ... ... ... X XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... ... xi XIV-A Statement showing cost of the Civil Veterinary Department ... xii VI-A Expenditure by local bodies ... ... ... ... xiii VMS ResourcesTABLE No. I. STATEMENT SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1916-17. Name of institution. Name of course of instructions if more than one followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. STUDENTS ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR CLASSED BY BDU- CATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS. RECEIPTS FROM EXPENDITURE ON EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURlNG 3 YEARS PREORDING. REMARKS. Admitted during the year (April 1916). Passed final examination during the year (April 1917). Failed to pass the final examination. Remaining und r instruc- tions at the and of the year. Scholarsh p-holders. Military students and others. In ordinary course. Instructions prolonged by reason of failure. Matriculated or with higher qualifications. Knowing some English but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English. Fees. Other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff Other expenses. Total. Number passed. In service of Government and local bodies. In service of State bodies or institutions. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 28 28 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Punjab Veteri- nary College, Lahore. 3 years' course... 16 42 52* 10ii TABLE II. SHOWING NUMBER OP DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1916-17. DISTRTCT. EQUINES. BOVINES Others. REMARKS Glanders. Ifluenza. Sutra. Dourine. Other contagious Diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and Mouth Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthdrax. Other coutngious diseases Total. Rinderpest. Foot and Mouth. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Surra. Other contagions diseases. 1 Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 16 16 17 18 49 20 21 Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 361 2 59 3 ... ... 365 31 ... ... ... 2 33 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 351 4 698 77 ... ... 1,128 ... ... ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 304 1 47 19 ... ... 371 ... 8 ... ... 44 52 Karnal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,506 32 1,297 ... ... ... 7,835 106 ... ... ... 72 178 Ambala ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 912 ... 136 1 ... 25 1,074 ... ... ... ... ... ... Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92 2 4 ... .. ... 98 ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 59 37 154 5 ... 9 264 7 1 1 ... 31 39 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 121 14 305 ... ... ... 440 ... ... ... 12 13 Jullandur ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 17 3 563 ... ... ... 583 ... ... ... ... ... ... Ladhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 73 12 83 5 ... ... 173 ... ... ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... ... ... 6 15 ... ... 21 1,132 ... 68 68 ... ... 1,268 81 ... ... ... 70 153 Lahore ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... 179 48 777 ... ... 10 1,014 ... ... ... ... 80 80 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 30 ... ... 30 231 14 905 ... ... ... 1,150 4 ... ... ... ... 4 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... ... 16 ... ... 16 220 10 311 ... ... 541 ... ... 1 ... 13 14 Sialkot ... ... .. ... ... 1 ... ... 1 985 14 8 4 ... ... ... 1,873 ... ... ... ... 56 56 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 4l ... 9 50 1,559 2 830 1 12 2,404 26 ... ... ... 40 66 Gujrat ... ... ... ... ... 15 ... ... 15 594 2 358 1 ... 43 998 ... ... ... 1 13 14 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 445 59 853 50 53 1,460 ... 14 ... ... 122 136 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 29 144 301 ... ... 497 ... ... ... 6 134 140 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 71 76 126 81 72 426 14 98 2 ... 46 160 Attock ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47 37 87 357 ... 43 571 ... 93 ... ... 214 307 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32 150 10 ... 179 371 ... 7 ... ... 1,302 1,309 Montgomery ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 226 1 5 2 ... ... ... 759 7 ... ... ... ... 7 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 106 4 851 10 ... ... 971 32 ... ... ... 30 62 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 99 4 34 85 ... ... 222 ... ... ... ... ... ... Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 372 ... 154 2 ... ... 528 ... ... ... ... ... ... Muzaffargnrh ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... 11 20 32 283 ... ... ... 340 ... ... ... ... 4 4 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... 11 ... 41 19 11 ... ... 71 ... ... .... ... 6 6 Total ... *1 30 128 ... 19 178 15,045 512 10,705 1,087 ... 446 27,795 308 221 4 7 2,291 2,831 Government Cattle Farm, Hissar ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 18 5 ... ... 23 ... ... ... ... ... ... *Plus 3 in the selected districts under this department.
iii TABLE III. SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1916-17. Distrist. Name of disraso againat which inocu- lation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inocn- lation was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIRD UNIN- OOULATSD IN COURSE OP OUTBRSAK. NUMBERS OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION.. REMARKS. Equines. Bovinos. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Eqnines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 8 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest. Scrum alone. 19 ... 247 ... ... 3,134 ... ... 8 ... Rohtak ... 11 ... 251 ... ... 1,954 ... ... 3 ... Gurgaon ... 22 ... 303 ... ... 6,456 ... ... 1 ... karnal ... 63 ... 2,530 ... ... 10,621 ... ... 45 ... Simla ... 9 ... 90 ... ... 664 ... ... 2 ... Ambala ... 27 ... 474 ... ... 6,312 ... ... 3 ... Ludhiana ... 8 ... 73 ... ... 462 ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 51 ... 1,129 ... ... ... 7,875 ... ... 3 ... Montgomery ... 18 ... 182 ... ... 8,019 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 81 ... 399 ... ... 15,4 88 ... ... 13 ... Muzaffargarh .... 5 ... 20 ... ... 1,331 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 8 ... 43 ... ... 823 ... ... ... ... Attock ... Rawalpindi ... 1 ... ... 36 ... ... ... ... 641 ... ... 1 9 69 1,626 4 ... Shahpur... 6 ... 16 ..... ... 1,307 ... ... ... ... Jherim... 6 ... 18 ... ... 270 ... ... 1 ... Gujrat ... 13 ... 286 ... ... 2,605 ... ... ... ... Kangra... 8 ... 48 ... ... 583 ... ... ... Kolarpur ... 6 ... 62 ... ... 613 ... ... 5 ... Jullundur ... 2 .... 13 ... ... 627 ... ... ... ... Lahore ... 8 ... 56 ... ... 2,534 ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... 3 ... 15 ... ... 731 ... ... 8 ... Gurdaspur ... 6 ... 66 ... ... 260 ... ... ... ... Sinikot ... 14 ... 258 ... ... 1,919 ... ... 12 ... Gujranwala... 24 ... 779 ... ... 5,551 ... ... 6 ... Total ... 365 ... 7,403 ... ... 81,106 ... ... 113 ... Hissar ... Hæmorrhagic acpticæmia. Serum alone. 2 ... 31 ... ... 303 ... ... 1 ... Robtak ... 1 ... 8 ... ... 150 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 3 ... 19 ... ... 646 ... ... ... ... Simla... 2 ... 4 ... ... 135 ... ... ... ... Ambala ... 2 ... 15 ... ... 626 ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 3 ... 13 ... ... 362 ... ... ... ... Mentgomery ... 1 ... 28 ... ... 430 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 2 ... 154 ... ... 927 ... ... ... ... Mazafforgarh .. 2 ... 10 ... ... 300 ... ... ... ... Dura Ghazi Khan 1 ... 5 ... ... 100 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 19 ... 244 ... ... 4,951 ... ... ... ... Altock ... 2 ... 30 ... ... 544 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi ... 3 ... 84 ... ... 391 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 8 ... 75 ... ... 2,229 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 11 ... 79 ... ... 413 ... ... 1 ... Heshiarpur ... 3 ... 10 ... ... 850 ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... 6 ... 23 ... ... 711 ... ... ... ... Lahore ... 3 ... 33 ... ... 408 ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... 12 ... 124 ... ... £087 ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... 3 ... 49 ... ... 633 ... ... ... ... Sinikot ... 6 ... 32 ... ... 746 ... ... ... ... Ghjranwala ... 6 ... 117 ... ... 1,367 ... ... ... ... Total ... 100 ... 1,137 ... ... 18,698 ... ... 2 ...
iv TABLE IIIv TABLE IV. SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR. District. Number of villages Number of Veteri- nary Aesistants employed. CASTRATIONS PERVORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATRD FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEAERS. Total number of cases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines Bovines. Others, Total. Equines. Berines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ... ... ... ... 1,103 6 83 1,669 4 43 2,145 27 2,212 211 2,450 178 950 843 1,071 6,566 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 640 5 36 2,95 35 2,467 27 1,202 2 1,231 226 l,662 51 1,839 5,537 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 1,213 7 43 2.573 100 2,715 13 4,848 46 4,907 115 2,581 77 2,773 10,395 Karnal ... ... ... ... 854 6 58 1.902 16 1,971 13 1,014 10 1,037 157 1,016 9 1,182 4,190 Ambala ... ... ... ... 558 5 120 2,355 14 2,489 5 1,176 11 1,192 161 1,133 64 1,408 5,089 Simla ... ... ... ... 395 3 ... ... ... ... ... 43 105 147 104 357 84 495 642 Kangra ... ... ... ... 687 7 3 33 4 40 44 10,742 611 11,897 281 2,387 252 2,920 14,357 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 468 5 19 451 62 532 3 1,222 60 1,815 221 655 42 818 2,765 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... 392 5 6 419 7 431 16 963 1 985 191 553 21 770 2,186 Ludhana ... ... ... ... 394 4 7 1,367 11 1,385 ... 1,103 8 1,106 74 553 12 039 8,130 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... 928 7 56 3,683 18 3,757 67 2,657 6 2,730 301 1,021 13 1,335 7,822 Lahore ... ... ... ... 433 5 68 835 5 908 8 522 37 567 179 445 41 665 2,140 Amritear ... ... ... ... 448 6 12 870 4 835 3 708 3 714 239 809 371 1,419 3,019 Gurdaspur... ... ... ... 217 8 8 151 11 170 3 297 2 802 16 266 48 359 831 Sislkot ... ... ... ... 565 6 36 887 23 386 12 838 75 925 933 1,378 127 1,860 3,171 Gajranwala ... ... ... ... 575 6 9 271 117 397 52 1,055 297 1,494 201 541 220 975 2,776 Gujrat ... ... ... ... ... 532 3 30 1,259 2 1,291 4 1,246 ... 1,250 174 261 23 453 2,999 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... 447 4 66 218 71 325 7 2,752 173 2,932 133 234 27 894 3,651 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... 233 3 5 263 ... 268 ... 2,590 73 2,663 38 86 21 145 3,076 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... ... 435 3 49 416 26 493 ... 2,886 441 3,330 116 190 77 383 4,206 Attock ... ... ... ... 347 4 10 89 8 107 4 3,222 272 3,498 129 263 203 615 4,220 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... 186 3 61 210 8 279 2 1,570 87 1,659 116 231 37 433 2,371 Montgomory ... ... ... ... ... 471 5 86 2,l08 428 2,622 24 1,762 230 2,056 189 605 99 893 5,571 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... 409 5 9 1,407 16 1,432 20 1,528 15 1,563 899 1,414 138 2,011 5,006 Jhang ... ... .. ... 423 3 13 3,740 8 3,756 6 995 17 1,018 l89 694 100 983 5,757 Multan ... ... ... 645 6 6 1,801 87 l,894 11 3,169 133 3,313 837 1,262 73 1672 6,879 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... 442 5 36 2,357 14 2,397 80 1674 49 1,803 317 602 91 1,010 6,210 Dara Gbazi Khan ... ... ... ... 377 4 160 1,185 20 1,365 164 2,34 4 74 2,582 635 646 119 1,400 5,347 Total ... 14,010 133 909 34,355 1,554 36,908 615 56,364 3,097 60,076 5,303 22,379 3,243 31,925 128,909
vi TABLE V. SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES. DISTRICT. Number of Veterinary Dispen saries. Number of Veterhary Assistant employed at dispensaries. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF IN AND OUT- PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Expenditure. Remaining on 1st April 1916. Admitted dur- ing the year. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. 1917. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals Equiues. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Receipts. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Hissar ... 5 5 1 2 1 235 330 62 236 32 63 253 330 59 3 2 4 2,129 7,748 4,057 17.65 33.4 18.25 2,665 8,080 4,120 14,865 Rs. 822 Rs. 4,132 Rohtak ... 4 4 4 4 ... 425 612 21 429 616 21 421 603 21 8 13 ... 3,225 7,908 2 097 24.4 84.41 1248 3,654 8,524 2,118 14,296 222 3,280 Gurgaon ... 6 6 ... 4 ... 268 327 20 208 331 i 20 205 330 20 3 1 ... 2,544 8787 2,779 20.16 46..3 14.38 2,752 9,118 2,799 14,669 141 4,359 Karnal ... 4 4 2 1 ... 291 209 3 293 210 3 288 269 3 5 1 ... 2,470 4,362 1,075 20.52 28.17 9.61 2,763 4,572 1,078 8,413 429 2,819 .Ambala ... 5 5 4 4 ... 453 347 22 457 351 22 452 350 19 5 1 3 4,049 10,429 2,220 26.93 52.72 12.82 4,497 10,780 2,242 17,519 429 4 205 Simla ... 2 2 2 ... 6 154 5 159 156 5 165 135 5 158 1 ... 7 343 336 639 39 2.79 6.17 504 341 804 1,649 5850 6,834 Kangra ... 6 6 1 2 ... 135 29 ...... 136 31 ... 136 31 ... ... ... ... 3,702 21,740 8,777 195 66.3 19.03 8,838 21,771 8,777 84,386 347 4,555 Hoshiarpur ... 4 4 1 ... ... 262 236 55 253 236 55 262 234 55 1 2 ... 3,499 6,341 1,650 17.93 30.57 869 3,762 6,577 1,705 12,044 241 4,623 Jullundur ... 4 4 4 2 ... 319 561 55 323 566 55 317 561 55 6 5 ... 4,167 8,424 2,854 25.43 4979 1875 4,490 8,990 2,969 16,389 715 4,368 Ludhiana ... 4 4 3 9 ... 203 477 23 206 486 23 198 481 23 8 5 ... 2,107 5.945 2,223 16.7 46.84 179 2,313 6,431 2,246 10,990 205 3,311 Ferozepore ... 6 6 13 1 3 372 185 85 387 186 88 382 180 86 5 6 2 4,176 7,266 2,027 31.6 47. 61 12.65 4,663 7,452 2,115 14,130 2,230 3,985 Lahore ... 4 4 2 ... ... 366 129 6 368 129 6 365 127 6 3 2 ... 2.179 3 109 1,037 20.33 17.09 5.59 2,547 3,238 1,043 6,828 932 2,633 Amritsar ... 5 5 ... 2 ... 494 229 129 494 231 129 489 229 129 5 2 ... 5,417 6,611 1,822 24.89 26.1 13.23 5,911 6,842 1,951 14,704 1,385 6,222 Gurdaspur ... 7 7 3 3 ... 652 232 19 656 235 19 616 226 19 9 9 ... 7,733 7,322 1,397 43.85 38.58 7.23 8,388 7,557 1,416 17,361 607 3.417 Sialket ... 5 5 .... 2 ... 286 92 22 286 94 22 283 94 22 3 ... ... 6,899 12,258 2,218 37.69 50.8 10.43 7,185 12,362 2,240 21,787 285 2,923 Gujranwaia ... 5 5 3 2 ... 406 113 48 409 115 48 403 113 48 6 2 ... 5,724 5,847 1,846 38.35 33.53 10.69 6,133 6,962 1,894 13,989 742 11,805 Gujrat ... 3 3 4 1 ... 143 38 4 147 39 4 147 39 4 ... ... ... 8,741 4,370 981 7.68 8.07 2.28 8,888 4,409 985 9,282 100 3,023 Shahpur... 4 4 ... ... 2 124 39 6 124 39 8 124 39 8 ... ... ... 3,010 1,673 1,366 6.56 3.28 2.51 3.194 1,712 1,374 6,220 63 2,618 Jhelum ... 3 3 1 ... 1 172 51 12 173 51 13 173 48 23 ... 3 ... 8,659 3,044 1,213 7.14 5.61 2.18 3,232 3,095 1,226 7,553 227 2,130 Rawalpindi ... 4 4 13 4 1 547 145 204 560 149 205 559 147 203 1 2 2 3,382 2,525 1,831 6.05 2.96 2.29 3,922 2,675 2,636 8,633 1,086 8,779 Attock ... 4 4 1 ... ... 86 39 9 87 39 9 87 39 7 ... ... 2 2,774 3,641 1,600 4.62 6.53 2.61 2,861 3,680 1,609 8,150 71 2,946 Mianwali ... 3 3 2 1 1 187 32 9 189 33 10 180 33 10 3 ... ... 1,606 1,959 889 4.94 6.27 2.24 1,795 1,992 890 4,677 109 1,804 Montgomery .... 4 4 3 ... ... 335 69 17 338 69 17 333 67 15 5 2 2 3,931 2,653 1,578 28.75 15.35 9.06 4,319 2,722 1,595 8,636 215 5,581 Lyallpur ... 4 4 5 2 1 291 271 39 296 273 40 283 268 37 13 5 8 4,382 5,857 1,734 29.26 35.65 10.79 4,678 6,130 1,774 12,582 470 11,661 Jhang ... 3 3 ... 1 ... 172 24 6 172 25 6 167 24 6 5 1 ... 2,241 1,660 947 15.59 10.1 5.88 2,413 1,685 953 5,051 215 2,413 Multan ... 5 5 4 2 1 334 146 31 338 148 32 332 142 31 6 6 1 3,467 3,391 2,048 32.69 26.39 16.19 3,805 3,542 2,080 9,427 441 2,792 Muzaffargar ... 5 5 2 ... 1 288 134 27 290 134 28 236 130 27 4 4 1 4,136 4,393 2,089 28.33 24.36 11.62 4,476 4,532 2,117 11,125 193 2.506 D. G. Khan ... 4 4 1 ... ... 160 22 4 161 22 4 155 21 4 6 1 ... 5,197 2,546 1,203 37.01 17.47 9.82 5,358 2,568 1,296 9,222 239 6,323 Total ... 122 122 ... 49 18 8,100 5,126 1,007 8,181 5,175 1,116 5,067 6,100 1,013 14 76 32 101,605 163,164 60,277 ... 00.840 107,830 57,802 386,577 18,511 1,25,137
vii TABLE VII. SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1916-17. Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Voterinary Assistants. Subordinate Staff not included in previous columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. In Schools and Colleges... Provincial ... ... ... In Dispensaries ... viii. TABLE X. RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DETAILS. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL RODIES, DONKEY STALLONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-brod, Persian. Catalonian. Sicilian. TOTAL. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. T. B. English. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance an 1st April 1916 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 58 ... 5 1 ... 64 68 ... 6 49 ... 16 5 76 Increase Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Received from Civil Veterinary Department ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 5 ... ... ... 5 Total ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 61 ... 5 1 ... 67 71 ... 6 64 ... 16 5 81 Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 4 ... ... 1 5 Sold ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Transforred to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total decresse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 .... ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... 4 ... ... 1 5 Balance on 31st March 1917 ... ... 4 ... .. ... ... 4 57 ... 5 1 ... 63 67 ... 6 50 ... 16 4 76 TOTAL ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 57 ... 5 1 ... 63 67 ... 6 50 ... 16 4 76
ix TABLE XI SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horse, Pony or Donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March 1917. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT BTUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVEBAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERBO PER STALLION EMPLOY RD AT STUD. REMARKS Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re port. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... Punjab ... 4 4 4 165 164 41.5 41 Total ... 4 4 4 166 164 41.6 41 Pony ... Punjab... 63 62 66 3,237 8,633 52.2 55.04 Total... 63 02 66 3,237 3,633 62.2 55.04 Donkey ... Punjab ... 70 74 75 8,942 4,057 53 27 54.09 Total ... 76 74 75 3,942 4,057 63.27 54.09 TABLE XII SHOWING AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, ETC., OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS. DISTRICT. HORSES. PONY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year report report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... 418 437 248 292 Rohtak ... ... ... 473 427 283 247 Gurgaon ... ... ... 621 434 238 221 Karnal ... ... ... 355 478 216 288 Ambale ... ... ... 333 373 247 262 Kangra ... ... ... 352 377 226 215 Hoshiarpur ... 612 832 403 858 210 170 Jullundur ... ... ... 369 334 207 180 Ludhiana ... ... ... 384 333 264 204 Gurdaspur ... ... ... 362 332 255 284 SialKot ... ... ... 443 430 204 232 Mianwalli ... 303 499 375 279 208 221 Montgomery ... ... ... 134 269 97 134 Muzaffargarh ... 401 350 401 350 223 209 Total ... 1,156 1,241 6,508 5,220 8,128 8,054 Average 899 414 893 378 223 218
x TABLE XIII. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGRADING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1913-17. Name of fair. Number of horse fairs and shows told. TOTAL NUMBER OF TOTAL COMPRNING FOR PRIZES TOTAL NUM BER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT NUMBER OF RE- MOUNT PURCHASED PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS NUMBER OF MULES PRICE PAID FOR GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZE MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Loweet price Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds, From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 6 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 26 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Ambala ... 1 707 400 116 153 707 ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 133 ... ... 609 ... 600 337 5 ... Jullundur M. C. 1 1,540 1,367 64 74 660 20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 19 ... ... ... 707 ... ... 168 ... 168 163 ... ... Gurdaspur ... 2 694 823 60 60 694 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 250 ... 250 146 ... ... Sialkot M. C.... 1 130 182 149 146 ... 180 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 15 ... ... ... 372 ... ... 200 ... 200 176 ... ... Mianwali ... 1 72 ... 66 ... 237 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 223 ... 225 225 ... ... Montgomery ... 1 808 814 253 107 708 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 330 ... 330 302 26 ... Total ... 7 4,001 3,168 703 540 3,006 200 ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... 34 34 ... ... ... 1,212 ... ... 1,773 ... 1,773 1,354 31 ...
xi ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR. 1916-17. Name of fair. Number of Cattle Fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Balls. Bullocks Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds, From Local Fund. From other sources. Total. Amount actually award- ed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 6 108 52,600 2,055 17,547 1,552 3,893 3,270 ... 39 16 18 81 25,829 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 3 2 106,387 3,309 466 10,855 240 2,501 ... 43 22 35 95 33,758 343 ... ... 1,656 ... 1,656 826 ... Gurgaon ... 2 ... 11,707 756 6,789 225 16 235 ... 55 16 36 80 3,726 40 ... ... 896 ... 896 365 ... Jullundur Municipal Committee. 1 ... 1,994 2,533 4,324 1,515 9 1,619 ... 40 22 35 60 3,734 64 ... ... 299 ... 299 299 ... Ludhiana ... 1 11 5,037 5,332 6,689 6,995 32 4,388 ... 105 33 56 81 3,014 210 ... ... 808 ... 808 855 (a) ... Ferozepore ... 11 52 10,756 7,642 12,833 12,884 4608 5,236 ... 22 37 69 11,710 740 ... 1,870 ... 1,870 1,788 ... Lahore ... 2 45 854 766 971 1,342 25 454 100 150 85 110 55 2,033 190 ... ... 803 ... 803 550 Amritsar Municipal Com- mittee. 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 26 18 43 92 36,010 502 ... ... 2,594 100 2,694 1,970 ... Gurdaspur ... 2 12 2,502 2,601 1,108 4,284 1 300 ... 10 8 19 ... 2,466 53 ... ... 250 ... 250 101 (b) ... Sialkot ... 4 54 8,326 9,710 6,184 29,341 11 1986 ... 32 15 87 ... 15,600 524 ... ... 1,748 ... 1,748 1,140 ... Gujranwala ... 2 331 2,010 3,021 1,438 1,126 4 209 ... 22 16 29 105 2,093 151 ... ... 654 ... 664 441 ... Gujrat ... 1 85 248 312 125 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 362 ... ... 500 ... 500 49 2 Shahpur ... 2 133 129 75 7 86 10 53 ... 49 26 38 85 174 321 ... ... 600 ... 600 470 1 Rawalpindi ... 2 1,201 376 57 14 19 4 453 70 62 28 42 105 476 363 ... ... 400 ... 400 400 ... Lyallpur ... 1 55 2,160 2,534 614 4,327 4 377 119 ... 27 20 29 77 7,723 273 ... ... 1,250 ... 1,250 867 ... Mianweli ... 1 15 45 3 5 ... ... 4 ... 94 ... ... ... 4 56 ... ... 235 ... 235 235 ... Montgomery ... 1 17 l,151 258 160 140 161 69 ... 60 33 56 105 193 184 ... ... 430 ... 430 338 ... Multan ... 1 4 33 26 12 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83 ... ... 194 ... 194 194 ... Jhang ... 1 13 8 28 8 15 11 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 83 ... ... 400 ... 400 332 ... Total ... 46 2,133 206,278 41,018 58,294 74,706 13,407 20,897 64 53 25 41 84 (c) 1,48,543 4,550 ... ... 15,587 100 15,687 11,668 3 (a) Includes Rs. 570 awarded at the Jalalabad (Mamdote Estate) and Moga cattle fair. (b) xii TABLE XIV-A. STATEMENT SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR. Major heads. AMOUNT. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... 11.242 78,907 5,103 95,252 Veterinary instruction ... ... 14,515 95,759 4,318 1,14,537 Subordinate establishment ... ... 1,68,364 27,173 1,95,537 Hospitals and dispensaries ... ... ... 22,196 92,430 1,14,626 Breeding operations ... ... 6,743 1,65,144 1,49,951 3,11,838 Prizes ... ... ... ... 2,000 8,372 10,372 Fairs and Shows ... ... ... ... 57,472 57,472 Total ... 32,560 5,22,870 8,44,814 8,99,684 NOTE:xiii EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES. District. Stipends. HOSPITAL CHARGES. BREEDING OPERATIONS. FAIRS AND SHOWS. Grand Total of columns 2, 8,15 and 20. Pay of compounders and menials. Cost of medicines and in- struments. Expenditure on buildings and repairs. Furniture. Contingencies. Total. Bulls. Horses and ponies. Donkeys. Total. Horse fair. Cattle-fair. Total. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Prizes. Contingencies. Prizes. Contingencies. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 120 1,267 590 1,970 200 105 4,132 3,375 17 ... 2,690 ... 1,239 6,721 ... ... ... 6,279 6,279 17,252 Rohtak ... ... ... 1,082 1,269 761 42 126 3,280 1,200 130 ... 2 367 ... 1,136 4,833 ... ... 826 5,659 6.485 14,598 Gurgaon ... ... 212 1,440 1,570 1,157 30 162 4,359 2,875 433 ... 3,104 ... 475 6,887 ... ... 365 1,008 1,873 12,831 Karnal ... ... 254 964 974 636 67 278 2,819 982 109 ... 2,130 ... 1,542 4,763 ... ... ... ... ... 7,836 Ambala xiv TABLE VI-B. SHOWING RESOURCES OF LOCAL BODIES EARMARKED FOR VETERINARY OBJECTS DURING 1916-17. District By that part of Imperial grant of of local rate which has been specially set apart by the Local Government for Veterinary object. Receipts from fees for medicines, etc. Fees at horse fairs. Fees at cattle fairs. GOVERNMENT GRANT FOR PRIZES. Total receipt of local bodies Ear- marked and available for Ve- terinary expenditure. EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES. Amount by which column 12 ex- ceeds column 8, i. e., out of - pocket extenditure by local bodies on Veterinary objects. Horse fair. Cattle fair. By contribution to Provin- cial Funds for pay of Veterinary Assistants. By contribution to other local bodies. By direct payment. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar XV TABLE XVI. RETURN OF ANIMALS ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1916-17. Detail. Herd Bulls. Supernumerary bulls. Cows. Mule produce. Female produce. Castrated produce. Orduance bullocks. Cultivation bullocks. Mules. Pony mares for mule breeding. Pony stallion. Camels. Donkey Stallion. Donkey colts. Donkey mares. Donkey fillies. Rams. Ewes. Mule lambs. Female lambs. Female goats. Female kids. Male goats and kids. Bony fillies. Arab pony fillies. Total. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 Balance on 1st April 1916 36 ... 1,496 1,389 1,090 138 ... 283 113 83 1 7 6 95 87 65 9 492 259 28 20 *16 14 3 ... 5,878 Increase By birth ... ... ... ... 122 108 ... ... ... 38 ... ... ... ... 19 ... 35 ... ... 218 280 ... 17 25 ... ... 843 By purchase ... ... ... ... 9 ... ... ... 38 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 51 Presented by Colonel H. T Pease, C.I.E. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 By transfer ... 2 200 175 ... ... 221 105 53 ... 3 ... ... 2 ... 8 ... 1 135 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 918 Total ... 38 200 1,671 1,420 1,198 362 105 374 151 87 2 7 8 114 105 100 10 627 607 496 21 33 39 3 3 7,690 Decrease Died ... 2 ... 48 54 88 4 ... 7 1 1 ... ... 1 2 1 3 3 47 43 39 2 6 3 ... ... 355 Destroyed ... ... ... 8 3 2 ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 Sold ... 3 200 77 21 231 20 66 *14 37 1 1 ... 1 21 3 15 ... 44 124 05 ... 7 17 ... ... 977 Transferred ... 1 ... ... 398 175 100 39 46 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 8 ... ... 1 136 ... 1 ... 3 ... 918 Total ... 6 200 133 476 496 133 105 67 40 3 1 ... 2 25 4 26 3 91 169 239 2 14 20 3 ... 2,267 Balance on 31st March 1917. 32 ... 1,538 944 702 220 ... 307 111 84 1 7 xvi TABLE XVI-A. DETAIL OF SHEEP ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1916-17. Detail. RAMS. EWES. MALE LAMBS. FEMALE LAMBS. Total. REMARKS. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Marino. Total. ½ bred merino. ¼ bred merino. 1/9 bred marino. ¾ bred merino. ½ bred merino. ¼ bred merino. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Balance on 1st April 1916 ... ... ... 1 8 9 89 275 117 11 492 7 50 198 4 259 7 55 203 1 266 1,026 Increase ... By birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46 201 1 248 ... 45 182 3 230 478 By transfer ... ... ... 1 1 7 29 98 1 135 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 136 By transfer from merino. ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Total ... 1 9 10 96 305 215 12 628 7 96 400 5 508 7 100 385 4 496 1,642 Decrease ... Died ... ... ... ... 3 3 3 30 13 1 47 ... 11 31 1 43 ... 5 33 1 39 132 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Sold by auction ... ... ... ... ... 13 26 5 ... 44 4 31 48 ... 83 ... 16 49 ... 65 192 Sold for breeding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 1 37 ... 41 ... ... ... ... ... 41 Transferred ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 7 29 98 1 135 136 Transferred to cross bred. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Total ... ... ... 3 3 16 56 18 2 92 7 43 117 3 170 7 50 180 2 239 504 Balance on 31st March 1917 ... ... 1 6 7 80 249 197 10 538 ... 53 283 2 838 ... 50 205 2 257 1,138 Value Rs. ... ... ... ... 15 615 630 2,116 238 2,954 ... 149 2,495 250 2,894 498 20 513 6,391
xvii TABLE XVII. HISSAR FARM. RESULTS OF DONKEY AND MULE BREEDING ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM IN THE YEAR 1916-17. Stallions on register at close of year. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. RESULTS OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERINGS. AVERAGE RESULT OF PREVIOUS YEAR'S COVERING PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Number of Produce. Number not held. Average of produce. Average of not held. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Donkey Breeding ... *7 7 8 97 92 13.85 11.5 54 38 6.75 4.75 Mule Breeding ... *7 8 8 85 87 10.62 10.87 xviii TABLE XVIII. ABSTRACT SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF THE HISSAR FARM, DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1916-17. Receipts paid into Treasury. Rs. A. P. Sale of animals (a) ... ... ... 1,12,622 0 0 Sale of garden produce ... ... ... 158 0 0 Other heads ... ... ... 13,073 3 7 Total ... 1,24,853 3 7 Expenditure. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers ... 15,697 8 5 Ditto ditto of subordinate staff ... 38,580 6 9 Cultivation expenses ... ... ... 24,254 0 2 Feed of animals, including reserve fodder ... ... 54,227 13 9 Purchase of animals (b) ... ... ... 7,108 0 0 Other Heads (c) ... ... ... ... 15,080 0 6 Total ... 1,54,947 13 7 Valuation of animals issued on book credit. Siege Train Bullocks ... ... ... 16,000 0 0 Mules and donkeys ... ... ... 25,050 0 0 Bulls and other animals (d) ... ... ... 6,875 0 0 Total ... 47,925 0 0 Valuation of animals, grain and fodder, etc., on hand at end of year. Valuation of animals, as per Table XVI attached ... 5,24,682 0 0 Do. of grain ... ... ... 6,473 9 6 Do. of fodder ... ... ... 67,007 10 4 Do. of machinery and dead stock articles, etc. ... 65,501 0 8 Total ... 6,63,664 4 6 (a) Includes valuation of animals issued on book credit. (b) Includes price of 3 Arab pony fillies purchased from the Army Remount Department, and adjusted by Book Debit. (c) Includes items adjusted by book debit system on account of foreign stores, etc., as intimated by the Accountant-General, Punjab. (d) Includes price of animals supplied to Mauritius Government. NOTES.ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1917-18. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1918. Price 0-10-0 or 10d.
Annual Report on the Punjab Veterinary College, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, and the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, for 1917-18.
Revised List of Agents for the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C., and 25, Museum Street, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornbill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. W THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. WILLIAM WESLEY & SON, 28, Essex Street, Strand, London. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. Manager, Imperial Book Depôt, Delhi GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. Manager, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. Honorary Secretary, Punjab Religious Book Society, Anarkali, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, RANGOON.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1917-18. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1918.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 15 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. 1 NOTE ON VETERINARY PROGRESS IN THE PUNJAB BY THE DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE. 1 2 3 4 5 REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE THE YEAR 1917-18. 1 Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Admissions ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 3 Post-Graduate Course ... ... ... ... 3 4 Examination results ... ... ... ... ... ib. 5 Other classes ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 6 Hospital ii Para. Subject Page. Sheep and Goats. 21 Gillar iii Para. Subject. Page. Contagious diseasesNo. 5828-S. (Rev. & Agri.2 account of a decrease in deaths from rinderpest, but the deaths due to foot and mouth disease and to blackquarter were more than double those recorded in 1916-17. 5. The number of veterinary hospitals in the province increased by five and is now 127. The increasing value and popularity of these institutions will appear from the fact that the total number of animals treated during the year was over 360,000 against an average of 146,000 in the quinquennium ending in 1910 and only 30,000 in the quinquennium ending in 1905. The construction of a veterinary hospital is an appropriate object of private muni- ficence and Sir Michael O'Dwyer commends for emulation by other public spirited gentlemen the example of Lala Lachhmi Narayan who has built a new hospital at Beri and that of the progressive inhabitants of Adampur who are themselves building a hospital for their village. 6. The department is steadily working for the improvement of cattle breeding and there are now 1,087 stud bulls at work in the province, an increase of nearly 10 per cent. on the figures for last year. The majority of additions during the year were Hissari bulls, the popularity of the Dhanni bull being more or less restricted to the districts nearest to its home. 7. The Hissar cattle farm suffered seriously from the excessive monsoon rains of 1917 and the consequent severe visitations of blackquarter, foot and mouth disease, hæmorrhagic septicæmia and rinderpest. Surra made its first appearance in the farm and is suspected to have spread from some of the camels of the 2nd Government CamelCorps. The Lieutenant-Governor concurs in the commendation bestowed by the Chief Superintendent on Mr. Rranford for his management of the farm. The farm showed a profit of Rs. 43,181 on the year. This marked improvement was due to a large number of births during the year and to the marketing of animals and of fodder at a higher rate. The improve- ment would no doubt have been even greater but for the loss caused by the unprecedented sickness. Among the most noteworthy features of the year's working should be mentioned the disposal of 100 cows at Rs. 300 each to a representative of the Brazilian Government, the distribution of 206 bulls to Punjab District Boards, a higher number than in any previous year, and the realization of Rs. 3,123 for wool, the quality of which drew special commenda- tion from the Cawnpore Woollen Mills, Ltd. The substantial addition which has been made to the fodder reserve is also satisfactory especially in view of the present year's shortage. 8. Colonel Farmer, C.I.E., has administered the department through- out the year with his usual vigour and ability. The Veterinary Department has made remarkable progress year by year under his efficient and sympathetic control. The Lieutenant-Governor desires to acknowledge the excellent work done by him and the other officers of the department in spite of the extra burden of work which has been thrown upon them by the shortage of staff and by the prevalence of an unusual amount of sickness throughout the year. H. D. CRAIK, Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab. 1544 CS-322-5-10-18Note on Veterinary Progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture. 1. The Veterinary College remained understaffed as before, but despite the extra work entailed Colonel Pease and his staff maintained the high standard which is associated with the name of the College. Indeed judged by educa- tional results the standard was still further advanced, and the percentage of passes in every class is most satisfactory. It was, owing to the war, impossible to hold the post-graduate class. Admissions were well maintained, the educa- tional qualifications of the new students being practically identical with those of the previous year. One student of the 4th year class, Kashmira Singh, was allowed to go on recruiting work, and earned the reward of a quota of 150 recruits by receiving a Commission in the Army. In hospital work the number of equines was practically identical with that of the previous year, while bovine patients showed a slight increase. The dog hospital continues very popular. 2. The question of the Aitchison Ganj branch hospital has not yet been forwarded to Government but the municipal committee has expressed its assent to the proposals made. The scheme for laying out the playgrounds has not yet been returned by the Public Works Department. 3. The Civil Veterinary Department like the College has worked short- handed and has necessarily had to devote less attention than could be desired to some branches of the work, but the energy of neither Colonel Farmer nor his officers has flagged. The incumbents of the three posts of Chief Superintend- ent, and Superintendents have averaged 162 days in camp and travelled over eight thousand miles by rail and fifteen hundred each by road, while the assist- ance rendered to the Army Remount Department in the control of contagious equine diseases and attendance at cattle fairs has added to their responsibilities. A high rate of animal mortality has persisted which was no doubt largely due to the abnormal autumn rains of 1917, and Colonel Farmer thinks, as he did last year, that the recorded figures include by no means all the actual casualties from surra. Conferences on this important question have been lately held at Amritsar and Simla and the question of preventive measures, including the compulsory notification of the disease among camels and the payment of com- pensation for animals destroyed is now under consideration. In connection with dourine, which is believed to be so widely spread that the Act has now been applied to the whole province, Colonel Farmer suggests that the time has come for the registration of all privately-owned stallions, but even if adequate steps could be adopted for their control the effect of the measure would be far from complete owing to the usual practice of leaving entire horses which are not kept for stud purposes. 4. Lala Lachmi Narain of Beri is to be congratulated on his public spirit in presenting a veterinary hospital to his town; the further increase of 8 per cent. in the number of animals treated in such hospitals during the year is a sure sign of the steady growth of appreciation of the services of the depart- ment. There was a further increase of 94 stud bulls in the districts during the year. The Civil Veterinary Department has again deserved well of the province. 5. The Hissar Cattle Farm had a year of unprecedented sickness owing to the heavy rains, while the material damage done to the barracks etc., by the phenomenal falls in September and October, very much handicapped opera- tions. Surra too made its first appearance in Hissar, imported probably by the corps camels stationed there. Mr. Branford however, with the able assistance of Captain Morris and the staff, surmounted those natural diffi- culties and is able to show a successful year's working. The auditor's report (the delay of which has postponed the submission of my review) shows a very satisfactory result, as the profit of the year despite its calamities amounted to Rs. 43,181 against a loss last year of Rs. 18,904. Separate action is being taken in regard to the auditor's objections. A substantial addition has been made to the fodder reserve. The Brazilian Government bought 100 head of cattle for Rs. 30,000, as much as Rs. 400 being paid for one cow. The Arab paddock now shows the first foal2 Report on the Punjab Veterinary College for the year 1917-18 BY COLONEL H. T. PEASE, C.I.E., PRINCIPAL. Staff. 1. I remained in charge of the College during the year, and in addition to my own work carried out the duties of Professor of Sanitary Science. Mr. W. Taylor was Professor of Pathology and Parasitology and remained in charge of the out-patient and small animals clinics. Mr. E. Burke, I.S.O., was Pro- fessor of Surgery and in charge of the Horse Hospital. Khan Bahadur S. Mahtab Shah, Gilani, was Professor of Anatomy and Physiology. Khan Sahib Syed Sardar Shah was Professor of Bovine Pathology and in charge of the Cattle Hospital. Ghulam Rasul Khan, who was appointed to officiate for Khan Sahib Ghulam Hussain Khan, on furlough pending retirement, was House Surgeon and Professor of Materia Medica and Pharmacy. The following posts have remained unfilled owing to lack of suitable candidates:3 Of the 26 Punjabi Civilians, for the 4 years' course, 6 were Entrance passed and 5 Entrance failed, all the rest had certificates of the 4th high class or Anglo-Vernacular Middle School examination. All military students are admitted under paragraphs 68 et seq. of Army Regulations, India, Volume VIII. Post-Graduate Course. 3. Owing to the War and to the absence of the Post-Graduate Professor on military service, the Post-Graduate Class was held in abeyance. Examination results. 4. In the first year class of the 4 years' course 28 were examined and 24 passed, an average of 85.71 per cent. Two failed in one subject only and, having obtained 50 per cent. of marks, are eligible for examination in June next. All the 4 who failed were transferred to the 3 years' course as unfit for the higher training. In the first year class for the 3 years' course 51 students appeared and 40 passed, average 78.43 per cent. Eight failed in one subject only and will be examined again in June. Of the 3 remaining 1 military student having failed twice and 1 failing badly, were struck off and 1 was remanded for another year. In the second year class of the 4 years' course 29 appeared, 1 being unable to appear on account of sickness. Of these 25 passed, an average of 86.2 per cent. Three men having failed twice were struck off and 1 was remanded to 3 years' course. In the second year class of the 3 years' course, 42 appeared, 1 being absent on account of sickness. Of these 35 passed, an average of 83.3 per cent. One man failed in one subject only and will be re-examined in June. One having failed twice was struck off and 5 were remanded for another year. In the 3rd year class of the 4 years' course, 19 candidates were examined and 18 passed, average 94.73 per cent. The student who failed was transferred to the 3 years' course. The Final year class of the 3 years' course consisted of 45 students who all appeared before the Board of Examiners. Of these 36 passed and obtained the Diploma, average 80 per cent. Five failed in one subject only, obtained over 50 per cent. aggregate and will be re-examined by the President of the Board in June next. At the examination held in June 1917, 1 student who had failed to pass the final examination in April 1917 was examined again, but failed to satisfy the President of the Board and was remanded for another year. Of the 4 students of the second year class (3 years' course) who were examined, 3 passed and were promoted to the next higher class, and 1 having failed twice was remanded to his regiment. In this class 2 students of the 4 years' course were examined and passed and were consequently promoted to the 3rd year class of 4 years' course. Of the 8 students of the first year class, in 3 years' course, who were examined, 7 passed and were promoted. One failed and was remanded. In this class 2 students of the 4 years' course were also examined and passed. I consider that the results of the examinations are very satisfactory. Other classes. 5. Fourteen dressers were trained during the vacation. Fifty-four military men were trained as nalbands during the year. Hospital. 6. The practice in the horse hospital was normal, 1,157 equine in- door patients being treated against 1,160 and 1,425 out-door against 1,428 last year. There was an increase in the number of cattle in-door patients, 160 against 87 last year. Cattle out-door patients numbered 1,021 against 1,018 last year.
4 In the small animals' hospital there was an increase in the canine patients of which there were 470 in-patients against 356 last year. There has been a falling off in the number of out-door patients5 Much greater use is now being made of the laboratories for the training of 3 years' course students. The practical training in the use of the mi- croscope, the examination of fresh and stained specimens from common con- tagious disease, etc., as well as in the preparation of smears and the collection of material for examination is now carried out. There is likewise a class in Practical Histology for the second years' class and a course in Elementary Pathology for the Final year's class of the 4 years' course. Museum. 11. The museum has been placed in the charge of Karam Ellahi, Assistant Professor in the Post-Graduate Course. Much work has been done in it during the year. My best thanks are due to those officers who have sent specimens, especially to the officers of the Army Remount Department who have so kindly sent us the mouths of old horses of known age. General results. 12. The general results of the year's working may be considered to be very good. The standard of education is gradual- ly rising. The percentage of passes is higher than usual. The income has increased and the practice been maintained. As results of the improvement of the graduates turned out it is satisfac- tory to note that increased pay and improved prospects are now offered in the Army Remount Department and the Army Transport Department and that a subordinate Indian Veterinary Department has been sanctioned for the Army. Pay has also been increased in the Civil Veterinary Department of some pro- vinces. Punjab has not moved in this direction. Increased pay and prospects should have the effect of inducing better men to come forward for training. New Hostel. 13. The scheme for the new hostel is still hung up for want of funds and the present is not a time to undertake the work. The provision of a play-ground for our students is, however, another matter and some progress has been made in the scheme for providing it. The question of sufficient healthy exercise for our students is an important one and they should, I think, be provided with a play-ground as soon as possible. The year has been an unhealthy one, fever and dysentery being rife among the students. The medical officer in charge of the hostel carried out his duties in a very satisfactory manner. Punjab Veterinary Associotion. 14. The association has again had a successful year and is in a flourish- ing condition. The Journal has been con- siderably improved and is a very valuable contri- bution to the vernacular veterinary literature of the country. It is much appreciated and has a considerable sale. Much credit is due to the Editor, Haq Nawaz Khan, and the Secretary of the Society, Ghulam Rasul Khan, who have worked hard and gratuitously in the interests of the association. General. 15. The whole of the staff have as usual worked remarkably well and loyally and the results achieved are due chiefly to the assistance they have rendered. Mr. Taylor has done excellent work and is a very promising officer of good scientific attainment and sound common sense. Mr. E. Burke, I.S.O., has again, I am glad to say, been granted an extension of service. The quality of the services he has rendered are well known to Government and have been recognized by them. The Indian Professors have worked well and the Assistant Professors are keen, hard working, are making excellent progress and promise to make valuable teachers. The work of improving the text- books has been continued and the Translator, Lala Prabhu Lal, has been kept hard at work. To the whole of the staff my best thanks are due for their loyal service and cordial co-operation in the work.
6 Report on the Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, for the year 1917-18 By COLONEL J. FARMER, C.I.E., CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I.7 Part II.8 Anti-rinderpest inoculations9 II10 The following additions and casualties took place during the year :11 The remaining fairs and shows were either attended by the Veterinary Inspectors of the Department or abandoned on account of scarcity of fodder and prevalence of contagious diseases. To prevent the spread of contagious diseases at fairs every animal is examined by this Department before entering the fair ground. At the Amritsar Dewali Horse Fair 18 cases of Equine Surra were detected and sent to the lazeretto where they were detained and, after persuasion, eventually were destroyed, This Department did all this work for the Army Remount Department. Part IV.12 I inspected the farm three times during the year, and also supervised the selection of bulls for the districts and selected young male stock to be put aside for bulls to be issued to District Boards during the coming year. After his 18 years' experience of the farm the Chief Superintendent considers that Mr. Branford deserves great credit for his management of the Farm. B.13 (b) Equine contagious abortion14 Towards the close of the year, numerous black buck in the Bir died of the disease, the prominent symptoms of which were wasting and diarrh15 The following were sold16 August up to the end of November, but were so worried by flie that they put on no condition. Girth measurements of the majority in the autumn were the same or less than they had been in the spring. Cattle as regards condition did not suffer so much from flies. One donkey mare and one donkey filly were sold to Java. Sheep17 15,223 maunds (lbs. 1,252,636) of hay, valued at Rs. 14,126, and 261 maunds (lbs. 21,476) of green grass, valued at Rs. 87, were received from the Bir. Small areas sown in the autumn with rhodes grass (chloris guyana) and birseem (trifolium alexandrinum) were completely washed out by floods. The jowar fodder crop was very poor except at Chaoni, in all other blocks it was much damaged by the borer worm and floods, and most of the late sown jowar was entirely destroyed on germination by grass-hoppers and crickets. The oats harvested in 1917 were good. The crop sown in 1917 is the lightest on the farm for several years. This is probably due to insufficient pre- paration of the land. Several hundred acres were well ploughed in August, but practically no cultivation could be done in September owing to floods. During that month land already ploughed grew up into a jungle and no more could be got ready. The sowing season found the farm with no land ready to sow. A further deluge on October 25th and 26th again put work back, and damaged all and destroyed part of the crop already sown. In addition, from the rains to the end of the year, as already explained labour was more expensive and difficult to obtain than ever before, and the per- manent cultivation staff of ploughmen was 25 per cent. to 30 per cent. under full strength. 9. Veterinary Hospital.TABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab Veterinary College ... i II Statement showing the number of deaths from cantagious diseases amongst animals ... ... ... ... ... ii III Statement showing results of preventive inoculation ... ... iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour ... ... ... ... v V Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated at veteri- nary hospitals and dispensaries ... ... ... ... vi VII Statement showing the total strength of subordinate veterinary staff employed vii VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ... ib. X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... viii XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ... ... ... ix XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ib. XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non- selected districts ... ... ... ... ... ... x XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows xi XIV-A Statement showing cost of the Civil Veterinary Department ... xii VI-A Expenditure by local bodies ... ... ... ... xiii XVI Return of animals on the Hissar Cattle Farm ... ... ... xiv XVI-A Return of sheep on the Hissar Cattle Farm ... ... xv XVII Results of donkey and mule breeding on the Hissar Farm ... ... xvi XVIII Abstract showing main results of the working of the Hissar Farm ... xvii
TABLE I. STATEMENT SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1917-18. Name of the institution. Name of course of instructions if more than one followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. STUDENTS ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR CLASSED BY EDUCATIONAL QUALI- FICATIONS. RECEIPTS FROM EXPENDITURE ON EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURING THREE YEARS PRECEDING. REMARKS. Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year (April 1918). Failed to pass the final examination. Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of the year. Scholarship-holders. Military students and others. In ordinary course. Instruactions prolonged by reason of failure. Matriculated or with higher qualification. Kuowing some English but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English. Fees. Other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff. Other expenses. Total. Number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of State bodies or institutions. In private practice. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 5 8 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Punjab Veteri- nary College. 3 years' Course 15 36 36 9* 86 16 2 21 28 13,688 8,569ii TABLE II. SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1917-18. DISTRICT. EQUINES. BOVINES. OTHERS. REMARKS. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and Mouth Disease. Hæmorrhagic sep- ticæmia. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and Mouth. Gillar. Anthrax. Surra. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Other diseases. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,203 6 409 197 ... ... 1,815 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 681 13 394 15 ... ... 1,103 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gorgaoa ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,127 40 528 38 ... 20 1,753 35 ... 33 ... ... ... ... 68 Karnal ... ... ... ... 125 ... ... 125 1,029 91 539 ... ... ... 1,659 30 2 ... ... ... ... ... 82 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 327 102 389 11 ... ... 829 30 ... 59 ... ... ... ... 89 Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 10 ... ... ... ... 37 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 119 81 267 ... ... 2 469 ... 17 ... ... ... 5 353 375 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 4 164 113 1,257 7 ... ... 1,541 ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 8 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112 82 ... ... ... 194 ... 2 ... ... ... 6 ... 8 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 8 253 11 ... ... 293 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... ... ... ... 202 ... ... 202 241 51 319 293 ... ... 904 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Lahore ... ... 4 ... 2 ... ... 6 413 42 446 ... ... 12 913 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... ... 2 ... 144 ... ... 146 192 46 938 ... ... 12 1,188 ... ... ... ... 31 2 12 45 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 8 295 82 430 ... ... ... 807 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98 44 724 ... ... 3 869 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 120 ... ... 120 222 57 705 ... ... 136 1,120 ... ... 27 ... 12 ... 27 66 Gujrat ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... 4 691 4 1,571 5 ... 38 2,809 4 ... ... ... 7 4 86 51 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 87 ... ... 37 30 69 1,095 190 ... 7 1,391 ... ... ... ... 28 ... 542 670 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 40 265 555 ... ... 868 ... 9 ... ... ... ... 164 173 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 62 103 146 ... 29 363 ... 11 ... ... ... ... 68 79 Attock ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85 71 248 913 ... ... 1,817 ... 120 ... ... ... ... 73 193 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 368 ... 221 24 ... 50 663 ... 78 ... ... ... ... 298 371 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 16 ... ... 16 58 ... 25 ... ... ... 83 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... ... ... ... 19 ... ... 19 89 68 1,530 81 ... ... 1,763 2 7 10 ... ... ... ... 19 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45 59 124 61 ... ... 289 ... ... 125 ... ... ... ... 125 Multan ... ... ... ... 440 ... ... 440 547 10 223 25 ... ... 805 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mazaffargarh ... ... ... ... 247 ... ... 247 292 19 829 33 ... ... 673 ... ... 36 14 ... ... ... 50 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100 ... 81 4 ... ... 135 ... ... 232 ... ... ... ... 232 Total ... 6 1 1,862 ... ... 1,869 8,495 1,295 13,445 2,609 ... 309 26,153 101 246 522 14 79 19 1,582 2,563 Government Cattle Farm, Hissar ... ... ... 3 ... 3 6 73 11 68 45 ... 18 215 ... 19 ... ... ... ... ... 19
iii TABLE III. SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1917-18. District. Name of disease against which inocu- lation was carried out Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inocu- lation was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNIN- OCULATED IN COURSE OF OUTBREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest Serum alone. 53 ... 1,113 ... ... 7,906 ... ... 6 ... Rohtak ... 31 ... 670 ... ... 5,860 ... ... 2 ... Gurgaon ... 32 ... 477 ... ... 6,837 ... ... 3 ... Karnal ... 24 ... 734 ... ... 4,330 ... ... 6 ... Simla ... 1 ... 27 ... ... 207 ... ... 7 ... Ambala ... 10 ... 313 ... ... 1,973 ... ... 1 ... Ludhiana ... 2 ... 20 ... ... 220 ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 16 ... 180 ... ... 4,039 ... ... ... ... Montgomery ... 3 ... 46 ... ... 630 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 54 ... 497 ... ... 16.635 ... ... 6 ... Muzaffargarh .. 21 ... 135 ... ... 3,180 ... ... ... ... Dera Ghazi Khan 1 ... 2 ... ... 24 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 1 ... 3 ... ... 224 ... ... ... ... Jhang ... 2 ... 4 ... ... 516 ... ... ... ... Attock ... 5 ... 73 ... ... 912 ... ... 1 ... Rawalpindi ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 191 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 11 ... 155 ... ... 2,630 ... ... ... ... Gujrat ... 6 ... 127 ... ... 756 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 14 .. 120 ... ... 629 ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 11 ... 131 ... ... 1,206 ... ... 11 ... Gujranwala ... 6 ... 45 ... ... 923 ... ... 2 ... Lahore ... 14 ... 199 ... ... 3,239 ... ... 6 ... Amritsar ... 11 ... 317 ... .. 1,299 ... ... 1 ... Gurdaspur ... 7 ... 31 ... ... 1,883 ... 1 ... Sialkot ... 1 ... 10 ... ... 50 ... ... ... ... Total ... 338 ... 5,461 ... ... 66,199 ... ... 53 ... Government Cattle Farm, Hissar. 6 ... 50 ... ... 4,286 ... ... 23 ... Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Vil- lages. Hissar ... Vaccianation. 5 ... ... ... ... 663 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 6 ... ... ... ... 2,207 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 8 ... ... ... ... 1,110 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... 11 ... ... ... ... 2,223 ... ... ... ... Ludhiana ... 4 ... ... ... ... 762 ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... 18 ... ... ... ... 3,360 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 11 ... ... ... ... 4,037 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 8 ... ... ... ... 3,655 ... ... ... ... Dera Ghazi Khan 2 ... ... ... ... 1,000 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 5 ... ... ... ... 1,331 ... ... ... ... Jhang ... 2 ... ... ... ... 450 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 7 ... ... ... ... 1,561 ... ... ... ... Rawalpindi ... 7 ... ... ... ... 1.400 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 14 ... ... ... ... 1,061 ... ... ... ... Lahore ... 8 ... ... ... ... 1,881 ... ... ... ... Gujranwala ... 6 ... ... ... ... 2,762 ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 3 ... ... ... ... 399 ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... 5 ... ... ... ... 618 ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... 14 ... ... ... ... 3,353 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... 139 ... ... ... ... 33,771 ... ... ... ...
iv TABLE IIIv TABLE IV. SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1917-13. District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veteri- nary Assistances employed. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ... ... ... ... 945 6 60 1,644 765 2,469 7 2,319 202 2,528 208 2,241 662 3,111 8,108 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 442 5 23 1,712 86 1,821 6 1,038 14 1,058 90 1,175 163 1,428 4,307 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 895 6 17 1,530 62 1,609 2 3,940 106 4,048 90 2,130 26 2,245 7,902 Karnal ... ... ... ... 509 4 63 1,344 3 1,410 25 1,732 18 1,776 73 928 12 1,013 4,198 Ambala ... ... ... ... 579 5 135 3,267 10 3,412 5 1,973 69 2,047 166 969 30 1,165 6,624 Simla ... ... ... ... 165 3 ... 2 ... 2 ... 928 2 930 45 308 19 372 1,304 Kangra ... ... ... ... 748 7 8 27 3 38 81 15,268 557 15,901 145 2,468 363 2,976 18,915 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 663 4 13 448 38 499 6 2,942 126 3,073 240 893 68 1,201 4,773 Jullundar ... ... ... ... 566 5 6 267 1 274 58 4,683 4 4,745 118 512 9 639 5,658 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 323 4 6 1,699 42 1,747 7 1,587 3 1,597 72 364 11 447 8,791 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... 736 7 118 3,297 126 3,541 46 6,350 57 6,453 289 1,381 34 1,704 11,698 Lahore ... ... ... ... 417 5 23 570 ... 593 17 2,598 ... 2,615 72 188 28 298 3,506 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 493 6 8 660 12 680 9 1,842 37 1,888 143 962 252 1,357 3,925 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 364 7 22 220 6 248 20 1,8 9 3 1,842 102 668 8 778 2,868 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 348 5 5 133 1 139 2 1,299 1 1,302 173 513 37 723 2,164 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 414 6 16 319 25 360 6 2,135 36 2,177 74 250 25 349 2,886 Gujrat ... ... ... ... 645 1 11 2,288 ... 2,299 ... 849 ... 849 169 3 7 62 578 3,726 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 4 3 1 12 1,653 ... 1,665 1 4,584 51 4,636 154 222 46 422 6,723 Jhelum ... ... ... ... 422 1 6 688 ... 694 1 2,534 231 2,766 109 104 44 257 3,717 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... 587 1 8 1,207 ... 1,215 3 4,143 198 4,844 63 398 57 518 6,077 Attock ... ... ... ... 466 1 1 1,208 ... 1,209 9 2,481 690 3,180 95 185 73 353 4,742 Mianwali ... ... ... ... 210 ... 55 1,549 18 1.622 ... 1,947 913 2,860 71 164 127 362 4,844 Montgomery ... ... ... 351 4 77 1,295 69 1,441 7 1,367 125 1,499 97 177 31 305 3,245 Lyallpur ... ... ... ... 617 5 25 2,030 89 2,144 16 2,548 4 2,568 279 1,166 58 1,503 6,215 Jhang ... ... ... ... 517 3 9 3,104 15 3,128 ... 3,283 39 3,122 165 410 43 618 7,068 Multan ... ... ... ... 497 5 16 2,511 108 2,635 14 1,299 167 l,4 0 236 479 75 790 4,905 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... 492 5 53 1,958 86 2,097 17 2,350 506 2,873 174 799 235 1,208 6,178 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... 325 4 61 2,363 80 2,504 1 1,275 43 1,319 290 384 109 783 4,606 Total 14,139 116 857 38,993 1,645 41,495 365 81,108 4,202 85,675 4,002 20,785 2,716 27,503 154,673
vi TABLE V. SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR 1917-18. District. Number of Ve- terinary Dis- pensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants em- ployed. NUMBER OF IN-PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. NUMBER OF OUT-PATIENTS TREATED DURIMG THE YEAR. Grant total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases supplied with medicines but not brought to Hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other ani- mals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other ani- mals. Total Equines. Bovines. Other ani- mals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... 5 5 238 420 79 737 2,574 9,923 6,325 18,822 19,559 52 936 173 1,161 390 4,117 Rohtak ... ... ... 5 5 443 673 29 1,145 3,485 8,510 1,703 13,698 14,843 ... 100 1,286 202 1,588 420 3,906 Gurgaon ... ... ... 6 6 193 849 23 565 2,840 11,248 3,501 17,589 18,134 ... 67 726 281 1,074 153 6,408 Karnal ... ... ... 4 4 814 278 1 593 2,417 5,173 1,239 8,829 9,422 ... 97 293 108 498 305 3,174 Ambala ... ... ... 5 5 408 438 24 870 4,198 11,225 2,538 17,959 18,829 ... 423 1,797 135 2,855 386 5,761 Simla ... ... ... 3 3 149 17 304 470 312 400 751 1,463 1,933 ... 5 2 5 12 7,439 8,271 Kangra ... ... ... 6 6 120 34 2 156 2,669 25,728 4,274 32,671 32,827 ... 27 11 5 43 309 3,726 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 4 4 293 270 36 599 3,334 7,637 1,468 12,439 13,038 ... 46 395 41 483 217 4,656 Jullundur ... ... ... 5 5 368 469 34 871 4,296 10,275 2,046 16,617 17,488 36 347 60 443 542 7,968 Ludhiana ... ... ... 4 4 165 487 20 672 2,293 7,437 2,414 12,144 12,816 ... 55 1,906 209 2,170 195 2,393 Ferozpure ... ... ... 6 6 324 192 110 626 4,273 8,315 2,632 15,220 15,846 ... 199 1,487 64 1,700 2,401 4,915 Lahore ... ... ... 4 4 385 174 4 563 4,040 4,603 1,032 9,675 10,238 ... 79 373 5 457 1,463 8,205 Amritsar ... ... ... 6 6 485 243 98 826 5,847 7,612 1,905 15,364 16,190 ... 86 393 9 488 1,078 6,365 Gurdaspur ... ... ... 7 7 780 279 38 1,097 8,356 6,777 1,427 16,560 17,657 ... 57 154 8 219 825 4,742 Sialkot ... ... ... 5 5 315 111 13 439 6,787 12,377 2,480 21,594 22,033 ... 29 136 4 169 247 8,349 Gujranwala ... ... ... 5 5 544 117 25 686 5,613 6,071 1,619 13,803 13,989 ... 54 293 19 366 787 10,283 Gujrat ... ... ... 3 3 139 52 9 200 3,848 4,499 1,070 9,417 9,617 ... 65 486 4 566 286 2,006 Shahpur ... ... ... 4 4 151 47 8 206 3,118 2,669 1,251 7,038 7,244 ... 60 151 17 228 78 19,163 Jhelum ... ... ... 3 3 142 46 14 202 2,955 3,279 1,251 7,485 7,687 ... 17 158 ... 175 284 2,606 Rawalpindi ... ... ... 4 4 290 203 85 578 4,042 3,675 1,316 9,033 9,611 ... 212 101 2 315 350 6,137 Attock ... ... ... 4 4 65 44 10 119 2,414 3,281 1,532 7,227 7,346 ... 10 167 ... 177 46 3,471 Mianwali ... ... ... 3 3 167 44 17 228 1,695 2,354 947 4,996 6,224 ... 41 109 7 157 177 2488 Montgomery ... ... ... 4 4 361 72 22 455 3,955 3,365 1,714 9,034 9,489 ... 118 326 44 488 413 8,768 Lyallpur ... ... ... 5 5 267 308 34 609 4,118 6,306 1,631 12,055 12,614 ... 49 502 6 527 651 6,035 Jhang ... ... ... 8 3 168 58 10 236 2,359 2,263 950 5,572 5,808 ... 5 98 8 106 116 8,959 Multan ... ... ... 5 5 294 173 43 510 3,658 3,582 2,930 10,170 10,680 ... 38 214 18 265 423 8,768 Muzzafargarh ... ... ... 5 5 258 120 12 890 3,757 4,074 3,102 10,933 11,323 ... 76 174 12 262 181 4,084 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... 4 4 155 35 7 197 4,975 2,945 1,897 9,817 10,014 ... 127 149 34 310 246 9,514 Total ... 127 127 7,981 5,733 1,111 14,845 104,226 185,608 56,895 316,724 351,063 ... 2,195 13,130 1,470 16,795 20,393 1,43,854 Government Cattle Farm, Hissar ... 1 2 199 669 175 1,043 182 260 183 680 1,678 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
vii TABLE VII. SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1917-18. Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate Staff not included in previous columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. Punjab ... In Schools and Colleges ... ... ... ... In Dispensaries ... ... ... 120 ... On other work ... ... 18 *70 ... *16 on itinerating duty. 4 attached to offices. 8 Government Cattle Farm, Hissar. 1 Inspection Post, Kohala. 8 Reserve. 44 vacancies. (87 deputed to Military Department and 7 vacancies). Total ... 18 190 ... TABLE VIII. RETURN OF STUD BULLS FOR THE YEAR 1917-18. DISTRICT. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BODIES. REMARKS. Number on 1st April 1917. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March 1918. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Hissar ... ... 98 20 200 14 104 Rohtak ... ... 18 2 200 8 17 Gurgaon ... ... 44 4 200 6 42 Karnal ... ... 49 12 200 3 58 Ambala ... ... 51 10 200 4 67 Simla ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Kangra ... ... 22 ... ... 2 20 Hoshiarpur ... ... 55 12 200 8 59 Jullundur ... ... (a) 64 15 200 11 68 (a) Include 4 bulls, that had gone astray last year. Ludhiana ... ... 86 10 200 3 43 Ferozepore ... ... 76 19 200 4 91 Lahore ... ... 24 (b) 16 200 20 20 (b) 15 from Hissar and 1 from Amritsar. Amritsar ... ... 51 ... ... 4 47 Gurdaspur ... ... 60 9 200 6 63 Sialkot ... ... 37 8 200 4 41 Gujranwala ... ... 86 12 200 6 93 Gujrat ... ... (c) 26 10 200 7 29 (c) Include 3 buffalo built that were not accounted for last year. Shahpur ... ... 24 15 200 1 88 Jhelum ... ... 5 1 240 1 5 Rawalpindi ... ... 8 6 167 1 8 Attock ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 Mianwali ... ... 14 ... ... 1 13 Montgomery ... ... 41 ... ... 4 37 Lyallpur ... ... 38 10 200 5 43 Jhang ... ... 13 6 200 1 18 Multan ... ... 26 8 200 ... 34 Muzaffargarh ... ... 33 8 200 7 84 Total ... 1,000 213 ... 126 1,087
viii TABLE X. RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1917-18. DETAILS. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicilian. TOTAL. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. T. B. English. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1917 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 58 ... 4* 1 ... 63 67 ... 6 50 ... 16 4 76 Increase Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Received from Civil Veterinary Department ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 Total ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 63 ... 4 1 ... 68 72 ... 6 54 ... 16 4 80 Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... 5 6 ... 1 2 ... 2 ... 5 Sold ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Destroyod ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Transferred to Army Remount Depart- ment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 Total decrease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... 11 11 ... 1 8 ... 2 ... 11 Balance on 31st March 1918 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 52 ... 4 1 ... 57 61 ... 5 46 ... 14 4 69 TOTAL ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 52 ... 4 1 ... 57 61 ... 5 46 ... 14 4 69 * One Arab erroneously shown in this column in previous years has now been added in column 8.
ix TABLE XI. SERVICES AND PRODUCE OP EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES, DURING 1917-18. Horse, pony or donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March 1918. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOY- ED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re- port. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... Punjab ... 4 4 4 133 166 31.5 41.5 Total ... 4 4 4 138 166 34.5 41.5 Pony ... Punjab ... 57 57 62 2,784 3,237 48.84 52.2 Total ... 57 57 62 2,784 3,237 48.81 52.2 Donkey ... Punjab ... 69 71 74 3,876 3,942 54.59 53.27 Total ... 69 71 74 3,876 3,942 54 59 53.27 TABLE XII. SHOWING AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, &c., OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS DURING THE YEAR 1917-18. DISTRICT. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... 287 418 215 248 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 385 473 217 283 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 951 621 288 238 Karnal ... ... ... ... 410 355 240 216 Ambala ... ... ... ... 876 363 248 247 Kangra ... ... ... ... 319 352 236 226 Hoshiarpur ... 391 412 411 408 212 210 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 394 369 228 207 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 357 384 281 264 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 298 352 137 255 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 417 443 200 204 Mianwali ... ... 419 383 847 375 205 205 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 194 ... 97 Transferred to Army Remount Depart- ment from 1st April 1917. Muzaffargarh ... 409 401 409 401 246 228 Total ... 1,219 1,196 5,361 5,508 2,903 3,128 Average ... 406 399 412 393 223 223
X TABLE XIII. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1917-18. Name of Fair Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUM- BER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRIOR PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRIOR PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED Number of medals awarded. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Ambala ... 1 992 707 120 116 992 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 215 ... ... 600 ... 600 397 6 ... Jullandur M. C. 2 1,346 1,540 63 24 349 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 80 80 ... ... ... ... ... ... 225 ... 225 225 ... ... Gurdaspur ... 2 375 694 ... 60 375 On account of rains no judging took place and no prizes were awarded. Mianwali ... 1 400 72 117 56 400 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 181 ... 181 181 ... ... Total ... 6 3,113 3,018 300 256 2,116 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 80 80 ... ... ... 215 ... ... 1,006 ... 1,006 803 6 ...
xi TABLE XIV. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR, 1917-18. Name of fair. Number of caitle fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMAL SOLD. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually award- ed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 6 ... 43,075 784 4,833 1,026 1,554 2.739 ... 49 26 27 93 39,561 55 ... ... 132 ... 132 132 ... Rohtak ... 2 ... 23,584 1,989 ... 6,134 39 2,632 ... 51 24 4'J 90 18,983 ... ... ... 878 ... 878 798 ... Gurgaon ... 2 ... 19,366 1,472 10,143 247 33 311 ... 60 18 33 62 7,816 12 ... ... 448 ... 448 120 ... (a) Jullundur Municipal Committee. 2 1,774 2,429 1,919 4,645 19 295 ... 20 16 32 94 5,034 153 ... ... 340 ... 340 340 ... ... ... (b) (b) Ferozepore ... 8 14 7,285 4,502 14,081 11,413 3,133 4,524 ... 23 24 42 82 11,746 623 ... ... 2,818 ... 2,818 2,785 Lahore .. 1 7 133 107 289 300 7 236 ... 15 19 49 50 831 74 ... ... 411 ... 411 376 ... Amritsar Municipal Com- mittee. 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43 57 40 100 199 33,992 511 ... ... 2,594 100 2,694 1,456 ... Gurdaspur ... 2 39 1,662 2,447 1.867 5,207 ... 592 ... 22 14" 41 ... 3,940 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sialkot ... 3 18 5,359 8,069 3,206 29,302 25 2,020 ... 86 49 131 ... 19,072 329 ... ... 1,284 .. 1,234 930 ... Gujranwala ... 2 229 2,346 3,015 1,510 2,285 19 325 ... 33 23 40 103 2,829 92 ... ... 654 ... 654 373 ... Gujrat ... 1 59 182 156 121 135 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 234 ... 600 ... 600 600 1 Shahpur ... 1 92 155 87 25 154 1 125 ... 40 33 35 140 148 130 ... ... 600 ... 600 472 ... Rawalpindi ... 2 21 1,329 43 5 18 8 254 230 180 66 176 235 720 42 ... ... 400 ... 400 200 ... Attock ... 1 116 12 14 29 ... ... 29 ... 88 ... ... 7 200 ... ... 317 ... 317 234 ... Lyallpur ... 2 6 2,458 2,962 1,533 4,931 6,037 13 ... 30 27 41 71 9,677 268 ... ... 1,250 ... 1,250 1,034 2 Mianwali ... 1 108 171 52 70 12 8 23 ... 24 31 61 ... 257 257 ... ... 395 ... 395 395 ... Multan ... 3 85 601 366 586 ... 195 257 ... ... ... ... ... ... 477 ... ... 316 ... 316 316 ... Jhang ... 1 1 16 24 3 11 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67 ... ... 400 ... 400 198 ... Dora Ghazi Khan ... 1 ... 2 5 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 208 ... 208 25 ... Total ... 43 865 109,510 28,523 40,221 65,652 10,090 14,375 ... ... ... ... ... 1,44,613 3,631 ... ... 14,045 100 14,145 10,774 3 (a) Includes Rs. 706 realised in fees at horse fair (b) Includes amounts realised and prizes awarded at Jalalabad and Moga fairs.
xii TABLE XIV-A. STATEMENT SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1917-18. Major Heads. AMOUNT. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... 2,869 80,340 ... 88,209 * This head does not exist in this office books. Veterinary Instruction ... ... 3,545 96,680 3,437 1,03,662 xiii TABLE VI-A. EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES DURING 1917-18 AS SUPPLIED BY DISTRICTS. District. Stipends. HOSPITAL CHARGES. BREDDING OPERATIONS. FAIRS AND SHOWS. Grand Total of columns 2, 8, 15 and 20. Pay of compounders and menials. Cost of medicines and in- struments. Expenditure on buildings and repairs. Furniture. Contingencies. Total. Bulls. Horses and ponies. Donkeys. Horse fairs. Cattle fairs. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Total. Prizes. Contingencies. Prizes. Contingencies. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 120 1,294 1,328 1,245 150 100 4,117 4,000 248 ... 1,436 ... 362 6,546 ... ... 132 6,223 6,355 17,138 Rohtak ... ... 82 1,215 1,835 856 ... ... 3,906 400 61 ... 1,924 ... 868 3.253 ... ... 798 5,879 6,677 13,918 Gurgaon ... ... 10 1,412 1,480 3,250 68 198 6,408 907 520 1,000 4,404 ... 612 7,443 ... ... 120 669 789 14,650 Karnal ... ... 220 980 1,152 636 34 372 3,174 1,800 318 1,200 2,464 ... 1,695 7,477 ... ... ... ... ... 10,871 Ambala ... ... ... 1,393 1,527 2,601 102 133 5,761 2,000 273 ... 2,254 ... 1,169 5,696 397 1,924 ... ... 2,321 13,778 Simla District Board ... ... 315 179 183 2 250 929 ... 19 ... ... 51 26 96 ... ... ... ... ... 1,025 Simla Municipal Committee ... ... 567 260 391 ... 6,124 7,342 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7,342 Kangra ... ... 82 1,213 1,916 597 ... ... 3,726 ... 221 ... 319 ... 472 1,012 ... ... ... ... ... 4,820 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 1,280 1,114 1,844 269 149 4,656 2,198 ... ... 1,625 ... 1,699 5,522 ... ... ... ... ... 10,178 Jullundur District Board ... 384 1,738 1,524 4,706 ... ... 7,968 3,028 286 ... 1,578 ... 913 5,805 ... ... ... ... ... 14,157 Jullundur Municipal Committee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 108 73 ... ... ... ... 181 225 3,586 310 3,587 7,788 7,919 Ludhiana ... ... ... 1,370 919 ... 23 86 2,398 2,019 332 ... 1,786 ... 2,772 6,939 ... ... ... 8,546 3,546 12,903 Ferozepore ... ... ... 1,368 ... 1,320 ... 2,227 4,915 4,416 113 426 2,838 ... ... 7,793 ... ... .. 2,088 2,088 14,795 Muktsar Municipal Committee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 886 ... 729 2,107 3,722 3,722 Abohar Notified Area ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,605 ... 1,605 1,605 Lahore ... ... 88 1,214 1,021 666 ... 304 3,205 3,107 371 4,857 5,997 ... ... 14.332 ... ... 376 2,154 2,530 20,155 Amritsar District Board ... 208 1,394 1,148 292 ... 27 2,831 ... 17 1,C00 3,677 ... ... 4,694 ... ... ... ... ... 7,763 Amritsar Municipal Committee 230 1,488 688 1 409 918 3,504 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 495 ... 1,456 16,219 18,170 21,904 Gurdaspur ... ... 96 1,521 1,933 1,285 ... ... 4,742 1,817 278 ... 2,884 ... 1,196 6,175 ... 1,295 ... ... 1,295 12,308 Sialkot ... ... 120 1,235 1,453 287 109 225 3,359 1,600 2,511 ... 2,085 ... 1,202 7,398 ... ... 930 5,466 6,396 17,273 Gujranwala ... ... 210 1,952 1,414 6,637 11 269 10,283 1,544 305 400 3,612 ... ... 5,861 267 1,052 373 l,016 2,708 19,062 Gujrat ... ... 240 832 685 337 13 139 2,006 2,C00 581 ... 1,515 ... ... 4,096 170 495 600 ... 1,265 7,607 Shahpur ... ... 120 962 865 (a) 17,336 ... ... 19,163 3,118 249 1,109 4,160 1,500 668 10,795 51 1,677 472 335 2,535 32,613 Jhelum ... ... 92 902 683 583 ... 333 2,503 245 ... ... 646 ... ... 891 ... ... ... ... ... 3,489 Rawalpindi ... ... ... 859 1,675 3,663 ... ... 6,137 1,002 929 ... 2,097 ... ... 4,028 335 1,448 200 636 2,619 12,784 Attock ... ... ... 750 827 1,588 ... 306 3,471 ... 192 ... 2.394 ... 120 2,706 ... ... 234 289 523 6,700 Miauwali ... ... ... 673 583 814 11 107 2,188 230 287 500 1,461 ... 819 3,297 181 127 395 777 1,480 6,965 Montgomery ... ... ... 2,274 800 200 264 230 3,768 ... ... ... 595 ... 298 893 ... ... ... ... ... 4,661 Multan ... ... ... 812 922 1,577 193 229 3,768 1,615 327 650 5,236 ... ... 7,828 ... 32 316 32 880 11,976 Lyallpur ... ... 1,452 1,501 1,657 2,507 119 232 6,636 1,000 380 1,000 6,442 810 ... 9,632 275 1,320 1,034 5,468 8,097 25,217 Jhang ... ... ... 982 614 2,246 14 103 3,959 1,436 620 460 2,151 375 5,045 305 578 198 ... 1,081 10,085 Muzaffargarh ... ... 225 1,284 657 1,744 ... 399 4,084 1,000 66 ... 2.455 ... 1,473 5,594 ... ... (b) 227 273 500 10,403 Dera Ghazi Khan... ... 72 742 1,003 1,572 ... 197 3,514 ... ... 800 2,873 ... ... 3,673 300 1,000 25 475 1,800 9,059 Total ... 4,051 35,577 31,865 60,904 1,793 13,712 1,43,854 41,190 9,627 13,393 70,911 2,736 16,864 1,54,721 3,887 14,534 10,560 57,239 86,220 3,88,846 (a) Includes Rs. 16,680 on account of cost of improvements and repairs to horse fair ground at Sargodha. (b) This expenditure was incurred in connection with a small fair held at Kharar.
xiv TABLE XVI. RETURN OF ANIMALS ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM. FOR THE YEAR 1917-18. Detail. Herd bulls. Supernumerary bulls. Cows. Male produce. Female produce. Castrated produce. Ordnance bullocks (bul- locks for services). Cultivation bullocks. Mules. Pony mares for mule breeding. Pony stallion. Camels. Donkey stallion. Donkey colts. Donkey mares. Donkey fillies. Rams. Ewes. Male lambs. Female lambs. Female goats. Female kids. Male goats and kids. Arab pony fillies. Arab pony mares. Buffaloo male calves. Total. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 Balance on 1st April 1917 32 ... 1,538 944 702 229 ... 307 111 81 1 7 6 89 101 74 7 536 338 257 19 10 19 8 ... ... 5,423 Increase By birth ... ... ... ... 654 661 ... ... ... 41 ... ... ... ... 25 ... 35 ... ... 199 183 ... 22 17 1 ... ... 1,838 By purchase .. ... ... 1 21 6 ... ... 3 20 1 ... 5 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 60 By transfer ... 6 224 95 ... ... 4 110 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 12 90 ... ... 6 ... ... ... 8 ... 563 Presented by Zamindars. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 3 Total ... 38 324 1,634 1,619 1,360 233 110 316 172 85 1 12 6 114 110 109 21 626 537 440 25 41 36 4 4 3 7,889 Decrease Died ... 3 ... 63 229 112 13 ... 14 4 4 ... 1 ... 0 4 8 6 38 99 42 2 8 8 ... ... ... 688 Destroyed ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 4 ... ... ... ... 2 3 ... 1 ... 1 .. ... ... ... ... ... 16 Sold ... 4 224 48 13 180 2 110 19 20 1 ... 3 ... 22 10 9 1 56 221 74 5 19 27 ... ... ... 1,054 Transferred ... 1 ... ... 234 95 96 ... 19 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... ... 12 90 ... 6 ... 3 ... ... 565 Total ... 9 224 112 476 398 111 110 53 30 9 ... 4 ... 28 16 29 7 95 332 207 7 33 29 3 ... ... 2,323 Balance on 31st March 1918. 20 ... 1,623 1,143 971 122 ... 203 142 70 1 8 6 86 94 80 14 531 203 233 18 8 7 1 4 3 5,667 Value, Rs. ... 8,000 ... 1,36,237 1,90,850 41,409 20,675 ... 27,110 27,080 8,610 100 1,358 2,450 32,800 11,780 5,080 500 4,276 1,658 1,828 120 12 20 ... 5,000 30 5,30,031 N. B.-One donkey stallion and one Arab stallion lent by the Army Remount Department are included.
xv TABLE XVI-A. DETAIL OF SHEEP ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1917-18. Detail. HAMS. EWES. MALE LAMBS. FEMALE LAMBS. Total. REMARKS. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Crossbred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Balance on 1st April 1917 ... ... 1 6 7 80 446 10 538 ... 336 2 338 ... 255 2 257 1,138 Increase ... By birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 195 4 199 ... 183 ... 183 382 By transfer ... ... 10 2 12 ... 90 ... 90 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 102 By purchase, 2 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Total ... 2 11 8 21 80 536 10 626 ... 531 6 537 ... 433 2 440 1,624 Decrease ... Died ... 1 1 4 6 5 31 2 38 ... 96 8 99 ... 40 2 42 185 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Sold by auction ... ... 1 ... 1 13 43 ... 56 ... 127 ... 127 ... 57 ... 57 241 Sold for breeding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94 ... 94 ... 17 ... 17 111 Transferred ... ... . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 2 32 ... 90 ... 90 102 Total 1 2 4 7 18 75 2 95 ... 327 5 332 ... 205 2 207 641 Balance on 31st March 1918 1 9 4 14 62 461 8 531 ... 204 1 205 ... 233 ... 233 983 Value, Rs. ... ... 15 135 350 500 223 4,010 40 4,276 ... 1,608 50 1,658 ... 1,828 ... 1,828 8,262
xvi TABLE XYII. HISSAR FARM. RESULT OF DONKEY AND MULE BREEDING ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM IN THE YEAR 1917-18. TABLE XVIII. ABSTRACT SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OP THE WORKING OP THE HISSAR FARM DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1917-18. Receipts paid into Treasury. Rs. A. P. Sale of animals (a) ... ... ... 1,12,505 4 0 Sale of garden produce ... ... ... Nil. Other heads ... ... ... ... 17,881 11 3 Total ... 1,29,886 15 3 Expenditure. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers ... 16,577 14 7 Ditto ditto of subordinate staff ... 38,150 13 3 Cultivation expenses ... ... ... 22,443 3 7 Feed of animals, including reserve fodder ... ... 31,988 12 7 Purchase of animals ... ... ... 5,639 3 0 Other heads(b) ... ... ... ... 34,114 5 5 Total ... 1,48,914 4 5 Valuation of animals issued on booh credit. Siege train bullocks ... ... ... 20,500 0 0 Mules and donkeys ... ... ... 19,625 0 0 Bulls and other animals ... ... ... Nil. Total ... 40,125 0 0 Valuation of animals, grain and fodder, etc., in hand at end of year. Valuation of animals, as per table XVI on page xiv ... 5,30,031 0 0 Do. of grain ... ... ... 11,490 8 0 Do. of fodder ... ... ... 1,09,847 0 7 Do. of machinery and dead stock articles, etc. ... 75,364 2 4 Total ... 7,26,732 10 11 (a) Includes valuation of animals issued on book credit. (b) Includes items adjusted by book debit system on account of foreign stores, etc., as intimated by the Accountant-General, Punjab, and Rs. 6,374-8-0 spent on wire fending from the farm budget. NOTE.ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1918-19 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1919. Price Re. 0-10-0 or 10d.
Annual Report on the Punjab Veterinary College, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, and the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, for 1918-19.
Revised List of Agents for the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & CO., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C., and 25, Museum Street, London, W.C. BERNARD QUZRITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. WILLIAM WESLEY & SON, 28, Essex Street, Strand, London. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. The Manager, Imperial Book Depot, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i- Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depdt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. HONORARY SECETARY, Punjab Religious Book Society, Anarkali, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co. Bombay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAI & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESON & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, RANGOON.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, AND THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE FARM, HISSAR, For the year 1918-19. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1919.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. (Maximum limit of text, 15 pages.) Para. Subject. Page. NOTE ON VETERINARY PROGRESS IN THE PUNJAB BY THE DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE. 1-2 REPORT ON THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1918-19. 1 Staff ... ... ... ... .. ... 3 2 Admissions of students and classes ... ... ... ... b. 3 Examination results ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 Other classes dressers' course ... ... ... ... ib. 5 Hospital ... .. ... ... ... ... ib. 6 Income ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 7 Expenditure ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 8 Demand for graduates ... ... ... ... ... ib. 9 New hostel ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 10 Punjab Veterinary Association ... ... ... ... ib. 11 General ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, PUNJAB, FOR THE YEAR 1918-19. Part I.Para. Subject. Page II.iii Para. Subject. Page. Contagious diseaseNo. 2952-S. (Rev. & Agri.2 The number of animals treated at the hospitals of the Province totalled 291,985, a decline of 70,000 compared with the preceding year. As in so many other branches of the administration, the influenza epidemic was mainly responsible for this diminished outturn of work. An important feature of the year was the inauguration of six Cattle Insurance Societies in the Jullundur and Rohtak Districts and the deputation of a Veterinary Assistant to assist in the promotion of such societies elsewhere in the Province. The movement is one which will require careful handling in its early stages, but which, should success be achieved, is likely to prove of incalculable benefit to the agriculturists and stock breeders of the Province. 6. The number of stud bulls working in the Province has increased by 175 to 1,265 and 200 bulls were sent out from the Government Cattle Farm at Hissar during the year, A scheme for subsidising selected owners of Dhanni bulls was approved by Government during the year. Some progress has been made in the popularisation of three quarter and half-bred merino rams, the Hissar Farm having supplied 165 rams, all but one of which were taken by private breeders. His Honour thinks that more might be done by District Boards in helping to popularise the introduction of merino blood, which has resulted in a marked improvement of the wool, whenever it has been possible to ensure a systematic use of the rams. 7. The Hissar Cattle Farm enjoyed a healthy and prosperous year. Large sales of stock at high prices, especially to the Brazilian Government, realised the record sum of Rs 1,34,787, while the profit and loss account showed a satisfactory surplus of Rs. 11,534 on the year's working. The rainfall though seasonable was scanty, resulting in a dearth of fodder but comparative immunity from disease. The only contagious diseases that gave trouble were black- quarter, rinderpest and foot and mouth disease, and the Lieutenant-Governor acknowledges the careful management to which Colonel Farmer attributes the diminishing losses caused by outbreaks of contagious disease on the Farm. Stall feeding had to be resorted to, to a large extent, owing partly to the lack of fodder and partly to other causes and the foresight with which substantial additions were made to the fodder reserve in the preceding year was thus amply justified by even's. The question of fodder storage is one that affects the whole Province, and His Honour hopes that some progress in this direction may result from the investigations of the committee which the Government of India is about to assemble to consider the matter. Five more Arab mares and one stallion were purchased at the close of the year and it is hoped in course of time to provide the Province from the farm with all the Arab stallions it requires. 8. The Veterinary Department had carried on its work throughout the year with a staff even more depleted than before and an extra strain has undoubtedly been thrown upon all its members from the Chief Superintendent downwards. Colonel Farmer and his assistants have not failed to respond readily to the additional calls made upon them and the Lieutenant-Governor desires to express his appreciation of the efficient manner in which the work of the department has been discharged. 1144ICSNote on the Veterinary Progress in the Punjab by the Director of Agriculture. 1. Colonel H. T. Pease remained as Principal of the College throughout the year under report, but retired in July 1919, and his place is being filled by Colonel Walker. Seventy-eight students were admitted in May 1918, 52 for the 3-year course and 26 for the 4-year course. This was 7 below the number admitted in May 1917. In all 57 men passed out qualified during the year. The number of Punjab civilian students, who in 1918-19, numbered only 15, is in- adequate for the demand. The qualifications of the entrants is, too, far too low, and is marked contrast to the standard of students obtainable for the Lyallpur Agricultural College. In the latter the Principal can pick and choose from among a plethora of matriculates, but a matri- culant is rarely found attempting to enter the Punjab Veterinary College. The low scale of pay of the subordinate Civil Veterinary Department in the Punjab is greatly responsible for this, and the proposals for increase recently sent up will if sanctioned be neither premature nor excessive. The post-graduate course was in abeyance during the year, but as Mr. Cross returns to duty in November and is to be posted to the College it will be started again. Mr. Burke, Professor of Surgery, is due to retire in November 1919, but proposals to extend his term till 31st March 1920 have been forwarded to Government. In the meantime a new Professor of Surgery, Mr. Sewell, has been recruited in England, and is expected out by October. Colonel Pease's retirement from the post of Principal which he has held some 18 years will be a great loss to the College. He was largely responsible for the design of the College, which Veterinary Officers from all parts of India praise very highly, and to Colonel Pease must be assigned the credit for the efficiency of the teaching and hospital work. 2. The shortage of staff in the Civil Verterinary Department was as marked as in the previous year, and Colonel Farmer had to take over 6 more districts under his direct control in the Central Punjab Circle owing to Mr. G. Taylor's transfer to Bombay. There were 46 Veterinary Inspectors and Veterinary Assistants below strength in a total subordinate cadre of 208, 37 of these being on military duty. Mr. G. Taylor has now left the Punjab, probably for good, and Rai Sahib Lala Kotu Ram is officiating for him. The newly recruit- ed officer, Mr. Garewal, officer under training, is officiating for Mr. Quirke as Superintendent, North-West Frontier Province and North Punjab, while the latter is on leave. In spite of the difficulties thus occasioned Colonel Farmer's zeal has been equal to all the demands put upon him. Despite the dryness and heat prevailing in the summer of 1918, contagions cattle disease were responsible for nearly 28,000 deaths. Seventy-five per cent. of these were due to rinderpest2 Six cattle insurance societies have been started in Jullundur and Rohtak, the Madar society being premier. As Mr. Calvert, Registrar, Co-operative Credit Society, has pointed out these societies, which will only pay premia to those members who have adopted the treatment prescribed by the Veterinary Inspector will give great scope for the activities of the Veterinary Department. Cattle-breeding proceeds steadily, and there are now 1,265 stud bulls in the Province against 1,090 in the previous year. The demand for Dhanni bulls in the North Punjab has been so great that there was a danger that the home of the breed in the Chakwal and Talagang Tahsils might become bereft of them. The proposal to subsidise selected owners of this. class of animal in Attock and Jhelum has been accepted by Government. The big question of the improvement of cattle-breeding and the agency for the purpose were briefly touched on at the Sectional Meeting of Veterinary Officers in Lahore in March 1919, and at the recent Punjab Agricultural Conference in July. It is obviously impossible to arrive at definite views on this subject until systematic measurements of height, girth weight, pull and so forth are carried out, so that past and present achievement may be compared. 3. The Hissar Cattle Farm weathered a bad year of fodder shortage when many animals had to be stall fed. The Auditor's report shows a profit of Rs. 11,534 against the profit of Rs. 43,181 in previous year. Mr. Branford, Superintendent, was on leave for 6 months and Captain Morris, Deputy Superintendent, officiated for him. The courageous way in which these officers tackle the difficulties of running a Farm of nearly 5,000 head of cattle and over 1,000 sheep is worthy of high praise. A marked testimony of the excellence of the work carried out on the Farm is the strong demand for cattle by foreign Governments, the Brazilian Government alone buying no fewer than 358. Five new Arab mares and 1 Arab stallion were added to the Farm. The breed of Jacks appears to be excellent, and their quality was particularly commented by visitors to the Farm. The supply is for the present sufficient both for District Boards and Army mule breeding requirements. S. M. JACOB, Dated 5th August 1919. Director of Agriculture, Punjab.
Report on the Punjab Veterinary College for the year 1918-19 BY COLONEL H. T. PEASE, C.I.E., PRINCIPAL. Staff. 1. I was in charge of the College during the year and carried out the duties of Professor of Sanitary Science in addi- tion to my own. This is the fifth year during which this extra work has fallen to my share. Mr. W. Taylor occupied the chair of Pathology and Parasitology and remained in charge of the small animals clinic. Mr. E. Burke, I. S. O., was Professor of Surgery. Khan Bahadur Syad Mahtab Shah, Gilani, was Professor of Anatomy and Physiology. Khan Sahib Syed Sardar Shah, Gilani, was Professor of Cattle Pathology. Khan Sahib Ghulam Hussain Khan, House Surgeon, retired from the service, on the 1st of October 1918, and Ghulam Rasul Khan, who had been officiating for him, was confirmed in the appointment. Sheikh Fakir Ali, Assistant to the Professor of Sanitary Science, who is the senior Assistant Professor, was promoted to the grade Rs. 1504 Examination results. 3. Four-years' Course.5 accumulating evidence shows that it is very successful. Fifty-seven dogs were inoculated during the year with no failure. One hundred and ten cases of con- tagious disease were treated in the Contagious Ward. In addition to this the post Office, Jail and Vaccine Depôt animals were periodically inspected. The proposed Municipal Hospital scheme is slowly progressing. Plans and estimates are being prepared by the Public Works Department and will doubtless soon be completed. Income. 6.The total amount credited into the Government Treasury this year is Rs. 21,239-3-0 against Rs. 22,246-9-0 last year. The falling off is due to closing the forge for part of the year and to the influenza epidemic. Every endeavour has been made to realize outstandings. Only Rs. 1,193 remained at the end of the year. Expenditure. 7.Despite the strictest economy the total expenditure comes to Rs. 1,08,024-12-6 against Rs. 1,02,606-4-6 last year. The increase is due, partly to the 2 new appointments in the Indian Staff being filled and partly to the extraordinary rise in prices of all commodities. Demand for graduates. 8. The demand for graduates is increasing and the supply totally in- adequate. All Departments are very short hand- ed and the great loss to the people is resulting. With large sums of money available for Agriculture and Education it seems short-sighted policy to neglect Veterinary Education and the provision of the rank and file to cope with contagious disease in the districts. The Punjab is doing far more than its fair share in this matter, but even though the college is over crowded it cannot hope to provide the number of veterinary graduates required for other Provinces and the various Government Departments. Another Vernacular College is badly wanted and it is hoped that the United Provinces College may soon materialise. New hostel. 9. During a particularly unhealthy year, both physically and morally, experience has shown the desirability of provid- ing proper hostel accommodation for the whole of our students, as soon as possible, and I trust that the matter may be taken in hand as soon as funds can be made available. The present temporary hostel is too small to hold all our students, and it is not very suitable for the purpose. Very few of the Professors, students or menials escaped influenza. The whole of our work was dislocated and no work of any value could be done for quite two months. Three student and 3 menials died. There is no doubt that the students in the temporary hostel suffered less severely than those living in the city ; we kept them as far as possible in the open air and held classes outside, whenever possible, during the winter. When a proper hostel is provided it will be possible to inaugurate several necessary measures for the protection of students by the establishment of co-operative stores, dairy, etc. Punjab Veterinary Association. 10. The Veterinary Association has again had a successful year and is in a flourishing condition. The journal continues to improve and is much appreciated. General. 11. I am glad to say that the behaviour of the students during the recent disturbances has been exemplary. No one has taken any part in hartal nor associated with any political offenders and the lectures continued and the Annual and Final examinations were held as usual. The Medical Officer in charge of the students had a heavy year's work and did it very satisfactorily. Steps have been taken to provide a play ground on the hostel site and the work is now in the hands of the Public Works Department, funds having been provided. The whole of the staff worked as usual loyally and well and my best thanks are due to them for the unfailing assistance they rendered me during a particularly trying year. C
6 Report on the Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab for the year 1918-19. BY COLONEL J. FARMER, C.I.E., CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT. Part I.- Administration. 1. The following statement shows the names of officers who held charge of the several appointments and the amount of touring performed by them during the year under report. Name of appointment. Name of Officer. Dates of holding charge. Number of days spent on tour. NUMBER OF MILES TRAVELLED By rail. By road. Chief Superintendent, Civil Ve- terinary Department, Punjab. Colonel, T. Farmer, C.I.E. 1st April 1918 to 31st March 1919 193 8,373 1,370 Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab. Mr. T. F. Quirke Ditto ... 125 11,173 1,528 Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab. Mr. G. Taylor .. 1st April 1918 and 8th January 1919 to 31st March 1919. 52 1,695 222 Officiating Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab. Rai Sahib Lala Kota Ram. 2nd. April 1918 to 7th January 1919 203 13,085 1,805 Deputy Superintendent, South Panjab. Ditto. ... 1st April 1918 and 8th January 1919 to 31st March 1919. 68 2,072 873 Officiating Deputy Superinten- dent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment. Pandit Janki Nath... 10th July 1918 to 20th February 1919. 118 3,130 1,035 Officer under training ... Mr. J. S Garewal ... 1st April 1918 to 31st March 191 209 10,858 1,323 Mr. D. Meadows remained on military duty throughout the year, con- sequently the post of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, North Punjab and North West Frontier Province was held by Mr. Quirke. Mr. G. Taylor held charge of the office of Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, South Punjab, for 2 months and 25 days during the year, i.e., 1st April 1918 and from 8th January 1919 to 31st March 1919. He was transferred to Poona to officiate as Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay Presidency, during the absence of Lieutenant-Colonel G. K. Walker, C.I.E., O.B.E. Rai Sahib Lala Kotu Ram, Deputy Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, officiated as Superintendent for 9 months and 6 days, viz., from 2nd April 1918 to 7th January 1919, in place of Mr. Taylor. The former held charge of the office of Deputy Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, for 1st April 1918, and from 8th January 1919 to the close of the year. In the absence of Mr. Taylor the districts of Jhang, Multan, Mont- gomery, Lyallpur, Muzaffargarh and Dera Ghazi Khan were temporarily transferred to the Central Punjab Circle which greatly increased the work of the Chief Superintendent. Pandit Janki Nath, Veterinary Inspector, attached to the office of Super- intendent, Civil Veterinary Department, South Punjab, was appointed to officiate as Deputy Superintendent and was placed in quasi independent charge of the above districts with his headquarters at Lahore. These districts were re-transferred to the South Punjab Circle in February 1919. 2. The Superintendent of the North-Punjab Circle is still in charge of the North-West Frontier Province, Civil Veterinary Department administra- tion ; but owing to the war the question of the appointment of a separate Superintendent could not be dealt with. It is very difficult for one officer to do justice to the work of both Provinces.
7 3. The Chief Superintendent, Superintendents, Officiating Superinten- dent, Deputy Superintendent and Officiating Deputy Superintendent toured in all the districts of their respective circles, in connection with horse and cattle breeding, investigation of contagious diseases, and for the inspection of veterinary hospitals, etc. 4. Every possible assistance was rendered to the Army Remount Department by the officers of this department in dealing with equine contagi- ous diseases in the selected districts lying within their respective jurisdictions. Tours were also made by them in various districts for the investigation of the prevalence of Dourine. 5. The officers of this department took every opportunity for discussing the work with Deputy Commissioners and local officials and for making known the operations of the department to agriculturists, etc. 6. The Chief Superintendent inspected the following hospitals outside his own circle :8 1.9 Inoculation against rinderpest was limited this year to a considerable extent by the restricted supply of serum. II.10 The mistake in the number of bulls of the Lahore District has been rectified this time by including 112 bulls (that had been given to zamindars on ½ price) in Column 6 of table VIII. II.11 According to Mr. G. Taylor it will take a long time before the influence of the merino blood will become generally apparent on the wool owing to the difficulty in getting the people to use the rams systematically Where this is done the improvement is very marked indeed. We have two examples of this in Ferozepore District, in the flock of the Mamdote Estate and that belonging to Haji Muhammad Bakhsh of Chak Sokar. The latter has been very success- ful due entirely to his personal interest in the matter. Reports by the Cawnpur Woollen Mills on the wool are encouraging indeed, but it will be some time before the improved wool can be produced in sufficient quantity to realise its full commercial value. IV.12 During the year under report 1 Veterinary Inspector and 2 Veterinary Assistants were released from the military department whereas 3 Veterinary Assistants were deputed temporarily, and 2 were permanently transferred to that department, The latter 2 were transferred at their own request on ac- count of the increased pay and improved prospects in the military department. The department is 46 men under strength owing to - (a) At military duty ... ... ... ... 87 (b) Vacancies ... ... ... ... 9 Regarding (b) the Lahore Veterinary College has not been supplying the Punjab requirements. The following casualties took place during the year :13 It is pleasant to observe in the report that losses caused by contagious abortion is decreasing. This is no doubt due to careful management. Foot and mouth disease is one which cannot be kept out of the Farm as there are so many public roads which go through it. It is gratifying to note that no fresh cases of Surra, Piroplosmosis, Strangles and Coccidiosis occurred. This again shows the care taken in dealing with outbreaks of contagious diseases on the Farm. The number of bulls supplied (192) to District Boards and the Oat Hay Farm is less than last year, when (206) were issued, but this was owing to one District Board owing to the fodder famine not taking any bulls. The Farm supplied the full number of jacks required by the A. R. D. Punjab and North-West Frontier Province District Boards which is 8 more than last year. The supply of jacks from the Hissar Farm is a considerable help to the Military Department and District Boards concerned, because if they were not bred in Hissar they would have to be obtained from Europe or America at double the cost. The sheep breeding continues to do well. The Arab breeding will, it is hoped, be a success. I purchased 5 new mares and a stallion at the end of the year, but they did not arrive until the beginning of April. 1 visited the Farm six times to advise and assist in the work as Mr. Branford was on leave and also to see the stock issued to A. R. D. and District Boards. Great credit is due to Mr. Branford and Captain Morris for their work during the year. B.14 6. The work of the Farm in the autumn was severely handicapped by the influenza epidemic which affected a very large proportion of the Farm staff. It was only with the greatest difficulty that the absolutely necessary work of feeding and grazing animals could be carried on. Work in the cultivation was for a time at a stand-still. The epidemic was very severe, and deaths were numerous. Many old and valued Farm servants died ; chief among them were Jani the arm fitter, Alah Din for many years bullock Jemadar, and Lekhia one of the cultivation Jemadars. 7. Contagious diseases were less prevalent than usual. This was pro- bably due to the small rainfall. Dry heat has a marked sterilising effect on the viruses of the diseases from which we usually suffer most. The following diseases occurred :15 this outbreak the more aged animals suffered most. Possibly this was owing to their being in rather poor condition. Altogether 7 animals died from the disease as against 73 in 1917-18. (g) There were no fresh cases of Surra, Piroplasmosis, Strangles, or Coccidiosis, all of which diseases gave trouble during the previous year. A note describing the Farm outbreak of Surra in 1917 has been accepted for publication by the ' Agricultural Journal.' 8. Table XVI shows the change in Farm stock during the year. The following are details of changes :16 Donkey Stallions. -The last stallion added named "Hindustan" measures height 12.3½, girth 54½, Shank 717 The Jowar fodder crop was poor owing to the total destruction of a large percentage immediately after germination by insects and to the failure of canal supply and the absence of rain in the autumn 78 acres failed totally, and water rate was remitted on that area. The area sown with oats in the autumn was less than average, and much of it was sown very late this again was due to the poor supply of canal water and to the influenza epidemic. In the spring the supply of canal water greatly improved and favoured by abnormally cool weather the late sown erop matured well. 10.Veterinary Hospital.TABLES. No. Subject. Page. I Statement showing the main results of the Punjab Veterinary College... i II Statement showing the number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals ... ... ... ... ... ii III Statement showing results of preventive inoculation ... ... iii IV Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour ... ... ... ... v V Statement showing the number of animals treated and castrated at Veteri- nary hospitals and dispensaries ... ... ... ... vi VII Statement showing the total strength of Subordinate Veterinary staff employed ... ... ... ... ... vii VIII Return of stud bulls ... ... ... ... ... ib. X Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... viii XI Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies ... ... ... ... ... ix XII Statement showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions ... ... ... ... ib. XIII Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non- selected districts ... ... ... ... ... x XIV Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and shows ... ... xi X IV-A Statement showing cost of the Civil Veterinary Department ... xii XV Expenditure by local bodies ... ... ... ... xiii XVI Return of animals on the Hissar Cattle Farm ... ... ... xiv XVI-A Return of sheep on the Hissar Cattle Farm ... ... ... xv XVII Results of donkey and mule breeding on the Hissar Farm ... ... xvi XVIII Abstract showing main results of the working of the Hissar Farm ... xvii
TABLE I. STATEMENT SHOWING THE MAIN RESULTS OF THE PUNJAB VETERINARY COLLEGE, LAHORE, FOR THE YEAR 1918-19. Name of the institution. Name of course of instructions if more than one followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. STUDENTS ADMITTED DURING THE YEAR 1918 CLASSED BY THE EDUCA- TIONAL QUALIFICA- TIONS. RECEIPTS FROM EXPENDITURE ON EMPLOYMENT OF GRADUATES WHO PASSED OUT DURING 3 YEARS PRECEDING. REMARKS. Admitted during the year 1918-19. Passed final examination during the year 1918-19. Failed to pass the final examination in 1918-19. Remaining under instruc- tions at the end of the year (1st May 1919). Scholarship.holders. Military and other students. In ordinary course. Instructions prolonged by reason of failures. Matriculated or with higher qualification. Knowing some English but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English Fees. Other sources. Total. Salaries of instructing staff. Other expenses. Total. Number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of States, bodies or institutions. In private praetioe. Number unemployed. 1 2 3 4 | 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 i 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. | Punjab Veteri- nary College, Lahore. 3 Years' Course 13 39 *57 ii TABLE II. SHOWING NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONGST ANIMALS DURING THE YEAR 1918-19. District. EQUINES. BOVINES. OTHERS. REMARKS. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other contagious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot and Mouth diseases. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Black quarter. Anthrax. Other contagious diseases. Total. Foot and Mouth. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Rinderpest. Surra. Black quarter. Inflnenza. Other. Rikka Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Hissar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 975 37 251 42 ... .. 1,305 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,372 32 385 4 ... ... 2,793 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,372 25 140 ... ... ... 1,537 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Karnal ... ... ... ... 10 ... ... 10 1,450 21 16S ... ... 8 1,647 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 4 Ambala ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 653 33 128 ... ... ... 814 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 7 ... ... ... ... 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kangra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,163 30 35 ... ... ... 1,228 ... ... 14 . ... ... ... ... 14 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 421 21 116 ... ... ... 558 ... 8 16 ... ... ... ... ... 24 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 239 52 124 ... ... ... 415 ... 6 4 ... ... 16 ... 26 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 563 16 31 ... ... ... 610 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ferozepore ... ... ... ... 29 ... 4 33 944 8 128 ... ... ... 1,080 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lahore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 513 456 ... ... ... 969 .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... 8 297 104 221 ... ... ... 622 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 652 22 115 ... ... 12 801 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 9 Sialkot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 293 252 ... ... ... 545 .. ... 1 ... ... ... .. ... 1 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 573 33 124 7 ... ... 737 ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... 20 Gujrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 601 42 266 ... ... 112 1,021 . ... ... ... ... 4 ... 4 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 734 21 403 44 ... 1,202 ... .. ... 3 ... ... 12 ... 15 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 148 2 120 105 ... 15 390 ... ... ... ... ... .. 307 ... 307 Rawalpindi ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... 5 1,035 8 69 8 ... ... 1,120 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Attock ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 2,997 1 319 139 ... 66 3,522 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 316 ... 317 Mianwali ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... 8 1,138 13 181 54 ... 81 1,467 ... ... ... ... ... ... 82 ... 82 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... ... ... 9 ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1,345 8 955 24 ... 2 2,334 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. Jhang ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 69 ... 17 ... ... ... 86 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 19 Multan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 40 ... ... ... 48 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... 10 ... ... 10 260 ... 286 130 ... ... 676 ... ... ... 1 ... ... .. 155 156 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... 10 51 ... ... 81 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 Total ... 5 ... 70 ... 8 83 20,842 536 5,349 608 ... 296 27,631 ... 14 35 4 1 3 770 174 1,001 Government Cattle Farm, Hissar ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 7 5 ... 45 ... 9 66 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
iii TABLE III. SHOWING RESULTS OF PREVENTIVE INOCULATION DURING THE YEAR 1918-19. District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inocula- tion was undertaken. NUMBER OF ANI- MALS WHICH DIED UNINOCULATED IN COURSE OF OUT- BREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANI- MALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULA- TION. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Hissar ... Rinderpest. Serum alone. 46 ... 1,214 ... ... 7,294 ... ... 13 ... Rohtak ... 35 ... 573 ... .. 12,739 ... ... 6 ... Gurgaon ... 39 ... 945 ... ... 6,543 ... 18 ... Karnal .. 27 . 675 ... ... 6,413 ... ... 11 ... Ambala ... 53 ... 457 ... ... 6,198 ... ... 21 .. Simla ... 2 ... 13 ... ... 97 ... .. 1 ... Ludhiana ... 16 ... 157 ... ... 1,663 ... ... .. ... Ferozepore ... 22 ... 463 ... ... 4,336 ... ... 2 ... Lyallpur ... 15 ... 277 ... ... 3,369 ... 36 ... Multaa ... 1 ... 24 ... ... 33 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 13 ... 22 ... ... 3,362 ... ... 2 ... Rawalpindi ... 28 ... 124 ... ... 9,172 ... ... 15 ... Attock ... 33 ... 714 ... ... 7,114 ... ... 17 ... Jhelum ... 9 ... 45 ... ... 859 ... .. ... ... Gujrat ... 2 ... 38 ... ... 225 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 20 ... 308 ... ... 4,353 ... ... 4 .. Shahpur ... 7 ... 107 ... 1,864 ... ... ... ... Kangra ... 35 ... 769 ... ... 5,330 ... ... 8 ... Gurdaspur .. 46 ... 411 ... ... 6,347 ... 16 ... Jullundur ... 14 ... 165 ... ... 2,370 ... ... 1 ... Hoshiarpur 35 ... 444 ... ... 4,654 ... ... 9 ... Lahore ... 14 ... 209 ... ... 4,950 ... ... 11 ... Amritsar ... 23 ... 401 ... ... 3,942 ... ... 1 ... Gujranwala ... 13 ... 49 ... ... 2,582 ... ... 1 ... Sialkot ... 5 ... 90 ... ... 584 ... ... 3 ... Total ... ... .. 653 ... 8,794 .. ... 106,393 ... ... 196 ... Number of villages. Hissar ... Hæmorrhagic speticæmia. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia Vaccination. 3 ... ... ... ... 281 ... ... ... ... Rohtak ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1,637 ... ... ... ... Gurgaon ... 1 ... ... ... ... 302 ... ... ... ... Karnal ... 11 ... ... ... ... 2,397 ... ... ... ... Ambala ... 1 ... ... ... ... 219 Ferozepore ... 14 ... ... ... ... 2,776 ... ... ... ... Montgomery ... 5 ... ... ... ... 1,100 ... ... ... ... Lyallpur ... 13 ... ... ... ... 3,151 ... ... ... ... Multan ... 23 ... ... ... ... 10,405 ... ... ... ... Muzaffargarh ... 6 ... ... ... ... 2,220 ... ... ... ... Attock ... 4 ... ... ... ... 651 ... ... ... ... Shahpur ... 6 ... ... ... ... 4,344 ... ... ... ... Mianwali ... 15 ... ... ... ... 3,646 ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... 15 ... ... ... ... 2,338 ... ... ... ... Hoshiarpur ... 12 ... ... ... ... 1,170 ... ... ... ... Lahore ... 25 ... ... ... ... 5,234 ... ... ... ... Amritsar ... 8 ... ... ... ... 1,448 ... ... ... ... Gujranwala ... 15 ... ... ... ... 8,428 ... ... ... ... Sialkot ... 6 ... ... ... ... 677 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... 85 ... ... ... ... 52,464 52,464 ... ... ... ...
iv TABLE IIIv TABLE IV. SHOWING THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED BY VETERINARY ASSISTANTS ON TOUR DURING 1918-19. District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veteri- nary Assistant's employed. CASTRATIONS PER- FORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castrations per- formed. REMARKS. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Hissar ... ... ... ... 985 6 36 923 697 1,656 86 4,112 589 4,787 285 1,364 511 2,160 8.603 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 386 5 46 931 80 1,057 51 2,022 20 2,093 35 774 43 852 4,002 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 907 6 48 1,429 89 1,566 68 5,852 44 5,964 81 1,521 26 1,628 9,158 Karnal .. ... ... ... 232 4 4 110 8 122 63 977 47 1,087 22 213 5 240 l,448 Ambala ... ... ... ... 461 5 55 1,578 6 1,640 46 1,731 96 1,873 46 293 28 367 3,880 Simla ... ... .. ... 251 2 2 1 1 4 3 243 111 357 43 336 26 407 768 Kangra ... ... ... ... 754 7 9 6 3 18 18 3,897 1,207 5.122 138 1,476 106 1,720 6,860 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... ... 869 5 8 205 19 232 1 1,355 1,356 86 412 13 511 2,099 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 370 6 8 376 13 397 ... 1,181 14 1,195 495 981 21 1,497 3,089 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 255 4 ... 1,011 6 1,017 39 1053 58 1,150 95 367 43 505 2,672 Ferozepore ... ... .. ... 574 7 168 2,295 86 2,549 157 2,914 140 3,211 308 557 19 884 6,644 Lahore ... ... ... ... 329 5 33 384 1 418 3 176 ... 179 297 493 6 796 1,393 Amritsar ... .. ... ... 340 6 4 378 ... 382 ... 416 15 431 106 547 152 805 1,618 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 208 6 12 190 15 223 ... 236 236 112 294 8 414 873 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 182 5 4 83 1 88 1 409 3 413 98 210 2 310 811 Gujranwala ... ... ... ... 239 5 11 428 21 460 ... 222 ... 222 86 172 10 268 950 Gujrat ... ... ... ... 304 3 20 645 ... 665 1 276 ... 277 231 346 30 607 1,549 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 279 5 7 2,274 18 2,299 1 197 12 210 125 225 32 382 2,891 Jhelum ... ... ... 408 4 5 232 5 242 8 682 108 798 264 334 140 738 1,778 Rawalpindi ... .. ... 305 5 ... 399 ... 399 4 941 53 998 47 212 16 275 1,672 Attock ... ... ... ... 431 4 ... 667 ... 667 2 633 78 763 70 266 28 364 1,794 Mianwali ... ... ... ... 275 3 ... 496 14 510 11 480 37 528 123 148 24 295 1,333 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 166 3 23 816 39 878 24 212 15 251 38 57 20 115 1.244 Lvallpur ... ... ... ... 327 4 22 1,576 18 1,616 64 803 24 891 149 422 31 602 3,109 Jhang ... ... ... 152 3 30 791 2 823 12 5 2 19 103 193 27 323 1,165 Multan ... ... ... ... 323 5 24 1,803 8 1,835 34 299 45 378 101 439 67 607 2,820 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... 221 6 14 1,574 27 1,615 9 184 7 200 111 396 47 554 2.369 Dera Ghazi Khan ... ... ... ... 260 4 20 2,018 97 2,435 24 1,109 53 1,186 252 333 96 681 4,002 Total ... 10,293 133 614 23,625 1,274 25,513 730 32,667 2,778 36,175 3.949 13,381 1,577 18 907 80,595
vi TABLE V. SHOWING NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED AND CASTRATED AT VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES DURING THE YEAR 1918-19. District. Number of Veteri- nary Dispensaries. Number of Veteri- nary Assistants employed. NUMBER OF IN-PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. NUMBER OF OUT-PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Grand total of in- patients and out- patients treated during the year. Total number of cases supplied with medicines but not brought to Hospitals. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. Receipts.vii TABLE VII. SHOWING TOTAL STRENGTH OF SUBORDINATE VETERINARY STAFF EMPLOYED DURING THE YEAR 1918-19. Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate staff not included in previous columns. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. Punjab ... In Schools and Colleges ... ... ... ... ... In Dispensaries ... ... ... 128 ... On other work ... ... (a) 18 (b) 62 ... Total ... ... 18 190 ... (a) Includes one Veterinary Assistant working as sub. pro stem. Veterinary Inspector. (b) On itinerating duty ... 9 Attached to offices of Superintendents ... 4 viii TABLE X. RETURN OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES FOR THE YEAR 1918-19. DETAILS. HORSE AND PONT STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. DONKEY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Catalonian. Sicllian. TOTAL. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. T. B. English Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Balance on 1st April 1918 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 52 ... 4 1 ... 57 61 ... 5 46 ... 14 4 69 Increase Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... 1 ... ... 6 6 ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Received from Civil Veterinary Department ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... 8 ... ... ... 8 Total ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 61 ... 5 1 ... 67 71 ... 5 56 ... 14 4 79 Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 Sold ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Transferred to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total decrease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... 4 ... 1 ... 5 Balance on 31st March ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 57 ... 5 1 ... 63 67 ... 5 52 ... 13 4 74
ix TABLE XI. SERVICES AND PRODUCE OF EACH CLASS OF HORSE, PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS, UNDER LOCAL BODIES, DURING 1918-19. Horse, Pony or Donkey. Province. Stallions on Register on 31st March 1919. STALLIONS ACTUALLY EMPLOYED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOY- ED AT STUD. REMARKS. Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re- port Previous year. Year under re- port. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Horse ... Punjab ... 4 4 4 199 138 49.7 34.5 Total ... 4 4 4 199 138 497 34.5 Pony ... Punjab ... 63 61 57 2,979 2,784 48.83 48 84 Total ... 63 61 57 2,979 2,784 48.83 48.84 Donkey ... Punjab ... 74 71 71 3,680 3,876 51.83 54.59 Total ... 74 71 71 3,680 3,876 51.83 54.59 TABLE XII. SHOWING AVERAGE COST OF FEED, KEEP, ATTENDANCE, ETC., OF HORSE PONY AND DONKEY STALLIONS DURING THE YEAR 1918-19. District. HORESE. PONY. DONKEY. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... ... ... 640 287 497 215 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 502 385 199 217 Gurgaon ... ... ... ... 550 951 361 288 Karnal ... ... ... ... 583 410 243 240 Ambala ... ... ... ... 503 376 232 248 Kangra ... ... ... ... 347 319 266 236 Hoshiarpur ... 412 391 444 411 227 212 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 425 394 260 228 Ludhiana ... ... ... ... 339 357 230 231 Gurdaspur ... ... ... ... 296 2?8 175 137 Sialkot ... ... ... ... 480 417 227 200 Mianwali ... ... 460 419 487 347 245 205 Muzaffargarh ... 395 409 395 409 263 246 Total ... 1,267 1,219 5,991 5,361 3,425 2,903 Average ... 422 406 466 412 263 223
x TABLE XIII. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING HORSE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD IN NON-SELECTED DISTRICTS DURING THE YEAR 1918-19. Name of Fax. Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUM- BER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. PRIZE-MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Government of India for next year's fair or show. REMARKS. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price Average price From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded, Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Ambala ... 1 584 992 123 120 557 27 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 29 ... ... 600 ... 600 355 1 ... Jullundur ... 2 1,169 1,346 76 63 1,169 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 70 ... ... ... 550 ... ... 290 ... 290 290 ... ... Sialkot ... 1 176 ... 35 ... ... 176 ... ... ... ... 180 45 130 ... ... ... ... ... ... 147 ... ... 314 ... 314 133 ... ... Gurdaspur ... 2 762 375 28 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 250 ... 250 79 ... ... Mianwali ... 1 1,074 400 224 117 212 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 7 ... ... ... 489 ... ... 785 ... 785 262 ... ... Total ... 7 3,766 3,113 486 300 1,928 203 ... ... ... ... 180 45 130 ... ... 78 ... ... ... 1,215 ... ... 2,239 ... 2,239 1,119 1 ...
xi TABLE XIV. ABSTRACT OF PARTICULARS REGARDING CATTLE FAIRS AND SHOWS HELD DURING THE YEAR 1918-19. Name of Fair. Number of Cattle Fairs and Shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMAL SOLD. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. PRIZE MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. REMARKS. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Fund. From other sources. Total. Amount actually award- ed. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... 6 13 47,678 762 10,756 1,167 3,959 2,020 72 216 112 125 574 46,340 150 ... ... 374 ... 374 374 ... Rohtak ... 4 ... 114,142 3,789 ... 16,031 468 3,911 ... 216 75 166 250 61,178 149 ... ... 1,461 ... 1,461 1,461 ... Gurgaon ... 2 ... 3.427 727 3,071 127 44 27 ... 122 25 59 ... 201 1,839 ... ... 448 ... ... ... ... Ambala ... 1 5 329 608 635 3,728 5 184 ... 27 17 45 1,129 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jullundur ... 2 ... 2,159 2,079 1,947 5,816 10 542 ... 17 16 38 23 4,634 157 ... ... 335 ... 335 335 ... Ludhiaua ... 1 18 3,739 6,132 11,458 8,642 35 4,424 ... 95 35 65 75 2,369 197 ... ... 803 ... 808 719 ... Ferozepore ... 9 69 7,062 5,909 13,956 16,886 6,620 7,828 36 248 189 432 998 23,063 549 ... ... 2,214 ... 2,214 2,013 ... Lahore ... 3 173 1,107 913 685 1,810 125 1,737 48 108 67 114 84 3,064 267 ... ... 980 ... 980 ... ... Amritsar ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46 70 49 87 211 28,713 366 ... ... 2,594 ... 2,594 1,557 ... Gurdaspur ... 2 48 2,273 3,156 948 6,832 2 200 ... 22 21 45 ... 4,018 55 ... ... 250 ... 250 146 ... Sialkot ... 6 27 7,630 11,152 5,433 32,671 23 2,646 ... 37 19 41 ... 2,906 171 ... ... 2,282 ... 2,282 1 343 ... Gujranwala ... 1 ... 3,451 1,948 1,902 3,463 13 475 ... 27 19 36 ... 3,269 37 ... ... 266 ... 266 206 ... Gujrat ... 1 47 150 405 73 106 1 ... ... ... 52 ... 105 5 237 ... ... 670 ... 670 ... ... Shahpur ... 2 181 171 145 120 76 6 233 ... 45 3 38 148 225 550 ... ... 640 ... 640 640 3 Rawalpindi ... 2 180 485 66 45 58 22 2 232 193 61 132 118 1,246 68 ... ... 420 ... 420 490 2 Attock ... 1 12 ... 100 132 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 99 ... ... 500 ... 590 ... ... Mianwali ... 1 80 459 220 142 1 6 167 ... 41 34 ... ... 301 224 ... ... 785 ... 785 382 ... Lyallpur ... 2 2 3,031 2,751 1,160 5,737 5,433 62 ... 34 29 43 104 12,302 355 ... ... 1,290 ... 1,290 1,236 ... Jhang ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 93 35 ... ... ... ... ... ... 105 ... ... 660 ... 660 532 ... Multan ... 1 8 31 17 7 ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 74 ... ... 200 ... 200 192 ... Total ... 50 861 197,324 40,574 52,120 102,656 16,480 24,498 ... ... ... ... ... 1,93,963 5,649 ... ... 17,177 ... 17,177 13,258 5
xii TABLE XIV-A. STATEMENT SHOWING COST OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DE- PARTMENT DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR IN THE PRO- VINCE OF PUNJAB. MAJOR HEADS. AMOUNT. REMARKS. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... 83,883 ... 83,883 * This head does not exist in the books of the Account- ant-General, Punjab Veterinary Instruction ... ... ... 93,791 3,502 1,02,293 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 1,19,289 21,839 1,41,228 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 22,483 1,16,571 1,39,054 Breeding Operations ... ... ... 1,60,217 1,81,496 3,41,713 Prizes ... ... ... ... 7,109 7,700 14,809 Fairs and Shows ... ... ... * 58,792 58,792 Total . 4,91,872 3,89,900 8,81,772
xiii TABLE XV. (EXPENDITURE BY LOCAL BODIES) AS SUPPLIED BY DISTRICTS. District. Stipends. HOSPITAL CHARGES. BREEDING OPERATIONS. FAIRS AND SHOWS. Grand total of columns 2, 8, 15 and 20. Pay of compounders and menials. Cost of medicines and in- struments. Expenditure on buildings and repairs. Furniture. Contingencies Total. Bulls. Horses and ponies Donkeys. Total. Horse fair. Cattle fair. Total. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Purchase. Up-keep. Prizes. Contingencies. Prizes. Contingencies. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Hissar ... ... 120 1,686 1,890 2,577 210 273 6,636 3,250 56 1,500 3,200 ... 1,986 9,992 ... ... 374 6,950 7,324 24,072 Rohtak ... ... ... 1,890 2,550 139 8 31 4,618 1,600 442 ... 8,011 ... 795 5,848 ... ... 1,461 6,724 8,185 18,651 Gurgaon ... ... 188 1,831 2,270 1,785 145 186 6,217 1,050 273 950 2,201 ... 1,082 5,556 ... ... ... 596 596 12,557 Karnal ... ... 160 1,156 1,430 751 41 261 3, 39 1,350 437 ... 3,500 ... 1,702 6,989 ... ... ... ... ... 10,788 Ambala ... ... ... 1,722 2,063 849 208 185 5,027 1,400 289 ... 3,019 ... 1,161 5,869 355 2,380 ... 675 3,410 14,306 Simla District Board ... 378 505 20 179 ... 1,082 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,082 Simla Municipal Committee ... ... 753 310 452 ... 6,025 7,540 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7,540 Kangra ... ... ... 1,683 1,423 438 ... ... 3,544 ... 199 ... 347 ... 533 1,079 ... ... ... ... ... 4,623 Hoshiarpur ... ... ... 1,677 1,090 1,575 536 127 5,005 186 ... ... 1,744 ... 1,813 3,743 ... ... ... ... ... 8,748 Jullundur District Board ... 168 2,571 2,981 1,290 ... ... 6,842 458 496 1,200 3,537 ... 1,500 7,191 ... .... ... ... ... 14,201 Jullundur Municipal Committee ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 290 2,614 335 2,614 5,853 5,853 Ludhiana ... ... 93 1,320 1,195 7,830 187 72 10,604 2,068 367 ... 1,695 ... 2,531 6,661 ... ... 719 1,433 2,152 19,510 Ferozepore ... ... ... 1,758 ... 515 ... 3,084 5,357 923 653 ... 1,636 ... ... 3,212 ... ... 481 1,718 2,198 10,768 Muktsar Municipal Committee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,086 1,669 649 ... 3,404 3,404 Abohar Notified Area ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 886 674 1,560 1,560 Lahore ... ... 96 3,663 1,439 3,203 ... ... 6,310 4,000 479 1,800 7,595 ... ... 13,874 ... ... ... ... 480 20,710 Amritsar District Board ... 112 1,336 1,283 742 ... 329 3,690 407 138 600 5,230 ... ... 6,375 ... ... ... ... ... 10,177 Amritsar Municipal Committee ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 415 ... 1,557 ... 1,972 1,972 Gurdaspur ... ... 94 1,796 1,406 896 ... ... 4,098 1,215 328 2,000 3,640 ... 1,737 8,920 79 ... 146 1,373 1,598 14,710 Sialkot ... ... 120 1,550 1,266 474 100 104 3,494 1,600 2,511 1,500 2,882 ... 1,586 10,079 133 ... 1,343 10,339 11,815 25,508 Gujranwala ... ... 216 2,517 992 1,764 161 841 6,275 500 144 700 4,459 .. ... 5,803 ... 270 206 636 1,112 13,406 Gujrat ... ... 240 1,035 773 148 ... 127 2,083 2,000 466 1,575 1,490 ... ... 5,531 170 468 331 339 1,308 9,162 Shahpur ... ... 90 1,230 1,064 2,759 ... ... 5,053 1,600 150 1,000 4,821 215 745 8,531 ... ... 1,140 275 1,415 15,089 Jhelum ... ... ... 1,105 1,190 659 ... 76 8,030 217 353 1,300 1,196 ... ... 3,066 ... ... ... ... ... 6,096 Rawalpindi ... ... ... 920 2,248 2,200 ... ... 5,368 326 2,210 ... 2,510 ... ... 5,046 405 1,205 330 404 2,844 12,758 Attock ... ... 876 999 3,736 ... 226 5,837 197 573 ... 3,208 200 563 4,741 ... ... 490 260 750 11,328 Mianwali ... ... 192 910 834 3,012 115 59 4,930 1,048 470 ... 1,922 545 981 4,966 262 ... 382 1,159 1,803 11,891 Montgomery ... ... ... 1,400 1,200 718 ... 106 3,424 6,353 ... 750 1,272 ... 630 9,005 ... 681 ... ... 681 13,110 Multan ... ... ... 1,045 ... 385 ... 1,123 2,553 1,215 1,648 ... 5,181 ... ... 8,044 1,365 ... 192 200 1,757 12,354 Lyallpur ... ... 1,365 1,914 1,295 4,385 110 256 7,910 2,172 707 1,800 7,346 ... 475 12,500 310 2,224 1,236 6,061 9,831 31,603 Jhang ... 185 1,149 572 1,249 83 114 3,167 310 578 1,287 2,689 ... 180 5,044 285 361 532 ... 1,178 9,574 Muzaffargarh ... ... 233 2,000 1,075 1,161 ... 847 5,083 1,620 256 1,200 2,372 ... 1,581 7,029 ... ... ... ... ... 12,345 Dera Ghazi Khan ... 250 1,086 1,236 9,319 ... ... 11,641 ... ... ... 3,714 ... ... 3,714 405 895 ... ... 1,300 16,905 Total ... 3,922 41,962 36,579 54,981 2,083 14,452 1,50,057 37,065 14,223 19,162 85,417 960 21,581 1,78,408 5,560 12,767 12,790 42,430 73,977 4,06,364
xiv TABLE XVI. RETURN OF ANIMALS ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1918-19. Detail. Herd bulls. Supernumerary bulls. Cows. Male produce. Female produce. Castrated produce. Ordnance bullocks (bulls for services). Cultivation bullocks. Mules. Pony mares for mule breeding. Pony stallion. Camels. Donkey stallions. Donkey colts. Donkey mares. Donkey fillies. Rams. Ewes. Male lambs. Female lambs. Female goats. Female kids. Male goats and kids. Arab pony fillies. Arab pony mares. Buffaloe bull calves. Pony colts. Total. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 23 29 30 Balance on 1st April 1918 29 ... 1,522 1,143 971 122 ... 263 142 76 1 8 6 86 94 80 14 581 205 233 18 8 7 1 4 3 ... 5,567 Increase ... By birth ... ... ... ... 674 632 ... ... ... 16 ... ... ... ... 31 ... 30 ... ... 232 243 ... 7 16 1 ... ... 1 1,883 By purchase ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 74 20 10 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 107 By transfer 2 201 201 ... ... 109 115 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 1 165 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 804 Presented to the Farm. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Total ... 31 201 1,723 1,819 1,603 261 115 337 178 87 1 9 6 117 103 110 16 696 437 476 19 15 23 2 4 3 1 8,363 Decrease ... Died ... 1 1 20 101 58 1 ... 15 2 2 ... ... ... 4 1 5 ... 33 14 16 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 275 Destroyed... ... ... 5 4 ... 3 ... 3 1 4 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 24 Sold ... 3 200 198 51 337 5 115 20 22 ... ... 1 ... 25 6 10 ... 31 161 60 ... ... 8 ... ... ... 1 1,254 Transferred 2 ... ... 310 201 106 ... 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... ... 1 165 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 804 Total ... 6 201 223 466 596 115 115 47 26 6 ... 1 ... 29 9 21 ... 65 176 241 ... 1 10 ... ... ... 1 2,367 Balance on 31st March 1919. 25 ... 1,500 1,563 1,000 116 ... 290 153 81 1 8 6 83 94 26 16 631 261 225 19 14 2 2 4 3 ... 6,006 Value, Rs. ... 5,690 ... 1,32,852 1,80,605 27,950 19,955 ... 33,915 33,890 9,46 80 1,174 2,210 30,865 12 090 5,950 150 5,322 2,171 1,49 7 113 85 40 250 2,000 150 ... 5,08,694 N.B.xv TABLE XVI-A. DETAIL OF SHEEP ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM FOR THE YEAR 1918-19. Detail. RAMS. EWES. MALE LAMBS. FEMALE LAMBS. Total. REMARKS. Country bred. English. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Morino. Total. Country bred. Cross bred. Merino. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Balance on 1st April 1918 ... ... 1 ... 9 4 14 82 461 8 531 ... 204 1 205 ... 233 ... 233 983 Increase ... By birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 230 2 232 ... 242 1 243 475 By transfer ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 165 ... 165 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 166 By purchase ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Presented to the farm ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Total ... 1 1 9 5 16 62 626 8 696 ... 434 3 437 ... 475 1 476 1,625 Decreaae ... Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 21 4 33 ... 14 ... 14 ... 16 ... 16 63 Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Sold by suct on ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 26 ... 29 ... 51 ... 51 ... 52 ... 52 132 Sale for breeding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 ... 110 ... 110 ... 8 ... 8 120 Transferred ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 165 ... 165 166 Total ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 50 4 65 ... 175 1 176 ... 241 ... 241 482 Balance on 31st March 1919 ... 1 1 9 5 16 51 576 4 631 ... 259 2 261 ... 234 1 235 1,143 Value, Rs. ... ... ... 15 10 130 325 480 153 5,145 24 5,322 ... 2,071 100 2,171 ... 1,487 10 1,497 9,470
xvi TABLE XVII. RESULT OF DONKEY AND MULE BREEDING ON THE HISSAR CATTLE FARM IN THE YEAR 1918-19. xvii TABLE XVIII. ABSTRACT SHOWING MAIN RESULTS OF THE WORKING OF THE HISSAR FARM DURING THE OFFICIAL YEAR 1918-19. Receipts paid into Treasury. Rs. A. P. Sale of animals (a) ... ... 1,55,575 13 0 Sale of garden produce ... ... 225 0 0 Other heads ... ... ... 28,986 11 7 Total ... 1,84,787 8 7 Expenditure. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers 11,364 10 0 Ditto ditto of subordinate staff 40,281 12 2 Cultivation expenses ... ... 21,223 3 10 Feed of animals, including reserve fodder ... 34,316 1 1 Purchase of animals ... ... 11,960 0 0 Other heads (c) ... ... 30,992 6 7 Total ... 1,50,138 1 8 Valuation of animals issued on Book credit. Seige Train Bullocks ... ... 22,400 0 0 Mules and Donkeys ... ... 27,450 0 0 Bulls and other animals ... ... Nil. Total ... 49,850 0 0 Valuation of animals, grain and fodder, etc., on hand as end of year. Valuation of animals as per table XVI attached 5,08,694 0 0 Do of grain, as per statement attached 13,863 10 4 Do of fodder as per statement attached 1,00,114 5 8 Do of Machinery and Dead Stock articles, etc., 76,048 7 1 Total ... 6,98,720 7 1 (a) Includes valuation of animals issued on book credit, (b) Does not include house rent received by P. W. D., and includes Rs. 5 adjusted by book credit on account of cost of cartridge returned. (c) Includes items adjusted by book debit system by the Accountant-General, Punjab, and Rs. 7,366-2-0 spent on wire-fencing from the Farm budget. NOTE: