MANUAL OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT CENTRAL PROVINCES & BERAR [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Nagpur PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS 1916 PRICEMANUAL OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT CENTRAL PROVINCES & BERAR [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Nagpur PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS 1916
CONTENTS. Page. SECTION I.CONTENTS. Page. I.MANUAL OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, CENTRAL PROVINCES. SECTION I. CLASSIFICATION OF VETERINARY DISPENSARIES. (1) Classification. I. Veterinary Dispensaries in the Central Provinces and Berar are divided into three classes, viz:2 SECTION II. ORGANIZATION OF THE SUBORDINATE ESTABLISHMENT. 3. The cadre of the Civil Veterinary Department is in accordance with Government of India (Revenue and Agriculture Department) letter No. 492-193, dated the 25th February 1913, constituted as follows:3 Para. 8 of C. P. Sectt. letter No. 8234 SECTION III. SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE DEPARTMENT. Paras. 5 & 9 of C. P. Sectt. letter No. 8235 provisions of the Chief Commissioner's Book Circular No. IV-20, but shall send a copy of his order to the Director of Agriculture for information. Deputy Commissioners may, in urgent cases, grant leave to Veterinary Assistants, reporting their action to the Superintendent. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 4893. d. 17- 12-92. 20. The Director of Agriculture is the controlling authority in res- pect of expenditure incurred by the Superintendent under the heads "Tra- velling allowances" and "Contingencies". C. P. Sectt. letter No. 4866 SECTION IV. FUNCTIONS OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT. Rev. Book Cir., Section IV, Serial No. 8. 22. The Superintendent shall forward copies of reports of all serious outbreaks of cattle diseases to the Inspecting Veterinary Officer of the Military Division concerned. C. P. Sectt. Cir. letter No. 4169, d. 19-9-99. (R. D.) and letter No. 28-C, d. 22- 11-05, from I. G., C. V. D. 23. He shall scrutinize and pass all indents for medicines, instruments and stores of the Dispensaries in Class I and II. 24. He shall inspect and advise upon cattle-breeding operations carried on in estates under Court of Wards' management and Government Cattle Farms. 25. He shall inspect, in the course of his tours, the horses, stables and feeding arrangements of the mounted police and pony dâk lines in the several districts of the Provinces. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 2809, d. 15-7- 99. 26. He shall notify in the local newspapers appearance on dâk lines of diseases which are dealt with under the Glanders and Farcy Act. 27. He shall, when practicable, inspect slaughter-houses within Muni- cipal limits and report on the arrangements if they are noticed to be unsatisfactory. 28. He shall exercise control over the tour programmes of Deputy Superintendents and District Veterinary Inspectors in order to prevent aimless journeys being performed or the same circuit being unnecessarily covered. 29. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 2007 SECTION V. SUPERINTENDENT'S OFFICE. 33. The Superintendent may make all permanent and temporary appointments in the Ministerial and Menial Establishment of his office except that of Head Clerk. Provided that permanent appointments to posts carrying pay of over Rs. 25 a month shall be subject to the approval and confirmation of the Director of Agriculture, to whom they shall be reported, as each appointment is made, in a statement showing:8 Dispensaries at Nagpur, Pachmarhi and Chikalda. On the 1st April in each year the Superintendent shall send to the Comptroller, Central Provinces, an acknowledgment of the advance in Comptroller's Form 1-10. 40. He shall submit the following reports and returns, on the dates specified against each:9 made in the Roll, send a copy of it to the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. The Superintendent will also maintain a Nominal Roll of all Veterinary Inspectors and Veterinary Assistants and he will see that it is correct and kept up to date and forward a copy of it to the Director of Agriculture, on the 15th January and 15th July of each year. 42. The returns and reports received by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, are.10 SECTION VI. DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENTS. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 251 11 SECTION VII. DISTRICT VETERINARY INSPECTOES. 49. A Veterinary Inspector shall exercise immediate supervision over the work of Veterinary Assistants in his charge, under the direction of the Superintendent and the Deputy Superintendent. 50. He shall inspect each Veterinary Dispensary once a quarter and submit his report in the prescribed form, through the Secretary of the Local Board and the Deputy Commissioner concerned to the Deputy Superintend- ent who will, after perusal, forward it to the Superintendent. 51. He shall in the course of his inspection instruct the Veterinary Assistants on the collection of blood-sucking flies, preparation of blood smears, washing animals infested with ticks and lice, and also verify on the spot the diagnosis and treatment by the Veterinary Assistant of the animals brought to the Dispensary. 52. He shall, while at head-quarters attend the Dispensary at least twice a week and assist the Veterinary Assistants in professional matters. 53. He shall summarise and tabulate all information received from Veterinary Assistants, check their diaries and indents for medicines and note on all correspondence before submitting it to the Deputy Superintend- ent for transmission to the Superintendent. 54. He shall submit by the 10th of every month a diary showing the details of work performed by him during the preceding month with his travelling allowance bill for that month. C. P. Sectt. Agrl. Deptt. letter No. 352 12 both from Veterinary Assistants and Inspectors. If there be any putridity or doubt as to the purity of the material, it should be discarded. On no account may a cracked bottle or one having an inefficient cork be used. 60. The Veterinary Inspector shall, whenever possible, inspect all the ponies and stables on the dâk lines in his district and carry out such duties as may be entrusted to him under the rules sanctioned by the Local Administration under the Glanders and Farcy Act. He-shall also inspect horse and cattle trucks, station yards, etc., where cattle and horses may be congregated and, whenever necessary, take prompt measures to prevent the spread of infectious disease. 61. He shall visit, as far as possible, cattle-fairs and shows, and ascertain the localities from which any particularly fine cattle are brought. When present at a weekly market he shall inspect the cattle and see that they are free from disease of a contagious type. 62. He shall inspect Government bulls, lent to cattle owners and Court of Wards' Estates, and report on their condition and suitability for the herd. 63. He shall visit all slaughter-houses under the inspection of Veterinary Assistants within the limits of the Municipalities which he visits and remark briefly in his diary on the existing arrangements. 64. He shall inspect extensive grazing grounds in his district and take measures to check the spread of any epidemic prevailing there. He will carefully note all villages and places where epidemic disease has occurred during the current year and at what times, in order to localise such disease and to facilitate sanitary and inoculation preventive methods at a future date. 65. He shall, as far as possible, collect and submit to the Superin- tendent through the Deputy Superintendent information regarding the different breeds of cattle to be found in the various tracts, the sufficiency or otherwise of water and fodder, the manner in which the animals are utilized and the average prices obtaining for each class of cattle. He shall pay particular attention to the reporting of disease and note the system of reporting in grazing areas, whether Government Forest, Zamindari or other. Any laxity of reporting should be immediately brought to the notice of the Superintendent through the Deputy Superintendent. Para. 453 of the Manual of Apptts. and Allowances. 66. He is not permitted to engage in private practice or to charge fees: nor may he have an interest in a private Dispensary or druggist's shop, nor shall he engage in any private trade or business. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 6395, d. 5-10-05. 67. The Veterinary Inspector is a Drawing Officer and holds a permanent advance of Rs. 10 to meet contingent expenditure. He shall send to the Superintendent, an acknowledgment of the amount on the 1st April of each year in form bearing Comptroller's Register No. 113 68. Veterinary Inspectors shall submit the following reports and returns, on the dates specified against each, to the Superintendent through the Deputy Superintendent:14 SECTION VIII. VETERINARY ASSISTANTS. (1) General. Paras. 3 and 4 of Notifica- tion No. 950, d. 9-2-05. 69. In order to provide for the training of local men for appointment to the subordinate staff, scholarships are granted by the Local Adminis- tration tenable at the Punjab Veterinary College. Scholarships tenable at other Colleges are also granted from time to time, information regarding which may be obtained from the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment. 70. The number of scholarships tenable at the Punjab and other Veterinary Colleges will be regulated by the Director of Agriculture, with the sanction of the Local Administration, in accordance with the probable number of vacancies in the posts to be filled. 71. The following are the conditions regulating the grant of scholar- ships at the Punjab Veterinary College:15 (j) Applications should be addressed to the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, and should give the candidate's name, age, his father's name, father's occupation, caste, place of residence, vernacular languages known by him, and date of passing the School Final Examination or the date on which the candidate obtained a University degree. The application should be accompanied by the required medical certificate, by copies of the certificates of examina- tions passed by the candidate and certificates from two gentlemen of position, as to his respectability. (k) Approved candidates will have to enter into the following agree- ment:16 78. He is required to be present in the Dispensary during working hours and will prescribe personally for all cases. He is responsible for all medicines made up in the Dispensary. He shall take every precaution in sending out poisonous drugs and see that they are properly labelled "Poison". 79. If a Second Veterinary Assistant be attached to the Dispensary, he will, whenever he treats a case, make the necessary entry in the patient's ticket-book himself. 80. The Veterinary Assistant in charge shall at once report to the Local Body and District Inspector any outbreak of epidemic disease which may occur among animals in the town in which the Dispensary is situated or in its neighbourhood and adopt suppressive measures in collaboration with the Local Body and District authorities. 81. He shall be responsible that the carcase of any animal which may die in the Dispensary premises is removed without delay, and if such death was due to contagious or infectious disease, shall see that the carcase is suitably buried or burnt. 82. He shall reside in or near the Dispensary, and if he is in charge of a Municipal Dispensary shall not, without the orders of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, the Deputy Superintendent in charge of the Division, the Veterinary Inspector or the Deputy Commissioner, absent himself for more than a few hours at a time. In other cases he may leave to attend outbreaks, or for touring purposes, as directed by the Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, the Deputy Superintendent in charge of the Division, the Veterinary Inspector or the Deputy Commissioner (vide paragraph 93). 83. Except as above provided and for the purpose of conducting post mortem examinations (vide Appendix C.), he shall not leave the Hospital or Dispensary during working hours, save in very urgent cases, of which he should make a note, stating date, name of owner of animal, nature of case and time up to which he was absent. 84. No in-patients may be admitted without the permission of the Veterinary Assistant in charge, provided that, if the Veterinary Assistant is absent when an animal is brought, it may be admitted provisionally. 85. He shall keep a register of medicines and of instruments and appliances, and shall enter without delay the names of any which may be damaged, destroyed, lost or issued from stock and of any new ones which may be supplied to the Dispensary. No instruments or appliances may be lent out from the Dispensary without the express permission of the Secre- tary or Chairman of the Local Body. 86. The Veterinary Assistant in charge is responsible for the safe custody of all articles in the Dispensary. 87. He is responsible that all poisonous drugs are kept under lock and key apart from other drugs, that the key is kept in his own custody and that they are not dispensed except by an authorized person and that each bottle is labelled with a "Poison" label.
17 88. When the Veterinary Assistant in charge is absent from the Dispensary for any short period, he shall retain the keys of the poison almirah and of the almirahs containing the main supply of medicines, and shall leave with the Compounder only a supply of stock medicines sufficient for the period of his absence. If there is a Second Veterinary Assistant, he shall hand over the keys to him. 89. He is responsible that all circulars and notices ordered to be hung up on the Dispensary walls are clean, legible and up-to-date. 90. He shall forward copies of remarks in the Visitors' Book through the Secretary, Local Board, and the Deputy Commissioner to the District Inspector, the Deputy Superintendent in charge of the Division and the Super- intendent, Civil Veterinary Department, not later than the day following that on which they were recorded. 91. No Veterinary Assistant, whether attached to a Dispensary or on peripatetic duty, or other Dispensary subordinate shall have any interest in a private Dispensary or druggist's shop, nor shall he engage in any private trade or business. 92. Veterinary Assistants may be required to perform post mortem examinations as detailed in Appendix C. It is no part of the duty of Veterinary Assistants to destroy ownerless dogs, and it is undesirable that they should be employed for this purpose. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 804 18 The rules relating to private practice are given below:19 (k) Any person disputing the charge made by an Assistant for private attendance may appeal to the Deputy Commissioner, who, in case of doubt, may consult the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. 95. Two statements showing (1) the details and class of patients treated (Form No. XXV20 receipt of information. He shall leave behind him, either with the Assistant in charge of the Dispensary,or with the Tahsildar or Chairman of the Local Body, such detail of his proposed tour as may be possible. 101. Under the orders contained in Appendix B the patwari reports such outbreaks both to the Deputy Commissioner and Veterinary Assistant in Form No. 33 of Schedule XXV. The Veterinary Assistant should abstract the details in his register, and file them in the Dispensary after taking necessary action. 102. He shall adopt suppressive measures, such as isolation of all sick or suspected animals; inspect healthy cattle daily, in order to detect suspicious cases; disinfect sheds and fittings; cause all droppings and litter of sick animals to be removed and burnt, and see that all carcases of animals dying of infectious or contagious disease are properly buried or burnt. 103. In carrying out the measures detailed in the preceding rule, the Veterinary Assistant should seek the co-operation of the district and village officials, while taking care to avoid troubling cattle owners unneces- sarily. 104. He should advise cattle owners as to the nature of the disease, its treatment and the steps necessary to overcome it, and induce them to co-operate in extirpating the disease. 105. On investigating the nature of the disease, he shall make a special report to the District Inspector, if he is not on the spot, giving in detail the symptoms, number of attacks and deaths, and the measures adopted. 106. He shall inform the inhabitants of neighbouring villages of the existence and prevalence of disease, and advise them to keep the cattle belonging to their villages away from the infected areas. 107. In the case of contagious disease affecting villages near the boundary of another tahsil or taluk, he shall give due intimation to the Tahsildar concerned, in order that he may warn the Veterinary Assistant of that tahsil or taluk to adopt precautionary measures. 108. In the event of village officials not rendering the necessary assistance, he shall report the fact, with the least possible delay, to the Tahsildar, a copy of the report being submitted to the District Inspector. 109. When a Veterinary Inspector is present at an outbreak of contagious disease and organizes measures for inoculation and other methods of treatment, in conjunction with any Veterinary Assistant of the District or Central Staff, that Assistant will work under the direct control of the Veterinary Inspector. C. P Gazette Notification No. 166, d. 16-4-10. 110. The Veterinary Assistant shall report at once to the District Inspector the appearance of diseases notified under the Glanders and Farcy Act and carry out the rules of the Act when appointed an Inspector under it. 111. The Veterinary Assistant will, if he is not engaged in suppress- ing outbreaks of contagious diseases, or carrying out any special orders,
21 attend to ordinary cases in his beat and collect and submit to the Veterinary Inspector, through the Local Body, information regarding grazing grounds, water-supply, the different breeds of cattle and means of improving them and other miscellaneous subjects. He should at the same time give advice to cattle owners and point out the importance of maintaining good breeds and endeavouring to improve others of an inferior kind. He shall never travel without his touring medicine chest and rinderpest outfit; when necessary he can take his spraying outfit or the apparatus for the treatment of foot and mouth disease. 112. He shall prepare two statements (1) in Form XXV22 SECTION IX. WORKING OF VETERINARY DISPENSARIES. C. P. Sectt. letter No. C-76, d. 28-5-13. 119. Veterinary Dispensary buildings will be constructed in accordance with the standard plan, either departmentally or by the Public Works Department, and their cost borne by Local Bodies. 120. Proposals for the construction of new buildings or for alteration in, or additions to, existing buildings will be submitted to the Director of Agriculture. 121. The advantages of a Veterinary Dispensary in a town are largely shared by the town inhabitants, so that Municipalities may fairly be asked to make an annual contribution for the upkeep of the Dispensary to the District Council or District Board Funds. 122. Veterinary Assistants and Inspectors must remember that the most important part of veterinary work is done outside the Dispensary, especially in attending to outbreaks of infectious disease. 123. The Dispensary records will consist of the following registers:23 whom the Veterinary Dispensaries are maintained, shall also be treated free of charge, if brought to the Dispensary during working hours. 125. The destroying of animals does not form a part of the legitimate duties of the Veterinary Department and is not permitted within the Dispensary premises except with the previous orders of the Superintendent. But there is no objection to a Veterinary Assistant undertaking the work as a private arrangement, and charging a fee, not exceeding Rs. 6, for destroying a large animal and Rs. 3 for a small animal. These charges do not include the cost of removing or burying the carcase, which should be arranged for by the owner. 126. The hours during which a Veterinary Dispensary shall be open for the treatment of patients are24 SECTION X. RULES FOR THE TRAINING, EXAMINATION AND EMPLOYMENT OF COMPOUNDERS OF VETERINARY DISPENSARIES. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 59, 25 138. The following are the rates of pay sanctioned for Compounders:26 SECTION XI. THE PROVINCIAL VETERINARY HOSPITAL, NAGPUR, AND VETERINARY DISPENSARY, PACHMARHI. 143. The duties of the Nagpur Veterinary Hospital and the Pach- marhi Veterinary Dispensary staff will be generally those detailed in Sections VII and VIII of this Manual. 144. The Veterinary Assistant, Nagpur Hospital and Lecturer, Agri- cultural College, works under the direct supervision and control of the Superintendent and will correspond on all veterinary matters direct with that officer, and in his capacity of Lecturer, with the Principal, Agricultural College. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 45727 SECTION XII. ACCOUNTS. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 4893, d. 17-12-92. 151. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces, is a Drawing Officer and signs (1) his salary and travelling allowance bills, (2) the salary and travelling allowance bills of his office establishment and (3) the abstract and detailed contingent bills of his office. The travelling allowance bills of the Superintendent and the Deputy Superintendents and the detailed contingent bills of his office, as well as those of the Veterinary Inspectors are countersigned by the Director of Agriculture. Para. 2 of Sectt., letter No. 32428 will sign the bills and have them presented at the District Treasury for payment without pre-audit of the same by the Comptroller, except in the Nagpur District, where such bills have to be pre-audited and made payable at the Sub-Treasury concerned. Payment in the case of other districts will be made by the District Treasury Officer to the Deputy Commissioner, who will disburse the amounts to the Veterinary Assistants attached to the Dispensary at the Sadar head-quarters, and arrange to have cash orders issued on the respective Sub-Treasuries in his district on account of the pay of the Veterinary Assistants attached to the Dispensaries at outlying tahsils. (d) Travelling allowance bills of the Veterinary Assistants attached to districts and tahsils should be dealt with in the same manner as their pay bills, only one bill being prepared by each Veterinary Assistant for the claims of a single month. Deputy Commissioners will sign the travelling allowance bills of the officials attached to their districts in the spaces provided for the signatures of the Drawing Officer before they are presented at the District Treasury for payment. 155. The Service Books and character rolls of the Veterinary Assistants working under the orders of the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, will be maintained by that officer, and those of the Veterinary Assistants attached to the Dispensaries in the various districts and tahsils by the Deputy Commissioners concerned. 156. Each peripatetic Veterinary Assistant or Assistant in charge of a Dispensary will hold an advance of Rs. 5 or more according to require- ments, to meet petty contingent expenditure and purchase country medicines locally. He will be held responsible that vouchers to the extent of the whole or part of the advance are furnished to the Local Body or Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, as the case may be, before a requisition is submitted for recoupment of the expended amount. 157. Charges on account of conveyance hire paid to a Veterinary Assistant for attendance on sick animals of Government, irrespective of the Department to which they belong, will be borne by the Civil Veterinary Department and drawn by the Superintendent in contingent bills under "Office expenses and miscellaneous", duly supported by a certificate as required by Article 1080 of the Civil Service Regulations. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 198629 LIST OF APPENDICES. PAGES. APPENDIX A.30 SCALE OF FEES LEVIED AND RULES IN FORCE AT CERTAIN VETERINARY HOSPITALS. C. P. Sectt. letter No. 2131 Appendix B. Measures to be adopted in case of outbreaks of contagious disease: The importance of securing prompt reporting of epidemic cattle disease is enjoined on all Deputy Commissioners. Touring Officers should see that the Patwaris, in compliance with Patwari Rule XXVIII. submit prompt reports of all cases of epidemic cattle disease within their circles and that Mukaddams recognize their duties under Rule (i) of the rules, framed by the Chief Commissioner under Section 141 (1) of the Land Revenue Act. On the receipt of a report of epidemic cattle disease by a peripatetic Veterinary Assistant (vide paragraph 100 of the Manual), he should immediately proceed to the spot and at the same time report to the Deputy Commissioner and the Veterinary Inspector what action he is taking. It should be borne in mind by the Veterinary Assistant that his absence on a prolonged visit to a very distant and perhaps unimportant outbreak would often prevent him from attending more important outbreaks nearer head- quarters, especially at a season when epidemic disease is rife. If the Veterinary Assistant is not at head-quarters when he receives the report, he must use his own discretion. If a report of an outbreak is received by a Veterinary Assistant in charge of a Dispensary, he shall be guided by the orders contained in paragraph 93 of this Manual. The duties of District Veterinary Inspectors in connection with outbreaks are contained in para- graphs 55 to 57 of the Manual. Revenue Officers should explain to cattle owners the value of inoculation and of the segregation of diseased cattle. They should use their influence to induce cattle owners to comply with the directions of the Veterinary Officer when dealing with such outbreaks and should do their best to ensure that Veterinary Officers perform their duties efficiently, tactfully and with due regard to the prejudices of the people. Revenue Book Circular, Section III, Serial No. 1, Rule XXVIII. 2. On the occurrence of any epidemic disease of cattle, the Patwari should report it by " post bearing " to the Veteri- nary Assistant of his tahsil or district, and to the Deputy Commissioner. Books containing tripli- cate report slips for this purpose will be supplied to Deputy Commissioners and other Indenting Officers by the Central Jail Press, Nagpur, on receipt of the annual indent in the ordinary course. Police Manual, paragraph 5, page 107. 3. The officer in charge of a police station shall, on receipt of a report from a Kotwal of the presence of infectious cattle disease in a village, forward to the Veteri- nary Assistant in charge of the tahsil, notice of the same by Service post card. Forms will be supplied for this purpose by the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. NOTE.Appendix B..33 Appendix C. Rules for the conduct of Post mortem Examinations. Post mortems on animals must be made by the Veterinary Assistant upon the request of the Police or of a private individual, if he can show the existence of reasonable suspicion of any foul play. The Veterinary Assist- ant should, in all cases, take the precaution of having a Police representa- tive present. If there is any indication of poison, the parts of the anatomy should be placed in vessels and sealed in accordance with the rules given below. If the Police or the owner of the animal wish it, suspected portions of the viscera should be made over to them, after having been placed in separate vessels and sealed in the presence of the Police. In all cases the Veterinary Assistant should send a detailed report of his examination to the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. The post mortem exami- nation should be made with the least possible delay compatible with care- ful examination, after receipt of the report. 2. Post mortems for the private information of the Veterinary Assist- ant should be made with due precaution and specimens of the lesions, etc., should be sent to the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department. 3. In cases of suspected anthrax, on no account must the body be opened, but only blood smears should be taken and sent for diagnosis. In cases where rabies is suspected, the brain of the animal should be sent at once direct to the Pasteur Institute, Kasauli. The tissue should be placed in glycerine, if the journey is likely to last more than two days. 4. In all cases details of the occurrence should be sent to the Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department. 5. A non-graduate Assistant may charge a fee of Rs. 3 for a post mortem made for a private person, and Rs. 5 if he is a Veterinary graduate. Preservation, packing and despatch of substances to the Chemical Examiner for analysis and report. 1. Articles sent for examination should, as a rule, if under 10 seers in weight, be sent by registered post. If above this weight, they should be sent by rail (passenger train, freight pre-paid). In the latter case the Rail- way receipt should be enclosed in the letter advising despatch of the parcel, 2. In all cases a letter advising despatch of the parcel must be sent to the Chemical Examiner in form No. 2 appended with as much additional information as possible concerning them. It should be sent by post and not enclosed in the parcel. The number and date of the letter must always be written on the outside of the parcel, preferably on the label. 3. Great care must be used in packing substances sent to the Chemi- cal Examiner, so that the success of the analysis may not be endangered and to avoid all risk of the parcel becoming dangerous or offensive to Post Office or Railway officials. Such an accident would render the sender liable to prosecution under Section 61 of the Post Office Act (VI of 1898). The Chemical Examiner is directed to report the name of any officer who fails to comply with these instructions.
Appendix C.35 Appendix CAppendix C.37 Appendix C.Appendix C.39 Appendix D. Directions for the collecting and packing of material for despatch to Muktesar for purposes of investigation, Blood, pus and other fluid, should be forwarded either in sealed pipettes or as smear preparations on cover-glasses or slides. In using the pipettes the following precautions are to be observed :40 Appendix D.41 Appendix E. The Glanders and Farcy Act, 1899, with Notifications and Rules thereunder. ACT No. XIII OF 1899. PASSED BY THE GOVERNOR GENERAL OF INDIA IN COUNCIL. Received the assent of the Governor General on the 20th March, 1899. An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Glanders and Farcy. WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to Glanders and Farcy; It is hereby enacted as follows : 42 Appendix E.43 Appendix E.44 Appendix E.45 Appendix E.46 Appendix E.47 Appendix E.48 Appendix E.49 Appendix E.Glanders & Farcy. 50 Appendix E.51 [Appendix E.52 Appendix E.53 Appendix E.54 Appendix F. List of Bazar Medicines used in Veterinary practice. 1. Aloes (Elwa). 2. Alum (Pitkari). 3. Ammonium chloride (Nawsagar). 4. Anisi Fructus (Sonf). 5. Areca nut (Supari). 6. Asafoetida (Hing). 7. Bael fruit (Belphal). 8. Black pepper (Kalimirch). 9. Black salt (Sondha Nimak). 10. Borax (Sohagi). 11. Butea Frondosa (Palas Parsa) 12. Camphor (Kaphur). 13. Catechu (Katha) 14. Chalk (Khirya matti) 15. Cocoanut oil (Khopra ka tel). 16. Croton seed (Jamal gota). 17. Cupri Sulphas (Nila tota) 18. Gardenia lucida (Dikamali). 19. Ferri Sulphas (Hirakhas). 20. Gall (Majuphal). 21. Ginger (Sonth). 22. Gum Acacia (Babul gondh). 23. Linseed (Alsi). 24. Liquorice (Mulaethti). 25. Mallotus Phillippinensis (Kamela). 26. Mustard (Rai). 27. Mustard oil (Rai ka tel). 28. Oleum Ricini (Arandi ka tel). 29. Caram seed (Ajwan). 30. Ophelia Chirata (Chiraeta). 31. Opium (Affim). 32. Pharbitis Nil (Kaladana). 33. Plantago (Isab ghol). 34. Potassii Nitras (Shora). 35. Resina (Ral). 36. Senna (Sonamukhi). 37. Sesamum Indicum (Tilli ka tel). 38. Sodium Chloride (Nimak). 39. Sulphur (Gandhak). 40. Tobacco (Tambaku). 41. Turpentine oil (Tarpin ka tel). 42. Vinegar (Sirka). 43. Vinum Indicum (Sharab).
55 Appendix G. List of Statements to be appended to the Annual Report. Serial No. of form in Sche* dule. Name of form. Page. 15 Table I56 Appendix H. RINDERPEST. Instructions for Inoculating: Bovines with Anti-Rinderpest Serum, Manufactured at the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, Muktesar, By "Serum Alone" Method. SERUM ALONE. N. B.No virulent blood to be used. 1. The " Serum Alone" method is to be used only in actual outbreaks of Rinder- pest. It serves to protect animals from contracting the disease and thereby curtails the spread of the infection. The immunity conferred by a single dose of serum is of short duration, varying from 3 to 6 weeks. Consequently, if cattle are subjected to infection for a longer period they should be re-inoculated. 2. The serum is injected subcataneously in the region of the shoulder and, for this purpose, the hair should be clipped over a small area of about 2 inches diameter, and the part washed with a 5 per cent. carbolic solution before introducting the needle of the syringe. After injecting the fluid withdraw the needle placing one finger or thumb over the small tumour made by the injected serum in order to diffuse the fluid downwards into the surrounding tissues before letting the animal loose. After inoculation with serum alone, all the animals should be turned out together with the infected herd in order that an opportunity of contracting natural infection and a longer immunity may be given. Bullocks may be worked on the day following the serum injection. 3. STANDARDISED DOSE OF SERUM57 Appendix H.58 Appendix I. Hæmorrhagic Septiæmia- SERUM No. 32. Instructions for treating Bovines and Equines with Hæmorrhagic septicæmia Sernm. Prepared at the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, Muktesar. By " Serum Alone " Method. 1. The " serum alone" method is to be used only in actual outbreaks of Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. It serves to protect animals from contracting the disease and thereby curtails the spread of the infection. The immunity conferred by a single dose of serum is of short duration, for not more than six weeks. Consequently, if animals are subjected to infection for a longer period they should be re-injected. 2. The serum is injected subcutaneously in the region of the shoulder and for this purpose, the hair should be clipped over a small area of about 2 inches diameter, and the part washed with a 5 per cent, carbolic solution before introducing the needle of the syringe. After injecting the fluid withdraw the needle and place one finger or thumb over the small tumour made by the injected serum and diffuse the fluid downwards into the surrounding tissues. 3. The doses of serum are :59 Appendix J. Anthrax. SERUM No. 26 Instructions for treating Bovines and Equines with Anthrax Serum, Prepared at the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, Muktesar. By " Serum Alone " Method. I. The " Serum Alone " method is to be used in actual outbreaks of anthrax. It serves to protect animals exposed to infection and thereby curtails the spread of the disease, and permits of measures being taken to disinfect and remove the source of infection. The immunity conferred by a single dose of serum, is of short duration, not more than four weeks. Consequently if animals are subjected to infection for a longer period they should be re-injected. II. The serum is injected subcutaneously in the region of the shoulder, and, for this purpose, the hair should be clipped over a small area of about two inches diameter and the part washed with a 5 per cent. carbolic solution before introducing the needle of the syringe. After injecting the fluid withdraw the needle, placing one finger or thumb over the small tumour made by the injected serum, and diffuse the fluid downwards into the surrounding tissues. III. The doses of serum are :60 Appendix K. Registers and Forms. Serial No. of form in Sche- dule, Name of form. Page. 1 Patient's Ticket. 62 2 Do. Register. 63 3 Statement showing the details and class of patients treated at the dispensary 64 4 Indent for Veterinary medicines and other expendable articles ... ... * 5 Register showing the number of cases treated during tour ... 65 6 Statement showing the number or animals trea- ted by Veterinary Assistants 66 & 67 7 Tour Diary of Veterinary Assistants 68 8 Statement showing the results of inoculation in Patwari Circles ... *.. 9 Bill for professional attendance on cattle 69 & 70 10 Serum Register 71 11 Statement showing quantities of serum received, consumed and balances in hand at close of quarter 72 12 Register showing the details ol animals inspected at slaughter-houses ... 73 13 Visitors' books of Veterinary Dispensaries 74 & 75 14 Inspection Report of Veterinary Dispensaries by Veterinary Inspectors 7661 Appendix K.Appendix K.63 Appendix K.Appendix K.Appendix K.Appendix K.67 Appendix K.Appendix K.Appendix K.Appendix K.71 Appendix K.Appendix K.73 Appendix K.Appendix K.75 Appendix K.Appendix K.77 Appendix K.Appendix. K79 Appendix K.Appendix K.Appendix K.Appendix K.83 Appendix K.Appendix K.85 Appendix K-Appendix K.Appendix K.88 Appendix K.89 Appendix K.Appendix K.91 Appendix K.Appendix K.93 APPENDIX L. List of Records at dispensaries and in the offices of Veterinary'Ins- pectors and Deputy Superintendents with the periods for which they are to be preserved. Serial No. Names of records. Period of pre- servation. 1 Daily register of out-patients 3 years. 2 Daily register of in-patients 3 94 Appendix. L.Amendment to the Manual of the Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces and Berar. No. 14, dated Nagpur, the 6th March 1923. PAGE 97, APPENDIX N. Insert the following as Appendix N to the Civil Veterinary Manual :2 Powers of inspector. 5. An inspector may, subject to such rules as the Local Govern- ment may make in this behalf,3 and fifty rupees, he shall report accordingly to the Collector, who shall decide the amount to be so paid. Committees for hearing appeals. II. (1) The Local Government shall, by rules published in the local official Gazette, make provision for the constitution of a com- mittee or committees for the hearing of appeals from decisions under section 10. (2) Such rules shall provide that not less than one member of any committee constituted thereunder shall be a person not in the employ of Government or of a local authority. Appeals. 12. Any owner may, within two months from the date of a decision under section 10, appeal against such decision to the com- mittee constituted in that behalf by rules made under section 11, and the decision of such committee shall be final. Vexatious entries and searches. 13. (1) Whoever, being an inspector appointed under this Act, vexatiously and unnecessarily enters or searches any field, building or other place, shall be punishable, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. (2) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted after the expiry of three months from the date on which the offence has been committed. Rules. 14. (1) The Local Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules as aforesaid may4 (b) any horse in respect of which an order under section 5, clause (b), is in force, or (c) any mare which has been branded in pursuance of section 8, clause (b), shall be punishable with fine which may amount, in the case of a first conviction, to fifty rupees, or in the case of a second or subse- quent conviction, to one hundred rupees. Protection to persons acting under Act. 16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is, in good fa th, done or intended to be done under this Act. II.5 (2) in clause (b)6 areas specified in each case, the powers conferred and duties imposed upon Inspectors by the said Act:7 (b) The owner or person in charge of a building, field or other place to be searched shall, on requisition by the Inspector, allow free ingress to the Inspector and shall afford him all reasonable facilities for search. (c) Searches shall, where possible, be made in the presence of the owner or keeper of the horse and the owner or person in charge of the building, field or other place to be searched, or, failing them, in the presence of a police officer, and with all reasonable regard for the convenience of the occupants of the place. (d) The Inspector may break open any outer or inner door or window of any building or other place or any gate of a field to be searched, if, after notification of his authority and purpose and demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance. 2. If as a result of his search or otherwise the Inspector finds a horse which in his opinion is affected with dourine, he shall, by order in writing, prohibit the owner or keeper of such horse from using it for breeding purposes pending examination by the veterinary practitioner. 3. The Inspector shall forward under Section 6 the copy of the order issued by him under Section 5 to the nearest veterinary practitioner for action being taken under Section 7. The Inspector shall at the same time forward, for information, duplicate copies of his order to the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department (unless the Superintendent himself is the nearest veterinary practitioner), to the District Magistrate and to Officers Commanding, Jubbulpore and Saugor. 4. The provisions of Rule 2 shall govern any entry to be effected by the veterinary practitioner under Section 7. 5. The owner or keeper of a horse under examination in accordance with Section 7 shall permit blood or other material to be drawn from it for the purpose of examination. 6. If, in any case, the veterinary practitioner is of opinion that repeated examinations are necessary before coming to a decision he may, by an order in writing require the detention of the animal concerned in isolation in such place as he may consider suitable, for such length of time as may enable him to come to a decision, 7. All veterinary practitioners for the time being appointed under Section 4 shall have power under Section 8, clause (b), sub- clause (ii), to cause to be destroyed any mare found under that clause to be affected with dourine. 8. No person shall interfere with the execution of an order by the veterinary practitioner made under Section 8, clause (b).
8 9. In the case of a mare which has been destroyed or of a horse which had died in consequence of castration, the carcass shall be disposed of in such manner as the veterinary practitioner may direct. 10. Whoever shall be guilty of a breach of Rules 1 (b), 5, 6 or 8 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. 11. No prosecution under any of the rules mentioned in Rule 10 shall be instituted without the previous sanction in writing of the District Magistrate. No. 538-404-XIV.9 to exercise and perform within the areas specified in each case, the powers conferred and the duties imposed upon Veterinary Pract- tioners by the said Act: 10 4. The provisions of Rule 2 shall govern any entry to be effected by the Veterinary Practitioner under Section 7. 5. The owner or keeper of a horse under examination in accordance with Section 7 shall permit blood or other material to be drawn from it for the purpose of examination. 6. If, in any case, the Veterinary Practitioner is of opinion that repeated examinations are necessary before coming to a decision, he may, by an order in writing, require the detention of the animal concerned in isolation in such place as he may consider suitable, for such length of time as may enable him to come to a decision. 7. All Veterinary Practitioners for the time being appointed under Section 4 shall have power under Section 8, clause (b), sub- clause (ii), to cause to be destroyed any mare found under that clause to be affected with dourine. 8. No person shall interfere with the execution of an order by the Veterinary Practitioner made under Section 8, clause (b). 9. In the case of a mare which has been destroyed or of a horse which had died in consequence of castration, the carcass shall be disposed of in such manner as the Veterinary Practitioner may direct. 10. Whoever shall be guilty of a breach of Rules (b), 5, 6 or 8 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. 11. No prosecution under any of the rules mentioned in Rule 10 shall be instituted without the previous sanction in writing of the District Magistrate. No. 618-568-XlV.Amendments to the Manual of the Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces and Berar. No. 17, dated Nagpur, the 29th May 1924. PAGE 21. Paragraph 115.Amendments to the Central Provinces and Berar Civil Veterinary Department Manual. No. 20, dated Nagpur, the 19th October 1926. PAGES 14 AND 15. For the existing paragraphs 68,69,70 and 71 substitute the following and renumber paragraphs 72 to 94 in this section as 71 to 93 :2 (i) Candidates are selected by the Veterinary Adviser to Government in consultation with the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department. (j) Applications should reach the Veterinary Adviser to Government or the Superintendents, Civil Veterinary Department, before 31st January, and should give the candidate's name, age, his father's name, father's occupation, caste, place of residence, vernacular languages known by him, and date of passing the School Final Examination or the date on which the candidate obtained a University degree. The application should be accom- panied by the required medical certificate, by copies of the certificates of examinations passed by the candi- date and certificates from two gentlemen of position as to his respectability. (k) Approved candidates who will be selected in the first week of March will have to enter into the following agree- ment: