ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1910 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1910 [Price,ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1910 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1910
LIST OF AGENTS FOR TEE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA: THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. PROPRIETOR, HANTHAWADDY PRESS, Rangoon. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. IN ENGLAND: E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W. London, HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C., London. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. P. S. KING & Sox, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, W.S. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S.W. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. B. H. BIACKWELL, 50 & 51 Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. MESSRS. W THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. MESSRS. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT: R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, Germany. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig, Germany. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig, Germany. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. RUDOLF HAUPT, 1, Dorrientrasse, Leipzig, Germany,
TABLE OF CONTENTS. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 3IST MARCH 1910. PARA. PAGE. General Administration RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN BURMA For the year ending the 31st March 1910. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department,2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT Officer will endeavour constantly to inculcate the expediency of preventive measures, and to dispel the lack of public interest in controlling disease that is the main obstacle in the way of success. The Myitkyina outbreak described in the Report illustrates the necessity of strong and sympathetic working of the Rules: The question of amending and improving the Rules was considered during the year by the Local Government. No changes were found to be advisable. It was decided, however, to propose an amendment of the Village Act so as to permit of control of diseased cattle belonging to strangers coming to or passing through a village tract. The question of selecting permanent segregation camps and erecting sheds against possible outbreaks of disease (paragraph 20 of the Report) was considered, but the proposal was not considered practicable. The measures for the prevention of cattle-disease in the Shan States were also under the consideration of the Local Government, and revised Rules have recently been approved. The difficulty in the Shan States lies largely in the insufficiency of the staff, and its composition of persons other than Shans. A scheme has been adopted to remedy these defects. The Report makes it clear that in the Shan States and elsewhere, as in Myitkyina, Bhamo and Amherst, disease originates with imported cattle. The Lieutenant-Governor notes that the Superintendent proposes to make arrange- ments, if possible, for the watching of all regular import routes. Serum injection made some progress and was successful. It was apparently resorted to, however, only in the last emergency, and the people offer at least a passive resistance to its performance. Their education in this respect will neces- sarily be gradual, and will be dependent on the influence and tact of District and Veterinary Officers. It has been decided to undertake the experiment in the Möng Mit State, alluded to in paragraph 2 of the Resolution on the Report for 1908-09, and arrangements are being perfected for its introduction in case of an outbreak of disease. The Veterinary School. 3. Some progress was made in the equipment of the Veterinary School at Insein, but development is hindered by the lack of funds. The Lieutenant-Governor has read with regret of the unsatisfactory conduct of the pupils. The School should afford an effective inculcation of departmental discipline as well as technical instruction, and misconduct should be repressed firmly. Arrangements have been made under which Shan pupils will not be trained in the School, but locally at Taunggyi. By this plan it is hoped both to secure Shans to serve in the Shan States and to avoid the difficulties met with in training them at the School. Establishment. 4. The work of the staff was satisfactory and supervision was adequate. It is regretted that the special allowance attached to the posts of Reserve Veterinary Assistants has not removed the dislike to them. The Lieutenant-Governor agrees with the Director of Agriculture that men should not be retained too long on this duty. Pony breeding. 5. The impossibility of providing funds prevented any action during the year to give effect to the sanctioned scheme for the establishment of such operations. For the same reason no provision could be made in the current year's budget.
IN BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31st MARCH 1910. 3 General. 6. The figures shown in Table VI attached to the Report differ widely from those shown in previous years. The former figures were misleading, and steps will be taken to have these and certain other statements properly exhibited in future reports. 7. The Lieutenant-Governor commends the efficiency with which the Depart- ment was administered, and acknowledges especially the services of Lieutenant- Colonel Evans, who has since the close of the year been transferred to officiate as Inspector-General of the Department. His Honour has read with satisfaction the praise bestowed by Lieutenant-Colonel Evans on Messrs. Rennie and Cameron and other officers including the late Inspector Maung Nyo, and the cordial acknow- ledgment of the assistance of the District Officers. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma, G. F. ARNOLD, Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma.
From J. J. ANDERSON, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,( 2 ) interest. A scheme for the opening of a Veterinary School at Taunggyi, under a Veterinary Inspector who, in his spare time, will be available for peripatetic supervision and instruction has been sanctioned and will be given effect to from the 1st of July. Recruitment will be at the rate of two pupils from the Southern Shan States and two from the Northern Shan States annually : the ultimate strength of Veterinary Assistants being 12. It is hoped that by the local training of Shan students better results may be obtained than has been the case in the past. 7. Colonel Evans again notes the lack of spontaneous interest by cattle-owners in pre- ventive inoculation. A scheme has been framed and is under discussion for an experiment to test whether it is " possible to go on temporarily immunizing and then promoting disease among large numbers of cattle so as to produce an active immunity in each animal, such animals being used for breeding purposes. This, it is thought, might result in time in the production of a race of animals more or less non-susceptible to rinderpest " The locale of this experiment will be the Möng Mit State in the Ruby Mines District. 8. The inception of operations in connection with the pony-breeding scheme which has been approved has been delayed by financial stress. From local enquiries it is clear that full grown stallions will not be available but that it will be necessary to purchase and train selected colts. 9. The Bhamo Agricultural and Live Stock Show is now firmly established and exhibits are annually improving both in number and quality. 10. I concur in Colonel Evans' commendation of the work of Veterinary Inspectors and Assistants and should wish to associate myself with his appreciation of the work and character of the late Maung Nyo. It is to be regretted that the " Reserve " appointments are still so unpopular with Veterinary Assistants. A certain amount of relief would be given if men were not kept too long on the " Reserve " but were drafted out to districts say after two years and new recruits put in their place. 11. The measures to prevent the importation of Disease from China have been success- ful and an extension of the system to all frontier caravan routes would probably result in a great diminution of cattle disease in frontier districts. 12. The facts recorded in paragraph 20 of the Report as to specific cases where a strict application of the Segregation rules has had definite results is most encouraging and should stimulate district officers to be zealous in this direction. 13. The high opinion of Lieutenant-Colonel Evans which the Local Government has, for years, held and expressed, has been confirmed by his selection to officiate as Inspector- General of the Civil Veterinary Department. He leaves behind him, in Messrs. Rennie and Cameron, well-trained assistants in whose hands the maintained efficiency of the Department is assured. Printed by order of the Government of Burma C. G. B. P. O. No. 704, RCV. Secy., 9(b), 80-7-1910ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, For the year ending 31st March 1910. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. There were three Superintendents whose respective charges were the same as heretofore. The Superintendent visited 17 districts and the Northern and Southern Shan States; was on tour for 112 days and travelled 6,573 miles; he inspected the work of 32 Assistants and 2 Inspectors. He also inspected the mounted infantry ponies of some of the Military Police Battalions. He was absent on privilege leave for 38 days. The second Superintendent visited 10 districts and the Northern Shan States ; inspected the work of 23 Assistants and 2 Inspectors; was on tour 106 days and travelled 7,137 miles. He was 38 days on privilege leave. Towards the close of the year (24th March) he proceeded to England on combined leave. The third Superintendent visited 10 districts, inspecting the work of 23 Assistants and 2 Inspectors. He was absent on tour 46 days and travelled 3,586 miles. He also inspected the mounted infantry ponies of some Military Police Battalions and attended the Bhamo Agricultural Show held in March this year. He availed himself of three months privilege leave. I.2 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, The laboratory equipment indented for in 1908 arrived during the early part of the year and a temporary laboratory in the school was put in working order. During the year some 2,000 smears were examined, chiefly from obscure cases of disease or those suspected of being of a contagious nature. The number of animals treated at the Veterinary Hospital during the year amounted to 26 in-patients and 214 out-patients. The Superintendent held charge during the absence of the 3rd Superintendent on leave. This is the first year a Veterinary Hospital has been in Insein. The natives have not so far come forward to any great extent. It is hoped that as the hospital becomes better known greater advantage will be taken of its resources. Owing to financial reasons we have worked with as small a staff as possible, so that, had a large number of in-patients been sent to the hospital, it would have been difficult to deal with them. Animals are examined and passed for the municipal slaughter-house, and hack gharry ponies are also examined at the school. So far as contagious disease is concerned the. pupils have attended 3 outbreaks of rinderpest besides having seen cases of foot-and-mouth disease, surra and piro- plasmosis. They have also had the opportunity of preparing and examining a large number of microscopical specimens. The following buildings were completed and handed over by the Public Works Department during the year under report, viz., a godown for the storage of kerosene oil, quarters for the Veterinary Assistant and quarters for the accom- modation of followers. Temporary mat stabling for the accommodation of in-patients was also erected. Plans and estimates for a godown for the storage of grain and fodder have been prepared. In view of future expansion a portion of land, some 9 acres, was acquired. II.FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1910. 3 In the Tharrawaddy District the Tharrawaddy and Mônyo Townships suffered most, there being 289 and 273 deaths respectively. The outbreak in Tharrawaddy District in May was suppressed by end of July. Serum injection was carried out in Lwinbyin, where disease was severe. Towards the end of the year arrangements were made to carry out serum injection at Singaung in Ôkpho Township, but on arrival at the scene the owners were not keen on it. The outbreaks in Prome District were generally not of a severe type and occurred in various parts of the district. Disease was more or less prevalent throughout the year. Anthrax caused very little trouble. Foot-and-mouth disease was generally prevalent throughout the division, and was especially so in the Pegu and Hanthawaddy Districts, particularly in the Hlègu and Kawa Townships of the former and Taikkyi and Kyauktan in the latter. I saw numerous cases in the rains some of which, owing to the season, were severe. Veterinary Inspectors, 2. Special duty, Nil. Veterinary Assistants, 224 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, A few cases of anthrax were recorded in That on and Toungoo Districts and some 248 deaths were recorded in Amherst District. Foot-and-mouth disease was prevalent all over the division, being especially so in the Pa-an, Paung and Hlaingbwè Townships of the That6n District and in the Kyaikmaraw and Kawkareik Townships of the Amherst District. Veterinary Inspector, 1. Special duty, Nil. Veterinary Assistants, 13FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1010. 5 In the Bhamo District the disease was chiefly confined to the Kachin Hill Tracts and prevailed from April to July. Disease in the Yamèthin District was most severe in the Yamèthin Sub- division. Only a few cases of anthrax were recorded from Upper Burma. Though foot-and-mouth disease was prevalent in many districts, it was generally in a benign form. Veterinary Inspectors, 4. Veterinary Assistants, 416 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, animals were all tied to certain water-supplies the intermingling of healthy with affected animals was a matter not easy to avoid or to prevent, however stringent the orders on the subject may have been. The Northern Shan States have not been free from disease at any time of the year though most prevalent from July to December. As usual, rinderpest caused the heaviest mortality. In Hsipaw State 3,235 deaths are said to have occurred, and this estimate is considered by the Superintendent to be fairly accurate. In South Hsenwi the loss is estimated at some 5,000, but no actual figures are available. North Hsenwi and Manglun are said to have suffered somewhat severely. In the Tawngpeng State one circle, Mansan, the principal breeding centre, sustained considerable loss. The outbreaks in the Northern States were more or less local, i.e., disease would appear in a circle, die down, only to reappear later. Telegraphic information regarding cattle disease was received on forty occa- sions and extracts from the " Summary of Events " were also received through the Director of Agriculture, Burma. Six Veterinary Assistants were employed on special duty at various times, and Maung Po Kha and Maung Thet Tun are specially mentioned for good work. There are no Veterinary Assistants in the Northern Shan States; hence the frequent requests for assistance. The Superin- tendent remarks that the need of permanent men is very real. The Rules for prevention of cattle disease are said to have been fairly well observed in the Hsipaw and Tawngpeng States ; indifferently in South Hsenwi, and not at all in North Hsenwi and Manglun. The Superintendent observes that the Rules are not popular and that there is certainly no public feeling behind them, although the more "enlightened Chiefs and Circle officials understand and appre- ciate their utility." The Superintendent also notes that there is undoubtedly a brisk trade in hides and horns, and that the flesh of animals that have died from disease is eaten by villagers. This latter he infers from the fact that the receipts of the butchers fall off during an epidemic. There were several instances of breaches of the Rules. In one case a State policeman was convicted of accepting illegal gratifications for burking cases of disease. The two villagers who combined to aid him were severely punished. (2) Other Contagious Diseases. 9. The strength of the Mounted Infantry of the Burma Military Police at the end of the year was 1,928 including 800 transport animals. There were 35 deaths from contagious diseases, viz., surra 31, anthrax, 2, glanders 2. The month in which the greatest mortality occurred was during August. Surra was responsible for 18 deaths in the Myitkyina Battalion, 5 in the Northern Shan States Battalion, 4 in the Taunggyi Battalion and 4 in the Rangoon Battalion. These cases were all contracted at outposts. A few cases were also reported amongst privately owned ponies in the Shan States. The Superintendent, Mandalay Jail, suspecting tuberculosis, expressed a desire to have his cattle tested, and 51 animals were injected, but there were no "reactors." Hæmorrhagic septicæmia was the cause of some deaths in both Lower and Upper Burma. (3) Preventive Inoculation. Table III. 10. Serum injection was carried out in seven districts, two in Lower and five in Upper Burma, as follows :FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1910. 7 The number of oxen injected in 34 villages including the Vaccine Dep6t at Meiktila amounted to 3,466. The total number of deaths among inoculated animals was 226. Three Inspectors, seventeen Veterinary Assistants and twelve pupils received instruction. There were no spontaneous requests for serum injection. Several Veterinary Assistants, however, induced villagers to consent, and in one instance Pebin and Lungaung villages, Maymyo Subdivision, to submit a petition to this office to have their animals injected. The request was complied with and the Deputy Commissioner reports that the headmen and cattle-owners later on submitted to the Subdivisional Officer, Maymyo, a letter expressing their gratitude at the results. This is the first occasion, and I trust it may not be the last, on which the services of the Veterinary Department have been so appreciated by cattle-owners in the matter of serum injection as to merit special acknowledgment of this nature. The inspectors and Veterinary Assistants have, as far as we can ascertain, endeavoured to induce the villagers to consent to submitting their oxen to the operation. As was the case last year, nearly all those engaged in serum injection work suffered more or less severely from fever ; this was particularly the case when we carried out this work in Mogaung and Hôpin during the rains. Two or three men are still suffering from frequent attacks of fever contracted there. (4) Other Diseases. 11. The mortality from other diseases shows an increase principally in the Pegu Division. The total mortality for the Province under this heading is estimated at 85,838. The mortality figures are : Arakan Division 11,339, Pegu Division 24,237, Irrawaddy Division 29,113, Tenasserim Division 14,262; Upper Burma reported 6,887. (5) Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries. 12. The system remains unchanged. III.8 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, (4) Fairs and Shows. Table XIV. 14. As was the case last year, only one Show was held, viz., at Bhamo. The buffaloes were, as is usual at this Show, excellent and the entries were more numerous than last year and slightly in excess of the year previous, being 172 as against 55 last year. There is nothing worthy of notice amongst the exhibits in the other classes excepting a few young bulls. The total entries at the Show showed an improvement on last year, the numbers being 383 this year as compared with 194 last year. IV.FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1910. 9 V.10 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, 18. Veterinary School.FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1910. 11 quietly sends off the diseased animal or animals, failing which, the contacts, to the next village. The fact only becomes known when disease breaks out there. Karens are stated to be the worst offenders in this respect. In Pyapôn and Henzada Districts headmen and villagers were extremely dilatory in reporting outbreaks of disease. I would again call attention to the desirability of setting aside suitable sites in the vicinity of large villages or groups of smaller ones for permanent Segrega- tion Camps. In one subdivision I know of, camps have been more or less selected and temporary sheds erected thereon. The Deputy Commissioner considers that by these means the amount of disease and also the mortality therefrom have been decreased, and I am very much disposed to agree with him. 21. Registration of Cattle Deaths.APPENDICES. PAGE Table I.1 4 APPENDICES. TABLE I. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1909-10 (Paragraph 2). Veterinary colleges and schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final examination. Remaining under instruc- tion at end of year. Scholarship-holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolong- ed by reason of failure to pass. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 No. No. No. No. No. No. Burma ... Senior A 5 ... 5 ... Senior B 24* ... 20APPENDICES. 1 5 TABLE II. LOWER BURMA. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1909-10 (Paragraphs 3 to 6 and 16). District. EQUINES.* BOVINES. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. 1 3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Akyab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,308 131 Kyaukpyu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 171 17 Sandoway ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 16 North Arakan (Paletwa) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hanthawaddy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 595 380 Pegu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 366 629 Prome ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,296 133 Tharrawaddy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 912 176 Bassein ... ... .. .. ... ... ... ... ... 621 477 Ma-ubin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 4o Pyapôn ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 137 Myaungmya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 227 Henzada ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,058 528 Thayetmyo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,837 345 Amherst ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,470 219 Tavoy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 23 Mergui ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 16 Thaton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 183 599 Toungoo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,078 16 Salween Tracts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13,835 4,129. District. BOVINES. OTHERS.. Remarks. septicæmia.l6 APPENDICES. TABLE II. UPPER BURMA. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1909-10 (Paragraphs 7 and 16). District. EQUINES.* BOVINES. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 PakSkku ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 64 36 Minbu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Magwe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 231 17 Mandalay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 262 10 Bhamo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 923 ... Katha ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 456 ... Myitkyina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,358 ... Ruby Mines ... ... ... ... ... ... 112 1 Shwebo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 89 ... Sagaing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 325 663 Lower Chindwin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 ... Upper Chindwin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... Kyauksè ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 152 ... Meiktila ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 482 96 Yamèthin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 738 252 Myingyan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 168 3 Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,405 1,078 GRAND TOTAL FOR THE PROVINCE . ... ... ... ... ... ... 22,240 5,207 District. BOVINES. OTHERS. Remarks. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. APPENDICES. 17 TABLE III. Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1909-10 (Paragraph 10). Province. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out Method of inoculation follow- ed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was un- dertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNINOCULATED IN COURSE OF OUT- BREAK. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Burma Rinderpest. Serum alone method. 34 ... 984 ... ... 3,466 ... ... 226 ... Total ... ... ... 34 ... 984 ... ... 3,466 ... ... 226 ... TABLE IV. Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1909-10. Province. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Burma 18,965 112 2 ... ... 2 Total ... 18,965 112* 2 ... ... 2 Province. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castra- tions performed. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Burma ... 20 41,253 43 41,316 1,331 30,827 196 32,354 73,672 Total ... 20 41,253 43 41,316 1,331 30,827 196 32,354 73,67218 APPENDICES. TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1909-10 (Paragraph 2). Province. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed at dispensaries. IN-PATIENTS. Remaining on 1sl April. Admitted during the year. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma 108 112 18 5 3 Total 108 112* ... 18 5 1 3 Province. IN-PATIENTS. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Burma ... 18 5 3 15 15 3 3 ... ... Total ... 18 5 3 ... 15 5 3 3 ... ... Province. OUT-PATIENTS.. TOTAL NUMBER OF IN- AND OUT-PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Receipts. Expenditure. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendence. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Burma ... 1,850 14,626 541 5.07 40.07 1.5 1,868 14,631 544 17,043 ... ... Total ... 1,850 14,626 541 5.07 40.07 1.5 1,868 14,631 544 17,043 APPENDICES. 19 TABLE VI * Abstract showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during the year 1909-10. Province. RECEIPTS. Last year's balance. By Local Fund grants, By Govern- ment grants. By Munici- pal contri- butions. By fees. By other sources. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Province EXPENDITURE. Remarks. Pay. Travelling allowances. Medicines, instru- ments, etc. Furniture, etc. Contingen- cies. Total. Balance. 1 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... ... 9,658 ... ... 9,658 ... Total ... ... ... 9,658 .... ... 9,658 ... * As submitted by the Accountant-General, Burma. TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1909-10 (Paragraph 15). Province How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. No. Burma ... In schools and colleges Provincial ... 1 1 In dispensaries Do. ... ... 46* ... Includes Reserve 3 Head- quarters 2 Removed 1 Local Funds ... 65 ... Includes Died 1 Removed 1 Resigned 1 On other work Provincial.. 10 ... ... Includes died 1 Total ... 10 112 1
20 APPENDICES. TABLE VIII. Return of Stud Bulls for the year 1909-10. Province. PROPERTY OF GOVERNMENT. PROPERTY OF LOCAL BOARDS. Remarks. Number on 1st April. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March. Number on 1st April. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March. Number. Average price paid. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Burma ... Nil. Total ... TABLE IX. Showing main results of the working of Provincial Cattle Farms during the year 1909-10. Province. Name of farm. RECEIPTS. Sale of ani- mals. Sale of pro- duce. Other heads. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... ... Nil. Total ... Province. EXPENDITURE. VALUATION OF STOCK, GRAIN AND FODDER RE- MAINING AT CLOSE OF YEAR AS DETAILED ON REVERSE. Remarks. Salaries of establishment. Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- penses. Purchase of animals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Total. 1 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... Nil. Total ...
APPENDICES. 21 Valuation Statement of Cattle, Grain and Fodder in hand at close of the year 1909-10. NUMBER OR QUAN- TITY. Description. Rate. Value. Remarks. No. Quantity. i 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. 1 1 Cattle. Nil. Total ... Grain and Fodder. Nil. Total ... GRAND TOTAL ...
22 APPENDICES. TABLE X. Return of Horse, Pony and Donkey Stallions under Local Bodies for the year 1909-10 (Paragraph 13). Details. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Balance on 1st April 1909 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Increase ... Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Received from ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Decrease Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Destroyed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Transferred to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total decrease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Balance on 31st March 1910 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Details. HORSE AND PONY STAL- LIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIESAPPENDICES. 23 TABLE XI. Services and Produce of each class of Horse, Pony and Donkey Stallions under Local Bodies during the year 1909-10 (Paragraph 13). Horse, pony or donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March 1910. STALLIONS AC- TUALLY EMPLOY- ED AT STUD. NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Burma. Horse Nil. Total ... Tharrawaddy * ... ... ... 2 ... 38 ... 19 Pony Thamakan 24 APPENDICES. TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding Horse Fairs and Shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1909-10. Province. Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re- port. Previous year. * Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Burma ... Nil. Total ... Province. PRICE PAID FOR REMOUNTS. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. 1 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... Nil. Total ... ' Province. PRIZE MONEY PROVIDED. Amount sanctioned by Govern- ment of India for next year's fair or show. Remarks. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sour- ces. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... Nil. Total ...
APPENDICES. 25 TABLE XIV. Abstract of particulars regarding Cattle Fairs and Shows held during the year 1909-10 (Paragraph 14). Province. Number of cattle fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma. Bhamo ... ... 1 23 72 8 8 172 ... 100 Total ... 1 23 72 8 8 172 ... 100 Province. AVEREGE PRICE OF ANIMALS SOLD. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Burma. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Bhamo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 383 Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 383 Province. PRIZE MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. Remarks. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Burma. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Bhamo ... ... ... 1,345 ... ... 1,345 1,305 Total ... ... 1,345 ... ... 1,345 1,305
26 APPENDICES. TABLE XIV-A. * Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1909-10. Major Heads. AMOUNT. Remarks. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... 42,020 19,273 ... 61,293 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 39,092 ... 39,092 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 69,092 59,987 1,29,079 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 9,658 ... 9,658 Breeding Operations ... ... 450 ... 450 Prizes ... ... ... 1,305 ... 1,305 Fairs and Shows ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 42,020 1,38,870 59,987 2,40,877 * As submitted by the Accountant-General, Burma. G. H. EVANS, Lieut.-CoL, I.C.V.D., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Dept., Burma. G. B. C. P. O.- No. I, S., C. V. V.D., 15(a),22-8-1910[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
NLSTO INSERT COLOUR
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1910 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT. GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1910
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1911 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1911
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA For the year ending 31st March 1911 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1911
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA: THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W, NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. IN ENGLAND: HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C., London. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRURNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W, P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, W. S. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, S. W. T. FISHER UNWIN, I, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 5o & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. ON THE CONTINENT : R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, Germany OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig, Germany Karl W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig, Germany. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland.
[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is 8 to 10 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 3IST MARCH 1911. PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 I.RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN BURMA For the year ending the 31st March 1911. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department,2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT their ponies, compensation up to two-thirds of the estimated value of the animal should as a temporary measure be paid in all cases in which a pony was destroyed by the orders of a Veterinary officer. The total number of ponies destroyed up to the end of the year of report was 353, and a sum of Rs. 33,005 was paid by the Municipality in compensation. Active measures are still in operation and over 230 infected ponies have been destroyed since the 1st April 1911. Tangible results have been attained in diminishing the prevalence of glanders. The disease is not, however, eradicated, and the cessation of precautionary and preventive measures cannot yet be contemplated. Prevention. 3. The willing and intelligent co-operation of the villagers-in the measures of prevention and precaution for which they are respon- sible can be expected only as the result of patient education and encouragement by Departmental and District officers. These measures are practically two in numberIN BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31st MARCH 1911. 3 Assistants at the expense of the Chiefs in the Northern and Southern Shan States. The imperfect equipment of the Insein school referred to in the Report and the letter of the Director of Agriculture is due wholly to inability to provide funds for improvements. The Lieutenant-Governor will be prepared to consider a moderate scheme for stable and hospital accommodation, which seems to be urgently needed, and will if possible allot funds for carrying it into effect if approved. The staff has been strengthened since the close of the year by a Laboratory Assistant. The number of pupils at the commencement of the year was 33 and at the close 24. The standard of 14 passes out of 18 students sitting for the final examin- ation is satisfactory. His Honour is glad to observe that the conduct of the pupils is reported now as exemplary. Sir Harvey Adamson approves the evident insistence on practical demonstration as the groundwork of all the instruction at the school and is prepared, as stated above, to do as much as possible to facilitate it. The School at Taunggyi seems to have opened with favourable auspices and it is hoped that it may prove successful and useful. The restriction in the number of pupils, referred to in paragraph 20 of the Report, depends on the existence of subsequent employment for the trained Assistants turned out by the School. If additional Assistants are desired by the Chiefs His Honour will be ready to consider suggestions for admitting more students. Establishment. 5. The superior staff of the Department was. short-handed for the greater part of the year. One officer was lost to the Province by transfer, another was on leave and a third was for three months on special duty in Rangoon. The Lieutenant- Governor observes with satisfaction, however, that the Superintendents were energetic in inspection. His Honour desires that they should continue to be primarily touring officers as they have been hitherto. The subordinate staff, in spite of retirements among the Inspectors, was strengthened during the year, and reached a strength of 12 Inspectors and 120 Assistants. Their conduct and work is reported generally to have been satisfactory, and to have earned the commendation of District officers. Breeding operations. 6. The pony-breeding scheme remained in abey ance for lack of funds. General. 7. The Tables attached to the Report give a more adequate statistical representation than heretofore of the operations of the Department, which consists almost wholly of itinerant officers, this method of working being the best suited to the conditions of this Province. The Report considerably exceeds the prescribed length ; it is expected that future Reports will be confined strictly to the proper limit. The Lieutenant-Governor has read the Report with satisfaction, and has pleasure in commending the efficient work and careful administration of the Department and its satisfactory relations with the District officials. His Honour has noted with approval the names of the several officers mentioned for specially meritorious service. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma, R. E. V. ARBUTHNOT, Revenue Secretary to the Govt, of Burma.
From S. G. GRANTHAM, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma, ( 2 ) 7. I concur in Mr. Rennie's commendation of the work of the Veterinary Inspectors and Assistants and his insistence on the importance of tact as a pri- mary requisite for the establishment of successful co-operation between the Department and the inhabitants of country districts. 8. The sanction of the Local Government has been received to the com- mencement of a survey of cattle diseases within the Province since the close of the year under report. It is hoped that this survey when completed will throw much light on the question of the prevention of the spread of cattle epidemics. 9. Mr. Cameron was in charge of the Department from June 4th, the date of Lieutenant-Colonel Evans's departure until the 6th December when Mr. Rennie returned from leave. Their successful conduct of the Department in the face of much cattle disease in the districts and the interruptions of work due to the Kheddah case and the deputation of officers for the suppression of glanders in Rangoon Town is worthy of all commendation.
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, For the year ending 31st March 1911. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Superintendents.2 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA. On completion of training he returned to the Southern Shan States as Veterinary Assistant. Of the 13 pupils in the junior class one did not return to the school after the holidays. He wrote to say that owing to the death of his father he was urgently needed at home and did not wish to continue his classes. In January another student asked for and obtained permission to return to his home owing to the illness of his mother. He afterwards wrote to say that he did not wish to return to the school, and asked to be released from his bond. Thus at the end of the year there were 11 pupils in this class. In contrast to the behaviour of the pupils last year, it is a matter of con- siderable satisfaction to be able to state that the conduct of the present batch of pupils has been exemplary in every way. In accordance with the orders of Government a fresh batch of pupils was admitted during the year. Some slight delay in forming this class was unavoidable owing to the sanction of Government having been asked for and awaited to the inclusion in the bond of a clause requiring pupils on completion of the course to serve Government for three years if required. Sanction to this having been duly received, 15 pupils were taken on, on this understanding. Three pupils reported themselves in January 191 1, 6 in February and 6 in March. Two of the batch finding the work anything but to their liking returned to their homes. Thus at the end of the year there were 13 pupils in this class. It may be mentioned here that these two vacancies have since been filled up by two Kachin lads who were highly recommended by the Deputy Commissioner, Bhamo, with a view to their ultimate employment on the frontier. Analysis of the educational qualifications of the batch shews one pupil possessed of an VIIIth standard Vernacular certificate, ten with Vllth stan- dard and two with VIth standard certificates, while two likely-looking lads with lesser qualifications were taken on on the recommendation of a Burmese gentleman who has for years evinced great interest in the Department. That the Veterinary Hospital and Dispensary are becoming better known may be gathered from the fact that during the year 738 cases were recorded, 65 being in-patients, and 673 out-patients. Including in-patients the average number of cases receiving treatment daily was 9. It may be considered that this is a very small number of cases presented even for teaching purposes, but it must be remembered that pupils are not too capable of at once understanding and assimilating all the details of treatment of even one case let alone a large number. Every case is thoroughly explained in detail to them ; there is no sepa- rate hospital staff and the clinical demonstration of even a small number of cases occupies a considerable amount of the time of the present small teaching staff in the midst of their multifarious duties. There is evidence to show that if adequate provision were made for the admission of in-patients, not only as regards proper stabling arrangements but also in the matter of a staff sufficient for the needs of a combined school, laboratory and hospital, this class of patients could be con- siderably increased. Apart from any idea of an extensive Veterinary Hospital, proper accommodation for a certain number of in-patients for demonstration purposes is urgently required. It is impossible with the temporary stables at present provided to admit certain classes of cases, the care and attention of which, if Veterinary Assistants are intended to possess a general knowledge of all branches of Veterinary Science, are most desirable for sound instruction in clinique. It may be mentioned that one of the temporary buildings has recently collapsed and the other is in a tottering condition. The temporary laboratory was fully occupied during the year, the number of slides alone examined amounting to 6,916. Without a knowledge of the details of careful examination of a smear, figures alone do not give a correct idea of the work entailed. The efforts of the staff have been taxed to the utmost to deal with the amount of work now presented, and will be totally insufficient to cope with much further increase. Proposals are being submitted for the creation of the very necessary post of Laboratory Assistant.
FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1911. 3 II.4 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, rinderpest and foot-and-mouth disease in the Henzada, Thayetmyo and Bassein Districts. Rinderpest was virulent in the Henzada District, indeed the outbreaks have not been so extensive for over five years. It was particularly bad in the Lemyethna and Kanaung Townships. In the former township the disease which had been existing at the close of last year continued with increasing severity during the first quarter of the year, reaching its greatest virulence in June, when 511 deaths occurred. Altogether 1,726 deaths occurred in this township. What probably fostered the disease considerably was, as afterwards discovered to be the case, that the villagers made no attempt at proper segrega- tion, while carcases of diseased animals were reported to have been sold for food. In Kanaung Township the disease was particularly bad between April and July and killed 1,078 head of cattle. Serum protection was requested in Lemyethna Township in May, and 243 cattle in four villages were injected. Outbreaks were less severe in the Thayetmyo and Bassein Districts. In the former district, the Minhla and Kama Townships suffered most. The Assistant in the Minhla Township attended 25 outbreaks between December and March. In February serum injection was carried out in Minhla Township, and in Kama and Allanmyo Townships in August and November, respectively. In the Bassein District rinderpest in the Ngathainggyaung Township killed 577 cattle in the first quarter of the year. In the Ma-ubin District the disease lasted from the beginning of the year till the end of August in the Yandoon Township. In April in Yandoon Town itself 227 animals are reported to have died from the disease ; 217 of these belonged to natives of India (milkmen). A considerable outbreak took place at the close of the rains on the Kalateik grazing ground of the Pyap6n District and spread later to the Seikma grazing ground. These grounds being almost inaccessible during the wet weather, reports were received late, and before anything could be done disease was widespread, and altogether 60 victims are recorded. The outbreak was finally brought in check, very largely it is reported by the energetic measures carried out by the Township Officer, Bogale. Foot-and-mouth disease was widespread and virulent throughout the Division, and especially so in the Henzada District from which 1,379 deaths are reported, most of these being in the Lemyethna and Kanaung Townships. The Kyaunggôn and Ngathainggyaung Townships of the Bassein District, the Myaungmya Township, Myaungmya District, and the Pyapôn and Bogale Townships of the Py.ap6n District also show a considerable number of deaths. Anthrax, except for a sharp outbreak in Kanaung Township at the beginning of the year, did not cause any trouble in the Division. Veterinary Inspectors, 2. Bassein 1, Henzada 1. Veterinary Assistants, 24. Bassein 6, Ma-ubin 3, Henzada 5, Pyapôn 3, Myaungmya 4, and Thayetmyo 3. Special duty, 3. Bassein 2, Henzada 1. Outbreaks attended 1,230. Total mortality from contagious diseases 13,370. Table II. 6. Tenasserim Division.FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1911. 5 were ignorant of the nature of the disease, and as its increase gave rise to considerable anxiety they were, contrary to the usual attitude of the people in other parts of the Province, eager to adopt any measures for its suppression. The rules regarding segregation, etc., were most carefully carried out, but the disease, probably aided by biting flies, which were numerous, continued. Eight hundred and twenty animals are reported to have died in this outbreak up to the end of March. The district has been visited by both Superintendents. The mortality has been very great, but in May disease seemed to be on the decline. Foot-and-mouth disease was severe in the Thatôn District only, chiefly in Thatôn and Pa-an Townships. In the former 313 deaths and in the latter 251 are reported during the year. Veterinary Inspector, 1. Veterinary Assistants, 12.6 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, Veterinary Inspectors.5FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1911, 7 the road at Kyaukme to mule traffic. Sporadic cases in Tawngpeng accounted for 67 deaths, and from South Hsenwi 150 deaths were reported. In Lashio there was an outbreak of the disease amongst Military Police ponies and trans- port mules in which 70 mules died, besides several ponies. Veterinary Assistants.8 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, destroyed. Ninety ponies of the Rangoon Battalion were also tested, two of which reacted and were accordingly destroyed. Examination of blood smears sent by Veterinary Assistants and others showed a number of cases of hæmorrhagic septicaemia in cattle, buffaloes and elephants, a number of cases of surra in elephants, also numerous cases of piroplasmosis in different animals. An outbreak of sarcoptic mange affecting a considerable number of water buffaloes was reported from Katha District. (3) PREVENTIVE INOCULATION. Table III 11. Anti-rinderpest serum injection was carried out in six districts in Lower Burma, viz., Rangoon Town, Henzada, Bassein (twice), Prome, Thayetmyo (thrice) and Tharrawaddy, and four districts in Upper Burma, viz., Mandalay, Ruby Mines (twice), Pakôkku and Sagaing. The serum has been used for the first time in the Henzada, Prome, Pakôkku and Sagaing Districts. The outbreak in Rangoon Town was amongst Municipal bullocks, and 747 were injected at the request of the Municipal Veterinary Surgeon. The use of serum has still to be strongly advocated before villagers make up their minds to favour its employment. In certain places where it has been success- fully employed on previous occasions they are quite ready to again benefit by its use when an injection party arrives, but they do not make any urgent appeals for serum when disease appears amongst their cattle. In many instances no amount of persuasion or explanation as to the advantages of serum are sufficient to induce cattle owners to bring up their cattle. Frequently an inoculation party has had to return without injecting anything like the number of animals that had been hoped for. In one village in the Thayetmyo District the headman and cattle owners held such strong objection to the method that a bribe was offered to the head of the inoculation party in the hope of assuring his speedy departure. Considerable wastage of serum occurs owing to the dampness of the serum pit at Maymyo. It has been proposed to" arrange for the storage of serum at a suitable temperature with one of the cold storage companies in Rangoon instead. Much benefit would be derived from this arrangement inasmuch as serum could be despatched at once in charge of inoculation parties, and delay in receiving supplies of serum from Maymyo thereby obviated. In dealing with a rapidly contagious disease like rinderpest the saving of even one day's delay is of the utmost import- ance. In this connection it might be noted that delay is often occasioned in obtaining the necessary funds for the travelling expenses of serum injection parties. There is nothing in the nature of an adequate office advance from which money can be at once taken for that purpose, and the Accounts Code is none too elastic, although the Accountant-General personally has always been most willing to help as far as possible in meeting the difficulty. By the time that a party has waited a matter of three or four days (or longer as may happen during holidays) for a bill to be presented in the treasury and cash duly received, and then has travelled to an outbreak in such a remote part as, for instance, the Mömeik State, the necessity for the employment of serum or anything but a party to help in disposal of carcases of victims to the disease has all but disappeared. Segregation measures are unfortunately far from perfect in this country, and the earlier serum is used in an outbreak the better. In the initial stages where serum injection of the comparatively small number of mediate and immediate contact animals can be rapidly effected the spread of the disease may be controlled, and the necessiiy for later expensive measures involving considerable expenditure of serum in surrounding areas does not arise. Now that the amount of serum obtainable from the Muktesar Laboratory is limited it is more than ever incumbent that all expendi- ture should be to the best advantage. Inspectors are being supplied with an outfit containing sufficient serum to enable them to at once deal with many of the smaller outbreaks, or to begin operations in larger outbreaks pending the arrival of necessary help. Altogether 4,562 animals in 56 villages were injected during the year. The number of deaths from rinderpest amongst these cattle afterwards is reported to have been 35.
FOR THE-YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1911. 9 Seven Inspectors, 15 Veterinary Assistants, and 29 pupils attended outbreaks in which serum was employed. (4) OTHER DISEASES. 12. The mortality from causes other than contagious diseases recorded from Lower Burma is 81,633, viz -.10 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, The 3 Reserve Assistants were as usual kept very busy. The districts in which they were employed were Hanthawaddy, Bassein (twice), Pakôkku, Myingyan, and Bhamo (twice). Of these Reserve men Maung Tun Nyet spent 344 days out of headquarters, Maung Po Inn 280 and Maung Pike 256, the aver- age being 293.3 days. These men have had nearly four years' work as Reserve Assistants and have done extremely well, but as the work, as stated in former reports, is not too popular, they were only too glad to be posted-to district charges at the end of the year. Three Veterinary Assistants from district appointments have been placed on the Reserve in their stead. The average number of clays spent on tour by the Inspectors in Lower Burma was 1957, and 1241 in Upper Burma. They attended 107 outbreaks in Lower Burma and 124 in Upper Burma. Table IV. The Veterinary Assistants in Lower Burma attended 1,914 outbreaks and visited 11,455 villages, while those in Upper Burma attended 1,280 outbreaks and 9,005 villages were visited by them during the year. One Assistant was found to have falsified his diary and was accordingly fined, while in addition his increment has been stopped for three years. Another Assist- ant was tried for the same offence, but after very careful enquiry into the matter by the Deputy Commissioner he was acquitted. One Assistant was placed on trial by the Police on a charge of cheating and abetment of cheating but was dis- charged of the offence. A few Assistants were warned or punished for late sub- mission of diaries or for disregarding the orders of Veterinary Inspectors. With these exceptions, no unsatisfactory conduct on the part of Veterinary Assistants has to be reported, and District Officers on the whole report most favourably on the work done by their men. One Subdivisional Officer remarks that " There has been co-operation between the Township Officers and the Veteri- nary Assistants, and the fact that nothing in the nature of resistance has Been offered to the Veterinary Assistant, while in some . cases he has been actually assisted by the people, shows that he works with tact, the lack of which is so often a hindrance to the work of others whose duty it is to persuade jungle people to adopt precautions against diseases. " The Subdivisional Officer strikes the keynote of success in the carrying out of such duties as a Veterinary Assistant's in many places, as undoubtedly as things are at present tact is the essence of dealing with the real jungle Burman in matters relating to prevention of contagious disease, and a good deal can be. effected in many places by the exercise of this quality in the first instance. V.FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1911. 11 difficulties. Mere local precautions undertaken independently in separate village areascan hardly ever.be perfect enough, and of themselves effective, in checking the advance of infection into clean areas. Disease is not endemic in many large areas within the boundaries of the Province. Its occurrence in such parts is a matter of importation. No adequate cattle disease survey has ever been under- taken to map out the centres of disease and ordinary routes along which it spreads, but in many cases the course of disease has roughly been traced to one or other of its usual outside sources. Effective provision does not exist for inter- cepting and impounding infected animals in transit by road, rail or river or for closing off infected areas, and any means which could be devised for this purpose would be of incalculable benefit wherever practicable of application. Local action as required by the Rules in the Village Manual should be supplementary for the protection of healthy cattle within the diseased areas. Given means for intercepting infected cattle and closing roads leading from diseased areas and given also co-operation between township and township and district and district, and a further advance will have been made in controlling the ravages of contagious disease. It is perhaps worthy of note that the Shan States are in advance of Burma in this particular. In the revised rules which during the year have been issued by the Chiefs of Hsipaw, Tawnpeng and South Hsenwi, the Chiefs are empowered to grant discretion to circle officials to declare any road in their circles closed to animal traffic. From a remark in the Resolution on last year's report it would appear that a misconception exists regarding the nature of permanent segregation camps in villages. The object of such camps would be to do away with the risk of infection which exists at present. As things are now the local thugyi in whose charge contagious disease has broken out, has to make any arrangement he can, or such as he thinks fit, for segregating cattle. Cattle are often segregated not in one place, but in a number of places in and around the village, open paddy fields, mango gardens, under pôngyi kyaungs, etc. Disinfection of these places later is not of the most thorough kind, and as fences either do not exist or are not in a state of repair, healthy cattle may shortly after wander at will over the spot where the sick have stood and probably died. It is suggested that by providing per- manent segregation enclosures such risks would be disposed of. A piece of ground might be set apart and surrounded by a bamboo fence to be kept in repair by the village or villages concerned, or surrounded by a mud wall and deep ditch. A gate would be provided to keep sick cattle in and healthy ones out, and at some convenient time after the outbreak was over the Veterinary Assistant could see to the proper disinfection of the ground. With such a segregation camp thugyis could have no excuse for not immediately segregating sick cattle on the plea, ordinarily advanced now, that no suitable spot could be at once, prepared. 19. Importation of diseases from China.12 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, Veterinary Inspector Maung Tun Baw, who retired in December, had com- pleted thirty-five years' service. Like all these older men (who are now unfortu- nately diminishing in number) he was most zealous in his desire to benefit culti- vators and cattle alike,*and his personal influence with villagers in districts under his charge ensured a large measure of success in his work. By his retirement the Department has lost a very hard-working and energetic man. Veterinary Inspectors Maung Nge, Mônywa, and Maung Shwe ThaU, Akyab, have received special mention by Deputy Commissioners for their work during the year. Maung Kyaw, who, it is regretted to say, will shortly retire, has, in spite of advancing years, been an example in zeal and energy to the whole Depart- ment. It is most gratifying to read the commendations of District Officers in general on the work of Veterinary Assistants in their charge, and this feeling is only tempered by the knowledge that in too many cases while District Officers and Veterinary Assistants were doing all in their power to fight disease and requests for extra assistance were urgent, it was found impossible to at once accede to their demands. The need is more than ever felt for an adequate reserve, as appreciation of the work of Assistants has increased and Deputy Commissioners find it difficult to spare men from fixed charges for work else- where. The number in the reserve during the year was only 3, and it is not a matter for surprise that their services were fully engaged. The following Veterinary Assistants have been given special mention by District Officers for good work :FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1911. 1 3 for an inoculation gang to come up that by the time it arrives the mischief is done." 21. Supply of medicines to Veterinary Assistants.APPENDICES. PAGE Table I.10 APPENDICES. TABLE I. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1910-11 (Paragraph 2). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS Admitted, during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final examination. Remaining under instruc- tion at end of year. Scholarship-holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolong- ed by reason of failure to pass. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 No. No. No. No. No. No. Burma (Insein) ... Three years' Vernacular 13 ... 14* 4 24 ... Total ... ... 13 ... 14 4 24 ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. STUDENTS ADIMITTED DURING THE YEAR CLASSED BY EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS. RECEIPTS. Matriculated with higher qualifica- tions. Knowing some Eng- lish, but not Ma- triculated. Knowing no English or very little Eng- lish. From fees. From other sources. Total. 1 2 9 10 11 12 13 14 No. No No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma (Insein) ... ... ... ... 13 ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... 13 ... ... ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYMENT OF STUDENTS WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE THREE YEARS PRECEDING. Salaries of Instruct- ing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number pass- ed. In service of Govern- ment or local bodies. In service of other bodies or institu- tions. In private practice. Number unem- ployed. 1 2 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 1 Rs. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. No. No. No. No. No. Burma (insein) ... ... 14,680 8,781 23,461 32 31 ... ... 1APPENDICES. 17 TABLE II. LOWER BURMA. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1910-11 (Paragraphs 3 to 6 and 17 ). District. EQUINES.* BOVINES. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Akyab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,233 93 Kyaukpyu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 598 12 Sandoway ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 25 North Arakan (Paletwa) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hanthawaddy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 322 273 Pegu ... ... ... ... ... ... 874 704 Prome ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,216 57 Tharrawaddy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 408 21 Bassein ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 1,618 629 Ma-ubin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 383 116 Pyapôn ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52 386 Myaungmya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 219 522 Henzada ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,432 1,379 Thayetmyo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,523 140 Amherst ... ... ... ... ... ... 373 152 Tavoy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 Mergui ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 59 Thatôn ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 732 759 Toungoo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,119 31 Salween Tracts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51 Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16,136 5,421 District. BOVINES. OTHERS. Remarks. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia.18 APPENDICES. TABLE II. UPPER BURMA. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1910-11 (Paragraphs 7 and 17). District. EQUINES.* BOVINES. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Pakôkku ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 253 56 Minbu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,027 22 Magwe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 342 36 Mandalay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 858 2 Bhamo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 642 411 Katha ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 385 ... Myitkyina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,963 ... Ruby Mines ... ... ... ... ... ... 8rS 3 Shwebo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85 21 Sagaing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 555 33 Lower Chindwin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109 2 Upper Chindwin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 5 Kyauksè ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 177 7 Meiktila ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 309 77 Yamèthin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 741 ... Myingyan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,818 ... Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13,086 675 Grand Total for the Province. ... ... ... ... ... ... 29,222 6,096 District. Bovines. Others. Remarks. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia.APPENDICES. 19 TABLE III. Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1910-11 (Paragraph 11). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation follow- ed. which inoculation was un- dertaken. NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION. NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED. Number of animals which died after inoculation. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Rangoon Town. 2 ... 27 ... ... 747 ... ... 6 ... Henzada ... 4 ... 68 ... ... 243 ... ... 11 ... Bassein ... 6 ... 101 ... ... 531 ... ... 9 ... Prome ... 3 ... 19 ... ... 154 ... ... ... ... Serum-alone method. Tharrawad- dy. Rinderpest. 4 ... 41 ... ... 164 ... ... 1 ... Thayetmyo 8 ... 75 ... 783 ... ... 1 ... Pakôkku ... 11 ... ... ... 321 ... ... 2 ... Ruby Mines 4 ... 222 ... ... 419 ... ... 4 ... Mandalay ... 13 ... 80 ... ... 822 ... ... 1 ... Sagaing ... ... ... 11 ... ... 378 ... ... ... ... Total ... 56 ... 796 ... ... 4,562 ... ... 35 ...
20 APPENDICES. TABLE IV. Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1910-11 (Paragraph 16). District. Number of villages visited. IN umber of veterinary Assistants employed. CASTRATIONS PERFORMED. TREATED FOR CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. TREATED FOR NON-CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. Total number of cases treated and castra- tions performed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Akyab ... 1,261 9 ... ... ... ... ... 708 ... 708 40 2,406 11 2,457 3,165 Kyaukpyu ... 340 2 ... ... ... ... ... 437 ... 437 1 1,038 17 1,056 1,493 Sandoway ... 194 1 ... ... ... ... ... 433 ... 433 5 278 5 288 721 Hanthawaddy ... 1,029 5 ... ... ... ... ... 3,436 ... 3,436 75 2,217 11 2,303 5,739 Pegu 504 4 ... ... ... ... ... 1,847 ... r,847 56 1,471 3 1,530 3,377 Prome ... 508 3 ... ... ... ... ... 572 ... 572 41 766 13 820 1,392 Tharrawaddy ... 900 4 ... ... ... ... 16 435 ... 451 40 826 23 889 1,340 Bassein ... 1,544 6 ... ... ... ... 1 13,251 ... 13,252 70 1,177 5 1,252 14,504 Ma-ubin ... 423 3 ... ... ... ... ... 696 ... 696 12 485 3 500 1,196 Pyapôn ... 405 3 ... ... ... ... ... 727 ... 727 3 868 10 881 1,608 Myaungmya ... 067 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4,136 6 4,142 14 1,448 23 1,485 5,627 Henzada 1,067 5 ... ... ... ... 1 1,872 1,873 69 2,158 10 2,237 4,110 Thayetmyo ... 589 3 ... 1 ... 1 ... 3,102 1 3,103 60 627 19 706 3,810 Amherst 481 3 ... ... ... ... ... 501 ... 501 38 768 11 817 1,318 Tavoy ... Mergui ... 139 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 1,000 ... 1,011 1,011 Thaf6n 140 1 ... ... ... ... ... 63 ... 63 19 332 13 364 427 Toungoo ... 482 4 ... ... ... ... ... 1,066 ... 1,066 49 725 20 794 1,860 Salween Tracts 397 3 ... ... ... ... 1 185 ... 186 105 1,073 25 1,203 1,389 85 ... ... ... ... ... ... 212 ... 212 6 42 4 52 264 Total 11,455 64 ... 1 ... ... 19 33,679 7 33,705 714 19,705 226 20,645 54,351 Pak6kku 576 3 ... ... ... ... 4 775 ... 779 128 919 12 1,059 1,838 Minbu ... 853 3 ... ... ... ... ... 2,152 2 2,154 92 342 3 437 2,591 Magwe ... 519 3 ... ... ... ... ... 836 ... 836 134 816 12 962 1,798 Mandalay ... 733 4 ... ... ... ... 5 1,353 ... 1,358 155 1,092 13 1,260 2,618 Bhamo ... 602 3 ... ... ... ... ... 209 ... 20 805 747 104 1,656 1,865 Katha ... 521 3 ... ... ... ... 6 987 ... 993 105 697 5 807 1,800 Myitkyina ... 235 2 ... ... ... ... 1 209 ... 210 191 202 10 403 613 Ruby Mines 222 2 ... ... ... ... 2 542 ... 544 26 144 1 171 715 Shwebo ... 673 4 ... ... ... 2 579 ... 581 126 1,416 22 1,564 2,145 Sagaing ... 552 4 ... ... ... 1 1,405 ... 1,406 245 1,323 38 1,606 3,012 Lower Chindwin 578 3 ... ... ... ... 2 4,549 1 4,552 92 2,314 16 2,122 6,974 Upper Chindwin 398 3 ... ... ... ... 3 1,994 ... 1,997 195 2,064 9 2,268 4,265 Kyauksè ... 531 3 ... ... ... ... ... 847 ... 847 63 589 4 656 1,503 Meiktila ... 515 3 ... ... ... ... ... 396 ... 396 149 825 25 999 1.395 Yamèthin ... 478 3 ... ... ... ... 715 18 733 227 1,295 3 1,525 2,258 Myingyan ... 1,019 4 ... ... ... ... 1 1,908 1,909 280 1627 8 1,915 3,824 Total 9,005 50 ... ... ... ... 27 19,456 21 19,504 3,013 16,412 285 19,710 39,214* GRAND TOTAL... 20,460 114 ... 1 ... 1 46 53,135 28 53,209 3,727 36,117 511 40,355 93,565 Veterinary Ins- 813 ... ... ... ... ... ... 335 ... 335 32 377 18 427 762 pectors, Lower Burma. Veterinary Ins- 124 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,544 ... 1,544 72 1,290 13 1,375 2,919 pectors, Upper Burma. Northern Shan 425 6 ... ... ... ... ... 824 ... 824 57 ... 314 4 375 1,199 States. * Includes also cases treated by Assistants on special duty and Reserve Assistants.
APPENDICES. 21 TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1910-11 (Paragraphs 2 and 13). Province. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed at Dispensaries. IN-PATIENTS. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma ... ... 1* ... 3 ... ... 29 21 15 Total ... 1* ... 3 ... ... 29 21 15 Province. IN-PATIENTS. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March, Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Burma ... ... 32 21 15 30 20 15 2 1 ... Total ... 32 21 15 30 20 15 2 1 ... Province. OUT-PATIENTS TOTAL NUMBER OF IN- AND OUT-PATIENTS TREATED DURING THE YEAR. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Receipts. Expenditure. 1 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... 127 329 217 34 90 59 159 350 232 741 ... 8,387 Total ... 127 329 217 34 90 59 159 350 232 741 ... 8,387 * At Insein.
22 APPENDICES. TABLE VI.* Abstract showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during the year 1910-11. Province. RECEIPTS. Last year's balance. By Local Fund grants, By Govern- ment grants. By Munici- pal contri- butions. By fees. By other sources. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Province. EXPENDITURE. Remarks. Pay. Travelling allowances. Medicines, instru- ments, etc. Furniture, etc. Contingen- cies. Total. Balance. 1 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... ... ... 3,633 ... ... 8,633 ... Total ... ... ... 8,633 ... ... 8,633 ... i * As submitted by the Accountant-General, Burma. TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1910-11 (Paragraph 16). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Burma ... In Schools and Colleges No. No. No. Provincial 1* 1 1 * Southern Shan States, Taung- Do. ... ... ... ... gyi. In Dispensaries On other work Provincial ... 11 55APPENDICES. 23 TABLE VIII. Return of Stud Bulls for the year 1910-11. Province. Property op Government. Property of Local Boards. Number on 1st April. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March. Number on 1st April. Obtained during the year. Casualties during the year. Balance remaining on 31st March. Remarks Number. Average price paid. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Nil. Total ... TABLE IX. Showing main results of the working of Provincial Cattle Farms during the year 1910-11. Province. Name of farm. Sale of ani- mals. Receipts. Sale of pro- duce. Other heads. Total. 1 2 3- 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... ... Nil. Total ... Expenditure. Valuation of stock, GRAIN AND FODDER RE- MAINING AT CLOSE OF YEAR AS DETAILED ON REVERSE. Province. Salaries of establishment. Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- penses. Purchase of animals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Fodder. Total. Remarks. 1 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Nil. Total ...
24 APPENDICES. Valuation Statement of Cattle, Grain and Fodder in hand at close of the year 1910-11. NUMBER OR QUAN- TITY. Description. Rate. Value. Remarks, No. Quantity. 1 2 3 4 5 6 | Rs. Rs. Cattle. Ml. Total Grain and Fodder. Nil. Total ... 1 GRAND TOTAL
APPENDICES. 25 TABLE X. Return of Horse, Pony and Donkey Stallions under Local Bodies for the year 1910-11 (Paragraph 14). Details. HORSE AND PONY STALLIONS UNDER LOCAL BODIES. Horses. Ponies. Arab. Persian Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Balance on 1st April 1910 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Purchased in India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Increase Received from ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Died ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sold ... ... Decrease Destroyed ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... Transferred to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total decrease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Balance on 31st March 1911 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. Details. HORSE AND PONY STAL-LIONS lions UNDER LOCAL BODIES26 APPENDICES. TABLE XI. Services and Produce of each class of Horse, Pony and Donkey Stallions under Local Bodies during the year 1910-11 (Paragraph 14). Horse, pony or donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March 1911. STALLIONS ACTUALLY ED AT STUD NUMBER OF MARES COVERED. AVERAGE NUMBER OF MARES COVERED PER STALLION EMPLOYED AT STUD. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Burma. Horse ... Nil. Total ... Pony ... Thamakan ... ... ... 1 ... 5 ... 5 (Southern Shan States) Total ... ... ... 1 ... 5 ... 5 Grand Total ... ... ... 1 ... 5 ... 5 TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of Horse, Pony and Donkey Stallions during the year 1910-11. Province. Horse. Pony. Donkey. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Rs. Rs. Rs. a. b. Rs. a. b. Rs. Rs. Burma ... ... ... ... 450 4 9 ... ... Thamakan (Southern Shan States). Total ... ... ... ... 450 4 9 4 9 ... ...
APPENDICES. 27 TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding Horse Fairs and Shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1910-11. Province. Number of horse fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF ANIMALS PRESENT. TOTAL NUMBER COMPETING FOR PRIZES. TOTAL NUMBER OF HORSE STOCK (NOT INCLUDING BRANDED MARES) PRESENT. NUMBER OF REMOUNTS PURCHASED. Year under re- port. Previous year. Year under re- port. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. For Remount Department. For Native Cavalry. For Police. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Burma ... Nil. Total ... Province. PRICE PAID FOR remounts. NUMBER OF MULES PURCHASED. PRICE PAID FOR MULES BY GOVERNMENT. Total number of animals sold. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. By Government. By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average price. 1 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... Nil. Total ... Province. Prize money provided. Number of medals awarded. Amount sanctioned by Govern- ment of India for next year's fair or show. ..... Remarks. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma ... Nil. Total ...
28 APPENDICES. TABLE XIV. Abstract of particulars regarding Cattle Fairs and Shows held during the year 1910-11 (Paragraph 15). Province. Number of cattle fairs and shows held. TOTAL NUMBER OF STOCK PRESENT. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma. Bhamo ... ... 1 35 73 10 6 133 ... 84 Total ... 1 35 73 10 6 133 ... 84 Province. AVERAGE PRICE OF ANIMALS SOLD. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Burma. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Bhamo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 341 Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 341 PRIZE MONEY PROVIDED. Number of medals awarded. Province. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Remarks. 1 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Burma. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Bhamo ... ... ... *1,625 ... ... *1,625 *1,094 Total ... ... *1,625 ... ... *1,625 *1,094 * Provided under a separate Budget head and not in the Budget of the Civil Veterinary Department,
APPENDICES. 29 TABLE XIV-A. * Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1910-11. Major Heads. AMOUNT. Remarks. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... 28,284. 19,560 ... 47,844 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 8,226 ... 8,226 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 80,448 59,122 1,39,570 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 8,633 ... 8,633 Breeding Operations ... ... ... ... ... Prizes ... ... ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 28,284 1,16,867 59,122 2,04,273 * As submitted by the Accountant-General, Burma. RANGOON: T. RENNIE, 2nd June 1911. Offg. Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Dept., Burma.
NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1911 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1911
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1012 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1912 [Price,ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST MARCH 1912 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1912
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA : THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., MADRAS. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. * D. B.TARAPOREVALA & SONS & Co., 103, Meadow Street, Fort Bombay BUTTERWORTH & Co. (INDIA), LTD., 8.2, Hastings Street, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND: HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C., London. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER. & Co., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is 10 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1912. PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 I I.RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1912. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN BURMA FOR 2 THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1912. Establishment. 4. The superior staff (three Superintendents) of the Department was again below its full strength during the great part of the year and in consequence the time devoted to touring was less than might be desired. The subordinate staff (13 Inspectors, 118 Assistants and one teacher) was also slightly below strength 5 they treated 91,274 animals or rather fewer than in 1910-11. The time spent on tour by both inspectors and assistants might be increased with advantage; in the absence of epidemics, there are always ailing cattle for them to treat and the greater their familarity with the villagers in their charges the more their capacity for doing useful work. General. 5. Sanction was accorded during the year to a survey of contagious cattle diseases in pursuance of the view adopted by the Local Government that in Burma the suppression of disease is of more importance than the improvement of the breed of cattle. Lack of funds again prevented any action in connection with the scheme for breeding ponies. Acknowledgments. 6. The thanks of the Lieutenant-Governor are due to Colonel Evans and Mr. Rennie for their efficient administration of the Department. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma, W. J. KEITH, Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma.
From S. G. GRANTHAM, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, For the year ended 31st March 1912. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Superintendents.2 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, this disease exceeded 1,500, with the exception of the Irrawaddy Division, in which the recorded mortality was a little over 2,000. Anthrax and Hæmorrhagic septicæmia.FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST MARCH 1912. 3 " It has been observed that the hides of animals that die of infectious disease are sold in spite of rules to the contrary. Mr. Clague thinks that cattle owners do not recognize the primary stage of rinderpest, and that much damage is done before infected animals are segregated." Veterinary Assistants.4 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, be necessary to consider the advisability of adding to the reserve list men specially trained to take charge of operations in districts where the local staff is insufficient. Certain Veterinary Inspectors and Veterinary Assistants were entrusted to carry out inoculation, and so far have done so satisfactorily. This is the first year they have been allowed to do any inoculation except in the presence of superior supervision. Altogether 3 Veterinary Inspectors, 35 Veterinary Assistants and 29 pupils were engaged in this duty. (4) OTHER DISEASES. 8, The deaths reported from non-contagious diseases amount to 74,737 in Lower Burma and 16,798 in Upper Burma. (5) VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES. Table V. 9. Excepting Insein School.FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st MARCH 1912. 5 Table IV. The Veterinary Assistants in Lower Burma attended 1,103 outbreaks and visited 11,428 villages, while those in Upper Burma attended 1,279 outbreaks and 9,820 villages were visited by them during the year. The average number of days spent on tour by them in Lower Burma was 214.7 and in Upper Burma 254.50. The work of Veterinary Inspectors and Assistants has with few exceptions been well spoken of by District Officers. Those specially commended are as follows:6 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETY. DEPT., BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST MARCH 1912. Kachin Hill Tracts.APPENDICES. PAGE. Table I.8 APPENDICES. TABLE I. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1911-12 (Paragraph 2). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Admitted during the year. Number of students. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final exa- mination. Remaining under instruc- tion at end of year. Scholarship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein APPENDICES. 9 TABLE II. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1911-12 (Paragraphs 3 and 4). District. Equines* Bovines. Others. Columns Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia.10 APPENDICES. TABLE III. Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1911-12 (Paragraph 7). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation follow- ed. which inoculation was un- dertaken. Number of animals which died unincculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated Number of animals which died after inoculation. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. - Equines. Bovines. Others. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Rangoon Town. Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 3 ... 6 ... ... 780 ... ... 1 ... Hanlhawad- dy. 2 ... 22 ... ... 201 ... ... 2 ... Prome ... ... 8 ... 65 ... ... 575 ... ... 8 ... Tharrawad- dy. 4 ... 31 ... ... 385 ... ... 3 ... Bassein ... 9 ... 79 ... ... 519 ... ... 8 ... Thayetmyo 14 ... 275 ... ... 3,048 ... ... 47 ... Thatôn ... 1 ... 32 ... ... 46 ... ... ... ... Mandalay ... 1 ... 8 ... ... 398 ... ... ... ... Ruby Mines (Momeik). 2 1 108 ... ... 789 ... ... 13 ... Shwebo ... 4 ... 50 ... ... 952 ... ... 1 ... Lower Chin- dwin. ... 64 ... ... 1,090 ... ... 1 ... Meiktila ... L 5 ... 5 ... 163 ... ... 1 ... Total for 1911-12. Total for ... ... 54 ... 745 ... ... 8,946 ... ... 85 ... ... ... 56 ... 796 ... ... 4,562 ... ... 35 ... 1910-11.
APPENDICES. 11 TABLE IV. Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1911-12 (Paragraph 12). District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castrations performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castra- tions performed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Akyab ... 1,530 9 ... ... ... ... ... 2,883 2,883 52 2,673 27 2,752 5,635 Kyaukpyu ... 262 2 ... ... ... ... ... 173 ... 173 5 1,237 19 1,261 1,434 Sandoway ... 80 1 ... ... ... ... ... 653 ... 653 1 62 1 64 717 Hanthawaddy ... 1,086 4 .. ... .. ... 2 605 ... 607 112 2,971 49 3,132 3,739 Pegu 816 4 ... ... ... ... 3 210 ... 213 111 2,408 17 2,536 2,749 Prome ... 411 3 ... ... ... ... ... 461 ... 461 17 554 12 583 1,044 Tharrawaddy ... 803 4 ... ... ... ... .... 2,578 ... 2,578 42 1,060 12 1,114 3,692 Bassein ... 1,414 6 ... ... ... ... ... 3,298 ... 3,298 86 3,640 13 3,739 7,037 Ma-ubin ... 405 3 ... ... ... ... ... 94 ... 94 10 803 4 817 911 Pyapôrt ... 324 3 ... ... ... ... 2 85 ... 87 7 832 8 847 934 Myaungmya ... 985 4 ... ... ... ... .... 606 ... 606 4 1,561 31 1,596 2,202 Henzada ... 914 5 ... ... ... ... ... 565 ... 565 42 2,570 8 2,620 3,185 Thayetmyo ... 568 3 ... ... ... ... .. 3,629 ... 3,029 06 1,234 37 I,337 4,966 Amherst ... 477 3 ... ... .... ... ... 493 ... 493 55 888 21 964 1,457 Tavoy ... 95 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 480 ... 481 481 Mergui ... 130 1 .. ... ... ... ... 176 ... 176 7 442 33 482 658 Thatôn ... 578 4 ... ... ... ... .. 74.3 ... 743 37 800 30 867 1,610 Toungoo ... 536 3 ... ... ... ... 4 462 ... 466 76 1,384 70 1,530 1,996 Salween Tracts 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 18 19 19 Total ... 11,428 63 ... ... ... ... 11 17,714 ... 17,725 732 25,617 392 26,741 44.466 Pakôkku ... 1,012 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 905 ... 905 129 1,225 7 1,361 2,266 Minbu ... 662 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 303 1 304 154 611 2 767 1,071 Magwe ... 601 3 ... ... ... ... ... 4 1,307 ... 1,511 176 947 18 1,141 2,652 Mandalay ... 576 4 ... ... ... ... 663 ... 663 240 1,004 37 1,281 1,944 Bhamo ... 802 3 ... .... ... ... 9 173 3 185 3,465 1,781 31 5,277 5,462 Katha ... 526 3 ... ... ... 12 1,010 ... 1,028 155 1,071 13 1,239 2,267 Myitkyina ... 275 2 ... ... ... ... 12 18 ... 30 36 462 14 562 592 Ruby Mines ... 179 2 ... ... ... ... 2 403 ... 405 68 311 2 381 786 Shwebo ... 882 4 ... ... ... ... ... 2,712 ... 2,712 156 1,191 11 1,358 4,070 Sagaing ... 835 4 ... ... ... ... I 1,863 ... 1,864 484 1,337 6 1,827 3,691 Lower Chindwin 745 3 1 ... ... ... ... 2,971 240 3,211 93 1,789 11 1,893 5,104 Upper Chindwin 428 3 ... ... ... ... 4 5,042 ... 5,046 124 1,779 5 1,908 6,954 Kyauksè ... 815 3 ... ... ... ... 1,008 ... 1,008 153 727 5 885 1,893 Meiktila ... 292 3 ... ... ... ... 1 1,261 ... 1,262 223 430 26 679 1,941 Yamèhin ... 390 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1,062 ... 1,063 225 1,321 1 1,547 2,610 Myingyan ... 800 4 ... ... ... ... ... 1,379 ... 1,379 515 1573 38 2,126 3,505 Total ... 9,820 49 ... ... ... ... 46 22,286 244 22,576 6,446 17,559 227 24,232 46,808 GRAND TOTAL, 1911-12. 21,248 112 ... ... ... ... 57 40,000 244 40,301 7,178 43,176 619 50,973 91,274* Grand Total, 1910-11 20,460 114 ... 1 ... 1 46 53,135 28 53,209 3,727 36,117 511 40,355 93.565 Veterinary Ins- pectors, Lower Burma. 386 ... ... ... ... ... 139 ... 139 15 990 6 1,011 1,150 Veterinary Ins- pectors, Upper Burma. 758 ... ... ... ... ... ... 431 ... 431 143 298 23 464 895 Southern Shan States. 8c ... ... ... ... ... 8 444 ... 452 240 172 104 516 968 * Includes also cases treated by Assistants on special duty and three reserve Veterinary Assistants.
12 APPENDICES. TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1911-12 (Paragraphs 2 and 9). Province. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assis- tants employed at Dispensaries. In-patients. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma (Insein) ... 1 1 2 1 ... 20 8 44 Total for 1911-12 ... I 1 2 I ... 20 8 44 Total for 1910-11 ... 1 .. 3 ... ... 29 21 15 Province. In-patients. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Burma (Insein) ... 22 9 44 19 9 43 3 ... 1 Total for 1911-12 ... 22 9 44 19 9 43 3 ... 1 Total for 1910-11 ... 32 21 15 30 20 15 2 1 ... Province. Out-patients. Total number of in- and out-patients treated during the year. Receipts. Expenditure. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Burma (Insein) ... 165 303 261 .45 .83 .71 187 312 305 804 ... 6,942 Total for 1911-12 ... 165 303 26 .45 .83 .71 187 312 305 804 ... 6,942 Total for 1910-11 ... 127 329 217 .34 .90 .59 159 350 232 741 ... 8,387
APPENDICES. 13 TABLE VI.* Abstract showing Receipts and Expenditure of Veterinary Dispensaries during the year 1911-12. Receipts. Expenditure. Balance. Remarks. Columns. Pay. Travelling allowances. Medicines, instru- ments, etc. Furniture, etc. Contingen- cies. Total. 214 APPENDICES. TABLE XIV.* Abstract of particulars regarding Cattle Fairs and Shows held during the year 1911-12 (Paragraph 11). District. Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Bulls. Total number or stock present. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Total number of animals that com- peted for prizes. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 16APPENDICES. 15 TABLE XIV-A. * Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1911-12. Major Heads. Imperial. Amount, Remarks. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... 31,583 19,803 ... 51,386 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 21,828 ... 21,828 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 89,823 63,578 1,53,401 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 6,942 ... 6,942 Breeding Operations ... ... ... ... ... Prizes ... ... ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... ... ... ... ... Total for 1911-12 ... 31,583 1,38,396 63,578 2,33.557 Total for 1910-11 ... 28,284 1,16,867 59,122 2,04,273 * As submitted by the Accountant-General, Burma. G. B.C. P. O.NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1912 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1912
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st MARCH 1913 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1913 [Price,ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST MARCH 1913. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1913
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA : THACKER, SPINK. & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM& Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA & SONS & Co., 103, Meadow Street, Fort Bombay. BUTTERWORTH & CO. (INDIA), LTD., 8.2, Hastings Street, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND : HENRY S. KING& Co., 65, Comhill, E.C., London. CONSTABLE & Co., 1o, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is 10 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1913. PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 I I.RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT IN BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1913. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department( 2 ) Veterinary Instruction. 3. The educational record of the Insein Veterinary School was somewhat dis- appointing. No less than eight pupils were removed while six resigned, and only 17 applications for admission were received to fill 15 notified vacancies. The educational qualifica- tions of the candidates as yet show no signs of improvement. It is a matter for regret that no progress was made with the improved equipment of the school during the year. Funds have been allotted for the current year, however, and the work is shortly to be taken in hand. It is gratifying to note that greater advantage is being taken by the public of the opportunities for the treatment of sick animals which the school affords. General. 4. Proposals were submitted during the year by the Registrar, Co-operative Credit Societies, for the formation of a Central Society for the re-insurance of cattle insured with local societies so as to render it possible to include death from rinderpest among the risks insured. The scheme was returned for further consideration and revised proposals are expected after the Annual Agricultural Co-operative Conference. Establishment. 5. After the first three months of the year the superintending staff was at full strength. The total expenditure on the Depart- ment during the year rose slightly to Rs. 2,56,120 of which Rs. 1,10,005 were met by Imperial and Local Funds. Sir George Shaw desires to place on record his appreciation of Colonel Evans' services and those of Messrs. Rennie and Cameron, who continued to hold the posts of 2nd and 3rd Superintendents. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma, W.J. KEITH, Offg. Revenue Secretary to the Government of Bur mam
From C. R. P. COOPER, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Hon'ble Mr. W. J. KEITH, I.C.S., Officiating Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, For the year ended 31st March 1913. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Superintendents.2 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, Foot-and-mouth disease did not cause trouble anywhere. Veterinary Inspectors, 6.FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st MARCH 1913. 3 (2) OTHER CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. 7. Surra prevailed on certain Military roads, and at Waingmaw, Sima and Sadôn in the Myitkyina District. The disease was almost entirely amongst Chinese owned mules ; the mortality was heavy. Chinese in such matters are not easily dealt with. The disease was brought into Myitkyina and cases occurred there among the Mounted Infantry ponies and transport. Bhagwan Singh was present during most part of the outbreak and did excellent work. The Military Police Battalions report 14 deaths from the disease. Some cases occurred in Bhamo and the Ruby Mines. The Military Department had to deal with several outbreaks in Mandalay, Shwebo, Bhamo, etc. An Inspector and two Assistants were lent for some months to assist in suppressing outbreaks. (3) PREVENTIVE INOCULATION. Table III. 8. Serum injection was carried out in 13 districts, and cattle belonging to 119 villages were inoculated. Six Veterinary Inspectors and forty-four Assistants were from time to time engaged on this duty. The total number of animals injected amounted to 11,907. No unsatisfactory results were recorded. (4) OTHER DISEASES. 9. The deaths reported from non-contagious diseases amounted to 63,057 in Lower Burma and 17,050 in Upper Burma. (5) VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES. Table V. 10. Excepting Insein School4 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, Ten appointments were made, viz. 3 Veterinary Assistants and 7 Reserve Veterinary Assistants. Two Veterinary Assistants were promoted to Inspectorships to fill the vacan- cies caused, one by Maung Tha Dun Zan whose services were seconded for foreign service, Hsipaw State, and the other to the created post of a twelfth Inspectorship. The casualties amongst Veterinary Assistants during the year were 6, viz. two died and four were removed from the Department, one being medically unfit. One Veterinary Inspector retired from the service of Government and his place will shortly be filled. The strength at the end of the year was therefore 11 Veterinary Inspectors and 120 Veterinary Assistants. These were distributed as follows :FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st MARCH 1918. 5 16. Importation of disease from China.APPENDICES. PAGE Table I.8 APPENDICES. TABLE I. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1912-13 (Paragraphs 2 and 5). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Number of students Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final ex- amination. Remaining under instruc- tion at end of year. Scholarship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 12 ... 10 1 31 ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1 ½ Do. ... ... I ... 6 ... Total for 1912-13 ... 12 ... II 1 37 ... Total for 1911-13 ... ... 18 4 3 1 46 1 Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Students admitted during the year classed by educational qualifications. Receipts. Matriculated with higher qualifica- tions. Knowing some Eng- lish, but not Ma- triculated. Knowing no English or very little Eng- lish. From fees. From other sources. Total. 1 2 9 10 11 12 13 14 No. No. No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Insein ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... Taunggyi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total for 1912-13 ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... Total for 1911-12 ... ... ... ... 22 ... ... ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Expenditure. Employment of students who passed out during the three years preceding. Salaries of Instruct- ing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Govern- ment or local bodies. In service of other bodies or institu- tions. In private practice. Number unem- ployed. 1 2 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Rs. Rs. Rs. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... ... 6,562 9,626 16,188* 19 18 1,888 Taunggyi ... ... 1,800 1,483 3,283 3 ... 3 ... ... Total for 1912-13 ... ... 8,362 11,109 19,471 22 18 4 ... ... Total for 1911-12 ... ... 17,916 12,583 30,499 42 41 ... ... 1 As supplied by the Accountant-General, Burma.
APPENDICES. 9 Showing number of Deaths front Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1912-13 (Paragraphs 3 and 4). District. Equines 10 APPENDICES. TABLE III. Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1912-13 (Paragraph 8). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was un- dertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of animals which died after inoculation. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Prome ... Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 3 ... 57 ... ... 806 ... ... 2 ... Tharrawad- dy. 3 ... 179 ... ... 726 ... ... 6 ... Thayetmyo 1 ... 10 ... ... 173 ... ... ... ... Thatôn ... 4 ... 45' ... ... 156 ... ... 5 ... Amherst ... 7 ... 151 ... ... 742 ... ... 25 ... Mergui ... 3 ... 303 ... ... 138 ... ... 16 ... Magwe ... 1 4 ... 177 ... ... 1,432 ... ... J2 ... Sagaing ... 1 ... 78 ... ... 1,090 ... ... ... ... Lower Chin. dwin. 1 ... 91 ... ... 867 ... ... ... ... Upper Chin- dwin. 5 ... 844 ... ... 2,357 ... ... 63 ... Kyauksè ... 2 14 ... ... 1,540 ... ... ... ... Meiktila ... 4 ... 52 ... ... 1,078 ... ... ... ... Yamèthin ... 3 ... 5o ... ... 802 ... ... ... ... Total for 1912-13. ... ... 41 ... 2,051 ... ... 11,907 ... ... 129 ... Total for 1911-12. ... ... 54 ... 745 ... ... 8,946 ... ... 85 ...
APPENDICES. 11 TABLE IV. Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1912-13 (Paragraph 13). District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castratios. performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castra- tions preformed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Akyab ... 1,302 9 ... ... ... ... ... 1,476 ... 1,476 53 2,155 29 2,237 3,713 Kyaukpyu ... 281 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1,348 ... 1,348 5 1,380 7 1,392 2,740 Sandoway ... 71 1 ... ... ... ... ... 279 ... 270 2 48 3 53 332 Hanthawaddy ... 721 3 ... ... ... ... 1 114 ... 115 44 2,107 9 2,160 2,275 Insein ... 502 1 ... ... ... ... ... 267 ... 267 6 749 ... 755 1,022 Pegu 649 4 ... ... ... ... ... 97 ... 97 126 2,339 6 2,471 2,568 Prome ... 381 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1,225 ... 1,226 24 435 11 480 1,706 Tharrawaddy ... 718 4 ... ... ... ... ... 392 1 393 21 886 8 915 1,308 Bassein ... 1,378 6 ... ... ... ... ... 4,621 ... 4,621 79 4,505 5 4,5 89 9,210 Ma-ubin ... 531 3 ... ... ... ... ... 42 ... 42 15 1,150 4 1,169 1,211 Pyapôn ... 410 3 ... ... ... ... ... 38 ... 38 7 772 7 786 824 Myaungmya ... 772 4 ... i ... ... ... ... 227 ... 227 9 1,642 44 1,695 1,922 Henzada ... 1,019 5 ... ... ... ... ... 377 ... 377 72 3,025 ... 3,097 3,474- Thayetmyo ... 545 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3,108 ... 3,108 59 905 17 981 4,089 Amherst 6o9 3 ... ... ... ... 506 ... 506 42 724 ib 782 1,288 Tavoy ... 177 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 719 i... 731 731 Mergui ... 144 1 ... ... ... ... ... 366 ... 366 9 208 24 241 607 Thatôn ... 835 4 ... ... ... ... ... 254 ... 254 63 1,252 26 1,341 1,595 Toungoo ... 620 3 ... ... ... ... 2 236 ... 238 33 1,284 57 1,374 I,612 Salween Tracts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 12,165 63 ... ... ... ... 4 14,973 1 14,978 691 26,285 273 27,249 42,227 Pakôkku ... 793 3 ... ... ... .... 1 182 ... 183 112 936 35 1,083 1,266 Minbu ... 676 3 ... ... ... ... 4 519 1 524 203 765 16 984 1,508 Magwe ... 793 3 ... ... ... ... 2 1,654 ... 1,656 202 813 34 1,049 2,705 Mandalay ... 570 4 ... ... ... 1 951 ... 952 221 612 37 870 1,822 Bhamo ... 1,010 3 ... ... ... ... 2 329 4 335 5,670 6,970 15 12,655 12,990 Katha ... 591 3 ... ... ... ... 6 2,181 ... 2,187 77 573 1 656 2,843 Myitkyina ... 303 2 ... ... ... ... 9 260 ... 269 72 347 13 433 701 Ruby Mines 207 2 ... ... ... 5 675 ... 680 114 208 18 34o 1,020 Shwebo ... 7°5 4 ... ... ... ... ... 844 ... 844 178 862 25 1,065 1,909 Sagaing ... 1,052 4 ... ... ... 2 3,711 ... 3,713 428 1,059 7 1,494 5,207 Lower Chindwin 697 3 ... ... ... ... 2 408 ... 410 244 2,228 34 2,506 2,916 Upper Chindwin 355 3 ... ... ... ... 4 935 ... 939 103 812 11 926 1,865 Kyauksè ... 726 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1,163 ... 1,163 103 440 5 548 1,711 Meiktila ... 639 3 ... ... ... ... 3 3,477 ... 3,48o 255 552 37 844 4,324 Yamèthin ... 549 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3,126 ... 3,126 177 1007 4 1,188 4,314 Myingyan ... 718 4 ... ... ... ... ... 2,325 ... 2,325 633 1,631 37 2,301 4,626 Total ... 10,384 50 ... ... ... ... 41 22,740 5 22,786 8,792 19,820 329 28,941 51727 GRAND TOTAL, 1912-13. 22,549 113 ... ... ... ... 45 37,713 6 37,764 9,483 46,105 5,602 56,190 93,954i Grand Total, 21,248 112 ... ... ... ... 57 40,000 244 40,301 7,178 43,170 619 5o,973 91,274 Veterinary In- spectors, Lower Burma. 1,170 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1432 ... 1,433 13 54 3 562 1,995 Veterinary In- spectors, Upper Burma. 928 ... ... ... ... ... ... 134 ... 134 61 10 26 193 327 Northern Shan States. 19 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 1 ... 21 1 23 Southern Shan States. 136 ... ... ... ... 10 10 77 ... 87 223 141 150 514 601
12 APPENDICES. TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1912-13 (Paragraphs 2 and 10). Province. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assis- tants employed at Dispensaries. In-patients. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma (Insein) ... 1 1 3 ... 1 32 11 64 Total for 1912-13 ... 1 1 3 ... 1 32 11 64 Total for 1911-12 ... 1 1 2 1 ... 20 8 44 Province. In-patients. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Burma (Insein) ... 35 11 65 30 10 55 5 1 10 Total for 1912-13 ... 35 11 65 30 10 55 5 1 10 Total for 1911-12 ... 22 9 44 19 9 43 3 ... I Province. Out-patients. Total number of in- and out-patients treated during the year. Receipts. Expenditure. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Burma (Insein) ... 168 200 515 145 .54 1.41 203 211 580 994 ... 216 Total for 1912-13 ... 168 200 515 .45 .54 1.41 203 211 580 994 ... 216 Total for 1911-12 ... 165 303 26 45 83 71 187 312 305 804 ... 6,942
APPENDICES. 13 TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1912-13 (Paragraph 13). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary. Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. No. Burma. In Schools and Colleges Provincial 1* 1 1 * Taunggyi Ve- terinary School. Do. 1 NLSTO INSERT COLOUR
ANNUAL REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st MARCH 1913 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1913
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1914 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1914 [Price,REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1914 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1914
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA : THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Ltd., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., 103, Medows Street, Fort, Bombay. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Ltd., 8.2, Hastings Street, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND : HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C. A. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is 10 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1914. ARA. PAGE. General Administration ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 I.From P. C. FOGARTY, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1914. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department,2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31st MARCH 1914. Veterinary School at Taunggyi, Southern Shan States, appears to be well established and it is to be hoped that after a few years the pupils sent out from it may succeed in reducing the virulence of the rinderpest outbreaks which are a constant menace to the border districts in Burma. The Veterinary Inspectors spent on an average quite two days out of five at their headquarters. The Lieutenant-Governor considers that a minimum of 20 days a month on tour should be required of these officers. The total expenditure on the Department during the year was slightly more than 2½ lakhs, of which a fourth was borne by Local Funds and a fifth by the Imperial Budget. It has been decided that hence- forth the contribution from the Imperial Budget shall be a fixed annual grant of Rs. 46,001 and that in Upper Burma as in Lower Burma the cost of Veterinary Assistants shall be met from Local Funds, an equivalent contribution being made from the Provincial Budget. The Lieutenant-Governor's thanks are due to Colonel Evans and Messrs. Cameron and Rennie for the efficient work of the Department during the year under report. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma. W. J. KEITH, Offg. Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma.
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, For the year ended the 31st March 1914. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. The Superintendent was on tour 174 days. He inspected the work of Veterinary Assistants in 19 districts and travelled 7,321 miles. The Second Superintendent visited 16 districts, being on tour for 136 days and travelling 6,980 miles. The Third Superintendent was on tour for 85 days in 5 districts and travelled 5,146 miles. The Military Police Mounted Infantry ponies were seen by Superintendents while on tour as occasion offered. I.2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, (INCLUDING THE INSEIN Rinderpest.VETERINARY SCHOOL). BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1914. 3 Veterinary Assistants.4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN (4) OTHER DISEASES. 9. Deaths reported from non-contagious diseases amounted to 82,478, viz., Lower Burma 65,965 and Upper Burma 16,513. (5) VETERINARY HOSPITALS N AND DISPENSARIES. Table V. 10. Excepting Insein SchoolVETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1914. 5 The number of Veterinary Inspectors remained the same as at the beginning of the year, viz., Lower Burma 5, Upper Burma 6. The average number of days spent on tour by Veterinary Inspectors was 222 in Lower Burma and 226 6 in Upper Burma. They attended 141 outbreaks in Lower Burma and 165 in Upper Burma. Tables IV. Veterinary Assistants during the year visited 11,955 villages in Lower Burma and 10,720 in Upper Burma, the average number of days on tour being 224.6 in Lower Burma and 224 09 in Upper Burma. V.6 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETY. DEPT. (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1914. villages or groups of small ones is under consideration." In the Mergui District the rules were enforced as strictly as possible and segregation camps were built in almost all affected villages, the cattle owners themselves realizing the importance and immense value of prompt isolation of infected and in-contact animals. 17. Registration of Cattle Deaths.APPENDICES. PAGE Table I.8 APPENDICES. TABLE 1. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1913-14 (Paragraphs 2 and 5). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Number of students Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final ex- amination. Remaining under instruc- tion at end of year. Scholarship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 21 ... 9 ... 41* ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1 ½ Do. 7 ... 6 ... 7 ... Total for 1913-14 ... ... 28 ... 15 ... 48 ... Total for 1912-13 ... ... 12 ... 11 1 37 ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Students admitted during the year classed by educational qualifications. Receipts. Matriculated with higher qualifica- tions. Knowing some Eng- lish, but not Ma- triculated. Knowing no English or very little Eng- lish. From fees. From other sources. Total. 1 2 9 10 11 12 13 14 No. No. No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Insein ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total for 1913-14 ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... Total - : 1912-13 .. ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Expenditure. Employment of students who passed out during the three years preceding. Salaries of Instruct- ing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In Service of Govern- ment or local bodies. In service of other bodies or institu- tions. In private practice. Number unem- ployed. 1 2 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Rs. Rs. Rs No. No. Nc. No. No. Insein ... ... 5,890 10,078 15,968 APPENDICES. 9 TABLE II. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1913-14 (Paragraphs 3 and 4). District. Equines 19 APPENDICES. TABLE III. Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1913-14 (Paragraph 8). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was un- dertaken. number of animals which died uninoculated in Course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. number of animals which died after inoculation. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Prome ... Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 11 ... 45 ... ... 1,591 ... ... 6 ... Bassein ... 13 ... 56 ... ... 1,163 ... ... 11 ... Thayetmyo 1 ... ... ... ... 30 ... ... ... ... Amherst .. 2 ... 111 ... ... 43 ... ... ... ... Mergui ... 1 ... 88 ... ... 22 ... ... ... Toungoo .. 5 ... 8 ... ... 305 ... ... 2 ... Magwe ... 4 ... ... ... ... 602 ... ... 15 ... Katha ... 1 ... ... ... ... 50 ... ... 3 ... Yamèthin . 9 ... 62 ... ... 1,417 ... ... 4 ... Total for 1913-14 ... ... 47 ... 410 ... ... 5,223 ... ... 41 ... Total for 1912-13. ... ... 41 ... 2,051 ... ... 11,907 ... ... 129 ...
APPENDICES. 11 TABLE IV. Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1913-14 (Paragraph 13). District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castrations, performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castra- tions preformed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Akyab ... 1,310 8 ... ... ... ... ... 1,246 ... 1,246 23 2,159 18 2,200 3,446 Kyaukpyu ... 279 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1,873 ... 1,873 6 808 1 815 2,688 Sancbway ... 56 ... ... ... ... ... 298 ... 298 ... 41 1 42 340 Hanthawaddy ... 834 3 ... ... ... ... 1 1,096 ... 1,097 97 1,860 38 1,995 3,092 Insein ... 613 2 ... ... ... ... ... 389 389 9 442 451 840 Pegu 577 4 ... ... ... ... ... 415 ... 415 37 1,543 3 1,583 1,998 Prome ... 532 3 ... ... ... ... ... 286 ... 286 89 705 11 805, 1,091 Tharrawaddy ... ... 618 3 ... ... ... ... ... 414 ... 414 40 663 30 733 1,147 Bassein ... 1,476 7 ... ... ... ... ... 2,501 2,501 103 3,038 4 3,145 5,640 Ma-ubm ... 455 4 ... ... ... ... 1 136 ... 130 9 622 5 636 773 Pyapôn ... 365 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 ... 28 6 641 4 651 679 Myaungmya ... 569 3 ... ... ... ... ... 231 ... 231 5 795 45 845 1,076 Henzada ... 1,046 4 ... ... ... 1 591 ... 592 57 2,779 12 2,848 3,440 Thayetmyo ... 549 3 ... ... ... ... 2 635 ... 637 41 778 29 848 1,485 Amherst 86c 4 ... ... i ... ... 468 ... 468 42 519 17 578 1,046 Tavoy ... 99 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 334 14 ... 345 345 Mergui ... 317 1 ... ... ... ... ... 112 ... 112 8 426 14 448 560 Thatôn ... 803 4 ... ... ... ... 1 632 ... 633 37 948 40 I,025 1,658 Toungoo ... 597 3 ... ... ... ... ... 469 ... 469 38 859 34 931 1,400 Total ... 11,955 62 ... ... ... ... 6 11,820 ... 11,826 658 19,960 1,306 20,924 32,750 Pakôkku ... 797 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1,402 ... 1,402 186 840, 14 1,040 2,442 Minbu ... 848 4 ... ... ... ... 6 181 ... I87 224 1,152 7 1,383 1,570 Magwe ... 744 3 ... ... ... ... 1 855 ... 856 l85 902 17 1,104 1,960 Mandalay ... 569 5 ... ... ... ... 2 603! ... 605 I50 513 33 696 1,301 Bhamo ... 926 3 ... ... ... .. 4 835 18 857 4,088 1,940 8 6,036 6,893 Katha ... 626 3 ... ... ... ... 23 1,996 ... 2,OI9! 98 587 2 687 2,706 Myitkyina ... 227 2 ... ... ... ... 18 71 ... 89 53 266 7 326 415 Ruby Mines ... 138 3 ... ... ... ... ... 484 ... 484 48 222 3 273 757 Shwebo ... 850 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4,674 ... 4,674 137 777 20 934 5,608 Sagamg ... 982 4 ... ... ... ... ... 1,900 ... 1,900 458 1,057 9 1,524 3,424 Lower Chindwin 887 4 ... ... ... I 2,281 ... 2,282, 321 1,789 25 2,135 4,417 Upper Chindwin | 366 3 ... ... ... 3 20 ... 29. 96 964 5 1,065 1,094 Kyauksè ... 787 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1,434 ...1 1,434 130 408 1 539 1,973 Meiktila ... 537 3 ... ... ... ... ... 386 ... 380 168 394 53 615 1,001 Yamèthin ... 687 3 ... ... ... 2,277 ... 2,277, 201 795 20 1,016 3,293 Myingyan ... 749 4 ... ... ... 1,806 ... 1,806 585 2,339 12 2,936 4,742 Total 10,720 54 ... .... ... 58 21,211 18 21,287 7,128 14,945 236 22,309 43.596 GRAND TOTAL, 1913-14. 22,675 116 64 33.031' 18 33,113 7,786 34,905 542 43,233 76,346 Grand Total, 1912-13. 22,549 113 ... ... ... 45 37,713 6 37,764 9,483 46,105 602 56,190 93,954 Veterinary In- spectors, Lower Burma. 1,216 5 ... ... 207 ... 207 4 201 3 208 415 Veterinary In- spectors, Upper Burma. 1,440 . 6 ... ... ... ... ... 1 234 235 16 160 12 188 423 Veterinary In- spectors, North ern Shan States 313 4 ... ... ... ... 114 114 33 308 14 355 469 Northern Shan States. 1,328 4 ... ... ... 1,122 ... 1,122 119 538 19 67 1,798 Southern Shan States. 144 8 ... ... ... ... 1 162 I 164 150 224 87 46 625
12 APPENDICES. TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1913 14 (Paragraphs 2 and 10). Province. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assist- ants employed at Dispensaries. In-patients. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Equines. Bo vines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 (Burma) Insein ... 1 1 5 1 10 30 12 115 Total for 1913-14 ... 1 1 5 1 10 30 12 115 Total for 1912-13 ... 1 1 3 ... 1 32 11 64 Province. In-patients. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Burma ... ... 35 13 125 33 13 117 2 ... 8 Total for 1913-14 ... 35 13 125 33 13 117 2 ... 8 Total for 1912-13 ... 35 11 65 30 10 55 5 X 10 Province. Out-patients. Total number of in- and out-patients treated during the year. Receipts. Expenditure. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. Burma ... 177 344 734 48 .94 2.0I 212 357 859 1,428 ... 983 Total for 1913-14 177 344 734 48 .94 2.01 2l2 357 859 1,428 ... 983 Total for 1912-13 168 200 515 45 .54 1.41 203 2x1 580 994 ... 216
APPENDICES. 13 TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1913-14 (Paragraph 13). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. I 3 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. No. Burma In Schools and Colleges Provincial 1* 1 1 * Taungyyi Ve- terinary School. Do. ... 114 APPENDICES. TABLE XIV. Abstract of particulars regarding Cattle Fairs and Shows held during the year 1913-14 (Paragraph 12.) Province, Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Total number of stock present. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma. Bhamo ... ... 3 5 20 6 1 33 ... 38 Total ... 3 5 20 6 1 33 ... 38 Province. Average price of animal sold. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels, 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Burma. Bhamo...... ... ... ... ... ... ... 103 Total ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 103 Prize money provided. Number of medals awarded. Remarks From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Burma. Rs. Bhamo... ... ... ... ... ... ... 515* Total ... ... ... ... ... ... 515 * From the Funds " Public Exhibitions and Fairs " in Budget of Agricultural Department.
APPENDICES. 15 TABLE XIVA. * NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSE VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1914 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1914
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1915 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1915 [Price,REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1915 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1915
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA : THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Ltd., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., 103, Medows Street, Fort, Bombay. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Ltd., 8.2, Hastings Street, Calcutta.* IN ENGLAND : HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E. C. A. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., LTD., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is 10 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1915. PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 I.( 5 ) From P. C. FOGARTY, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, For the year ended the 31st March 1915. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department,REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, For the year ended the 31st March 1915. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Tours of Superintendents have of necessity been far less than in any year. The Superintendent was absent on privilege leave till the middle of July. For some months from the early part of August the Third Superintendent had his working hours and all leisure time fully occupied. I.2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN The following buildings were completed by the Public Works Department during the year: stables, cowshed, dog shed, experimental animal shed, incinerator and forge. A tube-well is in process of construction and when completed will enable the above mentioned buildings to be fully used. Sanction for the construction of a laboratory was received during the year. II.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1915. 3 Shan States. 5. Southern Shan States.4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE 1NSEIN The Veterinary Inspector is said to have done a very good year's work. He was on tour 210 days during the year and attended 25 outbreaks of disease, treat- ing 317 cases. (2) OTHER CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. 7. Blood smears, etc., were received from suspected cases in the following districts and confirmed :VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1915. 5 (2) EQUINES. 11. As in the previous year, no pony-breeding operations were carried out by the Department. (3) OTHERS. Nil. (4) FAIRS AND SHOWS. 12. An Agricultural Show was held at Bhamo on 12th March. It has been Table XIV. decided to continue the Show as an experiment. IV.6 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE 1NSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1915. V.APPENDICES. PAGE Table I.8 APPENDICES. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1914-15 (Paragraphs 2 and 5). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Number of students Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final ex- amination. Remaining under instruc- tion at end of year. Scholarship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' 21 ... 9 ... 50* ... Vernacular Taunggyi, Southern 1½ Do. ... ... 6 1 ... 1 Shan States. Total for 1914-15 ... ... 21 ... 15 1 50 1 Total for 1913-14 ... ... 28 ... 15 ... 48 ... Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Students admitted during the year classed by educational qualifications. Receipts. Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Matriculated with higher qualifica- tions. Knowing some Eng- lish, but not Ma- triculated. Knowing no English or very little Eng- lish. From fees. From other sources. Total 1 2 9 10 11 12 13 14 No. No. No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Insein ... ... ... ... 21 ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shan States. Total for 1914-15 ... ... ... ... 21 ... ... ... Total for 1913-14 .. ... ... ... 7 ... ... .. Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Expenditure. Employment of students who passed out during the three years preceding. Salaries of Instruct- ing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Govern- ment or local bodies. In service of other bodies or institu- tions. In private practice. Number unem- ployed. 1 2 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Rs. Rs. Rs. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... ... 7,203 13,312 20,515 19 19 ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern ... 1,800 674 2,474 10 ... 10 S. S. ... ... Shan States. Total for 1914-15 ... ... 9,003 13,986 22,989 29 19 10 ... ... Total for 1913-14 ... ... 7,690 11,383 19,073 28 23 5 ... ... * Class C, 8; Class B, 21; Class A, 21.
APPENDICES. 9 TABLE II. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1914-15 (Paragraphs 3 and 4). District. Equines10 TABLE III. Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1914-15 (Paragraph 8). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was un- dertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated Number of animals which died after inoculation. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Insein ... 2 ... 7 ... ... 78 ... ... 2 ... Pegu ... 3 ...... 36 ... ... 405 ... ... 7 ... Prome ... 12 .. 31 ... ... 6,526 ... ... 9 ... Toungoo ... Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 5 ... 17 ... ... 173 ... ... 3 ... Thayetmyo 7 ..... 77 ... ... 1,242 ... ... 16 ... Yamèthin ... 50 ... 248 ... .. 4,867 ... ... 138 ... Meiktila ... 7 ... 22 ... ... 971 ... ... ... ... Ruby Mines 3 14 ... ... 387 ... ... 7 Total for 1914-15. ... ... 89 ... 446 ... ... 9,649 ... ... 182 ... Total for 1913-14. ... ... 47 ... 410 ... ... 5,223 ... ... 41 ...
APPENDICES. 11 TABLE IV. Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1914-15 (Paragraph 13). District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castrations performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castra- tions performed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Akyab ... 1,239 8 ... ... ... ... ... 301 ... 301 30 2,297 22 2,349 2,650 Kyaukpyu ... 318 2 ... ... ... ... ... 317 ... 317 18 998 3 1,019 1,336 Sandoway ... 45 .. ... ... ... ... ... 40 ... 40 .. 5 1 6 46 Hanthawaddy ... 8 5 3 ... ... ... ... 3 254 ... 257 115 1,958 44 2,117 2,374 Insein ... 672 2 ... ... ... ... ... 399 ... 399 56 998 ... 1,054 1,453 Pegu ... 740 4 ... ... ... ... ... 47 ... 47 38 2,075 2 2,115 2,162 Prome ... 66 x 3 ... ... ... ... 9 1,385 ... 1,394 107 695 14 816 2,210 Tharrawaddy ... 708 4 ... ... ... ... 1 796 ... 797 36 1,041 21 1,098 1,895 Bassein ... 1,797 7 ... ... ... ... ... 3,077 ... 3,077 123 3,160 18 3,301 6,378 Ma-ubin ... 571 4 ... ... ... ... ... 60 ... 60 2 872 4 878 938 Pvapôn ... 579 3 ... ... ... ... 1 52 ... 53 17 1,006 10 1,033 1,086 Myaungmya ... 095 4 ... ... ... ... ... 197 ... 197 17 939 46 1,002 1,199 Henzada ... 1,158 5 ... ... ... ... 1 635 ... 636 55 1,960 9 2,024 2,660 Thayetmyo ... 475 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1,816 ... 1,816 16 451 15 482 2,298 Amherst ... 503 4 ... ... ... ... ... 382 ... 382 71 654 14 739 1,121 Tavoy ... 171 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 627 ... 630 630 Mergui ... 151 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 6 72 3 81 82 That&n 678 4 ... ... ... ... ... 576 ... 576 25 833 45 903 1,479 Toungoo ... 619 3 ... ... .. ... 1 396 ... 397 123 803 12 938 1,335 Salween Tracts 38 ... ... ... ... ... 25 ... 25 ... 20 ... 20 45 Total ... 12,633 64 ... ... ... ... 17 10,755 ... 10,772 858 21,464 283 22,605 33,377 Pakôkku ... 910 3 ... ... ... ... ... 501 ... 501 140 832 19 99 1,492 Minbu ... 886 4 ... ... ... ... 5 2,706 ... 2,711 195 814 7 1,016 3,727 Magwe ... 681 3 ... ... .. ... 11 1,466 ... 1,477 174 722 32 928 2,405 Mandalay ... 631 6 ... ... ... ... ... 1,355 ... 1,355 92 538 37 667 2,022 Bhamo ... 847 4 ... ... ... ... 7 1,413 44 1,464 1,005 1,251 27 2,283 3,747 Katha ... 495 3 ... ... ... ... 6 1,486 ... 1,492 97 627 ... 724 2,216 Myitkyina ... 188 2 ... ... ... ... 4 42 ... 46 94 238 13 345 391 Ruby Mines ... 374 3 ... ... ... ... 4 557 ... 561 77 313 3 393 954 Shwebo ... 527 4 ... ... ... ... ... 2,502 ... 2,502 103 465 13 581 3,083 Sagaing ... 950 4 ... ... ... ... ... 1,017 ... 1,017 370 1,248 5 1,623 2,640 Lower Chindwin 786 4 ... ... ... ... 1 1,762 25 1,788 278 1,408 31 1,717 3,505 Upper Chindwin 506 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1,509 ... 1,510 110 1,199 15 1,324 2,834 Kyauksè .. 686, 3 ... ... ... ... ... 617 ... 617 123 359 2 484 1,101 Meiktila ... 683 4 ... ... ... ... 2 916 ... 918 272 599 49 920 1,838 Yamèthin ... 606 4 ... ... ... ... ... 2,933 ... 2,933 143 435 19 597 3,530 Myingyan ... 700 4 ... ... ... ... ... 700 ... 700 644 1,695 51 2,390 3,090 Total . . 10,456 57 ... ... ... ... 41 21,482 69 21,592 3,917 12,743 323 16,933 38,575 Grand Total 1914-15. 23,089 121 ... ... ... ... 58 32,237 69 132,364 4,775 34,207 606 39,588 71,952 Grand Total 1913-14. 22,675 16 ... ... ... 64 33,031 18 33,113 7,786 34,905 542 43,233 76,346 Veterinary In- spectors, Lower Burma. 945 6 ... ... ... 570 ... 570 18 380 2 400 970 Veterinary In- spectors, Upper Burma. 1,449 6 ... ... ... 1 728 .. 729 103 407 19 529 1,258 Veterinary In- spectors, South- ern Shan States. 129 1 ... ... ... .. 7 222 2 23 197 252 101 550 781 Veterinary In spectors, North- ern Shan States 287 1 ... ... ... ... ... 13 ... 13 36 254 14 304 317 Assistants, North ern Shan States 1,436 4 .. .. ... ... ... 718 ... 718 411 1,394 4. 28 1,833 2,551
12 APPENDICES. TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1914-15 (Paragraphs 2 and 10). Province. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assist- ants employed at Dispensaries. In-patients. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 (Burma) Insein ... 1 1 2 ... 8 21 31 168 Total for 1914-15 ... 1 1 2 ... 8 21 31 168 Total for 1913-14 ... 1 1 5 1 10 30 12 115 Province. In-patients. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 (Burma) Insein ... 23 31 176 22 30 171 1 1 5 Total for 1914-15 ... 23 31 176 22 30 171 1 1 5 Total for 1913-14 ... 35 13 125 33 13 117 2 ... 8 Province. Out-patients. Total number of in- and out-patients treated- during the year. Receipts. Expenditure. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. (Burma) Insein ... 148 287 709 .40 .78 1.94 171 318 885 1,374 ... 13,350 Total for 1914-15 ... 148 287 709 .40 .78 1.94 171 318 885 1,374 ... 13,350 Total for 1913-14 ... 177 344 734 .48 .94 2.01 212 357 859 1,428 ... 983
APPENDICES. 13 TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1914-15 (Paragraph 13). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. No. Burma .. In Schools and Colleges Provincial 1* 1 1 *Taunggyi Vete- rinary School. Do. ... 114 APPENDICES. TABLE XIV. Abstract of particulars regarding Cattle Fairs and Shows held during the year 1914-15 (Paragraph 12). Province. Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Total number of stock present. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma. Bhamo ... ... 1 31 27 13 13 55 ... 30 Total for 1914-15 ... 1 31 27 13 13 55 ... 30 Total for 1913-14 ... 1 5 20 6 1 33 .. 38 Province. Average price of animal sold. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. 1 10 11 12 13 r4 15 16 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma. Bhamo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 169 Total for 1914-15 ... ... ... ... ... ... 169 Total for 1913-14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 103 Province. Prize money provided. Number of medals awarded. Remarks. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma. ... 1,550 ... ... 1,550 435 ... Bhamo ... Total for 1914-15 ... ... 1,550 ... ... 1,550 435 ... Total for 1913-14 ... ... ... ... ... ... 515
APPENDICES. TABLE XIVA.* Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1914-15. Major Heads. Amount. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... 53,558 ... 53,558 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 19,085 ... 19,085 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 89,236 65,880 1,55,116 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 14,347 ... 14,347 Breeding Operations ... ... 10,497 ... 10,497 Prizes ... ... ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... ... ... ... ... Total for 1914-15 ... 1,86,723 65,880 2,52,603 Total for 1913-14 ... 48,647 1,46,052 62,815 2,57,514 * As furnished by the Accountant-General, Burma. NOTE.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1915 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1915
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1916 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1916 [PriceREPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1916 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1916
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA : THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Ltd., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., 103, Medows Street, Fort, Bombay. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Ltd., 8.2, Hastings Street, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND : HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C. A. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Ltd., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is 10 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSE1N VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1916. PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 I.From P. C. FOGARTY, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,( 2 ) The question was discussed at the half-yearly Conference of the Agricultural and Co-operative Departments held in April last after the conclusion of the year under report, the unanimous opinion of the members being that the course should be included in the prescribed days of touring and that 250 days per annum is the minimum period for which such touring officers as Inspectors should be required to be absent from their homes. The effect of this modification of existing orders, if accepted, would be that the existing minimum of 240 days on tour would be retained but that in such years as an Inspector attends a 30 days' course at the Insein School, his maximum number of days on tour for purposes of inspection would be reduced to 220 only. It is hoped that this proposal may meet with the approval of Government. 3. The development of the work of Insein hospital during the year is worthy of note. The number of animals treated rose in the case of out-patients from 1,144 to 1,550 and the case of in-patients from 230 to 316. This hospital is under the special supervision of Mr. Cameron, and its increasing popularity is largely due to the enthusiasm and efficiency with which he has discharged his duties in connection with it. 4. Colonel Evans has been in charge of the Department throughout the year, and both he and Messrs. Rennie and Cameron are much to be congra- tulated on the successful results which have attended their labours. Printed by order of the Government of Burma. +G.B.C.P.O.RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, For the year ended the 31st March 1916. Extract from the proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department,REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1916. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Three Superintendents were employed throughout the year. Conditions remaining much as during the previous year their touring was very much restricted. The Superintendent was deputed to attend the Agricultural Conference held at Pusa in February, and all Superintendents attended the Provincial Agricultural Conference held in Mandalay during August. I.2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN A tube well has been sunk and it is reported that a good supply of excellent water will be available as soon as the necessary pipes have been laid down. Minor works, i.e., drains, etc., were completed. The construction of a laboratory has been deferred. II.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1016. 3 Shan States. 5. Southern Shan States.4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN Veterinary Assistants, 7.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1916. 5 IV.6 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1816. The Deputy Commissioner, Bhamo, in connection with this subject writes as follows :APPENDICES. PAGE Table I.8 APPENDICES. TABLE I. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1915-16 (Paragraphs 2 and 5). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Admitted during the year. Number of students Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final ex- amination. Remaining under instruc- tion at end of year. Scholarship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein... 3 years' Vernacular 21 ... 8 ... 59* ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ Do. 5t ... 1 ... 4 ... Total for 1915-16 ... ... 26 ... 9 ... 63 ... Total for 1914-15 ... ... 21 ... 15 1 50 1 Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Students admitted during the year classed by educational qualifications. Receipts. Matriculated with higher qualifica- tions. Knowing some Eng- lish, but not Ma- triculated. Knowing no English or very little Eng- lish. From fees. From other sources. Total. 1 2 9 10 11 12 13 14 No. No. No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Insein ... ... 1 20 ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... Total for 1915-16 ... ... ... 1 24 ... ... ... Total for 1914-15 ... ... ... ... 21 ... ... .. Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Expenditure. Employment of students who passed out during the three years preceding. Salaries of Instruct- ing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Govern- ment or local bodies. In service of other bodies or institu- tions. In private practice. Number unem- ployed. 1 2 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Rs. Rs. Rs. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... ... 7,827 14,681 22,508 28 28 ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. ... 1,877 1,318 3,195 13 ... 13S.S. ... ... Total for 1915-16 ... ... 9,704 15,999 25.703 41 28 13 ... ... Total for 1914-15 .. ... 9,003 13,986 22,989 29 19 10 ... ... * Class C, 20; Class B, 18; Class A, 21. APPENDICES. 9 TABLE II. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1915-16 (Paragraphs 3 and 4). District. Equines10 APPENDICES. TABLE III. Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1915-16 (Paragraph 8). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was un- dertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of animals which died after inoculation. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Yamèthin ... Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 54 ... 241 ... ... 5,014 ... ... 29 ... Meiktila ... 12 ... 9 ... ... 1,342 ... ... ... ... Bhamo ... 6 ... 19 ... ... 458 ... ... ... ... Total for 1915-16. ... 72 ... 269 ... ... 6,814 ... ... 29 ... Total for 1914-15 ... ... 89 ... 446 ... ... 9,649 ... ... 182 ...
APPENDICES. 11 TABLE IV. Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1915-16 (Paragraph 11). District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castrations performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castra- tions performed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Akyab ... 1,276 8 ... 1 ... ... 1 1,714 ... 1,715 28 3,762 23 3,812 5,527 Kyaukpyu ... 245 2 ... ... ... ... ... 64 ... 64 12 1,367 15 1,394 1,458 Sandoway ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hanthawaddy ... 812 3 ... ... ... ... ... 674 ... 674 96 1,970 55 2,121 2,795 Insein ... 589 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1,367 ... 1,367 29 533 7 569 1,936 Pegu ... 849 4 ... ... ... 1 525 ... 526 74 2,292 4 2,370 2,896 Prome ... 851 3 ... ... ... ... 3 6.598 ... 6,601 100 795 7 902 7,503 Tharrawaddy ... 831 4 ... ... ... 2 3,649 68 3,719 81 1,894 47 2,022 5,741 Bassein ... 1,990 7 ... ... ... ... 457 ... 457 100 2,919 36 3,055 3,512 Ma-ubin ... 536 4 ... ... ... ... ... 322 ... 322 24 814 7 845 1,167 Pyapôn ... 561 3 ... ... ... ... .. 157 ... 157 18 1,054 7 1,079 1,236 Myaungmya ... 914 .4 ... ... ... ... ... 204 ... 204 27 1,311 5 1,389 1,593 Henzada ... 1,329 5 ... ... ... ... ... 1,794 ... 1,794 88 2,135 6 2,229 4,023 Amherst ... 468 4 ... ... ... ... ... 187 ... 187 72 1,112 28 1,212 1,399 Tavoy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mergui ... 174 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 125 7 139 139 Thatôn ... 791 4 ... ... ... ... .. 272 ... 272 58 1,058 109 1,225 1,497 Toungoo ... 597 4 ... ... ... ... ... 740 ... 740 59 351 5 415 1,155 Salween Hill 44 ... ... ... ... ... 55 ... 55 3 13 2 18 73 Tracts. Total ... 12,857 63 ... ... ... ... 7 18,779 68 18,854 876 23,505 12 APPENDICES. TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1915-16 (Paragraphs 2 and 10). Province. Number of Veterinary Dispen- saries. Number of Veterinary Assist- ants employed at Dispensaries. In-patients. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year. Equines. Bovines- Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 (Burma) Insein ... 1 1 1 1 5 33 20 256 Total for 1915-16 ... 1 1 1 1 5 33 20 256 Total for 1914-15 ... 1 1 2 ... 8 21 31 168 Province. In-patients. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 (Burma) Insein ... 34 21 261 30 19 24.6 4 2 15 Total for 1915-16 ... 34 21 261 30 19 246 4 2 15 Total for 1914-15 ... 23 31 176 22 30 171 1 1 5 Province. Out-patients. Total number of in- and out-patients treated during the year. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Receipts. Expenditure. 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Rs. Rs. (Burma) Insein ... 251 437 862 2.3 3.9 5.8 285 458 1123 1,866 50 7,386 Total for 1915-16 ... 251 437 862 2.3 3.9 5.8 285 458 1123 1,866 50 7,386 Total for 1914-15 ... 148 287 709 *1.8 *2.5 * 6.1 171 318 885 1,374 ... 13,350 * Revised figures.
APPENDICES. 13 TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1915-16 (Paragraph 11). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. No. No. Burma ... In Schools and Colleges Provincial 1* 1 1 *Taunggyi School. Do. ... 1 ... Laboratory Assistant. ...... Provincial 12 13 ... ...... Local Funds ... 11614 APPENDICES. TABLE XIV. Abstract of particulars regarding Cattle Fairs and Shows held during the year 1915-16. Province. Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Total number of stock present. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Burma. 1915-16 ... ... ... ... ... Nil ... ... ... ... Total for 1915-16 ... ... ... ... Nil ... ... ... ... Total for 1914-15 ... 1 31 27 13 13 55 ... 30 Province. Average price of animal sold. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Bulls. Bullocks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels, 1 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma 1915-16 ... ... ... ... Nil ... ... ... ... Total for 1915-16 ... ... ... Nil ... ... ... ... Total for X9X4-X5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 169 Province. Prize money provided. Number of medals awarded. Remarks. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. 1 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Burma. ... ... Nil ... ... ... 1915-16 ... ... Total for 1915-16 ... ... ... Nil ... ... ... Total for 1914-15 ... ... 1,550 ... ... 1,550 435
APPENDICES. 15 TABLE XIVA.* Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1915-16. Major Heads. Amount. Remarks. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... 68,006 ... 68,006 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 20,482 ... 20,482 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 38,883 1,30,057 1,68,940 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 7,386 ... 7,386 Breeding Operations ... ... 10,829 ... 10,829 Contribution to District Funds on account of Veterinary Assis- tants. ... NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1916 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 19l6
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1917 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1917 [PriceREPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1917 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1917
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA : THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Ltd., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., 103, Medows Street, Fort, Bombay. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Ltd., 80, Hastings Street, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND : HENRY & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C. A. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Ltd., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is 10 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1917. PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 I.From A. E. H. KILLICK, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1917. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department,REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, For the year ended the 31st March 1917. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Three Superintendents were employed at the beginning of the year. In September the third Superintendent was appointed a Major in the Indian Army Reserve of Officers and left the Province. For the reasons given in previous reports only a few short tours were made. The Superintendents attended the Agricultural Conferences held at Maymyo. The Superintendent and Second Superintendent were appointed Members of the Stock Breeding Committee. I.2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN Two of the pupils were bitten, one by one of the dogs above mentioned, the other by a stray pariah dog which came through the school compound and bit the boy, two or three others having narrow escapes. The animal was pursued and eventually killed by the pupils. Examination of the brain revealed Negri bodiesVETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1917. 3 Veterinary Inspectors, 8.4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSE1N main caravan tracks in Hsipaw and South Hsenwi. In remote localities they are ignored as long as possible. The Kachins have not yet taken kindly to the rules, but have their own method of segregation which is to tie up a diseased animal in an out-of-the-way place till it dies. The body is, however, rarely buried and the surrounding soil is infected. Animals which are not observed to be healthy are driven away into the hills, but no care is taken to separate contacts. The Sawbwas are certainly alive to the importance of the rules and prosecutions for offences under the rules have increased. In Hsipaw State there were seventy prosecutions and in South Hsenwi there were sixty-seven." Veterinary Assistants.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31STMARCH 1917. 5 (5) VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES. 10. Excepting Insein School.6. REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1917. serious neglect of this kind was reported during the year under report. In Kyauksè District an examination in connection with working of the rules for prevention of cattle disease was held, when 26 headmen and six villagers presented themselves for examination. Prizes were awarded to those who satisfied the examiners. It is proposed to extend these examinations to the Meiktila and Myingyan Districts. Handbooks on the subject have already been distributed in Meiktila District. In certain delta districts segregation was as usual reported to be at times difficult, as during the rains inundations limited the amount of dry ground suitable for the purpose. The Deputy Commissioner, Lower Chindwin, further remarks : " The relations between the Veterinary Assistant and cattle owners continue to be cordial, as were the relations between the Veterinary Assistant and village headmen, who willingly received and carried out any instructions given them by the Assistants." The remarks of the Deputy Commissioner, Upper Chindwin, contain the following :APPENDICES. PAGE TABLE I.8 APPENDICES. TABLE I Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1916-17 (Paragraphs 2 and 5). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of coarse of instruction if more than one course followed. Number of students Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final ex- amination. Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of year. Scholarship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular ... ... 18 2 32 2 Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ Do. ... ... ... ... 4 ... Total for 1916-17 ... ... ... ... 18 2 36 2 Total for 1915-16 ... ... 26 ... 9 ... 63 ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Students admitted during the year classed by educational qualifications. Receipts. Matriculated with higher qualifica- tions. Knowing some Eng- lish, but not Ma- triculated. Knowing no English or very little Eng- lish. From fees. From other sources. Total. (1) (2) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) No. No. No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular ... ... ... ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... Total for 1916-17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total for 1915-16 ... ... ... ... 24 ... ... ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Expenditure. Employment of students who passed out during the three years preceding. Salaries of Instruct- ing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Govern- ment or local bodies. In service of local bodies or institu- tions. In private practice. Number unem- ployed. (1) (2) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) Rs. Rs. Rs. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 7,851 14,787 22,638 36 26 ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ Do. 2,190 1,647 3.837 13 ... 13S.S. ... ... Total for 1916-17 ... ... 10,041 16,434 26,475 39 26 13 ... ... Total for 191-16 ... ... 9,704 15,999 25,703 41 28 13 ... ...
APPENDICES. 9 TABLE II Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1916-17 (Paragraphs 3 and 4). District. Equines.10 APPENDICES. TABLE III Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1916-17 (Paragraph 8). District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was un- dertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of animals which died after inoculation. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) Yamethin ... Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 12 ... 21 ... ... 905 ... ... 3 ... Toungoo ... ... ... 9 ... ... 135 ... ... 1 ... Meiktila ... 2 .. 2 ... ... 303 ... ... ... ... Prome ... 3 ... 23 ... ... 323 ... ... ... ... Thayetmyo 7 ... 18 ... ... 1,741 ... 3 ... Ruby Mine 4 ... 63 ... ... 382 ... ... 15 ... Northern Shan State 8 ... 93 ... ... 1,115 ... ... 61 ... Total for 1916-17. ... ... 36 ... 329 ... ... 4,803 ... ... 82 ... Total for 1915-16. ... ... 72 ... 269 ... ... 6,814 ... ... 29 ...
APPENDICES. 11 TABLE IV Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1916-17 (Paragraph 13). Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castrations performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. treated and castrations performed. District. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bevines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) Akyab ... 1,260 9 ... ... ... ... ... 1,255 ... 1,255 18 3.157 11 3,386 4,641 Kyaukpyu ... 372 3 ... ... ... ... ... 13,813 ... 13,813 13 1,150 6 1,169 14,982 Sandoway ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hanthawaddy ... 835 5 ... ... ... ... ... 1,820 ... 1,820 83 1,407 9 1,499 3319 Insein ... 786 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3,787 ... 3,787 19 576 9 604 4.391 Pegu 1,037 4 ... ... ... ... 1,293 .. 1,293 119 2,091 2 2,212 3.5o5 Prome ... 672 3 ... ... ... ... ... 2,948 ... 2,048 66 823 7 890 3,838 Tharrawaddy ... 664 3 ... ... ... ... ... 910 ... 910 56 1,234 120 1,410 2,320 Bassein ... 2,199 7 ... ... ... ... 5 13,968 1 13,974 126 2,777 21 2,924 16,898 Ma-ubin ... 502 4 ... ... ... ... 1 605 ... 606 24 844 16 884 1,490 Pyapôn ... 678I 3 ... .. ... ... 1 160 ... 161 18 1,258 15 1,291 1,452 Myaungmya ... 996 4 ... ... ... ... 1,206 ... 1,206 7 1,325 22 1,354 2,560 Henzada ... 1,331 5 .. ... ... ... 1 1,522 ... 1,523 89 2,368 15 2,472 3.995 Amherst ... 559 5 ... ... ... ... ... 1,208 ... 1,208 45 525 25 595 1,803 Tavoy ... 152 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 124 13 156 156 Mergui ... 120 1 .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 119 6 133 133 Thatôn ... 783 5 ... ... ... ... 2 1,984 ... 1,986 54 987 130 1,171 3.157 Toungoo ... 683 3 ... ... ... ... 2 1,049 2 1,053 101 558 35 694 1,747 Salween Hill 13 ... ... .. ... ... 130 ... 130 ... 1 ... 1 131 Tracts. Total 13,642 68 ... ... ... ... 12 47,658 3 47,673 859 21,524 462 22,845 70,518 Thayetmyo ... 811 3 ... ... ... ... 1 6,984 ... 6,985 74 531 14 619 7,604 Pakôkku ... 553 3 ... ... ... ... ... 24 ... 24 138 511 7 656 680 Minbu ... 1,031 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 946 ... 946 312 1,435 17 1,764 2,710 Magwe ... 779 5 ... ... ... ... 16 3,667 ... 3,683 199 703 19 921 4,604 Mandalay ... 841 5 ... ... ... ... 3 734 ... 737 163 742 151 1,056 1.793 Bhamo ... 935 8 ... ... ... ... ... 704 17 721 234 879 94 1,207 1,928 Katha ... 876 3 ... ... ... ... 31 2,989 ... 3,020 42 798 ... 840 3,860 Myitkyina ... 302 2 ... ... ... ... 2 1,573 16 1,591 83 474 7 564 2,155 Ruby Mines ... 294 2 ... ... ... ... ... 157 ... 157 131 479 13 623 780 Momeik ... 166 1 ... ... ... ... ... 25 ... 25 66 117 1 184 209 Shwebo ... 835 5 ... ... ... ... 2 4,064 ... 4,066 180 735 49 973 5,039 Sagaing ... 702 5 ... ... ... ... .. 579 ... 579 248 1,054 20 1,322 1,901 Lower Chindwin 922 5 ... ... ... ... 2 1,024 10 1,036 311 2,140 27 2,478 3,514 Upper Chindwin 745 3 ... ... ... ... 1 702 ... 703 95 1,006 7 1,108 1,811 Kyauksè 882 3 ... ... ... ... ... 105 ... 105 166 652 23 841 946 Meiktila ... 802 4 ... ... ... ... 1 1,431 ... 1,432 211 701 39 951 2,383 Yamèthin 800 5 ... ... ... ... 2 1,835 ... 1,837 235 919 24 1,178 3,015 Myingyan ... 761 5 ... ... ... ... ... 731 ... 731 462 1,160 51 1,673 2,404 Total 13,037 70 ... ... ... ... 61 28,274 43 28,378 3,359 15,036 563 18,958 47,336 GRAND TOTAL, 1916-17. 26,6791 138 ... ... ... ... 73 75,932 46 76,051 4,218 36,560 1,025 41,803 1,17,854 Grand Total. 24,787 122 ... ... ... ... 107 50,294 32 50,725 4,400 38,658 978 44,036 94,761 Veterinary In- spectors, Lowe Burma. 2,252 7 ... ... ... ... ... 2,742 ... 2,742 19 687 II 717 3,459 Veterinary In- spectors, Uppe Burma. 1,793 8 ... ... ... ... ... 815 ... 815 145 277 20 442 1,257 Veterinary In- spector, South- ern Shan States 75 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 263 ... 265 145 216 55 416 681 Veterinary In- spector, North- ern Shan State 273 1 ... ... ... ... ... 31 ... 31 52 118 17 187 218 Veterinary Assis- tants, Northern Shan States. 2,242 7 .. .. ... ... ... 1,730 24 1,754 634 2,991 70 3,695 5,449
12 APPENDICES: TABLE V Showing number of Animals treated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1916-17 Paragraphs 2 and 10). Province. Number of Veteri- nary Dispensaries. Number of Veteri- nary Assistants em- ployed at Dispen- saries. In-patients. Remaining on 1st April. Admitted during the year Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (Burma) Insein ... 1 1 4 2 15 40 32 270 Total for 1916-17 ... 1 1 4 2 15 40 32 270 Total for 1915-16 ... 1 1 1 1 5 33 20 256 Province. In-patients. Total. Discharged during the year. Balance on 31st March. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. (1) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (Burma) Insein ... 44 34 285 38 28 283 6 6 2 Total for 1916-17 ... 44 34 285 38 28 283 6 6 2 Total for 1915-16 ... 34 21 261 30 19 246 4 2 15 Province. Out-patients. Total number of in- and out-patients treated during the year. Receipts. Expenditure. Number treated during the year. Average daily attendance. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. (1) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) Rs. Rs. (Burma) insein ... 173 590 922 212 6.07 67 217 624 1207 2,048 ... 11,318 Total for 1916-17 ... 173 590 922 212 6.07 67 217 624 1207 2,048 ... 11,318 Total for 1915-16 ... 251 437 862 2.3 39 5.8 285 458 1123 1,866 50 7,386 TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1916-17 (Paragraph 11). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) No. No. No. Burma... In Schools and Colleges Provincial 1* 1 1 * Taunggyi School. Do. ... 1APPENDICES TABLE XIVA.* Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1916-17. Amount. Remarks. Major Heads. Imperial. Provincial. 1 Local. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... 64,04a ... 64,042 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 20,393 ... 20,393 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 41,287 1,30,002 1,71,389 Hospitals and Dispensaries... ... 11,323 ... 11,323 Breeding Operations... ... 19,709 ... 19,709 Contribution to District Funds on account of Veterinary Assis- tants. ... 60,828NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1977 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1917
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE 1NSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1918 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1919 [Price,LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OP GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA : THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Ltd., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., 103, Medows Street, Fort, Bombay. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Ltd., 8-2, Hastings Street, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND : HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C. A. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Ltd., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is 10 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1918. PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 I.From J.J. ANDERSON, Esq., I.C.S., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1918. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department,REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1918. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Two Superintendents were on duty throughout the year. Conditions remaining unchanged, no extended tours could be undertaken. The Agricultural Conference held at Mandalay in August was attended by both Superintendents, as also the meetings held by the Stock-Breeding Committee in Rangoon. The ponies of the Military Police stationed at Mandalay, Pyawbwè and Taunggyi were also inspected. The Superintendent visited Taunggyi, inspected the school there and examined several of the Southern Shan States Veterinary Assistants. The Second Superintendent attended the Agricultural Conference held at Poona last December. I.2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE 1NSEIN did some 2,562 injections. Final-year students were also sent out into the Insein Subdivision later on to attend outbreaks under Inspectors, etc., and do the work. Such practical experience should prove eminently useful hereafter. Some 375 ponies were injected with Mallein, so the pupils had the benefit of learning all about the test. The number of animals treated at the hospital was 2,310; in-patients, 309, out-patients, 2,001; average daily attendance, 31.9. This year there has been an increase in all kinds of patients. The Munici- pality sent a number of gharry ponies for examination, etc., which was a great help. Rabies seems to be on the increase about Insein, i.e. during the past two years. For several years we never had a case, and as only sick animals are brought we were bound to have seen cases. This year we had 6 positive cases; four dogs, one bullock and a deer. Owing to such cases now being brought, a Special cage for suspected dogs is necessary and will be applied for. A dog was brought to school as owner stated he was dull and off-feed; there was nothing very suspicious about the animal; some ten minutes after owner left, he suddenly became very excited and commenced to fly at everyone: one pupil received a very slight graze on shoulder, he was sent to the Pasteur Institute at Rangoon to undergo treatment. Case was positive. Several cases of streptotrichosis in cattle and necroacillosis in goats, were treated. The total number of slides examined at the Laboratory was 6,751; of these 4,198 were received from the districts. Cases of the following diseases were confirmed at the Laboratory during the year:VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1918. 3 wherever waste or unoccupied lands exist. I have every reason for thinking the Indians lost a very large number of their ill-conditioned stock. In addition to the District Staff of one Inspector and four Assistants, there were two Inspectors and eleven Veterinary Assistants employed on special duty. In the Insein District up to the end of the year 8,464 injections were performed. Every effort was made to prevent disease being carried to neighbouring districts and all officials concerned were warned, as also the railway authorities, etc. Owing to the proximity of Reserve Forest in Taikkyi Township, disease got through to Okkan, and later was carried to Ngapyugale in Tharrawaddy District. It was also carried via Wachaung and Hpaunggyi into parts of Hlègu. The energetic measures promptly taken helped to check the spread. Anthrax.4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN Segregation Rules.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1918. 5 Surra.6 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN large number of cattle-owners and others interested in stock were present, the opportunity was taken to try and impress on them the very urgent necessity for bestowing as much care on the breeding stock as is done in the case of cart and plough bullocks. Efforts might be made to institute a fair here, but it will be necessary to impress on sellers desiring business to ask reasonable prices or sell stock at market rates. As a rule Burmans attending so-called Agricultural Shows do not wish to sell. Those who may be so inclined promptly ask prohibitive prices. I feel sure if a proper fair could be arranged, Municipalities and buyers from Lower Burma would gladly avail themselves of such an opportunity to procure suitable animals at fair prices to sellers. Agricultural Shows in Burma proved an absolute failure. The incentives present in other countries to make such the unqualified success they are, are in every sense wanting here. IV.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1918. 7 The average number of days spent on tour by Veterinary Assistants in Lower Burma was 234.2 and 189.6 in Upper Burma. They visited 16,921 villages in Lower and 15,122 in Upper Burma. The Assistants in Lower Burma treated 34,411 animals and in Upper Burma 37,156. VI.8 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1018. outbreaks, which occur in various parts of the province annually, has militated against more stringent measures than now exist being taken. Each year we are free, more susceptible stock is growing up, and each year we see increasing facilities for spread of disease by new areas being opened up, increasing traffic by development of commercial intercourse, and it is not difficult to see even further means of spreading disease. Many parts of the world have suffered disastrous visitations of this scourge, bringing misery to the inhabitants and loss to the States concerned. I have no desire to appear as an alarmist, but I think more stringent legislation than now exists is desirable to assist those whose efforts are directed towards the suppression of contagious cattle diseases. 14. Importation of Disease.APPENDICES. 9 TABLE I. Showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1917-18 (Paragraphs 2 and 5). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Number of students Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final examina- tion. Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of year. Scholar- ship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein 3 years' Vernacular 21 ... 16 ... 37 ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ do. 6 ... 4 ... 6 ... Total, 1917-18 ... ... 27 ... 20 ... 43 ... Total, 1916-17 ... ... ... ... 18 2 36 2 Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Students admitted during the year classed by educational qualifications. Receipts Matriculated with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, but not Matricu- lated. Knowing no English or very little English. From fees. From other sources. Total. (1) (2) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) No. No. No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Insein 3 years' Vernacular ... ... 21 ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ do. ... ... 6 ... ... ... Total, 1917-18 ... ... ... ... 27 ... ... ... Total, 1916-17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Expenditure. Employment of students who passed out during the three years preceding. Salaries of In- structing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of other bodies or institutions. In private practice. Number unem- ployed. (1) (2) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) Rs. Rs. Rs. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 7,875 16,694 24,569 35 35 ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ do. 1,861 1,641 3,502 7 ... 7S.S. ... ... Total, 1917-18 ... ... 9,736 18,335 28,071 42 35 7 ... ... Total, 1916-17 ... ... 10,041 16,434 26,475 39 26 13 ... ...
10 APPENDICES. TABLE II. Showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1917-18 (Paragraphs 3 and 4). District. Equines.APPENDICES. 11 TABLE III. Showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1917-18 (Paragraph 8). District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inoculated animals which died of the disease. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) Insein ... Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 123 ... 964 ... ... 8,464 ... ... 104 ... Tharra- waddy. 12 ... 61 ... ... 1,076 ... ... ... ... Thatôn ... 6 ... 50 ... ... 908 ... ... 12 ... Toungoo ... 2 ... 6 ... ... 202 ... ... ... ... Mandalay 1 ... 52 ... ... 31 ... ... ... ... Bhamo ... 20 ... 201 ... ... 1,249 ... ... 8 ... Northern Shan States. 8 ... 116 ... ... 877 ... ... ... ... Total for 1917-18. ... 172 ... 1,450 ... ... 12,807 ... ... 124 ... Total for 1916-17. ... 36 ... 229 ... ... 4,803 ... ... 82 ...
12 APPENDICES. TABLE IV. Showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1917-18 (Paragraph 12). District. Number of villages visited. IN umber of veterinary Assistants employed. Castrations performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) Akyab ... 1,736 9 ... ... ... ... ... 16 ... 16 27 4,862 41 4.930 4,946 Kyaukpyu ... 510 3 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 17 958 24 999 1,001 Sandoway ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hanthawaddy ... 698 5 ... ... ... ... ... 76 15 91 77 1,689 30 1,786 1,877 Insein ... 1,144 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1,164 ... 1,164 79 680 30 779 1,943 Pegu ... 740 4 ... ... ... ... ... 255 255 88 2,304 5 2,397 2,652 Prome ... 960 5 ... ... ... ... ... 1,567 ... 1,567 95 1,026 10 1,131 2,698 Tharrawaddy ... 695 4 ... ... ... ... 1 1,345 ... 1,346 55 832 85 973 2,318 Bassein ... 2,348 7 ... ... ... ... 1 446 ... 447 128 3,496 59 3,683 4,130 Ma.ubin ... 1,287 5 ... ... ... ... ... 212 ... 212 31 1,216 34 1,281 1,493 Pyapôn ... 743 3 ... ... ... ... 1 3 ... 4 8 1,060 5 1,073 1,077 Myaungmya ... 1,066 4 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2| 19 981 39 1,039 1,041 Henzada ... 1,543 5 ... ... ... ... ... 818 ... 818 95 2,549 18 2,662 3.48o Amherst ... 975 6 ... ... ... ... ... 440 ... 440 66 829 47 943 1,382 Tavoy ... 250 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46 285 32 363 363 Mergui ... 61 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 194 6 214 214 Thatôn ... 1,126 5 ... ... ... ... ... 526 ... 526 62 1,398 139 1,599 2,125 Toungoo ... 964 3 ... ... ... ... ... 131 ... 131 111 1,222 14 1,347 1,478 Tracts. 75 1 ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 53 140 ... 193 193 Tracts. Total ... 16,921 73 ... ... ... ... 3 7,003 15 7,021 1,071 25,721 598 27,390 34,411 Pakôkku ... 886 5 ... ... ... ... 1 36 ... 37 213 825 19 1,057 1,094 Minbu ... 1,108 3 ... ... ... ... ... 276 ... 276! 378 1,471 5 1,754 2,030 Magwe ... 1,441 6 ... ... ... ... ... 249 ... 249 354 1,481 26 1,861 2,110 Thayetmyo ... 695 4 ... ... ... ... 2 3,666 ... 3,668 59 6771 19 755 4,423 Mandalay 842 6 ... ... ... ... ... 684 ... 684 159 8x7 122 1,098 1,782 Bhamo ... 726 8 ... ... ... 2 6x1 15 628 99 702 85 886 1,514 Katha ... 909 4 ... ... ... ... 25 1,161 ... 1,186 86 893 ... 979 2,165 Myitkyina ... 282 4 ... ... ... ... 40 9 ... 49 81 697 5 783 832 Ruby Mines ... 323 3 .... ... ... ... 1 1,406 ... 1,407 125 343 6 474 1,881 Momeik ... 218 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 80 212 ... 292 394 Shwebo ... 1,186 5 ... ... ... ... 2 a,975 ... 2,977 297 1,286 49 1,632 4,609 Sagaing ... 706 5 ... ... ... ... ... 29 ... 29 261 1,181 17 1,459 1,488 Lower Chindwin 1,077 5 ... ... ... ... 2 604 ... 606 368 2,208 61 2,637 3,243 Upper Chindwin 1,062 3 ... ... ... ... 2 829 ... 831 115 1,814 19 1,948 2,779 Kyaukse ... 799 3 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 167 ... 167 132 661 22 815 982 Meiktila ... 692 5 ... ... ... ... 5 75 ... 80 230 897 35 1,162 1,242 Yamèthin ... 1,271 5 ... ... ... ... 2 1,010 ... 1,012 328 1,356 48 1,732 2,744 Myingyan ... 899 5 ... ... ... ... ... 260 ... 260 490 1,120 74 1,684 1,944 Total ... 15,122 80 ... ... ... ... 84 14,049 15 14,148 3,755 18,641 612 23,008 37,156 GRAND TOTAL, 1917-18. 32,043 153 ... ... ... ... 87 121,052 30 21,169 4,826 44,362 1,210 50,398 71,567 Grand Total, 1916-17 26,679 138 ... ... ... ... 73 75,932 46 76,051 4,218 36,560 1,025 41,803 117,854 Veterinary In- spectors, Lower Burma. 2,525 5 7 ... ... ... ... ... 513 ... 513 10 627 12 649 1,162 Veterinary In- spectors, Upper Burma. 1,797 7 ... ... ... ... ... 109 ... 109 88 517 10 615 724 Veterinary In- spector, South- ern Shan States. 5 1 ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... 5 83 70 39 192 197 Veterinary In- spector, North- ern Shan States 328 1 ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 86 49 253 ... 302 388 Veterinary Assis- tants, Northern Shan States. 2,42 6 ... ... ... ... ... 1,463 2 1,465 797 3,678 26 4,50 5,966
APPENDICES. 1 TABLE V. Showing number of Animals treated and castrated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1917-18 (Paragraphs 2 and 10). District. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of. Veterinary Assistants employed. Number of in- patients treated during the year. Number of out- patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) Rs. Rs. (Burma) Insein. 1 1 25 52 232 309 199 662 1,140 2,001 2,310 130 ... ... ... ... 470 18.978 Total, 1917-18 1 1 25 52 232 309 199 662 1,140 2,001 2,310 130 ... ... .. ... 470 18,978 Total, 1916-17 1 1 44 34 285 363 173 590 922 1,685 2,048 ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,818 TABLE VII. Showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1917-18 (Paragraph 12). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) No. No. No. Burma ... In Schools and Colleges Provincial 3* 1 I * Taunggyi, 1 Laboratory, 1 Special duty, Insein, 1. Do. ... ... ... ... Provincial 15 17 ... ... Local Funds ... 139NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1918 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1919
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSE1N VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1919 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1919 [Price,LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA: THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Ltd., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., 103, Medows Street, Fort, Bombay. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Ltd., 8.2, Hastings Street, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND: HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C. A. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Ltd., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is ten pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1919. PARA PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 I.From C. M. W. DEFACIEU, Esq., Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,( 2 ) From D. F. CHALMERS, Esq., I.C.S., Director of Agriculture, Burma, to the Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1919. Extract from the proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Development Department,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, 2 FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 81ST MARCH 1919. 3. An increase in the staff of 6 Inspectors and 29 Veterinary Assistants was sanctioned during the course of the year and a further increase of 3 Deputy Superintendents, 1 Inspector and 23 Assistants has been sanctioned since the close of the year. The Lieutenant-Governor fully appreciates the good work done by the staff of Veterinary Assistants, but he is impressed with the necessity for a larger measure of supervision over this peripatetic work than can at present be given by the small supervisory staff. The reorganisation of the Department on the basis of the Public Services Commission's Report, on which the Secretary of State's orders are awaited, will, it is hoped, remedy this defect. His Honour also considers that an attempt should be made to open Veterinary Dispensaries at centres where they are likely to be resorted to by the local population. Detailed proposals for such dispensaries are at present being worked out. In the Punjab there were in 1917-18 no fewer than 127 Veterinary dispensaries at which over 3,50,000 animals were treated, and over 16,000 castrations were performed. In Burma there is precisely one dispensary, at which, in the year of report, 1,999 animals were treated, and 5 castrations were performed. The attitude of the Burman towards Western Veterinary Science may be different from that of the Punjabi, but it is hardly likely to be so different as to justify this contrast, 4. In the concluding paragraph of his Report Colonel- Evans pays his usual tribute to the interest, kindly help and support he has received from District officers. In his power of evoking that interest and support, in his complete freedom from departmentalism, in his ready appreciation of the practical difficulties of District officers and his willingness to meet them, lies the secret of the success with which Colonel Evans has administered the Veterinary Department throughout an unusually difficult year, though deprived by the exigencies of the war of the services of Messrs Cameron and Rennie. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma. F. LEWISOHN, Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma, Printed by order of the Government of Burma. C. B. P., Maymyo-No. 41, R. S., 9-9-1919REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1919. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. For the greater part of the year there has been only one Superintendent. Soon after commencement of the year Major Rennie joined up and so far has not been released from military duty. The Military Police Mounted Infantry ponies were inspected at stations visited. The Shan States School was inspected twice. On the first occasion nothing could be done as on the day of arrival two pupils went down with influenza and the remainder followed suit rapidly. As the disease was in a severe form there was no use of my remaining on. Yawnghwe State was also visited. I.2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN of the VII Standard men we get have exhausted the greater part of their brain power in obtaining their certificates. The behaviour of pupils throughout the year has been exceptionally good. Pupils had several opportunities for practical work in the field. They did a considerable amount of serum injection in the Insein and Tharrawaddy Districts. Their assistance was a great help. During the year some 25 dogs were brought for examination suspected of being rabid, twelve of these cases were positive. A dog under treatment developed rabies and the sweeper attending him was bitten. The man was sent for treatment at the Pasteur Institute. The Veterinary Assistant under training for Inspectorship was appointed during the year. In October owing to a very urgent call for assistance from the Deputy Inspector-General of Military Police, Burma, Veterinary Inspector Maung Tun Aung was sent to Kyaukmyaung to examine Chinese mules for the Punitive Operations in Chin Hills. The number of animals treated at the hospital was 1,999; in-patients 203; out-patients 1,796; average daily attendance 23.39. The total is less than last year; which may be due to less sickness, or the prevalence of rinderpest about Insein; also influenza, and small-pox. Several cases of rinderpest were brought for treatment, also cases of surra, necrobacillosis, streptotrichosis, distemper, parasitic skin diseases, and fowl cholera. The total number of slides examined at the Laboratory was 6,858. Of these, 4,942 were received from districts. Cases of the following diseases were confirmed at the Laboratory:VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1910. 3 the above areas it appeared in the Mônyo Township, where some 850 deaths occurred between August and November. During February there was a recrudesc- ence of the disease in the Letpadan, Minhla and Gyobingauk Townships. When it is considered that there were some 391 outbreaks reported in the district during the year matters might have been much worse. Losses recorded: Letpadan 2,492, Minhla 1,969, Mônyo 1,093, Tharrawaddy 1,006. In addition to permanent district staff four Assistants were sent on special duty. Parties to assist in inocula- tion in different areas were made up and sent from school. Deputy Superintendent Bhagwan Singh and the Veterinary Inspector were constantly on the move directing and assisting in the work. Some 11,124 animals were injected. In the Insein District out of 3,318 deaths, 2,070 were reported during the first quarter in the Taikkyi Township. As is well known a great deal of the stock in this area is owned by Indians of various castes. An order under inoculation rules, viz. that infected herds not submitted for injection were to be kept well apart had a good effect and by June disease was more under control. Three Inspectors and nine Assistants were posted on special duty to this district. The school staff and some pupils assisted in the work of inoculation of cattle. Out of some 8,000 animals they injected 2,500. Early in the year the disease appeared in the Paungdè Township of the Prome District, and by August the whole district except the Padaung Township was infected. The very energetic action taken by the District officials coupled with free employment of serum assisted materially in reducing mortality. In the Padaung Township, however, the disease broke out in February and caused heavy losses, 862 deaths being reported in two months. The townships recording more than 500 deaths are Prome and Padaung. Special duty two Assistants. Number of injections, 15,112. Disease gave trouble in parts of Henzada. Mortality in the Zalun Township during the year was 1,786. Special duty 1. Inoculation 6,098. Danubyu Township of the Ma.ubin District suffered the most, some 727 deaths were reported during the year, of which 585 were in March. Assistants on special duty 3. Inoculations done 8,902. Anthrax, Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia, etc.4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN Foot-and-mouth disease.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1919. 5 Foot-and-mouth disease.6 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN Two Deputy Superintendents, 14 Inspectors and 77 Veterinary Assis- tants in addition to the School Staff were engaged on this work; while all the pupils (57) received practical training at different times in the field. (4) OTHER DISEASES. 9. The mortality recorded in Lower Burma amounted to 76,757 and in Upper Burma 16,880. (5) VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES. Table V. 10. Excepting Insein SchoolVETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA. FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1919. 7 One Assistant died, one was promoted to an Inspectorship, and one was removed owing to ill-health (mental trouble). Twelve passed pupils were appointed Veterinary Assistants in January. During the year two Assistants were sent on special duty to the Sandoway District, nine to Insein, four to Tharrawaddy, three to Hanthawaddy, two to Prome, three to Ma-ubin, one to Henzada, one to Thatôn, two to Thayetmyo, two to Mandalay and one to Katha,8 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSRlN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1919. to be cordial and the Veterinary Staff received co-operation from the latter in the measures adopted for prevention of the spread of cattle disease of all kinds." Thanks to the energetic measures adopted by Deputy Commissioner, the maintenance of regular segregation camps and sheds, and the provision of storage tanks for water in the precarious tract, disease in this district is far less than it used to be. In some districts headmen and villagers take little interest. In the Yandoon Subdivision there were some forty prosecutions for failure to report, failure to dispose of carcases, etc. In Thayetmyo several prosecutions were instituted with the desired effect. Pollution of water-supply by leaving carcases of animals that have died in the water or throwing carcases in, is not uncommon. The Assistant Superintendent, Sinlumkaba (Bhamo), observes, "It is almost impossible to cause his Kachins to adopt precautionary measures on the outbreak of disease." In the Kyauksè and Yamèthin Districts headmen, etc. are encouraged to pass an examination in the rules and several candidates present themselves every year. In the former district Veterinary Assistants generally attend the village group conferences of headmen within their charge. On the whole there is improve- ment. 15. Our thanks are due to the Director and First Bacteriologist, Muktesar, for his prompt compliance with our numerous indents for serum which, we are aware at times owing to various causes, has been no small tax on the staff, 16. It affords me the greatest pleasure in reporting on the very excellent and willing work performed by the department during outbreaks under often trying circumstances and in exceptionally trying weather The outbreaks dealt with have been very numerous. I beg to bring to notice the good work done by Deputy Superintendents Maung Pe Than and Bhagwan Singh, especially so that of Maung Pe Than as he has been continuously at work throughout the year; Veterinary Inspectors Maung Tun Aung, Maung Nyan Kyaw, Maung Pe (2), Maung Kya Nyun, Maung Po Thin, Maung Shwe Dôk, Maung Shwe So, Maung Tun Ba and Maung San Hla; Veterinary Assistants Maung Tun Nyet and Maung Khan, Insein; Maung Chit Po, Maung San Po and Maung Po Ku, Pegu; Maung Kyaw Khin, Letpadan; Maung Po Kyin (II), Zigôn; Maung Khway. Miohla, Maung Myint (II), Reserve Veterinary Assistant, and Maung Tun Nyein, Headquarters Assistant, Rangoon; Maung Bwin Gyi (School); Maung Mya Maung, Yandoon; Maung Po Kha and Maung Po Hla, Prome; Maung Win, Henzada; Maung Tun Mya, Toungoo; Maung On Pe, Reserve Veterinary Assistant, Thatôn; Maung Tin (I), Thavetmyo; Maung Shwe Po Yin, Amara- pura; Maung Po Nyein, Reserve Veterinary Assistant, Mandalay; Maung Po Yin, Madaya; Maung Po Hnyin. Banmauk; Maung Po Chi, Mogaung; Maung Ba Tin, Singaing; and Maung Po Inn, Thazi. I desire also to record my thanks and appreciation of the excellent work of Mr. J. C. Batlivala, Deputy Superintendent, who, as usual, never fails and can always be relied on however much work is on hand. 17. In conclusion my grateful thanks are due to all District Officers for their interest, kindly help and support in all matters relating to the work of the depart- ment G. H. EVANS, Superintendent Civil Veterinary Rangoon, the 15th May 1919. Department, Burma.
APPENDICES. 9 TABLE I. Statement showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1918-19 (Paragraphs 2 & 5). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course* of instruction if more than one course followed. Number of students Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final examina- tion. Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of year. Scholar- ship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 21 ... 12 6 42* 6 Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 12 do. 6 ... 3 ... 6 ... Total, 1918-19 ... ... 27 ... 14 6 48 6 Total, 1917-18 ... ... 27 ... 20 ... 43 ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Students admitted during the year classed by educational qualifications. Receipts Matriculated with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, but not Matricu- lated. Knowing no English or very little English. From fees. From other sources. Total. (1) (2) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) No. No No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular ... ... 18 ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ do. ... ... 6 ... ... ... Total, 1918-19 ... ... ... ... 24 ... ... ... Total, 1917-18 ... ... ... 27 ... ... ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Expenditure. 10 APPENDICES. TABLE II. Statement showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1918-19 (Paragraphs 3 & 4). District. Equines.APPENDICES. 11 TABLE III. Statement showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1918-19 (Paragraph 8). District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated Number of inoculated animals which died of the disease. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) Insein ... Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 94 ... 1,531 ... ... 7,964 ... ... 194 ... Hantha- waddy. 18 ... 218 ... ... 935 ... ... 6 ... Pegu ... 12 ... 166 ... ... 1,448 ... ... 35 ... Prome ... 90 ... 648 ... ... 15,112 ... ... 120 ... Tharra- waddy. 112 ... 1,338 ... ... 11,124 ... ... 175 ... Bassein ... 12 ... 72 ... ... 1,207 ... ... 9 ... Ma-ubin ... 57 ... 540 ... ... 8,902 ... ... 54 ... Pyapôn ... 16 ... 550 ... ... 2,246 ... ... 71 ... Henzada ... 47 ... 846 ... ... 6,098 ... ... 106 ... Amherst ... 1 ... 6 ... ... 100 ... ... ... ... Thatôn ... 1 ... 8 ... ... 175 ... ... 10 ... Toungoo ... 10 ... 45 ... ... 856 ... ... ... ... Thayetmyo 20 ... 126 ... ... 2,639 ... ... 12 ... Mandalay 14 ... 268 ... ... 1,349 ... ... 43 ... Katha ... 13 ... 153 ... ... 3,053 ... ... ... ... Meiktila ... 6 ... 14 ... ... 390 ... ... 2 ... Yamèthin 5 ... 21 ... ... 1,108 ... ... ... ... Kalaw ... 1 ... 8 ... ... 118 ... ... 1 ... Total for 1918-19. ... ... 529 ... 6,558 ... ... 64,824 ... ... 838 ... Total for 1917-18. ... ... 172 ... 1,450 ... ... 12,807 ... ... 124 ...
12 APPENDICES. TABLE IV. Statement showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1918-19 (Paragraph 12). District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castrations performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) Akyab ... 2,011 10 ... ... ... ... 1 36 ... 37 23 5,587 28 5,638 5,675 Kyaukpyu 416 2 ... ... ... ... ... 59 ... 59 14 880 25 919 978 Sandoway ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hanthawaddy ... 1,114 5 ... ... ... ... ... 775 2 777 97 2,353 42 2,392 3,169 Insein 1,639 4 ... ... ... ... 1 623 ... 624 51 1,053 19 1,123 1,747 Pegu 1,583 5 ... ... ... ... ... 438 ... 438 79 2,618 6 2,703 3,141 Prome ... 850 5 ... ... ... ... ... 488 ... 488 34 713 8 755 1,243 Tharra waddy§ ... 951 5 ... ... ... ... 1 1,556 ... 1,557 20 1,338 45 1,403 2,960 Bassein ... 1,959 8 ... ... ... ... ... 2,209 ... 2,209 108 2.674 42 2,824 5,o33 Ma-ubin 1,115 5 ... ... ... ... ... 663 .. 663 49 1,218 42 1,309 1,972 Pyapôn ... 636 4 ... ... ... ... 2 76 ... 78 2 897 11 910 988 Myaungmya ... 1,159, 4 ... ... ... ... 3 238 ... 241 31 1,311 30 1,372 1,613 Henzada 1,376 6 ... ... ... ... ... 586 ... 586 44 1,336 20 1,300 1,886 Amherst 670 7 ... ... ... ... ... 379 ... 379 62 1,176 49 1,287 1,666 Tavoy§ ... 354 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50 425 25 500 500 Mergui ... 108 1 ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 9 17 116 1 134 143 Thatôn ... 1,299 6 ... ... ... ... ... 835 ... 835 136 2,348 170 2,554 3,389 Toungoo 914 5 ... ... ... ... 3 218 ... 221 108 1,656 26 1,790 2,011 Salween Hill Tracts. 207 1 ... ... ... ... 2 6 ... 8 134 438 ... 572 580 Rangoon * 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 18,361 87 ... ... ... ... 13 9,194 2 9,209 1,059 27,837 589 29,485 38,694 Thayetmyo ... 664 5 ... ... ... ... ... 654 ... 654 59 401 11 531 1,185 Palôkku ... 814 4 ... ... ... ... 4 1,562 ... 1,566 219 1,071 34 1,324 2,890 Minbu ... 922 3 ... ... ... ... ... 28 ... 28 233 1,453 7 1,688 1,716 Magwe ... 1,162 5 ... ... ... ... 3 1,120 ... 1,123 327 1,199 11 1,537 2,660 Mandalay ... 850 5 ... ... ... ... 2 619 ... 621 104 1,005 76 1,185 1,806 Bhamo ... 1,163 7 ... ... ... ... 5 1,172 23 1,200 115 1,286 63 1,464 2,664 Katha 842 5 ... ... ... ... 47 688 ... 735 82 1,134 5 1,221 1,956 Myitkyina ... 249 2 ... ... ... ... 6 200 ... 206 61 348 8 417 633 Ruby Mines ... 317 2 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 186 675 21 882 884 Momeik ... 209 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 111 205 4 330 320 Shwebo ... 1.227 6 ... ... ... ... 26 656. ... 682 261 1,097 63 1,421 3,103 Sagaing ... 599 5 ... ... ... 914 ... 914. 184 673 16 873 1.787 Lower Chindwin 849 5 ... ... ... ... 23 969 ... 992 315 1,730 43 2,088 3,080 Upper Chindwin 746 4 ... ... ... ... 9 2,146 5 2,160 187 709 83 989 3,149 Kyauksè ... 831 3 ... ... ... ... 6 516 ... 522 163 623 27 813 1,335 Meiktila ... 814 4 ... ... ... ... ... 280 ... 280 228 964 41 1,333 1,513 Yamèthin ... 976 5 ... ... ... ... ... 539 ... 539 377 1,660 56 2,093 2,632 Myingyan ... 842 5 ... ... ... ... ... 703 ... 703 486 1,198 59 1,743 2,446 Total ... 14,076 76 ... ... ... 133 12,766 28 12,927 3,693 17,501 628 21,822 34,749 Grand Total, 32,437 163 ... ... ... 146 21,960 30 22,136 4,752 45,338 1,217 51,307 73,443 1918-19. Grand Total, 1017-18. 32,043 153 ... ... ... ... 87 21,052 30 21,169 4,826 44,362 1,210 50,398 71,567 Veterinary In- spectors, Lower Burma. 1,510 *7 ... ... ... ... ... 133 ... 133 13 102 4 119 232 Veterinary In- spectors, Upper Burma. 1,519 7 ... ... ... ... 4 126 ... 130 246 1,189 22 1,457 1,587 Veterinary In- spector, South- ern Shan States. 24 1 ... ... ... ... 1 102 ... 103 90 112 105 307 410 Veterinary In- spector, North- ern Shan States 228 1 ... ... ... ... ... 26 ... 26 24 63 2 89 115 Veterinary Assist- ants, Northern Shan States. 1,460 6 ... ... ... ... ... 1,121 ... 1,121 383 2,271 14 2,668 3,789 * One Inspector on leave throughout the year is not shown. APPENDICES. 13 TABLE V. Statement showing the number of Animals treated and castrated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1918-19 (Paragraph 2). District. Number of veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Number of in- patients treated during the year. Number of out- patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (Burma). 1 1 23 25 155 203 302 523 1,171 1,798 1,999 180 2 1 3 5 Rs. 350 Rs. 16,664* Total, 1918-19 1 1 23 25 155 203 202 523 1,071 1,700 1,999 t8o 2 1 2 5 350 16,664 Total, 1917-18 1 1 25 52 232 309 199 663 1,140 9,001 2,310 130 ... ... ... ... 470 19,647 * Revised figure. TABLE VII. Statement showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1918-19 (Paragraph 12). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) No. No. No. Burma ... In Schools and Colleges Provincial 2* 1 1 D.S. * Laboratory, 1. Special duty, School, 1. Do. 15 19 ... ... Local Funds ... 146 ... District Cess Funds, 79. ... Northern Shan States 1 6 ... District Funds, 67. ... Southern Shan States 1 11 ... Total, 1918-19 ... ... 19 183 1 Total, 1917-18 ... ... 19 175 1 TABLE XIVa. Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1918-19. * Amount. Remarks. Major Heads. Imperial. Provincial. Local. _ Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... 47,783 ... 47,783 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 38,403 ... 38,403 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 50,252 1,53,501 2,03,753 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 16,664 16,664 Breeding Operations ... 5,405 5,405 Contribution to District Funds on account of Veterinary Assis- tants. ... 68,929 ... 68,929 Prizes ... ... ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... ... ... ... ... Total for 1918-19 ... ... 2,27,536 1,53,501 3,81,037 Total for 1917-18 ... ... 2,31,824 76,483 3,08,307 * As furnished by the Account-General. G.B.C.P.O.NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1919 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1919
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1920 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1920 [ Price, Re. I. ]
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA: AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. RANGOON TIMES PRESS, Rangoon. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Ltd., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Ltd., Bombay. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA, Sons & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. IN ENGLAND: HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C. A. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co., Ltd., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is ten pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1920. PARA. PAGE. General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... I I I.From C. M. W. de Facieu, Esq., Secretary to the Development Commissioner, Purma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma, letter No. 1039( 2 ) From C. R. P. COOPER, Esq., I.C.S., Officiating Director of Agriculture, Burma, to the Assistant Secretary to the Financial Commissioner, Burma, General Department letter No. 523RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA. For the year ended the 31STMarch 1920. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Development Department, No. 1V.-40 of 1920. Read2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31St MARCH 1990. 2. An increase in the staff of the Department by three Deputy Superinten- dents, one Inspector and twenty-three Assistants was sanctioned during the year, and a further increase will be necessary when the scheme for the establishment of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries at suitable centres takes shape. This matter is at present engaging the attention of the Development Commissioner, and the Lieutenant-Governor awaits Mr. MacKenna's matured proposals with interest, as he is convinced that such institutions are a very necessary supplement to the present entirely peripatetic system under which Veterinary Officers wander from village to village attending to cattle on the spot. The Lieutenant- Governor fully appreciates the merits of the present system which brings the Department into close touch with cattle-owners over wide areas, and he also recognises that much excellent work has been done in the past on the present lines, but he is of opinion that something more is required, and that there is abundant scope for useful work on the part of dispensaries on the model of those which have proved their worth in other Provinces. 3. The Insein Veterinary School continued to attract candidates in large numbers, and the Lieutenant-Governor is glad to observe that due weight is given to proficiency in practical work, but he agrees with the Development Commis- sioner that provision will shortly have to be made for higher veterinary education with a view to the training of Deputy Superintendents in Burma, and he awaits that officer's proposals. 4. This is the last report that will be written by Colonel Evans, who is about to retire after a record of 30 years' excellent service in Burma. He has seen the Department grow from a total strength of six Assistants to one with a staff of some 250 officers, and it is to his distinguished administrative ability and high professional attainments that the service owes the honourable position which it now holds. But, that has not been the whole secret of his success. Throughout his service he has laboured devotedly in the interests of the people of the Province and has won their respect and affection to a remarkable degree. The Lieutenant-Governor feels that by the departure of Colonel Evans he is losing a most valuable public servant and a trusted adviser, and desires to associate himself with the universal good wishes that will follow him into his well-earned retirement. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma, P. E. JAMIESON, Revenue Secretary to the Govt, of Burma
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA For the year ended the 31st March 1920. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Major Rennie, Second Superintendent, was released from military duty in May and proceeded on very necessary leave. Major Cameron, Third Superintendent, was absent on military duty through- out the year. The Superintendent was in charge during the year. He visited the Taunggyi School twice during the year, September and March, attended the cattle show at Pyawbwè in November, the Agricultural Conference at Mandalay in September and the Dairy Farm at Maymyo in the same month. Owing to an attack of influenza contracted soon after his arrival in Calcutta he, under medical advice, was unable to proceed to Pusa to attend the Agricultural Conference. I.2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN The behaviour of the pupils during the year was all that could be desired. At the close of the year there were 45 pupils, viz. Class C 18, Class B 16 and Class A 11. During the year Veterinary Inspector Maung Tun Aung, who had been kept on to assist the teaching staff, was sent to Toungoo District together with three pupils to assist in inoculation operations and help in suppressing outbreaks of rinderpest. He was also promoted to first grade Veterinary Inspector, and was later, in December, posted to Sagaing District. Maung Tun Aung is an excep- tionally good Inspector; keen, reliable and a real hard worker. I intend submit- ting his name for promotion. During the year, one Veterinary Inspector and four senior Veterinary Assistants who were acting as Inspectors were called in, the former to undergo training as Deputy Superintendent and the latter as Inspectors. In May six Shan passed pupils from Taunggyi and one Shan Veterinary Assistant from Yawnghwe with the consent of the Superintendent and Political Officer were sent down for a course of practical training and were sent back in July. They were also fortunate in having had an opportunity of seeing anti- rinderpest serum injections done in the Insein District. During the year 1,755 cases were treated in the hospital as out-patients, and 179 as in-patients ; the average daily attendance being 2203. The slight decrease, 41, in the number of out-patients treated is due to the falling off in the number of smaller animals ; on the other hand, there was an increase of over 100 cases amongst cattle, and we desire such cases. Six suspected cases of rabies were brought to the hospital, four in dogs and two amongst cattle. In two cases one dog and one calf, the result was positive. In other cases the owners were warned and the animals were never seen again. Five cases of surra were diagnosed including one calf and one dog. The disease was said to be very prevalent in and around Insein, Thamaing and Kama- yut. Some 45 ponies belonging to hackney gharry owners in Insein are said to have died. Three ponies kept for instructional purposes at the school were attacked and were destroyed. One pony of the Military Police, Rangoon, under treat- ment in the hospital was also attacked and had to be destroyed. Cases of rinderpest, foot-and-mouth, streptotrichosis, parasitic skin diseases, distemper and fowl cholera were also brought to the hospital for treatment. The total number of slides examined at the laboratory was 5,562. Of these, 4,442 were received from the districts. The following diseases were detected at the laboratory :VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 81st MARCH 1920. 3 has swept away nearly wholesale the livestock. " In Yandoon Township where disease was least troublesome, it notwithstanding existed in 30 villages, while in Donabyu Township 78 villages were reported to be infected. The disease was most severe in the Pantanaw Township in which 3,818 deaths were registered, in Donabyu which had 1,347 and Ma-ubin Township which had 1,075. The mortality practically all occurred during the first four months of the year, after which the disease gradually died out. The Assistant who was sent to this district on special duty remained till the end of September; some 4,836 cattle in 27 villages were inoculated during the year. What with segregation and inoculation the Inspector and the district staff had a busy time. In the Bassein District the disease started in the early part of the year, when only 17 deaths were recorded for the month of April4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN The Henzada and Lemyethna Townships of the Henzada District also suffered, the former during the first quarter of the year, losing 463 head of cattle, and the latter in July and August, losing 206 animals. Disease was also prevalent in parts of Pegu, Toungoo and Pyapôn Districts. Fortunately the outbreaks were of a mild nature and did not cause much anxiety. Veterinary Inspectors, 13.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1920. 5 Veterinary Assistants, 80.6 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN Pakôkku, Shwebo, Mandalay, Yamèthin, Mawleik, Moo, Shwewachaung, Myitkyina. Demodex Folliculorum.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1920. 7 IV.8 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN The Assistant employed in the school having been designated Assistant Instructor has not been included in the above list. Two Assistants died during the year and one retired from service owing to continued ill-health, mental trouble. Six pupils who had failed in the practical examination in the previous year were posted to districtsVETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR INDED THE 81»t MARCH 1920. 9 Commissioner, Yamèthin, on the subject:" The Indian owners of half-starved cattle are a serious menace to the province, especially in Upper Burma. Prone to all diseases, robbing the hard-worked Burma cattle of much of the scanty grazing and the fields of stubble that would be left as manure, turning all roads on and near the railway line into quagmires and paying no taxes they are a serious nuisance and a danger." The Deputy Commissioner, Amherst, observes, " several villagers in the Kawkareik Township were fined by their head- men for infringing the rules and an obstinate Chittagonian from the Legyaw Village-tract was fined Rs. 50 by the Township Magistrate, Kawkareik, for his gross negligence of the rules as an example to others and to make them realize the extent of the punishment to which they throw themselves open for gross negligence. " In Pyapôn, Ma-ubin, Thayetmyo, Toungoo, Bassein, Amherst and Sandoway it was found necessary to fine cattle owners and even some head- men for neglecting to see the rules carried out and in one instance in Thayetmyo District to dismiss one headman. In the Yamèthin District, on the other hand, not only did the headmen and cattle owners assist the district officers and Veterinary Assistants in promptly reporting outbreaks and observing the rules, but segregation sheds were maintained and kept in good condition for prompt and immediate action. In the Yamèthin and Kyauksè Districts examinations were held during the year in connection with the rules. In the latter district 22 candidates presented themselves ; 7 were village headmen, 4 sons of village headmen and 11 cultivators and 19 of these passed. In the Myingyan District owing to scarcity of fodder in the Natogyi, Taung- tha and Kyaukpadaung Townships grass cutting passes in reserved forest were issued to cattle owners. 15. Veterinary Inspectors and Assistants.10 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL). BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 81st MARCH 1980. Maung Kyin, Maung Khin Gyi, Maung Po Kyin, Maung Po Kun and Maung Sein Bwin, Bassein ; Maung Tin, Thayetmyo; Maung Tun Nyein and Maung Myint (2), Rangoon, Maung Po Hnyin, Banmauk, Maung Aung Ban, Buthidaung ; and Maung Bwin Gyi, School. 16. Our thanks are again due to the Director and First Bacteriologist, Muktesar, for his efforts to meet our very frequent demands for serum. 17. The department has been fortunate in having had for 30 years the services of such an excellent officer as Mr. J. C. Batlivala and my grateful thanks are due to him for his good work throughout the period. 18. This is the thirtieth Annual Report submitted by me and is the last. It is some satisfaction to have seen the department expand from half-a-dozen Veterinary Assistants to its present dimension. I should have been pleased to see it still larger ; however, this will come in time. From my lengthy experience in Burma I may be excused for again impressing the fact that in any agricultural country the first aim and principal object in maintaining a State Veterinary Department is the prevention and suppression of contagious diseases, as it is recog- nised that these and not ordinary ailments are the real source of loss to the agriculturalist and the State. Unfortunately the work performed by our men in dealing with contagious diseases is at places where it does not come prominently before the eye of the higher authorities or the public as does the work in a hospital. The loss in revenue due to cattle mortality can no doubt be estimated in £. s. d. but no one will venture to form any estimate what the losses to cultivators and the State might have been, even in a country like this where every difficulty exists, had it not been for the help of the district authorities and the work of the Veterinary staff in carrying out segregation and serum injection. I have only one regret and it is my inability to adequately express in words my very sincere gratitude and appreciation not only for the ever ready, willing and able help of my colleagues and members of the department, but that of all District Officers and their subordinates throughout my service, and no one realizes more than I do that such progress as may have been achieved is due entirely to their sympathy, consideration, encouragement and co-operation. I feel sure my successor will find the same kindness and consideration extended to him and thus the further progress of the department made easy. 19. In conclusion I desire to place on record my high appreciation of the work of members of the office staff, particularly Maung Po Htin, Head Clerk, who has been in the office nearly all my service. In leaving I feel that no one could be better served than I have been. G. H. EVANS, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary RANGOON, 15th May 1920. Department, Burma.
APPENDICES. 11 TABLE I. Statement showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1919-20 (Paragraphs 2 and 5). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Admitted during the year. Number of students Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final examina- tion. Scholar ship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 11 ... 6 ... 45* 5 Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ do. 4 3 6 ... 7 ... Total, 1919-30 ... ... 15 3 12 ... 52 5 Total, 1918-19 ... ... 27 ... 14 6 48 6 Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Students admitted during the year classed by educational qualifications From fees. Receipts Matriculated with higher qualifications. Knowing some English, but not Matricu- lated. Knowing no English or very little English. From other sources. Total. (1) (2) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) No. No. No. Rs. Rs. Rs. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular ... ... 11 ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 11 do. ... ... 7 ... ... ... Total, 1919-20 ... ... ... ... 18 ... ... ... Total, 1918-19 . ... ... ... 24 ... ... ... Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Expenditure. Employment of students who passed out during the three years preceding. Salaries of In- structing staff. Other expenses. Total. Total number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of other bodies or institutions. In private practice. Number unem- ployed. (1) (2) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (23) Rs. Rs. Rs. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 1,365 15,073 16,438 46 46 ... ... ... Taunggyi, Southern Shan States. 1½ do. ... ... 6 ... 6 ... ... Total, 1919-20 ... ... 1,365 15,073 16,438 52 46 6 ... ... Total, 1918-19 ... ... 2,025 15,876 17,901 47 42 5 ... ... *Class Co 18; Class B = 16; Class As 11=45.
12 APPENDICES. TABLE II. Statement showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1919-20 (Paragraphs 3 and 4). District. Equines.APPENDICES. 13 TABLE III. Statement showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1919-20 (Paragraph 8). District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated Number of inoculated animals which died of the disease. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) Insein ... Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 5 ... 23 ... 533 ... ... ... ... Hantha- waddy. 1 ... 2 ... ... 50 ... ... ... ... Tegu .. 13 ... 105 ... ... 1,056 ... ... 1 ... Prome ... 37 .. 315 ... ... 3,025 ... ... 8 ... Tharra- waddy. 19 ... 151 ... ... 1,590 ... ... 6 ... Bassein . 55 ... 594 ... .. 4,573 . ... 10 ... Ma-ubin ... 27 ... 836 ... ... 4,836 ... ... 131 ... Pyapôn ... 23 ... 350 ... ... 1,421 ... ... ... ... Myaungmya 7 ... 235 ... ... 968 ... ... ... ... Henzada ... 15 ... 618 ... ... 1,477 ... ... 48 ... That&n ... 5 ... 41 ... ... 343 ... ... ... ... Toungoo ... 29 ... 276 ... ... 4,163 ... ... 57 ... Thayetmyo 11 ... 241 ... ... 2,256 ... ... 15 ... Minbu ... 4 .. 30 ... ... 671 ... ... 14 ... Magwe .. 2 ... 18 ... ... 332 ... ... 3 ... Mandalay .. 7 ... 29 ... ... 595 ... ... 7 ... Bhamo ... 12 ... 50 . ... 993 ... ... ... ... Lower Chindwin 36 ... 382 ... ... 7,183 . ... 63 ... Meiktila ... 19 ... 52 ... ... 2,049 ... ... ... ... Yamèthin 129 ... 474 ... ... 17,514 ... ... ... ... Total for 1919-20. ... ... 456 ... 4,822 ... ... 55,628 ... ... 363 ... Total for 1918-19. ... ... 529 ... 6,558 ... 64,824 ... ... 838 ...
14 APPENDICES. TABLE IV. Statement showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1919-20 (Paragraph 12). District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castration performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) Akyab ... 1,452 10 ... ... ... ... ... 27 ... 27 23 4,298 26 4,347 4,374 Kyaukpyu ... 453 3 ... ... ... ... ... 359 ... 359 21 927 18 966 1,325 Sandoway ... 400 1 ... ... ... ... ... 452 ... 452 3 347 1 351 803 Hantbawaddy ... 1,182 5 ... ... ... ... ... 935 ... 935 99 2,045 83 2,227, 3,162 Insein * ... 936 4 ... ... ... ... 1 590 ... 591 83 984 24 1,091 1,682 Pegu 1,399 5 ... ... ... ... 6 1,462 ... 1,468 85 2,208 6 2,300! 3,768 Prome ... 1,026 4 ... ... ... ... ... 449 ... 449 90 1,116 3 1,209 1,658 Tharrawaddy * 1,076 5 ... ... ... ... 4 587 ... 591 95 1,452 138 1,685 2,276 Bassein ... 2,742 8 ... ... ... ... 12 3,640 ... 3,652 178 2,984 25 3,187 6,839 Ma-ubin ... 1,143 5 .. ... ... ... ... 546 ... 546 101 1,795 45 1,941 2,487 Pyap8n 559 3 ... ... ... ... ... 500 ... 500 8 929 8 945 1,445 Myaungmya ... 1,068 4 ... ... ... ... . 484 ... 484 28 1,102 17 1,147 1,631 Henzada ... 1,086 6 ... ... ... ... .. 669 ... 669 45 1,499 4 1,548 2,217 Amherst APPENDICES. 15 TABLE V. Statement showing the number of Animals treated and castrated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries anting the year 1919-20 (Paragraph 2). District. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Number of in- patients treated during the year. Number of out- patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (10) (Burma) Inscin 1 1 24 21 134 179 139 641 975 1,765 1,934 185 ... ... 1 1 Rs. Rs. Total, 1919-20 1 1 24 21 134 179 139 641 975 1,755 1,934 185 ... ... 1 1 25 17,153 Total, 1918-19 1 1 23 25 155 203 202 523 1,071 1,798 1,999 180 2 1 2 5 350 16,664 TABLE VII. Statement showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1919-20 (Paragraph 12). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) No. No. No. Burma .. In Schools and Colleges Provincial 1 * ... 1 D.S. * Laboratory. 1 A. I. Assistant In- structor. District ... Do. 23 18 1 D.S. District Cess Funds, 83. District Funds, 67. Do. ... Local Funds ... 150 ... Northern Shan States. ... ... 1 8 ... Southern Shan States. ... ... 1 13 ... 2 D.S. Total, 1919-20 ... ... 25 189 1 A.I. Total, 1918-19 ... . ... 19 183 1 TABLE XIVS A.* Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma ;during the financial year 1918-19. Amount. Remarks. Major Heads. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... 51,001 ... 51,001 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 36,853 ... 36,853 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 62,932 1,68,919* 2,31,851 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 17,153 ... 17,153 Breeding Operations ... ... 10,816 ... 10,816 Contribution to District Funds on account of Veterinary Assis- tants. ... 83,671 ... 83,671 Prizes ... ... ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... ... ... ... ... Total for 1919-20 ... ... 2,62,436 1,68,919 4,31,345 Total for 1918-19 ... ... 2,27,536 1,53,501 3,81,037 * As furnished by the Accountant-General. G.B.C.P.O.NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1920 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1920
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1921 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1922 [ Price, Re. I. ]
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA: AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. RANGOON TIMES PRESS, Rangoon. MAUNG LU GALE, Law Book Depôt, 42, Ayo-o-gale, Mandalay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. BUTTBRWORTH & Co., (India), Ltd., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Ltd., Bombay. * D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. IN ENGLAND : HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, E.C A. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. KRGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Ltd., 68[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is ten pages] TABLE OF CONTENTS REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSKHN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1921. PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 & 2 I I.From T. LISTER, Esq., I.C.S., Secretary to the Development Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, For the Year which ended on the 31st March 1921. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department, No. 34O. dated the 16th May 1922. READ2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, FOR THE YEAR WHICH ENDED ON THE 31st MARCH 1921. 3. A scheme for the opening of Veterinary Dispensaries and Hospitals was under consideration during the year, and the establishment of four dispensaries, two in Upper and two in Lower Burma was sanctioned, as an experiment, after the close of the year. If the experiment reveals a demand for such dispensaries the Local Government will be prepared to consider proposals for extending the scheme to other districts. The question of opening Veterinary Hospitals is still under consi- deration. 4. Proposals for improving the existing stock of ponies in the Province are still awaited from the Development Commissioner. Matters have been in abeyance since the Stock Breeding Committee reported in 1916, partly owing to the war, partly to doubts as to the advisability of adopting the Committee's recommenda- tions, and partly to the lack of staff and funds. His Honour trusts that it will be possible to make a start when the officer specially recruited for this object has had enough experience to enable him to formulate his suggestions. Sir Reginald Craddock will be obliged if the Development Commissioner will bear in mind the necessity of taking early steps in this matter, in dealing with which there has been in the past great hesitation and delay. 5. Cattle breeding, on the other hand, is primarily the concern of the Agricultural rather than the Veterinary Department. Hitherto progress in that direction has been greatly hampered by shortage of staff and funds. But as the higher staff is strengthened, the Agricultural Department must take up this important subject. A substantial sum out of the Rice Profits Fund has been set apart for the improvement of cattle, and the Agricultural Department in consulta- tion with the Veterinary Adviser must now busy itself with the preparation of a project to enable the sum set apart to be expended to the best advantage. 6. Proposals for providing higher veterinary education in the Province, in order to train candidates for Deputy Superintendentships, are still awaited from the Development Commissioner. 7. A proposal for the appointment of all Deputy Superintendents of the Department as Veterinary Practitioners and all Inspectors as Inspectors under the Glanders and Farcy Act, 1899, and for the payment of compensation for animals destroyed under the Act was received during the year, and sanctioned after its close. 8. The Lieutenant-Governor is glad to note that a pamphlet is being issued dealing with the common forms of cattle diseases and their treatment. Propaganda of this kind ought to be most beneficial. His Honour understands that in the Meiktila Division, and possibly elsewhere there are arrangements for instructing headmen in the treatment of cattle disease, and for the grant of rewards from the District Fund on their passing an examination. This method of imparting elementary education in the diagnosis and treatment of cattle disease, as well as the arrangements referred to in paragraph 8 of the Development Commis- sioner's letter, are commended to the attention of all Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners and of the District Councils which will soon come into existence. 9. The Lieutenant-Governor observes with pleasure that the work and conduct of the staff was good, and especially that their relations were excellent with the district officials and with the people. Co-operation of this kind is indispensable to the success of the department and the good relations of previous years were well maintained. His Honour has noted with pleasure the names of the officers who are mentioned for good work in the Report, and congratulates Mr. Rennie on a successful year's administration. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Burma, W. BOOTH-GRAVELY, Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma.
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA For the Year ended the 31st March 1921. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Colonel Evans was in charge of the Department up to 26th November when he proceeded on leave prior to retirement. He visited one district in Lower Burma and four in Upper Burma during the year. He also visited and inspected the school at Taunggyi. He attended a Conference at Maymyo in October and the Cattle Show at Pyawbwè in November. He was on tour for 43 days during the year and travelled in that time 2,700 miles, 110 of which were by road, 2,193 by rail and 397 by boat. Colonel Evans' services in this country are too well known to need recapitulation here; suffice it to say that during his long service in Burma he was well known to all officials and his knowledge and his personality will be missed not only in the Department but by all others who knew him. Mr. Rennie returned from leave on 16th April. He took over charge of the duties of Third Superintendent at Insein School in addition to his own duties when Major Cameron proceeded on leave in August, and charge of the Department on 27th November when Colonel Evans went on leave. While on tour he travelled 6,276 miles, viz. 554 by road, 5,309 by rail and 413 by boat being absent on tour 126 days. He visited and inspected the work of the district staff in 3 districts in Lower Burma and 7 in Upper Burma. He inspected the Military Police at Pyawbwè and examined the pupils at the Taunggyi School on the completion of their course of training. Major Cameron was released from military duty and returned to Burma on 17th May. He badly required a change and proceeded on leave for a year in August. During the year, two officers have been appointed to the Department. Captain A. O'Neill took over the duties of Second Superintendent on nth December. He toured in Magwe District in February and in Mandalay and Magwe Districts in March. Captain J. B. Idle reported on the 19th February, he being specially selected by the India Office for the post of Superintendent in charge of Stock-Breeding Operations. 2. The number of Deputy Superintendents was increased to five during the year by the appointment on probation of two Calcutta trained graduates. One Maung Pe was promoted in June and posted to Bassein. The other Maung Tun Aung was promoted in July and during the absence of Mr. Batlivala on leave was placed in charge of the School where he carried out the work in a very satisfactory manner. On Mr. Batlivala's return he was posted to Magwe in February. Maung Pe Than, Deputy Superintendent, Meiktila, was in February last deputed on special duty to Rangoon to prepare pamphlets and circulars in vernacular on diseases and their prevention for distribution in the districts and for the use of Veterinary Assistants.
2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSETN Mr. Batlivala proceeded on leave on June 8th, and returned before the expiry of his leave on January 31st. In charge of the School he carried out his duties in his usual able manner. Mr. Bhagwan Singh, in charge of Military Police, was on leave from 6th January to 13th March. His good services were recently recognized by the title of Sardar Bahadur being conferred on him. I.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1921. 3 Diseases detected were as noted below :4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN cannot fend for themselves. In many villages in the Mokaung area, they have to be laboriously watered by hand and many owners are hand-feeding their stock on tanaung bin leaves for lack of other fodder." It is not to be won- dered at that once a disease like rinderpest gets a start among such animals a heavy mortality ensues. In this district (Shwebo) there are six Assistants and they, alone, attended over 200 outbreaks. Excepting the months of July, November and January, inoculation operations were continued throughout the year in the districtVETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1021. 5 Shan States. 8. Southern Shan States.6 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN (2) OTHER CONTAGIOUS DISEASES. 10. Slides from suspected cases of the following diseases were sent and confirmed from places noted below :VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1921. 7 time deteriorates, plus the fact that we have not sufficient staff specially main- tained for this purpose to successfully carry out operations in many districts at the same time without calling in all the district staff to help, thus leaving the district with no touring Assistant at a time when it is imperative that fresh foci should be early discovered and spread of disease, from these prevented. Ten Assistants have been sanctioned as a flying column and it is hoped that we will soon be able to fill these vacancies. One Assistant has been appointed as an Acting Inspector in charge of the flying column8 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN The four Senior Assistants having completed their training in the School were appointed Inspectors, two in December and two in January. Of the three acting Inspectors who had to revert to their substantive appoint- ments as Assistants one was made an Inspector in charge of the flying column, this additional post having been sanctioned by Government during the year primarily for inoculation duties. The second man was called in for training in the School as an Inspector in September; the third reverted to his post as Assistant. At the close of the year there were 26 Inspectors, viz. 7 permanent, Lower Burma, and 9, Upper Burma, and 6 acting, Lower Burma, and 2, Upper Burma ; Shan States, 2 permanent. The Inspectors visited 2,562 villages in Lower Burma and 2,873 in Upper Burma. In the former 244 outbreaks were attended by them and 644 in the latter. Reckoning working days, i.e. the days in which the Inspectors were not on leave or sick, as averaging 360.9, the number of days spent on tour by each Inspector in Lower Burma would be represented by 214.2 days per annum, while in Upper Burma the number of working days being an average of 348.2, days spent on tour were 223.7 the percentage thus being 75.9 or equal to 277.03 days per annum. Tables IV and VII. 16. Veterinary Assistants.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1921. 9 The number of Assistants on special duty during the year are shown below together with the names of districts :10 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE 1NSEIN the Deputy Commissioner remarks that these were promptly dealt with by the Veterinary Assistants. The Subdivisional Officer, Salin, Minbu District, observes that " in the Sidôktaya Township in particular there is much greater realization on the part of headmen of the advantages of isolation and segregation." There is however no denying the fact that in most of the districts the headmen and the people begin to take steps when it is too late, and then the measures taken are only half-hearted. The Deputy Commissioner, Pakôkku, remarks that " although the Subdivisional Officers report that the headmen understand the rules, I am not at all persuaded that the headmen do their work properly in this district, and that the villagers take care to obey the rules. In many cases villagers have been found to leave their animals unburied and to have sold the flesh and the headman has done nothing at all. According to one of my Township Officers, the villagers take measures for the prevention of rinderpest, but as soon as a single case has occurred they prefer to have the disease run through the village-tract rather than do any more. The worst offenders as regards the neglect of the rules are frequently the headmen them- selves and I have had to warn or fine a number of headmen for their conduct, and in one case I have had to dismiss a thugyi whose previous record was bad. Some headmen, on the other hand, are particularly useful, but I think the indifferent headmen are in the majority and the rules themselves are not fully under- stood." Several of the headmen and villagers had to be fined in the Thayetmyo, Kyauksè, Myingyan, Minbu, Lower Chindwin and Pyapôn Districts and some headmen warned and villagers fined in Toungoo District. In Lower Chindwin and Thayetmyo Districts, one headmen had to be removed in each for neglect of the rules while in Minbu District " it was found necessary to send several gross offenders (villagers) to jail. In the Bhamo District owing to the continued recurrence of Haemorrhagic Septicaemia among pigs in the Mole and Taping Kayaings, pigs were notified to be cattle and the disease a contagious one for the purpose of rule 2(1) and 4 of the Cattle Disease Rules, 1914. An examination in connection with the rules was held in the Kyauksè District in October under the supervision of the Deputy Superintendent, Meiktila ; 23 candidates appeared for the examination, 11 of these were headmen, 2 sons of headmen and 10 cultivators. Fourteen of these candidates passed. Another examination was held at Meiktila under the supervision of the Veterinary Inspector when 8 candidates appeared and 6 passed ; 6 men were cultivators and 2 thugyis' sons. The Subdivisional Officer, Taungdwirgyi, suggests as an improvement on the rules that hide-traders be expressly forbidden to enter infected villages. 19. Veterinary Inspectors and Assistants.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1921. 11 The Deputy Commissioner, Prome, states that " in this district the Veterinary Assistants decidedly justify their existence, time after time checking outbreaks of disease by prompt action." Deputy Commissioner, Magwe, observes " all Veterinary Assistants have worked satisfactorily. They have also been on good terms with the people and won their confidence. All of them seem to understand their work. I consider the district is very fortunate in the present veterinary staff." In recognition of the meritorious services rendered by Maung Po Ba, Veterinary Inspector, Magwe, the Local Government have been pleased to grant him a Gold Watch and certificate of Honour. Veterinary Inspector Maung Pe, Yamèthin, was awarded a gun at the District Durbar held in January in apprecia- tion of his services in connection " with measures taken in the prevention of cattle disease and in inoculation." Maung Thaw, Veterinary Assistant, Ngathaing- gyaung, and Maung Po Kyin, Veterinary Assistant, Kyônpyaw, were each awarded a Silver Watch and a Certificate of Honour at the Commissioner's Durbar held at Bassein in February for specially good work The names of others deserving mention for good work are12 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPT., BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1921. to another that is the chief source of the spread of the disease. The Deputy Commissioner, Magwe, in this connection remarks that " it may be taken as certain that the outbreaks in. this district are almost invariably caused by importation of cattle from Myingyan and Meiktila Districts. If the rules forbid- ding removal of cattle from infected areas were strictly enforced this district would probably be almost immune." The Deputy Commissioner, Prome, observes that "cattle disease is generally imported into this district from Allanmyo or the Arakan Division whence herds of cattle are brought to Prome cattle market for sale and the affected animals from among them spread the disease in the different villages through which they pass before they are sold or to which they are taken after sale. The Veterinary Assistants of Prome have been instructed to examine all cattle brought to the cattle market and report if any of them is found to be sick. To this may be attributed to a certain extent the great decline in the number of cattle deaths." Taungup in the Sandoway District is situated on the line of traffic of cattle trade. All the cattle from Cheduba, Ramree and An Townships of the Kyaukpyu District which adjoins it come and stay here for some days before proceeding to Bassein and Prome Districts. The Deputy Commissioner, Hanthawaddy, remarks " One difficulty we are beginning to discover, a good deal of our disease is imported. Cattle come into the district from Siam via Moulmein, from Minbu and from Prome. An outbreak of disease in any of those places means an outbreak with us." 21. Since the appointment of a Deputy Superintendent to the Magwe Division, districts in Upper Burma, which have recently suffered so badly from disease, have now Deputy Superintendents in charge. 32. It would appear to be advisable to improve the system of registration and report of cattle deaths in Upper Burma. At present only rough estimates are kept, except in Yamethin and Thayetmyo Districts, where cattle death registers are kept. The result is that it is, as a rule, only at the end of the year when figures are being collected, that the full amount of losses from disease is realizable. 23. All requirements for serum during the year were promptly met by the Muktesar Laboratory, and the only difficulties experienced in its use were the smallness of inoculation parties and the difficulty in the transport of serum to remote parts of districts, both involving considerable delay in its early employ- ment in many outbreaks. 24. As heretofore, district officials have shown a ready appreciation of the difficulties to be met with in the suppression of contagious diseases, which still remains the main work of the Department, and have, as usual, done everything in their power to further efforts in this direction. T. RENNIE, Veterinary Adviser to the Govt, of Burma. Rangoon, 16th May 1921.
APPENDICES. 13 TABLE I. Statement showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1920-21 (Paragraphs 3 and 8). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Number of Students Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final examina- tion. Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of year. Scholar- ship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 1714 APPENDICES. TABLE II. Statement showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1920-21 (Paragraphs 6 and 7). District. Equines.APPENDICES. 15 TABLE III. Statement showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1920-21 (Paragraphs 7 and 11). District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated Number of inoculated animals which died of the disease. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (12) (12) (13) (14) Insein ... Renderpest. Serum-alone method. 1 ... 9 ... ... 200 ... ... ... ... Hantha- waddy 2 ... 13 ... ... 203 ... ... ... ... Pegu ... 14 ... 149 ... ... 2,375 ... ... 5 ... Tharra- waddy. 3 ... 9 . ... 267 ... ... 2 ... Prome ... 16 ... 65 ... ... 1,337 .. ... 13 ... Bassein ... 28 ... 311 ... .. 2,151 .. ... 8 ... Ma-ubin .. 5 ... 34 ... ... 1,036 ... ... ... ... Pyapôn ... 13 ... 190 ... ... 1,185 ... ... ... ... Myaungmya 21 ... 109 ... ... 1,311 ... ... 3 ... Henzada ... 1 ... 18 ... ... 130 ... .. 1 ... Amherst ... 19 ... 158 ... ... 1,274 ... ... 15 ... Thatôn ... 14 ... 138 ... ... 1,861 ... ... 17 ... Toungoo 11 ... 108 ... ... 1,363 ... ... 17 ... Minbu ... 42 ... 192 ... ... 1,980 ... ... 12 ... Magwe ... 42 ... 307 ... ... 6,020 ... ... ... ... Pakôkku .. 87 ... 2,226 ... ... 5,645 ... ... 26 ... Mandalay . 25 ... 123 ... ... 3,319 ... ... 57 .. Katha ... 12 ... 7 ... ... 841 ... ... ... ... Upper 40 ... 1,046 ... ... 3,594 ... ... 116 ... Chindwin Lower 86 ... 422 ... ... 9,950 ... ... ... ... Chindwin Sagaing .. 55 ... 328 ... ... 8,703 ... .. 26 ... Shwebo .. 66 ... 688 ... ... 8,447 ... ... 44 ... Meiktila .. 3 ... 18 ... ... 290 ... ... ... ... Yamèthin . 36 ... 98 ... ... 4,551 .. ... 11 ... Kyauksè .. 6 ... 13 ... ... 747 ... ... 4 ... Northern 11 ... 78 ... ... 1,009 ... ... ... ... Total for 1922 -21. ... ... 659 ... 6,857 ... ... 69,785 ... ... 377 ... Total for 1919 -20. ... ... 456 ... 4,824 ... ... 55,628 ... ... 363 ...
16 APPENDICES. TABLE IV. Statement showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1920-21 (Paragraphs 15 and 16). District. Number of villages visited Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castration Performed Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Equines. Bo vines. Others. Total. Eqnines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) Akyab ... 1,778 9 ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... 10 21 5,111 19 5,151 5,161 Kyaukpyu 329 2 ... ... ... ... 2 ?6 ... 226 18 841 21 883 1,109 Sand way 161 1 ... ... ... ...... ... 28 ... 28 25 343 7 345 373 Hanthawaddy .. 1,097 6 ... ... ... ... 1 267 ... 268 112 2,377 37 2,5 6 2,794 Insein ... 561 3 ... ... ... ... 387 ... 387 57 676 42 775 1,162 Pegu ... 1, 95 5 ... ... ... ... 896 ... 896 71 1,961 21 2,058 2,954 Prome ... 892 6 ... .. ... ... 3 370 ... 373 104 1,314 35 1,453 1,826 Tharrawaddy 839 4 ... ... ... ... 1 367 ... 368 71 1,061 90 1,228 1,596 Bassein ... 2,057 8 ... . . ... 1 1,764 ... 1,765 126 2,695 46 2,867 4,632 Ma-ubin ... 1,977 5 ... ... ... ... ... 280 1 287 110 1,479 27 1,606 4,893 Pyapôn ... 700 4 . ... ... ... ... 42 ... 42 8 852 18 8 8 920 Myaungmya ... 1,145 4 ... ... ... .. ... 449 ... 479 8 1,182 33 1,223 1,702 Henzada ... 1,169 8 . ... ... ... .. 659 ... 659 89 1,467 24 1,580 ,239 Amherst ... 1,273 7 ... ... ... ... 1 329 ... 330 38 1,160 50 1, 48 1,578 Tavoy ... 102 2 ... ... . ... ... ... ... ... 10 177 4 191 191 Mergui ... 214 1 ... ... ... ... . ... ... ... 22 460 17 505 505 Thatôn ... 1,179 6 ... ... ... ... . 2,398 ... 2,398 113 1,856 69 2,038 4,436 Toungoo ... 994 5 ... ... ... 2 689 ... 691 122 2,057 18 2,197 2,888 Salween Hill 139 1 ... ... ... ... ... 507 ... 507 41 154 5 200 707 Tracts. ... ... Rangoon & School. ... 3 ... ... ... ... . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 17,301 90 ... ... 9 9,794 1 9,714 1,161 27,202 89 28,952 38,665 Thayetmyo ... 803 5 ... ... ... ... . 1,303 ... 1,303 113 677 46 836 2,139 Pakôkku ... 1,477 7 ... ... ... ... ... 815 815 394 1,751 17 2,162 2,977 Minbu ... 1,281 4 ... ... ... ... .. 587 . 287 245 988 22 1,255 1,842 Magwe ... 1,447 5 ... ... ... ... ... 625 ... 625 227 1,415 29 1,671 2,296 Mandalay ... 1,119 6 ... ... ... ... ... 599 1 600 102 1,101 51 1,257 1,857 Bhamo ... 1,510 7 ... ... ... ... 2 186 ... 188 210 2,021 199 2,730 2,918 Katha ... 1,373 8 ... ... ... ... 9 3,220 1 3,230 116 1,015 11 1,142 4,372 Myitkyina ... 295 3 ... ... ... ... 4 15 ... 19 81 446 10 537 556 Shwebo ... 1,274 6 ... ... ... ... 1 2,414 ... 2,415 101 945 17 1,063 3,478 Sagaing ... 1,352 6 ... ... ... ... 6 1,196 ... 1,262 263 795 22 1,680 2,282 Lower Chindwin 1,278 6 ... ... ... ... 1 1,632 ... 1,933 336 1,738 91 2,165 3,798 Upper Chindwin 1,165 5 ... ... ... ... 3 1,212 ... 1,215 113 1,364 5 1,512 2,727 Kyauksè ... 1,053 3 ... ... ... ... ... 45 ... 451 196 1,006 35 1,637 2,088 Meiktila ... 1,118 6 ... ... ... ... ... 318 ... 318 433 1,062 90 1,585 1,903 Yamèthin ... 1,178 6 ... ... ... ... ... 260 ... 760 250 1,155 16 1,421 2,181 Myingvan ... 1,041 5 ... ... ... ... .. 627 ... 627 527 1,214 88 1,829 2,456 Momeik ... 57 ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 56 82 ... 138 138 Mogôk ... 400 ... ... ... ... ... ... 62 ... 62 257 826 1 1,084 1,146 Total 19,221 88 ... ... ... ... 26 16,022 2 16,050 4,050 20,301 753 5,104 41,154 GRAND TOTAL, 1920-21. 36,522 178 ... ... ... ... 35 25,726 3 25,764 5,211 47,503 1,342 54,06 79,820 Grand Total, 1919-20. 34,411 168 ... ... ... . 93 35,668 17 33,178 4,74 9 45,777 2,724 53,255 86,433 Veterinary In- spectors, Lower Burma. 2,562 13 ... ... ... ... ... 270 ... 270 62 612 17 691 961 Veterinary In- spectors, Upper Burma. 2,873 11 ... ... . ... 3 593 ... 596 228 1,289 26 1,843 2,909 Veterinary In- spectors, South- ern Shan States. 24 1 ... ... . ... 32 ... 32 97 139 9112 348 380 Veterinary In- spectors, North- ern Shan States 355 1 ... ... ... ... ... 15 ... 15 3 150 183 198 Veterinary Assist- ants, Northern Shan States. 1,688 11 ... .. ... ... ... 481 ... 481 59 2,500 67 3,163 3,644
APPENDICES. 17 TABLE V. Statement showing the number of Animals treated and castrated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1920-21 (Paragraph 5). District. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Number of in- patients treated during the year. Number of out- patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) Rs. Rs. (Burma) 1 1 22 24 207 253 113 537 1,087 1,767 2,010 199 2 ... ... 2 246 1,486 Inseia. Total, 1920-21 1 1 22 24 707 253 113 557 1,087 1,757 2,010 199 2 ... ... 2 946 1,486 Total, 1919-20 1 1 24 21 134 179 139 641 975 1,755 1,934 185 ... ... 1 1 25 17,168 TABLE VII. Statement showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the von 1920-21 (Paragraphs 15 and 10). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) No. No. No. Burma .. In Schools and Colleges Provincial 1 * 1 D.S. 1 A. I. * Laboratory. Assistant In- structor. District ... Do. 23 * 19 3 D.S. * 1 School. 2 Office. Do ... Local Funds ... 159 ... District Cess Funds, 86. Northern Shan States. ... ... 1 8 ... District Funds, 73. Southern Shan Slates ... ... 1 16 ... Total, 1919-20 ... ... s6 200 4 D.S. 1 A.I. Total, 1918-19 ... ... 25 189 2 D.S. 1 A.I. TABLE XIV A. Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1920-21. Amount. Remarks. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... ... 86,059 ... 86,059 Veterinary Instruction ... ... 42,922 ... 42,92a Subordinate Establishment ... ... 86,019 1,77,168 2,63,187 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 1,486 ... 1,486 Breeding Operations ... ... 9,087 ... 9,087 Contribution to District Funds ... 87,358 ... 87,358 on account of Veterinary Assis- tants. Prizes ... ... ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... ... ... ... ... Total, 1920-21 ... 3,12,931 1,77,168 4,90,099 Total, 1919-20 ... 2,62,496 1,68,919 4,31,345 G.B.C.D.O.NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1921 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1922
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1922 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1923 [Price Re. 1.]
[The maximum limit of the body of the Report is ten pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. EPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH PARA. PAGE General Administration ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 & 2 2 I.rom J. P. SHEETY, Esq., I.C.S., Officiating Secretary to the Development Commissioner, Burma, to the Revenue Secretary to the Government of Burma,( 2 ) Veterinary Adviser to expedite their completion. Provision should be made for the erection of a residence in the school compound for the Second Superinten- dent who at present has his headquarters in Rangoon. Mr. Keith considers that before any new buildings are constructed a small committee of veterinary experts selected from outside the department might usefully be appointed to examine the school buildings, present and proposed and the present curriculum of studies and to advise the Local Government on these matters and on the extent to which the school meets the requirements of the province. Outside criticism, especially outside expert criticism is nearly always useful and is espe- cially valuable in the case of a department like the Veterinary Department in which the number of superior officers is too small to provide adequate criticism from within the department. The Committee might also advise regarding the possibility of providing higher education in veterinary subjects. In Mr. Keith's opinion the number of government appointments is too small and the demand from private sources too small to justify any large expenditure on an institution capable of training out officers first for appointment to a Provincial Service. 4. Treatment of Diseases.( 3 ) dissipating it through the district, the men could so arrange their tours that one of them was always at headquarters to attend to the Dispensary and that without any reduction in the average number of days which are at present spent on tour. 6. Breeding Operations.( 4 ) 40 of the 15th November 1931. By the Local Government's Circular No. 43 of 1931 Deputy Commissioners were authorised to pay compensation to the owners of animals for the destruction of animals suffering from glanders and Lymphangitis Epizootica of half the market value up to a maximum of Rs. 150 in the case of ponies and Rs. 75 in the case of mules. Rules for the prevention and suppression of contagious and infectious diseases amongst domestic animals in towns were drafted during the year, circulated for information and discussed at the last Commissioner's Conference in October. Mr. Keith has prepared a re-draft in the light of the criticisms received; and has circulated it to selected officers for opinion. He trusts that his final proposals will reach the Local Government shortly. The difficulty in drafting a satisfactory set of rules has been due to the fact that the authorities responsible for working the rules vary according as the town is (a) a Municipal or a Notified area, (b) a town in which the Burma Rural Self-Government Act is in force or (c) a town outside that area. The sanction of the Local Government was accorded in July 1921 to the payment of Rs. 190 from the Meiktila District Fund as rewards and travelling allowance to candidates who appeared at certain examinations on the treatment of cattle diseases which were held at Meiktila and Thazi in March 1921. These examina- tions have been held for some years past in the Meiktila Division. Mr. Keith considers that it would be interesting if a brief account of these examinations giving particulars of the numbers who went up for them from each district, the numbers who passed and the number and value of money prizes given were included by the Veterinary Adviser in his Annual Report. It is to be hoped that the practice of holding these examinations will gradually extend to all districts in Burma under the regime of the new District Councils in order that in the course of time there may be at least one cultivator in every village with sufficient knowledge to diagnose and to treat the more common forms of cattle disease. Revised Rules were issued during the year under the Live-Stock Importation Act, 1898, mainly to prevent the introduction of Bovine Tuberculosis. The selection of an area for a Quarantine Station in Rangoon for the detention of imported animals subject to attention under these rules is still under discussion between the Veterinary Adviser, the Chairman, Rangoon Development Trust and the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of the City of Rangoon, and it is hoped that a suitable site has at last been found. The Local Government has decided that the staff of Veterinary Inspectors and Assistants employed in areas subject to the Burma Rural Self-Government Act shall be paid for from Provincial Funds and remain under the control of Government officers despite the fact that under the provisions of the Act the responsibility for contagious and infectious diseases is laid on District Councils. A proposal to impose upon the headman the duty of submitting regular weekly reports on the progress of rinderpest when that disease occurs in the village-tract was vetoed by the Local Government. Printed by order of the Government of Burma. G.B.C.P.O.-No. 1326, R.Secy., 6-3-1993RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA, For the year which ended on the 31st March 1922. Extracts from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma in the Agricultural Department, No. 50O., dated the 3rd February 1933, READ2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA position of the villages in these large areas and the lack of communications make it probable that many more deaths occur than are actually reported. Anti-rinderpest serum was employed in 305 outbreaks in 20 districts and out of the 28,380 animals inoculated only 76 succumbed to attacks of this disease. In the Upper Chindwin District which was responsible for 14,103 deaths out of 21,783 reported from Upper Burma the number of animals inoculated was comparatively small. It is evident that outbreaks of rinderpest in this district require special arrangements by the Veterinary Department and the District authorities in collaboration and the attention of the officers concerned will be drawn to this. Revised rules were issued during the year under the Live-Stock Importation Act, 1898, mainly to prevent the introduction of Bovine Tuberculosis. A suitable site has, it is reported, been selected for a quarantine station in Rangoon for the detention of imported animals subject to detention under these rules. 4. Of the four Experimental Veterinary Dispensaries sanctioned in April 1921 at a cost not exceeding Rs. 2,500 per annum, three were opened at Pakôkku, Prome and Myingyan. The fourth will shortly be opened at Toungoo instead of at Pegu as originally approved. The attendance at these dispensaries was as follows:FOR THE YEAR WHICH ENDED ON THE 31ST MARCH 1929. 3 as the latter finds necessary to deal with outbreaks of epidemic disease, and while they will still be subject to the disciplinary control of the Department, their services will be lent to District Councils which will also have to bear all the expenses of Veterinary administration in their districts except the pay and travelling allowances of the Inspectors and Assistants. The Deputy Commissioner will still have ample powers under the Village Act to compel the adoption of the necessary measures to enforce proper segregation, and under section 65A of the Burma Rural Self-Government Amendment Act he can compel District Councils to take certain measures in the event of any part of the district being visited or threatened with outbreaks of dangerous or infectious diseases. In the immediate future, while the District Councils are finding their feet, segregation will have to be enforced under the Village Act, but as District Councils become conversant with and experienced in their duties, the Local Government looks forward to the gradual substitution of bye-laws framed by the District Councils for dealing with the welfare of cattle rather than to orders under the Village Act. This, however, is a matter which cannot be unduly hurried. The essential thing is that proper measures should be enforced. 7. The Development Commissioner has expressed the opinion that once the staff of Deputy Superintendents has been brought up to strength, the subordinate establishment should be transferred entirely to the control of District Councils so as to relieve the Veterinary Adviser and his assistants of the work of checking the travelling allowance bills and diaries of the Assistants and to enable the latter to devote more time to actual inspection on the ground. The Local Government agrees that the Department is outgrowing the present system of administration and that there must be decentralization, but is not prepared at present to take any further action in the direction of placing Veterinary Assistants and Inspectors under the control of District Councils until it has some experience of the manner in which these bodies function. At the same time, although a strong Department can to some extent enforce simple measures of segregation, any real improvement in the welfare of cattle must come from conviction within the cultivator and not from pressure from without, and if the District Councils fulfil the hopes of their more ardent supporters, a much larger measure of willing co-operation in the suppression of disease among cattle may be looked for from the cultivator than has hitherto been the case. The Local Government has noted with pleasure the names of the officers who are singled out for their good work and congratulates Mr. Rennie on his successful administration of the Department for the second year. By order of the Government of Burma (Ministry of Agriculture), H. O. REYNOLDS, Secretary to the Government of Burma, Depts. of Agriculture, Excite and Forests.
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA For the Year ended the 31st March 1922. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. Mr. Rennie was in charge of the Department throughout the year. He held charge of the Veterinary School during the absence of Mr. Cameron on leave. He was on tour for 111 days, visiting 12 districts in Upper Burma and 4 districts in Lower Burma. He travelled 171 miles by road, 2,752 by river and 7,518 by rail. The work of 2 Deputy Superintendents, 10 Veterinary Inspectors and 46 Veterinary Assistants was inspected by him during the year. He attended the Agricultural Conference at Pusa in February 1922. He inspected the Military Police Battalion, Taunggyi, Southern Shan States, and examined the pupils at the Veterinary Training School, Taunggyi. Mr. Cameron returned from leave in December and was placed in charge of the Veterinary School, Insein. Captain O'Neill held charge of the Office of the Second Superintendent in addition to his own duties pending the return of Mr. Cameron from leave. He was on tour for 97 days, travelling 198 miles by road, 1,028 by river and 3,920 by rail and visiting 5 districts in Upper Burma and 5 in Lower Burma. He inspected the work of 6 Veterinary Inspectors and 19 Veterinary Assistants. This Officer's Headquarters have now been transferred to Mandalay, the Mandalay and Sagaing Divisions being placed solely in his charge. Captain Idle was employed during the year in collecting information as regards stock breeding and local conditions pertaining thereto. He travelled 390 miles by road, 7,691 by rail and 1,014 by steamer and examined Government stallions on tour. 2. One Deputy Superintendent was reverted early in the year thus reducing the number to four. Towards the middle of the year a Veterinary Inspector a graduate of Calcutta College, who had recently returned from military duty, was promoted to Deputy Superintendent and posted to the charge of the Irrawaddy Division. A sixth appointment was made in March so that at the close of the year there were six Deputy Superintendents. Mr. Batlivala was in charge of the Veterinary School, Insein, as Deputy Superintendent until February when he proceeded on four months' leave. Sardar Bahadur Bhagwan Singh was in charge of Military Police throughout the year and carried out his duties in connection therewith in his usual satis- factory manner. I.2 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN A new batch of 16 pupils* was admitted in June. One second year student (Class B) was dismissed for absence without leave ; he had been frequently warned for a similar offence. One student in Class ' A ' (first year) was found to be unsatisfactory and he was dispensed with in March. There were thus 40 pupils at the end of the year, viz.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31ST MARCH 1922, 3 were swept away and a special staff had to be employed to check the progress of the disease. The epidemic was still prevailing at the close of the year and inoculation is reported to have done good in preventing its spread. The Deputy Commissioner reports, " The Veterinary Staff with the co-operation of local officials strove hard to counteract the disease. Thousands of cattle were inoculated and precautions taken but the ignorance of the average villagers in dealing with epidemics and the casual manner in which buffaloes are let loose to graze, frequently for months at a time, renders the task of inoculation and segregation extremely difficult. The mortality was mostly confined to buffaloes ; which in many tracts live in a semi-wild state in the vast tract of jungle. Many of these died in the streams of the Chindwin River and their carcases floated down considerable distances before discovery, thus probably spreading the infection. The loss in many tracts is most serious as there are not nearly sufficient cattle left for agricultural purposes." Elsewhere with the exception of Katha District and the Gangaw Subdivision of Pakôkku District the disease was comparatively light. Anthrax.4 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN year as against 1920-21 shows that the desired decrease of mortality is maintained. This reflects credit on the Veterinary Assistants, who have carried out their duties satisfactorily." Veterinary School, Taunggyi.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA. FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1923. 5 As has been remarked before, in many areas the work of serum protection is much hindered by natural causes as well as by unwillingness of the people to submit their cattle. An inoculation party despatched to Papun was delayed by floods and arrived too late. In Magwe, as in most of the breeding districts of Upper Burma, the method is often rendered ineffective by reason of the cows and young cattle being difficult and often impossible to secure. In all 2 Deputy Superintendents, 8 Veterinary Inspectors and 80 Veteri- nary Assistants and a pupils were employed in serum protection duty. (4) OTHER DISEASES. 12. Deaths due to these amounted to 54,680 in Lower Burma and to 15,314 in Upper Burma. (5) VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES. Table V. 13. Three of the four Veterinary Dispensaries mentioned as having been sanctioned in last year's report were opened during the year. The dispensary sanctioned in Pegu has been delayed owing to the difficulty in securing a suitable building, but it is hoped that this difficulty will shortly be met. In Myingyan the dispensary was opened in October and in the first month treated 37 cases. The number has risen progressively each month up to 158 treated in March. The total for the six months during which the dispensary has been in operation is 657. In Prome a beginning was made in October ; the total for the first month was only 9 animals. Results have been poor, the total number of cases up to March being 106. The dispensary in Pakôkku was opened on 1st November. In the first month cases treated amounted to 29 and this number has shown little variation in the succeeding months ; altogether up to the end of March number of cases treated amounted only to 291. III.6 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN IV.VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1922. 7 The number of Assistants on special duty during the year are shown below together with the names of districts :8 REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE 1NSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL), BURMA, FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1928. Veterinary Assistants.APPENDICES. 9 TABLE I. Statement showing the main results of Veterinary Colleges and Schools during the year 1921-22 (Paragraphs 3 and 8). Veterinary Colleges and Schools. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. Number of Students Admitted during the year. Passed final examination during the year. Failed to pass final examina- tion. Remaining under instruc- tion at the end of year. Scholar- ship- holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) No. No. No. No. No. No. Insein ... 3 years' Vernacular 1610 APPENDICES. TABLE II. Statement showing number of Deaths from Contagious Diseases amongst Animals during the year 1921-22 (Paragraphs 6 and 7). District. Equines.APPENDICES. 11 TABLE III. Statement showing results of Preventive Inoculation during the year 1921-22 (Paragraphs 7 and 11). District. Name of disease against which inocula- tion was carried out. Method of inoculation followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninoculated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inoculated animals which died of the disease. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) Hantha- waddy Rinderpest. Serum-alone method. 4 ... 8 ... ... 324 ... ... ... ... Pegu ... 26 ... ... 19a ... ... 457 ... ... 26 ... Prome ... 11 ... 68 ... ... 1,226 ... ... 2 ... Tharra- 3 ... 9 ... ... 373 ... ... 3 ... waddy. Pyapôn ... 2 7 ... ... 137 ... ... ... ... Amherst ... 5 ... 54 ... ... 443 ... ... 1 ... Thatôn ... 26 244 ... ... 3,579 ... ... ... ... Salween .. 1 ... 5 ... ... 136 ... ... ... ... Toungoo . 17 ... 120 ... ... 1,094 ... ... 11 ... Mandalay .. 7 ... 68 ... ... 765 ... ... 9 ... Katha ... 15 ... 25 ... ... 1,785 ... ... ... ... Bhamo ... 8 ... 30 ... ... 991 ... ... 2 ... Meiktila ... 28 ... 43 ... ... 3,4o8 ... ... ... ... Yamèthin . 37 ... 225 ... ... 3,205 .... ... ... ... Magwe ... 51 ... 128 ... ... 4,306 ... ... 3 ... Minbu ... 5 ... 6 ... ... 745 ... ... ... ... Sagaing .. 6 ... 16 ... ... 1,694 ... ... ... Shwebo ... 10 ... 33 ... ... 1,092 ... ... 11 ... Upper Chindwin. 39 ... 264. ... ... 2,401 ... ... 6 ... Northern Shan State 4 ... 67 ... ... 219 ... ... 2 ... Total for 1921-22. ... ... 305 ... 1,612 ... ... 28,380 ... ... 76 ... Total for 1920-21. ... ... 659 ... 6,857 ... ... 69,785 ... ... 377 ...
12 APPENDICES. TABLE IV. Statement showing the number of Animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during the year 1921-22 (Paragraphs 15 and 16). District. Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castration performed. Treated for conta- gious diseases. Treated for non- contagious diseases. Total number or cases treated and castrations performed. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) Akyab ... 1,522 8 ... ... ... ... ... 19 ... 19 10 4,510 34 4,554 4,573 Kyaukpyu ... 415 3 ... ... ... ... ... 144 ... 144 11 1,373 39 1,423 1,567 Sandoway ... 189 1 ... ... ... ... ... 178 ... 178 12 315 18 345 523 Hanthawaddy ... 1,137 6 ... .. ... 3 1,488 . 1,490 154 2,349 37 2,540 4,030 Insein ... 723 7 ... ... ... ... 3 1,098 ... 1,110 85 755 57 897 1,997 Pegu ... 1,618 5 ... ... ... 5 591 ... 596 94 2,047 48 2,189 2,785 Prome ... 1,431 7 ... ... ... ... ... 3,374 .. 2,374 219 2,234 41 2,494 4,868 Tharrawaddy 1,352 6 ... ... ... ... 2 1,197 ... 1,199 202 1,620 175 1,997 3,196 Bassein ... 2,381 8 ... ... ... ... 6 7,478 ... 7,484 74 2,913 86 3,073 10,557 Ma-ubin ... 1,115 5 ... ... ... ... ... 693 ... 693 128 1,914 24 2,066 2,759 Pyapôn ... 742 4 ... ... ... .. 55 ... 55 27 1,495 22 1,544 1,599 Myaungmya ... 943 3 ... ... ... ... ... 202 ... 202 6 1,029 18 1,053 1,255 Henzada ... 1,109 7 ... ... ... ... 1,365 ... 1*365 50 1,841 17 1,908 3,273 Amherst ... 1,083 7 ... ... ... ... 1 614 2 617 65 1,856 54 1,975 2,592 Tavoy ... 258 2 ... ... ... ... ... 377 ... 377 22 678 26 726 1,103 Mergui ... 237 1 ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 9 II 473 29 513 522 Thatôn ... 1,048 6 ... ... ... ... ... 590 ... 590 95 2,085 94 2,274 2,864 Toungoo ... i,4i7 7 ... ... ... ... ... 905 ... 905 170 2,667 42 2,879 3,784 Salween ... 216 1 ... ... ... ... ... 46 ... 46 36 138 5 169 215 Rangoon & ... 3 ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... Insein. Total ... 9,036 97 ... ... ... ... 18 19,423 2 19,443 1,461 32,292 806 34,619 54,062 Thayetmyo ... 779 3 ... ... ... ... ... 4,149 40 4,189 93 1,407 62 1,562 5,751 Pakôkku ... 1,232 7 ... ... ... ... ... 1,192 ... 1,192 362 1,246 54 1,662 2,854 Minbu ... 936 4 ... ... ... ... 3 463 ... 466 300 669 46 1,015 1,481 Magwe ... 1,887 7 ... ... ... ... 2 3,151 ... 3,153 208 1,141 63 1,412 4,565 Mandalay ... 1,278 6 ... ... ... ... ... 2,951 ... 2,951 147 1,379 44 1,570 4,521 Bhamo ... 1,492 7 ... ... ... ... 1 574 ... 575 171 2,298 228 2,697 3,273 Katha ... 1,846 9 ... ... ... ... 9 3,015 ... 3,024 392 2,514 41 2,947 5,971 Myitkyina .. 476; 3 ... ... ... ... 11 494 ... 505 148 671 13 832 1,337 Shwebo ... 1,857 8 ... ... ... ... ... 883 ... 883 316 2,449 32 2,797 3,680 Sagaing ... 1,375 6 ... ... ... ... ... 1,164 ... 1,164 421 1,573 36 2,030 3,194 Lower Chindwin 964 6 ... ... ... ... 2 250 ... 252 340 2,199 105 2,644 2,896 Upper Chindwin 1,110 5 ... ... ... ... 4 1,188 ... 1,192 72 1,498 11 1,581 3,773 Kyauksè ... 1,032 3 ... ... ... ... 2,245 ... 2,245 179 1,414 69 1,662 3,90 7 Meiktila ... 991 5 ... ... ... ... ... 544 ... 544 384 951 41 1,376 1,920 Yamèthin ... 1,415 7 ... ... ... ... 1 3,309 6 3,316 371 1,550 41 1,962 5,278 Myingyan ... 1,147 6 ... ... ... ... .. 648 ... 648 907 1,664 300 2,871 3,519 Total 19,717 93 ... ... ... ... 33 36,220 46 26,299 4,811 24,623 1,186 30,620 56,919 GRAND TOTAL, 1921-32. 38,753 189 ... ... ... ... 51 45,643 48 45,742 6,272 56,915 2,062 65,238 1,10,981 Grand Total, 1920-21. 35,522 178 ... ... ... ... 35 25,726 3 25,764 5,211 47,503 1,342 54,056 79,820 Veterinary In- spectors, Lower Burma. 2,086 12 ... ... ... ... 6 463 ... 469 16 389 8 413 882 Veterinary In- spectors, Upper Burma. 3,422 11 ... ... ... ... ... 692 ... 692 341 1,351 34 1,726 2,418 Veterinary In- spectors, South- ern Shan States. 44 1 ... ... ... .. 4 835 ... 839 100 160 155 415 1,254 Veterinary In- spectors, North- ern Shan States. 511 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 32 138 3 173 180 Veterinary Assist- ants, Northern Shan States. 1,544 11 ... .. ... .. ... 961 ... 900 619 2,15 116 2,886 3,845
APPENDICES. 13 TABLE V. Statement showing the number of Animals treated and castrated at Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries during the year 1921-22 (Paragraphs 4 and 13). District. Number of Veterinary Dispensaries. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Number of in- patients treated during the year. Number of out- patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. (1) (a) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (II) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (Burma) Rs. Rs, Insein ... 1 1 11 11 220 248 138 1,034 983 2,165 2,403 633 1 ... 1 2 ... ... Myingyan 1 1 ... ... ... ... 301 241 115 657 657 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pakôkku ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 122 141 28 291 291 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Prome ... 1 1 ... ... . ... 36 40 30 I06 106 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... T0tal,1921-22 4 4 11 11 226 248 597 1,459 1,156 3,809 3,457 633 1 ... 1 3 316 17,856 Total,1920-21 1 X 32 24 207 253 113 557 1,087 1,757 2,010 199 3 ... ... 3 246 1,485 TABLE VII. Statement showing total strength of Subordinate Veterinary Staff employed during the year 1921-22 (Paragraphs 15 and 16). Province. How occupied. Whether paid from Provincial or Local Funds. Veterinary Inspectors. Veterinary Assistants. Subordinate teaching staff. Remarks. (I) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) No. No. No. Burma .. In Schools and Colleges Provincial 1 * ... 1 D.S. I A. I. * Laboratory. Assistant District ... Do. 22 *25 4 D.S. * 1 School. 2 Office. Do. ... Local Funds ... 164 ... District Cess Funds, 80. Northern Shan States. ... ... 1 11 ... District Funds. 78. Southern ... ... 1 26 ... Shan States. Total, 1921-22 ... ... 25 216 5 D.S. 1 A.I. Total, 1920-21 ... ... 26 209 4 D.S. 1 A.I. TABLE XIVa. * Statement showing the cost of the Civil Veterinary Department in the Province of Burma during the financial year 1921-22. NLS TO INSERT COLOUR
REPORT ON THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT (INCLUDING THE INSEIN VETERINARY SCHOOL) BURMA FOR THE YEAR ENDED THE 31st MARCH 1922 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1923
