ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1922-23 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA : SUPERINPENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. Price Annas 12.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE TEAR 1922-23 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA: SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1923.
AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF BOOKS PUBLISHED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. In India. (1) MESSRS THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta. (2) MESSERS. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. (3) MESSRS. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., College Street, Calcutta. (4) MESSRS. R. CAMBRAY & Co., 6 and 8-2, Hastings Street, Calcutta. (6) MESSRS. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. (6) MESSRS. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., 103, Meadow Street, Fort, Post Box No. 18, Bombay. (7) MESSRS. M. C. SIRCAR & SONS, 75, Harrison Road, Calcutta, (8) PROPRIETOR OF THE NEWAL KISHORE PRESS, Lucknow. (9) MESSRS. M. N. BURMAN & Co., Bankipore. (10) BABU RAM DAYAL AGARWALA, 184, Katra Road, Allahabad. (11) STANDARD LITERATURE Co., LTD., 13-1, Old Court House Street, Calcutta. (12) MANAGER OF THE INDIAN SCHOOL SUPPLY DEPOT, 309, Bow Bazar Street, Calcutta. (13) MESSRS. BUTTERWORTH & Co., LTD., 6, Hastings Street, Calcutta (14) MESSRS. RAM KPISHNA & SONS, Anarkali Street, Lahore. (15) THE OXFORD BOOK AND STATIONERY COMPANY, Delhi. In England. (1) MESSRS. A. CONSTABLE & Co., LTD., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. (2) MESSRS. KEGAN. PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, London. E. C, (Oriental Department) and 25, Museum Street, London, W. C. (3) MR. B. QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, Now Bond Street, London, W. C. (4) MESSRS. P. S. KING & SON. 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W. (5) MR. B. BLAVKWELL, 50-51, Broad Street, Oxford. (6) MESSRS. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., LTD., Trinity Street, Cambridge. (7) MESSRS. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, London, E. C. (8) MESSRS. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. (9) MESSRS. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, Ludgate Hill. London, E. C (10) MESSRS. LUZAC & Co.. 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. (11) MESSRS. OLIVER AND BOYD, Twoeddale Court, Edinburgh. (12) MESSRS. E. PONSONBY, LTD.. 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. (13) T. FISHER UNWIN, LTD., 1, Adelphi Terrace London, W. C. (14) MESSRS. EAST AND WEST, LTD., 3, Victoria Street, London, S.W. On the Continent. (1) M. ERNEST LEROUX, 28 Rae Bonaparte Paris, France. (2) MARTINUS NIFJOFF, The Hague, Holland. (3) OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. (4) FREDLANDER AND SOHN, Berlin.
MAXIMUM LIMIT-20 pages. CONTENTS. PAGE. 1. General administration ... ... 1No. 5800-V.D. FROM D. QUINLAN, ESQ., M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., DIRECTOR, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, AND VETERINARY ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. Bated Patna, the 7 th September 1923, SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit herewith, in duplicate, the Annual Report of the Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa, for the year 1922-23. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, D. QUINLAN, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director, Civil Veterinary Department, and Veterinary Adviser to the Government of Bihar and Orissa.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1922-23. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. THE department, during April, May and June, while was still on leave, was in charge of Captain P. B. Riley, who officiated as Director and Veterinary Adviser, at the same time acting as Deputy Director of the North Bihar range ; for the- remaining portion of the year, I carried out the above duties. Captain G. G Howard, the third Imperial officer, continued to act as a leave reserve officer, as he was not given charge of the Orissa range, owing to funds not being voted for the opening of the office and laboratory at Cuttack. 2. The veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Patna, Dinapur, Gaya, Nawada, Aurangabad Bhagalpur, Banks, Monghyr, Jamui, Sahebganj, Cuttack, Puri, Balasore, Bhadrak, Angul Phulbani, Sambalpur, Bargarh, Ranchi, Khunti, Hazari- bagh, Palamau, Purulia, Dhanbad and Chaibassa were inspected. A visit was also paid to Jamshedpur with a view to opening a hospital there, but it is doubtful if this can be done owing to shortage of funds. 3. A visit was paid to the North Bihar range to inspect the office of the Deputy Director at Muzaffarpur and to select young stock at the Sipaya farm and at Bettiah for the Director of Agri- culture, to whom all breeding operations have now been transfer- red. I acted as a member and President of the veterinary exa- mination board and in February attended the second veterinary conference held at Calcutta. I was on tour for 142 days.
2 4. While Captain Riley Was in charge of the South Bihar range in addition to the usual office routine, he conducted the pro- fessional examination of the veterinary inspectors and assistant surgeons held in April. He was on tour for thirty-nine days. 5. As in the previous year, Captain Howard worked in the laboratory and while at headquarters, helped in the disposal of routine work. He inspected the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Bankipnr, Bihar, Gaya, Nawada, Jahanabad, Aurangabad, Bhagalpur, Banka, Monghyr, Jamui, Dumka, Deoghur, Cuttack, Puri, Balasore and Ranchi; he visited the Sonepur fair ; attended the professional examinations held in April ; acted as an examiner at the annual examinations of the Agricultural College, Sabour, and attended the veterinary con- ference. It is a great pity that Captain Howard could not be placed in charge of the Orissa range. This is a very backward tract and wants the undivided attention of a whole time officer to bring the value of the different prophylactic measures adopted by the department to the notice of the raiyats, as well as to organize the reporting of disease, which is very indifferent. The question of supervising veterinary activities in the Feudatory States will also form part of the duties of this officer, but nothing much can be done in this direction until more money becomes available. NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 6. Captain P. B. Riley held charge of the range, while Babu Nilmani Chattarji acted as an Assistant Director throughout the year. The former officer inspected all the hospitals and dis- penoaries in the area, except Kishanganj; visited the important fairs and the cattle-breeding farms at Sipaya and Bettiah ; attended the veterinary conference and acted as President as well as examiner of the veterinary examination board. He was also a member of the Board of Examiners at the Madras Veteri- nary College. He was on tour for 137 days. 7. Money for the construction of a residence, office and small laboratory for the Deputy Director at Muzaffarpur was voted by the Council. It is intended to expend a sum of Rs. 50,791 on this project. The work will be taken in hand during the coming year. 8. Already the presence of the Imperial Officer in this circle is being felt, and in the course of another twelve months or so the
3 tightening up process which is in hand will he of benefit to all persons who in future will have any dealings with the department. More attention is being given to the diagnosis of disease, while a considerable saving of time has accrued through the opening of the serum depôt. 9. The record of work as exemplified in the statistics shows how well Captain Riley has been carrying out his duties, and I accordingly bring it to the notice of Government. VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. 10. The scheme for the opening of a Veterinary College at Patna received further consideration, but no definite decision. has so far been arrived at. An estimate, however, for a larger and better equipped college involving an outlay of approximately Rs. 4,60,000 has been prepared and submitted. 11. As regards the Bengal Veterinary College, the Govern- ment of Bengal demand an increased contribution of Rs. 67,000 towards its maintenance on the basis of actual expenditure. At an informal conference in Calcutta, the question of the reduction of the contribution was discussed by representatives of both Governments, but no decision as to the exact amount to be paid for the training of the boys was arrived at. This question is co- related to the scheme for establishing a college of our own, and is awaiting final settlement. 12. The number of applicants for admission to the College is low but the standard of education is still satisfactory. Altoge- ther eleven boys were admitted, against fifteen of the previous year. Of these, seven were granted stipends by local bodies, one by the Bettiah Raj, two by the Feudatory States, and one was admitted as a private student. No candidate appeared for the Government stipends of which two were vacant, and five were held by boys in the second and third year classes. At the end of the year, there were 39 students from this province on the roll, and of these, 25 were Hindus, 10 Muhammadans and 4 Indian Christians. 13. No State scholar was sent to the United Kingdom for veterinary training during the year. It is, however, the intention of Government to select a candidate during 1923-24. 14. As a substitute for the two years' course of training in Tngland for the officers of the provincial service, it was decided by the Government of India to open for them instead, a class at the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, Muktesar. A trial
4 course for 18 months was accordingly started, and the Assistant Director Rai Sahib Priya Nath Das was deputed there by Govern- ment from 3rd July 1922. 15. A short course of two and a half months for officers of the Indian Veterinary Service has also been instituted at Muktear and Captain Howard has been deputed to attend it early in the present year. TABLE II. TREATMENT OF DISEASE. 16. A reference to the enclosed map will show that contagi- ous diseases of cattle were prevalent in all districts of the province, And as usual, the virulence of the outbreaks was more conspicuous in South Bihar and Chota Nagpur than in the areas north of the Ganges. As compared with the previous year, the incidence of rinderpest was about the same, but hæmorrhagic septicæmia was more widespread and caused greater mortality than was recorded in either of the two previous years. There seems to have been a recrudescence also of foot and mouth disease, which affected large numbers of cattle in parts of Chota Nagpur and Orissa, and in consequence, the mortality appears to be higher than in the previous year. Altogether 6,452 outbreaks of the contagious diseases were reported, against 4,876 reported in 1921- 22 and 5,050 in 1920-21, the increase of 1,576 outbreaks over the previous year's figure being mostly attributable to the increased prevalence of foot and mouth disease. Active preventive mea- sures were adopted wherever possible and the results on the whole were satisfactory. 17. On many occasions chowkidars failing to give prompt information of outbreaks were reported, and punished by the authorities. Punishment is no doubt a deterrent, but what is likely to be more effective is the introduction of a regular system of rewards to chowkidars for the faithful discharge of their duties in connection with outbreaks. The Punjab Government have sanctioned a grant of Rs. 6,000 for rewards to patwaris. Similar action seems necessary in this province to stimulate the flagging energy of these low paid officers. 18. It is necessary again to draw attention to the conditions under which contagious diseases are controlled. It has been our policy. hitherto to ask for an increase of staff only when the public demands warranted that it would be appreciated. Recently.
5 however, the good work done by the veterinary assistant surgeons has come under such favourable notion that a scheme is now on hand to double the number of touring assistants in each subdivision. The cultivator who has to suffer under existing conditions very severe losses through outbreaks of contagious and infections dis- eases will, when this scheme is introduced, be better protected than ever before. Even when this proposed increass is taken into account, there is still very great room for improvement. In the more thickly populated areas, additional officers paid by Government will be required, but no matter how much the State may help, zamiadars and co-operative societies, and especially the latter, should employ their own veterinary assistants and in this way bring help to a wider circle. The roll of Government should be to control contagious diseases and to leave the other diseases to private management. 19. Including the foot and mouth disease cases, which Alone number more than 75,000, 149,257 animals were affected, and out of these 30,737 died, against 91,492 attacks and 28,655 deaths respectively in the year 1921-22. Pour thousand five hundred and six outbreaks were attended by veterinary assistant surgeons against 3,380 of the previous year. EQUINE. 20. Glanders.6 measures taken by the subordinate staff under the supervision of the Deputy Director. It was responsible for a considerable mortality among the cattle of the Taylor breed which are more susceptible to infection than country stock. Four hundred and twenty-five cattle died out of 685 affected in the course of the outbreak. One thousand one hundred and fifty inoculations were performed including those reinoculated. A detailed report of this outbreak has been submitted to Government. 26. Rinderpest of a severe type appeared in the Giridih sub- division of Hazaribagh district, where the infection is said to have been introduced by herds of buffaloes passing towards Bengal, from our mora westerly districts and from the United Provinces. It lasted for nearly eight months from August 1922 to March 1923, causing the loss of 1,143 animals out of 2,518 affected. Altogether 5,836 cattle were saved by inoculation ; four veterinary assistant surgeons attended the outbreak. 27. Another severe outbreak was reported in Purnea, the disease having been introduced by local cattle returning from the grazing grounds in Nepal. It spread to all than as of the Sadr subdivision. Eight hundred and forty-seven cattle died. 28. The great difficulty in dealing with the Patna outbreak was the opposition displayed by the cattle owners who would not have their animals done. " Serum alone " inoculation undoubtedly does leave something to be desired, but it is the best method of dealing with the disease under the conditions prevail- ing in India. The " simultaneous " method would be more beneficial to the country, and an endeavour will be made to extend it this year to selected villages. The movement of susceptible cattle into areas where the disease is of low virulence, thereby rejuvenating the disease and thus increasing its virulence is, I feel certain, the cause of its being continued through the decades. 29. Until the cattle disease question, as it affects the whole of India, is taken up as one big scheme directed by a professional head with his headquarters with the Imperial Government, little progress can be made, and much money will be wasted on the efforts of the provincial Governments, no matter how effective they may be in keeping disease in check in their own provinces. Legislation is required, but it should he applicable to the whole of India. 30. Foot and mouth disease.7 Balasore, Angul and Sambalpur. Altogether 2,034 outbreaks were reported, against 1,039 in the year 1921-22. Seventy- five thousand two hundred and twenty-four animals were attacked and 480 died, as compared with 24,599 attacks and 214 deaths of the previous year. 31. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia.8 TABLE III. INOCULATION. 36. It is satisfactory to be able to record that the number of inoculations is steadily increasing, as will appear from a perusal of the statistics in table III for the year under report. One hundred and fifty-nine thousand three hundred and twenty-five cattle were protected against the different contagious diseases, as compared with 123,387 in the year 1921-22, and 92,030 in 1920-21. There has been an appreciable increase in the number of cattle inoculated in the districts of the North Bihar range where this form of treatment was not previously very popular. This can be put down entirely to the energy displayed by the staff under Captain Riley's direction. Opposition to its intro- duction was offered as in previous years in the districts of Patna, Bhagalpur and the Santal Parganas; elsewhere inoculations were carried out without any great difficulty. Personal supervision by the inspecting staff and closer co-operation with the depart- ments of agriculture and co-operative societies should yield even better results in the future. 37. Rinderpest.9 41. Supply of serum and vaccine.10 one for Patna Sadr, one for Kodarma in Hazaribagh district and one for Daudnagar in Gaya district were created and the officers appointed. A second touring veterinary assistant surgeon for Singhbhum was sanctioned, but his headquarters have been fixed temporarily at Ghatsila. 44. The district road committee, Santal Parganas, as well as the district board, Bhagalpur, were unable to make any ad- ditional appointments for want of funds. The former district re- quires help urgently as it frequently appeals for our assistance. The attention of Government is drawn to this fact in the hope that it may see its way to bear the cost of a veterinary staff for this large area until such time as the district finances are in a position to support this burden. Monghyr applied for one for the Begusarai subdivision, while Hazaribagh decided to appoint two additional assistants to be stationed at Ramgarh in Sadr and at Dhanwar in Giridih subdivisions. The district boards of Patna, Gaya, Monghyr, Cuttack, Puri and Balasore have also under consideration proposals for the appointment of addi- tional touring veterinary assistant surgeons at Dinapur, Warisaliganj in Nawadah subdivision, Jamui, Cuttack Sadr, Puri Sadr and Balasore Sadr respectively. All those posts are likely to receive sanction during 1923-24. 45. Eighty-one thousand eight hundred and eighteen fresh cases including castrations, were treated on tour and at head- quarters as compared with 40,824 cases treated in the year 1921-22. The large increase of 40,994 cases over the previous year's figures is due mainly to foot and mouth disease, but there has also been an increase of 7,306 cases of non-contagious disease which is also satisfactory. Twenty-five thousand seven hundred and thirty villages were visited against 19,879 in 1921-22. TABLE V. HOSPITALS. 46. The number of hospitals was increased from twenty- three to twenty-six by the opening of new institutions at Hajipur, Dhanbad and Bargarh. The hospitals at Dumka, Ranchi, Palamau and Begusarai continued to be in charge of touring officers. A hospital assistant was appointed at Bargarh, but in view of the large area to be covered, it is proposed to allot five thanas, including Bargarh, to the assistant in charge of the hospital. Similar arrangements have also been suggested for the stationary assistants at Purulia and Sambalpur, the cost of travelling in their case being met by the local bodies concerned.
11 47. The new hospital buildings at Dumka and Chaibassa, for which the local bodies each received a grant of Rs. 10,000 from Government, as well as the buildings at Hajipur, Samastipur and Bagaha (Bettiah) have been completed, while those at Madhubani (Darbhanga) were under construction during the year. The proposals for opening hospitals in different parts of the Purnea district did not materialize as the board was unable to provide the funds. In Shahabad, the buildings at Sasaram were completed, but no progress has been made towards the erection of small hospitals in Buxar and Bhabua; the Puri district board has revived the question of building a hospital at Sadr, and also put up fresh proposals for another hospital at Khurda, but the question of funds has not yet been decided. Khurda being a Government estate has a legitimate claim for a subsidy from provincial revenues. In any case there is urgent need of assistants in the Orissa division, and it is hoped that Government will help the local bodies in some material way. The hospital at Dinapur is not completed, but it will be handed over before the rains. It is hoped to have the small hospital at Giridih taken in hand during 1923-24. Owing to want of funds the district boards of Gaya, Saran, Cuttack, Purnea and the road committee of the Santal Parganas could not construct any of the additional hospitals of which mention was made in last year's report. 48. Thirty thousand four hundred and ten fresh patients were treated at the hospitals during the year, as compared with 27,526 in 1921-22 showing an increase of 2,884 patients. In addition to the above, 676 castrations were performed, and 6,663 cases not brought to the hospitals were supplied with medicines against 644 and 8,176 respectively in 1921-22. TABLE VIII. BREEDING OPERATIONS. 49. Fifty-five stud bulls were maintained in the districts against 41 in 1921-22. The district board, Darbhanga, purchased six-bulls at an average price of Rs. 135 each; while one bull was supplied to the Muzaffarpur veterinary hospital by the Bettiah Raj in exchange for one desi bull returned. One Montgomery bull was also presented to the Saran district board by the local people. The stud bull maintained at the Begusarai hospital was returned to the Sipaya farm as unserviceable. 50. The cattle show at Niazipur was not held, as the district board, Shahabad, refused to supply the funds necessary to meet
12 the expenses and prize money. The bulls however remained in charge of their keepers who expressed their gratitude at what Government had done for them. 51. The whole of the cattle breeding question requires revision ; I believe it will be absolutely impossible to get ordinary local bodies to take up the question properly, unless Govern- ment makes it compulsory. From April 1st next, the Agricul- tural Department will take over control of cattle breeding mainly as it affects milk supply for the towns. Attention has, however, been directed to the necessity of keeping in view the predilection and prejudices of cultivators in these parts for grey cattle with a minimum of loose skin at the sheath and dewlap, at the same time endeavouring as far as possible to grade up for milk. It will be a slow process and costly but it will be worth it all, if the Council can be induced to vote the money and private enter- prise be stimulated, for without the latter no progress of a lasting character can be expected. TABLE IX. CATTLE FARMS. 52. The Bettiah Raj Farm.13 the whole ; but 7 cattle died from black quarter ; the causes of death in these cases being attributed to the reaction set up by the vaccine. 57. The upkeep of the farm cost Rs. 32,458, against Rs. 55,046 in 1921-22. Receipts under different heads such as sale of animals, produce, etc, amounted to Rs. 8,259, against Rs. 3,310 of the previous year. 58. As a result of the report of the Agricultural Committee, this farm as a cattle breeding station is to be disbanded, a step which will put back for an indefinite period the formation of the desi herd of dual purpose animals of which the herd at Sipaya was to be the nucleus. Cattle improvement cannot be carried out without selection and it is disheartening that the work already accomplished on lines which have proved so effective in Europe should now bo nullified. If the work was appreciated and encourged by influential and rich zamindars, especially those of the Hindu religion, the task of cattle improvement would be easy, but more often than not it is this class who frequently fail to recognize that it is in their interests that this work is being carried on. In spite of these set-backs, the subject is one of the very first importance to the country, and it is hoped that these few lines will catch the eye of some one who will use his influence to get the Council to recognize that money spent on the improvement of cattle by building up herds, is money spent in the very best possible manner, and will eventually be returned to the country in better live-stock. TABLES X, XI, XII. (Blank.) TABLES XIII and XIV. 59. The particulars of the principal fairs and shows are given in the above tables. There is nothing of importance to record. Prices of cattle and live-stock generally are still high and they show very little tendency to fall. Seventeen thousand eight hundred and eight cattle were booked by the Bengal and North- Western Railway to the Eastern Provinces during the year. PROVINCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. 60. There has been no change in the establishment of provincial service officers except that the Assistant Director,
14 Rai Sahib P. N. Das was on training at the Muktesar laboratory from the 3rd July, and that his post remained vacant. Babu N. Chattarji, Assistant Director, North Bihar range, still continues to be temporary, his present term expiring on the 31st August next. As the services of this officer are necessary for the efficient administration of the range, it is hoped that the post will be made permanent; a formal application to this effect has been submitted to Government. The work of this officer was satisfactory throughout the year. TABLE VII. SUBORDINATE ESTABLISHMENT. 61. The number of veterinary inspectors was ten as in 1921-22, but one additional post on Rs. 100 per mensem was sanctioned with effect from the 1st April 1923. Of these officers, three are employed in the North Bihar range and seven in South Bihar, Chota Nagpur and Orissa. 62. The number of staff veterinary assistants was increased from five to six with effect from the 1st April 1923, and of these, two were allotted to the North Bihar range and four to the southern ranges. Only three posts could be filled. The number of reserve veterinary assistant surgeons was nine as in the previous year, viz., three for the North Bihar range and six for the other ranges. Three additional posts were however sanc- tioned with effect from the 1st April 1923. The vacant posts of staff and reserve veterinary assistants will be filled in 1923-24. 63. The laboratory at Muzaffarpur was opened from the 1st April 1923, and from that date another laboratory assistant was appointed. There will thus be two assistants of this class in the department, while another is in training to proceed to Cuttack as soon as that range has been opened. 64. Eighty-eight veterinary assistant surgeons were on the roll on 1st April 1922, including the assistant employed by the Bettiah Raj. Sixteen new graduates joined the department during the year, the total being 104. Of this number, two veterinary assistant surgeons died, two were dismissed, one was discharged, and the services of one were dispensed with, one (Babu B. B. Chowdhury) was on deputation as kheda officer at Angul, while five acted as leave reserve. There were therefore 92 veterinary assistant surgeons in districts at the end of the year, of whom 22, including the Raj veterinary as istant surgeon, were employed in hospitals and 70 on touring duties.
15 65. The North Bihar establishment, which forms part of the total strength, consisted of two staff, one reserve and 32 (9 hospi- tal and 23 touring) veterinary assistant surgeons, including the Raj assistant, on 31st March last. 66. The names of the following officers are mentioned for good work :16 GENERAL REMARKS. 69. The draft manual is still under revision by Government, but it is hoped it will be issued during the coming year. It is very badly needed. 70. It is intended to carry on investigations of a tentative character regarding the incidence of tuberculosis and contagious abortion, and to make an attempt to extend " serum simultaneous" inoculation in selected areas, as well as to make further enquiries into the immunity conferred by the " serum alone " method. 71. The attention of Government is again drawn to the dreadful condition of the hackney services in practically all municipalities in the province. It is impossible to get trying magistrates to realize their responsibilities or to make them see that fining is not a deterrent punishment for those who habitually practise cruelty, and that the only way to end the sufferings of the unfortunate animals is by placing them in a veterinary hospital at the owners' expense until they are certified fit for work; or, what is more difficult to achieve, by ordering their destruction on the certificate of a veterinary assistant. 72. The year under review inspite of influences often adverse to up-to-date methods17 that each divisional headquarters will have a similar, but smaller station where examinations can be made, and the assistants be put right on questions of diagnosis and treatment. 74. In a previous paragraph, attention was called to the importance of bringing to the notice of the Government of India, the necessity of reorganizing the Veterinary Departments, with a view to making more effective the present system of control of livestock diseases. This is really an urgent subject, and should receive the earnest attention of the Government without delay, because the present system of dividing control between the provinces, leads to evasion and expense. There should be central control, with the provincial staffs working in harmony. Other- wise considerable sums will be wasted on ineffective measures which are not backed by legislation and co-operation. 75. The post-graduate training, which is being given to as many of (he assistants as can be spared, will help them in appre- ciating the necessity of. carrying out enquiries into the diseases of live-stock, and of submitting material to the laboratories for study. 7G. I wish to record my thanks to the members of the staff, for the loyal manner in which they have carried out their duties, and in particular Balm N. Chattarji, Babu R. K. Ram, and the laboratory assistant, Babu P. Panda, and the clerical staff under the direction of the head assistant, Babu Digbijoy Roy Choudhuri. D. QUINLAN, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director, Civil Veterinary Department and Veteinary Adorser to the Government of Bihar and Orissa.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1923-24 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA: SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1924. [Price Re, 1, annas 2.]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1923-24 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA: SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1924.
AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF BOOKS PUBLISHED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. IN INDIA. (1) MESSBS. THACKER SPUNK & Co., Calcutta. (2) MESSRS. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta- (3) MESSRS. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., College Street, Calcutta. (4) MESSRS. R. CAMBRAY & Co., 6 and 8-2, Hastings Street, Calcutta. (6) MESSRS. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. (6) MESSRS. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., 103, Meadow Strec Fort, Post Box No. 18, Bombay. (7) MESSRS. M. C SIRCAR & SONS, 75, Harrison Road, Calcutta. (8) PROPRIETOR OF THIS NEWAL KISHORE PRESS, LUCKNOW. (9) MESSRS. M. N. BURMAN & Co., Bankipore. (10) BABU RAM DAYAL AGARWALA, 184, Katra Road, Allahabad. (11) STANDARD LITERATURE Co, Ltd., 13-1, Old Court House Street, Calcutta. (12) MANAGER OF THE INDIAN SCHOOL SUPPLY DEPOT, 309, Bow Bazar. Street, Calcutta. (13) MESSRS. BUTTER WORTH & Co., Ltd., 6, Hastings Street, Calcutta. (14) MESSRS. RAM KRISHNA & SONS, Anarkali Street, Lahore. (15) THE OXFORD BOOK AND STATIONERY COMPANY, Delhi. IN ENGLAND. (1) MESSRS. A. CONSTABLE & Co., Ltd., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. (2) MESSRS. KEGAN, PAUL TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, Loudou, E. C., (Oriental Department) and 25, Museum Street, London, W.C- (3) Mr. B. QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. C. (4) MESSRS. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Groat Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W. (5) Mr. B. BLACK WELL, 50-51, Broad Street, Oxford. (6) MESSRS. DEIQHTON BELL & Co., Ltd.. Trinity Street, Cambridge (7) MESSRS. HE.NRY S. KING & Co . 65, Cornhill, London, E. C. (8) MESSRS. GRINDLAY & Co., 5'1, Parliament Street, London, S. W. (9) MESSRS. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, Ludgate Hill. London, E. C. (10) MESSRS. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. (11) MESSRS. OLIVER AND BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. (12) MESSRS. E. PONSONBY, Ltd., 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. (13) T. FISHER UNWIN, LTD., 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. (14) MESSRS. EAST AND WEST, LTD., 3, Victoria Street, London S. W. 1. ON THE CONTINENT. (1) M. EARNEST LEROOX, 28, Hue Bonaparte, Paris, France. (2) MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. (3) OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. (4) FREDLANDER AND SOHN, Berlin.
No 229 T.-VD. FROM D. QUINLAN, ESQ., M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., DIRECTOR, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, AND VETERINARY ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. Dated Camp Ranchi, the 28th September 1924. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit herewith, in duplicate, the Annual Report of the Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa, for the year 1923-24. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, D. QUINLAN, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director, Civil Veterinary Department, and Veterinary Adviser to the Government of Bihar and Orissa.
No.------------V. D. FROM D. QUINLAN, ESQ., M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., DIRECTOR, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, AND VETERINARY ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. Dated Patna, the 6th September 1924. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit herewith, in duplicate, the Annual Report of the Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa, for the year 1923-24. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, D. QUINLAN, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director, Civil Veterinary Department, and Veterinary Adviser to the Government of Bihar and Orissa.
REFERENCES Head Quarters[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
MAXIMUM LIMIT-20 pages. CONTENTS. PAGE 1. General administration ... ... 1ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1923-24. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. I HELD charge of the department as Director and Veteri- nary Adviser, in addition to the duties performed as Deputy Director of the Central Range. Captain P. B. Riley was Deputy Director in charge of the North Bihar Range, while Captain G.G.Howard, the third Imperial Officer, wasj attached to the head office from April to the end of October, and from the 1st November took over charge of the Orissa Range as Deputy Director, although his office did not actually move to Cuttack until the 15th December 1923. 2. During the year, I inspected the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Bankipur, Dinapur, Gaya, Muzaffarpur, Hazaribaghj Kodarma, Chatra, Cuttack, Jajpur, Puri, Khurda, Sambalpur, Ranchi, Purulia, Dhanbad, Palamau and Chaibassa. I also visited Pusa, and was present at Sonepur fair, where help was given in the purchase of elephants for the Madras and Central Provinces Governments. In December I appeared as a witness before the Royal Commission at Bombay, and in January attended the meeting of the Board of Agriculture and the cattle conference at Bangalore. I was on tour for: 172 days. 3. While at Patna, Captain Howard inspected the Work of the subordinate staff in the Central Range, took charge of the laboratory, and helped in the disposal of office routine. Prom the 2nd May 1923, he was deputed for two months and a half to the Imperial Bacteriological laboratory at Muktesar for special training. In November he gave a series of lectured
2 on pathology and meat inspection, to selected veterinary assistant surgeons at Patna, and talso practical demonstrations in the slaughterhouses at Dinapur and Shahaganj. Some experimental work in the treatment of surra and nasal granuloma in cattle was also carried out hy him. 4. Captain Howard passed his departmental examination by the lower standard. NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 5. Captain P. B. Riley held charge of this range through- out the year. He inspected all the veterinary hospitals except Sewan; and the dispensaries at Sitamarhi, Motihari, Bettiah, Bagaha, Laheriasarai, Madhubani, Katihar, Begusarai, Khagaria, Madhipura and Supaul. The cattle-breeding farms at Sepaya and Bettiah were visited. He acted as a member of the Board of Examiners at the Bengal Veterinary College, and as examiner of the Veterinary Examination Board. He was on special duty carrying out blood examinations of cattle at the Govern- ment farms at Kanke and Netarhat, and was on tour for 163 days. 6. The construction of office buildings, laboratory and residence for the Deputy Director did not advance very far, owing to delay in the acquisition of the site ; materials were however collected. It is proposed to start work on the office and the labora- tory at once, and to take up the residence later. It is expected that the former will be completed before the end of the year. The plan of the residence of the Deputy Director of Agricul- ture at Sabour has been finally selected. 7. The manner in which Captain Riley carried out his duties leaves nothing to be desired, as hospitals and dispensaries, and the work of the staff prove. It is brought to the notice of Government. ORISSA RANGE. 8. This range was opened on the 1st November and Captain Howard formally took charge of it on the 15th December 1923. It comprises all the districts of tbe Orissa division and the Ranchi, Manbhum and Singhbhum districts of the Chota Nagpur division. At present there are consi- derable difficulties in the way of ex-pansion in the Feudatory State*5, but the need of a veterinary staff exists, and will be met as funds become available. The office of the Deputy Director is now located in a hired bungalow.
3 9. Since joining his appointment, the Deputy Director inspected the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Cuttack, Puri, Khurda, Balasore, Angul, Khondraals and Dhanbad. He acted as an examiner at the annual examinations of the Bengal Veterinary College, and was on tour for 92 days in addition to the period spent on deputation at the Muktesar laboratory. VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. 10. The scheme for the opening of a veterinary college for this province was further discussed at a meeting of the Advisory Board, but it was decided to take no action for the present. The contribution to the Bengal Government, to meet the cost of educating students at the Bengal Veterinary College is very large, but it is undoubtedly lower than the upkeep of a col- lege could ever be. In my opinion, however, the Istandard of teaching in this institution is still capable of improvement. 11. Eighteen candidates joined the college during the year as compared with eleven in 1922-23. Their educational qualifications were fairly satisfactory. Thirteen boys were granted stipends by local bodies, two by Government, and the remainder were admitted as private students. 12. At the end of the year, there were 44 students from this province on the roster, against 39 in 1922-23, and of these 23 were Hindus, 16 Muhammadans, 4 Indian Christians and 1 Animist. According to nationality, there were 27 Biharis, 9 Bengalis, 3 Oriyas and 5 Chota Nagpuris. 13. The following table shows the results of the annual examinations of the students from Bihar and Orissa :4 14. During the year, a science graduate of the Benares University was selected by Government as a State scholar, and sent to the United Kingdom for training. He is studying at the Royal Veterinary College, London. 15. Assistant Director, Rai Sahib P. N. Das, joined the class for the training of Provincial Service Officers intended for promotion to the Imperial Service, held at the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, Muktesar, and returned in December. It is intended to depute the Assistant Director of the North Bihar Range, Babu Nilmani Chattarji, for a shorter course during the next year. 16. Captain G. G. Howard also went through a short course for Indian Veterinary Service Officers at the above laboratory, and returned to duty in July. 17. I wish to bring to the notice of Government the advantage of these courses for all officers who should be encouraged to take them as frequently as possible. They are invaluable for subordinate officers. TABLE II. TREATMENT OP DISEASE. 18. The attached map shows the distribution of contagious livestock diseases in the province. 19. It is satisfactory to be able to state that the year was not marked by any virulent or widespread outbreaks of any of the fatal diseases. The districts where heavy mortality was recorded, are Gaya, Ranchi, Hazaribagh, Manbhum and Palamau ; but even in these, the outbreaks were not of a severe type, and in consequence the death-rate was low. Outbreaks of foot and mouth disease, however, appeared to be fairly widely distributed, and caused a larger number of deaths as compared with the previous year. Altogether 5,712 outbreaks were brought to notice asainst 6,452 and 4,876 reported during the year 1922-23 and 1921-22 respectively. The usual preventive measures, with inoculation wherever possible, were adopted and in most cases the diseases were brought under control without experiencing any great difficulty. 20. As observed in the report for 1922-23, arrangements have been made with the Inspector-General of Police for the
5 introduction of a regular system of rewards to chaukidars for the prompt reporting of outbreaks, and for helping the staff during inoculation work. It is hoped that this system will further stimulate notification of disease, and so help to reduce the losses incurred by stock owners. 21. A sum of Rs. 10,000 was voted by the Legislative Council, to inaugurate the scheme for increasing the number of touring veterinary assistant surgeons from one to two for each subdivision. It now depends upon the public spirit shown by local bodies whether they will take advantage of the scheme and make it a success. The need of additional district staff is yearly becoming more observable, and it is hoped that as time goes on and their usefulness becomes demonstrated, increas- ing numbers of veterinary assistant surgeons will be employed by Government, by local bodies, and by co-operative societies. 22. Including 78,433 cases of foot-and-mouth disease, altogether 122,896 animals were affected, and of these, 20,267 died, as compared with 140,257 attacks and 30,737 deaths recorded in the year 1922-23. The total number of outbreaks attended by veterinary assistant surgeons was 4,249, against 4,506 in the previous year. EQUINE. 23. Glanders.6 28. The outbreaks in other districts deserving mention are those in the Colgong thana of the Bhagalpur district; and in Jamui subdivision of the Monghyr district. Although outbreaks occurred in the North Bihar and Orissa Banges, they do not need special notice. 29. Altogether 37,642 cattle were affected in 2,459 outbreaks, and of these-14,574 died, as compared with 54,617 attacks and 22,365 deaths in the year 1922-23. 30. Foot-and-mouth disease.7 35. Other contagious diseases.8 outbreaks as compared with 42,729 in the year 1922-23, the largest number 5,486 being done in Champaran, while 4,911 and 4,465 were immunized in Bhagalpur and Manbhum respectively. Only 8 inoculated cattle died. Forty-five cattle were protected against this disease by vaccine in Shahabad. 41. Anthrax.9 to be recovered for products received from the Muktesar labora- tory during the period under report. This figure includes also the value of 116,440 doses in hand on 31st March 1924. 44. The attention of Government is drawn to the large balances outstanding at the end of the period now under report, and the preceding year. District boards budget a certain sum as being sufficient to cover the cost of the average amount of serum used. When, however, a widespread outbreak occurs their funds are not sufficiently elastic to meet this extra expen- diture, and so it cannot be met. Tbe expansion of the subordi- nate staff also throws additional financial responsibilities on these local bodies, with the result that considerable sums must be set aside to meet the cost of the extra serum which the addi- tional staff requires. In some cases district boards have directed veterinary assistant surgeons not to order extra serum without permission, thereby causing considerable delay, and loss to cattle owners who are, after all, the persons who keep the boards going. 45. Suppression of contagious diseases should be a provincial charge. There appears to be no solid reasons why one district should spend considerable sums in suppressing outbreaks when others on the border may not have to pay out a farthing. For example, Champaran, which has a very small income from road cess and other sources, spent Rs. 12,760 on sera, a sum which it can ill-afford to spare from its roads and other public works. The same remarks apply to Purnea, Ranchi, Palamau and the Orissa districts. 46. Government should meet the cost, as is done in Madras, the Punjab, the Central Provinces, the United Provinces and Bombay, and to this end proposals are being placed before the Development Board for opinion. The cost during 1925-20 is estimated to be about one lakh of rupees. TABLE IV. NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED. 47. Including the veterinary assistant surgeons in charge of the hospitals at Ranchi, Palamau, Dumka and Begusarai, seventy-four assistants were employed on touring duty against seventy in 1922-23. Five new posts were created, viz., at Khagaria for the north Gangetic area of the sadr subdivision of Monghyr, at Warisaliganj in Nawada subdivision, at Gaya sadr (second additional), and at Ramgarh and Dhanwar in Hazaribagh. Of these, the posts at Khagaria, Ramgarh and Dhanwar were
10 filled during the year, and the others in 1924-25. The district boards bear the full cost of these assistants. The district board of Balasore propose employing an additional touring assistant for the sadr subdivision with headquarters at Soro. The district board, Cuttack, have also agreed to bear half the cost of establish- ment and contingencies of an assistant for the Government estate, Banki, provided the remaining expenses are met by Govern- ment; but the proposal was not approved by the Board of Revenue for want of funds in the Government Estates Improve- ment budget. This post is an important one and should be sanctioned as soon as funds permit. A second touring assistant for Bargarh with headquarters at Padampur is also necessary, as this part of the subdivision lies on the borders of the Central Provinces and is a constant source of infection. As the Road Committee, Santal Parganas, was unable to provide funds for additional touring assistants, Government have agreed to bear the full cost of an assistant for the Pakaur subdivision. The post will be sanctioned from the 1st April 1924. Additional assist- ants are urgently required for the sadr subdivision of Patna; the sadr and Banka subdivisions of Bhagalpur ; the Jamui subdivision of Monghyr ; Manbhum sadr; Simdega in Ranchi, and for Puri sadr. 48. It is satisfactory to be able to record that the scheme for the extension of the subordinate veterinary service referred to in the annual report for 1922-23 has now been introduced. This is a very great advance for the Department, as it shows that the efforts made in the past, in spite of much opposition, have been appreciated, and that the future is for the present assured. The scheme will mean that there will now be two touring veterinary assistant surgeons in each subdivision instead of one, and that in consequence greater attention will be given to the reporting and treatment of disease. By the scheme the number of touring veterinary assistant surgeons will be raised from 63 to 126. Local bodies will have to pay half the cost of pay and allowances of each assistant at the existing rates of contribution. Those bodies which have already employed more than one touring assistant at full cost for a subdivision will be given remission of half the contribution in respect of the second assistant. Ten additional posts have been provided for in the budget for the year 1924-25. It is hoped that the local bodies which have not yet been able to appoint additional staff for want of encouragement, will now find it easier to do so. It is a duty they owe the raiyat, who is the source from which all revenues spring.
11 49. Sixty-three thousand three hundred and thirty fresh cases including castrations were treated by veterinary assistant surgeons on tour and at headquarters, as compared with 81,818 in the year 1922-23. Of these, 16,378 were treated by the staff in North Bihar and 29,714 in the Orissa Range. Foot and mouth disease was responsible for the large increase in the latter. The total decrease of 18,488 cases is mainly attributable to the satisfactory climatic conditions prevailing throughout the period, and to a smaller number of foot-and-mouth disease cases. Thirty-two thousand nine hundred and thirty-five villages were visited against 25,730 in 1922-23. TABLE V. HOSPITALS. 50. A new hospital at Samastipur was opened, bringing the total number to 27 against 26 in the previous year. The new hospitals built at Dumka and Chaibassa remained in charge of the local touring assistants. A stationary assistant for the former with the necessary menial staff has recently been sanctioned at full cost to Government, as it is not possible for the Road Committee to contribute towards its maintenance. The post will be filled during 1924-25. No proposal has yet been received from the Singhbhum district board for a stationary veterinary assistant for Chaibassa. During the year, the Dinapur hospital was completed and made over, but the Patna district board has not yet applied for sanction for the post of stationary assistant. This district board has had several schemes for building hospitals under consideration, but up to date it has not been found possible to start them for want of funds. 51. In North Bihar, the question of appointing a stationary assistant for the Begusarai hospital, and also of opening a hospital at Bagaha is under consideration. The new hospital at Madhu- bani has not yet been completed. At Gopalgunj a site was selected, but the proposal for building a hospital did not materialize owing to lack of funds. 52. In Orissa, owing to the inability of the district board to meet the entire cost, Government have sanctioned a grant of Rs. 12,000 towards the cost of constructing a new hospital at Puri. An estimate amounting to Rs. 17,079 has been approved, and it is expected the work will be completed during 1924-25. Owing to an unfortunate misunderstanding over the payment of contributions by the Cuttack municipality to the district board,
12 the latter decided to close the hospital at Cuttack with effect from the 1st March 1921. The matter was referred to Government for decision, but no orders have yet been issued. This is one of the oldest institutions in the province and is very popular among the residents of the town. 53. Thirty thousand two hundred and eighty fresh patients were treated against 80,410 in 1922-23. Of these 14,774 were attended in North Bihar, and 8,495 at seven hospitals in Orissa. The remainder were treated in the central range. 54. Nine hundred and nine castrations were performed, and 3,979 cases not brought to the hospitals, were supplied with medicines, as compared with 676 and 6,663 respectively in 1922-23. TABLE VIII. BREEDING OPERATIONS. 55. Breeding operations having been transferred to the Agriculture Department, this subject needs no special comment in the present report. Fifty-two stud bulls were maintained in the districts against 55 in 1922-23, three having died13 were sent to the Mohant of Kumbhia; 2 animals died of hemorrhagic septicaemia, and 2 of black-quarter after vaccination. There were therefore 198 animals at the close of the year consisting of 1 bull, 4 buffalo bulls, 71 bullocks, 27 cows, 64 male calves and 31 female calves. 61. Efforts are being directed towards collecting a number of deshi Montgomery crosses which will form the basis on which future work will be developed at Sepaya. 62. The upkeep of the farm amounted to Us. 23,277 against Us. 32,458 in the previous year. Receipts from different heads amounted to Rs. 9,377 against Rs. 8,259 during 1922-23. TABLES X, XI AND XII. (BLANK.) TABLES XIII AND XIV. FAIRS AND SHOWS. 63. The particulars of the principal fairs and shows are given in the above tables. At the Sonepur fair, an elephant at a cost of Rs. 4,150 was purchased for the Madras police. The Deputy Director, North Bihar Range, and myself visited this fair. The former also visited the Sitamarhi fair in connection with the purchase of bullocks for the Purnea demonstration farm. Rai Sahib P. N. Das visited the Bihta show. The other important fairs and shows wore attended by the inspectors and local veterinary assistant surgeons. The price of cattle, especi- ally milch cows and work bullocks, still continues high. Twenty thousand three hundred and thirteen cattle were booked by the Bengal and North-Western Railway to different stations in Eastern Bengal and Assam, during the year. PROVINCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. 64. Assistant Director, Rai Sahib P. N. Das, resumed his duties on 31st December 1923, after finishing his course at the Muktesar laboratory, and went on leave for one month and a half from the 2nd January 1924. No substitute was appointed in his place. The post of Assistant Director, North Bihar Range, was sanctioned permanently from the 1st September 1923, Babu Nilraani Chattarji being confirmed from the same date. It is proposed to depute this officer to Muktesar for a special course
14 of training early in the year] 924-25. During the period he was in charge, the Rai Sahib carried out his duties with his usual zeal and thoroughness. TABLE VII. SUBORDINATE ESTABLISHMENT. 65. The number of veterinary inspectors was raised from 10 to 11, by the appointment of one additional inspector for the North Bihar Range where there are now four inspectors, the Central and Orissa Ranges having four and three respectively. Staff veterinary assistant, Babu R. K. Ram, was appointed a fourth grade inspector on Rs. 100 per mensem. 66. The six staff assistants were allotted at the rate of two to each range while the 12 posts of reserve assistants were distributed at 4 to each range. Five staff assistants were employed during the year and four veterinary assistant surgeons were on the reserve list on 31st March 1924. 67. As regards the staff employed in districts, there were 98 veterinary assistant surgeons on the roll on 1st April 1923 including the assistant employed by the Bettiah Raj. During the year 12 new graduates joined the department making the total number 110. Out of these, five were appointed to the staff, four acted as leave reserve, one was on deputation as Khedda officer in Angul, two were dismissed and one removed. There were accordingly 97 assistants employed in the districts at the end of the year Of these, 23 including the Bettiah Raj assistant were employed in hospitals, and 74 on touring duty. 68. On 31st March 1924, the subordinate staff of the North Bihar Range consisted of 4 inspectors, 2 staff, 2 reserve and 32 district veterinary assistant surgeons (10 in charge of hospitals and 22 touring). One laboratory assistant was appointed from the 1st May 1923. The Orissa Range opened with a subordinate staff of 32 officers consisting of 3 inspectors, 2 staff, 2 reserve and 25 district veterinary assistant surgeons of whom 5 were in charge of hospitals and 20 were on touring duty. A laboratory assistant will soon be appointed to this range. 69. The following officers are commended for good work :15 Hospital veterinary assistant surgeons.16 of many cattle, it is the cause of serious financial loss, owing to its effects on their usefulness. Some cases were sent the laboratory at Muktesar at the request of the Director, who also was good enough to visit Patna in March last, in connection with this and other diseases. Experiments are now being carried out both at Muktesar and at the veterinary hospital, Patna, into the aetiology-and treatment of the disease. So far tartar emetic gives the most satisfactory results. 72. Two hundred and fifty-three specimens were examined at the Muzaffarpur laboratory, positive results being shown in 44 ins- tances. Seventy-seven post-mortem specimens were also examined and preserved in the museum. This is a satisfactory record. 73. A laboratory will be opened for the Orissa Kange at Cuttack on the 1st April. GENERAL REMARKS. 74. The draft of the new manual has now gone through the press and is waiting for the final approval of Government. 75. No subject of very great interest came to notice during the year. One event however happened, which is of considerable importance to the department and that is, the voting of funds to increase the personnel in the districts. This will have far-reach- ing effects on the efficiency of the officers, as it will reduce the area under the control of each veterinary assistant and so bring him into more intimate contact with the rural population. In this respect Bihar and Orissa is more far-sighted than Great Britain; for the British Parliament, declined to furnish funds to bring to a conclusion important experiments which were being conducted in respect of the cause of foot and mouth disease and the methods by which it so mysteriously spreads to widely separated areas. As a result, the present epidemic between August 1923 and April 1924 has cost the Government over £3,000,000 or Rs. 450,00,000 and it is not yet under control. This huge expenditure is a signal warning of the necessity of providing in time for an efficient staff and the means of carrying out research. It is one of the ways by which the raiyat can be directly benefited from the taxes he pays. To members of the Legislative Council who may read this report, the thanks of the department are offered. At the same time it is hoped that they will keep in mind that funds must be provided each year to meet expansion which should proceed, not with a rush, but steadily, and in proportion as the scientific help given
17 by the department is appreciated. Through no better channel can they help Indian agriculture. No improvement can possibly be inaugurated unless cattle are protected against the ravages of disease. 76. The investigations into tuberculosis mentioned in last year's report were carried out in the Dinapur and Patna slaugh- terhouses, but with negative results. Several hundreds of cattle and buffaloes were examined. These will be continued next year, as well as the enquiries, previously mentioned, into the existence of nasal granuloma and the method of treatment. 77. It was not possible to send students for post-graduate training to Madras owing to a shortage of reserve officers. 78. The work of the staff has been good on the whole and my thanks are due to the members for the manner in which they have carried out their duties, in particular Rai Sahib P. N. ])as, who is as full of energy as ever; Babu B. K. Ram and the labora- tory assistant, Babu P. Panda; the head assistant, Babu Digbijoy Boy Choudhuri and the staff under him. D. QUINLAN, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director, Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orrisa,
TABLE II.
ii TABLE II. Slowing number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals during the year 1923-24.. District. Equines. Bovines Others. Remarks, Glanders. Anthrax. Sarra. Douriuo. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hemorrhagic Septicxmia. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other contagi- ous dicoases. Total. Rabies in dogs. Tetanus. Fowl Cholera. Babies in donkey Ovine Septic- æmia. Total. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 1. Patna ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... 6 909 363 260 ... ... 81 1,012 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,436 ... 203 ... ... 10 2,668 4 ... ... ... ... 4 3. Sliahabad ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 316 6 148 ... 27 6 602 6 ... ... ... ... 6 4. Saran ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 543 ... 177 16 ... ... 736 6 ... ... ... ... 6 5. Champaran ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 633 1 180 5 1 ... 830 4 ... ... ... ... 4 6. Mazapur ... ... ... ... ... 8 8 17 ... 104 27 ... ... 148 0 ... ... ... ... 9 7. Darbianga ... ... ... ... ... ... 36 ... 260 6 ... ... 302 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 8. Moaghyr ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 638 ... 120 ... 14 ... 772 4 4 10 ... ... 18 9. Bhagalpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 401 2 263 ... 10 ... 766 3 ... ... ... ... 3 10. Purnea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 362 ... 72 ... ... ... 424 ... ... ... ... ... ... 11. Santal Pargonas ... ... ... ... ... ... 618 ... 107 15 29 ... 772 ... ... ... ... ... ...
iii 13. Cuttack ...... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 142 750 ... 3 ... 895 ... ... ... ... ... ... 13. Balasore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91 43 433 ... ... ... 567 ... ... ... ... ... ... 14. Angul ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 923 31 13 18 ... ... 985 ... ... ... ... ... ... 15. Puri ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 221 10 ... 1 236 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16. Sambalpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 456 9 50 1 ... ... 515 ... ... ... ... ... ... 17. Hazaribagh. ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 908 15 224 ... 26 2 1,175 8 ... ... ... ... 3 18. Ranchi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,561 87 734 ... ... ... 2,382 11 ... ... ... ... 11 19. Palamau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 687 143 ... ... ... 68 898 ... ... ... ... ... ... 29. Manbhum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 393 2 167 ... ... 8 569 5 1 2 1 ... 9 21. Singhbhum ... ... ... 22 ... ... 22 166 1 8 ... 1 10 486 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 1 1 25 ... 5 32 13,473 570 5,915 81 117 289 20,445 64 13 2 1 ... 80
iv TABLE III. Statement showing results of preventive inoculation during the year 1924-25. District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out, Method of inocula- tion followed, Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertakes. Number of animals which died uninocu- lated in course of outbreaks. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inoca latcd animals which died of the disease. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Patna Binderpost " Serum Alone" 82 ... 164 ... ... 3,583 ... ... 3 .. Gaya 134 ... 762 ... ... 19,898 ... ... 79 ... Shahabad ... 61 ... 295 ... ... 6,838 ... ... 9 .. Saran ... ... 103 ... ... 644 ... ... 8 ... Champaran ... 33 ... 179 ... ... 3,967 ... ... 22 ... Muzaffarpur ... 26 ... 412 ... ... 4,418 ... ... 14 .. Darbbanga ... 18 ... 136 ... ... 2,603 ... ... ... ... Monghyr ... 30 ... 310 ... ... 6,676 ... ... 6 ... Bhagalpur 47 ... 222 ... ... 6,476 ... ... 6 ... Purnca ... 33 ... 890 ... ... 7,073 ... 6 ... Santal Par- ganas. 81 ... 206 ... ... 7,378 ... ... 9 ... Cattack ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Balasore 4 ... 70 ... ... 426 ... ... 12 ... Augul 14 ... 372 ... ... 6,247 ... ... 112 ... Pari ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sambalpur ... 30 ... 139 ... ... 3.028 ... ... ... ... Hazaribagh ... 60 ... 361 ... ... 19,861 ... ... 36 ... Ranchi 41 ... 476 ... ... 4,703 ... ... 30 ... Manbhum ... 50 ... 181 ... ... 6,337 ... ... ... ... Palamau ... 41 ... 242 ... ... 4,626 ... ... 47 ... Binghbhum ... 27 ... 247 ... ... 6,690 ... ... 8 ... Total... 704 ... 5,344 ... ... 106,368 ... 400 ... Patna ... Hæmor- rhagio Beptic- mia. H. S. Serum. . 32 ... 314 ... ... 4,468 ... ... 6 ... Gaya 9 ... 68 ... ... 1.615 ... ... 1 .. Shahabad ... 4 ... 35 ... .... 626 ... ... 2 .. Saran ... 14 ... 89 ... ... 1,342 ... ... 1 ... Champaran ... 43 ... 136 ... ... 61,70 ... ... 6 ... Muzaffarpur ... 16 ... 101 ... ... 4,003 ... ... 2 ... Darbhanga ... 42 ... 228 ... ... 11,380 ... ... ... ... Monghyr ... 14 ... 76 ... ... 2,270 ... ... 2 .. Bhagalpur ... 10 ... 96 ... ... 3,248 ... ... 6 ...
V TABLE IIIvi Showing the number of animals treated and castrated by Veterinary Assistants on tour during 1924-25. Province. (Name of hospital or dispensary.) Number of villages visited. Number of Veterinary Assistants employed. Castrations per- formed Treated for contagious diseases. Treated for non-contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1. Patna (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Vacant. 2. Patna ... 462 1 ... ... ... ... ... 150 ... 150 30 338 25 393 543 3. Dinaporo 180 1 9 ... 1 10 ... 5 ... 5 8 49 2 59 ... 4. Barh 455 1 1 2 1 4 ... 130 2 132 130 401 61 592 728 5. Bihar ... 657 1 3 1 4 8 ... 53 ... 53 163 361 107 631 692 6. Gaya (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Gaya 459 1 3 ... 1 4 ... 438 ... 436 11 66 ... 77 519 8. Gaya (Additional Touring) ... 229 1 2 ... ... 2 ... 640 ... 640 6 9 8 23 665 9. Sherghati (Gaya) ... 309 1 4 ... ... 4 ... 41 ... 41 186 625 3 814 859 10. Jahanabad 411 1 4 3 ... 7 ... 51 ... 51 223 405 66 694 752 11. Jahanabad (2nd Touring) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... 12. Nawada 338 1 2 ... ... ... ... 816 ... 816 145 365 34 544 1,362
vii 13. Warsaliganj 318 1 3 10 ... 13 1 442 ... 443 67 331 4 402 858 14. Aurangabad ... ... 285 1 32 ... ... 32 ... 226 ... 226 169 278 34 481 739 15. Daudnagar 349 1 6 2 1 9 ... 268 ... 268 89 25S 10 352 629 16. Arrah (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17. Arrah ... 198 1 ... ... 2 2 ... 56 ... 56 3 14 3 20 78 18. Baxar 324 1 1 4 6 11 ... 37 6 43 100 562 77 739 793 19. Barahpur (2nd Touring, Buxar) 364 1 ... 4 14 18 22 4 ... 26 3 384 33 420 464 20. Sasaram 204 1 7 1 6 14 ... 115 ... 115 84 686 78 848 977 21. Bhabua 186 1 11 ... ... 11 2 365 ... 367 65 637 4 706 1,084 22. Chapra (Hospital)... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23. Chapra ... 765 1 ... 2 4 6 ... 51 10 61 134 545 54 733 800 24. Siwan (Hospital) ... 19 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25. Siwan 675 1 ... ... ... ... ... 58 ... 58 203 463 26 692 750 26. Gopalganj 910 1 ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... 9 240 775 66 1,081 1,090 27. Motihari (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28. Motihari 1,012 1 ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... 12 232 740 1 973 985 29. Dhaka(2nd Touring, Motihari) 938 1 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 264 628 90 982 985 30. Bettiah Estate (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31. Bettiah 803 1 ... 13 ... 13 ... 125 ... 125 260 781 77 1,118 1,256 32. Bagaha (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33. Bagaha 903 1 1 ... ... 1 6 63 6 75 184 773 42 999 1,075 34. Muzaffarpur (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35. Muzaffarpur 587 1 2 ... ... 2 ... 41 ... 41 104 479 16 599 642
viii TABLE IVcontd. Showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veterinary assistants on tour during 1924-25ix 48. Samastipur 710 1 ... 1 1 2 ... 59 ... 59 12 477 22 511 572 Closed. 49. Monghyr (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50. Monghyr 421 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 101 ... 101 29 178 17 224 326 51. Khagaria 468 1 ... 14 ... 14 ... 4 ... 4 101 1,129 30 1,260 1,278 52. Beguserai 540 1 ... ... ... ... ... 432 ... 432 30 185 10 225 657 53. Jamui 231 1 ... 1 ... 1 9 669 9 687 113 581 69 763 1,451 54. Bhagalpur (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55. Bhagalpur 406 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 152 ... 152 10 132 8 150 303 56. Banka 463 1 ... ... ... ... ... 80 ... 80 41 214 32 307 387 57. Madhipura 271 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 96 1,040 13 1,149 l,49 58. Sapaul (Hospital) ... 252 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 3 62 ... 65 67 59. Supaul 431 1 1 4 5 10 ... 17 ... 17 120 263 65 448 475 60. Purnea (Hospital)... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61. Pnrnea 459 1 7 ... ... 7 ... 14 ... 14 33 347 3 383 404 62. Katihar 284 1 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 39 188 23 255 256 63. Araria 641 1 4 ... 3 7 ... ... ... ... 293 480 93 872 879 64. Kishanganj 452 i 9 ... ... 9 ... 22 ... 22 172 317 44 533 564 65. Dumka (Government Hospital). ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66. Dumka 366 1 ... ... ... ... .. 313 3 316 25 229 33 287 603 67. Sahebganj 343 1 ... ... 3 3 ... 124 ... 124 106 440 122 668 795 68 Pakur (Government Disper. sary) 206 1 ... ... ... ... ... 242 ... 242 12 110 30 152 394 69. Deoghar 343 1 ... ... 2 2 2 301 4 307 181 174 54 409 718 70. Cut ack (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71. Cuttack 396 1 1 3 ... 4 ... 4,139 ... 4,139 23 229 39 291 4,434
TABLE IVxi 84. Bargarh (Hospital) 312 1 ... ... ... ... ... 193 ... 193 ... 38 ... 38 231 Vacant. 85. Bargarh 370 1 ... ... ... ...... ... 392 2 394 11 559 17 587 981 86. Hazaribagh (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87. Hazaribagh 584 1 1 ... ... ... ... 322 ... 322 10 210 4 224 547 88. Koderma 459 1 ... ... ... ... ... 100 ... 100 111 309 111 531 631 89. Ramgarh 386 1 ... ... 3 3 ... 79 ... 79 86 321 62 469- 551 90. Chatra 255 1 ... ... ... ... ... 117 ... 117 140 347 44 531 648 91. Chatra (2nd touring) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92. Giridih 584 1 8 ... 1 9 3 1,214 13 1,230 93 392 101 586 3,825 93. Dhanwar 196 1 2 ... 5 7 ... 198 ... 198 25 277 10 312 517 84. Ranchi (Hospital)... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 95. Ranchi 255 1 ... ... ... ... ... 178 ... 178 26 235 8 269 447 96. Gumla 458 1 ... ... ... ... ... 477 ... 477 16 117 6 139 616 97. Khunti 501 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1,323 19 1,347 45 351 20 416 1,763 98. Daltonganj 294 1 6 ... ... 6 ... 434 ... 434 47 52 6 105 545 99. Daltonganj (2nd touring) 375 1 ... ... 2 2 ... 135 ... 135 39 47 7 93 230 100. Latehar 314 1 1 4 ... 5 ... 405 1 406 104 270 16 390 801 101. Purulia (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 102. Purulia 178 1 ... ... ... ... ... 36 ... 36 ... 276 ... 276 312 103. Purulia (2nd touring) 34o 1 ... 3 1 4 ... 234 ... 234 11 377 9 397 635 104. Dhanbad (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 105. Dhanbad 703 1 ... ... 1 1 ... 69 ... 69 159 538 68 765 835 106. Dhanbad (2nd touring) 132 1 ... ... ... ... ... 138 ... 138 ... 193 ... 193 331 107. Chaibassa 261 1 ... ... ... ... ... 279 ... 279 13 936 176 1,125 1,404 108. Chaibassa (2nd touring) 263 1 ... ... ... ... ... 48 ... 48 3 116 5 124 172 109. Ghatsila 433 1 1 ... ... 1 4 313 52 369 6 457 12 475 845 Total 35,381 104 142 126 102 370 49 27,315 127 27,491 6,353 33,353 3,326 43,032 70,893
xii TABLE V. Showing number of animals treated and castrated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries during the year 1924-25. District. ( Name of hospital.) Number of Veterinary Hos- pitals. Number of Veterinary Assist- ants employed. Nnmber of In-patients treated during the year. Number of Out-patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated, during the year. Total number of oases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Rs. Rs. 1. Purulia ... 1 1 12 32 23 67 83 492 265 840 907 67 ... ... ... ... 274 4,612 2. Chapra ... 1 1 61 75 13 149 414 820 499 1,723 1,882 250 5 ... 5 10 206 2,220 3. Muzaffarpur 1 1 99 72 04 265 363 522 540 1,425 1,690 48 12 5 7 24 1,288 4,245 4. Monghyr 1 1 20 38 30 88 96 319 625 1,040 1,128 ... 2 2 10 14 805 2,666 5. Purnea ... 1 1 42 21 35 98 237 240 146 623 721 461 5 ... 4 9 543 2,223 6. Sitamarhi 1 1 41 50 19 110 186 624 223 1,033 1,143 8 2 ... 5 7 240 1,759 7. Dumka (Government hospital). 1 1 10 19 11 40 57 378 99 534 574 4 ... ... 2 2 31 1,279 8. Banchi* ... 1 1 34 28 29 91 343 540 523 1,406 1,497 151 4 3 27 34 1,241 1,813 9, Baukipur... 1 1 63 35 14 112 445 886 904 2,235 2,347 ... 2 8 5 15 481 1,790 10. Laheriaserai 1 1 44 47 5 96 93 477 175 745 841 36 10 ... ... 10 380 2,829
xiii 11. Gaya 1 1 81 113 77 271 377 941 625 1,943 2,214 294 10 2 15 27 734 4,051 12. Balasore 1 1 1 36 5 42 14 796 335 1,145 1,187 88 ... 17 54 71 180 2,097 13. Sambalpur 1 1 23 53 24 100 103 1,270 227 1,600 1,700 824 1 5 2 8 773 3,341 14. Bargarh ... 1 1 3 41 2 46 18 1,583 54 1,655 1,701 25 ... 2 ... 2 64 1,081 15. Arrah ... 1 1 17 86 5 108 102 449 402 953 1,061 53 2 2 34 38 352 2,976 16. Hazaribagh 1 1 13 20 9 42 121 752 213 1,086 1,128 213 3 7 8 18 322 1,585 17. Bhagalpur 1 1 38 81 23 142 239 494 345 1,078 1,220 32 2 16 3 21 2,009 2,152 18. Cattack xiv TABLE VII. Showing total strength of subordinate staff employed during the year 1924-25. Province. How employed. Whether paid from Provincial or Local fund. Training staff. Veterinary Inspec- tors. Subordinate staff not included in previous columns. Veterinary Assistant Surgeons. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Bihar and Orissa ... .... In Schools and Colleges Provincial ... ... ... ... ... In Hospitals 1. Provincial ... ... ... ... 23 23 2. Local (under Private Estates). ... ... ... 1 1 On other works 1. Provincial... ... 11 6 86 103 2. Local ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 11 6* 110XV TABLE VIII. Return of stud bulls for the year 1924-25. District. Property of Government. Property of Local Bodies. Number on 1st April 1924. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31 st March 1925. Number on 1st April 1924. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1026. Number. Average price paid. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 ... ... ... Rs. ... ... ... ... Rs: ... ... 1. Patna ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... .... ... 1 3, Shahabad ... ... ... .... ... ... 20 ... ..... (a) 2 18 4. Saran. ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... .... (b)l 1 5. Champaran... ... .... ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... 3* 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... 5 1 125 (e)1 5TABLE IX. Showing main, results of the wcrking of Provincial Cattle Farm during the year 1924-25. Province. Name of farm. Receipts. Expenditure. Valuation of stock, gmin and fodder remaining at olose of year as detailed on next page. Remarks. Sale of animals. Sale of produce. Other heads. Total. Salaries of estab- lishment. Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- penses. Purchase of ani- mals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Foddor. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Bettiah Estate... Bettiah Raj Cattle Breeding Farm. 1,115 ... ... 1,116 1,080 10,515 ... ... 1,694 13,189 6,350 ... 800 7,160 2. Sopaya Farm ... Sepaya Farm 624 301 14,633 15,648 6,026 2,994 7,635 ... 6,889 23,543 8,642 275 500 9,417 Total 1,739 801 14,633 16,763 7,105 13,509 7,635 ... 8,483 36,732 14,992 275 1,300 16,667 Note-Sec next page for details of stock in band at close.
xvii Valuation statement of cattle, grain and fodder in hand at close of the year 1924-25. Number or quantity. Deseription. Rate. Value. Remarks. No. Quantity. 1 2 3 4 6 6 Mds. BETTIAH FARM. Cattle. Kg. Rs. 1 ... Bull 600 600 25 ... COWS ... ... 75 1,875 6 ... Male stock, 2 years old 180 900 6 ... Do. 1 year old 80 480 7 ... Do. calves ... ... 60 420 9 ... Female stock, 2 years old ... 80 720 0 ... Do. 1 year old 60 640 11 ... Do. calves ... 40 440 8 ... Buffalo bulls ... 125 375 76 ... Total ... 6,350 Grain and fodder. Rs. a. p. Grain Hay ... 1,600 Kirby, etc. 0 8 0 800 1,600 Total 800 Mds. SEPAYA FARM. Rs. Rs. 1 ... Bull Montgomery ... 300 300 1 ... Do. Cross-bred 100 100 25 ... Cows 40 1,000 29 ... Male stock, 1 year old and above 40 1,160 13 .... Do. calves 20 260 29 ... Female stock, 1 year old and above 20 580 6 ... Do. calves 12 72 : 6 ... Buffalo bull calves ... ... 75 450 69 ... Working bullocks ... ... 80 4,720 169 ... Total ... 8,642 Grain and fodder. Rs . a. p. 77 Grain Various 275 Hay 1,000 Silage 0 8 0 500 1,077 Total ... 775 245 2,677 GRAND TOTAL ... 16,567
xviii TABLE X. Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies for the year 1924-25. Details. Horse and Pony stallions under Local Bodies. Donkey stallions under Local Bodies. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Coantry-bred. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Blank
xix TABLE XI. Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies during 1924-25. Horse, pony or donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average number of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Tear under report. Previ- ous year. Tear under report. Previous year. Tear under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Blank. TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions during the year 1924-25. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. Province. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Blank.
XX TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1924-25. Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of horse fairsand shows held. Total number of animals present. Total number competing for prizes. Total number of horses stock (not including branded mares) present. Total number of animale Bold. Prizes awarded. Amount sanctionad by Government of India. Remarks. Year under report. Previous yew. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. from Imperial Funds, From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds, From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 16 16 17 18 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Bihta ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Barahpur 2 8,307 3,174 ... ... ... 3,197 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3. Khagra ... 1 3,650 2,516 20 12 ... 600 2,000 ... ... 40 40 40 ... ... 4. Sonepur 1 6,700 8,938 ... ... ... ... 2,719 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5, Singheswarthan 1 260 450 ... ... ... 100 125 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6. Dharamganj ... 1 1,600 ... 26 ... ... 160 410 ... ... ... ... ... 30 ... ... 7. Hardi 1 3,000 1,500 ... 2,160 ... ... ... ... ... ... 8. Madhuban ... 1 300 300 ... 150 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9. Bettiah Dasehra 1 1,140 1,030 ... 231 ... ... ... ... ... ... 10. Biswabhusunda 1 1,000 5,600 ... ... 1,000 500 ... ... ... ... ... 11. Purnea city ... 1 106 15 ... 60 30 ... ... 487 487 30 ... ... Total ... 11 20,053 3,48r 60 12 ... 1,810 11,522 ... 527 627 100 ...
XXI TABLE XIV.
xxii TABLE Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Number of stock present. Average price Bulls. Bollocks. Cows. Young stock Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks, 1 2 3 4 5 0 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. Rs, 1. Sitamarhi ... 1 ... 16,000 ... 4,000 ... ... 12,000 ... 150 each 8. Khagra ... 1 16 16,000 140 2,000 1,150 600 700 1,326 30 to 80 each 25 to 200 each 32 8. Chatra 1 3.000 1,000 2,000 1,800 4. Bihta 1 3 5.000 110 30 110 ... 7 ... 60 6, Sonepur ... 1 5 16,376 1.073 667 1,015 53 648 ... 10 to 350 each 6. Barahpur, ., ... 2 ... 15,946 1,662 3,363 2,838 ... 3,307 ... 25 to 375 7. Dharamganj 1 6,600 660 1,600 1,300 : ... ... 75 to 180 each 200 8. Biswabhusand ... 1 3,000 600 500 1,000. 9. Loalong ... ... 1 ... 2,000 800 3,000 600 ... 600 ... 35 10. Chanderdohl ... 1 ... 4.000 600 1,400 2,000 ... 20 to 140 each 11. Madhuban. ... 1 6,600 600 ... .... 35 to 150 each 12. Bettiah Dasehra 1 ... 12,000 ... 2,200 ... ... ... ... 50 to 200 each 18. Bafiganj ... 1 ... 5,000 500 300 200 ... ... ... 40 14. Siugheswarthan ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 200 ... ... 15. Motipur ... ... 1 ... 10,280 ... ... ... ... ... 100 each 10. Hardi 1 ... 20,000 .... ... ... ... 25 ... 100 each 17. Tirhut Show ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18. Bhairo-asthan ... 1 ... 13,000 2,000 ... ... 100 to 125 each 45 19. Deokund ... 1 6,000 800 2,000 800 600 20. Furnea city ... 20 2,000 300 1,000 200 ... ... 70 each Total 34 158,602 7,535 25,460 12,913 553 19,412 ... ...
xxiii XIV. shows held during the year 1924-25. of animal gold. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Prizes awarded. Number of medals awarded Remarks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provineisl Funds, From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. ... 800 25 150 250 400 Rs. 255 only was actually awarded. 30 to 100 each 35 to 150 each 90 to 200 each 32,500 160 ... 153 152 23 40 ... 1,000 ... ... ... 30 60 ... 19 ... 126 ... 123 20 to 300 each 50 to 425 each i00 to 240 each ... ... ... 40 to 175 40 to 200 ... ... ... ... 36 to 80 to 200 each ... 175 ... 190 200 390 Rs. 282 only was actually awarded. 125 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... SO 45 ... 5.000 ... ... ... 20 to 80 each 40 to 180 each ... ... 38 ... ... 100 100 ... ... ... ... 500 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 25 900 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,023 - ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,720 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Not held. ... ... 1,202 ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 30 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36 each 46 each 118 80 200 100 100 400 ... ... 46,663 487 TABLE XIV (A) Statement showing the expenditure of the Civil Veterinary Department during the year 1921-25 in the province of Bihar and Orissa. Heads of Account. Amount. Total. Imperial. Provincial. Local. 1 2 3 4 5 Superintendence Rs. Rs. 96,798 a. 0 p. 0 Rs. a. p. Rs. 96,798 a. 0 p. 0 Veterinary Instruction ... 1,419 0 0 9,351 6 0 10,770 6 0 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 35,888 0 0 62,879 10 6 98,767 10 6 Hospitals and dispensaries ... 1,33,022 0 0 1,88,525 13 6 8,21,547 18 6 Prizes ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... 2,916 0 0 2,916 0 0 B reeding operations ... 6,891 0 3 6,891 0 3 Total ... 2,67,127 0 0 2,70,563 14,3 5,37,690 14 3 B. & O. G. P. (C. V. D.) no. 8-280-21-U-1925No. 2714.D. GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA. EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. DEVELOPMENT BRANCH. RESOLUTION. The 11 th December 1925. READ2 for post-graduate courses, which, as the Director points out, are essential if the efficiency of the department is to be main- tained. Government consider that the indirect benefits from the establishment of a college and the engagement of more highly qualified veterinary officers for purposes of teaching, will justify the extra expense, while it is hoped that if the college is located in the province a sufficient number of students will offer themselves for training. The college laboratories will also provide opportunities for research, which, as the Director insists, is very much needed. Govern- ment trust, therefore, that this scheme will commend itself to the public. At present it is necessary to send officers for post-graduate training to Muktesar or Madras. The expanse of this is very great and very few officers can be deputed. 4. Treatment of disease.3 agree to bear the cost of serum for inoculations throughout the province, they have now undertaken to help the poorer district boards in cases of severe outbreaks, which have involved them in exceptionally heavy expenditure. In accordance with this decision a special grant of Rs. 5,760 was made last year to the Champaran district board. 6. Government appreciate the efficiency and keenness with which Mr. Quinlan has administered the department, and they note his commendations of other officers of the department. There can be no doubt that the department has in no sense yet reached its limit of usefulness indeed, it might almost be said, that only a beginning has been made. Much still remains to be done, and it is earnestly hoped that local bodies and all concerned will grasp the importance of the subject and ensure a more rapid rate of progress. ORDER.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1924-25 PATNA: SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1925.
PRICED PUBLICATIONS OF THE GOVERN- MENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA CAN BE HAD FROMNo. 6672-V.D, FROM D. QUINLAN, Esq., M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., DIRECTOR, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT AND VETERINARY ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA. To The SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. Dated Patna the 21st October, 1925. SIR, I have the honour to submit herewith, in duplicate, the Annual Report of the Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa, for the year 1924-25. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, D. QUINLAN, M.R.C.V., I.V.S., Director Civil Veterinary Department and Veterinary Adviser to the Government of Bihar and Orissa.
MAXIMUM LIMITREFERENCES Head QuartersANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1924-25. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION, 1. The posts of Director and Veterinary Adviser to Govern- ment as well as Deputy Director of the Central Range were in my charge throughout the year. Capt. P. B. Riley directed the North Bihar Range up to the 23th March, 1925, from which date he proceeded on eight months' leave. Capt. G. G. Howard acted as Deputy Director of the Orissa Range till 22nd March, and then took over charge of the North Bihar Range, being relieved at Cuttack by Assistant Director, Rai Sahib P. N. Das. 2. The following hospitals and dispensaries were inspected during the course of the ordinary tours :2 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 4. Capt. Riley held charge of this Range, except for the last three days of March. During this period, he inspected all hospitals and dispensaries ; visited the agricultural and cattle breeding farms at Pusa, Sipaya and Bettiah ; attended a meeting of the Divisional Development Board, and the Congress of the Bihar and Orissa Co-operative Federation, and acted as a member of the board of examiners at the Bengal Veterinary College He was deputed to Muktesar to study " nasal granuloma " and some other diseases which were under investigation at the time. During his absence Rai Sahib P. N. Das officiated, and inspected the hospitals and dispensaries, at Hajipur, Chapra, Sewan, Gopalganj, Bagaha, Bettiah and Motihari. He also attended a meeting of the Divisional Development Board, and some of the more important fairs and shows. 5. The office, laboratory and quarters for the laboratory assistant and reserve assistants were completed and taken over on the 1st April 1925. The residence for the Deputy Director is under construction and will be completed during 1925-26. This Range has now been in operation for four years and marked progress is evident in every direction. ORISSA RANGE. 6. Capt. Howard held charge of the Orissa Range up to the 22nd March 1925, when he proceeded to Muzaffarpur to act as Deputy Director, North Bihar Range. Assistant Director Rai Sahib P. N. Das relieved him. The following veterinary hospitals or dispensaries were inspected :3 8. From the statistics it will appear that marked improvement has taken place in the general work of this Range during the period under report; district boards have sanctioned more veteri- nary assistants ; inspection of slaughter houses has been accepted, and a wider field altogether has been opened to the activities of the department. It is satisfactory to note that the work of the staff is becoming more and more appreciated as the number of inoculations and the patients treated will testify. With the establishment of a properly equipped laboratory, and an increase of staff, it is hoped that veterinary relief in this neglected part of the province will develop considerably from now onwards. VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. 9. The question of establishing a veterinary college at Patna was again brought up for discussion, and it has now been decided that fresh proposals should be put forward for the approval of the Development Board. A research station as well as the dairy farm will also form a part of this scheme. I advocate the establishment of the college on these lines, and on this scale, because practical demonstration of the methods of breeding, rearing and feeding cattle is of the first importance for the train- ing of the assistants. Similarly, the research station is necessary. This scheme is under preparation. 10. Attention is again directed to the contribution payable by this Government towards the upkeep of the Bengal Veterinary College. For the year 1925-26, it will amount to about Rs. 82,000. Under the existing arrangement of a per capita charge, it would appear that expenditure will go up indefinitely with the decrease in the number of students admitted to the college from Bengal, and provinces other than Bihar and Orissa, and this fact should be borne in mind by Government. The standard of instruction is certainly not better than it was and in my opinion unless the staff can be considerably strengthened, the time has come to build a new college at Patna. I prefer the latter course because of the possibility of attaching a dairy farm to it. 11. I wish again to bring to notice the way in which the intro- duction of scientific treatment of live-stock is handicapped through the want of facilities for post-graduate and refresher courses, and for the teaching of bacteriology and pathology in general. These subjects are of the first importance in the prevention and treatment of disease. The courses mentioned are absolutely essential for all officers, and until they can be put through them
4 the public will not be getting as good a service as it is entitled to, for the money spent. To carry out this work efficiently a laboratory of suitable size is essential. A reference to this will be found in a later paragraph. 12. In respect of students admitted to the Bengal Veterinary College, twenty-three joined during the year against eighteen in 1923-24. Of these, one left and two were removed. Educa- tional qualifications were on the whole satisfactory. Fourteen were matriculates. Ten boys were awarded stipends from local bodies, two from Government and the remaining eight joined as private students. 13. At the end of the year there were 68 students on the roll compared with 44 in 1923-24; of this number, 28 were Hindus, 25 Muhammadans and 5 Indian Christians; and according to nationality, 40 were Biharis, 8 Bengalis, 4 Oriyas and 6 Chota Nagpuris. 14. The results of the aanual examinations are shown in the following table:5 16. The Assistant Director, Babu Nilmoni Chattarji, went through a special course of training for six months at the Im- perial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and returned to duty in December 1924. His work was well spoken of by the Director of the institute. Two officers of the subordinate service, viz., the laboratory assistant, Patna, and the inspector, Patna circle, also received instruction at the above institute for two and six months respectively; while a veterinary assistant surgeon attended the post-graduate training class at the Madras Veterinary College for nine months. As already stated, Capt. Riley was deputed to the institute for one month and two days. 17. Eight veterinary assistant surgeons passed at the half- yearly professional examinations during the year, and were duly promoted to higher grades. TABLE II. TREATMENT OF DISEASE, 18. The attached map shows the distribution of contagious livestock diseases in the province. From a reference, it will appear that diseases were reported in all districts, but as in the previous year, the outbreaks generally were not very severe except in Patna, Bhagalpur, Purnea, Cuttack, Puri, Angul, Ranchi and Palamau. The mortality was high in Gaya, Shahabad, Santal Parganas, Monghyr and Hazaribagh, but the outbreaks were sporadic and did not call for extra assis- tance. Foot and mouth disease was, as usual, widespread. In Patna, Darbhanga, Cuttack, Balasore and Puri, hæmorrhagic septicæmia was the cause of considerable loss. Parasitic diseases were very prevalent on account of the long rainy season, and in consequence large numbers of animals died in the Patna and Bhagalpur divisions. 19. Six thousand, five hundred and eighteen outbreaks were reported during the year, as compared with 5,712 in 1923-24 and 6,452 in 1922-23. The increase is due mainly to foot and mouth disease of which there were 78,725 cases. Including the above, 121,066 animals were affected, and of these 20,445 died, against 122,896 attacks and 20,267 deaths recorded in the previous year. Four thousand, eight hundred and seventy- seven outbreaks were attended, against 4,249 in the previous year.
6 20. There is still urgent need for additional touring assistants in all districts, and it is satisfactory to be able to note, that many district boards took advantage of the terms offered by Government under the scheme for the extension of the subordi- nate veterinary service, with the result that eight new posts were sanctioned. EQUINE. 21. Glanders7 27. Thirty-four thousand, one hundred and ninety-three cattle were affected in 2,230 outbreaks, and of this number, 13,473 died in comparison with 37,642 attacks, and 14,574 deaths in the year 1923-24. One thousand, nine hundred and seventy-five outbreaks were attended. 28. Foot and Mouth disease.8 33. Other contagious diseases.9 suspicion about inoculation has been a very up-hill task, but it is a matter of congratulation that the veterinary assistant surgeons have been able to change the public attitude consider- ably. Not only is inoculation more often taken without demur but assistance is more spontaneously sought for by the villagers in many places.'' Details of the work carried out in each district are shown in Table III. 37. Rinderpest.10 41. Supply of sera and vaccines.11 officer in charge of the hospital at Dumka where a stationary- assistant has now been appointed. In accordance with the scheme for the extension of the subordinate veterinary service 8 posts of second touring veterinary assistants were sanctioned; those at Soro (Balasore), Dhanbad, Chaibassa, Madhubani (Dar- bhanga) and Pakur (Government) being filled, while the remain- ing, viz., Jahanabad, Sitamarhi and Chatra remained vacant. Assistants for the new subdivision of Latehar, for Sira- dega and for Bihar and Patna Sadr, were also sanctioned from April, 1925. The post of third touring assistant for Gaya Sadr which was sanctioned in 1923-24 was filled. 44. Though the scheme recently sanctioned offers greater facilities to local bodies for the employment of additional touring veterinary assistants, a large number of district boards have not yet been able to take full advantage of it on financial grounds, one of the reasons being the cost of serum which in some instances has proved a heavy drain on their resources. Govern- ment have so far given relief to the boards to the extent of half the average cost of pay and allowances in the case of each touring assistant surgeon, but the boards are required to bear all the other expenses which includes, in addition to pay and allowances of the assistant, the cost of buildings, instruments, drugs, furniture, pay of menials, etc., and the cost of serum. In spite of these difficul- ties the scheme has been accepted willingly as eight new posts were sanctioned out of ten provided for in the budget. It is hoped that those district boards which failed to set aside funds in 1925-28 will see their way to take advantage of Government's offer at the earliest opportunity, as it is only by the appointment of touring officers that contagious diseases can be effectively kept under control, and that the greatest number of livestock owners can be reached. 45. The proposal for the appointment of a second touring assistant for Bargarh Government estate with Padampur as head- quarters was not approved, but the posts at Pakur and Simdega at full cost to Government were sanctioned. The district boards of Bhagalpur and Monghyr have agreed to appoint assistants for the sadr subdivision, but the local bodies in Manbhum and Puri were unable to provide any funds for similar appointments, although they are very badly needed. 46. Seventy thousand, eight hundred and ninety-three fresh cases including castrations were treated by the touring assis- tants in the mufassal and at headquarters as compared with
12 63,330 in 1923-24. Of these, 17,832 and 29,973 cases including castrations were treated by the staff in the North Bihar and Orissa Range respectively. The increase in the total number of cases was due partly to the increase in staff and partly to foot and mouth disease. Thirty-five thousand, five hundred and eighty-one villages were visited against 32,935 in 1923-24. This number includes 14,840 villages Visited by the staff in North Bihar and 8,812 in Orissa, compared with 13,931 and 8,472, respectively in 1923-24. TABLE V. HOSPITALS. 47. The number of hospitals increased from 27 to 29 by the opening of new buildings at Madhubani and Bagaha in North Bihar. The hospitals at Ranchi, Palamau, Begusarai and Dinapur remained in charge of touring veterinary assistant surgeons as already noted. A veterinary assistant for the Begusarai hospital has not yet been sanctioned. Propo- sals for the opening of other hospitals in the North Bihar Range did not materialise owing to financial difficulties of the local bodies concerned. In Orissa owing to an unfortunate dispute between the Cuttack District Board and Muni- cipality, the hospital had to close down to the great incon- venience of the people. Government were appealed to for aid but refused to take over the management. A grant of Rs. 12,000 was made by Government towards the building of a veterinary hospital at Puri. The work is in progress and will be completed early in 1925-26. A grant of Rs. 11,915 has also been sanc- tioned for the reconstruction of the veterinary hospital at Ranchi on condition that the balance of Rs. 5,957 is raised by the district board by public subscriptions. This amount could not be collected but the Board have agreed to meet it jointly with the municipality from their budget for 1926-27. 48. Thirty-six thousand, one hundred and seventeen fresh patients were treated against 30,280 in 1923-24. In addition, 1,061 castrations were performed and medicines were supplied for 6,199 cases not brought to the hospitals.
13 TABLE VIII. BREEDING OPERATIONS. 49. It is pleasant to be able to state that interest in the im- provement of cattle is being shown by all local bodies and to meet the wishes of the people, a committee was formed which will go into this question, and obtain locally the opinions of the persons most interested in the industry. There is not the least doubt in my mind that there is a great future for it in this province, for the market exists and the demand for good bullocks and more especially for milch cows is rapidly increasing in Bengal, and for the latter class in Calcutta, and in the industrial areas. About four thousand, five hundred maunds of milk are required daily in Calcutta alone, and the amount necessary to meet requirements in other industrial areas is also very large14 TABLE IX. CATTLE FARMS. 63. Bettiah Raj Cattle Farm.15 Samastipur and Sonepur District Traffic Offices to different; places in Bengal and Assam, via Katihar, Barauni Junction and Sonepur during the year. These figures give a very good indication of the place which the bullocks bred in this province occupies in agricultural development in those provinces, and of the need for meeting the demand for better cattle by the establishment of breeding farms, and of Government fostering the industry by every means in its power. PROVINCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. 59. Rai Sahib P. N. Das acted as Assistant Director at Patna until the 22nd March when he took over charge of the Orissa Range. He inspected soma hospitals and dispensaries, attended several meetings of the Divisional Development Board and District Boards. He discharged his duties efficiently and energe- tically. 60. Babu Nilmoni Chattarji, Assistant Director, North Bihar Range, was deputed to Muktesar for a special course of training for six months, and on his return was granted leave for four month3 and nine days from the 2nd January 1925. No substi- tute was appointed in his place. His work while at Muktesar was commented on favourably by the Director of the Institute. TABLE VII. SUBORDINATE ESTABLISHMENT. 61. The number of inspectors remained the same as in the previous year, i.e., four each in the North Bihar and Central ranges, and three in the Orissa Range. They were employed principally on inspection duty, and attending out- breaks and fairs and shows. Six were on leave for different periods. 62. Of the staff assistants, Maulavi Muhammad Quasim died; he was a promising officer ; another assistant, Babu D. Sahany, resigned and a third, Babu J. N. Mukharji was appointed laboratory assistant at Cuttack. 63 Three staff and five reserve assistant surgeons were attached to the range offices on 31st March 1925. 64 The staff employed in districts on the 1st April 1924, consisted of 101 veterinary assistant surgeons including the assis- tant employed by the Bettiah Raj. Six new graduates of the Bengal Veterinary College joined, three were recruited from
16 Madras and one from the Punjab, and one reverted from the Agriculture Department, making a total of 112. Of these, five acted as leave reserve, one was removed from service, one was promoted to a staff appointment and one was on long leave. There were accordingly 104 veterinary assistant surgeons in the districts at the end of the year. Twenty-four including the Bettiah Raj assistant were employed in hospitals and 80 on touring duty. 65. The following table shows the staff working in each range :17 Touring veterinary assistant surgeons.18 72. Accommodation for the laboratory the work in which is increasing rapidly, is causing considerable inconvenience, as the room which was suitable two years ago is now not large enough, for the work that is being done, or for any experiments being carried out. Suitable accommodation for experimental animals and for the attendants who must be present with them is also urgently needed. Plans for a research laboratory suitable for post- graduate training of the assistants are in preparation and will be put up with the plans and estimates for the college. The atten- tion of Government is drawn to the necessity of making provision for such training, because under existing conditions, the Bengal Veterinary college is unable to teach our students, and the best that can be done is to send two men a year to Madras; as the staff is increasing at the rate of ten a year it will be seen that post-graduate training for about 98 per cent, is out of the ques- tion. Twenty men a year at least should receive such training. Every officer, European and Indian, requires these eourses perio- dically, and in the interests of livestock owners, they should take them ; by doing so their value would be enormously increased. Similarly research is necessary to progress, but there is no means of carrying it out in any of the throe eastern provinces inspite of the enormous numbers of cattle in them and the monetary losses which result through failure to take proper and widespread preventive measures. There is not the least doubt that this province with proper organization and improve- ment of the milking capacity of its local cows, could easily supply the milk required in Calcutta and the coal-fields, but to fail to take precautions against preventible disease breaking out among the improved cattle through want of foresight in providing facili- ties for research would be a grave error of judgment, and in opposition to the practice adopted in all progressive countries. GENERAL REMARKS. 73. The Departmental Manual was published and distributed during the year and meets a long felt want. The work of the staff on the whole has been satisfactory and I take this opportu- nity of acknowledging the readiness with which it has carried out its duties The head office staff under Babu Digbijoy Roy Chowdhury worked satisfactorily. D. QUINLAN,M.R.C.V.S, I.V.S., Director, Civil Veletinary Department, Bihar and Orissa.
TABLE II.
TABLE II, Showing number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals during the year 1924-25, District, Equines. Bovines. Others. Remarks. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Deurine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic Septicaemia. Black-quartor. Anthrax. Other contagi- ous diseases. Total. Rabies in dogs. Fowl Cholera. Spirochaetosis in fowls. Canine Furra. Ovine Septi- cæmia. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 1. Patna ... ... 570 6 919 ... ' 83 1,528 6 ... ... ... 6 2. Gaya ... 1,942 58 273 ... 2,273 5 ... ... ... ... 5 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... 945 7 99 ... 0 4 1.0G4 7 ... ... ... ... 7 4. Saran ... ... 1 ... ... 1 22S 223 ... ... 4C1 3*' ... ... ... ... 3 *1 in cat. 5, Champaran 1 ... 1 368 6 200 ... 29 602 4 ... ... ... ... 4 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... 3 3 487 ... 279 33 2 801 4 ... ... ... ... 4 7. Darbhanga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 253 ... 474 19 ... 745 8* ... ... ,.. ... 9 *Includes 4 in jackals. 6. Mongnyr ... ... 721 1 196 ... 56 13 C87 ... ... ... ... 9. Bhagalpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... S36 6 35S ... ... 38 938 4 ... ... ... ... 4 10. Purnea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,041 112 ... ... ... 1,153 1 ... ... ... ... 1 11. Santal Parganas ... ... 1 ... 2 3 S99 11 183 ... 22 81 1,195 2 13 ... ... ... 14
iii 12. Cuttack ... ... ... ... ... 361 638 22 ... 1,011 9 ... ... ... ... 9 13. Balasore ... ... ... 2 340 ... ... 342 ... ... ... ... 14. Angul, ., ... 319 8 19 ... 346 ... 15. Puri ... 60 101 620 76 ... ... 847 ... ... ... ... ... 16. Sambalpur ... ... ... ... 456 3 148 4 7 1 618 ... ... ... 17. Hazaribagh ... ... 1,951 14 77 2 ... 2,044 3 ... ... 3 13. Ranchi ... 1,678 12 647 ... 2 7 2,346 7 ... 7 19. Palamau ... ... ... ... 1,056 13 11 9 7 1,096 ... ... 20. Manbhum ... ... ... ... 1,171 371 ... 1,642 3 ... ... 3 21. Singhbhum ... 846 ... 66 ... 13 913 4 ... ... ... 6 10 Total 3 4 12 19 14.674 876 4,820 176 99 83 22,627 62 4 10 2 6 84
iv TABLE III. Statement showing results of preventive inoculation during the year 1923-24, District Name of Disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inocula- tion followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninocu- lated in coarse of outbreaks. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inocu- lated animals . which died of the disease. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Bovines. Others. Equines. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Patna ... Rinderpest " Serum Alone". 51 441 ... 7,620 13 ... Gaya 161 758 ... 18,235 82 ... Shahabad ... 33 119 ... 4,921 ... 6 ... Saran 40 331 ... 4,891 ... 9 ... Champaran ... 87 360 ... 17,257 ... 64 ... Muzaffarpur ... 1 4 ... ... 250 ... Darbhanga ... 5 35 ... 577 ... Monghyr 28 187 2,813 27 ... Bhagalpur 64 264 6,892 20 Purnea 17 101 2,835 ... Santal Par- ganas. 50 372 ... 5,085 ... 49 Cuttack ... ... ... ... ... ... Balasore ... ... ... ... ... Angul 19 200 ... 3,873 74 ... Puri 6 S3 ... ... 625 ... ... Sambalpur ... 20 ... 282 2,747 ... 8 ... Hazaribagh ... 93 ... 634 9,775 32 ... Ranchi 37 376 ... 4,636 ... 6 Manbhum 37 247 ... 7,800 ... ... Palamau 28 848 ... 8,367 ... ... 68 Singhbhum ... 27 840 ... 4,482 ... 1 ... Total... 803 5,432 107,681 ... 459 Patna H. S. Serum. - 14 ... 59 1,155 2 ... Gaya 5 ... 23 927 Shahabad 13 ... 50 842 ... ... Saran Champaran ... Muzaffarpur ... Hæmo-rhagio Septicæ- mia. 11 28 15 ... 33 96 54 1,250 5,486 2,719 1 Darbhanga ... 23 ... 129 ... 3,006 ... Monghyr 7 ... 25 ... ... 1,556 ... Bhagalpur ... 34 ... 139 4,911 ... 1 ...
V TABLE IIITABLE IV. Showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veterinary assistants on tour during 1923-24. Province. (Name of hospital or dispensary.) Number of villages visited. Number of veterinary assistants employed. Castrations per- formed Treated for contagious diseases. Treated for non-contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Remarks, Equines. Bovines. Others Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1. Patna (Hospital) ... ... ... ... 2. Patna ... 469 1 1 ... 54 54 19 375 7 401 456 3. Dinaporo 310 1 1 19 19 8 89 2 49 69 4. Barh 417 3 ... 8 993 993 161 480 69 710 1,706 5. Bihar ... 507 1 4 3 8 46 46 155 287 113 555 609 6. Gaya (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Gaya 402 5 1 . 2 8 296 296 2 153 1 156 460 8. Gaya (Additional Touring) ... ... ... Vacant. 9. Sherghati (Gaya) ... 399 3 ... 3 7 38 45 173 386 21 580 628 10. Jahanabad 251 9 6 15 4 75 79 185 374 44 603 697 11. Nawada 430 1 1 328 328 120 368 34 522 851 12. Warsaligunj 118 2 ... 2 110 no 12 55 2 69 61
13. Aurangabad ... ... 393 1 33 2 3 38 200 20C 160 262 36 458 762 - 14. Daudnagar 437 1 15 ... 3 18 16G ... 166 90 193 14 297 481 16. Arrah(Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16. Arrah ... 177 1 ... ... 20 26 11 21 ... 32 58 17. Buxar 391 1 ... 7 7 ... 30 ... 30 83 479 76 638 675 18. Barahpur (2nd Touring, Buxar) 302 1 ... ... ... 37 302 1 340 340 19. Sasaram 135 1 5 ... 5 1 45 ... 46 102 530 124 756 807 20. Bhabua 217 1 6 1 7 104 104 84 474 15 513 624 21. Dumraon Raj ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Vacant. Abolished from 1st April 1934. 22. Chapra (Hospital) ... 1 ... 23. Chapra 981 1 80 ... 80 112 539 61 712 792 24. Siwan (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... | ... ... ... ... ... ... 25. Siwan. 754 1 36 36 223 514 11 748 784 26. Gopalganj 833 1 2 2 86 83 228 672 42 942 1,030 27. Motihari (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 28. Motihari 974 1 ... 178 ... 178 70 439 1 510 688 29. Motihari (2nd Touring) 980 1 36 ... 36 149 616 28 793 829 30. Bettiah Estate (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 31. Bettiah 739 1 ... 9 9 2 104 2 108 157 774 99 1,030 1,147 32. Bagaha... 1.055 1 53 ... 53 193 820 78 1,091 1,144 33. Muzaffarpur (Hospital) i ... ... ... ... ... ... 34. Muzaffarpur 618 1 3 ... 3 3 ... 3 75 420 8 503 509 35. Muzaffarpur (2nd Touring) ... 411 1 3 3 ... ... | ... | ... 41 323 3 367 870
TABLE IVix 45. Khagaria 250 1 1 9 ... 10 1 '" 56 56 86 617 6 708 774 49. Beguserai 399 1 ... ... 244 244 38 169 2 209 459 50. Jamui 231 1 ... ... | 55 4 59 140 446 40 (26 685 51. Bl:agnlpur (Hospital) 1 ... ... ... ... 52. Bhagalpur 450 1 1 1 123 123 3 175 178 302 53. Banka 443 1 4 4 50 50 73 243 44 362 416 54. Malhipura 330 1 1 5 6 ... ... 99 1,037 10 1,146 1,152 55. Supaul (Hospital) ... 206 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 56. Supaul 477 1 3 ... 3 59 59 109 215 34 358 420 57. Purnea (Hospital) 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 58. Puruea 351 1 ... 4 4 ... 37 37 53 303 14 370 411 59. Katihar 257 1 ... ... ... 5 5 55 224 30 309 314 60. Araria 615 1 4 2 6 25 ... 25 367 523 125 1,015 1,046 61. Kisharganj 289 1 4 ... 4 ... ... ... 229 348 53 630 634 C2. Dumka 219 1 ... 243 243 9 118 127 37Q 63. Sahebganj 232 1 2 2 4 551 551 72 378 142 592 1,147 64. Deoghar 258 1 2 1 i 2 5 ... 177 ... 177 142 226 83 451 633 65. Cuttack (Hospital) 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 66. Cuttack 489 1 4 ... 4 ... 6,048 9 6,057 13 552 22 587 6,648 67. Kendrapara 501 1 2 ... 2 4,044 4,044 12 710 74 736 4,842 68 Jajpur 296 1 ... 11 11 ... . 120 120 24 379 56 459 590 69. Balasore (Hospital) 1 ... ... ... 70. Balasore 433 1 ... 1 5 6 ... 1,180 1,180 13 109 21 143 1,329 Bhadrak 458 1 3 ... ... 3 730 ... 730 9 124' 11 144 877
x TABLE IVxi 84. Chatra ... 24S 1 ... 1 ... 27 ... 27 129 215 24 368 556 306 85. Giridih 495 1 ... ... 1 2 229 16 217 112 328 116 804 86. Dhanwar 265 ... 2 4 6 1 82 2 85 20 322 17 359 450 87. Ranchi (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 88. Ranchi 242 6 6 ... 214 214 40 292 2 334 551 89. Gumla 343 ... 1 ... 1 2 161 4 167 14 221 2 237 405 90. Khunti 408 139 7 196 60 389 26 475 671 91. Palamau 248 2 ... ... 2 ... 128 ... 128 47 76 1 124 254 92. Palamau (2nd touring) 393 ... 25 ... 25 215 182 40 437 462 93. Latehar (Khasmahal) 223 ... ... ... 97 97 173 294 30 497 594 94. Purulia (Hospital) 53 ... ... ... ... ... 95. Purulia 128 ... ... 5 5 165 1 166 171 96. Purulia (2nd Tourirg) 330 1 ... 2 3 164 164 6 57 63 230 97. Dhanbad (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93. Dhanbad 768 3 ... 3 ... 439 439 70 262 38 370 812 99. Singbhum 614 ... ... 10 10 ... 106 4 110 15 539 86 640 760 100. Ghatsila 530 1 265 1 267 14 637 22 673 940 Total 32,935 97 {128 85 111 324 20 22,993 50 23,063 5,966 31,286 2,691 | 39,943 63,330
xii TABLE V. Showing number of animals treated and castrated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries during the year 1923-24. District. (Name of hospital.) Number of Veterinary Hos- pitals. Number of Veterinary Assist- ants employed. Number of In-patients treated during the year. Number of Oat-patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup- plied with medicines but not broaght to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure Equines. Bovines. ? Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Rs. Rs. 1. Purulia ... 6 28 31 65 55 455 176 686 751 ... 1 1 ... 2 262 4,625 2. Chapra 40 80 9 129 312 770 402 1,514 1,613 215 2 11 13 458 1.881 3. Dumraon Raj 11. Laheria Sarai 1 86 39 12 87 118 370 167 655 742 23 8 1 1 3 12 332 1,994 12. Gaya 106 103 56 265 540 840 524 1,901 2,169 56 11 1 6 18 675 5.930 13. Balasore ... 4 26 13 43 13 891 199 1,106 1,149 74 1 10 24 35 194 2,198 14. Sambalpur 9 63 19 91 104 1,085 291 1,480 1,571 349 2 ... 2 771 4,790 15. Bargarh ... 8 29 ... 37 35 1,618 29 1,682 1,719 13 ... 3 ... 3 40 2,761 16. Arrah. 24 54 4 82 94 484 340 918 1,000 47 11 2 15 28 418 2,856 17. Hazaribagh. 19 15 12 46 110 810 128 1,048 1,094 205 1 4 5 537 1,376 18. Bhagalpur 48 97 25 170 191 372 332 895 1,065 7 7 2 16 1,937 3,284 19. Cuttack (b) 14 20 33 67 48 694 390 1,132 1,199 262 1 1 ... 2 179 1.873 20. Palamau*... ... 147 288 31 469 469 757 ... ... 64 4,588 21. Motihari ... 62 58 18 138 155 457 150 762 900 61 5 21 2 28 530 2,796 22. Bettiah Raj 102 75 9 186 910 1,992 835 3,737 3,923 1,254 7 134 311 452 ... 7.304 23. Begusarai* 30 45 1 76 193 379 28 600 676 200 4 4 ... 8 81 2,553 24. Supaul 31 43 8 82 119 677 287 1,083 1,165 28 3 14 137 154 218 1,612 25. Siwan 46 30 6 82 184 419 19S 801 883 13 5 ... 1 6 83 1,455 26. Hajipur ... 54 68 3 125 311 485 267 1,063 1,188 3 9 1 20 30 82 1,327 27. Dhanbad 29 37 74 140 50 351 124 525 665 2 1 ... 1 427 3,019 28. Samastipar 31 37 18 86 127 296 235 658 744 59 5 3 2 10 ... 1,572 29. Madhubani TABLE VII. Showing total strength of subordinate staff employed during the year 1923-24. Province. How employed. Whether paid from Provincial or Local fund. Training staff. Veterinary Inspec- tors. Subordinate staff not included in previous columns. Veterinary Assistant Surgeons. Total. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 ;' Bihar and Orissa ... ... In Schools and Colleges Provincial ... ... ... ... In Hospitals ... ... 1. Provincial ... ... ... ... 22 22 2. Local (under Private Estates). ... ... 1 1 On other works ... ...- 1. Provincial... ... 11 7 78 96 2. Local ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 11 7* 101XV TABLE VIII. Return of stud bulls for the year 1923-24. District. Property of Government. Property of Local Bodies. Balance remain* ing on 31st March 1024. Number on 1st April 1923. Obtained daring the year. Casual- tics during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1924. Number on 1st April 1923. Obtained daring the year. Casual- ties daring the year. Number Average Price paid. Number, Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. Rs. 1. Patna 3 ... (a)1 2 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 ... (b)2 20 4. Satan ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 5. Champaran... ... ... ... (c) 2 ... ... ... 2 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... 5 7. Darbhanga... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... 6 8. Monghyr ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 9. Bhagalpur... ... ... ... ... ... 30. Purnea ... ... ... ... 1 .. ... 1 11. Santal Par- ganas. ... ... ... ... ... ... ,. ... ... ... 12. Cuttack ... 1 2 ... (d)1 2 ... ... ... 13. Balasore ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 14. Angul 2 ... ... 2 ... ... ... 15. Puri ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16. Sambulpur ... 1 ... ... ... i ... ... ... 17. Hazaribagh ... (e)l ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 18. Ranchi ... ... ... ... ... ... 19. Palamau ... 2 ... ... (f) 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 20. Manbhum ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 21. Singhbhum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 6 3 ... 3 6 49 ... ... 3 46 (a) Died. (b) Died in the flood. (c) Includes one buffalo bull. (d) Rrjected as unserviceable. (e) Lent by Director of Agriculture in February 1934 for one year only, (f) Removed from the charge of Veterinary Assistant Surgeon.
xvi TABLE IX. Showing main results of the working of provincial cattle farm during the year 1923-24. Province Name of farm. Receipts. Expenditure. Valuation of stock, grain and fodder remaining at close of year as detailed on next page. Remarks. Sale of animals. Sale of produce. Other heads. Total. Salaries of estab- lishment. Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- penses. Purchase of ani- mals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Fodder. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Bihar and Orissa.. Bettiah 1,059 ... 1,053 1,080 14,43 8 ... ... 376 15,894 9,110 ... 1,080 10,190 Sepaya 725 341 6,311 8,311 9.377 7.276 1,639 6,419 45 7,878 23.277 13,632 280 1,805 15,717 Total 1,781 341 10,436 8,350 10,067 6,419 45 8,254 39,171 22,742 280 2,885 25,907 Note.xvii Valuation statement of cattle, grain and fodder in hand at close of ike year 1923-24. Number or quantity Description. Bate. Value. Remarks. No. Quantity. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Mds. BETTIAH FARM. Cattle. Rs. Rs. 2 ... Bulls 600 1,200 25 ... Cows 90 2,250 7 ... Male stock, 2 years old 180 1,260 20 ... Do. 1 year old 80 1,600 10 ... Do. calves 40 400 6 ... Female stock, 2 years old 80 400 11 ... Do. 1 year old 60 660 16 ... Do. calves 40 640 7 Buffaloes ... 100 700 103 ... Total ... 9,110 Grain and fodder. Rs. a. p. Grain Hay ... ... 2,160 Kirby, etc. 0 8 0 10S0 2,160 Totals 1,080 SEPAYA FARM. Mds. Cattle. Rs. Rs. 4 ... Buffalo Bull calves ... 75 300 1 Bull 300 300 27 Cows 50 1,350 41 Male stock, 2 years old 70 2,870 13 ... Do. 1 year old 30 890 8 ... Do. calves 20 160 11 ... Female stock, 2 years old 50 550 2 ... Montgomery Bull calves 150 800 9 ... Female stock, 1 to 2 years old ... 20 180 11 ... Do. calves ... 12 132 71 ... Bullocks ... 100 7,100 19S ... Total ... 13,632 Rs. a. p. Grain and fodder. 88 Grain ... ... ... various 280 306 Bhusa 0 12 0 230 3,150 Silage ... ... 0 8 0 1,575 3,544 Total ... 2,085 301 5,704 GRAND TOTAL ... 25,907
TABLE X. Return 0f horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies for the year 1923-24. Details. Horse and Pony stallions under Local Bodies. Donkey stallions under Local Bodies. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. xix TABLE XI. Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies during 1923-24. Horse, pony or donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 3l8t March. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average numb or of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Year under report. Previ- ous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Blank. TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions during the year 1923-24. Province. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Blank.
xx TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and stows held in non-selected districts during the year 1923-24. Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of horse (airs and shows held. Total number of animals present. Total number competing for prizes. Total number of horses stock (not including branded mares) present. Total number of animals sold. Prizes awarded. Amount sanctioned by Government of India. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year Year under report. Previous year Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds From Local Funds, From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Bihta ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Barahpur 2 3,174 3,404 ... ... 2,494 ... ... ... ... ... 3. Khagra 1 2,615 2,430 12 8 115 1,700 ... 55 66 40 ... ... 4. Sonepur 1 8/18 8,900 ... ... 8,918 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5. Singheswarthan 1 460 1,000 ... 450 250 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6. Dharamgunj ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Hardi 1 1,500 1,500 ... 1,500 700 ... ... ... 8. Madbuban ... 1 300 520 ... ... 300 155 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9, Bettiah Dasebra 1 1,030 1,000 ... 150 ... ... ... ... ... 10. Chandardohi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Fair not held. 11. Biswabhusunda 1 5,600 5,500 ... ... ... 600 1,230 ... ... ... ... 12, Motipur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto. Total ... 9 23,487 24,304 12 8 300 11,683 6,679 55 55 40 ...
xxi TABLE XIV.
xxii TABLE Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and Province (Name of fair or show.) Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Number of stock present. Average price Bolls. Bollocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bolls. Bollocks. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. Rs. 1. Sitamarhi ... 10,000 ... 4,000 ... ... 1,000 150 each 2. Khagra 200 15,000 160 500 1.200 600 l,350 25 to 70 each 55 80 to 176 each 3. Chatra 7 2.011 1,406 2,600 2,700 2,014 82 4. Bihta 5 2,600 200 800 1 160 65 76 6. Bonepur 6 30,730 1.010 ... 962 42 703 ... 50 to 300 each 6. Barahpur ... ... 14.071 3,604 6,259 2,667 75 to 800 7. Dharamganj ... 5,000 600 700 600 ... 60 to 150 each 70 8. Biswabhusanda 4,000 2,000 1,000 3,000 1,600 ... 9. Loalong 5,050 600 1,260 2,550 ... 600 86 10. Chanderdohi 500 5,400 440 1,000 3,600 ... 20 to 60 each 20 to 126 each 75 11. Madhuban 8,000 2,000 ... ... ... ... 190 each 12. Bettiah Dasehra ... 10,000 ... 4,000 ... 200 each 13. Rafiganj ..., .. ... 3,110 501 1,000 600 ... ... ... 26 14. Neazipur ... ... ... ... ... 16. Singheswarthan ... ... ... - ... ... ... ... 16. Motipur 1 13,000 ... 2 100 per pair. 17. Hardi 1 18,000 ... ... ... 70 each 18. Tirhut Show ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19. Bhairo asthan 1 14,000 ... 4,000 ... ... ... 200 each Total 17 777 1,67,872 12.410 26,609 17,770 643 7,327 ... ...
xxiii XIV. shows held during the year 1923-24. of animal Bold. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Prizes awarded. Number of medals awarded Remarks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. Amount realized in fees, From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. 13 13 14 16 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 33 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 400 18 150 250 400 25 to 90 ouch 30 to 100 each 90 160 each 18,000 189 ... 234 103 336 ... 23 40 ... 1,100 ... ... ... ... ... 46 60 ... 47 ... ... 140 ... 149 40 to 350 each 50 to 100 each 100 to 200 each ... ... ... ... 40 to 126 60 to 175 ... 1,360 ... ... ... 20 to 80 each 76 to 160 each ... 100 ... 190 200 390 40 40 ... ... ... ... 30 40 ... 6.000 ... ... ... 30 to 80 each 60 to 180 each ... ... 45 ... ... 100 100 ... ... ... ... 1,050 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 20 ... 1,089 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Not held. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto. ... ... ... 1,593 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, ... ... 476 ... ... ... ... ... ... 30,077 399 ... 150 823 402 1,375
TABLE XIV(A). Statement slowing the expenditure of tie Civil Veterinary Department during the year 1928-24 in the province of Bihar and Orissa. Heads of Account. Amount. Total. Imperial. Provincial. Local 1 2 3 4 5 Rs. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Superintendence ... 90,281 0 0 ... 90,281 0 0 Veterinary Instruction 49,444 0 0 6,560 14 0 56,004 14 0 Subordinate Establishment ... 38,387 0 0 58,855 4 6 97,192 4 6 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... 27,819 0 0 1,90,861 2 0 2,18,680 2 0 Prizes ... 825 0 0 ... 825 0 0 Fairs and Shows ... 2,690 0 0 2,690 0 0 Breeding Operation ... 6,546, 15 9 6,546 15 9 Total 2,06,706 0 0 2,65,514 4 8 4,72,220 4 8 B. & O. G.P. (C. V. D.) No. 15-350-24-9.1924No. 3081-D. GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA. EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. DEVELOPMENT BRANCH. RESOLUTION. The 8th December 1924. READ2 superior Veterinary Service. Government are glad to note the continued development of the scientific and research work of the department. Laboratories now exist at Patna and Muzaffarpur, and a third was opened for the Orissa range in April last. Government are anxious to encourage the interest of all the staff in the scientific side of their work, and are ready to depute the most promising members of the subordinate staff to special courses of training when- ever opportunity occurs. 4. Treatment of disease.3 on some of the poorer district boards, which are just those which often suffer most from outbreaks, and suggests that this expenditure should be made a provincial charge. This would involve Government in a recurring outlay of over one lakh, which they cannot undertake at present. Moreover in this province veterinary relief is one of the statutory obliga- tions of district boards, which they should discharge to the best of their ability. It is to be hoped, therefore, that in future no board will find it necessary to prevent the order- ing of serum without special sanction in each case, as any delay causes great loss to cattle-owners and makes it more and more difficult to control outbreaks which rapidly assume serious proportions. 6. Increase of staff.4 MEMO NO. 3082-85-D. The 8th December 1924. Director of Civil Veterinary Department Copy forwarded to the Director of the Agriculture, Bihar Local Sei:- overnment Department Finance department and Orissa, for information.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE TEAR 1924-25 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA: SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1925, [Price Re. 1 annas 4.]
TABLE II.
ii TABLE II. Showing number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals during the year 1922-23. District. Equines. Borines. Others. Remarks. Glanders. Anthrax. 8urra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hemorrhagic Septicemia. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other contagi- ous diseases. Total. Rabies in dogs. Tetanus in Goats. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 1. Patna ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 2,741 9 1,306 ... ... 1 4,067 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,440 7 550 ... 3 51 3,051 1 ... ... ... ... 1 3. Shababad ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 814 2 271 ... ... ... 1,087 9 ... ... ... ... 9 4. Saran ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 4 224 ... 155 25 ... 10 414 1 ... ... ... ... 1 5. Champaran ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 106 1 205 ... ... ... 312 - ... ... ... ... ... 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... 2 ... 3 5 41 3 490 26 ... 79 839 9 ... ... ... ... 9 7. Darbhanga ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 214 5 325 ... ... ... 544 3 ... ... ... ... 2 8. Monghyr ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 1,052 3 448 ... ... ... 1,501 2 1 ... ... ... 2 9. Bhagalpar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 883 6 382 ... 2 47 1,319 ... ... ... ... ... ... 10. Parnea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,392 41 76 ... ... ... 1,509 ... ... ... ... ... ... 11. Santal Parganas ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1,798 31 137 1 ... ... 1,967 5 ... ... ... ... 6
iii 12. Cuttack ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 156 63 914 46 16 ... 1,195 ... ... ... ... ... ,.. 13. Balasore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 14 139 ... ... ... 168 ... ... ... ... ... ... 14. Angul ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 20 ... ... ... 22 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16. Puri ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 849 44 283 ... ... ... 1,276 1 ... ... ... ... 1 16. Sambalpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 184 63 201 ... 47 22 617 ... ... ... ... ... ... 17. Hazaribagh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,917 3 136 ... 18 ... 3,074 4 ... ... ... ... 4 18. Ranchi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,471 57 847 ... 25 ... 2,400 5 ... ... ... ... 5 19. Palamau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 765 76 9 ... 26 ... 876 ... ... ... ... ... ... 20. Manbhum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,920 47 423 ... ... ... 4,390 3 ... ... ... ... 3 21. Singhbhum ... ... ... ... 13 ... ... 13 283 4 129 ... 1 2 419 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... 1 21 ... 6 28 22,365 480 7,444 98 138 212 30,737 45 1 ... ... ... 4
iv TABLE III. Statement showing results of preventive inoculation during the year 1922-23. District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inocula- tion followod. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninocu- lated in course of outbreaks. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inocu- lated animals which died of the disease. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Patna ... Rinderpest "Serum Alone" 62 ... 628 ... ... 7,104 ... ... 105 ... Gaya ... 152 ... 920 ... ... 20,230 ... ... 156 ... Shahabad ... 68 ... 281 ... 8,733 ... ... 17 ... Saran ... 16 ... 100 ... ... 1,689 ... ... 3 ... Champaran ... 15 ... 94 ... 1,746 ... ... 9 ... Muzaffarpur ... 3 ... 20 ... ... 276 ... ... 2 ... Darbhanga ... 16 ... 116 ... 2,466 ... ... 9 ... Monghyr ... 26 ... 230 ... 2,101 ... ... 14 ... Bhagalpur ... 33 ... 251 ... 4,524 ... ... ... ... Purnea ... 60 ... 523 ... 11,161 ... ... 11 ... Santal Par- ganas. 75 781 ... 8,031 ... ... 97 ... Cuttack ... 2 46 ... ... 230 ... ... 2 ... Balasore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Angul ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puri ... 23 267 ... ... 3,050 ... ... 17 ... Sambalpur ... 4 ... 13 ... 1,470 ... ... ... ... Hazaribagh ... 110 ... 624 ... 12,861 ... ... 61 ... Ranchi ... 35 247 ... 4,925 ... ... ... ... Manbhum ... 95 053 ... ... 17,669 ... ... 35 ... Palamau ... 22 244 ... 2,616 ... ... 20 ... Singhbhum ... 17 175 ... ... 2,309 ... ... 15 ... Total... 834 0,508 ... ... 113,100 ... ... 573 ... Patna Hæmor- rhagic Septicæ- mia. H. S. Serum. 27 ... 213 ... ... 2,741 ... ... 11 ... Gaya 23 ... 94 ... ... 3,278 ... ... 2 Shahabad 12 ... 41 ... 1,293 ... ... ... ... Saran 5 16 862 ... Champaran ... 28 ... 102 : 4,029 ... ... Muzaffarpur ... 32 241 8,373 4 Darbhanga ... 9 ... 63 ... ... 1,806 ... Monghyr 15 ... 87 ... ... 1,658 ... 3 Bhagalpur 22 161 ... 2,706 ... 6 ...
v TABLE IIITABLE IV. Showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veterinary assistants on tour during 1922-23. Province. (Name of hospital or dispensary.) Number of villages visited. Number of veterinary assistants employed. Castrations per- formed Treated for contagions diseases. Treated for non-contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1. Patna (Hospital) ... 4 1 ... ... 1 1 ... 611 ... 61 4 61 ... 65 127 2.'Patna ... 120 1 ... ... 2 2 ... 62 ... 62 12 88 3 103 167 3. Dinapore 375 1 5 ... 2 8 ... 1,622 ... 1,622 201 292 106 599 2,229 4. Barh 517 1 2 1 3 6 ... 78 13 91 337 521 126 984 1,081 5. Bihar ... 523 1 11 ... 8 19 ... 217 ... 217 119 183 76 378 614 6. Gaya (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Gaya 367 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 705 ... 705 6 23 1 30 736 8. Sherghati (Gaya) ... 319 1 5 ... ... 5 ... 12 ... 12 113 402 2 517 534 9. Jahanabad 346 1 7 4 ... 11 ... 278 ... 278 164 146 49 359 648 10. Nawada 453 1 2 ... 1 3 ... 109 ... 109 125 279 55 459 571 11. Aurangabad 482 1 20 ... ... 20 2 142 3 147 218 376 46 640 807 12. Daudnagar 205 1 8 ... 2 10 ... 16 ... 16 16 85 4 105 131
vii 13. Shahabad (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14. Arrah ... ... ... 293 1 2 ... ... 2 ... 305 ... 305 11 90 ... 101 408 15. Buxar ... ... 477 1 ... 1 3 4 ... 423 ... 423 108 472 63 643 1,070 16. Buxar (2nd Touring) ... 292 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 38 ... 38 31 149 7 187 226 17. Sasaram ... ... 251 1 4 ... 1 5 ... 230 1 231 74 377 55 506 742 18. Bhabua ... ... 319 1 1 2 ... 3 ... 182 ... 182 87 368 16 471 656 19. Dumraon Raj ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Vacant. 20. Chapra (Hospital) ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21. Chapra ... ... 581 1 ... ... ... ... ... 633 ... 633 49 292 12 353 986 22. Siwan (Hospital) ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23. Siwan ... ... 766 1 ... ... ... ... ... 270 ... 270 172 611 ... 783 1,053 24. Gopalganj ... ... 949 1 1 24 ... 25 ... 837 1 838 207 770 71 1,048 1,911 25. Motihari (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26. Motihari ... 475 1 ... ... ... ... ... 87 ... 87 85 487 31 603 690 27. Motihari (2nd Touring) ... 579 1 ... ... ... ... ... 155 ... 155 113 485 17 615 770 28. Bettiah Estate (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29. Bettiah ... ... 546 1 ... 28 ... 28 ... 379 ... 379 217 375 17 609 1,016 30. Ramnagar ... ... 818 1 4 ... ... 4 ... 52 ... 52 135 772 25 932 988 31. Muzaffarpur (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32. Muzaffarpur ... ... 480 1 5 ... ... 5 ... 346 ... 346 28 99 5 132 483 33. Muzaffarpur(2nd Touring) ... 387 1 5 ... ... 5 ... 75 ... 75 50 175 9 234 314 34. Sitamarhi (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35. Sitamarhi ... ... 344 1 ... ... ... ... ... 223 ... 223 59 230 55 344 567
viii. TABLE IVix 48. Bhagalpur (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49. Bhagalpur ... ... 227 1 3 ... ... 3 ... 204 ... 204 16 45 15 76 283 50. Banka ... ... 456 1 ... ... ... ... ... 63 1 64 72 355 26 453 517 51. Madhipura ... ... 269 1 1 ... 3 4 ... 381 ... 381 42 807 32 884 1,269 52. Sapaul (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53. Sapaul ... ... 379 1 ... ... ... ... ... 35 ... 35 47 271 12 330 365 54. Purnea (Hospital) ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55. Purnea ... ... 297 1 1 2 1 4 ... 292 2 294 64 161 44 269 567 56. Katihar (Purnea 2nd Touring). 516 1 ... 3 ... 3 10 260 14 284 97 381 44 522 809 57. Araria ... 222 1 4 ... ... 4 ... 74 ... 74 145 1,425 46 1,616 1,694 58. Kishanganj ... ... 283 1 4 ... 2 6 2 192 ... 194 83 361 8 452 652 59. Dumka ... ... 264 1 ... ... ... ... ... 487 ... 487 7 171 1 179 666 60. Sahebganj ... ... 142 1 1 1 2 ... 163 ... 163 89 445 115 649 814 61. Deoghar ... ... 383 1 ... ... ... ... ... 253 ... 253 172 110 38 320 573 62. Cuttack (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63. Cnttack ... ... 476 1 ... ... 6 6 ... 2,916 ... 2,916 20 345 34 899 3,321 64. Kendrapara ... ... 246 1 ... 2 8 10 ... 54 ... 54 21 410 101 532 596 65. Jajpur ... ... 356 1 ... ... 6 6 6 8,202 63 8,371 8 468 37 513 8,890 66. Balasore (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67. Balassore ... ... 350 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2,102 ... 2,102 12 202 8 222 2,324 68 Bhadrak ... ... 361 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 4,451 ... 4,451 8 1,636 87 1,731 6,183 69. Angul ... ... 546 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 2,561 ... 2,561 34 1,913 100 2,047 4,609 70. Khondmals ... ... 247 1 1 16 ... 17 ... 976 ... 976 35 1,502 117 1,654 2,647 71. Puri ... ... 356 1 2 ... ... 2 1,389 ... 1,389 77 299 102 478 1,869
x TABLE IVxi 84. Gum'a ... ... 464 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 292 ... 292 51 288 15 354 647 85. Khunti ... ... 240 1 ... ... ... ... ... 610 ... 610 45 216 21 282 8,2 86. Palamau ... ... 157 1 ... ... ... ... ... 107 ... 107 26 57 5 88 195 87. Palamau (2nd touring) ... 376 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 17 ... 17 135 251 47 433 451 88. Latehar Khasmahali ... ... 106 1 ... ... ... ... ... 205 ... 205 75 138 8 221 426 89. Purulia (Hospital) ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 90. Purulia... ... ... 549 2 1 ... 2 3 ... 454 ... 454 5 86 ... 91 548 91. Purulia (2nd Touring) ... 92. Dhanbad (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93. Dhanbad ... ... 667 1 ... ... ... ... ... 499 ... 449 56 194 19 269 768 94. Singhbhum ... ... 500 1 ... ... ... ... 4 897 7 908 13 410 110 533 1,441 95. Gharsila (Siughbhum 2nd Touring). 253 1 ... ... ... ... ... 428 ... 428 9 546 9 564 992 Total ... 25,730 92 110 96 64 270 25 47,898 122 48,045 4,807 26,274 2,422 33,503 81,818
xii TABLE V. Showing number of animals treated and castrated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries, during the year 1922-23. District. (Name of hospital). Number of Veterinary Hos- pitals. Number of Veterinary Assist ants employed. Numbcr of ln-patients treated during; the year. Number of Out-patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup* plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Rs. Rs. 1. Purulia ... ... 1 1 7 25 19 51 87 518 158 763 814 30 2 ... ... 2 341 2,322 2. Chapra ... ... 1 1 41 60 6 167 257 620 279 1,156 1,263 112 2 ... 4 6 230 2,196 3. Dumravan Raj ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4. Muzaffarpur ... 1 1 160 51 93 304 352 326 326 1,004 1,308 60 27 2 ... 29 2,652 4,871 5. Moughyr ... ... 1 1 37 39 24 100 163 602 533 1,298 1,398 ... 4 ... 3 7 1,527 4,318 6. Puraea ... ... 1 1 55 15 12 82 300 264 147 711 793 325 7 ... ... 7 1,361 3,414 7. Sitarmurhi ... ... 1 1 31 55 8 94 75 336 96 507 601 53 4 1 ... 5 275 1,366 8. Dumka ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 15 138 27 180 180 72 ... ... ... ... 246 12,981 9. Ranchi ... ... 1 1 34 41 70 145 328 827 525 1,680 1,825 245 4 2 5 11 974 1,601 10. Bankipur ... ... 1 1 46 15 10 71 446 743 607 1,796 1,867 47 4 1 7 12 482 1,632
xiii 11. Laheria Sarai ... 1 1 25 37 10 72 85 463 125 673 745 37 7 ... 4 11 314 2,040 12. Gaya ... ... 1 1 130 77 53 260 498 1,018 525 2,041 2,301 137 8 ... 1 9 752 4,838 13. Balasore ... ... 1 1 2 27 6 35 27 891 197 1,115 1,150 78 ... 7 3 10 169 2,114 14. Sambalpur ... ... 1 1 8 46 3 57 33 563 153 749 806 750 ... ... ... 255 2,497 15. Bargarh ... ... 1 1 3 27 1 31 25 1,086 31 1,142 1,173 68 ... 1 ... 1 39 805 16. Arrah ... ... 1 1 36 78 11 125 86 797 336 1,219 1,344 127 6 3 6 15 263 2,270 17. Hazaribagh ... 1 1 12 16 22 50 121 754 137 1,012 1,062 728 3 4 2 9 730 1,550 13. Bhagalpur ... . 1 1 26 91 24 141 234 460 290 984 1,125 25 2 7 ... 9 1,516 2,532 19. Cuttack ... ... 1 1 31 50 38 119 71 710 391 1,172 1,291 322 2 ... 1 3 359 1,972 20. Palamau ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 99 250 31 380 380 1,203 2 ... ... 2 205 6,543 21. Motihari ... ... 1 1 36 53 39 128 224 355 153 732 860 71 2 ... 3 5 541 5,321 22. Beltiah Raj ... 1 1 77 71 9 157 856 2,036 741 3,633 3,790 1,469 9 130 255 394 ... 5,255 23. Begusarai ... 1 1 15 31 2 48 113 310 21 444 492 100 ... ... 5 5 34 2,416 24. Supaul ... ... 1 1 29 54 11 94 127 1,324 207 1,658 1,752 352 12 92 104 103 1,796 25. Siwan ... ... 1 1 31 40 78 78 116 223 88 427 505 96 3 ... ... 3 105 1,964 26. Hajipur ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 246 364 191 804 884 16 8 ... 7 15 ... 935 27. Dhanbad ... 1 1 46 31 84 161 56 458 106 620 781 140 2 ... ... 2 380 1,317 23. Samastipur xiv TABLE VII. Showing total strength of subordinate staff employed during the year 1922-23. Province. How employed. Whether paid from Provincial or Local fund. Training staff. Veterinary Inspec- tors. Subordinate staff not veterinary included in Assistants Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Bihar and Orissa ... ... In Schools and Colleges ... Provincial ... ... ... ... ... In Hospitals 1. Provincial ... ... ... ... 21 21 2. Local (under Private Patates). ... ... ... 1 1 On other works 1. Provincial ... ... 10 4 76 90 2. Local ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 10 4* 98xv TABLE VIII. Rrturn of stud bull for the year 1922-23. District. Property of Government. Property of Local Bodies, Number on 1st April 922. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31 st March 1923. Number on 1st April 1922. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1923. Number. Average price paid. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. Rs. 1. Patna ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... ... ... (a)22 ... ... ... 22 4. Saran ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 5. Champaran ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 1 ... (b) 1 5 7. Daibhanga... ... ... ... ... ... 6 135 each. ... 6 8. Monghyr ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... (c) 1 1 9. Bhagalpur... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10. Purnea 1 ... ... ... 1 11. Santal Par- ganas. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12. Cuttack ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 13. Balasoreb ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 160 each. (d) 1 3 14. Angul ... 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 15. Puri ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16. Sambalpur ... ... (e) 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 17. Hazaribagh ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 18. Ranchi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19. Palmau ... 2 ... ... ... 2 l ... ... ... 1 20. Manbhum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 250 ... 1 21. Singhbhum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 5 1 ... ... 6 40 12 495 3 49 (a) Inclueds two buffalo bulls not preriously shown. (b) Returned to Betttah Raj. (c) Returned to Sepaya Farm as unserviceable. (d) Died. (e) Transferred form Kanke Farm. (f) Khaenshal bulls. Now placed in charge of Veterinary Assistant Surgeon.
xvi TABLE IX. Showing main results of the working of provincial cattle farms during the year 1922-28. Province. Name of farm. Receipts. Expenditure. Valuation of stock, grain and fodder remaining at close of year as detailed on next page. Remark. Sale of animals. Sale of produce. Other heads. Total. Salaries of estab- lishment. Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- poises. Purchase of ani- mals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Fodder. Total. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 16 16 17 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. North Bihar Range ... Bettiah Farm 1,409 ... ... 1,409 1,090 13,754 ... 1,172 1,378 17,384 13,350 ... 1,200 14,550 Sipaya Farm 3,682 4,144 433 8,269 9,626 6,644 7,999 9,289 39,468 18,647 605 1,788 20,940 Total 5,091 4,144 433 9,668 10,706 19,398 7,999 1,172 10,667 49,842 31.997 606 2,988 35,490 Note.xvii Valuation statement of cattle grain and fodder in hand at close of ths year 1922-23. Number or quantity. Description. Rate. Value. Remarks, No. Quantity. 1 2 3 4 6 6 Mds. BETTIAH FARM. Rs. Rs. Cattle. 3 ... Bulls ... ... ... 600 1,800 37 ... Cows ... ... ... 90 3,330 14 ... Male stock, 2 years old ... 180 2,520 16 ... Do. 1 year old ... 80 1,280 16 ... Do. calves ... 45 720 12 ... Female stock, 2 years old ... 80 860 16 ... Do. 1 year old ... 60 960 12 ... Do. calves ... 40 480 13 ... Buffaloes ... ... ... 100 1,300 139 ... Total ... ... 13,350 Grain and fodder. Rs. a. p. Grain ... ... ... ... ... Hay ... ... ... ... ... 2,400 Kirby, etc. ... ... 0 8 0 1,200 2,400 Total ... 1,200 SIPAYA FARM. Mds. Cattle. Rs. Rs. 3 ... Bulls 300 900 25 ... Cows 100 2,500 65 ... Male stock, 2 years old and above 100 5,500 6 ... Do. 1 year old to 2 years... 65 390 22 ... Female calves 20 440 2 ... Montgomery Bull calves 100 200 2 ... Female stock, 2 years old to 3 years 70 140 3 ... Buffalo Bull calves 50 150 5 ... Female stock, 1 year old to 2 years 35 175 16 ... Do. calves 12 192 62 ... Bullocks ... 130 8,060 201 ... Total ... 18,647 Grain and fodder. Rs. a. p. 109 Grain ... ... ... various 505 40 Bhusa ... ... ... 0 8 0 20 3,536 Kirby, etc., ... ... 0 8 0 1,768 3,685 Total ... ... 2,293 340 6,085 GRAND TOTAL ... ... 35,490
xviii TABLE X. Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies for the year 1922-23. Details. Horse and Pony stallions under Local Bodies. Donkey stallions under Local Bodies. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Porsian. - - Total. Arab. Persian. Country-brod. - - Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. - - Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Blank
xix TABLE XI. Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies during 1922-23. Horse, Pony or Donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average number of marcs covered per stallion employed at stud. Year under report. Previ- ous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Blank. TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions during the year 1922-23. Province. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Blank.
xx TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1922-23. Province. (Name of fair or show). Number of horse fairs and shows bold. Total number of animals present. Total number competing for prizes. Total number of horses. Stock (not including branded mares) present. Number of mules pur- chased. Price paid for males by Government. Total number of animals sold. Prizes awarded. Amount sanctioned by Government of India. Year under report. | Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers, By others. Total. Highest price. Lowest price. Average. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds, From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Bihta ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Barahpar ... 2 3,404 1,934 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,358 ... ... 10 ... 10 10 ... ... 3. Khagra ... 1 2,480 3,309 8 26 ... 200 ... ... ... ... ... 1,100 ... ... 50 30 80 80 ... ... 4. Sonepur ... 1 8,960 4,565 ... ... ... 8,900 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5. Singbeswarthan 1 1,000 599 ... ... ... 1,000 ... ... ... ... ... 275 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6. Dharamganj ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Hardi ... 1 1,500 2,000 ... ... ... 1,500 ... ... ... ... ... 700 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8. Madhuban ... 1 520 300 ... ... ... 520 ... ... ... ... ... 327 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9. Bettiah Dasehra 1 1,000 1,200 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 300 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10. Chandardohi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11. Biswabhusunda 2 900 900 ... ... ... 900 550 550 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12. Motipur xxi TABLE XIV.
xxii TABLE Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of cattle fairs and shown beld. Number of stock present. Average price Balls. Bollocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. Rs. 1. Sitamarhi ... ... 1 ... 15,000 ... 1,000 ... ... 1,000 150 2. Khagra ... ... 1 ... 7.000 100 400 4,000 660 650 ... 80 to 160 3. Chatra ... ... 1 11 1,960 1.300 2,600 1,800 ... 1,275 32 27 4. Bihta ... ... 1 16 2,000 176 160 ... 2 116 86 80 6. Sonepur ... ... 1 4 35,000 1,208 ... 808 79 710 ... 50 to 400 6. Barahpur ... ... 2 ... 18,863 762 1,639 1,078 ... ... ... 75 to 300 7. Dharamgauj ... 1 ... 2,000 400 860 2,000 ... ... ... 15 to 100 8. Biswabhusunda ... 2 ... 5,000 3,600 800 4,500 ... 900 ... 30 9. Loalong ... ... 1 ... 1,300 975 150 900 ... 540 ... 80 10. Chanderdohi ... 1 2 1,000 200 800 2,000 ... 200 ... 40 11. Madbuban ... 1 ... 5,826 ... 400 ... ... ... 113 each 13. Bottiah Dasehra ... 1 ... 6,000 ... 4,000 ... ... ... ... 200 13. Baflganj ... 1 300 2,000 1,000 200 100 ... 56 30 70 14, Niazipur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16. Singheswarthan ... 1 ... ... 17 ... 2 ... 800 ... ... 10. Motipur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17. Hardi ... ... 1 ... 15,000 ... ... ... ... ... ... 65 each 18. Tirhut Show ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19. Bhairo asthan ... 1 ... 15,000 ... 6,000 ... ... ... ... 120 per pair. Total ... 18 332 1,82,038 9,637 17,899 17,788 641 6,200 ... -
xxiii XIV. shows held during the year 1922-23. of animal sold. Amount realised in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Prizes awarded. Number of medals awarded. Remarks. Cows; Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. Prom Provoncial Foods. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. 12 13 14 16 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. ... ... ... 1,600 82 ... 160 200 ... 850 ... 30 to 60 60 to 170 85 to 200 30,500 47 ... ... 160 170 320 ... 24 66 ... 632 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 ... ... ... 40 ... ... 137 ... 137 40 to 400 60 to 6C0 126 to 200 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 to 126 60 to 178 ... 1,469 7 ... ... 96 ... 96 ... 60 to 60 40 to 160 ... ... 75 ... 190 200 890 ... 35 20 ... 950 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 35 ... 975 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 60 ... 3,000 18 ... ... ... 100* 100 ... *Out of Rs. 100 only Rs. 88 was actually awarded. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60 76 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Show not held. 75 to 125 50 to 100 ... ... 8 ... ... 187* ... 137 ... *Out of Rs. 137, only Rs. 20 was actually awarded. Discontinued, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Not held. ... ... ... 2,600 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41,516 277 ... 160 909 470 1,529 ...
xxiv ABLE XIV(A). Statement showing the expenditure of the Civil Veterinary Department during the year 1922-23 in the province of Bihar and Orissa. Heads of Account. Amount. Total. Imperial. Provincial. Local. 1 2 3 4 5 Rs. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Superintendence 75,841 5 3 ... 75,841 5 3 Veterinary Instruction ... 1,124 12 0 6,406 4 9 7,531 0 9 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 85,563 14 10 57,245 5 7 92,809 4 5 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ... 8,580 0 4 1,97,430 10 6 2,06,010 l0 10 Prizes ... ... ... ... ... Pairs and Shows ... ... ... 5,623 0 0 5,628 0 0 Breeding Operations ... ... ... 9,429 2 10 9,429 2 10 Total ... ... 1,21,110 0 5 2,76,139 7 8 3,97,249 8 1 A. & O. G. P. (C. V. D.) No. 1No. 2738-D. GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. DEVELOPMENT BRANCH. RESOLUTION The 26th October 1923. READ2 from the 1st November next, with such staff as has already been sanctioned, and to place proposals for the establishment of a laboratory and serum dep6t there before the new Legislative Council. 3. Education and training.3 Department. Another clear proof of the benefit which the department is bringing to the cultivators is the constant increase in the number of inoculations, which can only be carried out with the consent of the owners of the cattle. These increased from 92,030 in 1920-21 to 123,387 in the year 1921-22, and 159,325 in the present year. This shows a growing appreciation of the value of inoculation among those chiefly concerned. 5. The control of outbreaks.4 9. Government acknowledge the keenness and efficiency with which Mr. Quinlan has administered the department, and have noted his commendation of the services of his staff. ORDER ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1925-26 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA: SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA, 1926. [Price Re. 1 annas 6.]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1925-26 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA: SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA, 1926. [Price Re. 1 annas 6.]
PRICED PUBLICATIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF, BIHAR AND ORISSA CAN BE HAD FROMNo. 8226-V. D. From CAPT. P. B. RILEY, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., OFFG. DIRECTOR, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BIHAR AND ORISSA. To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION DEPART- MENT, PATNA. Dated Patna, the 6th November 1926. SUBJECT.CONTENTS. PAGE. 1. General Administration ... ... ... 1REFERENCES Head Quarters-District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1925-26 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1.Mr. D. Quinlan was the Director and Veterinary Advise1 to Government and also Deputy Director of the Central Range throughout the year. As I was on leave for eight months, Captain G. G. Howard acted as Deputy Director of North Bihar Range up to the 10th November 1925, when he also proceeded on leave for eleven months, having been relieved by Assistant Director Babu Nilmoni Chattarji. 2.Rai Sahib P. N. Das was in charge of the Orissa Range throughout the year, while Babu Nilmoni Chattarji on return from leave was posted to the Head office at Patna. 3.During the period under report Mr. Quinlan visited the following hospitals and dispensaries :2 College. He attended the Conference of the Board of Agricul- ture at Pusa and was present at the Sonepur fair, 4.Mr. Quinlan acted as President at the promotion exami- nations of the veterinary assistant surgeons in April and October 1925. 5.He was on tour for 144 days. NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 6.Captain G. G. Howard was in charge of this range up to the 10th November, 1923, after which he was relieved by Babu Nil- moni Chattarji for 22 days, i.e., until my return from leave. He was on tour for 84 days and inspected the hospitals and dispensaries at Muzaffarpur, Hajipur, Sitamarhi, Motipur, Chapra, Siwan, Motihari, Dhaka, Bettiah, Samastipur, Purnea and Supaul ; visited the Pusa and Sipaya farms as well as the Raj farm air Bettiah, attended the Sitamarhi and Sonepur fairs, an outbreak of surra at Jamshcdpur and a meeting of the Bhagalpur Divi- sional Development Board. He also acted as Secretary and Examiner at the promotion examinations of the veterinary assistant surgeons. 7.I was in charge of this Range from the 3rd December till the end of the year. During the period, I was on tour for 45 days and inspected the hospitals and dispensaries at Hajipur, Sitamarhi, Siwan, Laheriasarai, Samastipur, Madhubani, Supaul and Madhipura ; attended a meeting of the Saran district board and the Conference of the Board of Agriculture held at Pusa ; and acted as a member of the board of examiners at the Bengal Veterinary College. 8.During his short incumbency, Babu N. Chattarji was on tour for twelve days, inspected some of the hospitals and dispensaries and attended a meeting of the Tirhut Divisional Development Board. 9.The residence for the Deputy Director at Muzaffarpur was completed and handed over in December 1925, but some minor works such as the gate, fencing, etc., have yet to be done. 10.The work in this Range has developed considerably as the statistics will show. ORISSA RANGE. 11.Assistant Director Rai Sahib P. N. Das was in charge of the Orissa Range throughout the year and visited all the hospitals and dispensaries, the work in many instances being
8 checked more than once. He attended a few meetings of the district boards, the Divisional Development Boards and the Co-operative federation. 12.The construction of the office and laboratory at Cuttack. could not be taken up as the Khasinahal site previously selected was not made over and a new site is to be acquired. A revised scheme was accordingly drawn up which involved a cost of Rs. 32,000. It has received the approval of Government and proceedings for the acquisition of land are in progress. It is hoped that the work will be completed in 1927-28 at the latest. 13.The Range has maintained the popularity and improve- ment in its general work which was noticed id the previous year's report. VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. 14. The question of the establishment of a veterinary college received further consideration during the year -and it was finally settled subject to the assent of the Legislative Council, that this province should have a separate college with a view to imparting proper instruction and obviating the necessity of contributing so largely towards the maintenance of the Bengal Veterinary College. The old university site at Phuhvari (Patna) which is an excellent one, was selected for the purpose. Rough plans and estimates and also the layout were prepared and sub- mitted to Government. The initial expenditure on buildings, furniture and fittings, drainage, water and electric supply is roughly estimated at Rs. 6,35,900 and the. recurring charge at Rs. 1,05,630. In addition to the main college with a research laboratory, a separate scheme for the establishment of a cattle breeding and dairying farm on the same site at an initial cost of Rs. 2,48,223 and a recurring cost of Rs. 49,820 has also been approved by Government. As already reported, this farm will be utilised as a means of practical demonstration of the methods of breeding, rearing and feeding cattle to the students of the college and the interested public. The agricultural portion and the irrigation work on the farm has already commenced. 15. As regards admission of students to the Bengal Veteri- nary College, only 17 boys joined as compared with twenty- three during 1921-25. Of these, two left during the year. The educational qualifications of the candidates were satisfactory as thirteen were matriculates. To eliminate the unqualified, arrangements were made with the Principal that no candidate who was not previously approved by the Director should take
4 his admission. The result of this will be quite encouraging as it will tend to man the department only with the best type of officers in the subordinate cadre. Among those selected, 11 were awarded stipends from local bodies, 2 from Government and the remaining 4 joined as private students. 16, At the end of the year there were 52 Bihar and Orissa students on training in the college, compared with 58 in 1924-25. Of this number, 26 were Hindus, 20 Muhammadans and 6 Indian Christians. According to nationality, 34 were Biharis, 6 Bengalis, 6 Oriyas and 6 Ohota Nagpuris. The following table shows the results of the annual examina- tion of the Bengal Veterinary College in respect of the Bihar and Orissa students :5 TABLE II. TREATMENT OF DISEASE. 21. A reference to the attached map will show that the con- tagious diseases of livestock were fairly general in the province, but compared with the previous two years the year under report should be considered as the healthiest. Except in a few instances the outbreaks were mostly of mild character and sporadic. As the number of subordinate officers increased, it was possible to give prompt help on many occasions with the result that the out- breaks were checked before they could spread to a larger area. Heavy mortalities were, however, recorded in Gaya, Hazaribagh, Santal Parganas and Monghyr districts of the Central Kange, and in Ranehi of the Orissa Range. Rinderpest, hæmorrhagic septicaemia and foot and mouth disease were reported in all dis- tricts, while six districts were affected with black quarter and eight with anthrax. Altogether 6,408 outbreaks were brought to notice and of these, 4,912 were attended by the staff, as compared with 6,518 reported and 4,877 attended in 1924-25. Including 82,459 cases of foot and mouth disease, 116,872 animals were affected in the above outbreaks and out of them 16,275 died, against 121,066 attacks and 20,445 deaths recorded in the previous year. The above figures show a decrease of 110 outbreaks, 4,194 attacks and 4,170 deaths. 22. The following table shows statistics of contagious diseases for each range with respect to its area and cattle population :6 most, but it is to be regretted that though these bodies were willing to accept new posts, funds were ultimately not forth- coming and the proposals were dropped. The area which each touring assistant has yet to traverse is too large and must be diminished to a suitable size in order that adequate help can be given in outbreaks. Any money spent in this direction will be profitably spent, and those districts boards which have not yet bestowed matured consideration on this subject should think of it now and take greater advantage of the concession offered by Government. EQUINE. 24.Glanders,7 13,473 deaths in 1924-25. 1,733 outbreaks were attended by the staff. 31.The incidence of rinderpest in respect of each range was as follows:3 with 81 deaths and 97 attacks in 1924-25. 37 outbreaks were attended. The diaease was diagnosed microscopically. 36.Anthrax,9 and 145,593 in 1923-24, which shows a marked increase of 9,896 and 24,560 inoculations, respectively, over the figures of the previous two years. Of this number, 5S,555 cattle were inocu- lated in North Bihar and. 40,576 in the Orissa Range, an increase of 3,957 and 2,369 inoculations, respectively, compared with the previous year's figures. In the Central Range, the number protected was 71,022, against 67,452, or 3,570 more than in 1924-25. The details of the work in respect of each district are shown in the table. 41.Rinderpest.10 in Orissa Range. No vaccination was performed in the Central Range. 45.Supply of sera and vaccines.11 Simdega, Bihar and Patna Sadr subdivisions were filled, the three new assistants for Bihar and Patna sadr being stationed at Hilsa, Masaurhi and Sehra. Though Sehra is not a convenient place for headquarters, the dispensary was located there as the zamindar of Sehra generously provided accommodation for it and agreed to contribute to the District Board, Patna, a sum of Rs. 15 a month towards its upkeep. The question of cons- tructing a permanent dispensary at a more suitable place for this assistant is under the consideration of the board. The dispensaries at Hilsa and Masaurhi were opened in hired houses. Garhwa was selected as the headquarters of the second touring assistant of Latehar owing to its proximity to a large cattle mart. 50.In addition to the above posts which were sanctioned in 1924-25, only three new posts of touring veterinary assistant surgeons were created during the year in pursuance of the scheme for the extension of the subordinate veterinary service, and these were second touring assistants of Sasaram, Madhipura and Kishanganj. The posts at Sasaram and Kishanganj were filled up but that at Madhipura remained vacant for want of staff. One more post of touring veterinary assistant surgeon for Godda subdivision at full cost of Government was sanctioned with effect from April 1926, while another for the Banki Government estate jointly with the district board, Cuttack, was under the consideration of Government. 51.The district board of Bhagalpur was unable to provide funds for the entertainment of a second touring veterinary assistant surgeon for the Sadr subdivision, but the district board, Monghyr, resolved to have two such officers for Jamui and Sadr as soon as funds were available. Proposals for one more assistant for each of Manbhum and Puri districts, and a third for Barhi in Hazaribagh district, are still under consideration. The district board, Saran, in spite of the great necessity for a second touring assistant at Chapra Sadr, was unable to provide money for the same. Weed for this class of officers is being keenly felt in many other districts, but it is to be regretted that the local bodies are rather slow in their movement. It may be interesting to know that, though under the new scheme for the extension of subordinate veterinary service each subdivision of a district is to have two touring veterinary assistant surgeons, out of sixty-three subdivisions as many as twenty-eight have not yet been provided with the second touring assistant. If things go on at the present rate, it will take many years to complete the existing cadre which was calculated only to afford the minimum aid to each district. It is hoped that local bodies will take
12 greater interest, and be of real benefit to the people in the pre- vention of diseases as the wealth of the country depends, to a great extent, on the saving of livestock and thereby setting the cultivator free from financial embarassment. 52.Including castrations, 80,054 fresh cases were treated by the touring assistant surgeons in the mufassal and at head- quarters against 70,893 in 1924-25. Of these, including castra- tions, 21,809 cases were treated by the staff in North Bihar, 30,045 in the Central and 28,200 in Orissa Range as compared with 17,832, 23,088 and 29,973 cases respectively treated in the previous year. The increase in the total number of cases is due to greater efforts being made by the staff and to increasing popularity. During the period 43,877 villages were visited against 35,581 in 1924-25. This number includes 18,110 villages visited by the staff in North Bihar, 15,075 in the Central and 10,692 in the Orissa Range. Details of the work are shown in the table, TABLE V. HOSPITALS. 53.A new hospital having been opened at Jamshedpur, the total number of hospitals rose to 30 against 29 in 1924-25. This number excludes the hospital at Cuttack, but includes those at Ranchi, Palamau, Begusarai and Dinapur which remained in charge of touring veterinary assistant surgeons, the local bodies concerned being not in a position to sanction stationary posts. The Jamshedpur hospital has been run by the Board of Works at full cost to them. It has during its short existence become a popular institution. As regards Cuttack, the Assistant Direc- tor in charge of the Bange reports that the public in general. and particularly the local gentry have been put to great incon- venience for want of a hospital and that cases are being sent frequently to the Bange office for treatment and advice. For a divisional headquarters to go without a veterinary hospital is some what unusual, and the sooner the district board and the municipality can come to terms the better. The hospital should be re-opened without further delay as it is not possible for the Range office veterinary staff to meet the local demands in this respect. 54.The building for the Puri veterinary hospital for which Government sanctioned a grant of Rs. 12,000 was completed during the year. Construction of a new hospital at Ranchi with the Government grant of Rs. 11,915 could not be under- taken as the district board was unable to raise the balance of the estimate Bs. 5,957 and thus decided to sell the old building
13 and utilize its proceeds. A site has accordingly been selected outside the town on the old Hazaribagh road. A new hospital was constructed at Giridih and the district hoard, Hazaribagh, agreed to accept a post of stationary veterinary assistant surgeon from 1st April 1926. An officer of this class is urgently required for Begusarai but the district board, Monghyr, could not provide funds for this. The proposal for the appointment of a stationary assistant at Dinapur is still pending with the Patna district board. 55.Under the existing scheme each subdivision of a district is to be provided with a veterinary hospital and at this rate, there ought to be 63 hospitals in the province. Up to date, only 30 have been constructed. Compared with some of the major provinces, this number is extremely small. Local bodies in a better financial position should consider the possibility of establishing additional hospitals at important subdivisional head- quarters. A portion of their surplus closing balance, if any, could be very well spent in this direction. 56.40,831 fresh patients were treated in the hospitals against 36,117 in 1924-25. Of this number, 20,578 were treated in 14 hospitals of North Bihar, 12,117 in 9 of the Central and 8,136 in 7 of the Orissa Range. In addition, 1,100 castra- tions were performed compared with 1,061 in 1924-25. Medi- cines were also supplied for 4,820 cases not brought to the hospitals. 57."During the year, arrangements were made for the supply of a Burdizzo's castrator to each hospital and dispensary and printed instructions regarding its use were issued. TABLE VIII. BREEDING OPERATIONS. 58.The Cattle Committee, which met at Patna on 24th March 1925, held its enquiry into the condition of cattle in Patna, Shahabad and North Bihar and was dissolved after sub- mitting its preliminary -report in April of that year. It was reconstituted in July and toured in parts of the Chota Nagpur and Orissa Divisions, saw the cattle of those areas and took evidence from persons interested in the matter. It submitted its final report in the same month. The Committee was unani- mous as to the advisability of protecting Brahmani bulls, supplying them at their market value and building up, by election, a herd of bulls of the local breed such as exist in Shahabad. This herd, when formed, should be capable of exten- sion over the whole province. The university site at Phulwari
14 (Patna) was considered as the best place for starting operations. According to recommendations, a scheme for the establishment of a breeding and dairy farm at Phulwari under the control of the Director, Civil Veterinary Department, and attached to the pro- posed veterinary college was approved by Government and work on this farm has already started, The Committee also recom- mended that the merits of the Tharpakar breed with a view to the possibility of producing a dual purpose animal for the province should be considered, that experiments on crossing selected Mont- gomery bulls with local cattle should be continued and that a, strain of the Marvi cattle for draft purpose, should be introduced. As regards buffalo breeding, the Committee held that young buffalo bulls of the Murra type should be purchased by Government, bred up to a certain age at Sipava and then maintained by Government on small farms and at the veteri- nary hospitals. In pursuance of this policy, a separate scheme involving an annual maintenance charge of Rs. 22,680 was considered by Government, but it was decided to put the scheme into operation at a later and more suitable date. The Committee finally came to the conclusion that, in view of the breeding operations now in progress and of their future developments the number of gazetted appointments both in the Agricultural and Veterinary services is entirely inadequate and that one or two expert officers should be appointed forthwith in order to advise in matters connected with breeding. 59."With a view to protection of Brahrnani bulls and breeding bulls in general, a Bill entitled the Bihar and Orissa Cattle Protection Bill was introduced by a member of the Legis- lative Council and was under consideration during the year. 60.During the year a second lecture on dairying and cattle breeding, this time attended with cinema exhibitions, was delivered at Patna by Mr. Smith, the Imperial Dairy Expert, and was much appreciated by the public. His Excellency the Governor kindly presided, 61.Fifty-five stud bulls including 5 Government animals were maintained in the districts under the supervision of the veterinary assistant surgeons, as compared with 40 in the year 1924-25. Ten new bulls were obtained, while 4 died, 1 was sent to Goshala and 1 returned to the Cuttack farm. Other details are shown in the table. TABLE IX. CATTLE FARMS. 62.Bettiah Raj Cattle Farm.15 farm was closed and the herd consisting of 1 stud bull, 24 cows, 34 heifers, 23 bull calves and 4 bulls and 1 buffalo bull received back in the farm, or a total of 87 cattle, were disposed of before the close of the year. It is contemplated to maintain only buffalo bulls for supply to the raiyats of the estate. 63.The upkeep of the farm cost Rs. 9,331 against Rs. 13,189 in the preceding year. Receipts from the sale of animals amounted to Rs. 2,270 against Rs. 1,115 in 1924-25. 64.Government Cattle Farm, Sipaya.16 Babu Nilmoni Chattarji, from the 11th May 1925. The post of Assistant Director attached to the North Bihar Range remained vacant throughout the year. 69.;Babu Nilmoni Chattarji in addition to disposal of office routine and inspection helped the Director in the preparation of the Phulwari farm and college schemes. TABLE VII. SUBORDINATE ESTABLISHMENT. 70.During the year one post of inspector on Rs. 100 was sanctioned, but as it was not filled up the total number of inspec- tors remained eleven as before. They were employed principally on inspection duty, supervised the work of the veterinary assistant surgeons in special outbreaks and attended the important fairs and shows in their respective circles. The inspector of the Patna circle, Babu R. K. Ram, was on training at Muktesar for six months from 4th April 1925, and on return from there was granted leave on medical grounds up to the 28th March 1926. This circle was therefore placed temporarily in charge of the inspector, Arrah circle. Babu B. L. Sur, inspector of the Ranchi circle, was also granted leave on medical certificate from the 9th November 1925 to the end of February 1926, after which he retired from service. During his absence the Ranchi circle was placed under the inspector, Purulia circle. This latter inspector also inspected the work in Hazaribagh district. 71.As the existing grades of inspectors were too rigid to admit of promotions, Government was pleased to consider a pro- posal for the revision of their pay and abolished the 4th grade inspectorship on Rs. 100 thereby placing the last grade inspectors on Rs. 130 with effect from 1st April 1926. The net result of this revision was as follows :17 died. There were, therefore, 112 veterinary assistant surgeons employed in the districts at the end of the year. 74.The following table shows the subordinate staff working- in each range :18 the recipient of the King's and Queen's medals and some testimonials in recognition of his services in the field. Hospital 'veterinary assistant surgeons.19 mens and parasites were received and preserved in the Muzaffar- pur laboratory, and 165 in the Cuttack laboratory, during the year. These specimens when collected and identified will prove a valuable stock for the museum of the Patna veterinary college when it is opened. 80.The investigation into filariasis undertaken by labora- tory assistant Babu P. Panda could not be successfully carried out as he was mostly occupied with routine work and as the experimental animals had to be kept at the Biankipur veterinary hospital which is three miles off. A large number of dogs were however examined by him and among them about ten per cent, were found affected with the disease. 81.In North Bihar, an investigation in '' dry coat " in horses was conducted by Capt. Howard, but the horse died during the course of treatment. The conclusions so far arrived at were encouraging, and it is expected that good results will accrue from further investigations if carried out on the lines suggested by him. The experiment will be renewed as soon as an opportunity occurs. Towards the close of the year another experiment on the treatment of " Kumri " in horses was commenced in this range. The case is still under observation and treatment. 82.The veterinary assistant surgeons of North Bihar regularly visited the slaughter houses to find out cases of tuberculosis in cattle, but the results were negative. Enquiries were also made by them into the existence of contagious abortion in cattle. No case could be detected. GENERAL REMARKS. 83.The condition of the hackney carriage service throughout the province is far from satisfactory. During recent years, though the number of ponies has considerably decreased in most of the municipalities, they are still undersized, half-starved, irregularly matched and overloaded. No improvement can be expected without the co-operation of the municipal authorities with whom the grant of licenses rests. A considerable amount of cruelty is being daily perpetrated on these animals and it is time something tangible were done towards eradicating this scandalous practice. To make the measure effective, it is essential that the animal sent up as a cruelty case be ordered by the Magistrate to be detained and treated in an infirmary at the owner's expense. It is satisfactory to note that the attention of Government has been directed to this important subject quite recently and it is hoped that adequate measures will be taken in the near future.
20 During the year under report, 424 cases sent up under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act resulted in convictions. 84.Duriug the year, a severe flood occurred in Puri and Cuttack districts and caused some loss of cattle in the affected areas. A report giving particulars of the incident was submitted to Government. 85.Mr. J. E. Scott, I.C.S., Deputy Commissioner and Chairman, District Board, Singhbhum, introduced in the district a system of silos for the prevention of fodder scarcity. Twenty- five pits were constructed and these were filled by the villagers themselves under the supervision of the local veterinary assistant surgeons. Other districts where there is likelihood of scarcity of fodder should follow this example. 86.Veterinary inspector, Babu J. L. Bose, was deputed to Khedda duty in Angul and his work in that connection was highly appreciated both by the Deputy Commissioner and the Political Agent and Commissioner for the Orissa Feudatory States. He was subsequently deputed to Kachugaon Khedda Camp (Assam) to learn the process of capturing elephants by the erection of clancli stockades which is being introduced in the Khedda areas in Angul. The Assitant Director in charge of the Orissa range inspected the Khedda office at Pumagarh twice and put forward some valuable suggestions to the Deputy Commis- sioner. 87.Touring veterinary assistant surgeon, Babu K. Mohon, having been nominated for the post of Khedda officer for five years was also deputed to the Assam Khedda and received instructions under Mr. Bor, the Deputy Conservator of Forests. 88.Captain Howard's treatise on the treatment of elephants was approved by Government for publication, while Babu J. L. Bose has written a book on the markings of elephants which is yet to be approved. 89.The work in the head office has increased considerably owing to the expansion of the Department, establishment of the Phulwari farm and the scheme for the opening of a veterinary college at Patna. A proposal for revision of the staff is in contemplation. The head office staff under Babu Digbijoy Boy Chowdhury worked satisfactorily. P. B. RILEY, CAPT., M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Offg. Director, Civil Veterinary Department and Veterinary Adviser to the Government of Bihar and Orissa.
TABLE II.
ii TABLE II. Showing number of deaths from contagions diseases amongst animals during the year 1925-26. District. Equines. Bovines Others. Remarks. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Black-quartcr. Anthrax. Other contagi- ous diceases. Total. Rabies. Canine surra. Tetanus in goats. Fowl Cholera. Ovin Rinder- pest. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 1. Patna ... ... ... 5 1 ... 2 8 243 10 605 ... 46 3 907 4 ... 1 ... ... 5 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,757 8 660 ... 2 10 2,337 4 ... ... ... ... 4 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 94 20 160 ... ... 45 319 3 6 ... ... ... 9 4. Sarin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 211 68 ... ... 283 7 ... ... ... ... 7 5. Chainparan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86 1 159 ... ... 1 237 ... ... ... ... ... 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 96 6 203 27 ... ... 391 7 ... ... ... ... 7 7. Darbhanga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 ... 161 6 ... ... 220 7 ... ... ... ... 7 8. Monghyr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,173 ... 87 ... 5 19 1,284 4 ... ... ... ... 4 9. Bhagalpur ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 476 ... 253 14 1 8 752 23 ... ... ... ... 23 10. Purnea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 703 11 80 ... ... ... 794 3 ... ... ... ... 3 11. Santal Parganas ... 2 ... 6 ... 2 10 1,148 6 278 ... 43 5 1,480 4 ... ... ... ... 4
iii 13. Cuttaek ... ... ... ... ... 1 40 601 3 2 ... 647 5 ... ... ... 13. Balasore ... ... ... ... 99 18 283 390 ... ... 14. Angul ... ... 785 18 16 ... ... 780 ... 15. Pari ... ... ... 105 35 ... ... ... 140 ... ... 16. Sambalpur ... ... ... 228 6 98 ... 5 337 ... ... ... ... ... 17. Hazaribagh ... 1,234 9 106 25 1,374 1 1 18. Ranchi ... 1 1 1,020 187 610 9 1 1 1,828 2 ... 23 2 33 19. Palamaa ... ... 3 ... 1 4 370 54 86 53 563 ... ... 20. Manbhum ... 5 6 571 1 336 908 14 ... 12 26 21. Singhbhum ... ... 253 1 2 ... ... ... 256 5 ... 5 Total 2 5 18 7 32 10.384 501 4,988 137 135 160 16,275 93 6 1 28 14 142
iv TABLE III. Statement showing results of preventive inoculation during the year 1925-28. District. Name of disease against which inoculation was carried out. Method of inocula- tion followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninocu- lated in course of outbreaks. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inocu- lated animals which died of the disease. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equities. Borines. Others. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Patna ... Rinderpest "Serum Alone". 17 78 2.430 10 ... Gaya 134 629 ... 17,389 138 Shahabad ... 16 50 2,234 4 Saran 2 4 ... 338 ... ... Champaran ... 14 38 2.063 ... Muzaffarpur ... 10 47 ... 1.1983 8 ... Darbhanga ... 8 ... 38 2,331 Monghyr 20 326 3.331 21 ... Bhagalpur 66 ... 107 8,183 4 ... Purnca 43 311 13,154 3 ... Santal Par- ganas. 107 598 11,185 ... 23 ... Cuttack 1 1 26 ... ... Balasoro 6 60 531 ... ... Angul 41 405 ... 0,001 ... ... Purl ... Sambalpur ... 23 134 3,495 Hazaribagh ... 77 679 10,188 02 Ranchi 10 348 ... 3,588 ... 3 ... Manbhum 47 198 ... 9,398 6 Palamou 41 185 0,373 ... ... 17 Singhbhum ... 26 183 ... ... 4,4?3 ... 1 ... Total... 721 4,486 107,541 428 Patna Hæmer- rhagic Septicæ- min. H. S. Scrum. 29 07 ... 3,292 ... 8 Gaya 23 ... 128 ... 3,431 ... 7 Shahabad 20 ... 73 ... ... 2,354 ... ... 7 ... Saran 12 ... 05 ... 1,348 ... 1 Champaran ... 33 88 7,747 1 ... Muzaffarpur ... 39 143 7,949 6 Darbhanga ... 21 89 ... ... 8,333 ... ... ... ... Monghyr 11 30 ... ... 1,760 ... ... ... ... Bhagalpur 27 108 ... 4.474 ... 2 ...
V TABLE IIIvi TABLE IV. Showing the number of animals treated and castratcd by veterinary assistant surgeons on tour during 1925-26. Hospital and Dispensary. Number of villages visited. Number of veterinary assistant surgeons employed. Castrations per- formed. Treated for contagious diseases. Treated for non-contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castration performed. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1. Patna (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Masaurhi 346 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 35 ... 35 31 291 63 385 421 3. Sehra ... 137 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 18 139 15 172 174 4. Dinaporc 252 1 ... ... ... ... ... 35 ... 35 12 42 8 62 97 5. Barh ... 485 1 ... 3 ... 3 1 194 7 202 114 452 56 622 827 6. Bihar ... 905 1 7 3 ... 10 45 ... 45 226 528 96 850 905 7. Hilsa ... 307 1 ... ... ... ... 48 ... 48 59 357 82 448 496 S. Gaya (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9. Gaya ... 422 1 3 13 ... 16 ... 1,177 3 1,180 6 188 8 202 1,398 10. Gaya (Additional Touring) ... 416 1 ... ... 6 6 ... 517 ... 517 25 184 10 219 742 11. Shorghati (Gaya) ... 304 1 2 ... ... 2 ... 39 ... 39 146 804 8 958 999 12. Jehanabad 415 1 ... ... 3 3 ... 150 ... 150 27 189 8 224 377
vii 13. Jehnnabad (3nd Touring) ... 351 1 ... ... 2 2 ... 100 ... 100 26 266 47 339 441 14. Nawada 388 1 4 ... ... 4 ... 189 ... 189 153 637 34 824 1,017 15. Warisliganj 363 1 6 18 ... 24 ... 780 ... 780 80 371 4 455 1,259 16. Aurangabad 303 1 29 5 ... 34 ... 300 ... 300 92 488 28 608 942 17. Daudnagar 356 1 11 1 2 14 ... 119 ... 119 99 420 26 545 678 18. Arrah (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19. Arrah ... 323 1 ... ... ... ... ... 27 ... 27 8 170 ... 178 205 20. Buxar 360 1 7 2 2 11 ... 270 ... 270 73 679 71 823 1,104 21. Barahpur 391 1 ... ... 8 8 32 22 ... 54 55 314 14 383 445 22. Sassaram 439 1 1 ... 1 2 1 208 ... 209 104 622 299 1,025 1,236 1,664 cases sup- plied with medi- cines. 23. Sassaram (2nd Touring) 258 1 ... ... ... ... ... 92 ... 92 25 146 8 179 271 87 cases supplied with medicines. 24. Bhabua 223 1 5 4 ... 9 ... 538 ... 538 48 410 27 485 1,032 25. Chapra (Hospital)... 64 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26. Chapra ... 986 1 ... ... 5 5 ... 41 35 76 91 620 91 802 883 27. Siwan (Hospital) ... 56 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28. Siwan ... 839 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 250 611 79 940 943 29. Gopalganj 1,207 1 5 19 ... 24 ... ... ... ... 375 902 126 1,403 1,427 30. Motihari (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31. Motihari 1,513 1 ... ... ... ... ... 436 ... 436 219 536 52 807 1,243 32. Dhaka (2nd Touring, Motihari) 1,002 1 ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 6 285 661 53 999 1,005 33. Bettiah Estate (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34. Bettiah ... ... 1,045 1 1 31 65 97 ... 21 ... 21 493 755 191 1,439 1,557 35. Bagaha (Hospital) ... 434 1 4 ... 2 6 ... 393 ... 393 18 363 16 397 796
viii TABLE IVix 48. Madhubani 324 1 2 ... ... 2 ... 60 ... 60 23 455 65 543 605 49. Madhubani (2nd tournig) 418 1 ... 3 9 12 ... 13 ... 13 44 642 38 724 749 50. Samastipur (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51. Samastipur 751 1 ... 3 1 4 ... 312 ... 312 10 430 9 449 765 52. Monghyr (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53. Monghyr 362 1 ... ... ... ... ... 37 ... 37 19 314 ... 333 370 51. Khagaria ... ... 504 1 ... 10 ... 10 ... 169 ... 169 83 947 33 1,063 1.242 55. Beguserai 240 1 ... ... ... ... ... 415 ... 415 19 164 ... 183 598 56. Jamui 305 1 ... ... ... ... ... 275 ... 275 132 553 79 764 1,039 57. Bhagalpur (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58. Bhagalpur ... ... 488 1 ... ... ... ... ... 80 ... 80 10 151 7 168 248 59. Banka 425 1 ... ... 5 5 1 82 ... 83 53 364 41 458 546 60. Madhipnra 254 1 1 ... 3 4 ... ... ... ... 101 675 37 813 817 61. Madhipura (2nd touring) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Vacant. 62. Sapaul (Hospital)... 235 1 ... ... ... ... ... 28 ... 28 ... 80 1 81 109 63. Supaul 632 1 ... 16 11 27 ... 180 2 182 39 496 22 557 766 64. Purnea (Hospital)... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 65. Purnea ... ... 562 1 5 ... ... 5 ... 11 ... 11 167 448 9 624 640 66. Katihar ... ... 889 1 1 1 2 4 ... 91 ... 91 45 496 51 592 687 67. Araria ... ... 753 1 11 3 14 45 ... 45 407 616 72 1,095 1,154 68. Kissenganj ... ... 504 1 6 ... 6 ... 25 ... 25 180 364 50 594 625 69. Kissengani (2nd touring) ... 261 1 ... ... ... ... 8 ... 8 31 119 9 159 167 70. Dumka (Government Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71. Dumka ... ... 299 1 1 ... 2 2 376 ... 376 . 23 157' 13 193 571
x TABLE IVxi 84. Khondmals ... ... 465 ... 32 6 33 ... 912 912 6 982 70 1,855 85. Pari 579 1 1 2 ... 3 ... 653 653 41 454 64 559 1,215 86. Khurda 3S9 1 ... 11 16 27 ... 532 532 11 536 88 635 1.194 87. Sambalpur (Hospital) ...... ... ... ... ... 8S. Sambalpur 325 ... ...... 878 878 4 949 4 957 1,835 89. Bargarh (Hospital) 161 ... 78 ... 78 39 39 117 90. Pargarh 846 . .. 9 9 ... 474 474 12 481 23 516 999 91. Hazaribagh (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92. Hazaribagh 753 1 1 ... 464 464 32 279 ... 311 776 93. Kederma 498 ... ... 259 259 58 442 115 615 874 94. Ramgarh 610 3 3 ... 556 556 97 392 65 554 1,113 95. Chatra 33-1 1 2 ... 2 ... 35l 351 214 319 51 584 937 96. Chatra (2nd touring) 175 1 1 ... 83 83 72 171 33 276 360 97. Giridih 416 3 3 710 ... 710 7S 392 113 583 1,296 98. Dhanwar 403 ... ... 527 527 31 462 11 504 1,031 99. Ranchi (Hospital)... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100. Ranchi 505 ... 3,219 9,219 10 207 3 220 3,439 101. Gumla 356 ... ... ... 145 145 72 396 37 505 650 102. Khunti 127 ... ... ... 456 2 458 24 170 23 217 675 1C3. Simdega 225 3 47 3 52 659 2 661 11 29 18 58 771 104. Daltonganj 216 1 1 425 ... 425 22 498 11 531 957 105. Daltonganj (2nd touring) ... 324 3 3 269 ... 269 40 133 11 184 455 106. Garhwa 173 1 2 3 299 11 310 145 140 42 327 640 61 cases supplied with medicines. 107. Latehar (Khasmahal) 245 1 4 5 - 713 1 714 72 389 24 485 1,204 108. Purulia(Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109. Balarampur (1st touring, Purulia.) 318 : 1 490 281 490 15 22 291 12 318 367 80S 110. Raghunathpur (2nd touring, Purulia.) 402 1 ... 281 325 20 649
xii TABLE IVTABLE V.
xiv TABLE V. Showing number of animals treated and costrated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries during the year 1925-26. District. ( Name of hospital.) Number veterinary hos- pitals. Number of vetennary resist- ant surgeons .emplyoed. Number of in-patients treated during the year. Number of out-patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-paitients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. . Receipts Expenditure. Equines Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovnies Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Rs. Rs. 1. Purulia ... 4 39 31 74 C4 613 239 916 990 240 ... 541 1,606 2. Chapra ... 35 99 22 156 335 952 520 1,807 1,963 175 3 5 8 137 2,213 3. Muzaffarpur 126 105 72 303 310 721 474 1,508 1,811 12 25 7 S2 2,473 4,479 4. Monghyr 13 41 22 76 76 468 533 1,077 1,153 59 4 8 12 578 2,895 5. Purnea ... 42 18 79 259 253 135 647 726 120 3 1 5 9 376 4,951 6. Sitamarhi 39 56 21 116 176 670 198 1,044 1,160 ... 3 3 31 37 253 2,006 7. Dumka (Government hospital). 13 24 7 44 84 405 138 627 671 2 C 5 57 1,354 8. Ranchi * ... ... 31 47 21 99 215 519 441 1,205 1,304 157 4 1 12 17 1,440 2,797 9. Bankipur ... ... 129 91 14 234 374 905 871 2,150 2,384 16 4 9 13 26 795 2,788 10. Laheriaserai 37 63 24 124 141 613 252 1,006 1,130 200 4 ... 7 11 227 2,521
xv 11. Gaya 1 1 I 57 149 68 274 329 1,052 626 2,007 2,251 175 11 3 11 25 798 4,422 12. Balasore ... ... 1 1 ... 29 2 31 18 801 345 1,164 1,195 59 15 55 70 1,309 2,083 13. Sambalpur 1 1 14 92 11 117 72 1,358 146 1,576 1,693 642 ... 2 ... 2 743 4,842 14. Bargarh ... 1 L 3 23 26 23 1,669 66 1,758 1,784 145 ... 3 3 10 952 15. Arrah 1 24, 73 3 100 83 511 315 909 1,009 1 5 6 228 2,568 16. Hazaribagb. 1 9 21 13 43 185 853 235 1,273 1,316 301 5 3 2 10 549 1,424 17. Bhagalpnr 1 42 79 26 147 203 713 353 1,269 1,416 ... ... 3 3 1,056 3,024 18. Cuttack xvi TABLE VII. Showing total strength of subordinate staff employed during the year 1925-26. Province. How employed. Whether paid from Provincial or Local fund. Training staff. Veterinary Inspec- tors. Subordinate staff not included in previous columns. Veterinary Assistant Surgeons. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 !' Bihar and Orissa ... ... . In Schools and Colleges ... 1 Provincial ... ... ... ... ... In Hospitals 1. Provincial ... ... ... ... 24 24 2. Local (under Private Estates) ... ... ... 1 1 On other works ... 1. Provincial... ... 11 10 93 114 2. Local ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 11 10* 118t 139 * Four laboratory assistants and six staff veterinary assistant surgeons. xvii TABLE VIII. Return of stud bulls for the year 1925-26. District, Property of Government. Property of Local Bodies. Number on 1st April 1925. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1926. Number on 1st April 1925. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1926. Number. Average price paid. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 ... Rs. ... ... Rs. 1. Patna ... ... ... ... ... 2 .. ... ... 2 2. Gaya- ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 1.400 ... 3 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 ... ... 2 (a) 16 4. Saran ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 5. Champaran... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 Free ... 5(b) 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... 6 1 2C0 1 (c) 5(d) 7. Davbhanga... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 8. Monghyr ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 9. Bhagalpur... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 10. Purnea ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 11. Santal Par- ganas. ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 300 ... 2 12. Cuttack ... 2 (e) (f)1 ... 1(g) 2 ... ... ... ... ... 13. Balasoro ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 14. Angul, .. 2 ... 1(h) 1 ... ... ... ... ... 15. Puri 1 ... 1(i) ... ... ... ... ... ]6. Sambalpur ... 2 ... 2 ... 2 300 ... 2 17. Hazaribagh ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 18. Ranchi ... ,xviii TABLE IX. Showing main results of the working of Provincial Cattle Farms during the year 1925-26. Province. Name of farm. Receipts. Expenditure. Valuation of stock, grain and fodder remaining at close of year as detailed on next page. Remarks. Sale of animals. Sale of produce. Other heads. Total. Salaries of estab- lishment. Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- penses. Purchase of ani- mals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Fodder. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 42 13 14 15 16 17 Us. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Bettiah. Estate... Bettiah Raj Cattle Breading Farm, 2,270 ... 2,370 1,080 7,911 ... 390 9,381 ... ... ... 2. Sepaya Farm ... Sepaya Farm 25 8,981 8,081 2,195 2,195 11,201 5,202 2,420 6,638 536 10,038 24,834 11,180 696 810 12,586 Total 2,295 13,471 6,282 10,331 6,638 636 10,428 34,215 11,180 696 810 12,586 Note.xix Valuation statement of cattle, grain and fodder in hand at close of the year 1925-26. Number or quantity Description. Bate. Value. Remarks. No. Quantity. 1 2 8 4 5 6 Mds. SEPAYA FARM. Rs. Rs. Cattle. 300 1 Bull 300 32 COWS 40 1,280 27 Male slock, 2 years old 70 1.890 14 Do. 1 year old 40 560 14 Do. calves 30 420 59 Working bullocks & young calves Female stock, 2 years old 80 32 4,72G 832 26 Do. 1 year old 24. 168 7 14 Do. calves 16 210 8 Buffalo bulls calves 100 800 202 ... Total 11,180 Grain and fodder. Rs. a. p. 109 Grain Various 596 120 Hay Ditto 60 750 1,500 Silage 0 8 0 md. 1,729 Total 1,406 BETTIAH FARM. Rs. a p. Nil Rs. Nil The herd was disban de d at the close of the year. 202 1,729 GRAND TOTAL ... ... 12,586
xx TABLE X. Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies for the year 1925-26. Details. Horse and pony stallions under local bodies. Donkey stallions under local bodies. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred, Persian. xxi TABLE XI. Services and product of each class of horse,pony and donkey stallions under local bodies during 1925-26. Horse, pony or donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average number of mares covered per Station employed at Stun. Tear under report, Previ- ous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Blank. Total ... TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of horse, pony and donkey stallions during the year 1925-26. Province. HORSE. PONY. DONKEY. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4. 5 6 7 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Black.
xxii TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1925-26. Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of horse fairs and shows held. Total number of animals present. Total number competing for prices. Total number of horses stock (not including branded mares) present. Total number of animals sold. Prises awarded. Amount sanctioned by Government of India. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. From Imperial Fundi. From Provisional Funds*. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Bihts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Barahpur 3 6,110 2,307 ... ... ... ... 3.000 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3. Khagra ... 1 4,300 3,650 36 30 ... 1,800 3,000 ... ... ... 81 01 81 ... ... 4. Sonepur 1 0,017 6,700 ... ... ... ... 3,208 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5. Singheawarthan 1 600 250 ... ... ... 100 360 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6. Dharamganj ... 1 2,000 1,800 30 36 ... 3.000 018 ... 190 200 390 46 ... ... 7. Hardi 1 4,000 3,000 ... ... ... ... 1.660 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8. Madbuban ... 1 400 300 ... ... ... ... 800 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9. Bettiah Dasehra 1 1616 1.140 ... 350 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10. Bisvabhusunda 1 1,000 1.000 ... ... ... 1.000 600 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11. Purnea city ... 1 250 106 25 16 ... ... 225 300 300 310 800 66 ... ... Total ... 21 27,287 30.052 00 50 ... 4,800 12,313 200 480 501 1.171 181
TABLE XIV.
xxiv TABLE Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Number of stock present. Average price 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. Rs. 1. Sitamarhl ... 1 ... 10,000 ... 4,000 ... 1,000 ... 150 2, Khagra 1 8 30,000 100 1,500 750 1,000 l,570 100 to 200 40 to 200 3. Chatra 1 5 2,000 1,200 1,100 2,000 ... .1,110 50 40 4. Bihta 1 8 8,000 40 100 2 2 25 175 { 5. Sonepur 1 5 31,700 1,005 500 1,234 45 to 260 6. Barahpur ... 1 ... 20,082 1,157 13,814 2,133 1 1 ( 7. Dharamganj 1 12,?S0 1,000 3,000 3,920 ... { ( to 32 8. Biswabhusunda 1 5,000 600 2,000 1,200 1,000 ... to 125 9. Loalong 1 1 3,600 40:) 1,200 1,500 ... 375 50 45 10. Chanderdobi 1 13,400 1,800 1,900 1,100 ... 1 25 . to 260 11. Madhuban 1 6,500 too { ( 40 12. Beittiah Dasehra 1 ... 10,000 2,600 ... .., ... { to 150 13. Rafiganj 1 ... 3,000 500 500 ... ... ... ... 30 14, Singheawarthan 1 ... ... ... ... ... 4 0 ... ... 15. Motipur ... 1 ... 17,500 ... ... ... ... ... 100 75 10. Hardi 1 ... 20,000 ... ... ... ... 20 { to 160 17. Tirhut Show 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60 18. Bhairo-asthan 1 ... 12,000 ... 4,000 ... ... ... i to 160 19. Deokund 1 ... 6,000 000 8,000 900 300 ... ( 45 40 20. Purnea city 1 ... 6,200 600 2,000 300 80 ... { to 300 Total 20 27 2,362 0,202 41,114 15.330 1,047 6,695
xxv XIV. show held during the year 1925-26. Total number of animals that competed for prices. ant realised in fees. Number of medals awarded. Cows. Buffaloes. Camel*. From Imporial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total. Remarks. 12 19 14 15 16 17 18 IB 20 21 23 as Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 700 23 Rs. Rs. 160 Rs. 260 Rs. 400 ... 40 80 60 38,250 160 ... ... 247 317 ... to to to 125 300 120 40 40 ... 1,100 ... ... ... ... ... 38 ... 40 ... ... ... ... ... 20 to 350 80 to 376 115 to 240 ... ... ... ... ... 20 to 250 40 to 260 ) ... ... ... ... 20 to 60 40 to 300 ) ... 12,760 30 ... ... 190 200 100 ... 50 to 125 40 no 100 ... ... 46 100 100 16 40 so xxvi TABLE XIV (A) Statement showing the expenditure of the Civil Veterinary Department during the year 1925-26 in the province of Bihar and Orissa. Heads of Accounts. Amount. Total. Imperial. Provincial. Local. 1 2 3 4 5 Rs. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Superintendence ... 83,405 1 2 7 ... 83,406 1 2 7 Veterinary Instruction 1,898 11 0 8,493 1 5 9 9,892 1 0 9 Subordinate Establishment ... 37,554 6 1 69,728 5 4 1,07,282 1 1 5 Hospitals and dispensaries 1,86,920 8 2 1,86,488 9 5 8,23,359 1 7 Prizes ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... £,493 4 0 2,493 4 0 Breeding operations 8,955 7 5 8,955 7 5 Total 2,59,279 5 10 2,76,109 9 1 1 5,35,888 1 5 9 B.&O. Q. P. (C. V- D.) no. 8-286-6.12-1923No. 3509-D. GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA. EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. DEVELOPMENT BRANCH. RESOLUTION. The 23rd December 1926. READ2 a capital expenditure of over six lakhs of rupees and an annual recurring cost of over one lakh, will be placed before the Legislative Council at its next session. The college buildings will be erected on the old university site west of Government House at Patna, and the scheme provides not only for the college itself, together with the requisite residential buildings and hostel for students, but also for a research laboratory and clinic wards The staff will include, besides the Principal, professors of pathology and bacteriology, of hygiene, of surgery and of anatomy. The establishment of the college will do away with the necessity for the annual contribution which is at present paid to the Government of Bengal for the training of students at the Belgachia college, which has never been popular with students from this province. The college will also provide post-graduate courses for officers of the department. Pro- vided that funds for the scheme are voted by the Legislative Council an immediate start will be made on the erection of the college buildings during the coming year. 4. Breeding operations 3 made on the work of the farm. Plans and estimates are in course of preparation for the establishment of a breeding herd at Cuttack also, and it is hoped to take up the work during the coming financial year. Meanwhile the founda- tion of a herd of local animals has been laid by the pur- chase and maintenance of as many cows as can be accommo- dated on the Agricultural Department's experimental farm at that place. Arrangements are also being made for the purchase of breeding buffaloes, as recommended by the committee, and investigations are being carried out in suit- able areas into the question of the possibility of the exten- sion of grazing facilities, a question which has attracted the attention of members of the Legislative Council for some time past. 5. Treatment of disease.4 awaken them to the importance of taking drastic steps to deal with the main source of the infecting agentANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1926-27 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA : SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1928 [Price He. 1.]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1926-27 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PATNA : SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1928
PRICED PUBLICATIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA CAN BE HAD FROMCONTENTS. PAGE. 1. General Administration ... ... ... 1No. 1087-V.D. FROM MAJOR P. B. RILEY, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., OFFG. DIRECTOR, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BIHAR AND OR1SSA, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT, PATNA. Dated Patna, the 14th February 1928. SUBJECT.-REFERENCES [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] (Sd) D Quinlan I.V.S. Director Civil Veterinary Department Bihar & Orissa
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[Maximum limit, 25 pages.] ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1926-27 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. I held charge of the department as Director and Veterinary Adviser and also as Deputy Director of the Central Range from 1st April to 5th April 1926 and again from 7th December to the 31st March 1927. During the intervening period, I was on leave and Captain P..B. Riley, Deputy Director, North Bihar Range, officiated for me, being relieved by Assistant Director, Babu Nilmoni Chattarji. 2. On his return from leave, Captain G. G. Howard resumed charge of the Orissa Range on the 23rd October 1926 and relieved Rai Sahib P. N. Das who joined his post at Patna as Assistant Director and continued as such till 21st January 1927 when he again proceeded to Cuttack owing to the tragic death of Captain Howard through a shooting accident. During his short stay in Cuttack, he made many friends among the Indians of Orissa, and his loss is much deplored. 3. Prom the date of my return from leave to the end of March, I visited the Government Cattle Farm, Karnal, to select Tharparkar bulls and cows for the Phulwari farm, purchased bullocks and desi cows at Barahpur fair; visited Cuttack and the Bengal Veterinary College, Calcutta, and at the same time the Co-operative Dairy at Dogachia on the Eastern Bengal Railway. I was on tour for 27 days. 4. As officiating Director, Captain Riley passed the plans and estimates of the Phulwari farm and the Veterinary College
2 and made preliminary arrangements for starting the farm. He visited Sitamarhi, Dumraon and Bettiah fairs to select bullocks and cows. As a temporary member of the transferred subjects Standing Committee and the Development Board, he visited Ranchi on three occasions and discussed the cattle-breeding policy in this province at a meeting of the Development Board. He selected graduates for temporary appointments at the Bengal Veterinary College, Belgachia and was present at the Sonepur fair, attended an outbreak of Glanders at Bhagalpur, inspected the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Hajipur, Cuttack, Puri, Purulia and Motipur and acted as President and Member of the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary Examination Board. He was on tour for 123 days. 5. The State scholar, Mr. Muhammad Ismail Malik, returned in November after obtaining his diploma in England and was recruited as a temporary special officer on Rs. 300 a month from 1st December 1926. Arrangements have been made to depute Mr. Malik to the Muktesar laboratory for training from April 1927. NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 6. Captain Riley was in charge of the range from 1st to 23rd April 1926 and again from 12th December 1926 to 31st March 1927.* During the interval, Babu Nilmoni Chattarji was in charge, although for convenience of work his head- quarters were fixed at Patna temporarily instead of at Muzaffarpur. 7. Captain Riley was on tour for 55 days, travelled 1,353 miles by road, inspected the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Hajipur, Motipur, Chapra, Laheriasarai, Samasti- pur and Madhubani ; attended the Sitamarhi and Hardi fairs ; visited the Pusa farm and acted as a member of the Examining Board of the Bengal Veterinary College. 8. During his incumbency, Babu Nilmoni Chattarji spent 119 days on tour travelled 1,283 miles by road; inspected the hospitals and dispensaries at Muzaffarpur, Hajipur, Chapra3 9. The gate, fenciug and other minor works connected with the residence of the Deputy Director at Muzaffarpur were completed during the year. ORISSA RANGE. 10. On his return from leave, Captain Howard acted as Deputy Director of the range from the 23rd October 1926 till 21st January 1927 when he died. During this period he inspected the veterinary dispensaries at Khurda and Angul and the hospital at Purulia. He was present at the professional examinations of veterinary assistant surgeons held at Patna in October 1926. He was on tour for 32 days. 11. Rai Sahib P. N. Das held charge of the range from 1st April to 22nd October and again from the 24th January 1927 to the end of the year. He inspected almost all hospitals and dispensaries in the range more than once and scrutinised the work of the subordinate staff, visited some important outbreaks, attended District Board and Development Board meetings and delivered lectures at selected meetings of the Co-operative Federation Board, He was on tour for 144 days and travelled 1,796 miles by road. 12. The work connected with the construction of buildings for the range office and laboratory at Cuttack was started during the year, and it is hoped, will be completed by the end of September 1927. (The expenditure on this account will, accord- ing to the revised estimate, amount to Rs. 32,136.) VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College. 13. The plans and estimates for the proposed veterinary college were further scrutinised by Captain Riley and myself. At the request of the local Government, Mr. J. T. Edwards, Director of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, visited Patna and inspected the site of the college. Some plans were altered while the plan of the laboratory was redesigned according to his instructions. His Excellency Sir Henry Wheeler, the late Governor of the province, laid the foundation stone of the college on the 2nd of April 1927. 14. Including the additional cost of the redesigned labora- tory the total estimated non-recurring expenditure will amount to Rs. 6,53,800, against which a provision of Rs. 10,000 for bricks only was made in the Public Works Department supplementary budget for the year 1926-27.
4 15. The work on the Phulwari cattle-breeding and dairy farm near the site of the college, a separate scheme for which was approved by Government, was started during the year on receipt of a supplementary grant of Us. 12,290 towards construc- tion of buildings and Us. 16,657 for establishment, machinery, etc., required for the purpose. The excavation of the tank and channels and also the fencing which formed part of the scheme were finished by the Irrigation Department, the cost being met from the provision of Rs. 20,000 in the Veterinary budget for 1926-27. In addition there was a provision of Rs. 15,000 in the Public Works Department budget for collection of bricks. As some additional buildings such as menials' quarters and also gates and roads are required to complete the project supplemen- tary estimates are in course of preparation and will be submitted to Government when ready. Training at the Bengal Veterinary College. 16. During the year 19 students joined the college against 17 in 1925-26. Their educational qualifications were satisfactory. Among those selected, 12 were awarded stipends by local bodies and 7 joined as private students. No Government stipend was available. 17. At the end of the year, there were 66 Bihar and Orissa students under training compared with 52 in 1925-26. Of this number, 41 were Hindus, 21 Muhammadans and 4 Indian Christians. According to nationality, 40 were Biharis, 13 Bengalis, 8 Oriyas and 5 came from Chota Nagpur. 18. The results of the annual examination in respect of the Bibar and Orissa students are shown in the following table:5 made to depute the special officer, Mr. Muhammad Ismail Malik, to the Muktesar Research Institute for a six months' course. Professional examinations. 20. The half-yearly professional examinations for subordi- nate officers were held in April and October 1926. Captain Riley acted as President of the Board and Babu Nilmoni Chattarji as Secretary. 31 veterinary assistant surgeons including those who failed in previous examinations appeared, and 13 passed. Training in England. 21. The first State scholar, Mr. Muhammad Ismail Malik, after receiving the diploma of the Royal College of Veteri- nary Surgeons, London, returned in November 1926. Another candidate was awarded a scholarship and joined the Royal Veterinary College, London, in October. 22. The cost of training in England amounted to Rs. 3,280, while Rs. 34,200 was paid as contribution to the Bengal Govern- ment towards the cost of upkeep of the Bengal Veterinary College. TABLE II. Treatment of disease. 23. The distribution of the outbreaks of the different contagious livestock diseases is shown in the map attached. No extensive outbreaks except in the Dinapur and sadr subdivi- sions of Patna district occurred during the year. As regards Korth Bihar Range, the Deputy Director remarks as follows : " Though all the cattle diseases except Anthrax were reported during the period, the year was still healthier than the preceding one." The same remark applies generally in the case of the Central Range. For the reasons above mentioned, there was a marked fall in the number of deaths from contagious diseases, but such fluctuations are generally a prelude to high mortality later. But even this could be considerably lessened if there was a much larger staff. The smaller the area each assistant has to control, the fewer the outbreaks that remain unattended. As far as this province is concerned, the question of staff is really one of finance. In spite of the fact that Government gives liberal assistance to district boards willing to employ touring assistants, many local bodies still are very slow in making these appointments. As an instance, the district board,
6 Shahabad has just resolved to abolish two very important posts* viz. the second touring veterinary assistant surgeons stationed at Barahpur and Bikramganj, although the district from its situa- tion and its importance as an agricultural and cattle-breeding tract should have double the number of such officers to deal with disease effectively. It is also to be regretted that the Patna and Bhagal- pur district boards have not yet been able to provide funds although additional assistants are badly needed. Some radical change in the method of making these appointments is required. Boards will not recognise that the raiyat and his interests are paramount, and that his main industry should be improved wherever it is possible to do so. 24. Haemorrhagic Septicaemia was reported from all districts except Angul, and rinderpest from seventeen, the exceptions being Saran, Cuttack, Puri and Balasore. Although there has been an appreciable decrease in the number of out- breaks under all other heads, statistics show that foot and mouth disease was much more widespread and affected all districts without exception. Altogether 5,151 outbreaks were reported, and of these, 4,137 were attended by the staff, compared with 6,408 reported and 4,912 attended in 1925-26. Foot and mouth disease alone was responsible for 3,287 outbreaks. Including 93,739 cases of this disease, 111,924 animals were affected out of which 9,179 died, against 116,872 attacks and 16,275 deaths recorded in the previous year. The main feature in these outbreaks is that although the difference in the number reported during the last two years is 1,257 only, the mortality during the year was lower by more than seven thousand. 25. The statistics of contagious diseases according to the area and cattle population of each range are shown in the following: table :7 Equine. 27- Glanders.8 while at Dinapur it occurred within the cantonment, which was declared a " prohibited area " by the military authorities until the outbreak subsided. Altogether 215 animals died in these outbreaks out of 513 affected. 33. Foot and mouth disease.9 Canine. 39. Rabies.10 were accordingly 78,833 cattle protected from this very fatal disease against 59,733 in the year 1925-26 which shows an increase of 19,100 inoculations under this head. Only 28 inoculated cattle died, the death rate among the inoculated being .03 per cent. 43. Anthrax.11 to be recovered for products received from Muktesar, but this sum includes the value of 82,770 doses of sera and vaccines in stock on 31st March 1927. Excluding the stock in hand and the amount due by the department, the amount payable by local bodies is Its. 37,087. Inspite of reminders, many local bodies have not paid the bills for serum supplied up to the end of February 1927 while some have not even cleared up their arrears for the year 1925-26. 47. The charge for serum has proved a burden to many district boards and impeded the natural expansion of the department in so far as they have not been able to take additional touring assistants which would otherwise have been the case. TABLE IV. Number of animals treated. 48 The total number of veterinary assistant surgeons on touring duty was 97 against 90 employed in 1925-26. It includes those assistants who held charge of the hospitals at Ranchi, Begusarai, Dinapur and Palamau. 49. In North Bihar, the posts of second touring assistants sanctiond for the Madhipura, Araria and Begusarai subdivisions were filled during the year. The Saran district board approved of the creation of a post of second touring veterinary assistant surgeon for the Gopalganj subdivision, but the qusstion of the appointment of another officer of this class for Chapra sadr which was awaiting the approval of the Board for some time has been now approved. 50. In the Central range only two posts for Monghyr sadr and Jamui subdivisions which were noticed in the Government resolution on the anuual report for 1925-26 were sanctioned and filled. None of the other posts, viz. one each for the sadr and Banka subdivisions of Bhagalpur district, one at Barhi in Hazaribagh and also the touring veterinary assistant surgeon proposed for Patna City subdivision could be sanctioned as the local bodies were unable to provide funds. 51. The position with regard to the Orissa range was almost the same as no fresh appointment was made except at Banki which being a Government estate, the district board, Cuttack, agreed only to make a contribution equal to half the pay and allowances of the assistant and half of the contingent charges. The district board, Manbhum, have decided to accept another
12 touring veterinary assistant surgeon for the sadr subdivision from 1st April 1927, while the question of appointment of a fourth touring veterinary assistaut surgeon by the Singh- bhum district board remained undecided. In order to give proper veterinary aid to the outlying parts of Angul district Government was pleased to sanction the appointment of a second touring veterinary assistant surgeon for the sadr subdivision with effect from 1st April 1927. 52. No buildings for the Government dispensaries at Simdega and Banki were constructed. Plans and estimates are however in course of preparation and will be submitted when ready. The quarters for the touring veterinary assistant surgeon and those for the menial staff attached to the dispensary at Phulbani were almost completed during the year, but the repairs of the buildings taken over from the Agriculture Department for the dispensary at Angul could not be undertaken for want of funds. 53. It is a matter of regret that inspite of the remarks made in the Annual Report for 1925.26, and the hope expressed by Government in their resolution reviewing that report, no other local bodies have accepted additional touring veterinary assistant surgeons although these officers are the only agents available for saving livestock from the ravages of contagious diseases. District boards as a whole are favourable to the expansion of the Depart- ment but the fact that many members are young and inexperi- enced in respect of agricultural conditions and especially the difficulties attending its proper working and the importance of livestock to the industry, militates against any rapid advance in the number of the staff employed. 54. 109,187 fresh cases were treated by touring veterinary assistant surgeons in the mufassal and at headquarters against 80,054 in 1925-26, an increase of 29,133 patients in the year which is very satisfactory. The number included 1,119 castra- tions. Of these including castrations, 27,777 cases were treated by the staff in North Bihar, -16,301 in the central and 35,109 in the Orissa range as compared with 21,809, 30,045 and 28,200 cases respectively in 1925-26. During the year, 58,170 villages were visited against 4.3,877 in the previous year. This number includes 23,214 villages visited in North Bihar, 22,259 in the Central and 12,697 in the Orissa range. TABLE V. Hospitals. 55. The number of hospitals was increased from 30 to 31 by the opening of the new hospital at Giridih. The hospital at
13 Cuttack remained closed as the question of funds is still undecided. The owners of horses and cattle in the town are sending sick animals to the range office for such treatment and advice as circumstances will permit. For financial reasons also the Pari district board and municipality could not see their way to apply for the post of a stationary assistant although a hospital was built with provincial funds in 1925-20. The touring veteri- nary assistant surgeon holds charge of this hospital. The new hospitals at Ranchi (for which Government made a grant of Rs. 11,915) and at Purulia are under construction and will bo completed during 1927-28. A site was selected for a new hospital at Balasore, but the district hoard is now not in a position to acquire the land owing to lack of funds. It is pro- posed to open and maintain a veterinary hospital at Hiranpur, District Santal Pargauas, jointly with the district road com- mittee. Government sanctioned a grant of Its. 10,056 towards construction of new buildings; it was subsequently decided to purchase the exisisting medical dispensary at Hiranpur from the road committee with this grant, the committee bearing the cost of such alterations as are required. 56. 40,336 new patients were treated in the hospitals against 40,831 in 1925-20. Of this number 23,311 were treated in 1 |. hospitals in North Bihar, 13,504 in 10 of the Central and 9,521 in 7 hospitals of the Orissa range. In addition to these 1,012 castrations were performed in the three ranges compared with 1,100 in 1925-26. Medicines were also supplied for 0,500 cases not brought to the hospitals. 57. The castrations of animals by the Burdizzo method was introduced during the year and is being actively carried on. TABLE VIII. Breeding operations. 58. The Development Board at a meeting held on the 18th September 1926 considered a scheme for the breeding of buffaloes together with a note from the Director of Agriculture in which he proposed to purchase annually bulls of a superior type from the Punjab and the Military Dairy Farms and rear them at the Sipaya farm for distribution later. The points to decide were whether these bulls and others available for distribution should in future be kept at the veterinary hospitals or at other suit- able places, whether they should remain Government property and whether Goverement should pay for their maintenance and also whether their distribution should be undertaken by the Agricultural or by the Veterinary Department. After considera- tion, the Board concluded that the Agriculture Department
14 should be concerned only with the breeding of these bulls or their purchase from the Punjab, while the Veterinary Depart- ment should arrange for their distribution, that the bulls should remain Government property if Government are to pay for their maintenance ; district boards willing to undertake their maintenance may keep them either at veterinary hospitals or arrange with private persons to keep them. Government accep- ted these recommendations and recorded them in their resolution on the findings of the Cattle Committe. 69. To inaugurate the above scheme two buffalo bulls which were already on the Sipaya farm were supplied to the district boards of Patna and Shahabad. They have been located at the Dinapur and Arrah hospitals. The main cattle breeding project outlined in the Committee's report is awaiting the opening of the Phulwari and Cuttack farms. 60. The Bihar and Orissa Cattle Protection Bill again came up for discussion in the Legislative Council but was with- drawn. The whole question relating to the passing of all-India legislation for protection and improvement of livestock is now before the Royal Commission on Agriculture. 61. Fifty-nine bulls including five, the property of Govern- ment were maintained as different veterinary hospitals during the year against 55 in 1925-26. Six new bulls were obtained while 2 died and I was sent to Gosala. One of the 16 Shahabad district board bulls was reported to be missing and has not yet been recoverred. Details as to the distribution of the bulls are shown in the table. TABLE IX. Cattle farms. 62. The Bettiah Raj Cattle farm was closed down in 1925-26, the only existing cattle farm which comes under revision is the Government cattle farm, Sipaya, which consisted of 202 animals on the 1st April 1926. At the close of the year, there were 291 animals comprising 11 bulls (including 6 buffaloes), 20 cows, 60 male stock, 129 female stock (including 40 buffalo heifers) and 71 working bullocks. 63. The up-keep of the farm cost Rs. 30,355 against Rs. 24,834 and the receipts from the different heads amounted to Rs. 15,348 against Rs. 11,201 in the preceding year. PHULWARI CATTLE-BREEDING AND DAIRY FARM. 64. This farm was started nominally on the 1st October 1926, on the old university site at Phulwari which
15 consists of an area of about six hundred and forty acres. The primary object of this farm is to breed bulls of a milking strain for distribution in the "villages. It is also to be used for demonstrating agricultural methods and animal husbandry to the students of the veterinary college, which is also to be located on this area. It will be under the control of the Director of the Civil Veterinary Department and the Principal of the Veterinary College. Very little work was done during the year beyond the cultivation of fodder crops and for this purpose a portion was settled with the local raiyats under the hal -share system pending the arrival of ploughs and other agricultural implements. Pits containing 2,300 maunds of silage were prepared and a large quantity of grain such as pulses, mustard, etc., was harvested and either stocked or sold, the sale proceeds being credited to Government. 65. The following stock were purchased :16 TABLES XIII AND XIV. Fairs and shows. 70. All the fairs and shows were attended by the subordi- nate staff. the Sitan arhi and Hardi fairs were visited by the Deputy Director and the Khagra fair by Babu Nilmoni Chattarji. Captain Riley as Officiating Director visited the Sonepur fair. I was present at the Barahpur fair where some cattle were purchased for the Phulwari farm. There was an increase in the numbers present under each class especially under " cows " the number of which was nearly double that of the previous year. 40,302 cattle were booked to different places from stations under the Sonepur district of the Bengal and North-Western Railway. The particulars of the important horse and cattle fairs and shows are given in the tables. PROVINCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. 71. Due to changes in the personnel of the superior cadre the post of Assistant Director, Central Range, remained vacant from 26th April to 2nd November 1926 and from 23rd January 1927 to 14th February 1927. Similarly, the post of Assistant Director, North Bihar Range, was vacant from 1st April to 11th December 1926 and also from 11th February to March 31st, as both these officers relieved the Deputy Directors. While in charge of the North Bihar Range, Babu Nilmoni Chattarji assisted the Officiating Director at Patna in the work connected with the College and the farm. Rai Sahib P. N. Das acted as Assistant Director of the Central Range from 3rd November 1926 to 22nd January 1927. TABLE VII. Subordinate Establishment. 72. The regrading of the inspectors took effect from the 1st April 1926. Inspectors, Babus N. N. Ghose and J. L. Bose were appointed to the first grade on Rs. 200 and Babu R. K. Ram to the second grade on Rs. 160. Two other inspectors who were drawing Rs. 10(3 each were placed on the third grade on Us. 130. Two new circles, Chaibassa and Dumka, having been created during the year, veterinary assistant surgeons, Babus I. B. Ghose and M. M. Banarji were appointed
17 inspectors on Rs. 130 each and took over charge from 1st and 15th April 1926, respectively. There were thus 13 inspectors in the regular cadre against 11 in 1925-26, viz., 2 on 1st grade (Rs. 200), 3 on 2nd grade (Rs. 160), 8 on 3rd grade (Rs. 130) In addition to these posts one inspector under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act for the Patna Municipal area was sanctioned on Rs. 100, veterinary assistant surgeon, Babu S. B. Sahay taking charge from 15th January 1927. Owing to severe and prolonged illness, Babu R. K. Ram reverted to the senior grade of veterinary assistant surgeon and went on leave for six months from the 6th January 1927. Babu N. N. Ghose being in charge of the Phulwari farm and Babu R. K. Ram being placed on the reserve list, the posts of veterinary inspectors, Arrah and Patna circles, fell vacant. Staff veterinary assistant surgeon, Babu A. K. Ghose was accordingly appointed to act as officiating inspector of the Patna circle on Rs. 130 from 3rd January 1927. He also held charge of the Arrah circle from the same date. 13. There was no change in the laboratory staff except that Laboratory Assistant Babu P. Panda was on leave for one month and 8 days from the 7th March 1927 and his assistant Babu B. M. Lahiri officiated. One of the six posts of staff veterinary assistant surgeons was vacant throughout the year. On the 1st April 1926, there were 118 veterinary assis- tant surgeons employed in districts including the veterinary assistant under the Bettiah Raj. Five Bihar and Orissa and ten Bengal graduates joined the department making a total of 133. Of these, 3 acted as leave reserve, 1 was appointed inspector under the Cruelty to Animals Act, 3 were removed, 3 resigned, 2 were discharged and 1 died. There were there- fore 120 veterinary assistant surgeons employed in the districts at the end of the year. For want of suitable graduates 9 posts out of a total of 12 leave reserve assistants also remained vacant. To fill up the existing vacancies ten Bengal graduates as mentioned above were appointed as veterinary assistant surgeons temporarily for twelve months or until they were replaced by graduates of this Province. One of these assis- tants resigned while another was discharged, eight remaining up to the end of the year.
18 74. The distribution of the subordinate staff working in each range is shown in the following table. Range. Veterinary Inspector. Staff Veteri- nary Assistant Surgeon. Assistant. nary surgeons. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon employed in district. Hospital Touring. North Bihar 4 2 1 ... 11 28 Central ... 6 1 2 2 8 42 Orisaa ... 3 2 1 1 6 25 Total ... 13 5 4 3 25 85 The following officers are commended for good work :- North Bihar Range. Veterinary Inspector.19 required to submit, but even with this smaller number the variety of disease diagnosed is an indication of the urgent need of additional diagnostic centres, better teaching of the assistants and of increased provision for research into all classes of livestock diseases. 76. The following table shows the number of specimens received and the diseases diagnosed in each range:20 experimental station at Muzaffarpur with intravenous injection of tartar emetic and was discharged completely cured. Further experiments could not be made for want of suitable cases. 79. In the Orissa range, a considerable number of patholo- gical specimens and internal and external parasites were collected during the year. 80. Enquiries into the prevalence of tuberculosis and con- tagious abortion in cattle were abortive, but it is hoped to be able to obtain the help of the Muktesar laboratory for this work in the next year. TABLE XIV(a). Expenditure. 81. Details of expenditure under different heads are shown in this table. During the year, a sum of Rs. 6,18,125-13-11, was expended as compared with Rs. 5,35,388-15-9 in 1925-26, the increase being Hue to increased expenditure on staff, cost of instruction and breeding operations. Of the total amount, a sum of Rs. 3,19,105-7-5 was spent by Government and Rs. 2,99,020-6-6 by local bodies employing veterinary assistant surgeons. Compared with the total provin- cial revenues the expenditure incurred by Government amounts to approximately 5 per cent. The figures shown under " Provin- cial " were supplied by the Accountant-General while those shown under " Local " were obtained from the chairman of the local bodies concerned. GENERAL REMARKS. 82. During the year, greater attention was paid to the prevention of cruelty to animals, with the result that 617 cases were sent up for trial against 124 in the previous year. In consequence of the appointment of an inspector under the Act for the Patna City municipality, the condition of the ghari and ekka ponies appears to have markedly improved. During a period of two and a half months, 172 cases were detected and all of them were convicted. Rules for the adminis- tration of the Act within the municipal area were framed in consultation with the district authorities and submitted to the municipality for approval. The District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police, Patna, gave the inspector valuable assistance. It is hoped that other district and municipal bodies will follow the example shown by the authorities in Muzaffarpur where the Magistrate and the district board assisted the staff of the department in the suppression of cruelty.
21 83. Regarding the popularity of the Department, the Deputy Director, North Bihar Range quotes the following remarks made by the chairman, district board, Muzaffarpur:TABLE II.
ii TABLE II. Showing number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals during the year 1926-27. District, Equines. Bovines. Others. Remarks. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Poot-and-mouth disease. Hemorrhagic Septicemia. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other contagi- ous diseases. Total. Rabies. Tetanus in goats. Fowl Cholera. Anthrax in goats. Anthrax in sheep. Total. I 2 a 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 1. Patna ... ... 1 2 613 2 398 22 31Ia) 1,066 0 1 10 (a) Includes 1 Babies. 2. Gaya ... ... f78 55 232 38 26 1,124 7 ... 7 3, Shahabad ... ... 32 10 148 45 236 6 6 4. Saran ... ... ... ... 7 80 67 154 5 5 5. Champaran ... ... 3 3 181 14 1 198 16 ... ... .., 16 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... 2 2 41 12 256 33 ... 7 349 8 ... 8 7, Darbhanga ... 1 1 17 2 138 4 161 12 ... ... 12 8. Monghyr ... ... 205, 13 32 250 2 ... 2 9. Bhagalpur ... ... 4 4 186 a 317 ... 14 (l) 519 2 6 8 (b) Includes 1 Rabies. 10. Parnea ... ... ... ... ... 53 ... ... ... 109 ... ... 43 Santal Parganas ... ... i 1 224 ... 1,185 o 5 7
iii 12. Cuttack ... ... ... 9 322 ... 6 337 1 ... 1 23, Balasore ... ... 3 279 2 2 286 ... ... 14. Angul ... 112 6 118 15. Puri ... ... 17 115 132 .. 16. Sambalpur ... ... 102 30 249 39 510 ... 17. Hazaribagh ... ... 263 6 139 4 2 414 4 4 .. 8 18. Ranchi ... 106 48 340 4 1 490 3 9 1 13 19. Palamau ... 2 ... 2 811 "1 G2 38 103 l,685 ... 30. Manbhum ... ... ... ... 107 2 88 1 ... 198 13 4 17 21. Singhbhum ... ... 1 ... 1 135 1 52 1 ... 189 4 4 Total 7 4 ... 4 15 4,674 299 3.706 116 111 273 9,179 94 1 23 6 1 124
IV TABLE III. Statement showing results of preventive inoculation during the year 1926-27. District. Name of disease against which noculation van carried out. Method of inocula- tion followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninocu- lated in course of outbreaks. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inocu- lated animals Which died of the disease. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 a 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Patna ... Rindsrpest AR .. "Serum 50 ... 500 ... ... 4.833 ... ... 02 ... Gaya ... 87 ... 338 ... ... 13,732 ... ... 45 ... Shahabad ... 8 ... 24 ... ... 066 ... ... ... ... Saran ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Champaran ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Muzaffarpur ... 4 ... 23 ... ... 841 ... ... ... ... Darbhanga ... 1 1 ... 2 ... ... 426 ... ... ... ... Monghyr ... 12 ... 33 ... ... 2,407 ... ... ... Bhagalpur ... 10 ... 88 ... ... 4,040 ... ... 4 ... Purnea ... 11 ... 89 ... ... 1,645 ... ... ... ... Santal Par- ganas. 75 ... 403 ... ... 9,649 ... ... 23 ... Guttaok ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Balasoro ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Angul ... 12 ... 46 ... ... 1,941 ... ... 4 ... Pari ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sambalpur ... 12 ... 40 ... ... 2,001 ... ... ... Hazaribagh ... 26 ... 150 ... ... 3,175 ... ... 3 ... Ranchi ... 6 ... 26 ... ... 1,767 ... ... 1 Manbhum ... 20 ... 64 ... ... 4,277 ... ... 1 ... Palamau ... 40 ... 270 ... ... 6,456 ... ... 17 ... Singbhum ... 17 ... 02 ... ... 4,039 ... ... S ... Total... 408 ... 2,264 ... ... 62,280 ... ... 166 Patna ... Hæmor- rhagic Septicæ- mia. H. S. Serum. 15 ... 80 ... ... 2,012 ... ... 11 ... Gaya ... 10 ... 66 ... ... 2,945 ... ... ... ... Shahabad ... 10 ... 20 ... ... 1,633 ... ... ... ... Saran ... 7 ... 17 ... ... 723 ... ...... ... Champaran ... 36 ... 110 ... ... 7,414 ... ... ... ... Muzaffarpur ... 31 ... 142 ... ... 7,253 ... ... ... Dharbhanga ... 24 ... 98 ... ... 12,762 ... ... ... ... Monghyr ... 10 ... 22 ... ... 2,021 ... ... ... ... Bhagalpur ... 40 ... 132 ... ... 9,456 ... ... 8 ...
V TABLE IIIvi TABLE IV. Showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veterinary assistant surgeons on tour during 1926-47. Hospital and Dispensary. Number of Tillages visited. Number of veterinary assistant Burgeons employed. Castrations per- formed Treated for contagions diseases. Treated for non-contagious diseases. Total number of caso6 treated and castrations performed. Remarks. Equines. Bovincs. Others 1 Total. Equines. Bovincs. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 10 12 12 13 14 15 16 17 I. Patne. (Hospital) ... ... ... ... .. ... ... .... ... .... ... ... ... 2. Masaurhi 782 I 1 2 ... 71 ... 71 97 913 32 1,042 1.115 3. Sehra ... 272 6 ... 2 8 I 66 ... 67 43 350 21 414 489 4. Dinapore 184 ... 37 ... 37 5 208 8 221 258 5. Barb ... 362 1 1 397 ... 397 110 722 20 852 1,250 6. Bihar ... 952 8 8 2 111 ... 113 263 627 75 965 1,086 7. Hila ... 301 3 3 338 ... 338 56 607 20 683 1,024 8. Gaya (Hospital) ... ... ... 9. Gaya ... 551 3 3 1,760 ... 1,760 69 195 26 290 2,053 10. Gaya (Additional Tonring) 358 569 ... 569 35 132 7 174 743 11. Shergbati (Gaya) ... 850 2 2 2 323 4 329 159 344 37 540 871 l9. Jehanabad 887 4 9 13 5 261 ... 266 143 587 74 804 1.083
vii 13. Arwal ... 590 1 1 ... 3 3 149 ... 149 91 724 121 936 1,088 14. Nawada 643 1 3 2 5 ... 1,039 ... 2,059 197 818 42 1,057 2,101 15. Warsaliganj 563 1 3 15 18 643 ... 643 88 619 7 714 1,375 16. Aarangabad 586 1 10 10 285 ... 285 156 513 60 729 1,024 17. Daudnagar 470 1 5 ... 2 7 ... 30 ... 30 91 568 33 692 729 18. Arrah (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... 19. Arrali ... 366 1 77 ... 77 1 283 18 297 374 20. Buxar 503 1 2 4 7 13 1 286 ... 287 97 769 76 942 1,242 21. Barahpur 585 1 2 2 33 ... 33 102 562 18 682 717 22. Sassaram 542 1 2 3 5 39 39 98 642 223 963 1,007 1,150 cases su p-- plied with medi- cines. 23. Sassaram (2nd Touring) 591 1 8 8 172 ... 172 37 364 10 411 591 725cases supplied with medicines. 24. Bhabua 544 1 9 1 10 1,232 1,232 153 596 98 847 2,089 25. Chapra (Hospital) ... 58 1 26. Chapra ... 1,189 1 2 4 6 2 22 13 37 169 831 101 1,092 1,135 27. Siwan (Hospital) ... 38 1 ... ... ... ... ... 28. Siwan ... 992 1 ... ... ... 236 597 80 913 913 29. Gopalgauj ... ... 1,355 1 28 ... 28 ... 310 1,218 145 1,673 1,701 30. Motiliari. (Hospital) 1 ... ... 31. Motiliari 1,326 1 6 1 1 3 219 222 163 459 150 772 1,001 32. Baxaul (2nd Touring, Motiliari) 1,094 1 2 2 89 ... 89 190 445 18 653 744 33. Bettiah Estate (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... 34. Bettiah 1,648 1 11 29 40 52 52 379 948 198 1,525 1,617 35. Bagaba (Hospital) 554 1 1 1 ... 58 ... 58 54 597 25 676 735
viii TABLE IVix 48. Jainagar ... ... 624 1 2 1 4 7 ... 11 ... 11 40 628 136 799 817 49. Phulpras ... ... 812 1 ... 20 27 47 ... 247 ... 247 53 1,083 38 1,174 1,468 50. Samatipur (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51. Samastipur ... ... 877 1 ... 2 2 4 ... 288 ... 288 25 567 16 608 900 52. Monghyr (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58 Monghyr ... ... 825 1 ... 11 ... 11 ... 419 ... 419 63 1.088 1 1,152 1,582 54. Khagaria ... ... 609 1 ... 15 ... 15 36 ... 86 72 1,266 31 1,369 1,420 357 cases sup plied with medi- cines. 55. Beguserai ... ... 772 1 ... ... ... ... ... 437 ... 437 100 208 ... 303 740 56. Beguserai (2nd touting) ... 76 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35 65 1 101 101 57. Jamui... ... ... 528 1 2 ... 2 ... 1,517 ... 1,517 9 416 ... 425 1,944 58. Jamui (2nd touring) ... ... 889 1 ... ... ... ... 236 ... 236 10 171 24 205 441 59. Bhagalpur (Hospital) ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60. Bhagalpur ... ... 447 1 ... ... ... ... ... 184 ... 184 4 250 2 256 440 61. Banka ... ... 559 1 ... ... ... ... ... 129 ... 129 80 504 33 617 746 62. Madhipura ... ... 820 1 ... 4 6 10 ... ... ... ... 130 716 2 848 858 68. Bihpur ... ... 415 1 1 1 2 4 ... ... ... ... 28 449 85 512 516 6 4. Supaul (Hospital)... 395 1 ... ... ... ... ... 32 ... 82 55 218 5 278 810 65. Supaul ... ... 638 1 ... 21 54 75 ... 112 ... 112 47 567 97 711 898 66. Purnea (Hospital)... ... 1 ... ... ... ... :.. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67. Purnea ... ... 518 1 8 ... ... 8 ... 174 ... 174 110 491 ... 601 783 68. Katihar ... ... 565 1 ... ... 2 2 1 336 ... 837 57 413 55 525 864 69. Araria ... ... 910 1 10 ... ... 10 ... 75 ... 75 304 866 79 1,251 1,386 70. Forbesganj ... ... 811 1 ... ... ... ... ... 130 ... 130 67 417 9 493 623 71. Kishanganj ... ... 613 1 10 1 ... 11 ... ... ... ... 838 685, 27 1.050 1,061
x TABLE IVxi 84. Balasoro (Hospital) xii TABLE lVxiii 119. Katras ... ... 353 ... ... ... ... 32 ... 32 12 640 146 798 830 320. Chaibassa ... ... 596 ... ... ... ... ... 490 ... 490 6 1,458 105 1,569 2,059 121. Porahat ... ... 851 ... ... ... ... ... 67 ... 67 1 1,250 56 1,307 1,374 322. Ghatsila ... ... 364 ... ... 4 4 ... 274 ... 274 4 425 46 475 753 123. Jamshedpur (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 58,170 122 126 631 362 1119 20 38,735 66 38,821 8,090 56,363 4,794 69,247 109,187
xiv TABLE V. Showing number oj animals treated and castrated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries during the year 1926-27. District. ( Name of hospital.) Number of veterinary dis- penearies. Number ot veterinary assist- ant surgeons jmployod. Number of in-patients treated during the year. Number of out-patients troated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and ont-pationte treated during the year. Total number of oases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other arimals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Rs. Rs. 1. Purulia ... ... 1 1 9 40 26 75 88 633 209 930 1,005 76 ... 2 ... 2 250 3,827 2. Chapra ... ... 1 1 62 87 16 165 382 1,074 483 1,939 2,104 185 3 ... 4 7 217 2,171 3. Muaaffarpar ... 1 1 145 125 62 332 417 780 474 1,671 2,003 158 11 ... 3 14 1,291 5,611 4. Monghyr ... 1 1 45 S8 17 100 98 513 *50 1,061 1,161 58 ... 4 18 22 634 3,017 5. Purnea ... ... 1 1 41 37 9 87 339 408 183 930 1,017 151 1 ... 20 21 1,008 2,280 6. Sitamarhi ... 1 1 61 76 16 153 226 727 151 1,104 1,257 ... 2 2 21 25 199 2,624 7. Dumka (Government hospital). 1 1 15 30 5 50 69 682 130 881 931 1 6 7 67 1,889 8. Banobi* ... ... 1 1 15 29 35 79 207 706 507 1,420 1,499 169 3 8 9 20 1,270 4,938 9. Bankipur ... ... 1 1 167 70 7 244 397 953 750 2,100 2,344 62 1 ... 8 9 683 2,483 19. Laheriaserai ... 1 1 49 80 26 155 312 1,002 293 1,607 1,762 192 10 3 14 27 ... 3,834
xv 11. Gaya ... 1 1 50 101 82 1 233 295 1,072 648 2,015 2,24£ 210 9 ... 9 18 698 4,157 12. Balssore ... 1 1 ... 11 1 12 10 1 788 339 1,137 1,149 34 ... 66 103 169 395 2,095 13. Sambslpnr 1 1 14 85 9 108 34 1,677 81 1,792 1,900 342 ... ... ... ... 759 5,607 14. Bargarh ... 1 1 3 34 2 39 22 1,552 74 1,648 1,687 401 ... 2 ... 2 6 1,055 15. Arrah ... 1 1 26 78 6 no 65 722 232 1,019 1,129 ... 1 1 16 18 207 2,224 16. Hazaribagh 1 1 8 18 15 41 151 1,069 251 1,471 1,512 435 ... 42 14 56 289 1,687 17. Bbagalpnr 1 63 81 14 158 226 740 830 1,296 1,454 ... 5 8 8 21 1,383 2,909 18. Cattackxvii TABLE VII. Showing total strength of subordinate staff employed during the year 1926-27. Province. How employed. Whether paid from Provincial or Local fund. Training staff. Veterinary Inspec- tor. Subordinate staff not included in previous columns. Veterinary Assistant Surgeons. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Bihar and Orissa ... In Schools and Colleges Provincial ... ... ... ... ... In Hospitals 1. Provincial... ... ... ... 24 24 2. Local (under Private Estates). ... ... ... 1 1 On other works ... 1. Provincial... ... 13 9 98 120 2. Local ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 13 xvii TABLE VIII. Return of stud bulls/or the year 1926-27. District. Property of Government. Property of Local Bodies. Number on 1st April 1926. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties daring the year. Balance remain- ingon 31st March 1927. Number of 1st April 1936. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1927. Number. Average price paid. Number. average price paid. 1 2 8 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. Rs. 1. Patna ... 1(a) 1 2 1 140 3 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 ... ... 1(b) 15 4. Saran ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 5. Champaran... 6. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... 8(c) 1 Free 2(d) 7(e) ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... 5(f) 7. Darbhanga... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 8. Monghyr ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 9. Bhagalpur... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 10. Purnea ... ... 1 1 11. Santal Par- ganas. ... ... ... ... 2 1(g) ... ... 3 12. Cuttack ... 2(h) ... 2 ... ... ... ... 13. Balasore ... ... 2 ... ... 1(i) 1 14. Angul 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 15. Puri ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16. Sambalpur ... 1(j) ... ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... 2 17. Hazaribagh ... ... ... ... 1 2 660 ... 3 18. Ranchi ... ... ... 19. Palamau ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 20. Manbbum ... ... ... 1 1 21. Singhbhum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 4(i) 1 ... ... 6 53(c) 6 ... 4 51 (a) Buffalo ball received from Sipaya Farm. Property of Agriculture Department, (b) Hissing. (c) Includes 8 balls belonging to the Bettiah Raj not shown lost year. (d) Pied. (e) Includes four buffalo bulls. (f) Includes one buffalo bull. (g) Received from Pa6a Agricultural Firm maintained by Madhupur Municipality (h) Belongs to Agriculture Department, (i) Sent to Gowshala. (j) Excludes one bull shown in excess lost year.
xviii TABLE IX. Showing main results of the working of Provincial Cattle Farms during the year 1926-27. Province. Name of farm. Receipts. Expenditure. Valuation of stock, grain, and fodder remaining at close of year as detailed on reverse. Remarks, Sale of animals. Sale of produce. Other heads. Total. Salaries of estab- lishment . Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- penses. Purchase of ani- mals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Fodder. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 13 14 15 16 17 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Bihar and Orissst ... Sepaya Farm 152 14,107. 1,089 15,343 3,592 3,343 6,561 7,237 9,622 30,355 24,138 927* S8J* 25,446 * Grain crops not threshed on 31st March 1927 are omitted. Phulwari XIX Valuation statement of cattle, grain and fodder in hand at close of the year 1926-27. Number of quantity. Description. Rate (average). Value. Remarks. No. Quantity. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Mds. SEPAYA FARM. Cattle. Rs. Rs. 1 .... Bull Tharpaker 275 275 2 ... Bulls Montg. that are fresh in ervicc. 150 300 2 ... Do. from Bettiah reserved by the Veterinary Department. 200 400 20 ... Cows 104 2,030 46 ... Male stock, 1 year old & above ... 75 3,450 Do. 1 year old ... ... 14 ... Do. calves 25 350 63 ... Female stock, 1 year old & above 45 3,060 14 ... Do. 1 year old & above (Tharpaker). 177 2,478 7 Do. calves 15 105 6 ... Buffalo bulls 1 year old & above 183 1,098 40 ... Do. Heifer 118 4,720 71 ... Working bullocks 82 5,822 291 ... Total ... 24,138 Grain and fodder. Rs. a. p. 186 Grain Various 927 12 Bhusa 0 8 0 6 1.000 Silage 0 6 0 md. 375 1,198 Total ... 1,308 ... ... Phulwari Farm ... ... Valuation is not shown as the form was just started, with a very limited stuck. 291 1,198 GRAND TOTAL ... ... 25,446
xvii TABLE X. Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies for the year 1926-27 Details. Horse and pony stallions under local bodies. Donkey stallions under local bodies. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies, Italian. Cyprlan. Country-bred. Persian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-brod. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Blank
xxi TABLE XI. Services and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies during 1926-27. Horse, pony or donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March. Stallions actually employed at. staid. Number of mares covered. Average number of mares covered per stallion employed at stud. Year - under- report Previ- ous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Blank. Total ... TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc., of hone, pan?/ and donkey stall-ions during the year Province. HORSE PONY. DONKEY Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Year under Previous report. year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Blank.
xxii TABLE XIII. ;Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1926-27. Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of horse fairs and shows held. Total number of animals present. Total number competing for prizes. Total number of horses stock (not including branded mares) present. Total number of animals sold. Prizes awarded. Amount sanctioned by Government of India. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds, From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 ) Rs. Re. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Bihta ... ... 2. Barahpur 2 2,033 4,110 ... ... ... ... 1,800 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3. Khagra 1 6,040 4,300 60 35 ... 2,640 5,000 ... ... ... 73 73 ... ... ... 4. Sonepur 1 9,680 9,0i7 ... ... ... ... 3,259 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5. Singheswarthan 1 400 500 ... ... ... ... 250 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6. Dharamganj ... 1 2,600 3,000 ... 30 ... ... 898 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Hardi 1 5,000 4,000 ... ... ... ... 1,035 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8. Madhuban 1 250 400 ... ... ... ... 150 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9. Bettiah Dasehra 1 2,000 1,610 15 ... ... ... 500 ... ... ... 10 10 10 3 ... 10. Biswabhusunda 1 1,000 1,000 ... ... ... 700 600 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11. Purnea city ... 1 400 350 30 25 ... ... 86 ... 200 290 ... 400 347 I ... ... Total ... 11 28,403 27,287 105 90 ... 3,340 13,077 ... 200 200 83 573 367 3 ...
TABLE XIV.
xxiv TABLE Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Number of stock present. Avenge price Balls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. Rs. 1. Sitamarhi ... 1 ... 11,000 ... 4,000 ... ... 2,000 ... 150 2. Khagra ... 1 ... 27,000 3,200 3,000 7,500 935 935 ... 40 to 200 3. Chatra ... 1 ... 3.000 2,700 2,100 200 ... 1,000 ... 80 4. Bihla ... 1 10 4,000 700 ... 290 ... ... ... 75 5. Sonepur ... 1 6 32,575 1,315 600 1,100 64 760 ... 10 to 826 6. Barahpur ... .. 11,000 2,643 13,000 3,100 ... ... ... 25 to 360 7. Dharamganj ... 1 .. 16,000 1,200 4,000 6,800 ... ... 20 to 250 8. Biswabhusunda ... 1 ... 5,000 600 2,000 1,200 ... 2,000 ... 15 to 100 9. Loalong ... 1 ... 4,700 400 2,000 468 ... 432 ... 30 10. Chanderdohi ... 1 ... 8,060 e,040 2,400 3,500 ... ... ... 25 to 200 11. Madhuban ... 1 ... 3,000 ... 2,000 ... ... ... ... 150 13. Bettiah Dasehra ... 1 ... 23,200 ... 800 ... ... ... ... 40 to 50 13. Bafiganj ... 1 ... 2,000 600 ... ... ... ... ... 36 to 80 14. Singheswarthan ... 1 ... ... .., ... ... ... 397 ... ... 15. Motipur ... ... 1 14,000 ... 6,000 ... ... ... 100 to 200 16. Hardi ... ... 1 ... 17,000 ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... 17. Tirhut Show ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... 18. Bhuiro-asthan ... ... 16,000 ... 9,000 ... ... ... 92 to 200 19. Deokund ... 1 ... 4,000 500 500 500 ... ... ... 35 20. Purne city ... 1 ... 4,050 400 1,500 800 ... 150 ... 40 to 160 Total ... 20 16 206,585 16,198 52,900 25,458 999 7,681 ... ...
xxv XIV. shorn held during the year 1926-27. of animal sold. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that competed for prizes. Pries awarded. Number of medals awarded. Remark*. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other sources. Total 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 25 Rs. Rs. Rs- Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. ... ... ... 1,100 30 ... 150 250 400 ... 40 to 125 15 to 800 60 to 125 31,000 250 ... ... 256 356 ... 60 50 ... 500 ... ... ... ... ... ... 60 95 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 to 400 80 to 400 135 to 260 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 to 200 40 to 250 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 to 50 30 to 250 ... 12,400 35 ... ... 190 200 390 ... 26 to 150 50 to 200 ... ... 16 ... ... 100 ... ... ... 25 40 422 ... 36 to 90 25 to 250 ... 7,825 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,200 75 ... ... 200 490 690 15 25 to 35 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,000 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,025 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 780 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 40 ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 25 to 80 60 to 200 ... 545 164 .. 200 290 ... 490 ... ... ... ... 66,597 570 ... 35C 1,036 946 9601 2,226 15
xxvi TABLE XIV (A) Statement showing the expenditure of the Civil Veterinary Department during the year 1926-27 in the province of Bihar and Orissa. Heads of Account. Amount. Total. Imperial. Provincial. Local. 1 2 3 4 5 Rs. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Superintendence ... 83,088 7 7 ... 83,088 7 7 Veterinary Instruction ... 26,106 1 0 8,564 15 2 34,671 0 2 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 42,063 6 6 75,831 4 1 1,17,894 10 7 Hospitals and dispensaries ... 1,31,814 12 5 1,94,907 1 1 3,26,721 13 6 Prizes ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... 10,051 14 0 10,051 14 0 Breeding-operations ... 36,032 11 1 1 9,665 4 2 45,698 0 1 Total ... 3,19,105 7 5 2,99,020 6 6 6,18,125 13 11 B. & O. G. P. (C. V. D.) no. 24-352No. 1142-D. GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA. MINISTRY OF EDUCATION. RESOLUTION. Dated the 12th April 1928. READ2 hoped that the college will on completion he able to compare by no means unfavourably with any other institution of this nature in India. If the buildings can be completed in time for the purpose the first session of the college will be held in the year 1929. 3. Breeding operations.3 than in preceding years. The total number of deaths was only 9,179 against 16,275 in 1925-26 and 20,445 in 1924-25. There was only one serious outbreak of rinderpest during the year. This occurred in Bankipore and Dinapur and affected 513 animals, of which 215 died. In all there were 879 outbreaks of this disease, in which 12,626 animals were affected against 1907 affecting 27,359 animals1 in 1925-26. The number of recorded deaths decreased from 10,384 to 4,674. Similarly, the number of cases of haemorrhagic septicaemia fell from 6,723 to 5,182 and the number of deaths from 4,988 to 3,706. The prevalence of foot and mouth disease is spreading and this disease attacked 93,739 animals during the year, against 82,459 in 1925-26 and 78,725 in 1924-25. It is very satisfactory to record, however, that in spite of this increase in the number of animals affected the number of recorded deaths decreased from 570 in 1924-25 and 501 in 1925-26 to only 299 during the year under review. The rapidly growing appreciation by the public of the work of the department is shown by the steady increase in the number of cases which are brought for treatment to the veterinary hospitals or are treated by the touring veterinary assistant surgeons. The number of new patients treated in hospitals has risen from 36,117 in 1924-25 to 46,336 in 1926-27 and the number of fresh cases (including castra- tions) treated by touring officers in the muffasil or at head- quarters has increased from 70,893 to 109,187. It is of interest to compare the present position with that of ten years ago. During the five* years ending 1916-17, i.e., during the first few years or the separate existence of the province, the total number of fresh hospital and mufassil cases averaged 72,368. During the last five years they have averaged 121,863 and now stand at 155,523. This is a satisfactory achievement. 5. Increase of staff.4 required. Only one new hospital viz., that at Giridih was opened and only seven additional veterinary assistant surgeons on touring duty were employed during the year, the total number of such officers now being 97. Govern- ment agree with the Director that there is a wide scope for the expansion of the work of the department and the general progress recorded in the report shows that the present moment is suitable for such an expansion if funds can be found to finance it. 6. Cruelty to animals.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1927-28 PATNA SUPERINTENDENT. GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1928 [Price Rs 1.]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1927-28 PATNA : SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA. 1928 [Price Rs. 1.]
Priced Publications of the Government of Bihar and Orissa can be had fromNo. 8412-V.D. FROM MAJOR P. B. RILEY, I.V.S., OFFG. DIRECTOR, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BIHAR AND ORISSA To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT, PATNA. Dated Patna, the 19th November 1928. SUBJECT.CONTENTS. PAGE. 1. General Administration ... ... ... 1ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1927-28 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1. MR. D. QUINLAN held charge of the department as Director and Veterinary Advisor to Government and also as Deputy Director of the Central Range from 1st April 1927 to 6th February 1928, when he proceeded on combined leave for twenty- eight months preparatory to retirement on proportionate pension. During the remaining period, I officiated for Mr. Quinlan, being relieved of my duties as Deputy Director of North Bihar Range by Mr. Ismail Malik, the Special Officer on the 10th February 1928. 2. Assistant Director Rai Sahib P. N. Das continued to hold charge of the Orissa Range up to the end of the year. 3. In addition to ordinary inspection duties Mr. Quinlan visited the Imperial Agricultural Research Institute Pusa twice, saw the Bihar and Orissa students at the Bengal Veterinary College, was present at the Sonepur fair, and also selected cows at Karachi for the Government cattle-breeding farm, Patna. During the Puja holidays, he visited the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and on his return submitted a report to Government. While at headquarters, most of his time was spent in pushing on with the work of the cattle- breeding and dairy farm and the proposed veterinary college at Patna. He also gave evidence before the Royal Commission on Agriculture which sat at Patna in November 1927. He was on tour for 99 days. 4. As Officiating Director, I inspected the dispensary at Barh and visited the Bengal Veterinary College, and inspected
2 the herd at Sahour, and supervised the management of the farm and construction of the college buildings. Daily visits were made to the former, in order to regularise the accounts, staff and rations, and to organize the sale of milk. 5. On completion of his training at the Muktesar laboratory, Mr. Malik was again attached to the head office at Patna as temporary Special Officer and occasionally deputed to carry on investigation of diseases in the districts. 6. The question of separation of the Central Range from the Director's control was further considered, but was held in abeyance on financial grounds. For better administration of the Department, this range should be opened as early as possible. With the cattle-breeding and dairy farm and the veterinary college in full working order, it will not be convenient to exercise immediate control over this range. NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 7. As Deputy Director, 1 spent 132 days on tour, travelled 3,220 miles by road in addition to railway journeys, inspected hospitals and dispensaries at Sitamarhi, Motihari, Bettiah, Narkatiaganj, Bagaha, Phulparas, Purnea, Katihar, Araria, Bihpur, Begusarai, Khagaria, etc.; acted as president of the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary Examination Board in April and October 1927, visited important fairs and the Government farm at the Imperial Agricultural Institute, Pusa, and purchased bullocks at the Barahpur fair for the Patna breeding farm. 8. During his short incumbency as Special Officer in charge Mr. Malik was on tour for 9 days, travelled 130 miles by road, inspected hospitals and dispensaries at Purneah, Araria, Madhipura and Thana Bihpur as well as the site for the pro- posed new veterinary hospital at Purneah, visited the Pusa farm, and the Sitamarhi fair and purchased some bulls and cows for the Bettiah Raj. 9. The electric fittings in the office buildings and residence for the Deputy Director were completed during the year but current was supplied only to the residence. The office being situated outside the municipal area, the supply of current requires special sanction of Government which has since been applied for. ORISSA RANGE. 10. Rai Sahib P. N. Das held charge of the range through- out the year. He inspected all veterinary hospitals and also the dispensaries at Banki, Puri, Angul, Phulbani, Balasore, Soro, Bhadrak, Sambalpur, Bargarh, Chaibassa, Porahat, Ghatsila,
3 Balarampur, Raghunathpur, Dhanbad, Ranchi, Khunti, Gumla and Simdega; checked the district work of the subordinate officers as far as practicable and explained to the villagers the utility of this department wherever possible ; visited many villages where outbreaks of cattle diseases occurred, personally verifying the results of inoculations ; inspected the offices of the veterinary inspectors, Ranchi and Chaibassa, the Kheda office at Angul and some of the Pinjrapoles of the range; besides, he attended au outbreak of surra at Jamshedpur, some meetings of district boards and Divisional Development Boards, a meeting of the Selection Board held at Ranchi; gave evidence before the Opium Enquiry Committee at Cuttack and also acted as a member of three site selection committees. 11. He was on tour for 212 days and travelled 3,654 miles by road. 12. The newly constructed buildiugs for the office and laboratory were occupied from the 1st November 1927, the previous rented house being vacated. The question of electric installations in these buildings was under consideration, but the work of raising of the ground of the office compound was takcu in hand. Plans and estimates for certain other improvements to the new office buildings are in course of preparation. VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. 13. Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College.4 14. Training at the Bengal Veterinary College.5 the cost of training in England amounted to Rs. 3,867 while Rs. 86,773 was paid to the Bengal Government as contribution towards maintenance of the Bengal Veterinary College. TABLE II. TREATMENT OF DISEASE. 20. The enclosed map will show the prevalence of the different contagious livestock diseases in the province during the year under report. No extensive outbreak of rinderpest occurred except one in Shahabad during, the year. Unlike the previous year, contagious diseases of cattle were reported almost from all districts and consequently the number of deaths considerably increased ; the districts of Cuttack and Balasore were however free from rinderpest. During the year, anthrax caused heavy mortalities in the Central and Orissa ranges. The increase in the number of deaths from different diseases was to some extent due to non-attendance of about seventeen hundred reported outbreaks as the staff was quite insufficient for the purpose. 21. Altogether, 8,394 outbreaks were reported and of these 6,68-1 were attended by the staff compared with 5 151 reported and 4,137 attended in 1926-27. Foot and mouth disease alone was responsible for 5,373 outbreaks. Including 175,718 cases of this disease, 200,075 animals were affected, out of which 11,251 died against 111,924 attacks and 9,179 deaths recorded in the previous year. 22. The statistics of contagious diseases according to the area and cattle population of each range are shown in the following table :6 23. Chaukidars punished or rewarded.7 30. Altogether 14,623 cattle were affected in 1,148 out- breaks and out of these 6,405 died, against 12,626 attacks in 879 outbreaks and 4,674 deaths during the year 1926-27. 31. Particulars of the outbreaks of rinderpest in respect of each range as compared with the previous year are shown below:8 35. Anthrax,9 39. The details in respect of each district are shown in table III. 40. Rinderpest.10 died as against two in 1926-27. No outbreak was reported except in Charaparan and North Bhagalpur of the North Bihar range. The disease was absent in this range in the preceding year. 47. Black-quarter.11 49. In spite of repeated reminders issued local bodies have in many cases failed to meet the entire cost of serum supplied while some of them have approached Government for redemp- tion which has resulted in heavy outstanding at the close of the year. Some kind of decision should be arrived at in this connection, and it is satisfactory to note that it is now under the consideration of Government. Their decision is being anxiously awaited. TABLE IV. NUMBER OF ANIMALS TREATED. 50. The total number of veterinary assistant surgeons on touring duty was 92 against 97 employed in 1926-27. It includes those assistants who held charge of the hospitals at Ranchi, Begusarai, Dinapur and Palamau. 51. In North Bihar two new posts of second touring assistant surgeons for the Gopalganj and Samastipur subdivisions were filled during the year. The post of 2nd touring assistant surgeon for the Begusarai subdivision, which was created last year, was converted into one of hospital assistant surgeon. The question of construction of small veterinary dispensaries in outlying stations of Purneah district is now under the considera- tion of the district board. 52. In the Central range, only one post of third touring assistant surgeon for Aurangabad subdivision was sanctioned but could not be filled as the district board was unable to meet the expenditure for want of budget provision. A proposal for the creation of a post of touring assistant surgeon by Government for the long neglected Jamtara subdivision of the Santal Parganas district is now under consideration. None of the posts mentioned in previous year's report viz. at Bhagalpur, Banka, Barhi (Hazaribagh) and Patna City could be created owing to shortage of funds at the disposal of the local bodies concerned. 53. In Orissa range, the post of 2nd touring assistant surgeon for the Angul sadr subdivision, which was created last year, was filled. During the year two additional posts, one for Bhadrak and another for Manbhum sadr subdivision, were sanctioned; but owing to shortage of officers only the latter post could be filled. 54. The quarters for the touring assistant surgeon and the menial staff of the Phulbani veterinary dispensary were completed during the year, while the proposal for the construction
12 of quarters for the second touring assistant surgeon of Angul was submitted to Government for approval. The position with regard to the construction of Government dispensaries at Simdega and Banki has not much improved ; plans and estimates for the former have just been received, while steps are being taken to acquire the land selected for the latter dispensary. 55. The same remarks as were made by Mr. Quinlan in paragraph 53 of previous year's report regarding extension of veterinary relief by the local bodies to livestock owners still hold good, as will appear from statements made in the preceding paragraphs. The district board of Shahabad, instead of creating an additional post of touring assistant surgeon which is urgently required for the Bhabua subdivision, decided to abolish two such posts for the Sadr and Sasaram subdivisions with a view to retrenching expenditure. This action on the part of the board was however not approved by Government. A similar resolution was also adopted by the district board, Moughyr, in respect of the second touring veterinary assistant surgeons employed in Begusarai and Jamui subdivisions. It was subsequently withdrawn when their request to convert one of the two touring assistants at Begusarai was acceded to. 56. During the year under report 167,518 fresh cases were treated by touring veterinary assistant surgeons in the districts and at headquarters including 6,256 castrations as against 109,187 in the previous year, 'The increase of 58,331 patients during the year is very satisfactory, and it is evident that veterinary aid is now being appreciated by the public. Of the total number including castrations, 32,151 cases were treated by the staff in North Bihar, 61,973 in Central and 73,391- in Orissa range, as against 27,777, 46,301 and 35,109 cases respectively in the year 1926-27, the increase in Orissa range being largely due to foot and mouth disease. There has also been a marked improvement in the number of visits of the touring staff as 63,973 villages were visited by them during the year against 58,170, the figures according to ranges being 26,933 for North Bihar, 24,373 for Central and 12,667 for Orissa range compared with 23,214, 22,259 and 12,697, respectively in the previous year. TABLE V. HOSPITALS. 57. The number of hospitals including those in charge of the touring veterinary assistant surgeons was 31 as shown in the report for 1926-27. The hospital at Cuttack remained closed
13 throughout the year, but the district board and the municipality, Cuttack, have since decided to reopen it in a building on the local Khasmahal land after slight alterations; proposals for the transfer of the land including the building have been submitted for approval. It is now expected that this hospital will be reopened next year. A stationary veterinary assistant surgeon for the new hospital at Puri, to be maintained jointly by the district board and the Puri municipality, was sanctioned during the year, but the post could not be filled. The new buildings for the hospitals at Ranchi and Purulia were completed but construction of the hospital at Balasore, for which a site has already been selected, could not be taken in hand as the district board was unable to provide funds. During the year sites for the construction of two new hospitals at Laheriasarai and Purnea were also selected and plans and estimates are in course of preparation. The work connected with the conversion of the human dispensary at Hiranpur into a Government veterinary hospital is still in progress and it is hoped that the hospital will be opened early in 1929-30. One of the two posts of touring veterinary assistant surgeons of Begusarai subdivision was converted into that of a hospital assistant surgeon. 58. The attitude of the district board, Patna, towards this department is not very encouraging as in spite of the urgent necessity impressed upon them by Government for the creation of a post of stationary veterinary assistant surgeon for Dinapur no action appears to have been taken by them. Moreover, the board is about to retransfer the Bankipur veterinary hospital to the Patna municipality, which means that they are not disposed to maintain even a single hospital in the district. 59. The total number of patients treated at the veterinary hospitals during the year under report was 51,505 against 46,336 in 1926-27. Out of these, 25,553 were treated in 14 hospitals in the North Bihar, 14,717 in 10 of the Central and 11,235 in 7 hospitals of the Orissa range. In addition to these, 1,675 castrations were performed in the three ranges compared with 1,612 in 1926-27. Medicines were also supplied for 14,969 cases not brought to the hospitals against 6,506 cases of the previous year. 60. Castration of bull calves by the Burdizzo method was encouraged to a greater extent with the result that out of the total number of 7,931 castrations performed both by the touring and stationary staff as shown in tables IV and V, 3,280 were done by this method. This operation is rapidly replacing the older methods as it finds favour with the cultivator wherever it is demonstrated.
14 TABLE VIII. BREEDING OPERATIONS. 6.1. Buffalo breeding.15 TABLE IX. CATTLE FARMS. 64. Patna Cattle breeding and Dairy Farm.16 68. The dairy continued to supply milk to the residents of the New Capital and also undertook to supply it to the General Hospital from 1st March 1928. The average number of cows in milk per day during the year was 43, and the total milk yield was 92,835 lbs, or an average of 6.7 lbs. per cow per day. Of the above, 73,037 lbs. of milk was sold and the balance was fed to the claves. Income from the sale of milk amounted to Rs. 7,303. 69. The total area brought under cultivation during the year was 259 acres, of which 180 was leased on batai system and the remainder was cultivated by the farm agency. Crops such as jowar, gram, oats, khesari and kulthi were sown and harvested. In addition, 5,000 maunds of silage was made during October and November and stocked in silo-pits for use in the dry season. 70. No spring crops could be sown as the irrigation chan- nels constructed by the Irrigation Department proved too large and consequently unsuitable for pump irrigation. This was a great drawback as the milch cattle require succulent fodder at all times in order to give the best results; Government however have been pleased to sanction the remodelling of the channels and the construction of 3 regulators for distribution of water at a cost of Rs. 1,212. It is hoped that there will be no further trouble on this account. 71. With the exception of the Farm Manager's quarters, the Public Works Department completed all the buildings which were sanctioned originally along with the scheme for the farm. Good progress was also made on additional buildings, e.g. bhusa shed, silo-pits etc., which were subsequently sanctioned. 72. Government was pleased to sanction the construction of additional quarters for milk writer, machine-man, etc. at a cost Rs. 24,389, as the presence of these men was constantly required on the farm. Sanction was also given to the construction of a bull shed with compound wall at Rs. 8,470, of which the detailed plans are now under revision. A pucca road was also sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 11,978 and gates and culverts at Rs. 4,275 to be done departmentally. 73. As regards water-supply, provision was made for an open well with necessary equipment at Rs. 4,439, but on further consideration and discussion with the Agricultural Engineer it was decided to have a tube well instead. Accordingly a 5" tube well capable of discharging 6,600 gallons of water per hour was sunk by the Agricultural Engineer on the farm and the total
17 cost including testing charges, price of tanks, pump and pipes amounted to Rs. 4,507 only. It has been decided to use a Worthington pump on this well. 74. The erection of the dairy plant was practically com- pleted during the year by the Indian General Trading Co., Bombay, but the plant could not be tested for want of water-- supply. Construction of drainage on the farm is an urgent necessity and it is hoped that the Public Health Department will be in a position to remove the inconvenience in the near future. 75. The total revenue of the farm amounted to Its. 9,485 including Rs. 1143 from rent of trees and land ; while the total expenditure was Rs. 1,22,469 as shown in the table. It includes the initial cost of machinery, livestock etc., but not the buildings. SlPAYA FARM. 76. Details as to the working of this farm are not given as it is under the control of the Director of Agriculture, Bihar and Orissa, and it does not appear necessary to deal with it in this report any further. TABLES X, XI AND XII. (Blank.) TABLES XIII AND XIV. Fairs and shows. 77. All the fairs and shows were attended by the subordinate staff concerned. The Sita narhi and Sonepur fairs were visited by the Deputy Director. Mr. D. Quinlan also visited the Sonepur fair. The total number of cattle booked to 'different places from stations under the Sonepur and Samastipur districts of the Bengal and North-Western Railway is 52,182. The particulars of the important horse and cattle fairs and shows are given in the tables. PROVINCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. 78. Owing to shortage of officers in the superior cadre, Rai Sahib Priya Nath Das, Assistant Director, Central Range, held charge of the Orissa Range throughout the year, while
18 Babu Nilmoni Chattarji, Assistant Director, North Bihar Range, was attached to the head office and assisted the Director in connection with the work of the college, the farm and the range. The post of Assistant Director, North Bihar Range, remained vacant throughout the year. TABLE VII. SUBORDINATE ESTABLISHMENT. 79. The number of inspectors, including one under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, employed for the Patna City Municipality, was 14 as showa in previous year's report. First grade inspector Babu N. N. Ghose being appointed temporary livestock inspector on Its. 200 per month for one year, the post vacated by him was filled by third grade inspector Babu D. N. Mukharji in charge of Motihari circle from the 1st July 1927, while the last vacancy was filled by veterinary assistant surgeon Babu M. S. Mohon Raj as inspector of the Chaibassa circle on Rs. 130 per month from the same date. Babu D. N. Mukharji also held charge of the Muzaffarpur circle during the absence on deputation of Babu H. K. Roy to the Madras Veterinary College. Staff veterinary assistant surgeon Babu A. K. Ghose was appointed third grade inspector on Rs. 130 per month against a permanent vacancy which was caused by the reversion of Babu R. K. Ram to the post of a senior grade veterinary assistant surgeon. 80. There was no change in the laboratory staff except that assistant laboratory assistant, 1 abu B. M. Lahiri of Patna, was appointed to act as staff veterinary assistant surgeon from the 1st May 1927. For want of a suitable officer trained in labora- tary work, this post remained vacant from that date. Laboratory assistant Babu J. N. Mukharji of Cuttack was on six months deputation to the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and reserve veterinary assistant surgeon Babu P. C. Kunar officiated for him. 81. On the 1st April 1927 there were 123 veterinary Assistant surgeons employed in districts including the veterinary assistant surgeon under the Bettiah estate. Sixteen Bihar and Orissa graduates joined the department, thereby bringing the number to 139. Out of eight Bengal graduates employed on the above date, seven were discharged on the expiry of their term of one year, one only being retained for a further period of 12 months until further orders. There were therefore 132
19 veterinary assistant surgeons on the roll. Of these three acted as leave reserve, two were appointed inspectors, one resigned, one died and two were removed, the total number of officers actually employed in districts at the end of the year being again 123. Owing to shortage of graduates, nine posts out of a total of 12 leave reserve assistants remained vacant. 82. The table below shows the distribution of the subordi- nate staff, range by range :20 Hospital assistant surgeons.21 anthelmintics were of great value. Another experiment in " infectious granuloma "in dogs was undertaken by laboratory assistant Babu P. Panda in order to find out its cause, mode of infection and treatment, if any. Infected material was introduced in healthy dogs by scarification, but the animals did not develop the disease. Further trials in this connection will be made when the college is opened. 87. Special investigation of several diseases was conducted in the laboratory in North Bihar. One Arab pony was treated at the experimental station for non-sweating with Thyroid gland extract and Iodine which proved efficacious, the animal being discharged cured. Though interesting, this experiment could not be proceeded with for want of more cases. The cases treated at the Sathi Factory in 1926-27 for bovine surra did not relapse, showing that the cure effected was permanent. No further case being detected, this experiment also was discontinued. Four ponies were treated for bursatti with intravenous injection of tartar emetic, of which three were discharged completely cured and one was taken away by the owner while under treatment. One ease of Ankylostomiasis in a dog was treated at the experimental station with Tetra Form which made a, complete recovery. In addition, 21 cases of foot and mouth disease were treated with Lugol's solution and 138 cases of Hæn orrhagic Septicaemia with Camphor and Pot. Permanganate by the district staff with satis- factory results. 88. At the laboratory, Cuttack, a fair number of coccidiosis and ankylostomiasis cases were detected and treated with satis- factory results. A dog found suffering both from ankylostomiasis and coccidiosis was treated and cured by officiating laboratory assistant Babu P. C. Kunar with oleum chenopodium. TABLE XIV (a). EXPENDITURE. 89. During the year, a sum of Rs. 6,85,196-11-11 was expend- ed on the department as compared with Rs. 6,18,125-13-11 in 1926-27, the increase being chiefly contributed by the heads " Superintendence," ''Veterinary Instruction " (Provincial) and " Subordinate Establishment " (Local). Of the total amount, a sum of Rs. 3,68,220 was spent by Government and Rs. 3,18,377-11-11 by local bodies against Rs. 3,19,105-7-5 and Rs. 2,99,020-6-6 respectively in the year 1926-27. Compared with the total provincial revenues, the
22 expenditure incurred by Government amounts approximately to 4 per cent. The figures shown under " Provincial " was collected from the Accountant-General's statements while those shown under "Local'' were supplied by the chairmen of local bodies employing veterinary assistant surgeons. Details of expenditure under different heads are shown in the table. PREVENTION OF CRJUEDTY TO ANIMALS. 90. During the year, 1,348 cases of cruelty were sent up for trial against 617 of the preceding year, of which 1,048 ended in conviction. This is a clear indication of the special attention which is now being given to the prevention of cruelty to animals, In Patna alone the inspector under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act prosecuted 573 cases out of which convictions were secured in 473, and 91 cases were pending when the year closed. A sura of Rs. 1,351-13-0, including Rs. 331 from pending cases of the previous year, was realized as fines and credited to the municipal fund. The condition of hackney carriage and ekka services continued to show marked improvements. The rules for the administration of the Act in the municipal area, which were framed in 1926-27, have not yet been approved by the Patna City municipality. In order to bring uniformity throughout the province, steps are being taken to standardize the heights of gharri and ekka ponies and also to introduce some of the provisions of the Cruelty to Animals Act in rural areas of selected districts in order to afford protection to animals in these areas. The whole question of sup- pression of cruelty to animals is now before Government for con- sideration. GENERAL REMARKS. 91. With a few exceptions, the work done by the department was greatly appreciated by local bodies. In North Bihar, the chairman of the district board, Muzaffarpur, again gave expression to his feeling and regretted that the services of this useful depart- ment could not be fully utilized for want of sufficient funds at the disposal of the board. The trend of thought in most district boards is that they consider the charge for serum as a heavy drain on their resources and that local bodies should therefore be relieved of the charges in order to give them a free hand to appoint additional veterinary assistant surgeons. The principle hitherto followed was that the charges on account of serum as a general rule should he met by local bodies, but where a local body
23 is unable to meet them, Government would bear a part of the cost only in exceptional circumstances. As most district boards have now approached Government for a free supply of sera and vaccines on an analogy of the free supply of preventives in a human epidemic, the decision of Government in the matter is being awaited. But the important point to consider is whether the wishes now expressed by certain district boards to entertain additional assistants in lieu of the proposed redemption in the cost of serum will be actually realized, as the question depends upon the particular constitution of each board and the view-point from which it is looked at. 92. Heavy floods again visited parts of Balasore and Cuttack districts causing damage to fodder and loss of a number of cattle in the flooded areas. Owing to prompt measures adopted by detailing veterinary staff and opening travelling veterinary dis- pensaries, no serious outbreak of contagious diseases could occur among the afflicted cattle. A detailed report of the floods was submitted by Rai Sahib P. N. Das, the range officer, who also visited those areas. 93. Silage-making operation (was continued by the staff in Singhbhum district and further extended to the Bargarh sub- division of district Sambalpur with satisfactory results. 94.. As noted before, separation of the Central range from the immediate control of the Director which has been decided upon by Government has become an urgent necessity, and the sooner effect is given to it the better. 95. There has been a heavy rush of work in the head office in consequence of the rapid expansion of the department. It is proposed to strengthen the existing ministerial staff by appoint- ing an office Superintendent and a dealing assistant which are absolutely required to cope with the work. 96. The clerical staff at the head and range offices worked satisfactorily. P. B. RILEY, MAJOR, I.V.S., Offg. Director, Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa, Patna.
ii TABLE II. Showing number of deaths from contagions diseases amongst animals during the year 1927-28. Province. Equines. Bovines. Others. Remarks. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other oonta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hæmorrhaglo Septicæmia. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other contagi- ous diseases. Total. Rabies in dogs Anthrax In Elophant. Fowl Cholera. Other diseases. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 1. Saran ... ... ... ... ... 18 15 424 117 ... ... 674 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Champaran ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 202 26 426 41 34 ... 722 4 ... ... ... ... 4 3. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... ... *1 1 19 4 430 393 ... ... 846 8 ... ... ... ... 8 * Tatanas. 4. Darbhanga ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 ... 440 70 7 ... 555 8 ... ... ... ... 8 5. Monrhyr, (Begusarai and Khagaria). ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 4 80 ... ... ... 114 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.Bhagalpur (Supanl and Madhipura). ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 3 336 2 1 ... 370 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Purnea ... ... ... ... ... ... *1 1 32 8 300 ... ... ... 238 2 ... ... ... ... 2 * Rabies. Total ... ... ... 1 ... 2 3 '367 68 2,236 626 39 ... 3,319 22 ... ... ... ... 22
ii Province. Eqnines. Bovines. Others. Remarks. Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot- nd-mouth discsse. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other conta- gions diseases. Total. Babies in dogs. Anthrax in Elephant. Fowl Cholera. Other diseases. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Patna ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 7 925 ... 2 1 944 4 1 ... ... ... 6 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... ... 557 18 41S ... 78 19 1,087 3 ... ... ... ... 3 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,508 11 365 4 11 50 2,939 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4. Monghyr ... (Except Begussrai and Khagaria). ... ... ... ... ... ... 112 ... 99 ... 9 ... 320 3 ... ... ... ... 3 5. Bhagalpur (Except Supaul and Madhipura). ... ... ... ... 3 3 144 6 365 ... 2 23 460 1 ... 11 6 ... 18 6. Santal Parganas ... ... ... ... ... ... 428 4 535 ... 15 ... 977 3 ... ... ... ... 2 7. Hasaribagh ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 439 4 91 43 20 1 598 3 ... ... ... ... 3 8. Palamau ... ... ... ... ... ... 376 2 71 ... 64 38 451 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 2 ... 4 6 4,468 62 2,776 47 20 132 7,076 16 l ... 6 ... 34
iii ORISSA RANGE. 1. Cuttack ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42 239 ... 105 ... 386 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2. Balasore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 218 ... 20 4 276 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3. Angul ... ... ... ... ... ... 321 57 ... ... ... ... 378 *1 ... ... ... ... 1 * In Jackal. 4. Puri ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 40 70 ... ... 3 119 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5. Sambalpur ... ... 2 ... ... 3 363 36 128 ... 13 265 818 ... ... ... ... ... ... * Include one surra and one rabies, rest of Anthrax but outbreaks not confirmed mi- croscopically. 6. Banehi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 383 40 247 ... 2 iv TABLE III. Statement showing results of preventive inoculation during the year 1927-28 District. Name of disease against which noeulation was carried out. Method of inocula- tion followed. Number of outbrcaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uuinocu- lated in course of outbreaks. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inocu- lated animals which died of the disease. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. | Others. 1 2 8 4 6 6 7 8 10 11 12 13 Patna ... Rinderpest " Serum - alone". 8 ... 7 ... ... 884 ... ... 1 ... Gays. ... 78 ... 213 ... ... 10,794 .. ... 10 ... Shababad ... 183 ... 804 ... ... 17,689 ... ... 316 ... Saran ... 2 ... 15 ... ... 667 ... ... ... ... Champaran ... 31 ... 181 ... ... 6,903 ... ... ... ... Muzaffarpur ... 3 ... 19 ... ... 464 ... ... ... ... Darbhanga ... 4 ... 36 ... ... 873 ... ... ... ... Monghyr 14 ... 71 ... ... 2,803 ... ... ... ... Bhagalpur 33 ... 108 ... ... 4,700 ... ... ... ... Purnea 6 ... 17 ... ... 1,102 ... ... ... ... Santal Par- ganas. 59 ... 673 ... ... 9,076 ... ... 16 ... Cuttack ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Balasore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Angul 88 ... 258 ... ... 3,872 ... ... 80 ... Puri 2 ... 15 ... ... 189 ... ... 3 ... Sambalpur ... 26 ... 87 ... ... 4,866 ... ... 42 ... Hazaribagh ... 61 ... 108 ... ... 6,607 ... ... 6 ... Ranchi 28 ... 108 ... ... 5,681 ... ... 7 Manbhum 43 ... 113 ... ... 8,680 ... ... 3 Palamau 15 ... 100 ... ... 3,197 ... ... ... ... Singbhum 34 190 ... ... 6,722 ... ... 5 ... Total... 587 3,141 ... ... 92,183 ... ... 338 ... Patna ... Hæmor rhagic Septicæ- mia. H. S. Scrnui. 53 ... 211 ... ... 6,734 ... ... 5 ... Gaya 45 ... 223 ... ... 7,807 ... ... 2 ... Shahabad 10 ... 67 ... ... 1,848 ... ... 8 ... Saron 34 ... 99 ... ... 4,250 ... ... ... ... Champaran ... 68 ... 103 ... ... 14,133 ... ... ... ... Muzuffarpur ... 62 ... 264 ... ... 12,606 ... ... ... ... Darbhanga ... 55 ... 107 ... ... 17,760 ... ... ... ... Monghyr 17 ... 60 ... ... 4,276 ... ... ... ... Bhagalpur 67 ... 264 ... 14,731 ... 3 ...
V TABLE IIIvi TABLE IIITABLE IV.
viii TABLE IV. Showing the number of animals treated and castrated by veterinary assistant surgeons on tour during 1927-28. Hospital and Dispensary. Number of villages visited. Number of veterinary assistant employed. Castrations per- formed Treated for contagious diseases. T reated for non-co ntagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Remarks. Equines. Bovines. Others Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 1. Chapra (Hospital)... 40 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Chapra ... 1,388 1 ... 12 ... 12 ... 28 4 32 205 1,012 118 1,335 1,379 8. Siwan (Hospital) ... 213 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4. Siwan ... 1,119 1 ... 15 ... 15 ... ... ... ... 181 662 176 1,019 1,034 5. Gopalganj (1st dispensary) ... 1,316 1 ... 35 ... 35 1 2 5 8 277 1,608 103 1,988 2,031 6. Gopalganj (2nd dispensary) ... 710 1 ... ... ... ... ... 31 ... 3l 63 453 28 544 575 7. Motihari (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8. Motihari 595 1 ... 3 1 4 ... 324 ... 324 114 466 57 637 965 9. Baxaul 1,723 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 70 ... 70 247 848 46 1,141 1,212 10. Bettiah Estate (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11. Bettiah 1,383 1 ... 25 ... 41 ... 70 ... 70 238 937 204 1,379 1,490
ix 12. Bagaha (Hospital) 795 1 1 ... 4 4 ... 399 ... 389 35 750 31 816 1,219 40 cases supplied with medicines. 13. Narkatiaganj 1,145 1 1 6 3 10 ... 18 ... 18 284 1,110 42 1,426 1,454 14. Muzaffarpur (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15. Muzaffarpur (1st dispensary) 757 1 ... ... ... ... ... 107 ... 107 59 660 46 765 872 16. Muzaffarpur (2nd dispy.) 1,424 1 ... ... ... ... 1 4 ... 5 5 557 ... 562 567 17. Sitamarhi (Hospital) 138 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18. Sitamarhi 906 1 ... 6 ... 6 ... 130 ... 130 143 394 74 611 747 19. Sursand 983 1 ... ... ... ... ... 147 ... 147 140 540 55 735 882 20. Hajipur (Hospital) 102 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21. Hajipur 730 1 ... ... 10 10 ... 92 ... 92 154 496 75 725 827 22. Laheria Serai (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23. Laheria Serai 761 1 3 ... 1 4 ... 115 ... 115 87 695 44 826 945 24. Madhubani (Hospital) 13 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 25. Jainagar 807 1 3 9 9 21 ... 52 ... 52 155 977 160 1,292 1,365 26. Phulprus 790 1 ... 42 5 47 ... 192 ... 192 14 1,366 22 1,402 1,641 27. Samastipur (Hospital) ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28. Samastipur ... ... 626 1 ... 16 2 18 ... 67 ... 67 12 600 16 628 713 29. Reserah ... ... 525 1 ... 79 ... 79 ... 28 ... 28 34 632 8 674 781 30. Beguserai (1st dispy.) ... 432 1 ... ... ... ... ... 57 ... 57 48 225 ... 273 330 31. Beguserai (2nd dispy.) ... 776 1 2 17 ... 19 ... 6 ... 6 201 490 6 697 722 32. Khagaria 707 1 1 8 ... 9 ... ... ... ... 80 1,377 30 1,487 1,496 33. Supaul (Hospital)... 344 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 303 2 323 323 34. Supaul 709 1 2 11 38 51 ... 15 ... 15 46 654 42 742 808 35. Madhipura ... 442 1 ... 5 3 8 ... 5 ... 5 41 838 3 882 895
x TABLE IVxi 4. Dinapore 306 1 2 42 44 ... 215 ... 215 7 75 4 86 345 5. Barh ... 475 1 ... 13 1 14 1 455 ... 456 114 761 26 901 1,871 6. Bihar ... 847 1 1 54 55 2 49 ... 51 215 835 79 1,129 1,235 7. Hilsa ... 685 1 ... 65 4 69 628 ... 628 41 952 11 1,004 1,701 8. Gaya (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9. Gaya ... 698 1 11 ... 4 15 3 1,853 3 1,859 118 463 34 615 2,489 10. Tekari ... 454 1 ... ... ... ... 379 ... 379 30 267 11 308 687 11. Sherghati (Gaya) ... 639 1 5 103 1 109 ... 172 ... 172 175 1,015 85 1,275 1,556 12. Jehauabad 75J 1 3 86 23 112 735 2 737 160 805 123 1,088 1,937 18. Arwal ... 556 1 2 30 13 45 ... 460 ... 460 118 1,006 120 1,244 1,749 14. Nawada 984 1 3 38 4 45 ... 501 ... 504 308 1,183 67 1,558 2,107 15. Waresaliganj 769 1 7 302 ... 309 179 ... 179 98 555 6 659 1,147 16. Aurangabad 615 1 12 112 13 137 8 243 14 265 153 542 44 739 1,141 17. Daudnagar 496 1 8 56 2 66 5 50 ... 55 102 549 18 669 790 18. Arrah (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19. Arrali ... 133 1 ... ... ... ... ... 222 ... 222 ... 5 ... 5 227 20. Barahpur 521 1 ... 13 2 15 ... 121 ... 121 60 384 12 456 592 21. Buxar 586 1 2 28 5 35 ... 406 ... 406 77 687 85 849 1,290 22. Sassaram 900 1 4 325 3 332 ... 832 ... 332 1.0 820 168 1,088 1,752 23. Bikramganj 640 1 3 217 3 223 ... 581 ... 581 57 234 10 801 1,105 24 Bhabhua 377 1 7 184 3 194 ... 1,723 ... 1,723 97 307 36 440 2,353 25. Monghyr (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 Monghyr 625 1 1 27 ... 28 ... 471 ... 471 29 779 5 813 1,312 27. Jamui 1st (Dispensary) 433 1 ... 88 18 106 ... 1,421 ... 1,423 188 2,260 61 2,531 4,038
xii TABLE IVxiii 40. Kederma 655 8 ... 21 21 ... 387 387 56 580 87 723 1.131 41. Ramfcarb 727 L ... 269 2 271 125 125 92 1,180 170 1,442 1,833 42 . Chatra (1st dispensary) 605 [ 4 72 7 83 1 103 1 105 147 1,381 48 1,576 1,764 43. Chatra (2nd dispensary) 727 244 6 250 35 35 148 970 42 1,169 1,445 44. Giridih (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45. Giridih 407 65 8 73 ... 1,038 ... 1,038 3 298 10 311 1,422 4C. Dhanwa- 595 1 213 25 239 1 246 I ... 247 25 434 15 474 960 47.. Daltonganj (1st dispensary ... 268 1 6 7 186 186 249 838 81 1,1t8 1,361 48. Daltonganj (2nd dispensary) 342 1 1 2 ... .3 73 159 412 48 619 694 49. Garhwa 500 3 183 5 1 221 224 247 408 63 718 1,133 50. Latehar 522 50 95 26 4111 ?2 275 58 1481 J88 188 111 1,619 77 1,S07 2,053 Total 24,373 23 22,213 20 22,256 4,412 28,661 2,133 35,236 61,973 ORISSA RANGE. 1. Cuttack (Hospital) ... ... 2. Cuttack 234 14 6 20 587 587 12 221 35 268 875 4,066 oases sup- plied with medi- cine. 3. Kendrapara 1,361 43 3 46 ... 455 455 4 1,036 200 1,240 1,741 4. Jajpur 822 34 10 44 2,939 ... 2,9 9 15 385 48 448 3,481 5. Banki ... 533 14 1 15 ... 7,211 7,211 4 341 16 361 7,587 757 cases supplied with medicine. 6. Balasore (Hospital) ...... ... ... 7. Balasore 561 2 132 29 163 566 566 1 261 8 270 999 8. Soro ... ... ... 327 4 2 6 1,137 1,137 8 447 19 474 1,617 9. Bbadrat (1st dispensary) ... 497 ... 88 22 10 ... ! 2,965 2.965 5 378 52 435 3,510 10. Bhadrak (2nd dispensary) ... 97 9 9 ... ;' 883 883 2 25 2 29 921 11 Angul (1st dispensary) ... 502 ...| 25 2 27 8,057 8,057 | 31| 1,358 160 1,549 9,633
xiv TABLE IVxv 25. Purulia (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... 26. Balarampnr ... 454 ... ... 18 1 19 ... 55 ... 55 12 687 39 788 812 27. Baghunathpur ... 394 1 ... 58 1 59 ... 663 ... 663 20 341 37 398 1,120 28. Dbanbad (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29. Dhanbad ... 397 ... ... 6 ... 6 ... 262 24 286 ... 215 17 232 524 30. Katraa ... ... 398 ... ... 4 ... 4 ... 258 ... 258 21 259 150 433 695 31. Chaibussa ... ... 392 ... ... ... ... ... ... 168 ... 168 6 837 62 905 1,073 32. Porahat ... 493 ... ... ... ... ... ... 68 12 80 4 840 53 897 977 33. Ghatsila ... 418 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 238 ... 238 9 315 13 337 576 34. Jamshedpur (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 12,667 33 11 726 157 894 2 56,361 211 56,574 362 1 3,823 1,741 15,926 73,394 Grand total ... 63,973 126 142 5550 564 6256 27 81,152 240 81,419 8,672 65,572 5,599 79,843 1,67,518
TABLE V. Showing number of animals treated and castrated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries during the year 1927-28. District. ( Name of hospital.) Number of veterinary hos- pitals. Number of "veterinary assist- ants employed. Number of in-patients treated during the year. Number of out-patients treated during the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of oases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animal Total. Equines. Bovincs. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animal Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. Rs. Rs. 1. Chapra ... 1 1 41 110 18 169 314 1,226 474 2,014 2.183 219 2 ... 3 5 180 2,065 2. Muzaffarpur ... 1 1 127 100 78 805 418 616 603 1,637 1,942 73 7 1 4 12 1,694 5,629 3. Purnea ... 1 1 54 21 22 97 338 488 232 1,058 1,155 25 1 9 29 39 619 3,171 4. Sitamarhi ... 1 1 47 119 16 182 225 1,003 200 1428 1,610 ... 4 7 9 20 178 3,552 5. Laheriaserai ... 1 1 59 96 42 197 313 1,119 388 1,770 1,967 198 12 8 7 22 ... 2,344 6. Motahari ... 1 1 77 118 57 252 203 645 309 1,157 1,409 93 2 7 2 11 498 2,298 7. Bettiah Raj ... 1 1 112 100 19 231 1,058 2,460 1,258 4,776 5,007 1,923 12 163 455 630 ... 4,179 8. Begusarai* ... 1 1 40 64 1 105 372 774 94 1,240 l,345 500 6 ... 28 34 88 1,781 9. Supaul ... 1 1 39 71 17 127 126 940 339 1,405 1,532 ... 4 15 169 188 75 1,581 10. Siwan ... ... 1 1 58 195 15 268 324 898 265 1,497 1,755 ... 4 40 3 47 60 1,876
xvii 11. Hajipur ... ... 1 1 68 79 16 163 378 804 403 1,585 1,748 22 3 ... 85 88 271 3,193 12. Samastipur ... 1 1 29 128 13 170 135 916 250 1,301 1,471 135 2 4 3 9 60 1,547 13. Madhubani ... 1 1 44 186 21 201 213 895 252 1,360 1,561 231 5 2 22 29 ... 1,994 14. Bagaha ... ... 1 1 39 63 19 121 116 503 128 747 868 11 2 2 5 9 ... 2,355 Total ... 14 14 834 1,400 354 2,588 4,533 13,287 5,145 22,965 25,553 3,430 66 253 824 1,143 3,723 36,967 CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Monghyr ... 1 1 20 60 13 93 148 539 498 1,185 1,278 40 ... 3 28 31 660 2,649 2. Dumka (Government hospital). 1 1 13 41 7 61 70 648 122 840 901 244 3 19 4 26 72 1,517 3. Bankipur ... ... 1 1 391 60 21 472 346 947 747 2,040 2,512 73 5 ... 8 13 1,125 3,783 4. Gaya ... ... 1 1 69 138 78 285 274 1,107 648 2,029 2,314 54 9 3 4 16 996 3,375 5. Arrah ... ... 1 1 18 56 5 79 61 1,090 185 1,336 1,415 ... ... 5 15 20 113 2,263 6. Hazaribagh ... 1 1 3 22 25 50 101 1,241 218 1,560 1,610 439 4 41 11 56 420 1,344 7. Bhagalpur ... 1 1 66 92 19 177 185 1,035 358 1,578 1,755 ... 2 1 5 8 816 3,692 8. Daltonganj* ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 237 626 121 984 984 498 2 ... 7 9 176 6,538 9. Dinapore*... ... 1 1 22 22 15 59 95 604 200 899 958 37 1 2 6 9 157 2,534 10. Giridih ... ... 1 1 9 38 14 61 70 675 184 929 990 191 5 80 3 88 140 1,243 Total ... 10 10 611 529 197 1,337 1,587 8,512 3,281 13,380 14,717 1,576 31 154 91 276 4,675 28,938 ORISSA RANGE. 1. Purulia ... ... 1 1 16 40 30 86 104 597 228 929 1,015 51 ... 3 5 8 206 5,452 2. Ranchi* ... ... 1 1 17 20 50 87 193 543 530 1,266 1,353 129 3 15 8 26 1,200 23,097(b) 3. Balasore ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 5 785 372 1,162 1,162 27 ... 48 151 199 471 1,861 4. Sambalpur ... 1 1 9 53 11 73 11 3,568 120 3,699 3,772 ... ... ... ... ... 129 4,771 5. Bargarh ... ... 1 1 1 25 ... 26 20 1,046 47 1,113 1,139 8,986(a) ... 2 ... 2 9 1,829 6. Dhanbad ... 1 1 4 38 68 110 32 1,326 195 1,553 1,663 763 ... 1 1 2 328 3,315 7. Cuttack (c) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8. Jamshedpur ... 1 1 28 82 14 124 202 440 365 1,007 1,131 7 ... 15 4 19 4,208 3,789 Total ... 7 7 75 258 173 506 567 8,305 1,857 10,729 11,235 9,963 3 84 169 256 6,551 44,114 Grand total ... 31 31 1,520 1,187 724 4,431 6,687 30,104 10,283 47,074 51,505 14,969 100 491 1,084 1,675 14,949 1,10,019 (a) Foot and mouth disease cases supplied with medicine from the hospital. (b) Includes cost of construction of new hospital. (c) Closed. In charge of touring veterinary assistant surgeons.
TABLE VII. Showing total strength of subordinate staff employed during the year 1927-28. Province How employed. Whether paid from Provincial or Local fund. Training staff. Veterinary Inspec- tor. Subordinate staff not included in previous columns. Veterinary Assistant Surgreons. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Bihar and Orissa ....... In Schools and Colleges Provincial ... ... ... ... ... In Hospitals 1. Provincial ... ... ... ... 26 26 2. Local (under Private Estates). ... ... ... 1 1 On other works... 1. Provincial... ... 14 9 96 119 2. Local ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 14 xix TABLE VIII. Return of stud bulls for the year 1927-28. District. Property of Government. Property of Local Bodies. Number on 1st April 1027. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1929. Number on 1st April 1927. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1928. Number Average price paid. Number. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. Rs. Rs. 1. Saran ... ... ... 1 2 500 1(a) 2 2. Champaran ... ... ... ... ... ... 7(b) ... ... ... 7 3. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... 6 1 225 1(c) 5(d) 4. Darbhanga ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... l(e) 3 5. Monghyr Beguserai and Khagaria.) ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 6. Bhagalpur (Madhipura and Supaul.) ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1(f) 1 7. Puraea ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Total ... ... ... ... 21 3 ... 4 20 CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Patna 1(g) ... ... ... 1 3 1 350 1(A) 3 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 ... 2(i) 13 4. M o n g h y r- (except Begu- serai and Khagaria.) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (a) Died. (b) All including four shown in previous year as district board property belong to the Bettlah Raj. (c) Sent to Gowsala. (d) Includes one buffalo bull. (e) Lost. (f) Died. (g) Buffalo bull-Property of Agriculture Department, (h) Sent to Pinjrapole. (i) One died and one was Bent to Gorakshini.
xx TABLE Vlll-eoncld. District Property of Government. Property of Local Bodies. Number on 1st April 1927. Obtained daring the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain* ing on 31st March 1928. Number on 1st April 1927. Obtained during the year. Casual* ties during the year. Balance remain, ing on 31st March 1928. Number. Average price paid. Number. Arerage price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 CENTRAL RANGE xxi TABLE IX. Showing main results of the working of Provincial Cattle Farms during the year 1927-28. Province. Name of farm. Receipts. Expenditure. Valuation of stock, grain and fodder remaining at closer of year as detailed on reverse. Sale of animals. Sale of produce. Other beads. Total. Salaries of estab- lishment. Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- penses. Purchase of ani- mals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Fodder. Total. 1 2 8 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Bihar and Orissa Phulwari, Cattle Breeding Farm. 350 7,499 1,836 9,486 5,371 7,414 16,742 33,413 *59,529 1,22,469 44,915 110 1,650 46,705 Total ... 350 7,499 1,636 9,486 6,371 7,414 16,742 33,413 69,529 1,22,469 44,945 110 1,660 46,705 * Includes Rs. 5,049 for plant and machinery. Note.xxii Valuation statement of cattle, grain and fodder in hand at close of the year 1927-28. Number or quantity. Description. Rate (average). Value. Remarks. No. Quantity. 1 2 3 4 6 6 Mds. PULWARI FARM. Cattle. Rs. Rs. 6 ... Bulls 350 2,100 51 ... Cows Tharparker 470 23,970 105 ... Cows Desi 111 11,655 43 ... Bullocks 125 5,375 12 ... Male stock, 1 year old 20 240 63 ... Do. calves 10 630 ... Female stock, 2 years old xxiii TABLE X. Return of horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies tor the year 1927-28 Details. Horse and pony stallions under local bodies. Donkey stallions under local bodies. Horses. Ponies. Total horses and ponies. Italian. Cyprian. Country-bred. Persian. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. Arab. Persian. Country-bred. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 6 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Nil
xxiv TABLE XI. Services and produce of each clan of horse,pony and donkey stallions under local bodies during 1927-28. Horse, pony or donkey. Province. Stallions on register on 31st March. Stallions actually employed at stud. Number of mares covered. Average number of marea covered per stallion employed at stud. Ill Previ- ous year. Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Nil Total ... TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc, of horse, pony and donkey staitions during the year 1927-28. HORSE PONY. DONKEY. Province. Year under report. Previous year. Year under Previous report. yean Year under report. Previous year. 1 2 3 4. 5 6 7 Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Nil
xxv TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1927-28. Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of horse fairs and shows held. Total number of animals present. Total number competing for prizes. Total number of horses stock (not including branded mares present. Total number of animals sold. Prizes awarded. Amount sanctioned by Government of India. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year Year under report. Previous year Belonging to breeders. Belonging to dealers. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds, From other sources. Total. actually Amount awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. Rs, Rs. Rs. s. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Khagra 1 7,050 8,700 6,040 9,680 50 60 7,050 2,935 3,600 78 78 78 2. Sonepur ... 1 500 400 360 *** 3. Singheswartnan 1 5,200 2,600 1,480 » ... 4. Dharamganj .... 1 1.500 5,000 949 5. Hardi 1 250 250 200 6. Madbuban 1 1,200 1,000 58 7. Bettiah Dasehra 1 36!) 400 "85 "so "350 160 "260 290 540 "425 8. Puinea City ... 1 162 9. Chujideidehi . 1 1,500 Total 9 20,250 26,370 85 90 7,400 9,824 250 290 78 618 £03 ... CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Bihta 2.033 Nil 2,000 2. Barahpur 2 3,700 1,000 400 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3. Biswabhusunda 1 600 ... Total 3 4,300 8,033 2.400 ... ORISSA RANGE Nil Grand Total ... 12 80,650 28,403 85 90 ... 7,400 12,224 260 290 78 618 603
xxvi TABLE Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and Province. (Name of fair or show.) Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Number of stock present. Average price Balls. Bollocks. Cows. Young stock Buffaloes. Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. 1 2 3 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 11 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. Rs. Rs. 1. Sitamarhi ... ... 1 ... 21,000 ... 4,000 ... ... 1,231 ... 125 to 350 2. Khagra ... 1 ... 28,000 3,300 2,000 8,880 900 789 ... 35 to 200 3. Sonepur ... 1 4 26,000 1,530 500 1,000 66 700 ... 10 to 300 4. Dharamganj ... 1 ... 14,000 1,100 3,510 6,000 ... ... ... 20 to 160 5. Chanderdchi ... 1 ... 8,000 2,000 3,500 6,000 ... ... ... 25 to 130 6. Madhuban ... 1 ... 4,000 ... 1,560 ... ... ... ... 40 to 300 7. Bettiah Dasehra ... 1 ... 27,975 25 800 ... ... ... ... 25 to 400 8. Singheswarasthau ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 350 ... ... 9. Motipur ... 1 ... 20,000 ... 5,000 ... ... ... ... 100 to 200 10. Hardi ... 1 ... 25,000 ... ... ... ... ... ... 50 to 150 11. Tirhut Show ... ... ... ... Not held ... ... ... ... ... 12. Bhiro-nsthan ... 1 ... 15,000 ... 7,000 ... ... ... ... 200 to 300 13. Purnea city ... 1 ... 3,035 500 1,000 650 ... 97 ... 40 to 160 Total ... 12 4 192,010 8,455 29,860 22,530 966 3,166 ... ... CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Chatra ... ... 2,000 900 2,300 500 ... 200 ... 30 2. Bihta ... ... 8,000 50 500 45 ... 50 ... 45 9. Barahpur ... ... ... 14,000 1,500 15,000 2,600 ... ... ... 25 to 150 4. Biswabhusunda ... ... ... 6,000 1,800 700 2,000 ... ... ... 15 to 150 6. Loalong ... ... ... 3,000 340 4,600 600 ... 200 ... 30 6. Rafiganj ... ... ... 2,000 200 150 ... ... ... ... 25 to 40 7. Deokund ... ... ... 6,000 500 500 500 ... 500 ... 30 to 40 Total ... 8 ... 40,000 6,290 23,650 6,245 ... 950 ... ... ORISSA RANGE. Nil Grand total ... 20 4 233,010 13,745 52,510 28,775 965 4,116 ... ...
xxvii XIV. shown held during the year 1927TABLE XIV (A) Statement showing the expenditure of the Civil Veterinary Department during the year 1927-28 in the province of Bihar and Orissa. Heads of Account. Amou nt. Total. Imperial. Provincial. Local. 1 2 3 4 5 Rs. Its. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Superintendence ... 92,585 0 0 ... 92,585 0 0 Veterinary Instruction ... 87,954 0 0 7,844 2 6 95,798 2 6 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 45,516 0 0 91,238 12 5 1,36,754 12 5 Hospitals and dispensaries ... 1,42,165 0 0 1,96,548 9 11 3,38,713 9 11 Prizes ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... 12,382 6 0 12,882 6 0 Breeding operations ... 10,363 13 1 10,368 13 1 Total ... 8,68,220 0 0 3,18,877 11 11 6,86,597 1 1 11 B.&O.G. P. (C. V. D.)no.6-375-5-12-l928No. 2516-D. GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA. EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT. RESOLUTION. Dated the 20th November 1928. READ2 of training at the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, London. 3. Breeding operations.3 arrangements for providing the farm lands with an adequate water-supply, the irrigation channels designed for the pur- pose being found on trial to be unsuitable. Steps have now been token to remodel them. There was also some delay in obtaining a water supply for the dairy, but this has been remedied by the sinking of a five inches tube well capable of discharging 6,600 gallons of water an hour. The work was carried out by the Agricultural Engineer, and the total cost (including pump, pipes, tanks and testing charges) was only Us. 4,500. The crying need of the farm is now a suit- able drainage system. A scheme has been sanctioned by Government and it is hopped that it will shortly be carried out. 5. Livestock diseases.4 that area also. The growth in expenditure upon sera and vaccines in the province is, however, causing considerable difficulty to the local bodies which have hitherto been responsible for footing the bill, and many of them have appealed to Government to take over the burden. The provincial revenues are unfortunately in no condition to undertake lightly fresh recurring commitments, but the matter is receiving the careful consideration of Government. 7. Treatment of disease.5 that the limited resources of the department are being utilized to the full by the Director and his staff. Order*ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1928-29. SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA, PATNA 1980 [Price Re. 1.]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1928-29. SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BIHAR AND ORISSA, PATNA 1930 [Price Re. 1.]
Priced Publications of the Government of Bihar and Orissa can be had fromNo. 7556-V. D. FROM MAJOR P. B. RILEY, I.V.S., OFFG. DIRECTOR, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPART- MENT, BIHAR AND ORISSA, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA, EDUCATION AND DEVELOP- MENT DEPARTMENT, PATNA. Dated Patna, the 20th December, 1929. SUBJECT :CONTENTS. PAGE. 1. General Administration ... ... ... 1[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] BIRDS EYE VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT CATTLE BREEDING FARM
[Maximum limit 25 pages.] ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BIHAR AND ORISSA FOR THE YEAR 1928-29. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 1.MR. D. QUINLAN, being on combined leave preparatory to retirement, I held charge of the department as officiating Director and Veterinary Adviser to Government and also as Deputy Director of the Central Range throughout the year, Mr. Ismail Malik and Rai Sahib P. N. Das remaining in charge of the North Bihar and Orissa Ranges respectively. 2.During the year I visited the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Muzaffarpur, Purnea, Bhagalpur, Monghyr, Samastipur, Siwan, Hajipur, Bettiah, Dinapur, Patna, Cuttack, Banki, Balasore, Puri, Sambalpur, Ranchi, Purulia, Dhanbad and Tatanagar ; attended a meeting of the Provincial Develop- ment Board at Ranchi and the Conference held at Simla in connection with the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Agriculture ; acted as an examiner at the annual examina- tions of the Bengal Veterinary College, as President and Exam- iner of the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary Examination Board and also as a member of the Selection Board which met at Patna for the selection of the superior staff for the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College. I also visited Sonepur fair, interviewed the Bihar and Orissa students at the Bengal Veterinary College at
2 Belgachia and assisted in the purchasing of horses from the Remount Depôt at Calcutta for the Military Mounted Police, Arrah. I was on tour 157 days and travelled 862 miles by road. 3.In addition to the above work and the ordinary office routine, I paid regular visits to the cattle-breeding farm, Patna and inspected the college buildings which were under construction as often as it was necessary. 4.As funds did not permit, the Central Range could not be separated during the year but a proposal for the rearrangement of work by placing the Assistant Director, Babu Nilmoni Chattarji, in charge of the range without immediate additional expense was submitted to Government. This proposal has since been approved and effect has been given from 22nd May last. NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 5.Special Officer, Mr. Ismail Malik, m.r. c.v.s., was in charge of the range throughout the year. He spent 201 days on tour, travelled 4,701 miles by road excluding the journeys by rail, inspected all the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries num- bering 43, visited the Government cattle farms at Sipaya and the Imperial Agricultural Institute at Pusa and the important cattle fairs in the range. In addition to this he visited the seats of several outbreaks during the epidemic seasons, supervised the work of the staff, gave a demonstration of the use of Burdizzo's castrator in villages and personally castrated a number of animals. CENTRAL RANGE. 6.This range was under my control throughout the year but the Assistant Director, Babu Nilmoni Chattarji, who was attached to the head office, spent 109 days on tour, travelled 2,062 miles by road and inspected the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Gaya, Tikari, Sherghati, Jahanabad, Warisali- ganj, Nawadah, Aurangabad, Daudnagar, Arrah, Barahpur, Bhabua, Monghyr, Jamui, Bhagalpur, Banka, Dumka, Sahebganj, Deoghur, Godda, Hazaribagh, Kodarma, Chatra, Giridih, Ramgarh, Buxar, Dhanwar, Pakur, Bikramganj and Sasaram. He also attended an outbreak of equine Surra at Chatra and another of Johne's disease at the Monghyr dairy farm, acted as an examiner and Secretary to the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary Examination Board in April and October and as Judge at the Cattle Show held at Bihta fair. He
3 further gave instructions to the new veterinary graduates preliminary to their appointment and delivered lectures on common contagious diseases to the cadets at the Hazaribagh Police Training School. 7.In addition to the above work, Babu Nilmoni Chattarji, when at headquarters, also assisted the Director in the disposal of office routine, ORISSA RANGE. 8.Bai Sahib P. N. Das held charge of this range during the year except for two months and a half when he went on leave and 1st grade inspector Babu J. L. Bose officiated for him. He inspected the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries at Balasore, Ranchi, Samhalpur, Bargarh, Purulia, Puri, Kendrapara, Cuttack, Banki, Khurda, Angul and Phulbani (Khondmals) ; checked the mufassal work of the touring veterinary assistant surgeons in 95 villages and visited many others which either suffered from the deleterious effect of cattle- disease or in which inoculations were done. In Sambalpur district he personally attended a widespread outbreak of rinderpest and gave every assistance to the staff in order to bring the disease under control. 9. In addition to the above, the Assistant Director inspected five gowshalas and suggested improvements to their respective authorities, presided at the annual meeting of the " Gorakshini Sava '' (Society for the protection of cattle) which attracted a large audience, his presidential speech was published in the local press as well as the Indian Veterinary Journal. He further attended some meetings of the district boards and Veterinary Dispensary committees, a meeting of the Selection Board held at Patna, the reception committee meeting of the Bihar and Orissa Co-operative Congress and read a paper on the introduction of silo pits in the rural co-operative societies at one of the meetings of the Chota Nagpur Divisional Develop- ment Board held at Ranchi. He was on tour for 110 days and travelled 1,654 miles by road. 10.During the officiating period of 21/2 months, Babu J. L. Bose inspected eight hospitals and dispensaries and perso- nally attended an extensive outbreak of rinderpest in the Bargarh subdivision and checked the figures of inoculations and castrations performed by some veterinary assistant surgeons. He was on tour for 37 days and travelled 318 miles by road.
4 11.The major part of the additional work for improve- ments to the newly-built Range office at Cuttack was carried out, while the question of electric installation for the buildings is still under consideration. It is also proposed to construct a set of quarters for the reserve veterinary assistant surgeons and a few sheds for housing animals for experimental purposes in the office compound. VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. 12.Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College.-Credit is due to the Public Works Department for pushing on with the construc- tion work of all buildings including the residences of the Principal and Professors with the result that all construction work with a few minor exceptions was completed by the end of the year. Messrs. Mansfield and Son of Calcutta also collected materials at the site according to the terms of their contract and will finish the work of fitting and connections for the internal water-supply, etc., before the 1st July 1929. It was, however found impossible to do much with regard to the water-supply and sanitation and also electric installation to the buildings due to lack of funds and as more time was required for the preparation of the necessary schemes. In addition to this, the two most important posts, that of the Principal and Professor of Pathology and Bacteriology and Research Officer, could not be filled as the Selection Committee in London failed to recruit them on the terms offered by Government. For these, reasons the opening of the college had to be postponed until next year, i.e., the 1st July 1930. 13.Mr. A. D. MacGregor, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Principal of the Bengal Veterinary College, originally applied for the post of Principal of the Patna Veterinary College, hut he ultimately withdrew his candidature and it has therefore been necessary to consider fresh proposals for the recruitment of the Principal. Steps are also being taken for the appointment of a Professor of Pathology and Bacteriology and Research Officer on revised terms. Both posts will be advertised in India as well as the United Kingdom. It is necessary for these officers to join their respective appointments at least five months in advance of actual opening of the college. 14.A selection board was constituted at Patna for inter- viewing candidates for the posts of Indian professors and lecturers. Its recommendations are now before Government.
5 As regards the appointment of the subordinate staff, the posts were duly advertised, but as the Principal should also see the candidates, the applications are awaiting his appointment. 15.The total non-recurring expenditure on the college up to 31st March 1929, amounted to Rs. 6,11,443-14-0. 16.Training at the Bengal Veterinary College.6 20.Professional Examinations.7 the number of deaths almost doubled. Foot and mouth disease was responsible for 2,008 outbreaks as against 5,373 in 1927-28. Including 69,780 cases of this disease, the total number of animals affected in the above outbreaks was 114,566 compared with 200,075 of the previous year which shows a decrease in the number of attacks by over eighty-five thousand. The staff could render help in 5,970 outbreaks. 26.The following table compares the statistics of outbreaks of contagious diseases, deaths, etc., with reference to the area and cattle population in each range :8 BOVINE. 32.Rinderpest was reported in all districts, the heaviest mortalities being caused in Cuttack, Sambalpur, Ranchi, Angul and Puri districts of the Orissa Range, and Palamau, Santal Parganas and Gaya of the Central Range. Though there has been a slight increase in the number of deaths in North Bihar there was no special outbreak in that range. The condition of the Central Range was much the same. It is in the Orissa Range that the disease demanded greatest attention. In Cuttack, it appeared in a virulent form and lingered throughout the year, the Sadr and Banki subdivisions of the district being badly affected. The staff that could be detailed to these areas did not prove sufficient and as a result, more than three thousand cattle succumbed. Ranchi and Sambalpur also suffered considerably from the same malady though the percentage of deaths in them was lower than in Cuttack. The majority of the outbreaks in Sambalpur were confined to the Bargarh subdivision where the disease ultimately took a virulent form in consequence of the infection imported from the surrounding Feudatory States in Orissa and the States of the Central Provinces, bordering on it. On account of its peculiar situation it is necessary to have this part of the district placed under proper surveillance. A proposal for the appointment of another touring veterinary assistant surgeon for this subdivision with Padampur as his headquarters has already been submitted to Government for sanction. 33.The following table shows the particulars of the out breaks of rinderpest in each range as compared with those of the previous year :9 34.Foot and mouth disease.10 previous year. The disease was diagnosed microscopically in all cases. According to practice, a monthly return of: anthrax was regularly submitted to the Consulats General of America at Calcutta. 38.Other contagious diseases.11 was extensively carried out in the Orissa Range as the disease prevailed throughout the range, even Cuttack and Balasore, which had the reputation of being healthy districts, not being excepted. In all, 68,021 head of cattle were protected in this range against 27,865 in 1927-28 which must be called a substan- tial increase for the year. In the Central and North Bihar Ranges, though there was no special outbreak to attend, protec- tion was given in 71,528 and 9,549 cattle against 50,195 and 14,122 respectively, in the previous year. In addition, inoculation by "serum simultaneous " method was undertaken at the Government Cattle Farm, Patna, where 89 animals were protected 43.Of the total number, 891 animals died of the disease, the death-rate among the inoculated being '59 per cent, 44.Hæmorrhagic Septicmmia.12 49.Supply of sera and vaccines.13 TABLE IV. NUMBER OF ANIMALS TRFATED. 51.The total number of veterinary assistant surgeons employed on touring duty during the year was 100 as compared with 92 in 1927-28. 52.No new post of touring veterinary assistant surgeon could be added to the cadre as the district boards were unable to provide funds for same. On the contrary, the district board, Gaya, resolved to abolish the third touring veterinary assistant surgeon of Aurangabad (Nabinagar) and Gaya Sadr (Tikari) with effect from the 14th June and 5th July 1929 respectively. The district board, Hazaribagh, also resolved to abolish the entire veterinary establishment of the district, but Government having waived their claim to the recovery of the proportionate sbare of contribution on account of the pay and allowances of the veterinary assistants and agreed to supply sera and vaccines free of charge so long as its financial position does not improve, the board subsequently agreed to maintain the existing institu- tions. Another post of touring veterinary assistant surgeon in Monghyr was converted into a post of stationary veterinary assistant surgeon for the hospital at Begusarai. 53.None of the proposals for constructing new buildings as veterinary dispensaries advanced further except that the proposal for the Simdega dispensary was sent up to Government while the proposal for building quarters for the second touring veterinary assistant surgeon, Angul, was sanctioned. 54.In consideration of the popularity which the department has gained and in view of its future expansion the need for additional posts of touring veterinary assistant surgeons is being keenly felt throughout the province but more urgently in the districts of Bhagalpur, Hazaribagh, Patna, Cuttack, Puri, Sam- balpur, Singhbhum and Ranchi. Most of the local bodies which were approached have expressed their inability to incur further ex- penditure so long as substantial relief is not given towards meeting the cost of serum. The useful work which this class of officer is doing for the public in the suppression of cattle-disease, by preven- tive inoculations, by advising on sanitary measures, and feeding arrangements and also by the elimination of scrub bulls in addition to treating ordinary cases is now generally admitted and requires little comment on the subject. The Royal Commission on Agriculture emphasized this point when they recommended
14 a large increase in the staff of touring veterinary assistant surgeons. In their opinion each touring assistant should have charge of 25,000 head of cattle. Even on a most rough calcula- tion on this basis, the ultimate number of such assistants for the province would be in the neighbourhood of 1,100 against which the present cadre hardly consists of 150 assistants under all heads. Time has therefore come when the question of increasing the subordinate staff should receive the best and earliest consideration both of Government and the local bodies. 55.During the year under report 146,889 fresh cases were treated by touring veterinary assistant surgeons in the districts and at headquarters against 167,518 in the year 1927-28. The number included 27,891 cases of castration. The decrease of 20,629 cases in the total number is to be attributed to the fact that foot and mouth disease was Jess prevalent both in Orissa and Central Ranges as noticed above. This disrase affected Orissa very severely in the year 1927-28. 56.Of the total number including castratioas, 40,860 cases were treated by the staff in North Bihar, 65,106 in Central and 40,923 in Orissa Ranges as compared with 32,151, 61,973 and 73,394 respectively, in the previous year. 57.The touring staff was able to visit 63,663 villages as compared with 63,973, the figures according to ranges being 25,733 for North Bihar, 26,253 for Central and 11,677 for Orissa against 26,933, 24,373, and 12,667 respectively, in 1927- 28. The decrease of about 1,200 in the number of villages visited in the North Bihar Range was due to greater attention being devoted to castration work, while that of about 1,000 in the Orissa Range to continued outbreaks being present in par- ticular areas. This decrease was however almost made up by an increase of 2,000 villages visited in the Central Range. TABLE V. HOSPITALS. 58.There was no change in the number of hospitals which remained 31 as before including those in charge of touring veterinary assistant surgeons. Of the latter class, the hospital at Begusarai was placed under a stationary veterinary assistant surgeon. 59.It is gratifying to note that the district board and the municipality, Cuttack, have at last come to a decision for
15 the re-opening of the local veterinary hospital. Government was pleased to lease out a plot of the Khasmahal land to the municipality together with the building on it on a nominal rent of Re. 1 per annum and plans and estimates for conversion of the existing building into a hospital were drawn up. Pend- ing the necessary alterations the hospital was started informally from 1st April 1929 by placing it under a reserve veterinary assistant surgeon. Government will shortly be approached for sanction to the terms arrived at between the two local bodies for the maintenance of this institution. The hospital at Puri was formally opened during the year in the newly-constructed build- ing with a stationary veterinary surgeon in charge. The district board, Balasore, was anxious to build a new hospital, but it was considered unwise to launch upon an expensive scheme of this kind when the financial position of the board was such as to necessitate the abolition of two out of a total of four posts of touring veterinary assistant surgeons. The stationary veterinary assistant surgeon was therefore withdrawn temporarily as an alternative to the abolition of two touring veterinary assistant surgeons proposed by the board, the hospital being placed in charge of the sadr touring assistant. A proposal was made to the district board, Ranchi, for the entertainment of a stationary veterinary assistant surgeon with a view to reliev- ing the present veterinary assistant surgeon who is a touring officer with hospital duties to perform but it was not accepted by the board. 60.The district board, Patna, having transferred the management of the Bankipur veterinary hospital to the Patna City municipality, there is now no stationary veterinary assistant surgeon under this board. 61.With the exception of the Hiranpur Government veterinary hospital, none of the other proposals for the construc- tion of new veterinary hospitals matured. As regards Hiranpur, the work of converting the human dispensary into a veteri- nary hospital made satisfactory progress, but possession of the land could not be obtained during the year as the proceedings for the transfer were not completed. An assistant will shortly he placed in charge of this hospital. 62.Altogether, 56,525 fresh patients were treated at the veterinary hospitals during the year as compared with 61,505 treated in 1927-28. Of these, 28,625 patients were treated in 14 hospitals in the North Bihar, 16,088 in 10 hospitals in the Central and 11,812 in 8 hospitals in the Orissa Range as shown in the table. In addition to these, 10,851 cases were supplied with
16 medicines but not brought to the hospitals and 2,869 castrations were performed by the hospital assistants in the three ranges against 6,509 cases and 1,675 castrations in the year 1927-28. The figures indicate an all-round improvement under this head. TABLE VIII. BREEDING OPERATIONS. 63.Control of livestock improvement.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A COW BYRE AT THE PATNA FARM.
17 year. To this number, 15 new bulls were added during the year, making a total of 73 against which 11 casualties were recorded. There were thus 62 bulls left at the close of the year. Details as to their distribution according to ranges are shown in the table. 66.Castration of scrub bulls.18 overseer whose services were lent by the Director of Agricul- ture was re-called with effect from the 10th September 1928. This post remained vacant during the rest of the year as no qualified candidate would join on a fixed pay of Rs. 60 per mensem. A progressive scale of pay on Us. 60[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] STUD BULLS (THAPAKUR).
19 6.01 lbs. per cow per day. Of the total quantity, 203,100 lbs. was sold, 2,848 was separated for cream and the balance was fed to the calves. The income from the sale of milk and cream amounted to Its. 21,139-6-9. 72.The total area of land cultivated by the farm agency was 259 acres in addition to which 142 bighas were leased out at a rental of Rs. 1,923-8-0. Crops such as maize, juar, meth, gram, oats, khesari and mustard were grown and a total output of 23,013 maunds valued at Rs. 17,034 was obtained during the year. The figure includes 10,632 maunds of silage. 73.No spring crops could be sown as the canal authorities were unable to supply sufficient water for irrigation. The irrigation department will be again addressed on the subject. 74.The construction of the following additional buildings was completed during the year :20 Motipur, Dharamganj and Singheswarthau were visited by Special Officer, Mr. Malik. I also visited the Sonepur fair. 79.Forty-nine thousand and twenty-four cattle were booked to different places from stations under the Sonepur and Sama3ti- pur districts of the Bengal and North-Western Railway as compared with 52,182 in the year 1927-28. 80.Particulars of the important horse and cattle fairs and shows are given in the tables. PROVINCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. 81.There was no change in the personnel of this establish- ment except for a period of 21/2 months when Rai Sahib P. N, Das proceeded on leave and 1st grade veterinary inspector, Babu J. L. Bose offciated as Assistant Director in charge of the Orissa Range. The special pay of Rs. 30 per mensem which the Rai Sahib was drawing was raised to Rs. 100 per mensem with effect from 18th September 1928. The post of Assistant Director, North Bihar Range remained vacant as before. TABLE VII. SUBORDINATE ESTABLISHMENT. 82.The number of inspectors employed on the permanent staff was 13 as in the previous year. In addition, there were two inspectors appointed temporarily, under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, one new post being created as an experimental measure for one year by the Bihar and Orissa Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. The post was filled by touring veterinary assistant surgeon, Maulavi A. U. Ahmad with effect from 16th March 1929. 83.The temporary post of livestock inspector held by Babu N. N. Ghose was extended until further orders, the officer being deputed in the same capacity for one year for training at the Imperial Institute of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Bangalore, Central Creamery Institute, Anand and the Imperial Cattle Breeding Farm, Karnal. First grade inspector, Babu J. L. Bose was granted leave on medical ground for seven months with effect from the 23rd January 1929. In the chain of vacancies caused by the absence of these two officers, inspectors, Babu D. N. Mukharji acted as 1st grade inspector for sometime and then reverted to his substantive post on Rs. 130 per mensem. Veterinary assistant surgeon, Babu M. S. Mohan Raj who acted as inspector in the last vacancy throughout the year was transferred from Chaibassa to Cuttack, Babu J. L. Bose of the latter circle being posted to Chaibassa. Inspector, Babu D. C. Guha was transferred from North Bihar to the Patna circle vice Babu S. R. Bagchi to North Bihar.
21 84. On 1st April 1928, the number of veterinary assistant surgeons employed in districts including the assistant under the Bettiah Raj was 123. Thirteen Bibar and Orissa graduates joined the department making the number 136 Out of these, one was appointed officiating inspector, one temporary inspector under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, one temporary assistant to the laboratory assistant, one was on deputation to Angul khedda, two resigned, one was removed and one died, leaving 128 veterinary assistant surgeons actually employed in districts at the end of the year. 85. Staff veterinary assistant, Babu P. Kalidoss reverted to a post of reserve veterinary assistant surgeon and the vacancy was filled by reserve veterinary assistant surgeon, Babu P. Gartia. 86. Nine posts in the subordinate staff remained vacant for want of Bihar and Orissa graduates. 87. The following table shows the distribution of the subordi- nate staff range by range :22 Touring assistant surgeons.23 solution and 216 cases of hæmorrhagic septicaemia with camphor and Pot. Parmanganate successfully by the district staff in this range. 92.In the Central Range, three cases of equine surra were treated by the Laboratory Assistant with intrathecal and intra- venous injection of " Bayer 205 ". The same treatment was also adopted in one case in North Bihar and another in Orissa Range. In all these cases, the results achieved were satisfactory. 93.Twenty-two cases of rinderpest including some at the Cuttack Agricultural Farm were treated and completely cured by Iodine injections. TABLE XIV (A). EXPENDITURE. 94.The expenditure on the department amounted to Rs. 7,14,114-13-0 as compared with Rs. 6,36,597-11-11 in 1927-28 the increase of Rs. 27,517-1-1 being chiefly contributed by the heads " Subordinate Eestablishment (Local)", " Hospitals and Dispensaries " (both Provincial and Local) and " Fairs and Shows" (Local). There was a decrease of Rs. 14,695 under " Superintendence" (Provincial) due to a lower rate of pay and less travelling allowance drawn by the present Director. The decrease under " Veterinary Instruction" is due to a fixed amount of contribution per student now charged by Bengal Government. Of the total amount, a sum of Rs. 3,64,965 was spent by Government and Rs . 3,49,149-130 by local bodies as compared with Rs. 3,68,220 and Rs. 3,18,377-11-11 respectively in the preceding year. Compared with the total provincial revenues, the expendi- ture incurred by Government during the year amounts approximately to "63 per cent. The figures shown under "Provincial" and "Local'' were collected from the statements furnished respectively by the Accountant-General and the local bodies concerned. Details are shown in the table. 95.Up till now the report has shown the figures for expen- diture only, but strictly speaking since the farm has been started, this cannot be called merely a spending department. As a matter of fact, the revenue from the farm alone amounted to Rs. 27,988-9-9 while against the total expenditure of Rs. 3,64,965 under "Provincial" a sum of Rs. 1,05,057 was credited to Government. It includes recoveries from the local bodies on account of pay and allowances of the veterinary assistant surgeons. PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS. 96.Reporting of cases under the " Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act" was conducted on a regular basis though
24 there was a decrease in the total number of eases sent up for trial. During the year 1,014 cases were sent up in the three ranges and out of these, 918 cases ended in conviction. 97.The inspector under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act employed under the Patna City Municipality had 400 cases prosecuted out of which 359 resulted in convictions while 41 cases were pending trial at the close of the year compared with 573,473 and 91 cases respectively in 1927-28 The fall in the number is attributed, to abatement of the crime in consequence of the regular prosecution maintained. A sum of Rs. 3,190 was realized as fees and credited to the municipal fund. The inspector also examined 560 hackney carriage and ekka ponies for licenses. 98.The most important event under this head was the inauguration of the Bihar and Orissa Society for the preven- tion of cruelty to animals under the patronage of His Excel- lency the Governor Sir Hugh Stephenson, k.c.s.i., k.c.i.e. and Lady Stephenson. A munificent donation of Rs. 5,000 was received from the late Maharajah of Darbhanga and also other donations from notable persons. It came into existence in August 1928 with Mrs. Ansorge as its first honorary secretary and myself as honorary treasurer. The Society has now got an inspector of its own, a veterinary assistant surgeon appointed under the Act for one year for the present. It contemplates opening up branches at convenient centres as soon as funds will permit. With the formation of such societies and joint efforts made by the departmental staff it is hoped that much of the cruel treatment to which the animals have hitherto been subjected will disappear. ROYAL COMMISSION ON AGRICULTURE. 99.The much expected report of the Royal Commission on Agriculture was issued during the year. Its main recom- mendations so far as they relate to this department are confined to (1) instruction, (2) control of livestock disease, (3) increase of staff and (4) raising the status of the department. As regards control of livestock improvement, the Commission agreed that the work should be left generally to the Agriculture Department. The recommendations have since been considered by Govern- ment in detail and effect will be given in each case as funds become available. GENERAL REMARKS. 100.The work of the department as the figures indicate has developed considerably in all its aspects and it would have done more had it been privileged with more officers in the superior as well as inferior cadre. As regards the former, the department
25 was managed throughout the year with only one Indian Veteri- nary Service officer in place of the three in 1926-27 and two in 1927-28. The officiating Director's time was spent mostly at headquarters disposing of urgent and important files frequently received from Government, inspecting the cattle farm and watching the construction and fitting up of the various sections of the veterinary college. I may mention here that these two schemes which involved an approximate non-recurring expendi- ture of over Rs. 10,00,000 have been carried out under the personal supervision of the Director. 101.Shortage of the subordinate staff was keenly felt especially in Orissa where extensive outbreaks occurred but extra staff could not be drafted. It is apparent that the depart- ment is working at top pressure but the pressure cannot be maintained unless the subordinate staff is strengthened consider- ably. 102.The silo operation in Orissa though it made consider- able progress in the preceding years could not proceed further owing to the outbreaks that prevailed. The Assistant Director incharge of the range submitted a detailed report on silage. 103.The khedda held in Angul during the year proved abortive and it is reported that on account of the changed condi- tion of the forest the future of this operation in /Vngul is not very hopeful. 104.The increase of work in the head office continued unabated and Government after due consideration of the proposal was pleased to sanction the post of a Superintendent and also a dealing assistant but at the same time abolished the post of the former head assistant. Effect to this revision was given from 1st October 1928. Consequent upon the re-arrangement of work for the Central Range, though some of the abnormal pressure on the head office has diminished, the work is still very heavy. The clerical staff at the Head and Range offices worked extremely well and special mention is made of Babu D. Roy Chowdhury, the Superintendent, who worked indefatigably throughout a record year of work. P. B. RILEY, MAJOR, I.V.S., Offg. Director, Givil Veterinary Department and Veterinary Advisor to the Government of Bihar and Orissa.
TABLE II Showing number of deaths from contagious diseases amongst animals during the year 1928-29. Profince. (Bihar and Orissa.) Eqnines. Bovines Others Glanders. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious diseases. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disease. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other contagi- ous diseases. Total. Rabies in dogs Anthrax in Fowl Cholera. Variola. Other conta- gious dise- ases. Total. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 16 16 17 18 19 20 21 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 1. Saran ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 506 138 ... ... 648 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Champaran ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 203 ... 383 51 ... ... 637 3 ... ... ... ... 3 3. Mnzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... 659 383 ... 1 1,050 11 ... ... ... 11 4. Darbhanga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52 ... 534 104 ... ... 690 7 ... ... ... ... 7 5. Monghyr. ... ... (Begusarai and Khagaria). ... ... ... ... ... ... 104 ... 41 9 ... ... 154 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6. Bhagalpur (Supaul and Madhipura). ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 ... 302 ... ... ... 331 ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Purnea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 ... 460 ... ... ... 482 4 ... ... ... ... 4 Total ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 424 1 8,881 686 1 3,992 25 ... ... ... ... 25
ii Province. (Bihar and Orissa.) Equines. Borises. Others. Remarks Gindars. Anthrax. Surra. Dourine. Other conta- gious disease. Total. Rinderpest. Foot-and-mouth disuse. Hæmorrhagic .-epticæmis. Black-quarter. Anthrax. Other contn- gious diseacese. Total. Babies in dogs. Anthrax in shop. Fowl Cholor', Variola. Other conta- gious dise- ases. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 31 CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Patna ... ... ... 1 ... ... 3 4 139 12 2,056 6* ... 1 2,214 7 ... ... ... ... 7 * Among cattle of the Patua Farm. 2.Gaya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 796 24 1,168 ... 76 116 2,179 ... 243 ... ... ... 243 3. Shahabad .... ... ... ... ... ... ... 178 ... 336 21 ... 18 553 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4. Monghyr ... ... (Except Begosarai and Khagaria). ... ... ... ... ... 287 ... 106 ... 17 1 411 1 ... ... ... ... 1 6. Bhagalpur ... ... (Except Supaul and Madhipura). ... ... ... ... 2 2 92 ... 551 23 13 71 750 1 ... 18 ... 2 21 6. Santal Ferganas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 874 ... 494 ... 1 .... 1,369 2 ... ... ... ... 2 7. Hazaribagh ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 326 2 78 ... 6 1 413 14* ... ... 6 ... 10 12 in bovines-. 8. Palamau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,855 24 109 2 19 66 2,166 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Total ... 1 1 1 6 6 4,647 63 4,968 62 131 274 (a) 10,054 26 243 18 5 2 294
iii ORISSA RANGE. 1. Cuttack ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,032 81 378 ... ... 13 3,604 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Balasore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94 12 233 ... 9 338 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3. Angul ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,556 1 ... ... ... ... 1,557 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4. Pari ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,622 5 392 ... ... 23 2,043 1 ... 6 ... 1* 8 *Canine linstom per. 5. Sambalpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,048 61 124 ... 8 7 2,238 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6. Ranchi ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2,280 13 807 ... 2 2,602 9 ... ... ... ... 9 7. Manbhum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 203 ... 213 ... 10 9 441 13 ... 1 ... ... 14 8. Singhbhum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 589 2 81 ... 3 87 762 6 ... ... ... ... 6 Total ... ... ... 1 1 11,414 165 1.728 27 150 13,484 28 ... 7 ... 1 36 Grand Total ... 1 3 ... 5 9 16,385 228 0,597 (a) 737 168 425 37,630 79 243 26 5 3 365 (a) Includes 6 deaths among cattle of the Patna Farm.
IV TABLE III. Statement showing results of preventive inoculation during the year 1928-2.9. District. Name of disease against which occulation was carried; out. Method of inocula- tion followed. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals union died uninocu- lated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of inocu- lated animals which died of the disease. Equines. Bovines. Others. Equinces. Bovines. Others. Equines. Bovines. Others. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. Baron ... Rinderpest " Serum alone. 8 ... 3 ... 583 ... ... ... ... Champaran ... 22 ... 88 ... 3,272 ... ... ... ... Muzaffarpur ... 2 ... 7 ... 371 ... ... ... ... Darbhanga ... 1 ... 7 ... 190 ... ... ... Monghyr ... 23 ... 67 ... 4,810 ... ... ... ... Bhagalpur 4 ... 21 ... 823 ... ... ... ... Purnea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... CENTRAL RANGE. 64 193 ... 9,549 ... ... ... Patna "Serum alone". 14 49 2,007 ... 18 ... Gaya 68 ... 314 9,536 ... 99 ... Shahabad 28 137 3,545 ... 13 ... Monghyr 27 173 5,691 ... ... 6 ... Bhagalpur 12 80 8,608 ... 1 ... Santal Par- 102 63 2 ... 18,096 ... 38 ... Hazaribagh ... 40 ... 116 ... ... 5,507 ... 7 ... Palamau 136 805 ... ... 22,978 78 ... 417 2,368 71,628 ... 269 ... Patna Govern- ment Cattle Farm. Serum Si- multeniously method. ... ... ... 86 ... ... ... ... ORISSA RAMUS. Cuttack "Serum alone. 52 ... 2,117 ... 11,479 ... ... 233 ... Balasore 1 ... 90 ... 2.4 ... ... 11 ... Angul 90 ... 1,083 ... 11.810 ... ... 200 ... Purl 28 ... 369 ... 7,116 ... ... 73 ... 8ambalpur 71 ... 1,099 ... ... 11,301 ... ... 70 ... Ranchi 86 ... 359 ... 12,889 ... ... 19 ... Manbham 20 ... 93 ... 3,679 ... ... ... ... Singbhum 66 ... 537 ... 9,373 ... ... 14 ... 402 ... 6,316 ... 68,021 ... ... 680 ... Total .. 673 ... 8,875 ... 1,49,184 ... ... 889 ...
v TABLE IIIvi TABLE IIIvii TABLE IIIviii TABLE IV. Sowing the number of animals treated and castrated by veterinary assistant surgeon on tour during 1928 29. Hospitals and Dispensaries. Number of Tillages visited. Number of veterinary assistant surgeons employed. Castrations per- formed Treated for contagions diseases. Treated for non-contagious diseases. Total number of cases treated and castrations performed. Remarks. Equities. Bovines. Others Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. Equines. Bovines. Others. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. 1. Chapra (Hospital) 43 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Chapra 1,238 1 ... 133 2 135 ... 20 ... 20 130 1,015 88 1,233 1,388 3. Siwan (Hospital) 176 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4. Siwan 1,018 1 ... 139 4 143 ... 40 ... 40 133 545 171 849 1,032 5. Gopalganj (let dispen- sary). 1,166 1 3 330 ... 333 ... 69 ... 69 252 906 55 1,213 1,615 6. Gopalganj (2nd dispen- sary) 1,044 1 ... 394 2 396 ... 36 ... 36 ... 600 ... 600 1,032 7. Motihari (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8. Motihari 781 1 ... 75 9 84 ... 78 ... 78 83 763 96 942 1,104 9, Raxaul 1,005 1 ... 152 1 153 ... 60 ... 60 59 657 33 749 962 10. Bettiah Estate (Hos- pital. ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11. Bettiah 1,915 1 1 983 163 ,147 ... 69 ... 69 208 787 143 1,138 2,354
IX 12. Bagaha (Hospital) 418 1 ... 188 7 195 ... 74 ... 74 46 369 11 426 695 62 coases supplied with medicines. 13. Narkatiaganj 850 1 1 255 9 265 ... 25 ... 25 159 925 42 1,126 1,416 14. Muzaffarpur (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15. Muzaffarpur (1st dispen- sary) 884 1 2 98 5 105 ... 75 ... 75 35 593 18 646 826 16. Muzaffarpur (2nd dispy.) 997 1 ... 93 ... 93 ... 25 ... 25 8 502 5 515 633 17. Sitamarhi (Hospital) ... 92 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18. Sitamarhi ... 1,032 1 ... 251 23 274 ... 69 ... 69 105 297 59 461 804 19. Sursand 922 1 ... 125 35 160 ... 203 ... 203 171 483 115 769 1,132 20. Hajipur (Hospital) 76 1 ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... 11 ... ... ... ... 11 21. Hajipur 742 1 ... 58 28 86 ... 19 ... 19 175 522 92 789 894 22. Isheria Serai (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23. Laheria Serai ... 690 1 ... 81 14 95 ... 929 ... 929 87 908 75 1,070 2,094 24. Madhubani (Hospital) 204 1 ... 21 2 23 ... 26 ... 26 12 249 18 279 328 25. Jainagar 860 1 2 210 25 237 ... 42 ... 42 148 1,103 107 1,358 1,637 26. Pbulpras ... 669 1 ... 303 ... 303 ... 91 ... 91 24 1,260 13 1,297 1,691 27. Samastipur (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28. Samastipur ... 854 1 ... 236 11 247 ... 79 ... 79 26 572 11 609 935 29. Roserah 722 1 ... 406 ... 106 ... 136 ... 156 5 55? 2 559 1,101 30. Beguserai (Hospital) ... 14 1 ... ... ... ... ... 100 ... 100 ... ... ... ... 100 31. Beguserai (Hospital) ... 740 1 ... 160 ... 160 ... 6 ... 6 302 652 ... 954 1,120 32. Khagaria 730 1 3 202 ... 205 ... 20 ... 20 66 1.304 32 1,402 1,627 33. Supaul (Hospital)...... 381 1 ... 101 ... 101 ... ... ... ... 15 342 2 359 460 34. Supaul 716 1 ... 508 7 515 ... 18 ... 18 28 450 35 513 1,046 35. Madhipura ... 452 1 ... 553 3 556 ... ... 71 608 12 691 1,247
X TABLE IVxi 4. Dinapore 360 1 ... 87 1 88 ... 38 ... 38 2 45 1 48 174 5. Barh 519 1 1 164 2 167 2 103 3 108 83 496 101 685 960 6. Bihar 863 1 1 281 5 287 ... 31 ... 31 164 919 113 1,196 1,514 7. Hilsa 743 1 ... 144 10 154 ... 68 ... 68 2 895 ... 897 1,119 8. Gays (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9. Gaya 552 1 2 201 10 213 ... 174 ... 174 19 1,093 3 1,115 1,502 10. Tekari 702 1 4 202 10 216 4 785 10 799 152 1,243 50 1,445 2.460 11. Sherghati 711 1 14 512 ... 526 ... 101 7 108 189 1,339 68 1,596 2,230 12. Jahanabad ... 638 1 ... 132 ... 132 ... 192 ... 192 124 952 89 1,165 1,489 18. Arwal 185 1 1 112 10 123 ... 104 ... 104 65 1,017 33 1,115 1,342 14. Nawada 861 1 3 263 4 270 ... 142 ... 142 256 1,052 130 1,438 1,850 15. Warsaliganj... 875 1 1 307 5 313 ... 47 ... 47 57 840 17 914 1,274 16. Aurangabad... 408 1 11 122 ... 133 ... 102 ... 102 161 797 57 1,016 1,251 17. Dandnagar ... 495 1 2 245 10 257 ... 100 ... 100 56 773 26 855 1,212 18 Nabinagar ... 74 1 ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... 20 28 46 1 75 95 19. Arrsh (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20. Arrah (Sadar) 266 1 ... 6 ... 6 ... 25, ... 25 12 217 4 233 261 21. Barahpur ... 616 1 ... 116 4 120 6 147 ... 153 43 696 8 747 1,020 22. Buxar 488 1 6 438 4 448 ... 68 1 69 73 1,042 57 1,172 1,689 23. Sassaram ... 781 1 ... 807 7 614 ... ... ... ... 110 2,045 204 2,359 2,973 24. Bikramganj ... 425 1 3 311 6 320 ... 829 ... 829 75 617 13 705 1,854 25. Bhabhua 431 1 11 965 8 984 7 144 ... 151 130 819 22 971 2,106 26. Monghyr (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 Monghyr 630 1 ... 159 3 182 ... 138 ... 138 27 491 13 531 851 28. Jamui 526 1 1 312 43 356 ... 209 ... 209 177 2.171 104 2,452 3,017
xii TABLE IXII 41. Koderma 973 1 5 286 14 305 ... 134 ... 134 208 1,265 126 1,599 2,038 42. Ramgarh 873 1 ... 575 11 586 ... 89 ... 89 99 2,191 150 2,440 3,115 48. Chatra (1st dispensary) 794 1 2 314 3 319 ... 295 17 312 157 1,664 38 1,854 2,485 44. Chatra (2nd dispensary) 553 1 3 340 ... 343 ... 282 ... 282 125 663 11 799 1,424 45. Giridih (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46. Giridih 867 1 ... 324 ... 324 ... ... ... ... 2 1,005 ... 1,007 1,331 47. Dhanwav 896 1 ... 315 75 390 ... 42 ... 42 19 922 47 998 1,420 48.Daltonganj (1st dispen- sary). 317 1 2 235 3 240 ... 220 ... 220 182 628 78 888 1,348 49.Daltonganj (2nd dispen- sary). 563 1 1 308 4 313 ... 226 ... 226 147 475 56 678 3,217 50.Garhwa 444 1 1 315 11 327 ... 155 ... 155 202 503 42 747 1,229 51.Latehar 576 1 ... 129 10 139 ... 588 ... 588 100 1,199 88 1,337 2,114 Total 26,253 51 88 12,286 368 12,742 19 6,877 39 6,935 4,159 39,088 3,182 45,429 65,106 ORISSA RANGE. 1. Cuttack (Hospital) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2. Cuttack 276 1 1 45 5 51 ... 449 ... 449 27 384 49 460 960 203 eases sup- plied with medi- oines. 8. Kendrapara... 934 1 ... 93 3 96 ... 387 7 394 16 785 141 942 1,432 4.Jaipur 577 1 ... 77 5 82 ... 2,515 ... 2,515 14 441 55 510 3,107 5. Banki 692 1 ... 61 3 64 ... 1,521 ... 1,521 2 241 9 252 1,837 409 cases supplie with mediomes. Hospital closed at the end of the year. 6. Balasore (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7. Balasore 491 1 ... 116 12 128 ... 428 ... 428 2 222 20 244 800 8. Soro 353 1 ... 70 18 88 ... 377 ... 377 5 653 54 712 1,177 9. Bhadrak (1st dispensary, 474 1 ... 285 41 326 ... 973 ... 973 13 1,087 134 1.234 2,533 10.Bhadrak (2nd dispensary) 401 1 ... 38 ... 38 ... 1,615 ... 1,615 6 381 24 411 2,064 11.Angul (1st dispensary) 468 1 2 66 16 84 ... 42 ... 42 28 1,116 115 ... 1,385
xiv TABLE IVxv 26. Purulia (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27. Purulia 240 1 ... 35 ... 35 ... 9 ... 3 30 218 ... 248 292 28. Balarampur 64 1 ... 9 ... 9 ... 3 ... 3 3 77 77 ... 80 02 29 Bagnunathpur 364 1 ... 163 9 174 ... 14 ... 14 8 452 32 492 680 30. Dhanbad (Hospital) ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31. Dhanbad ... 485 1 ... 150 4 154 ... 118 ... 118 1 446 18 465 737 32. Katras 443 1 ... 114 2 116 ... 164 ... 162 ... 664 ... 661 942 33. Chaibassa ... 235 1 ... 382 2 384 ... 120 ... 120 7 351 28 386 890 34. Porahat 315 1 ... 103 ... 103 ... 122 ... 122 5 222 27 254 479 35. Ghatsila 375 1 ... 159 30 179 ... 223 ... 223 9 315 34 358 760 36. Jamshedpur (Hospital) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 11,677 35 9 3,135 269 3,413 ... 23,305 16 23,321 333 12,851 1,005 14,189 40,923 Grand total 63,663 129 128 26,605 1,158 2 7,891 48 32,531 55 32,605 8,242 73,319 4,802 86,393 146,889
xvi TABLE V. Showing number of animals treated and castrated at veterinary hospitals and dispensaries during the year 1928-29. District. (Name of hospital.) Number of veterinary die- pensaries. Number of veternna y assist- ant surgeons employed. Number of in-patients treated during the year. Number of out-patients treated daring the year. Grand total of in-patients and out-patients treated during the year. Total number of cases sup- plied with medicines but not brought to hospitals. Castrations performed. Receipts. Expenditure. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Equines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. Eqnines. Bovines. Other animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. Rs. Rs. 1. Chapra... 1 1 34 120 18 172 357 1,409 393 2,159 2,331 352 1 5 6 12 210 2,242 2. Muzaffarpur... 1 1 157 147 65 369 348 592 716 1,656 2,025 62 10 1 3 14 1,575 5,554 3. Purnea ... 1 1 43 39 17 99 440 577 218 1,235 1.334 30 2 22 21 45 370 2,725 4. Sitamarhi... 1 1 63 134 19 216 253 1,266 220 1730 1,955 ... 5 13 10 27 203 5,368 5. Laheriaserai... 1 1 49 115 82 246 346 1,529 299 2,174 2,420 450 2 10 12 24 ... 3,022 6. Motihari ... 1 1 81 164 54 299 252 954 263 1,469 1,768 211 1 25 13 39 374 2,293 7. Bettiah Raj... 1 1 113 113 27 253 1,046 2,878 1,327 5,251 5,504 2,336 12 166 528 706 ... 4,862 8. Begusarai... 1 1 41 111 3 155 458 1,126 97 1,681 1,836 945 6 45 ... 51 96 2,340 9. Supaul... 1 1 23 100 14 137 66 1,167 292 1,525 1,662 ... ... 214 82 246 69 6,785 10. Siwan... 1 1 70 200 8 278 283 1,207 228 1,713 1,991 ... 4 442 6 452 60 1,567
XVII 11. Hajipur ... 1 1 72 69 26 167 399 907 896 1,702 1,869 12 4 10 73 87 851 4,482 12. Samastipur 1 1 49 124 12 185 174 970 234 1,378 1,563 269 4 87 8 44 ... 1,691 13. Madhubani 1 1 56 135 9 200 182 981 210 1,373 1,573 535 2 21 41 64 ... 2,151 14. Bagaha ... 1 1 15 74 15 104 105 512 73 690 794 85 1 18 2 21 ... 2,097 Total 14 14 866 1,645 369 2,880 4,709 16,075 4,961 25,745 28,625 5,287 54 1,028 750 1,832 3,308 47,149 CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Monghyr 1 1 46 76 42 164 116 538 504 1,153 1,817 50 ... 20 18 38 628 1,603 2. Dumka (Government hospital). 1 1 15 38 5 58 113 719 151 983 1,041 40 ... 54 6 60 81 1,786 3. Bankipur... 1 1 822 99 12 433 373 1,266 928 2,567 3,000 105 4 13 8 25 1,069 2,198 4. Gaya 1 1 59 141 100 300 280 1,233 605 2,118 2,418 68 2 19 7 28 712 3,921 5. Arrah 1 1 23 71 1 95 51 907 166 1,124 1,219 ... 2 34 9 45 138 1,922 6. Hazaribagh 1 1 7 44 15 66 135 1,385 252 1,772 1,888 459 ... 56 29 85 120 1,119 7.Bhagalpur 1 1 103 37 54 194 206 1,040 377 1,623 1,817 15 2 75 1 78 386 1,868 8.Daltongani* 1 1 ... ... ... ... 94 234 47 375 375 642 l 10 ... 10 59 15,8579 9.Dinapore*... 1 1 13 34 13 60 74 1,180 247 1,501 1,561 369 2 91 ... 92 247 2,526 10.Giridih ... 1 1 3 47 19 69 80 1.162 191 1,433 1,503 ... ... 202 7 211 36 1,203 Total 10 10 591 587 261 1,439 1,522 9,659 3,468 14,649 16,088 1,748 13 574 85 672 3,471 84,003 ORISSA RANGE. 1. Purulia ... ... 1 1 10 37 31 78 35 500 177 912 990 31 2 14 3 19 219 3,490 2. Ranchi* ... 1 1 18 26 66 110 174 636 490 1,300 1,410 131 3 105 3 111 1,057 2,380 3. BalasoreTABLE VII. Showing total strength of subordinate staff employed during the year 1928-29. Province How employed. Whether paid from Provincial or Local fund. Training staff. Veterinary Inspec- tor. Subordinate staff not included in previous columns. Veterinary Assistant Surgeons. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Bihar and Orissa ... In Schools and Colleges Provincial ... ... ... ... ... In Hospitals 1. Provincial ... ... ... ... 27 27 2. Local (under Private Estates), ... ... ... 1 1 On other works 1. Provincial... ... 15 10 106 130 2. Local ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... *15 xix TABLE VIII. Return of stud bull for the year 1928-29. Province. (Bihar and Orissa.) Property of Government. Property of Lcoal Bodies. Number on 1st April 1928. Obtained daring the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1020. Number on 1st April 1923. Obtained during the year. Casual- ties during the year. Balance remain- ing on 31st March 1020. Number. Average price paid. Number. Average price paid. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. Rs. Rs. 1. Saran ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 2. Champaran ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 1 100 ... 8 3. Muzaffarpur ... ... ... ... ... 5 2 Free 1(a) 6 4. Darbhanga ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 200 ... 5 5. Monghyr (Beguserai and Khagaria.) ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 6. Bhagalpur (Madhipura and Supaul.) ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 150 ... 4 7. Purnea ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Total ... ... ... ... ... 20 8 ... 1 27 Central Range. 1. Patna 1(b) ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... 3 2. Gaya ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 3. Shahabad ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 ... 4(c) 9 4. Monghyr- (except Begu- serai and Khagaria.) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (a) Made over to Gosala. (b)Property of Agriculture Department. Buffalo ball. (c) 2 sent to Gorasahini to zamindar and 1 to Maharaja, Dumraon.
xx TABLE VIIITABLE IX.
xxii TABLE Showing main results of the working of Provincial Province. Name of farm. Receipts. Sale of animals. Sale of produce. Other heads. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Rs. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Bihar and Orissa Government Cattle Farm, Patna. 1.261 (a) 23,370 9 0 3,348 (b) 0 9 27,988 9 9 Total ... 1281 23,870 0 0 3.348 0 27,938 9 9 Note.xxiii IX. cattle Farms during the year 1928-29. Expenditur Valuation of stock, grain and fodder remaining at close of year as detailed on reverse. Salaries of estab- lishment and allowances. Feed and keep of animals. Cultivation ex- penses. Purchase of ani- mals. Other heads. Total. Cattle. Grain. Fodder. Total. 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 RS. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. Rs. a, p. Rs . Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 12,700 16 0 22,076 4 3 13,211 16 0 2,400 (c) 11,776 7 0 02.204 10 0 46,992 1,167 372 49,621 12.790 16 0 22,076 4 3 13,821 16 o 2,400 11,770 7 9 62.204 10 0 40,002 1,167 872 48.621 stock in hand at close, and Rs. 406 being the sale proceeds of milk, not actually paid within too year, sales, not actually received during the year for angle Irons, etc., and Rs. 424 for pipes*.
xxiv Valuation statement of cattle, grain and fodder in hand at close of the year 1928-29. Number or quantity Description. Rate (average). Value. Remark No. Quantity. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Mds. GOVERMENT CaTTLE FARM, PATNA. Cattle. Rs. a. p. Rs. 42 Bullocks ... 125 0 0 5,250 4 Balls (Tharparker) ... 350 0 0 1,000 49 Cows (Ditto) 470 0 0 23,030 97 Cows (De.i) 111 0 0 10,767 23 Cows (ditto) 101 5 6 2,400 10 Male stock, 2 years old 50 0 0 500 67 Do. 1 year old 20 0 0 1,340 50 Do. calves ... 10 0 0 500 7 Female stock, 2 years old 40 0 0 280 64 Do. 1 year old 15 0 0 810 58 Do. calves... 10 0 0 580 1 Pony 135 462 Total 46,992 Grain and fodder. 293 Grain 3 1 5 0 1,157 1,488 Silage ... ... 0 4 0 372 Kirby, etc. 1,781 Total 1,629 492 1,781 GRAND TOTAL 48,521
xxv TABLE X. Return for horse, pony and donkey stallions under local bodies for the year 1928-29. STATEMENT BLANK. TABLE XI. Service and produce of each class of horse, pony and donkey stallions tinder local bodies during 928-29. STATEMENT BLANK. TABLE XII. Showing average cost of feed, keep, attendance, etc, of home, pony and donkey stallions during the year 1928-29. STATEMENT BLANK.
xxvi TABLE XIII. Abstract of particulars regarding horse fairs and shows held in non-selected districts during the year 1928-29. Province. (Names of fairs and shows.) Number of horse fairs and shows held. Total number of animals present. Total number competing for prizes. Total number of horses stock (not including branded mares) present. Total number of animals sold. Prizes awarded. Amount sanctioned by Government of India. Remarks. Year under report. Previous year. Year under report. Previous year. Belonging to breeders. Belonging to drain's. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds, From other sources. Total. Amount actually awarded. Number of medals awarded. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 16 16 17 18 NORTH BIHAR Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. RANGE*. 1 1. Khagra ... 1 6,300 7,050 56 60 6,300 3,349 ... 78 78 14 2. Soncpur ... 1 9,955 8,700 ... ... 2,187 ... 3. Singheswarasthan 1 450 500 ... ... 100 4. Dharamgani ... 1 4,175 5,200 6 8 1,003 ... 5. Hardi ... 1 2,000 1,500 ... ... 900 ... 6. Madbuban ... 1 400 250 ... ... 80 ... 7. Bettiah Daschra 1 l,500 1,200 ... ... 9.,0 ... ... 8. Purnea City ... 1 480 350 ... ... 350 250 55 35 90 90 9. Chunderdohi ... 1 1,400 1,500 ... ... 520 ... ... Total ... 9 20,660 26,250 62 68 0.C50 10,389 ... ... 55 113 168 104 CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Bihta ... 2. Barahpur ... 2 2,609 3,700 ... 3,000 ... ... 3. Biswabhusanda 1 1,300 1,000 ... ... ... 600 550 ... ... ... Total ... 3 3,800 4,700 ... (500 2,556 ... ... ORISSA RANGE 68 Nil Grand Total ... 12 30,459 30,950 62 7,350 12,939 ... 56 113 168 104 ... ...
TABLE XIV.
xxviii TABLE Abstract of particulars regarding cattle fairs and Province. (Names of fairs or shows.) Number of cattle fairs and shows held. Number of stock present. Average price Balls. Bullocks. Cows. Young stock. Buffaloes Camels. Others. Bulls. Bullocks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 NORTH BIHAR RANGE. Rs. Rs. 1. Sitamarhi ... ... 1 21,200 4,125 ... 1,280 135 to 360 2. Khagra ... ... 1 28,270 3,200 3,000 9,100 925 695 ... 30 to 260 3. 8onepur ... ... 1 9 39,000 1,584 4,000 1,095 37 682 25 10 250 4. Dharamganj ... ... 1 16,600 800 4,000 7,100 ... ... 25 to 190 6. Chanderdebi ... 1 ... 8,900 1,200 2,800 7,600 ... 30 to 180 6. Madhuban ... 1 3,000 1,000 20 to 200 7. Bettiah Daschra ... 1 27,000 30 470 ... ... 100 to 360 8. Singheswarasthan .... 1 ... 300 (ele- phants). ... ... 9. Motipur ... ... 1 20,000 6,000 ... ... ... 50 to 150 10. Hardi ... ... 1 10.000 10,000 ... 50 to 160 12. Bhairo-asthan ... 1 26,000 ... 6,000 90 to 300 11. Tirhut Show ... 1 13. Purnea city ... 1 616 160 600 350 80 60 50 Total 13 9 2,04,676 6,961 40,995 25,145 1,012 3,007 ... CENTRAL RANGE. 1. Chatra ... ... 3,200 3 000 1.500 600 160 ... ... 35 2. Bihta ... ... 1 4 6.400 100 400 10 50 75 3. Barahpar ... ... 1 1,050 13,000 2,000 60 to 160 4. Biswabhusands ... 1 700 1,600 1,100 ... 6. Loalong ... ... 1 ... 4,000 600 3,900 1,600 400 ... 15 to 126 37 6. Rafiganj ... ... 1 2,000 400 400 200 40 7. Deokund 1 2,000 500 500 500 ... 60 Total 8 4 38,000 6,250 21,200 6,050 600 ORISSA RANGE. Grand total ... 20 13 243,675 13,214 02,195 31,196 1,04 2 3,607 Nil ...
xxix XIV. shows held during the year 1928-29. of animal sold. Amount realized in fees. Total number of animals that Competed for priaes. Prices awarded. Number of medals awarded. Remarks. Cows. Buffaloes. Camels. From Imperial Funds. From Provincial Funds. From Local Funds. From other soures. Total. 12 13 14 16 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Rs. }- Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 760 29 160 250 400 16 to 100 26 50 82,610 197 ... ... ... 536 336 ... 26 to 376 60 to 402 400 to 175 ... ... ... ... ... 20 to 70 30 to 200 ... 1,060 48 ... ... 190 260 390 ... 15 to 60 36 to 200 ... 6,006 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 to 86 ... ... ... 100 ... 200 260 400 860 16 Rs. 139 actually awarded. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,848 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,000 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,400 ... ... ... ... ... ... 36 66 60 360 180 664 ... 200 135 ... 336 ... ... ... 66,768 ... 660 826 836 2,211 16 30 45 ... 2,000 76 180 180 ... 26 to 30 10 70 ... 460 35 ... ... ... 85 85 ... 20 to 160 26 to 240 ... 1 81 ... ... 7 ... 7 ... 16 to 200 -40 to 160 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 80 35 ... 2,054 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 80 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 49. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,505 101 ... ... 7 265 272 ... ... ... ... 60,273 746 ... 660 832 1,101 3,488 16
xxx TABLE XIV(A). Statement showing the expenditure of the Civil Veterinary Department during the year 1928-29 in the province of Bihar and Orissa. Heads of Account. Amount. Total. Imperial. Provincial. Local. 1 2 3 4 5 Rs. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Superintendence ... 77,890 0 0 ... 77,890 0 0 Veterinary Instruction ... 63,971 0 0 7,252 11 0 71,223 11 0 Subordinate Establishment ... ... 46,061 0 0 1,09,142 10 3 1,55,203 10 3 Hospitals and dispensaries ... 1,77,043 0 0 2,02,780 14 6 3,79,823 14 6 Prizes ... ... ... ... Fairs and Shows ... ... 21,305 3 9 21,305 3 9 Breeding operations ... 8,668 5 6 8,668 5 6 Total ... 3,64,965 0 0 3,49,149 13 0 7,14,114 18 0 B.& O. G. P. (C. V. D.) no, 4-396-11-1-1930No. 2717-D. GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORIS8A. EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT RESOLUTION. Dated Patna, the 23rd December 1929. READ2 3. The services of the Bengal Veterinary College were in the meantime continued and ten new students joined the college during the year against 12 in the previous year. The State veterinary scholar in England is reported to be making satisfactory progress and he will prove a welcome addition to the superior staff on the completion of his training. 4. Diseases of animals.3 North Bihar showed, some decrease, probably due to the unwillingness of local bodies) to incur heavy expenditure on the supply of sera and vaccine, which has become a, considerable burden. The total expenditure on this account during the year amounted to over Rs. 2 lakhs out of which an amount of over Rs. 75,000 is still recoverable from the local bodies concerned. A sum of Rs. 24,000 was sanctioned by Government in addition to the ordinary provision of Rs. 5,000 in the veterinary budget, for the relief of district boards on this account. The provincial revenues are however unfortunately not, in a condition to undertake fresh recurring commitments and unless local bodies are prepared to increase their allotment for supply of sera and vaccine, further progress will be considerably hampered, just when the department, as a result of strenuous effort, has succeeded in breaking down ignorant and prejudiced opposition to preventive inoculation. 6. Treatment of disease,4 the various breeds. Special attention was paid to this work in North Bihar and the total number of castrations per- formed during the year amounted to 33,667 against 7,931 in 1927-28. It will be necessary to continue this work in the improvement in live-stock is ever to be attained. It is satisfactory to note the improvement in the work- ing of the Patna cattle-breeding and dairy farm, though it will need a great deal of sustained and vigorous effort before the present poor average of 6.04 lbs. milk per cow per day is improved. 8. A most important step for the humane treatment of animals was taken during the year by the inauguration of the Bihar and Orissa Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals under the patronage of His Excellency and Lady Stephenson. This society came into existence in August 1928, as a result of the efforts made by Mrs. Ansorge, who was the first Honorary Secretary and who worked hard to make it a success. The Society has now got an inspector of its own and hopes to open up branches at convenient centres as soon as funds permit. Government await future develop- ments in this direction with considerable interest. 9. The cruelty inspector working under the Patna City municipality continued to do good work and there was an appreciable decrease in the number of prosecutions which reflects credit on his efforts to raise the standard of treatment of animals. 10. General.5 ORDER.