ANNUAL REPORT OF THE BENGAL VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BENGAL, FOR THE YEAR 1912-1913. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT BOOK DEPOT. 1913. [PriceANNUAL REPORT OF THE BENGAL VETERINARY COLLEGE [INCLUDING THE REPORTS OF THE EPIZOOTIC DISEASES DEPARTMENT IN CALCUTTA AND ITS VICINITY AND THE RAYMOND RESEARCH LABORATORY] FOR THE YEAR 1912-1913. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT BOOK DEPOT. 1913.
Published at the BENGAL SECRETARIAT BOOK DEPOT, Writers' Buildings, Calcutta. OFFICIAL AGENTS. In India[ Maximum limit, 4 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. Page. General Administration .......... 1 Veterinary Instruction ...... ib Treatment of Disease ...... 2 Expenditure of the College ...... ib. General remarks .... ib. Epizootic Diseases Department ...... ib. The Raymond Research Laboratory ..... 3 APPENDICES. Table I ........ 4 Table XVITHE BENGAL VETERINARY COLLEGE. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. I WAS posted to Bengal on the 15th April and took over formal charge of the Bengal Veterinary College on the afternoon of the 4th June. I also held, in addition to my own duties, the charge of the Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Bengal, from 22nd April to 27th October, both days included. VETERINARY INSTRUCTION. 2. Students.2 TREATMENT OF DISEASE. 9. During the year under report 2,428 patients were treated against 2,184 of the previous year showing an increase of 244 and 1,892 operations were performed against 1,881 of last year. The number of cruelty to animal cases sent by the trying Magistrates was 245 which in comparison with 14,932 prosecutions appears very small. 10. The fees realised for treatment and shoeing amounted to Rs. 19,704-14-9 and the cost of feeding was Rs. 24,110-10-3 which includes the cost of feeding of the College riding ponies, the ambulance horses and the breeding and draft bulls, as also any chargers, horses or cattle used in public service. EXPENDITURE OF THE COLLEGE. 11. Table XIV-A shows, in detail, the expenditure of the College during the year. GENERAL REMARKS. 12. During the year under report a new hospital for dogs has been erected and certain low portions of the compound of the Bengal Veterinary College have been raised. A new building for the office and quarters for the Principal are highly necessary. 13. Staff3 THE RAYMOND RESEARCH LABORATORY. During the year under report some up to-date electrical apparatus for special experiments were purchased. 2. Pathological specimens, smears, dabs, etc., were received from the Civil Veterinary Departments of Bengal, BiharTABLE I. Provincial report showing the main results of the Bengal Veterinary College during the year 1912-13. VETERI- NARY COLLEGES AND SCHOOLS. Name of course of instruction if more than one course followed. NUMBER OF STUDENTS. STUDENTS ADMITTTED DURING THE YEAR CLASSED BY EDUCA- TIONAL QUALIFI- CATION. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. EMPLOYEMENT OF STUDENTS WHO PASSED OUT DURING THE THREE YEARS PRECEDING. Admit- ted dur- ing the year. Passed during the year. Failed to pass out Remain- ing under instruc- tion at the end of the year. Scholarship-holders. Others. In ordinary course. Instruction prolonged by reason of failure to pass. Matriculates or with higher qualifications. Knowing some English but not matriculated. Knowing no English or very little English, From fees. Others. Total. Instructing staff and their salaries. Others. Total. Total number passed. In service of Government or local bodies. In service of other local committees or institution. In private practice. Unemployed in veterinary work. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1 7 18 19 20 21 22 No College fee is charged for instruc- tion. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Veterinary College, Bengal. Three years' course in English. 26 3 27 13 45 15 27 ... ... ... Principal's salary and allowance. 18,700 1 7 Stipends ... 676 0 0 92 78 .. 8 6* Allowance to Examiner. 450 0 0 Assistant Principal's salary and allowance. 5,985 0 0 Prizes ... 562 5 9 Five Lec- turers' sa- lary. 12,550 0 0 Gymnasium Instructor's salary. 528 0 0 Riding Mas- ter's salary. 240 0 0 Total ... 38,003 1 7 Total ... 1,088 5 9 39,69 1 7 4 * One dead. TABLE XIV-A. Statement showing the expenditure of the Bengal Veterinary College during 1912-13. HEADS OF ACCOUNTS. AMOUNT. Total. Imperial. Provincial. Local. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Superintendence 5,979 10 10 28,937 1 10 34,916 12 8 Veterinery Instruction ... 19,061 12 14 1,07,538 7 3 2,597 9 4 1,29,197 13 6 Subordinate Establishment ...... 17,576 12 9 ...... 17,576 12 9 Hospitals and Dispensaries ... ...... 8,314 7 2 ...... 8,314 7 2 Breeding operations ... ...... 1,337 7 7 ...... 1,337 7 7 Prizes ... ... ...... ...... ...... ...... Fairs and Shows ...... ...... ...... ...... Total ... 25,041 7 9 1,63,704 4 7 2,597 9 4 1,91,343 5 8 Furnished by Accountant-General, Bengal.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BENGAL, FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT BOOK DEPÔT, 1913.
[Maximum limit, 15 pages.] TABLE OF CONTENTS. PREFACE AND GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. PAGE Officer in charge duration of tour, etc. ...................................................... 1 PART I.-VETERINARY INSTRUCTIONS. Training of Veterinary Inspectors and Reserve Veterinary Assistants..... 1 PART II.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BENGAL, FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. PREFACE2 prompt notification to this department, and consequent earlier attendance of Veterinary Assistants, though in the latter there is still much to be desired. 8. In some cases it came to my notice that the police failed to report at all, and in others the disease had subsided before this department got the report. EQUINES. 9. Glanders.3 One hundred and forty-six outbreaks of rinderpest, 23 of hæmorrhagic septicæmia and three of anthrax at which inculation could be undertaken were reported, and the total number of cattle inoculated was 21,705 as per details below against 21,193 of the previous year:4 the fact, that the previous year's returns of these assistants included the figures for the number of daily attendances of patients, both old and new, instead of new cases only shown this year, under instruction of this office The decrease against other assistants, viz., Burdwan, Midnapore, Jessore and Malda, is also noticeable, and is reported to be due to the decrease of foot and mouth and other contagious diseases. 31. In spite of the decrease noted above, the total number of patients treated by the assistants shows a slight increase, which is partly due to the appointment of three new assistants during the year. TABLE V.5 Construction of a new building for this hospital is now pending selection of a new site by this department. The present site is objeced to by the University, on the ground that it will be too near the proposed girl's school; other six or seven sites selected have been unobtainable for various reasons. Every effort will be made to overcome this site-selecting difficulty and to get the erection of the hospital in hand this year. 40. Narainganj Municipal Hospital.6 50. Malda.7 the improvement of Siri cattle in the district of Darjeeling, and a herd of 28 heifers and 2 bulls was imported by Government from Bhutan and handed over to the St. Andrew's Colonial Homes under certain conditions. 59. I have twice inspected the cattle, which are in fairly good condition, and in a few years will, I think, be quite a good herd. 60. Table IX shows the working of this farm during the year. 61. Horse and pony stallion. 8 He attended an outbreak of glanders at Berhampore, and several outbreaks of cattle diseases in the districts of Jessore, Khulna and Nadia. (4) Inspector J, N. Dutt Chowdhury was in charge of the Burdwan Division from 11th May 1912 to the end of the year. Prior to that Babu S. N. Dutt was in charge. Babu J. N. Dutt Chowdhury was on tour for 186 days and travelled 6,658 miles by rail and 669 miles by road. He inspected the dispensary and the work of the Veterinary Assistant at Chinsura and Burdwan thrice, and Tarakeswar, Midnapore, Contai, Suri and Burdwan (I. V. A.) and Uluberia twice each. He also checked the work of all these assistants in the mufassal and attended an outbreak of glanders at Burdwan, where five ponies were tested by him with mallein, of which one only re-acted and was destroyed. The cattle shows at Suri, Midnapore and Chinsura were also attended by him. (5) Inspector K. C. Sen was in charge of the Chittagong Division from 15th July to the end of the year. Before that date the work of the division was performed by the Inspector of the Dacca Division in addition to his own duties. Under the orders of the Superintendent he came down to Belgachia in March last to be examined for confirmation of his appointment, and succeeded in passing his examination. He was on tour for 146 days, and travelled 4,234 miles by rail, 1,315 miles by road, 755 miles by steamer and 168 miles by boat. He inspected the dispensaries at Chittagong and Comilla thrice each, and the work of Itinerant Veterinary Assistants of Chittagong, Comilla and Noakhali both at their head-quarters and in the interior thrice each. He visited 116 villages in this connection during these inspections. STAFF VETERINARY ASSISTANTS. 66. Of the four Staff Veterinary Assistants sanctioned for the province, the services of one were placed under the disposal of the Director of Agriculture, Bengal, in connection witn the cattle survey operation. Three only were therefore actually employed by this department. All these men have on the whole worked fairly well and have justified their appointments. I consider Staff Veterinary Assistant a most useful section of the department. It acts as a training and sorting ground for possible Inspectors. They are employed on various important duties, especially attending and. helping Veterinary Assistants and Inspectors with outbreaks of contagious diseases. RESERVE VETERINARY ASSISTANTS. 67. There were seven leave reserve originally sanctioned for Bengal. Of these, five were taken to Bihar on the reconstitution of the provinces, leaving two only for the two divisions of West Bengal, and one was received from East Bengal and Assam. These three men were, however, found to be insufficient and disproportionate to the strength of the subordinate staff. Sanction has therefore been obtained during the current year for the appointment of three more men under this head. The work of all the reserve men employed during the year was satisfactory. VETERINARY ASSISTANTS. 68. Of the 55 assistants employed, 18 were Stationary and 37 Itinerant. The details of their work have been given under the respective heads. 69. On the whole the assistants have worked fairly well. 1 wish they would all take keener interest in their work itself, and that 1 saw less tendency in some of them to do just enough to escape reprimand. OFFICE STAFF. 70. On reconstitution of the province three of the original office staff tayed in Bengal9 and the typist came here from Veterinary Office, Eastern Bengal and Assam, where the former was second clerk and is new to his work here. 71. They have all done their best to help me to run the department under rather difficult circumstances, in that part of the cadre are employed under the regulations of Eastern Bengal and Assam and part under those of old Bengal. They have given me every assistance in drawing up a scheme to amalgamate these two sections. 72. There is necessity felt for another clerk, and Government will be approached this year for sanction of this post. PART V.-EXPENDITURE OP THE DEPARTMENT. 73. Table XIV (a) shows the cost of the department during the year. PART VI10 to be made out of care and feeding of cattle. Until the care of cattle is understood, the purchase and distribution of selected bulls will be productive of little or no result. 83. Another plan to stimulate a desire to improve local cattle would be to give numerous small money prizes for good cattle at every méla to which cattle are brought. 84. Supervision.No. 6149, dated Calcutta, the 23rd July 1913. From2 7. Veterinary dispensaries. REVENUE DEPARTMENT. AGRICULTURE. DARJEELING, THE 14TH OCTOBER 1913. RESOLUTION2 under the consideration of Government during the year. The solution appears to lie in the direction of utilizing other Government servants who are in a position to obtain information of the outbreak of cattle disease to supple- ment the reports now submitted by the police. By far the largest number of deaths from bovine contagious diseases, viz., 5,154 out of a total death-roll of 7,637, was caused by rinderpest. The mortality would have been far more serious but for the valuable results obtained from preventive inoculation. There were 146 outbreaks of this disease, resulting in the death of 2,067 uninoculated animals. On the other hand, out of 19,085 animals which were inoculated, only 43 or about 0'2 per cent. died. Similarly, there were only 3 deaths among 2,407 animals inoculated for hæmorrhagic septicæmia, and only one out of 286 inoculated for anthrax. It is reported that considerable prejudice against inoculation still exists among the cultivators. Only time can cure this, and the Governor in Council is confident that the persistent and tactful efforts of the officers of the Veterinary Department will in the end overcome, objections which are due to ignorance and inexperience. 5. The itinerant veterinary assistants visited 10,409 villages as against 8,055 in the previous year. Three new assistants were appointed during the year, bringing the number up to 62. excluding the 5 divisional inspectors. This number falls far short of that which it is hoped eventually to reach, viz.. two veterinary assistants to each subdivision ; but there are hopeful signs that local bodies are beginning to realize their responsibilities in this direction, and several applications have recently been received by Govern- ment for additional officers. 6. The stables in Calcutta and the neighbourhood, in the area under the Glanders Act, were regularly inspected by the staff of the Veterinary College. A further decrease in cases of glanders was observed, the disease occurring in only 4 stables as against 15 last year. Hut there was an increase in cases in the mufassal, 240 out of a total of 260 deaths occurring in the Sodepur Pinjrapole. There were severe outbreaks in Barisal and Mymensingh. The question of extending the provisions of the Glanders and Farcy Act, which in the eastern districts has hitherto been in force only in a few specified areas, has been engaging the attention of Government, and orders will shortly be issued bringing the Act into force throughout the province. The Governor in Council notes with satisfaction that Mr. Kerr is able to report that comparatively little trouble has been experienced this year in enforcing the provisions of the Act, and that the obstructive attitude of some municipalities, to which a reference was made in last year's review, has, except in one instance, given place to a more reasonable policy. 7. The number of patients treated at the various dispensaries shows a large increase, viz., from 17,289 to 22,106, or over 27 per cent. Rather less than one-fourth were in-patients. Satisfactory progress is shown in practically all the districts of the province. At Dacca considerable difficulty has been experienced in selecting a site for the new veterinary hospital, which is greatly needed, and special difficulties have been reported from Burdwan and Mymensingh, which will be dealt with in due course. In connection with the remarks made in last year's Resolution on the subject of the want of accommodation for in-patients at certain places, the Superinten- dent states that the only places where such accommodation is urgently required are Bakarganj and Dacca. Proposals for erecting a new dispensary building with all the necessary accommodation at Dacca are now under consideration, and the Governor in Council will issue orders to the Director of Agriculture to submit a scheme for Bakarganj as soon as possible. 8. The difficult and important question of the improvement of cattle breeding has continued to engage the attention of Government and of the Agricultural Department. Shortly before the close of the year the sanction of Government was accorded to the establishment of a cattle and cultivation farm at Rangpur, and a prominent place in the work of the farm will be given to the improvement of the breed of cattle. The main object of the farm is to demonstrate to private persons the feasibility of such under- takings and the possibility of working them at a profit, and it is hoped that, if success attends the present experiment, Government will ultimately be able to withdraw in favour of private enterprise. Progress, however, must
3 necessarily be slow, and the gloomy picture which Mr. Kerr draws of the present position as regards cattle-breeding clearly shows that it would be idle to expect any material improvement in the breed of cattle in Bengal for some years to come. Use is made of debilitated and badly shaped bulls, and little or no care is taken to prevent in-breeding. Though suitable bulls have been placed at the disposal of District Boards, they are seldom used, and even when used the value of the good stock is often lost owing to neglect of the cow or the calf. The question of feeding is of the greatest moment, but little attention is ordinarily paid to it. The cultivator may in time be persuaded that the benefits to be secured by greater care in such matters are worth the extra expenditure which is involved, but it will require protracted demonstration on the part of the Agricultural Department and its allies to achieve this result. The Governor in Council is, however, satisfied that the Director of Agriculture and the officers of the Veterinary Department are giving this vital question the attention it deserves, and His Excellency recognizes that progress must inevitably be slow. 9. Only 245 animals were sent for treatment to the Bengal Veterinary College in connection with cases under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act during the year, though nearly 15,000 prosecutions were instituted under the Act. The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, again draws attention to the futility of punishing owners by nominal fines only, without compelling them to have their animals treated, with the natural consequence that unfit animals are put to work again immediately the trial is over. The remedy for this evil lies in the hands of the trying Magistrates. 10. The Governor in Council desires to acknowledge his appreciation of the services of Major Smith, the Principal of the College, and of Mr. Kerr, the Superintendent of the Veterinary Department. The opinions expressed by these officers regarding the work of their subordinates have been duly noted. By order of the Governor in Council, H. F. SAMMAN, Offg. Secretary to the Govt. of Bengal. No. 3035 T.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE BENGAL VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BENGAL, FOR THE YEAR 1912-1913. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT BOOK DEPOT. 1913. [Price