THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES. SECOND EDITION. (Revised up to 17th October 1899.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 8 annas.] 1899. [9 pence.]
THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES. SECOND EDITION. (Revised up to 17th October 1899.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1899.
?CONTENTS. PART I. CHAPTER I - PAGE (1) Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 .. .. .. .. .. 5 (2) Government of India, Home Department Notification, No. 302,  dated 4th February 1897, conferring powers on Local Govern-  ments .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 (3) Government of India, Home Department Notifications,* No.  1550, dated 28th April 1899, and No. 2653, dated 15th Sep-  tember 1899, prescribing rules for the transmission of  plague microbes or cultures . . . . . . . . . . 7 CHAPTER II -  (1) Regulations for the City of Madras (Notification,* No 898,  Fort St. George Gazette, dated 18th December 1897) - . 10 (2) Notification No. 830, dated 18th October 1898, declaring the  whole of the City of Madras to be subject to section 309 of  the City of Madras Municipal Act, 1884 ...... 23 CHAPTER III --  (1) Original Mufassal Regulations for District Municipalities and  Towns and Villages (Notification,* No. 897, Fort St. George  Gazette, dated 18th December 1897) 24 (2) Notification, No. 531, dated 5th July 1898, directing that passen-  gers proceeding from infected parts to the Nilgiris shall  obtain passports at Pdanr ... . . . . . . 40 (3) Notification, No. 638, dated 9th August 1898,framing rules  in connection with the issue of passports at Pdanr 41 (4) Additional Mufassal Regulations for District Municipalities  and Towns and Villages (Notification,* No. 169, Fort St.  George Gazette, dated 1st March 1898) 41 CHAPTER IV -  (1) Regulations for the Inspection of Inward-bound Vessels (Noti-  fication,* No. 163, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 31st August  1897) ................ 58 (2) Regulations for the Inspection of Outward-bound Vessels  (Notification,* No. 181, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 2nd  November 1897) .............. 66 (3) Notification, No. 37, dated 26th April 1898, directing that the  Regulations for the Inspection of Outward-bound Vessels  be brought into force in certain ports 72 CHAPTER V -  Rules under the District Municipalities Act, 1884, for combating  plague in Municipalities (Notification,* No. 185, Fort St. George  Gazette, dated 16th March 1897) . . ........ 73 * As amended by subsequent Notifications.
?iv PART II. CHAPTER VI -                                                 - PAGE (1) Resolution of the Government of India, Home Department,  Sanitary, Nos. 227-240, dated 3rd February 1898, explain-  ing the plague policy . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 (2) G.O., No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898, communicating the  above resolution with subsidiary instructions 102 CHAPTER VII -  (1) Instructions regarding construction, equipment and manage-  ment of Plague Hospitals and Plague Camps 109 (2) Plague Commissioner's hints regarding the construction of  private Plague Hospitals in Madras 122 (3) Equipment of a ten-bed hospital . . 128 (4) Equipment of camps attached to Railway Inspection Stations. . 133 (5) Equipment of camps attached to Road Frontier Inspection  Stations 142 CHAPTER VIII -  Treatment of plague 145 CHAPTER IX -  Important orders relating to plague measures -  (1) Agency to be employed . . . . . . . . . . . . 161 (2) Evacuation of houses and segregation. . . . . . . .  161 (3) Search parties . . . . . .  . . . .  . . 164 (4) Inspection and burial of corpses . . . . . . . .  165 (5) Disinfection . . . . . . . .  . . . . 166 (6) Railway inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . 174 (7) Observation system and passport rules . .    . . 178 (8) Inoculation . .  ..  . .   . .         . .         . . 184 (9) Fairs, festivals and pilgrimages. .         . .   . .         . .          191 (10) Rats. .         . .         . .         . .         . .         . . 193 CHAPTER X - Orders affecting the regulations issued in the Marine Department-  (1) Instructions regarding the admission of healthy vessels from  infected ports and the working of cargo     . .         . . 195 (2) Precautions to be adopted in identifying passengers by Bom-  bay Steam Navigation Company's steamers from infected  ports in the Bombay Presidency 196 (3) Precautions for embarking passengers at Madras Ports on  vessels arriving from infected ports . . 197 (4) Circular to Belgian Consular Agents 198 (5) Letter from the Government of India, Home Department,  No. 1624, dated  1st June 1897,  explaining the terms of  the Venice Sanitary Convention         . .         . .         . .        .. 199 CHAPTER XI -  Miscellaneous orders -  (1) Plague correspondence .. .. .. .. .. .. 208 (2) Plague Regulations .. .. .. .. .. .. 209 (3) Reports and returns .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 210 (4) Sanitary Commissioner's tours . . . . . .   . .        212 (5) Duties of the Railway Staff 213 (6) Rules for sending articles to the Plague Research Laboratory,  Bombay .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 214 (7) Plague officers and allowances 216 (8) Plague expenditure and accounts 225
?PART I. CHAPTER I. (1)-EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897). An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. Short title, extent and commencement. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows:---  1. (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897; (2) It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive of Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti); and (3) It shall come into force at once. Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2. (1) When at any time the Governor-General in Council is satisfied that India or any part there- of is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the Governor-General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary Regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of per- sons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including compensation if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in Council may take measures and prescribe Regulations for- (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such
?6 detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary; and (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, tem- porary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected with any such disease. (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred by this Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories administered by it. Penalty. 3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall  be deemed to have  committed an offence punishable under XLV of section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. 1860. Protection to persons acting under Act. 4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any  person for anything done or in good  faith intended to be done under this Act. (2)-GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME DEPARTMENT NOTIFICA- TION CONFERRING POWERS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (No. 302, DATED 4TH FEBRUARY 1897). WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, is pleased to direct that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised by Local Governments with regard to their respective terri- tories as follows:- (a) All the said powers * by the Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal and Chief Commissioner of Burma. *                    *                   *                   * * Note.-Local Governments, however, should not issue Regulations affecting sea-borne trade. Such Regulations will be issued by the Government of India alone. (G.O., No. 142, Marine, dated 20th February 1897.)
?V (3)-RULES REGARDING THE TRANSMISSION OF PLAGUE MICROBES OR CULTURES. A.-Notification of the Government of India, Home Department (Sanitary-Plague), dated Simla, 28th April 1899, No. 1550, as amended by Notification No. 2648 dated 15th, September 1899. In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, the Governor-General in Coun- cil is pleased to make the following Regulation to be observed by all persons embarking on board vessels at any port in British India, namely,- 1. No person, without the written or printed permission in this behalf of the Local Government in whose territories the port is situated, under the signature of a Secretary to Government, first obtained, shall take either on his own person, or in any baggage or parcel, or as cargo or otherwise howsoever, or shall send or permit to be taken or sent on his account either on the person of another, or in any baggage or parcel, or as cargo or otherwise howsoever, any plague microbes or cultures on board any vessel in any port in British India. 2. No person, whether he has or has not obtained per- mission as hereinbefore required, shall take, send or permit to be taken or sent as aforesaid any such microbes or cultures, on any such vessel at any such port unless and until he has- (1) given 14 clear days' notice in writing of his intention so to do to the Health officer of such port; and (2) by a certificate in the form hereinafter contained and signed by such person, and in such other manner as may be required by such officer, satisfied such officer that all such microbes or cultures- (a) are addressed to, and intended for scientific purposes at, some recognised constituted laboratory or laboratories specified by such person in his own handwriting; and (b) are secured in a hermetically closed tin or tins of adequate strength, placed in a strong outer box of wood or tin with a layer of at least three-quarters of an inch of raw cotton-wool between the inner and the outer case, the outer case being enclosed in stout cloth, securely fastened and sealed, and labelled with such distinguishing in- scription as will suffice to make immediately manifest the nature of the contents,
?8 Form of certificate referred to in rule 2 (2). Certified that the plague microbes (or cultures) which I wish to send to by the vessel which is timed to sail from the port of on the are addressed to the Scientific Laboratory at and are intended for scientific purposes at that Laboratory or other recognised Scientific Laboratories. Certified also that the microbes (or cultures) are secured in tin(s) of adequate strength, hermetically sealed, and labelled. (Signed) DATED The 1899. (G.O., No. 421, Marine, dated 13th May 1899; No. 926, Marine, dated 5th October 1899.) B.-Notification of the Government of India, Home Department, (Sanitary-Plague), dated Simla, 15th September 1899, No. 2653. In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897), the Governor- General in Council is pleased to make the following regula- tions to be observed by persons sending or taking from place to place in India cultures or other articles known or believed to contain the living germs of plague:- 1. No person who is not a Commissioned Medical Officer, a Military Assistant Surgeon, or a medical practitioner in possession of a qualification not lower than that of L.M.S. of the University of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay, shall, without the special permission of the Governor-General in Council or a Local Government, take in his private possession from one place to another any culture or other article which he knows or believes to contain the living germ of plague. 2. No such culture or other article as aforesaid shall be sent from one place to another,- (a) unless it is securely packed in a hermetically closed tin of adequate strength, placed in a strong outer box of wood or tin with a layer of at least three-quarters of an inch of raw cotton-wool between the inner and the outer case, the outer case being enclosed in stout cloth, securely fastened and sealed, and labelled with such distinguishing inscription as will suffice to make immediately manifest the nature of the contents;
9 (b) unless it is consigned to a Government Laboratory or to a person specially permitted by the Governor- General in Council or the Local Government to receive such cultures or other articles; and (c) unless the sender declares its nature to the carrying agency and signs a certificate to the effect that he has advised the consignee of its despatch. 3. No package containing any such culture or other article as aforesaid shall be opened in any place which is free from plague without the special permission of the Governor-General in Council. (G.O., No. 1446-P., dated 2nd October 1899.) 2
?10 CHAPTER II. (1)-REGULATIONS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897, FOR THE CITY OF MADRAS. (G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897; Notification No. 898, "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 18th December 1897, Part I, pages 1589-1593.) WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and the Presidency of Madras is threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease, His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council, in exercise of the powers dele- gated to him under section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, by the Governor-General in Council, is pleased to prescribe under the said Epidemic Diseases Act the following revised Regulations to be observed in the City of Madras:- 1. Every house-holder who becomes cognizant of any case of the bubonic plague or of fever with glandular swellings in his house or in any other private dwelling within the municipal limits of the City of Madras, or of the arrival thereat of any person from any area which has been notified * by the Govern- ment or the President of the Municipal Commission to be infected, shall be bound forthwith to give information of the same to the Health officer or a Sanitary Inspector of the municipality. Every house-holder and every keeper or person in charge of an hotel, chuttram or other place of public resort shall also in the same manner forthwith report the arrival at the house, hotel, chuttram or other place, of any person from any area which has been notified * by the Governor in Council or the Collector to be infected. 2. The President of the Municipal Commission or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may, when he considers necessary, enter upon any pre- mises at any time during daylight and summarily execute any * Note.-Only the places actually infected with plague should, as a rule, be notified as such (G.O., No. 878-P., dated 12th June 1899).
11 work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in, sections 313, 314, 321, 322, 326 or 327 of the City of Madras Municipal Act, 1884. 3. When in the opinion of the Health officer of the munici- pality and of a Medical officer deputed by the Surgeon-General or, in the absence of any such officer, of the Surgeon of the district, any building or place is so overcrowded as to make the inmates or occupants thereof specially liable to an attack of the bubonic plague, the President or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may, by notice posted on some conspicuous part of the building or place, require the owner or occupier, if actually residing in the build- ing or place, or the tenants or the actual inmates thereof, to abate as prescribed in the notice the overcrowding within twenty-four hours by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or inmates of the said building or place; and in default of compliance with the requisition in the said notice may sum- marily eject all the inmates or occupants, or reduce the number of inmates or occupants in such manner and to such extent as may appear necessary; and the owner or the tenants or the inmates of such building or place shall not be entitled to claim any compensation on account of such ejection. 4. When any building or place has, in the opinion of the Health officer of the municipality, been so infected with the plague as to render its further occupation a source of danger to the inmates, tenants or occupants thereof, the President or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may summarily cause such building or place to be vacated and thoroughly cleansed and disinfected; and the said officer may cause the inmates of such building or place to be detained and segregated in such place as he may appoint for a period not exceeding ten days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague among such persons; and the building or place shall not be re-occupied until, in the opinion of the Health officer, it is safe to be re-occupied; and the owner or occupier or the tenants or the inmates thereof shall not be entitled to claim any compensation on account of anything done under this Regulation. In like manner if it appears to the said officer that, in view of the prevalence of the plague within his jurisdiction, any building within such jurisdiction, intended or used as a dwell- ing, is in so insanitary a condition as to be unfit for human habitation, he may summarily cause the same to be vacated and prohibit by a written order the further use of such building as a dwelling. After such prohibition no owner or occupier
12 of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives written permission in this behalf. 5.  No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know,  that a person has been suffering from the plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every article  therein likely  to retain infection,  disinfected to  the satisfaction of the Medical officer appointed by the President in this behalf. 6.  If, in the opinion of the Health officer and of a Medical officer deputed by the Surgeon-General or, in the absence of any such officer, of the Surgeon of the district,  the destruc- tion of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of the plague, the President or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and of the materials of which it is constructed;  and the President may, in his discretion,  give compensation, but no person shall be entitled to claim it of right, at the expense of the Municipal fund constituted under Madras Act I of 1884 for any loss or damage caused by reason of such destruction. 7.  The President may, in his discretion, disinfect or destroy any collection of rags in rag-pickers' houses and rag stores, or of second-hand gunny-bags imported from any part of India infected by the plague; and no person  shall be entitled to claim compensation for any loss or damage sustained by him by reason of the disinfection or destruction of any such articles under the powers conferred by this Regulation. 7-A. The President of the Municipal Commission or any officer appointed by him either generally or specially in this behalf, or the Medical officer in charge of railway inspection station may take any measures that he may deem necessary for the disinfection of the clothing of any person found within the limits of his jurisdiction, who, in the opinion of the said officer, is likely to have been infected, or of any articles likely in the opinion of the said officer to carry infection, which are in the possession of such person; and such person shall be bound to submit to such measures and he may, if necessary, be detained until such measures are taken. * 8. The President shall provide and maintain in such localities whether within or without the municipal limits, as * As amended by G.O., No. 13-P., dated 4th January 1899; Notification No. 18, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 10th January 1899, Part I-A, |pages 4 and 5.
?13 in the opinion of the Health officer of the municipality may be proper for the purpose, suitable and sufficient accommo- dation as approved by the Health officer and by a Medical officer deputed by the Surgeon-General or, in the absence of any such officer, by the Surgeon of the district, for the isolation and treatment of persons suffering from or suspected to be suffering from the plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, and for their detention until they shall be certified to be free from infection. In the places so provided, the President shall furnish such hospital establish- ments, equipment and supplies as the Health officer may require, and shall also make arrangements for feeding persons detained under any of the regulations now prescribed, on payment by them of the cost; but in the case of indigent persons the President shall supply them with food free of charge: provided that any person so detained may cater for himself subject to such rules and conditions as the Health officer may prescribe. The President shall also in like manner and subject to like approval provide accommodation for persons who may be required to vacate any building or ground under the preceding Regulations Nos. 3 and 4, and who may be unable to procure necessary accommodation for themselves. He shall also appoint such other establishments as he considers necessary to carry out the Regulations under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. Explanation.-Any certificate given under this Regulation should contain an accurate description of the person named in it to prevent so far as possible its being used by another person. * 9. Any building or place, whether within or without the municipal limits, which is in the opinion of the Health officer and of a Medical officer deputed by the Surgeon-General or, in the absence of any such officer, of the Surgeon of the district, suitable and required for the purpose of the accommodation to be provided under Regulation 8, may be entered  upon and occupied by the Municipal Commissioners (if unoccupied with- out any notice whatsoever and if occupied after twenty-four hours' notice in writing conspicuously posted on such building *  As amended by G.O., No. 1374-P., dated 25th October 1898; Notification No. 901, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 1st November 1898, Part I-A, page 312.  Note.-This provision obviates the necessity for taking action under the Land Acquisition Act (G.O., No. 940-P., dated 29th August 1898; P.C., No. 1002, dated 14th April 1899).
?14 or place) and used for the purposes of the accommodation under Regulation 8 as aforesaid; and the owner or the lessee of such building or place shall not be entitled to claim from the Municipal Commissioners anything beyond a reasonable rent for the period during which the building or place may remain in their occupation: provided always the Municipal Commissioners shall be bound at their own cost to cleanse and disinfect the said building or place and, if a building, to whitewash it both internally and externally before vacating it. 10.  The Municipal  Commissioners  shall provide suitable conveyances   for  the  free   carriage   of persons   suffering   or suspected to be suffering from   or  infected   by the plague, and for the transport of any clothing, bedding or other articles which may have been exposed to infection. 11.  When  in any  building or  place   there is  a  person suffering or suspected to be suffering from the bubonic plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, or believed to have recently arrived from an infected area, the President or  any  officer  generally or specially  authorized by him in writing in this behalf may enter and inspect such person  or building or place, and either- (a)  remove such person to one of the places of accom- modation provided under Regulation 8, and in such place or in some other place so provided to which, at the discretion of the Health officer, he may from time to time be removed, there detain and treat him until he shall be certified by the Medi- cal officer in charge of the place to be free from infection, or (b)  take measures for segregating and detaining such person in his own house or in some other suitable place, if, in the opinion of the Health officer, the said person can be there treated with no greater risk of spreading the infection than would arise if he were removed to a place provided under Regulation 8. Provided that no person segregated or detained under this Regulation shall leave the place of segregation or detention except with the written permission of the officer in charge, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition.
?15 12. At or near the railway station of Perambr any Medical officer appointed either generally or specially by the President of the municipality in this behalf may detain any train and may require any person travelling therein to alight and sub- mit himself to medical examination as the Medical officer may direct, and may for this purpose, with the assistance if neces- sary of the police, using such reasonable force as may be required, detain such passenger either on the railway pre- mises or in some other suitable place which the President shall, if necessary, provide at the expense of the Municipal fund; and if the said person is found to be suffering from or is sus- pected to be suffering from the bubonic plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, the Medical officer may deal with him under Regulation 11. Any such Medical officer or other officer generally or specially appointed by the President in this behalf may also demand of any person so travelling his name, his usual abode and parti- culars of the places in which he has resided or which he has visited during the preceding fifteen days, and also the address to which he is about to proceed and any other particulars which the Medical or other officer may think fit in view of satisfying himself as to the likelihood of the said person's spreading the infection of the plague. A person so interrogated shall be bound to answer truly to the best of his knowledge and belief all such questions and inquiries. If any such person is found to have within the preceding ten days been within a part of India believed by such Medical or other officer to be infected by the plague, and is unable to satisfy such officer that he is proceeding to any fixed place of residence, such officer may remove him or cause him to be removed to a place provided under Regulation 8, and may there cause him to be detained for ten days when, if he is certified free from the infection of the plague, he shall be permitted to depart therefrom. 13. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any Regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such Regula- tion, has been required or empowered to take under any such Regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence pun- ishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment of either description
?16 for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both. 14. The President of the Municipal Commission is em- powered to direct the evacuation of houses in the neighbourhood of an infected house or of a block of houses or a particular locality, and to prohibit re-occupation of such houses or locality without permission. The President shall give notice for such period as he may deem necessary, and shall provide temporary accommodation for those removed from the houses evacuated. The President may require the evicted persons to reside in any place which he may appoint under such restrictions as he may deem necessary for a period not exceeding ten days, after which, provided no further sickness has occurred, any one who wishes to depart may, after necessary precautions, be allowed to depart. 15.  The President of the Municipal Commission or  any officer specially authorized by him in this behalf is empowered to close places used for the supply, preparation  or storage of articles of food  and   drink  in infected   localities   or  in  the immediate neighbourhood of infected houses, and to direct the removal of all articles of food and drink found in such places. 16.   (1) The President of the Municipal Commission, when and to the extent he may deem necessary, may make Regula- tions- (a) for prescribing the route which shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the grave-yard, burning ground or other place for final disposal of the corpse, and the places, if any, at which such procession may halt on its way for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes; * (b) for enforcing   burial   in   certain  places   or at  a certain depth. (2) He may also prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than ground specially assigned by him for such purpose. * As amended by G.O., No. 429-P., dated 4th May 1898; Notification No. 377, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 10th May 1898, Part I-A, page 124. Note.-Any Regulations which the President may find necessary to frame under this clause should provide that when the burial of a person who has died of plague takes place in proximity to habitations or sources of water-supply, the corpse shall be wrapped in a cloth soaked in a solution of corrosive sublimate and be buried six feet deep. (G.O., No. 429-P., dated 4th May 1898.)
17 (3) When a person dies of the plague elsewhere than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it for the funeral. Such persons shall disinfect themselves according to the orders which may be issued by the President of the Municipal Commission in this behalf. 17.   A canal boat shall be subject  to  all the Regulations applicable to buildings; and passengers by a canal boat shall be subject to interrogation, inspection and detention in the same manner as passengers by railway. In order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague either by or to a canal boat, the President of the Municipal Commission or any officer generally or specially empowered by him in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspicuous position of the boat. 18.  The President of the Municipal Commission may, in order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague, prescribe that no dhobies shall wash clothes except at such places and at such times and under such conditions as may be prescribed. * 19. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, or scavenger employed by the President, Municipal Commission, to do duty in connection with plague or general sanitation, shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge, or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct, or was engaged for a specified term and discharged at the end of it. (2) No such maistri, peon, watchman, cooly or sca- venger in the absence of a written contract authorizing him so to do, and without reasonable cause, shall resign his employment or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice to the President or neglect, or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. 20. When, in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these rules, a pass or certificate is granted to any person * As revised by G.O., No. 604-P., dated 26th April 1899; Notification No. 389, published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 2nd May 1899, Part I-A., page 179. 3
?18 or persons to enable him or them to go from one place to another or for any purpose, such pass or certificate shall not be used by any other person or persons or for any other purpose. * 21. The provisions of these Regulations in regard to segregation do not apply to persons who hold certificates that they have been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, provided such certificates bear a date not earlier than six months but not later than ten days, previously. Such persons shall be entitled to the following privileges:- (a) Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, plague, they shall not be liable to detention at any railway or road observation camp when travelling, except for such period as may be required to disinfect their baggage and clothes, if those are considered suspicious. (b) They shall not be liable to take out passports and present themselves daily for observation for ten days after arrival from a plague-infected place, or from any place noti- fied by His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of No. 22 of the City of Madras Plague Regulations; but they may be observed at their own residence and shall, with this view, be bound when required by any Plague officer to give their names and addresses for the next ten days. (c) Inoculated persons who have been living in an infected house or have otherwise been exposed to plague infection shall not be liable to be segregated, but may be required to evacuate the infected house and to have their clothes and personal effects disinfected. When, however, all the occupants of a house have been inoculated, neither the patients nor the other inmates of the house shall be required to be segregated, provided arrangements are made to the satisfaction of a Plague authority for the disinfection of the house and its contents, and for the prevention of the spread of plague to the neighbouring dwellings. The inoculation certificate shall be in the following form. But when in a certificate issued under authority, thumb impression has not been taken, other satisfactory evidence of identification may be accepted:- * As re-issued in G.O., No. 381-P., dated 11th March 1899, and published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 11th April 1899, Part I-A, pages 141 and 142.
?19 [COUNTERFOIL.]             Plague Inoculation [Royal Anns]  Certificate. No.                                    No.                                         CERTIFIED that                    , father's name Name                                                                                              , Street Father's name                          , resident of              Village  Street        ,Town   , District   Village                Taluk                                                                                                                                    Town            has been inoculated by me, and Taluk                                   that his thumb-mark was at the time impressed    before me. District    Space for left thumb-mark. Signature and }            Designation.                                                   Date                             Dated   Initials of operator.                                                                                              NOTE.-Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, plague, the holder of the certificate is exempted from segregation,   from detention when travelling, and from ten days' observation  under the passport rules. If does not, however, exempt him from  liability to evacuate an infected house, except in the case where all  the occupants of the house have been inoculated, or to have his clothes disinfected when travelling. The certificate is valid for a period of six months. * 21-A. Every inoculated person (who is exempted from segregation, detention and observation  under the preceding Regulation 21)  shall be bound, when called upon to do  so by any Medical officer appointed under Regulation 12, to pro- duce the certificate showing that  he has been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process,  and also to impress his thumb-mark for the purpose of identification.  22. Every person arriving, or suspected of having arrived, from any place declared to be infected with plague, or from any place notified by His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of this Regulation, shall, unless exempted under Regulation 21, be bound to appear at a place provided for the purpose and obtain a passport binding him to present himself daily for inspection for the next ten days before the officer  named in the passport, and he shall be bound so to *  G.O., No. 1462-P., dated 19th November 1898; Notification No. 1025, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 20th December 1898, Part I-A, page 378.  As re-issued in G.O., No. 381-P., dated 11th March 1899, and published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 11th April 1899, Part 1-A, pages 137-38, and as amended by G.O., No. 999-P., dated 28th June 1899; Notification No. 563, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 4th July 1899, Part-I-A, page 254. Note.-This Regulation does not apply to passengers from a non-infected area who pass through an infected station without breaking journey at that station (G.O., No. 1185-P., dated 27th September 1898).                                                                   '  Note.-The town should be divided into convenient circles, so that persons required to present themselves for daily inspection may not have to go a long distance for the purpose. For each circle an officer should be appointed to conduct the ten days' inspection (G.O., No. 890-P., dated 24th August 1898).
?20 present himself. On the expiry of ten days the passport- holder shall deliver up his passport to the inspecting officer for transmission to the President, Municipal Commission, Madras. In case he has to leave Madras City within the aforesaid period of ten days, he shall forthwith give intima- tion to the inspecting officer, who shall report the fact to the local authority * of the new place of residence, and enter in the passport the name of the officer before whom the passenger must present himself at the new place of resi- dence, and the passenger shall be bound to present himself accordingly. Provided that, when it appears desirable, the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, or the Health Officer may, by endorsement on the passport, exempt any person from personal attendance and permit him to be inspected at his residence. In the case of minors and incapacitated persons, the obligation to take out passports for them, to present them for daily inspection, to report truly their names and addresses, to intimate any changes in their residence, and to comply other- wise with the requirements of this Regulation shall vest in their legal guardians or persons in whose charge they travel or who receive them at the railway station of destination. The passport shall, in the case of those arriving by the Madras Railway, be issued at Perambr, and in the case of those arriving by sea at the harbour. It shall be in the following form:- PASSPORT. (To be issued to a person arriving from a plague-infected locality, or any notified area, under Regulation 22 under the Epidemic Diseases Act, published in the Fort St. George Gazette, Part I-A, dated April 11, 1899, page 137, as amended by Notification No. 563, Fort St. George Gazette, dated July 4, 1899, Part I-A, page 254.) 1.  Passport No. 2.  Station of issue. 3.  Date of arrival. 4.  Name of person. 5.  Father's name. 6.  Caste. 7.  Age. 8.  Whence coming. 9.  Destination and residence during the next ten days  (give Circle, Street and Number or Name of the owner of the house). * Vide Mufassal Regulation 17 (i), published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 11th April 1899, Part I-A, page 139.
?21 10. When the triplicate of the passport sent and to whom. I declare the above information to be correct, and I do hereby bind myself  to appear   for   inspection,   daily,  for the          to present the abovementioned person                  next ten days, before the passport examiner of _________________ Circle. Date Signature or mark of traveller. Declared and signed before me. Date Signature and designation of the officer  issuing the passport. Note.-This should be prepared in triplicate, one copy being retained by the officer issuing it, the second delivered to the person to whom it is issued, and the third sent to the officer who is to conduct the ten days' inspection. Endorsement of the Inspecting officer.   Date. Signature. Designation. 1st day   2nd ,,   3rd "   4th "   5th "   6th "   7th "   8th "   9th "   10th "   Forwarded to the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, the passenger having been duly inspected. Date. Signature and Designation of the Examining officer.  (See reverse.) Reverse. Regulation 22 under the Epidemic Diseases Act, published in the Fort St. George Gazette, Part I-A, dated April 11, 1899, page 137, as amended by Notification No. 563, Fort St. George Gazette, dated July 4, 1899, Part I-A, page 254. City Regulation 22.-Every person arriving, or suspected of having arrived, from any place declared to be infected with plague, or from any place notified by His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. Greorge in Council for the purposes of this Regulation, shall, unless exempted under Regulation 21, be bound to appear at a place provided for the purpose
?22 and obtain a passport binding him to present himself daily for inspec- tion for the next ten days before the officer named in the passport, and he shall be bound so to present himself. On the expiry of ten days, the passport-holder shall deliver up his passport to the inspecting officer for transmission to the President, Municipal Commission, Madras. In case he has to leave M adras City within the aforesaid period of ten days, he shall forthwith give intimation to the inspecting officer, who shall report the fact to the local authority * of the new place of residence, and enter in the passport the name of the officer before whom the passenger must present himself at the new place of residence, and the passenger shall be bound to present himself accordingly. Provided that, when it appears desirable, the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, or the Health officer may, by endorsement on the passport, exempt any person from personal attendance and permit him to be inspected at his residence. In the case of minors and incapacitated persons, the obligation to take out passports for them, to present them for daily inspection, to report truly their names and addresses, to intimate any changes in their residence, and to comply otherwise with the requirements of this Regulation shall vest in their legal guardians or persons in whose charge they travel or who receive them at the railway station of destination. N.B.-Any person disobeying or evading the above or any other Plague Regulation or any order made in pursuance thereof renders himself liable to prosecution for an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to Rs. 1,000 or both. INSTRUCTIONS TO THE OFFICER APPOINTED TO CONDUCT THE TEN DAYS' INSPECTION. 1. The officer shall daily inspect the passenger and initial the original passport in token of the inspection. 2. He shall daily ascertain from the passenger whether there is any sickness or death in the house in which he is or has been residing. If the passenger is found to exhibit any symptoms of plague, or if any sickness or death is reported in his house, or if the passenger does not appear for examination on any day, the fact should be immediately reported to the President or the Health officer of the municipality. 3. If the passenger intimates or it is otherwise known that he desires to leave Madras within the period of ten days, the particulars of his future residence should be obtained and the fact communicated with- out delay to the local authority of the place of the new residence. The officer before whom the passenger must present himself for inspection at the new place of residence should be entered in the passport. Intima- tion of departure to any railway station in the Province of Mysore should be telegraphed to the- * Vide Mufassal Regulation 17 (i), published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated April 11, 1899, Part I-A, page 139.
?23 (a) Assistant Surgeon on plague duty, Yesvantpur, when the destination is a station on the Mysore State Railway; (b) Residency Surgeon, Bangalore, when the destination is a station within Mysore Province on the Madras Railway. 4. The inspecting officer should maintain a register in the following form:- (1) Date of receipt of intimation. (2) Name of traveller. (3) From what infected or notified area arriving. (4) Date of arrival of traveller. (5) Number, date and place of issue of passport. (6) How long kept under observation. (7) State of health of the traveller and other persons living in the house in which he is or has been residing. (8) Date of departure if occurring within ten days. (9) Destination. (10) Date of intimation of departure to the local authority of the place of destination. (11) Date of despatch of the passport to the President, Muni- cipal Commission, Madras. (2)-NOTIFICATION No. 830, FORT ST. GEORGE GAZETTE, DATED 18TH OCTOBER 1898, PART I-A, PAGE 292. WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and the City of Madras is threatened with, an outbreak of plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law in force in the City are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease, His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council in exercise of the powers delegated to him under section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, by the Governor-General in Council, hereby de- clares the whole of the City of Madras to be subject to the provisions of section 309 of the City of Madras Municipal Act, 1884.
?24 CHAPTER III. (1)-ORIGINAL MUFASSAL REGULATIONS UNDER THE EPI- DEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897, FOR DISTRICT MUNICIPALITIES AND TOWNS AND VILLAGES. (G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897; Notification No. 897, "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 18th December 1897, Part I, pages 1583-1589.) WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and the Presi- dency of Madras is threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease, His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council, in exercise of the powers delegated to him under section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, by the Governor-General in Council, is pleased to prescribe, under the said Epidemic Diseases Act, the following revised Regulations to be observed in the district municipalities con- stituted under the District Municipalities Act, 1884, and in other towns and villages in the Presidency:- * 1. In every district municipality and every town or village, every house-holder and every medical practitioner practising therein who becomes cognizant of any case of the bubonic plague or of fever with glandular swellings in his house or in any other private dwelling within the limits of the munici- pality, town or village, shall be bound to give information of the same, with the least practicable delay, in the municipality to the Chairman of the Council and the Medical officer in charge of the municipal dispensary or hospital, and in a town or village not being a municipality, to the village head or to the nearest officer of the Revenue or Medical Department, who shall report the fact at once to his immediate official superior. Every house-holder and every keeper or person in charge of an hotel, chuttram or other place of public resort, * As amended by G.O., No. 1023-P., dated 7th September 1898; Notification No. 743, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 13th September 1898, Part I-A, page 266; G.O., No. 1317-P., dated 12th October 1898 ; Notification No. 829, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 18th October 1898, Part I-A, page 292.
?25 shall also in the same manner forthwith report the arrival at the house, hotel, chuttram or other place, of any person from any area which has been notified * by the Governor in Council or the Collector to be infected. The Chairman or the Rev- enue or Medical officer, as the case may be, shall forthwith send information to the Collector of the district of the occurrence of any such case. 2. On the requisition of the Collector, and to the extent to which he may determine, a Municipal Council or a District Board, if it has not already made the provision, shall provide and maintain in such localities, which, in the case of a munici- pality, may be within or without the municipal limits, as in the opinion of the District Medical and Sanitary officer, or a Medical officer deputed by him, may be proper for the purpose, suitable and sufficient accommodation  to the satisfaction of such Medical officer, for the isolation and treatment of persons suffer- ing or suspected to be suffering from the plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, and also accommodation for their detention until they shall be certified by the Medical officer in charge to be free from infection. In the places so provided, the Municipal Council or the District Board, as the case may be, shall furnish such hospital establishments, equipment and supplies as the District Collector may determine, and shall also make arrangements for feeding persons detained under the powers conferred by any of the Regulations made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, on payment by them of the cost; but in the case of indigent persons, the Municipal Council or the District Board, as the case may be, shall supply them with food free of charge: provided that any person so detained may cater for himself subject to such rules and conditions as the medical officer in charge may prescribe. The Municipal Council or Dis- trict Board, as the case may be, shall, on like requisition and in like manner and subject to like approval, provide accommoda- tion for persons who may be required to vacate any building or ground under the Regulations set out below numbered 4, 5 and * Note.-Only the places actually infected with plague should, as a rule, be notified as such (G.O., No. 878-P., dated 12th June 1899).  Note.-Rule 24 of the rules issued in G.O., No. 252-M., dated 13th March 1897, requires that isolation huts shall be erected and maintained in each municipal town. Camps are also attached to all railway and road inspection stations. As regards other places, sheds should be erected when actually required, any case of plague that may occur being meanwhile isolated in a hut or shed remote from inhabited houses as directed in Additional Mufussal Regulation 17 (page 46) (G.O., No. 1090-P., dated 17th September 1898). The cost of sheds constructed in Cantonments should be borne by the Cantonment funds. (P.O. No. 802, dated 25th November 1898), 4
?26 6, and who may be unable to procure necessary accommodation for themselves. Explanation.-Any certificate given under this Regulation should contain an accurate description of the person named in it to prevent, so far as possible, its being used by another person. 3. When, in any building or place within a municipality, town or village, there is a person suffering or suspected to be suffering from the bubonic plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, or believed to have recently arrived from an infected area, the Collector or any officer appointed by him, generally or specially in this behalf, may enter and inspect such person and building or place, and either- (a) remove such person to one of the places of accom- modation provided under the preceding Regulation 2, and in such place or in some other place so provided to which at the discretion of the Medical officer in charge he may from time to time be removed, there detain and treat him until he shall be certified by the said medical officer to be free from infection, or (b) take measures for segregating and detaining such person in his own house or in some other suitable place, if, in the opinion of the Medical officer in charge, the person can be there treated with no greater risk of spreading the infection, than if he were removed to a place provided under the preceding Regulation 2. Provided that no person segregated or detained under this Regulation shall leave the place of segregation or deten- tion except with the written permission of the officer in charge, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition. 4. * Any building or place which is required for and is, in the opinion of the District Medical and Sanitary officer or the medical officer deputed by him in this behalf, suitable for the purpose of the accommodation to be provided under Regulation 2, may be entered  upon and occupied by the Municipal Council * As amended by G.O., No. 1374-P., dated 25th October 1898; Notification No. 901, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 1st November 1898, Part-I-A, page 12.  Note.-This provision obviates the necessity for taking action under the Land Acquisition Act (G.O., No. 940-P., dated 29th August 1898; P.C., No. 1002, dated 14th April 1899).
27 or the President of the District Board, as the case may be, or a person deputed by him in this behalf (if unoccupied without any notice whatsoever, and if occupied after twenty-four hours' notice in writing conspicuously posted on such house or build- ing) and may be used for the purposes of the accommodation under Regulation 2; and the owner or the lessee of such building or place shall not be entitled to anything beyond a reasonable rent for the period during which the ground or building may remain in the occupation of the Municipal Council or the Col- lector and President of the District Board, as the case may be: provided that the Municipal Council or the Collector and Presi- dent of the District Board, as the case may be, shall be bound at the cost of the municipality or the district board, as the case may be, thoroughly to cleanse and disinfect the ground or building and, if a building, to whitewash it internally and externally before vacating it. 5. When any building or place is, in the opinion of the Collector or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf, so overcrowded as to make the inmates or occupiers specially liable to an attack of the bubonic plague, the Collector or officer authorized as aforesaid may, by a notice posted on some conspicuous part of the building or place, require the owner or occupier, if actually residing in the building or place, or the tenants or the actual occupants thereof, to abate, as prescribed in the notice, the overcrowding within twenty-four hours by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or other occupants of the said building or place, and, in default of compliance with the requisition in the said notice, may sum- marily eject all the inmates or occupants, or reduce the number of the same in such manner and to such extent as may appear necessary; and the owner or occupier or the tenants or the inmates of such building or place shall not be entitled to claim any compensation on account of such ejection. 6. When a building or place has, in the opinion of an officer appointed in this behalf, been so infected with the plague as to render its further occupation a source of danger to the inmates thereof, the Collector or an officer generally or specially author- ized by him in writing in this behalf may summarily cause such building or place to be vacated and thoroughly cleansed and disinfected; and the said officer may cause the inmates of such building or place to be detained and segregated in such place as he may appoint for a period not exceeding ten days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague among such persons; and the building or place shall not be re-occupied
28 until, in the opinion of such Medical officer, it is safe to be re-occupied. In like manner, if it appears to the said officer that, in view of the prevalence of the plague within his jurisdiction, any building within such jurisdiction, intended or used as a dwell- ing, is in so insanitary a condition as to be unfit for human habitation, he may summarily cause the same to be vacated, and prohibit, by a written order, the further use of such building as a dwelling. After such prohibition no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives written permission in this behalf. The owner or the occupier or the tenants or actual inmates or occupants of any building or place dealt with under this Regulation shall not be entitled to claim any compensation on account of anything done thereunder. 7. The Municipal Council or the Collector, and President of the District Board, as the case may be, shall provide suitable conveyances for the free carriage, to a place provided under Regulation 2, of persons suffering, or suspected to be suffering, from the plague, and for the transport of any clothing, bedding or other articles which have been exposed to infection. 8. If it shall appear to the Collector or an officer deputed by him in this behalf that the water in any well, tank or other place is likely, if used for drinking, to engender or to cause the spread of the plague, he may by public notice prohibit the removal or use of the said water. 9. If the Collector of the district or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf is of opinion that the destruction of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of the plague, the Collector or such officer as aforesaid may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and the materials of which it is con- structed; and the Chairman of the Municipal Council or the President of the District Board, as the case may be, may in his discretion grant compensation, but no person shall be entitled to claim it of right, for any loss or damage caused by reason of such destruction, out of the Municipal fund constituted under Madras Act IV of 1884 or the Local fund constituted under Madras Act V of 1884, as the case may be. 10. No owner, driver or person in charge of a public con- veyance shall carry any person suffering from the plague; nor shall any person suffering from the disease enter a public conveyance.
29 11. No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know, that a person has been suffering from the plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected to the satis- faction of the Medical officer appointed by the Collector in this behalf. 12. The Collector or an officer generally or specially author- ized by him in writing in this behalf may, when he considers necessary, enter upon any premises, whether situated in a municipality or not, at any time during daylight and summarily execute any work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in sections 186, 220, 221 and 228 of the District Municipalities Act, 1884, or sections 99 and 101 of the Local Boards Act, 1884. 13. The Collector of the district may, in his discretion, order the disinfection or destruction of any collection of rags in rag-pickers' houses and rag-stores or of second-hand gunny- bags imported from any part of India infected by the plague; and no person shall be entitled to claim compensation for any loss or damage sustained by him by reason of the disinfection or destruction of such articles under the powers conferred by this Regulation. The Collector of the district may also, by an order in writing, authorize generally or specially any Magistrate or any Chairman of a Municipal Council to exercise the power of disinfection vested in the Collector of the district by this Regulation. 14. At or near any railway station appointed by notifica- tion in the Fort St. George Gazette as an inspection station, any Medical officer appointed in this behalf may detain any train and may require any person travelling therein to alight and submit himself to medical examination as the Medical officer may direct, and may for this purpose, with the assistance, if necessary, of the police, using such reasonable force as may be required, detain such passenger either on the railway premises or in some other suitable place which the Collector shall, if necessary, provide at the expense of the Municipal or Local fund, as the case may be; and, if the said person is suffering from or suspected to be suffering from the bubonic plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, the Medical officer may deal with him under the preceding Regulation 3,
30 Any such Medical officer or person acting under his imme- diate orders may also demand of any person so travelling, his name, his usual abode and particulars of the places in which he has resided or which he has visited during the preceding fifteen days, and also the address to which he is about to proceed, and any other particulars which the Medical officer may think fit, in view of satisfying himself as to the likelihood of the said person's spreading the infection of the plague. A person so interrogated shall be bound to answer truly to the best of his knowledge and belief all such questions and enquiries. If any such person is found to have, within the preceding ten days, been within a part of India believed by such Medical officer to be infected by the plague, and is unable to satisfy such officer that he is proceeding to any fixed place of residence, such officer may remove him, or cause him to be removed, to a place provided under Regulation 2, and may there cause him to be detained for ten days, when, if he is certified free from the in- fection of the plague, he shall be permitted to depart therefrom. 14-A. If the place at which an inspection is held under Regulation 3 be a railway station, and if no suitable accommo- dation for plague cases has been provided in the neighbourhood of such station, the officer making the inspection may require that a passenger who is found to be suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, the plague, or to have so lately suffered therefrom as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, be carried on by the railway administration in a railway compartment vacated for the purpose to the nearest inspection station or other place where such accommodation is available. 15. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any Regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such Regula- tion, has been required or empowered to take under any such Regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment of either descrip- tion for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both. 16. The Inspecting Medical officer at an inspection station notified under Regulation 14 may require any passenger who may have been medically inspected to deliver up his ticket in
?31 order that some mark indicative of his having been inspected may be impressed thereon; and such passenger shall be bound to deliver it up accordingly. 17-i.* Every person arriving, or suspected of having arrived, from any place declared to be infected with plague, or from any place notified by His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of this Regulation shall, unless exempted under Regulation 31,  before leaving the railway station at which he has alighted, or before disembarking  from the steamer, ship or boat in which he has travelled, or in the case of arrival by road either immediately on reaching a Road Frontier Inspection Station or within twelve hours from the time of arrival at any other place, obtain from the officer mentioned in Regulation 17-ii a passport binding him to present himself for daily inspection for the next ten days before the local authority of the town or village where he may be; and he shall be bound so to present himself. Provided that, where it appears desirable, the Municipal Chairman or any Revenue officer not below the grade of Deputy Tahsildar may, by endorsement on the passport, exempt any person from personal attendance and permit him to be inspected at his residence. Explanation.-By a "local authority" is meant any of the following officers:- (a) The local Medical officer; (b) The Station-house officer; (c) The headman of the village; (d) Any person appointed  by   the   Collector   of   the              district for the purpose of this Regulation. In places where there is more than one local authority, the duties prescribed in these rules shall be performed by, or with the permission of the Collector under the orders of, the officer who stands first in the order given in this explanation. 17-ii. The following officers are authorized to issue pass- ports:-                                                           (a) To  travellers alighting at railway inspection stations.  The  medical officer in charge  or other  officer acting  under  his orders. * As re-issued in G.O., No. 381-P., dated 11th March 1899, and published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 11th April 1899, Part I-A, pages 139 and 140. Note.-Copies of this Regulation should be hung up at railway stations (G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898). It does not apply to passengers from a non-infected area who pass through an infected station without breaking journey at. that station (G.O., No. 1185-P., dated 27th September 1898).  Note.-For passport form see page 53.
?                                                                32 (b)  To travellers alighting at rail-  way stations included within       municipal limits.                         Such Medical, Sanitary or other officer as may be appointed by the Chairman with the Collector's approval. (c)  To travellers alighting at other   railway stations.                              The Stationmaster or other officer appointed by the Collector for the purpose. (d)  To  travellers  arriving    by   steamer, ship or boat.                       The Medical, Sanitary   or   other officer appointed to examine such travellers.       (e)  To travellers arriving by road.                  The Medical, Sanitary   or   other officer appointed to examine such travellers,   or if no such officer has  been   appointed,   the local authority of the place of arrival.  17-iii. Every person required to take out a passport shall declare truly his name, address, and such other particulars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport and shall re- port forthwith to the local authority any change in his place of residence occurring within ten days from the date of arrival. On the expiry of ten days, he shall deliver up his passport to the local authority of the place where he may then be. 17-iv. The issue of a passport, or any change in the residence of the person to whom it has been granted, shall immediately be communicated by the officer issuing it (in the former case) or by the local authority (in the latter case) to the Municipal Chairman or the local authority of the place of destination.* If the local authority of the place of destination is not known, the intimation shall be sent to the Tahsildar concerned for transmission to the local officer by whom the traveller has to be observed. The communication may be made by a post card, or by a special messenger, or in any other manner which the Collectors concerned may determine. The telegraph need be used only in urgent cases. Intimation of departure to any railway station in the Province of Mysore shall, however, be telegraphed to the- (a) Assistant Surgeon on plague duty, Yesvantpur, when the destination is a station on the Mysore State Railway; (b) Residency Surgeon, Bangalore, when the destination     is a station within Mysore Province on the Madras Railway. 17-v. The local authority of the place of destination shall see that, on the arrival of the traveller, he is observed daily for * This rule applies whether the place of destination is in British or Mysore territory.
33 ten days. Any case of illness or death in the house in which such traveller is or has been residing shall be forthwith re- ported to the immediate superior of the local authority with full details. After ten days, the passport shall be recovered from the traveller and sent to the Tahsildar. Any officer of the Revenue Department not below the rank of Deputy Tahsildar may require that the person or the clothing and other effects of the traveller shall be disinfected in such manner as may be ordered by the Collector. 17-vi. The headman of every village shall keep himself promptly informed of the arrival of every person from an infected or notified area without a passport and shall deal with him as in the preceding clauses of this Regulation to which such person shall be bound to submit himself. 17-vii. A register * shall be maintained by each local authority in the following form:- (1) Date of receipt of intimation. (2) Name of traveller. (3) From what infected or notified area arriving. (4) Date of arrival of traveller. (5) Number, date and place of issue of passport. (6) How long kept under observation. (7) State of health of the traveller and other persons living in the house in which he is or has been residing. (8) Date of departure if occurring within ten days. (9) Destination. (10) Date of intimation of departure to the local authority of the place of destination. (11) Date of despatch of the passport to the Tahsildar. 17-viii. In the case of persons passing through a Railway Frontier Inspection Station, the Medical officer in charge shall arrange to record the following information in respect to every traveller from an infected or notified area who is not detained by him under the provisions of Regulation 14 and to send it without delayif possible by the railway guard of the same or next trainto the District Medical and Sani- tary officer of the District to which such traveller is proceeding:  whether in British or Mysore territory. (1) Date of arrival. (2) Name of traveller. (3) Father's name. (4) Caste. (5) Age. (6) Whence coming. * Note.The register may be kept in manuscript (G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898). 5
34                     District.          Taluk.                                 (7) Destination and residence during  }  Village.                                                    the next ten days.                   Street.                                                                                        Number or name of the            owner of the house. 17-ix. In the case of other persons coming from an infected or notified area, the duty of recording the above information and communicating it to the District Medical and Sanitary officer shall devolve on the officer issuing the passport. 17-x. The District Medical and Sanitary officer shall for- ward the report referred to in Regulation 17-viii and ix to the Tahsildar concerned, whose duty it shall be to see that the per- sons therein mentioned are duly observed, and that any case of sickness or death in the houses occupied by them is promptly reported, and to bring to the Collector's notice all instances of omission to issue passports or attempts to evade this Regulation. 17-xi. Whenever the deaths reported from any village are found to be more frequent than usual, or when any case of fever with glandular swellings is reported, the Tahsildar with the nearest Medical officer shall at once proceed to the village and make inquiries with a view to ascertain whether plague exists in the village. 17-xii. In municipalities, the Tahsildar's duties under this Regulation shall be performed by the Municipal Chairman. The term "Tahsildar" includes Deputy Tahsildar. 17-xiii. In the case of minors and incapacitated persons, the obligation to take out passports for them, to present them for daily inspection, to report truly their names and addresses, to intimate any change in their residence, and to comply other- wise with the requirements of this Regulation shall vest in their legal guardians or persons in whose charge they travel or who receive them at the railway station of destination. 18.  If a passenger from any railway station referred to in the last preceding Regulation appears to be attempting to evade inspection at an inspection station by alighting at a station short of that for which his ticket has been taken, the Station- master or railway official in charge shall insist on his continuing his journey as far as the inspection station, either by the same or the next following train, and may, with the assistance of the police, take all such steps as may be necessary to compel him to do so. 19.  Any such passenger alighting at a railway station short of an inspection station, who from his being unable to show any
35 business at the place of alighting appears to have so alighted for the purpose of evading examination at such inspection station, may be detained by the stationmaster at the railway station at which he has alighted and be forwarded by the same or the next train to the inspection station. The railway fare of the person so detained and forwarded to the inspection station shall be paid by the passenger and, if not paid, shall be recovered from him by the railway authorities as excess fare. * 20. When any carriage from the Bombay Presidency or from any infected area is detached from a train at any railway station in the Madras Presidency, it shall be disinfected or ventilated in the following manner as soon as possible and before it is again brought into use:- Third and intermediate class carriages- The interior wood-work of the carriages, especially the floors and seats, shall be thoroughly washed with a solution of perchloride of mercury (1 in 1,000) or with a carbolic acid solution (a wine-glassful to a gallon) applied with a mop; the doors and windows shall be opened, and the vehicle exposed to the air. First and second class carriages- The floors and wood-work shall be treated as above, the cushions being also brushed and thoroughly cleaned. * 20-A. Any railway carriage from which a passenger who is suffering or suspected to be suffering from the plague has been removed shall be detached at the nearest convenient station, and shall be disinfected as follows:- (i) The carriages, after being detached from the train, should be thoroughly washed with soft soap and lime-water. After an interval of two to three hours, this should be washed off with plain water, and then the following disinfecting solution should be thoroughly sprayed all over the interior as well as the exterior of the carriages by means of a syringe:- Corrosive sublimate    ... ... ... 1/2   oz. Hydrochloric acid ... ... ... 1     ,, Water   ...      .... ... ... ... 3    gallons. This solution should be allowed to dry on the car- riages. Special care must be taken to direct the solution into all the cracks and crevices and jilmills. * As amended by G.O., No. 73-P., dated 22nd February 1898; Notification No. 170, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 1st March 1898, Part I-A, pages 63 and 64,
36 (ii) After disinfection, the carriages should be kept out in the open for 48 hours. They can then be brought into use again. (iii) In the case of first and second class carriages, which afford greater facilities than third-class compartments for the harbouring of plague germs, it will be necessary, if the carriages are contaminated, to burn the cushions and to disinfect the wood-work in the manner indicated above, and repaint the interior. (iv) Any compartment in which a suspicious case has travelled should be sprayed with the above disinfecting solu- tion before being allowed to proceed. 21. The clothing, bedding and personal effects of all persons detained or segregated under Regulation 3, or removed under Regulation 14 to a place provided under Regulation 2, shall be thoroughly disinfected and may, at the discretion of the Medical officer in charge of the place of detention or segregation, be destroyed. The Collector of the district may, in his discretion, at the cost of Local or Municipal funds, award compensation for articles destroyed; but no person shall be entitled as of right to recover any compensation by way of damages or otherwise for the destruction or disinfection of any article dealt with as above. Where the clothes or bedding of a traveller shall have been destroyed as hereinbefore provided, the Medical officer may, if the person is poor, arrange for providing other necessary articles in their place, the cost of the same being intimated to the Collector of the district who shall debit it to Local or Municipal funds at his discretion. 21-A. The District Collector or any officer appointed by him either generally or specially in this behalf, or the Medical officer in charge of a railway inspection station, may take any measures that he may deem necessary for the disinfection of the clothing of any person found within the limits of his jurisdiction, who, in the opinion of the said officer, is likely to have been infected, or of any articles likely in the opinion of the said officer to carry infection, which are in the possession of such person; and such person shall be bound to submit to such measures, and he may, if necessary, be detained until such measures are taken. 22. The Collector of a district may, in case of emergency or to save delay, provide for the execution of any work or the doing of any act which a district board or municipality is empowered or required to execute or to do in accordance with these Regulations, and the immediate execution or the doing of
37 which is in the said Collector's opinion necessary for the service or the safety of the public, and may charge the expense of executing the work or doing the act to the local board or municipality concerned. 23. The Collector is empowered to direct the evacuation of houses in the neighbourhood of an infected house or of a block of houses or a particular locality, and to prohibit re-occupation of such houses or locality without permission. The Collector shall give notice for such period as he may deem necessary, and shall provide temporary accommodation for those removed from the houses evacuated. The Collector may require the evicted persons to reside in any place which he may appoint, under such restrictions as he may deem necessary, for a period not exceeding ten days, after which, provided no further sickness has occurred, any one who wishes to depart may, after necessary precautions, be allowed to depart. 24. The Collector of the district or any officer specially authorized by him in this behalf is empowered to close places used for the supply, preparation or storage of articles of food and drink in infected localities or in the immediate neighbour- hood of infected houses, and to direct the removal of all articles of food and drink found in such places. 25. (1) The Collector of the district, when and to the extent he may deem necessary, may make Regulations- (a) for prescribing the route which shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the grave-yard, burning ground or other place for final disposal of the corpse, and the places, if any, at which such procession may halt on its way for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes; * (b) for enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain depth. (2) He may also prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than ground specially assigned by him for such purpose. (3) When a person dies of the plague elsewhere than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse * As amended by G.O., No. 429-P., dated 4th May 1898; Notification No. 377, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 10th May 1898, Part I-A, page 124. Note.-Any Regulations which the Collectors may find necessary to frame under this clause should provide that, when the burial of a person who has died of plague takes place in proximity to habitations or sources of water-supply, the corpse shall be wrapped in a cloth soaked in a solution of corrosive sublimate and be buried six feet deep. (G.O., No. 429-P., dated 4th May 1898.)
38 except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it for the funeral. Such persons shall disinfect themselves according to the orders which may be issued by the Collector in this behalf. 26. A canal boat shall be subject to all the Regulations applicable to buildings; and passengers by a canal boat shall be subject to interrogation, inspection and detention in the same manner as passengers by railway. In order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague either by or to a canal boat, the Collector of the district or any officer generally or specially empowered by him in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspicuous position of the boat. 27. The Collector of the district may prescribe that no dhobies within an infected area to which he may extend this Regulation shall wash clothes except at such places and at such times and under such conditions as may be prescribed. * 28. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every maistri, peon, watchman, cooly or scavenger employed to do duty in connection with plague, shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge, or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and discharged at the end of it. (2) No such maistri, peon, watchman, cooly or sca- venger in the absence of a written contract authorizing him so to do, and without reasonable cause, shall resign his employment, or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice, or neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. 29. Officers specially appointed by the District Collector for this purpose are authorized to prevent the passage of suspicious persons from or into, as the case may be, any town, village or local area to which this rule may be applied by the Govern- ment, unless such persons have been detained in a place of observation for a period prescribed by the Government, and, if arrangements for disinfection of their clothing, baggage, &c., have been made under the Collector's orders, unless such dis- infection has been effected. Such officers shall have the widest discretionary power, subject to the general or special orders of * As revised by G.O., No. 604, dated 26th April 1899; Notification No. 389, published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 2nd May 1899, Part I-A, page 179,
39 the District Collector, to decide what person shall be considered 'suspicious' for the purposes of this rule. So long as he remains in a place of observation under this rule no person shall be allowed to communicate, except with the permission of the said officers, with persons outside the limits of the place. He shall obey such orders as may be issued by the plague authority for the cleanliness or protection from infection of the persons, property or quarters of the persons detained. 30. When in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these rules a pass or certificate is granted to any person or persons to enable him or them to go from one place to another or for any purpose, such pass or certificate shall not be used by any other person or persons or for any other purpose. * 31. The provisions of these Regulations in regard to segregation do not apply to persons who hold certificates that they have been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, provided such certificates bear a date not earlier than six months but not later than ten days previously. Such persons shall be entitled to the following privileges:- (a) Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, plague, they shall not be liable to detention at any railway or road observation camp when travelling, except for such period as may be required to disinfect their baggage and clothes, if those are considered suspicious. (b) They shall not be liable to take out passports and present themselves daily for observation for ten days after arrival from a plague-infected place, or from any place noti- fied by His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of No. 17 of the Original Mufassal Plague Regulations; but they may be observed at their own residence and shall, with this view, be bound when required by any Plague officer to give their names and addresses for the next ten days. (c) Inoculated persons who have been living in an infected house or have otherwise been exposed to plague infection shall not be liable to be segregated, but may be required to evacuate the infected house and to have their clothes and personal effects disinfected. When, however, all the occupants of a house have been inoculated, neither the patients nor the other inmates of the house shall be required to be segregated, provided arrangements are made to the satisfaction of a Plague authority for the disinfection of the * As re-issued in G.O., No. 381-P., dated 11th March 1899 and published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 11th April 1899, Part I-A, pages 140-41.
?                                                            40  house and its contents, and for the prevention of the spread of plague to the neighbouring dwellings. The inoculation certificate shall be in the following form. But when in a certificate issued under authority, the thumb impression has not been taken, other satisfactory evidence of identification may be accepted:- [COUNTERFOIL.]     Plague Inoculation [Royal Arms] No.        Certificate. Name      No. Father's name         CERTIFIED that          , father's name Street       , resident of Street     Village       Town  ,Village Town        ,Taluk  ,District    Taluk     has been inoculated by me,and   That his thumb-mark was at the time impressed before me. District     Space for left thumb-mark.          Signature and  Date               designation.  Initials of operator.               Dated  NOTE.-Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, plague, the holder of the certificate is exempted from segregation, from detention when travelling, and from ten days' observation  under the passport rules. It does not, however, exempt him from liability to evacuate an infected house, except in the case where all the occupants of the house have been inoculated, or to have his clothes disinfected when travelling. The certificate is valid for a period of six months.  32. Every inoculated person (who is exempted from segregation, detention and observation under the preceding Regulation 31) shall be bound, when called upon to do so by the officer mentioned in Regulation 17-ii, to produce the certificate  showing that he has been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, and also to make an impression of his thumb-mark for the purpose of identification. (2)-NOTIFICATION No. 531, FORT ST. GEORGE GAZETTE, DATED                                5TH JULY 1898, PART I-A, PAGE 194. Under the provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council directs that all passengers who arrive at Pdanr from plague- * G.O., No. 1462-P., dated 19th November 1898; Notification No. 1024, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 20th December 1898, Part I-A, page 378.
41 infected parts on their way to the Nilgiris shall, with refer- ence to the revised Mufassal Regulation 17 published on page 137, Part I-A, of the Fort St. George Gazetle, dated 27th May 1898, obtain passports from the Medical officer in charge of the plague inspection station at Pdanr before proceeding further. (3)-NOTIFICATION No. 638, FORT ST. GEORGE GAZETTE, DATED 9TH AUGUST 1898, PART I-A, PAGE 240. Under the provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council is pleased to issue the following rules in continuation of Notification No. 531, published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 5th July 1898, Part I-A, page 194:- (1) All railway carriages containing passengers from plague-infected parts holding tickets to Mttuplaiyam shall be locked before arrival at the Pdanr railway station. (2) After the train has entered the Pdanr railway platform, the locked carriages shall be opened and each passenger coming, or believed to have come, from an infected part shall be examined by the Medical officer, who will give him a pass-port if there are not sufficient grounds for detaining him under the Plague Regulations. (3) The Madras Railway Company shall not carry any such passenger beyond Pdanr unless he produces a pass-port signed by the inspecting medical officer. (4)-ADDITIONAL MUFASSAL REGULATIONS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897, FOR DISTRICT MUNICI- PALITIES AND TOWNS AND VILLAGES. (G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898; Notification No. 169, "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 1st March 1898, Part I-A, pages 55-64.) WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and the Presidency of Madras is threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease, His Excellency the Gov- ernor of Fort St. George in Council, in exercise of the powers delegated to him under section 2, sub-section (3), of the 6
?42 Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, by the Governor-General in Council, is pleased to prescribe, under the said Epidemio Diseases Act, the following Additional Regulations to be observed in the district municipalities constituted under the District Municipalities Act, 1884, and in other towns and villages in the Presidency:- PART I.-MEASURES PRELIMINARY TO THE ACTUAL OCCURRENCE OF PLAGUE. 1. Should it appear that plague imminently threatens to attack any district, Government may declare such district or part of it to be Under Observation.* 2. Thereupon the Collector shall establish Frontier In- spection Stations; arrange Observation Circles; organise Sanitary and Cordon Staffs, &c.; and strengthen and train his district establishment; and may require certificates of the causes of death. Frontier Inspection Stations. 3. These shall be established as near as may be to the frontier on roads  and at railway stations. 4. At each Frontier Inspection Station shall be erected a sufficient number of sheds for hospital and observation pur- poses; and disinfectants and stores shall be maintained. 5. All persons shall be allowed to pass freely except- (a) those suspected of plague, (b) those suspected of arriving from an infected locality. (a) All persons  suspected of plague, with their families and attendants, shall be detained, information being urgently sent to the nearest revenue officer of or above the grade of  Throughout, the word Tahsildar  and the nearest Medical Tahsildar includes Deputy officer. Such officers shall inform the Tahsildar. District Medical and Sanitary officer, and proceed to the spot to aid in effecting isolation and disinfection. * Note.-When proposing any observation scheme, the Collector should enclose a map of the district on tracing cloth on the scale of 4 miles to an inch, showing clearly (1) the proposed arrangements, and (2) any arrangements previously sanctioned (P.C., No. 991, dated 27th December 1898).  Note.-Road Frontier Inspection Stations should be located only at places where they can be efficiently worked, i.e., at places where the nature of the country forces traffic to converge between narrow lines and not where the country is flat and open (G.O., No. 878-P., dated 12th June 1899).  Note.-These must be detained as long as the suspicion of plague remains (P.C., No. 838, dated 27th March 1899).
?43 When the officer in charge of the Frontier Inspection Station may declare such course to be safe, the persons detained may be released with passports as prescribed below. * (b) Persons  suspected of arriving from an infected area may be disinfected if the Collector so orders, and also (i) at a Road Frontier Inspection Station shall be provided with passports, which shall bind them to present themselves for daily inspection for the next ten days before the local authority, i.e., the local Medical officer or Police Station-house officer or village Headman in any village where they may be. As passports are issued, the officer in charge shall inform the Municipal Chairman or the local authority of the place of destination; (ii) at a Railway Frontier Inspection Station shall have their tickets distinctively marked, if not so marked before. On arriving at their railway station of destination, the stationmaster or other officer appointed by the Govern- ment or Collector for the purpose shall provide them with passports and send intimation as required by the preceding clause (i). The officer in charge of a Frontier Inspection Station may also, when specially authorized by Government or the Col- lector, detain all persons from an infected area who appear to be suspicious  whether by reason of their appearance, the dirty condition of their clothes, or the fact that they are travelling in gangs, or belong to classes which are likely to disseminate the disease, or cannot be traced on arrival at their destination, or depended upon to give information should plague occur among them after arrival at their destination, or for any other reason. Such officer shall have the widest discretionary power, subject to the general or special orders of the Col- lector, to decide what person shall be considered "suspicious" for the purposes of this rule. Any person refusing to comply with, or attempting to evade, this rule may be detained for ten days at the nearest Inspection Station or other place appointed by the Collector for the purpose. Every person passing a Frontier Inspection Station shall be bound to declare his destination truly. * As amended by G.O., No. 641-P., dated 2nd July 1898; Notification No. 582, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th July 1898, Part I-A, page 206.  Note.-Such persons may, if they prefer it, instead of being detained, be allowed to go back after disinfection to the place they came from, if they give a satisfactory reason and purchase a return ticket (P.C., No. 838, dated 27th March 1899).  Includes also any person appointed as such by the District Collector-vide Regulation 17-i, page 31.  Note.-All persons from infected areas may be said to fall under this class unless they can be depended on to reside in a fixed place and to present themselves daily for medical examination for ten days after arrival (G.O., No. 855-P. dated 19th August 1898)
?44 Observation Circles. 6. For the taluks necessary in his opinion to be watched, the Collector may appoint the requisite number of Plague Inspectors,* who should be given a range with a radius not usually exceeding 5 miles. For non-municipal towns, Assist- ant Plague Inspectors may be appointed. The Collector may also appoint Plague Supervisors to check the work of Inspectors and Assistant Inspectors, who shall report through them to the District Sanitary officer. 7. This observation staff shall work under the District Medical and Sanitary officer in subordination to the Collector. Its duty will be to constantly and systematically patrol the circles in order to gain the earliest possible information of a case of plague, so that immediate action may be taken, and to report any pressing sanitary need to the District Medical and Sanitary officer. It should also check the possession of passports or passes in the case of persons arriving from an infected locality. Should any person so arrive without a passport or pass, or having broken its conditions, any member of the observation staff may detain him and cause him to be produced before a Plague Authority who may subject him to isolation in the nearest proper place. Inspectors and Assistant Inspectors shall keep a record of all persons suffering from continuous fever for more than twelve hours, and shall arrange with the village Headman to have such persons inspected twice daily. If a member of the observation staff shall discover a case of plague, he shall act as is laid down in Regulation 17. Ambulance and Cordon Staffs, &c. 8. The Collector shall keep in readiness in a central posi- tion- Two stretchers with awnings. Medical stores, disinfectants and comforts, hospital furniture and clothing. 9. The Collector shall make all arrangements for being able to concentrate immediately, when desirable, the following Ambulance Staff in the same central position:- Two trained nurses. Four male ward attendants. * Note.-The Government has since decided that the employment of special officers should be restricted and that for obtaining information regarding plague and for the proper working of the passport rules, the chief reliance must be placed on the existing village and Revenue officers (G.O., No. 878.P., dated 12th June 1899).  As amended by G.O., No. 878-P., dated 12th June 1899; Notification No. 512, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 13th June 1899, Part I-A, page 235.
?45 Three female ward attendants. Four dhooly bearers. Three male and two female toties. Two dhobies. Two cooks. One certificated Sanitary Inspector. Two Hospital Assistants. One Compounder. 10. * When he sees fit, the Collector shall concentrate the Ambulance Staff and hold it in readiness. 11. The Collector shall also arrange through Government for one hundred men of the Madras Infantry, with complete tent equipage, being placed at his disposal under the command of a European officer. Seventy-five of the men shall remain at their Military head- quarters warned for duty, and the remaining 25 with a Native officer, shall, when required by the Collector, join for duty and training at the locality chosen for assembly of the Ambulance Staff. The detachment shall be at the disposal of the Collector for cordon, guard, disinfection and sick transport duties. N.B.-By the word 'Cordon' is meant a guard posted round a village, camp, hospital or other place so as effectually to prevent the ingress and egress of persons not provided with passes, and not going in or coming out on duty under these rules. 12. The Collector shall also warn for such duty in com- munication with the heads of their respective departments as many Police, Salt and Abkri , and Revenue peons as can spared. Strengthening and Training Districi Establishment. 13. The Collector may strengthen his own office and that of the District Medical and Sanitary officer by the employment of such temporary clerks as may be required. He may also indent upon the Inspector-General of Ordnance, Madras, to supply the District Medical and Sanitary officer with personal and office tents, for which lascars may be entertained. * As amended by G.O., No. 445-P., dated 21st March 1899.  Note.-See Chapter XI (7) for orders restricting the employment of troops.  Note.-Plague officers have full powers of an Assistant Commissioner in the matter of punishment of the peons of the Salt and Abkri Department placed under them for plague duty, and Assistant Plague officers may award black marks or fine up to one rupee, or suspend up to one month. Suspension for accumulation of black marks can, however, be inflicted only by the Plague officer. As regards Sub and Assistant Inspectors, Collectors have power to suspend them, reporting to the Board for all orders as to punishment (G.O., No, 1611-P., dated 20th December 1898).
?46 The Collector may at his discretion temporarily close any existing hospital or dispensary and transfer the whole staff to plague duty. 14. He shall see that the rules* framed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897 (Notification No. 185, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 16th March 1897), have been carried out in every municipality, and also that the whole district establishment knows its duties both while the district is Under Observation and also on the outbreak of plague. He shall especially bring rules 15 and 17 to the notice of village officers. 15. It shall be the duty of Station-house officers and village officers to prevent the entry into their villages of per- sons coming without passports or passes from any infected area, and to inspect daily for a space of ten days persons so arriving with passports or passes. Certificates of the Causes of Death.  16. When he has a sufficient medical staff at his disposal to secure immediate inspection, so that there may be no chance of funerals being delayed, the Collector may order in respect of any particular area that the certificate of a Medical officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death. After the issue of such an order, if a burial or cremation takes place without such a certificate having been obtained, the death may be presumed to have been due to plague, and the persons believed to have been in recent immediate contact with the corpse shall be liable to segregation and detention. PART II.-MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED ON THE OCCURRENCE OF PLAGUE. 17. On the occurrence of a suspected or actual case of plague in a village, whether in a district declared to be Under Observation or not, it shall be the duty of the village headman to send intelligence by express to the Tahsildar and (if Plague Inspectors have been appointed) to the nearest Plague Inspector; and meanwhile to isolate the patient and all who have been in attendance upon him or in contact with him, in a hut or shed remote from inhabited houses. 18. The Plague Inspector and the Tahsildar shall inform all superior officers up to the Collector by the quickest possible * Printed on pages 73 to 82.  As amended by G.O., No. 641-P., dated 2nd July 1898; Notification No. 582, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th July 1898, Part I-A, page 206.
?47 means, and shall go at once to the village. The Tahsildar shall arrange to be accompanied or followed by the nearest Medical officer with a supply of medicines and disinfectants, and by a staff of constables and peons. 19.  On arrival at the village, the Plague Inspector (or Medical officer if there is no Plague Inspector) shall supervise the isolation of the patient and the disinfection of his residence, clothing and excreta, and the person and clothing of his attend- ants, and shall continue such supervision until relieved under the orders of a Plague officer and sent back to other duty; the Tahsildar shall act as follows:- (a) If the plague patient be a traveller newly arrived at the village, or a resident newly returned to it from an infected locality, and have been with his attendants put into complete isolation from the beginning of his sickness, the Tahsildar may content himself with continuing such isolation, with pro- viding the patient with medical attendance, and with thorough disinfection as above. But (b) if he thinks it necessary, or is so ordered by superior authority, and provided the attack shall have been declared by a Medical officer to be probably plague, after first completely isolating the patient and his attendants by a cordon of police, peons and taliaris, &c., he shall construct- a Hospital into which he shall remove the patient and which he shall provide with a guard; a Suspect Camp, where he shall remove, disinfect and detain all persons who have been in attendance on, or in contact with, the patient,  and which he shall surround with a cordon; and a Staff Camp, to house the Ambulance and  Cordon Staffs on their arrival. 20.  On receiving information of a case of plague, the duties of a Plague Officer (defined below, Regulation 26) shall be as follows:- He shall send telegraphic information to the Collector and the District Medical and Sanitary officer. He shall then go to the scene of outbreak, and shall enforce the measures mentioned above. He may also isolate the whole village or part of it by cordons, patrols, chowkies, gates, or in such other manner as he may deem expedient. He may also, when authorized by the Collector, compel the evacuation of the village or any part of it, and the removal of the inhabitants to a Health Camp, provided sufficient shelter is available, and may isolate the Health Camp with a cordon and
?48 may order disinfection in it; and may also cause the village to be disinfected. 21. The Collector, on receiving information, shall tele- graph to Government, the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioner, and despatch the Ambulance and Cordon Staffs to the village under the District Medical and Sanitary officer. He may indent on the Surgeon-General for two Com- missioned Medical officers, one of whom should relieve the District Medical and Sanitary officer and the other be held in reserve; * may notify by tom-tom (the notification to be as soon as possible published in the District Gazette) that any town or village or group of villages is an infected area, whereupon Part I of   these rules  and original Mufassal Regulation No.   17, shall come into force in the district if they have not been put in force by Government already; may requisition the services of any public servant or, for work connected with a railway, of any railway  employ; may authorize a Plague officer to remove all or part of the inhabitants of an infected area into a Health Camp, provided proper shelter is available; and shall, if possible, go to the village and direct operations. He shall also at once take steps to organize a second Ambulance Staff as provided for in Rules 9, 10, et seq. so as to be ready for despatch to any other locality in which plague may break out. 22. If authorized by the Collector under Rule 21, the Plague officer may cause an infected area to be evacuated, all inhabitants except patients and suspects being moved into a Health Camp where disinfection may be ordered. He shall see that the Hospital, the Suspect Camp and the Health Camp are properly organized and cordoned. He shall see that the patrols and guards round the infected area completely isolate it, or such part of it as he deems fit. On the evacuation of houses, he shall cause them to be surrounded by a cordon and to be thoroughly disinfected. If no observation  staff has been already appointed, the Collector shall organize one. This must be rendered parti- cularly efficient within a radius of 20 miles round an infected *   As amended by G.O., No. 1447-P., dated 2nd October 1899; Notification No. 816, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 3rd October 1899, Part I-A, page 348.  Note.-Railway servants should not be called upon to do plague duty when it would interfere with their proper avocations or require them to absent themselves from the place where their duty as railway servants have to be performed (G.O., No. 295-M., dated 1st February 1898; G.O , No. 314-P., dated 4th April 1898).  Note.-The observation circles round an infected area should be five and not ten miles in diameter. These are called preventive circles (P.C., No. 88, dated 7th October 1898).
?49 area.    It may be necessary to constitute special search parties under European officers. 23.  If a case of plague be detected in a town (including a municipal town) the Collector may not, without the sanction of Government, cause the evacuation of the whole town, but may cause the evacuation of a section containing  not more than 200 houses. Such evacuated area may be surrounded by a cordon, if necessary by breaking down walls or houses, but with as little injury to property as possible; and its inhabitants may be removed into a Health Camp. 24.  When there is a town or large village in the vicinity of an infected area, the  Collector  may  establish a Camp of Observation at such town or village and may order detention and disinfection in such camp of all suspected persons coming from such area without passes. Dissolution of Hospitals and Camps, &c. 25.  No Hospital or Suspect Camp or Observation Camp shall be closed without the special orders of the Collector. Provided there have been no actual or suspected case of plague therein, the Collector shall, in his discretion, allow a Health Camp to be closed after ten days, and a village or town or section of a town to be re-inhabited one month after evacuation. Administrative Staff. 26.  For administrative  purposes in connection with the plague, the Collector shall have under his orders the follow- ing Plague Authorities:- (a)  A  Superior   Staff consisting  of   Plague  officers appointed by Government. (b)  A Subordinate Staff consisting of Assistant Plague officers appointed by the Collector. (a) Plague officers include Divisional-officers, Assistant Collectors and the District Medical and Sanitary officer, and also Personal Assistants to the Collector; Special Divisional-officers (either to relieve Divisional- officers engaged in plague operations or to be in plague charge of a division); Extra Assistants to be in charge generally of a Taluk but, if necessary, of a smaller area. (b) Assistant Plague officers shall be Tahsildars and Deputy Tahsildars (ordinary or special) ex-officio; or persons 7
?50 of known and approved character and responsible position, specially appointed. Assistant Plague officers shall have the powers given by Regulations 3 and 7 and (in infected areas) 27 of the Regu- lations* published in Fort St. George Gazette Notification No. 897 of 18th December 1897. Plague officers shall have these powers, and shall also have powers given by Regulations 4 and 5 and (in areas Under Observation) 27. 27. The Collector may, from time to time, assign to Plague officers and Assistant Plague officers, jurisdiction over such local areas as he may deem fit. He may also appoint any required number of Superintend- ents of Camps or Gumastas as well as menial servants.  28. In the case of appointments made in connection with the plague, the cost of which is under the standing orders debitable to the ordinary service heads, the sanction of Govern- ment shall be obtained and proposition statements forwarded in accordance with paragraph 12 of the annexure to G.O., No. 604, Financial, dated 21st September 1896, as amended by G.O., No. 785, Financial, dated 24th September 1897. As regards appointments which are not additions to existing establishments and which have been newly created on account of the plague, the Collector shall forward, for the formal sanction of Government, a monthly return showing the number of such appointments, their designation, salary, date of commencement and the duties attached to each appointment. The return should be divided into two sec- tions to distinguish the appointments paid from Local and Municipal funds from those paid from Provincial. Passports and Passes. 29. Passports and passes shall be in the forms attached. Passports may be granted as prescribed in Rule 5 to persons entering the district from an infected area; passes, by a Plague Authority or other officer authorized by the Collector in this behalf, to persons leaving an infected area within the district.  30. The Collector may exempt from the necessity of taking out passports or passes any person with regard to whom there are no reasonable grounds for suspicion of infection. * Printed on pages 24 to 40.  As amended by G.O., No. 641-P., dated 2nd July 1898; Notification No. 582, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th July 1898, Part I-A, page 206.  As amended by G.O., No. 330-P. dated 14th April 1898; Notification No. 303, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th April 1898, Part I-A, page 92.
51 31.  The Collector  may at his discretion exempt from the necessity of taking out passes persons who are merely returning from an infected area to their own village after bringing to market in such area articles of food or fuel; Provided that such return be within eight hours after arrival and not after sunset, and that such exemption shall not apply to any such person who may have entered a dwell- ing house within the infected area. 32.  Passes may be of two kinds, either (1) general, or (2) special.    General passes may be given to agriculturists and others having occasion to make daily or frequent journeys by road, rail or boat from an infected area, and may be given for an indefinite period;  but they  will not cover residence outside of the infected area, and will not cover journeys by rail unless that is expressly stated on them.    In the case of agriculturists, where the officer granting the pass is satisfied that it is necessary for the whole family to go and work in the fields, a single  pass may be given for the family, but there must  be a separate pass for each person making a railway journey under a general pass.    Special passes shall be passes permitting persons to leave the infected area and reside else- where, and may be granted for households, provided that the name and description of each person covered by the pass is entered therein. 33.  General passes should be given freely, and in the case of agriculturists working in the fields need not be revoked even should a case of plague occur in the family of the pass- holder. 34.  Special passes may also be given freely, especially at the beginning of an epidemic,  when a Plague Authority is satisfied that no case of plague has occurred in the house of the applicant, or in any adjacent house or among any of his relations or  associates: provided that the Plague Authority may always require the disinfection in a prescribed manner of all clothes and other articles to be taken away before a pass is given.    When the applicant is known or suspected to have been exposed to infection, no officer shall grant a pass until the applicant has been kept under medical observation (1) for a period which may extend to ten days, (2) or until the reasons for suspicion have disappeared.    In such cases disinfection of clothes, &c., should always be insisted on.    In this rule applicant includes all the persons in a household on whose behalf a special pass is applied for.
?52 Disinfection. 35. When it is provided in these rules that disinfection may be employed, disinfection as follows, as often as seems to him necessary, may be ordered by any Plague Authority unless where otherwise provided:- Of the person (if specially ordered by the Collector).- In a bathing tub with Jeye's fluid or carbolic acid, strength 1 in 100. Of travellers' bundles (1) if specially ordered by the Collector, to be opened out and steamed for 20 minutes by steam pressure of 20 lb. and temperature 250; or (2) other- wise, to be treated as below:- Of clothes, silks, etc.-To be exposed first one side, then the other, for eight hours in a strong sun. Other cloths, etc.-In perchloride of mercury, 1 in 1,000. Of an infected house.-If its value is Rs. 100 or less and there is no danger of the fire spreading, it may be burnt. Otherwise, if a Plague Authority so directs, it may be unroofed and treated as follows after removal of all surrounding obstructions (walls, huts, sheds, pandals, etc.) to ensure a complete perflation of air. Of houses in an infected area.-Each house shall be opened to light and air in its dark rooms. Infected things of small value such as bedding, cots, etc., may be burnt. Everything else, as well as the entire interior of the house, including the floors, shall be sprayed or sprinkled with perchloride of mercury. Rubbish shall be burnt or carted away. Then the exterior and interior of the house shall be limewashed, chloride of lime being mixed with the limewash. Of other places and spaces in such an area.-As any Plague Authority may direct. 36. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any Regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or. obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such Regu- lation, has been required or empowered to take under any such Regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment of either de- scription for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both.
?                                                             53                                                 APPENDIX A.*         PASSPORT.  (To be issued to a person arriving from a plague-infected locality, or a notified area, under Regulation 5 under the Epidemic Diseases Act, published in the "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 1st March 1898, Part 1-A, pages 55-63 and Regulation 17, published in the " Fort St. George Gazette," dated 11th April 1899, Part I-A, pages 139-141.)   1.  No. of  passport. 2.  District. 3.  Station of issue. 4.  Date of arrival. 5.  Name of person. 6.  Father's name. 7.   Caste. 8.   Age. 9.  Whence coming. 10.  Destination and residence during the next ten days  (give  District,   Taluk, Village, Street and Number or Name of the owner of the house). 11.   When the duplicate of the passport sent and to whom. I  declare  the  above information to be correct, and  I  do hereby  bind myself to appear\to present the above-mentioned person for inspection, daily, for the next ten days before the local authority, i.e., the Medical officer, or the Station-house officer or the village headman of the town or village where I may be for the time being. Date       Signature or mark of traveller.  Declared and signed before me.  Date         Signature and designation of officer             issuing the passport . (SEE REVERSE.)  NOTE.-This should be prepared in triplicate, one copy being retained by the officer issuing it the second delivered to the person to whom it is issued and the third sent to the local authority of the place of destination. * As amended by G.O., No. 864-P., dated 7th June 1899; Notification, No. 524, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 13th June 1899, Part I-A, pp. 239-240.
?54 Extract from Revised Regulation 17 under the Epidemic Diseases Act, published in the "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 11th April 1899, Part I-A, pages 139-141. 17. i. ~ or from a suspected of having arrived, from any place declared to be infected with plague, Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of this tempted under Regulation 31, before leaving the railway station at which he has alighted, or the steamer, ship or boat in which he has travelled, or in the case of arrival by road either immediately on reaching a Road Frontier Inspection Station or within twelve hours from the time of arrival at any other place, obtain from the officer mentioned in Regulation 17-ii a passport binding him to present himself for daily inspection for the next ten days before the local authority of the town or village where he may be; and he shall be bound so to present himself. Provided that, where it appears desirable, the Municipal Chairman or any Revenue officer not below the graded Deputy Tahsildar may, by endorsement on the passport, exempt any person from personal attendance and permit him to be inspected at his residence. Explanation.-By a "local authority" is meant any of the following officers:- (a) The local Medical officer; (b) \ill\ (c)  \ill\ (d)  Any person appointed by the Collector of the district for the purposes of this Regulation. In places where there is more than one local authority, the duties prescribed in these rules shall be performed by, or with the permission of the Collector under the orders of, the officer who stands first in the order given in this explanation. ***** iii. Every person required to take out a passport shall declare truly his name, address, and such other particulars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport and shall report forthwith to the local authority any change in his place of                       thin ten days from the date of arrival. On the expiry of ten days, he shall deliver up his passport                                of the place where he may then be. iv. The issue of a passport, or any change in the residence of the person to whom it has been granted, shall immediately be communicated by the officer issuing it (in the former case) or by the local authority (in the latter case) to the Municipal Chairman or the local authority of the place of destination.* If the local authority of the place of destination is not known, the intimation shall be sent to the Tahsildar concerned for transmission to the local officer by whom the traveller has to be observed. The communication may be made by a post-card, or by a special messenger, or in any other manner which the Collectors concerned may determine. The telegraph need be used only in urgent cases. Intimation of departure to any railway station in the Province of Mysore shall, however, be telegraphed to the- (a) Assistant Surgeon on plague duty, Yesvantpur, when the destination is a station on the Mysore State Railway; (b) Residency Surgeon, Bangalore, when the destination is a station within Mysore Province on the Madras Railway. Y. The local authority of the place of destination shall see that, on the arrival of the traveller, he is observed daily for ten days. Any case of illness or death in the house in which such traveller is or has been residing shall be forthwith reported to the immediate superior of the local authority with full details. After ten days, the passport shall be recovered from the                                       \ill\hsildar. Any Officer of \ill\                                        below the rank of Deputy Tahsildar may require that the person or the clothing and other \ill\                                       be disinfected in such manner as may be ordered by the Collector. vi. The headman of every village shall keep himself promptly informed of the arrival of every person from an infected or notified area without a passport and shall deal with him as in the preceding clauses of this Regulation to which such person shall be bound to submit himself. vii. A register shall be maintained by each local authority in the following form:- (1)  Date of receipt of intimation. (2)  Name of traveller. (3)  From what infected or notified area arriving. (4)  Date of arrival of traveller. (5)  Number, date and place of issue of passport. (6)  How long kept under observation. (7)  State of health of the traveller and other persons living in the house in which he i" or has been residing. (8)  Date of departure if occurring within ten days. (9)  Destination. (10)  Date of intimation of departure to the local authority of the place of destination. (11) Date of despatch of the passport to the Tahsildar. ***** xiii. In the case of minors and incapacitated \ill\                                      ake out passports for them, to present them for daily inspection, to report truly their names                                         any change in their residence, and to comply otherwise with the requirements of this regulation shall vest in their legal guardians or persons in whose charge they travel or who receive them at the railway station of destination. N.B.-Any person disobeying or evading the above rules shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to Rs. 1,000 or both. Endorsement of the Local Authority. Date Signature of ocal authority. Designation. 1st day   2nd "   3rd "   4th "   5th "   6th "   7th "   8th "   9th "   10th "                Tahsildar Forwarded to the Municipal Chairman of the traveller having been duly observed. Date Signature and Designation of local authority. * This rule applies whether the place of destination is in British or Mysore territory.
?55 II. [General Pass-Regulation 32.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by road or boat from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. This pass protects  the person named above and the members of his family mentioned on the reverse, but it does not authorize journey by rail, for which a separate  pass shall be obtained by each individual requiring it, nor does it cover residence outside the village of It will be in force until revoked. Signature. Designation. Date. (Reverse of Form II.) Name.                     How related to pass-holder. Signature. Designation. Date.
?56 III. [General Pass-Subsidiary pass for Railway journey only- Regulation 32.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by rail from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. Signature. Designation. Date. IV. [Special Pass-Regulations 32 and 34.] (To be issued to persons leaving an infected area to reside elsewhere.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Whence arrived. Whither going.
57 This pass covers also the members of the family of the above-named person, whose names and descriptions are given on the reverse. Signature. Designation. Date. (Reverse of Form IV.) Name.     How related to pass-holder. Signature. Designation. Date. 8
?58 CHAPTER IV. (1)-REGULATIONS FOR THE INSPECTION OF INWARD-BOUND VESSELS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897. (G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897; Notification No. 163, "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 31st August 1897, Part I, pages 1117 to 1119.) IN exercise of the powers delegated to him by the Governor- General in Council under section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to prescribe, under the said Epidemic Diseases Act, the following temporary Regulations to be observed in all ports of the Madras Presidency. These Regulations will supersede those now in force and which are published on pages 601-604, Part I of the Fort St. George Gazette of the 11th May 1897:- 1. In these regulations- (1) "Vessel" includes anything made for the con- Definitions. veyance by water of human beings or of property. (2) "Port officer" includes any person acting under the authority of Government in charge of port discipline. (3) "Master" when used in relation to any vessel means any person (except a pilot or harbour master) having for the time being the charge or control of the vessel. (4) "Sanitary authority" means the Collector of the district, and the Municipal Council or Local Board, the area under whose jurisdiction includes or abuts on any part of a customs port. Where a customs port is included within or abuts on the jurisdiction of more than one of the authorities above-mentioned, the Governor in Council shall appoint which of them shall be the Sanitary authority for the purpose of these Regulations, or he may distribute among them, in such manner as he may deem fit, the duties imposed by these Regulations. The jurisdiction of every Sanitary authority shall, for the purposes of these Regulations, extend to sea- ward for a distance of three miles beyond low water mark on all parts of the coast line bounding the area ordinarily under its jurisdiction.
59 (5) "Port Health officer" includes any duly qualified medical practitioner appointed by a Sanitary authority or by the Local Government to act in the execution of these Regu- lations. (6) "Observation" means segregation either on board a vessel, or in an isolation camp or place. (7) "Surveillance" means that the persons subjected to it will not be isolated; they will at once obtain free pra- tique, but will be kept under medical supervision. 2. (1) " Infected " used with reference to a vessel denotes any vessel with plague on board, or on board which one or more cases have taken place within twelve days. (2) "Suspected" used with reference to a vessel denotes any vessel on board which there has been a case of plague at the time of departure, or during the voyage, but on which no fresh case has occurred for twelve days. (3) "Healthy" used with reference to a vessel denotes any vessel which has come from, or which during the voyage has touched at, an infected port, but which has had no death, or case of plague on board, either before departure, during the voyage, or on arrival. 3. The master of every "infected," "suspected," or Regulations. "healthy" vessel shall, when within three miles of the coast of any part of the Madras Presidency, cause to be hoisted at the foremast head the Commercial Code flag Q being a yellow flag, and shall keep the same displayed during the whole time between sunrise and sunset. If any person on board such vessel be at the time suffering or suspected to be suffer- ing from the plague, the master shall also hoist the Commer- cial Code flag R below the yellow flag Q. Any such vessel arriving at a port after dark shall hoist on coming to an anchor one white light at the foremast head and one red light at the mainmast head. 4. The master of any such vessel shall before arriving at an anchorage pump out the bilge water, if possible after disinfection, and pass fresh sea water over the parts that have been in contact with the bilge water. The bilge water shall not be discharged within port limits. * No tindal or other person in charge of, or navigating, any registered boat shall attempt to make such boat fast to, or shall take it alongside of, a vessel in quarantine or * Added by G.O., No. 410, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; Notification No. 57, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 7th June 1898, Part I, page 514,
60 coming from an infected port, until such vessel has been granted pratique by the Health officer of the port. 5. The Port officer on the arrival of any vessel display- ing the flag or flags or light or lights aforesaid, or if he ascertains from the master of such vessel, or otherwise has reason to believe, that the vessel is infected, suspected or healthy from an infected port, shall detain such vessel, and order the master forthwith to moor or anchor the same in such place as may be fixed by him; and the master shall moor or anchor accordingly. Provided that in the case of any ship which has not communicated with the shore, the master if he objects to submit to the obligations imposed by these Regulations shall be free to put back to sea. In such case the Port officer shall send immediate information to the Sanitary authorities of the port in India, Burma or Ceylon to which the vessel is bound or at which she is next about to call. 6. While a vessel shall be so detained, no person shall leave the same. 7. The Port officer, on the approach to the port of any vessel displaying the flag or flags or light or lights aforesaid, or on his detaining any vessel as aforesaid, shall forthwith give notice thereof and of the cause of such detention to the Sanitary authority of the port, and also to the Port Health officer. 8. The detention by the Port officer of a vessel under Regulation 5 shall cease as soon as the vessel shall have been, as hereinafter provided, duly visited and examined by the Port Health officer or, if the vessel shall, upon such examin- ation, be found to be infected or suspected, as soon as the same shall be moored or anchored in pursuance of Regulations 9 and 13. 9. The Sanitary authority shall, as speedily as practicable, with the approval of the Port officer, fix some place where vessels may be moored or anchored for the purpose of Regula- tion 13; and shall make provision for the reception of plague patients and other persons removed from vessels under these Regulations. The place to be fixed as aforesaid, where any vessel may be moored or anchored for the purpose of Regula- tion 13, shall be some place within the jurisdiction of the Sanitary authority, unless the Local Government otherwise orders, in which case the place so fixed shall, for the purposes of these Regulations, be deemed to be within such jurisdiction.
?61 10. On receiving the notice prescribed by Regulation 7, the Port Health officer shall forthwith visit and examine the vessel, in regard to which such notice shall have been given, for the purpose of ascertaining whether she is infected, suspected or healthy. He shall also do so if he have reason to believe that any vessel which has arrived or is within the jurisdiction of the Sanitary authority, whether detained by the Port officer or not, is infected or suspected or has come from or touched at a port where plague prevails. The master of such vessel shall permit it to be so visited and examined and shall afford all reasonable facilities for such examination as the Port Health officer may deem requisite. 11. For the purpose of ascertaining the state of the vessel as aforesaid, the Port Health officer may demand from the doctor of the ship or, failing him, from the master a declara- tion on oath whether there has been or has not been a case of plague on the ship since her departure, or whether any person suffering or suspected to be suffering from the plague has left or been removed from the vessel prior to or during the voyage, and all particulars relative to any such circum- stance; and the doctor or the master, as the case may be, shall be bound to make a true declaration to the best of his knowledge and belief. 12. When the Port Health officer has made such exami- nation as aforesaid, he shall forthwith give a certificate in duplicate in the following form, or to the like effect, and shall deliver one copy to the master and transmit the other to the Sanitary authority. He shall also, if the vessel is infected or suspected, give immediate information of the fact to the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras:- Certificate. day of 189 I hereby certify that I have examined the vessel ,of                                        , now lying in the port of (or detained at                ) and that I find that she is (a) "infected" with plague, (b) "suspected," or (c) "healthy" from an infected port (as the case may be). (Signed) Port Health Officer. 13. The master of any vessel certified by the Port Health officer to be "infected" or "suspected" shall thereupon
62 moor or anchor her if he has not already done so at the place fixed for that purpose under Regulation 9 where she shall remain until the requirements of these Regulations have been duly fulfilled, and from which she shall not depart without the written or, where communication with the vessel is impracticable owing to stress of weather, the signalled permission of the Port Health officer. 14. No person shall leave any such vessel until the exami- nation hereinafter prescribed shall have been made. 15. (1) The Port Health officer shall, as soon as possible after a vessel has been certified as infected, suspected or healthy, examine every person on board the same. (2) If any person on board any such vessel is found to be suffering from plague, or from any illness which the Port Health officer suspects may prove to be plague, the Port Health officer shall certify accordingly. Every person who shall be so certified by him shall, if possible, be imme- diately disembarked and shall be detained for treatment in a suitable hospital or ward or isolation camp or other place. (3) If the vessel is certified to be infected, all persons on board shall be kept under observation or surveillance, as the Port Health officer may determine, and shall, if possible, be disembarked for the purpose. (4) All persons kept under observation, whether on shore or on board the vessel, shall be detained for such period as the Port Health officer shall, in his absolute discretion, pre- scribe with regard to the sanitary condition of the vessel and the date of the last case of plague which has occurred among the crew or passengers, but which shall not exceed ten days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague which has occurred on board, or which may subsequently occur among the persons detained in such camp or place as the Sanitary authority shall have appointed for the purpose of their detention or on board the vessel, after which they shall, if certified by the Chief Medical officer on the spot to be free from the infection of plague, be permitted to proceed to their destination. (5) If the vessel is certified to be suspected or healthy, all persons on board who may disembark shall be subjected to surveillance either at the port or at their destination as the Sanitary authority may direct, in the case of a suspected vessel for a period of ten days from the date of the arrival of the vessel in port, and in the case of a healthy vessel for the period
?63 necessary to complete * a term of ten days from the date of the vessel's departure from the infected port last visited.  In either case the Port Health officer may place under observation, instead of surveillance (for the above-mentioned terms) any person whom he may consider to be in any way likely to carry the infection of the plague. 16. A clean Bill of Health shall not be granted to an infected vessel until all the requirements of these Regulations have been complied with, nor until ten days have elapsed from the date of the last case of plague which has occurred on board; nor, if the person attacked has been treated on board, until ten days from the death or recovery of such person.  17. In the case of a vessel certified to be suspected, a clean Bill of Health shall be given, provided the require- ments of these Regulations have been complied with, and if ten days have elapsed since the vessel's departure from the infected port last visited. If ten days have not elapsed, the vessel may be detained in quarantine at the discretion of the Port Health officer for the time necessary to complete the period of ten days; the crew and passengers being placed during such period under observation or surveillance. 17-A. In the case of a healthy vessel, a clean Bill of Health shall be granted at once, provided the requirements of these Regulations have been complied with. Such precautions  shall, however, be taken in regard to the landing of cargo, passen- gers and crew as may be prescribed by Government or as may be considered by the Port Health officer to be necessary. 18. No port clearance shall be granted to any vessel which has been subjected to these rules unless with the written concurrence of the Port Health officer. 19. No person detained for treatment or placed under observation shall leave the camp or place or vessel in which he is detained under treatment or observation, until the Chief Medical officer present at the spot shall have certified that such person is free from the infection of the plague. * Note.-'Where persons are landed from a ship arriving from an infected port with no medical man in charge, Port Health officers will arrange for such persons being placed under "surveillance" or "observation" for the full period of ten days after landing, even if the ship is declared to be " healthy." ' (G.O., No. 719, Marine, dated 1st August 1899.)  As amended by G.O., No. 823, Marine, dated 21st September 1897; Fort St. George Gazette, dated 5th October 1897, Part I, page 1231. - As revised by G.O., No. 668, Marine, dated 4th August 1898; Notification No. 94, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 9th August 1898, Part I, page 758.  See page 195.
64 20. Every person placed under surveillance shall present himself for examination by the Medical officer appointed for this purpose by the Sanitary authority, at such times and places as such Medical officer may direct. 21. If any person suffering from plague or from any ill- ness which the Port Health officer suspects may prove to be plague cannot be disembarked under Regulation 15, he may be detained on board the vessel, which shall remain subject, for the purpose of this Regulation, to the control of the Port Health officer. Such person shall not be removed from or leave the vessel, except with the consent, in writing, of the Port Health officer; and, if the illness from which such person suffered is, or proves to be, plague, the vessel shall be treated as an infected vessel. 22. Any person detained under observation or placed under surveillance who is certified by the Port Health officer or by the Medical officer appointed under Regulation 19 to be suffering from plague, or from any illness which such officer suspects may prove to be plague, may be taken to such hospital or ward or observation camp or other suitable place as may be appointed for that purpose by the Sanitary authority of the port or place, and detained there until his recovery, or for such period, not exceeding ten days, as may be necessary for ascertaining whether his illness is, or is not, plague. The said person shall be bound to remain in the place where he is detained and to follow such instructions as the Sanitary authority may prescribe. 23. The Port Health officer shall, in the case of every vessel certified to be infected or suspected, give directions for the disinfection of all parts of the vessel which have been inhabited by plague patients and he may also give such other directions for the more thorough disinfection of the vessel as may appear to him to be necessary for preventing the spread of infection. The master of the said vessel shall forthwith carry into execution all such directions. 24. In the event of any death from plague on board such vessel while detained under these Regulations the master shall, as directed by the Sanitary authority, or the Port Health officer, either cause the dead body to be taken out to sea and committed to the deep properly loaded to prevent its rising, or shall deliver it into the charge of the Sanitary authority for disposal, if the former procedure be not in accordance with caste or race customs.
65 25. The master shall cause to be destroyed any articles on board his vessel that may have been soiled with plague discharges and he shall also cause to be disinfected or de- stroyed the clothing and bedding, and other articles of personal use likely to retain infection which are on board his vessel and which have been used by any person who has suffered from plague on board such vessel, or who, having left such vessel, shall have suffered from plague during the stay of such vessel in the port. If the master shall have neglected to do so or have done so ineffectually before the vessel arrives in port, he shall forthwith, upon the direction of the Sanitary authority or the Port Health officer, cause the same to be disinfected or destroyed to the satisfaction of that authority, and in accordance with the instructions as to disinfection contained in the appendix to these Regulations. If the said master neglect to comply with any such direc- tions within a reasonable time, the Sanitary authority or the Port Health officer shall cause the same to be carried into execution at the expense of the said vessel. 26. Provided facilities exist for obtaining suitable water in the port, the master shall, on the direction of the Port Health officer, cause all tanks in an infected or suspected vessel to be completely emptied and cleaned and disinfected in such manner as the Port Health officer may direct and fresh water to be taken in. The Port Health officer may also, if he thinks necessary, give like directions in the case of a healthy vessel. The master of the vessel shall forthwith carry any such direction into execution. 27. Any mails or cargo which may be brought by any vessel subject to these Regulations may be landed under such precautions as the Port Health officer may deem necessary to prevent the spread of the disease. 28. It will be the duty of the Port officer to facilitate the conveyance to all vessels detained under these Regulations of such supplies of provisions, stores or other articles as may be required by those on board. Such supplies will be placed on the boats of the vessel, to be subsequently removed by the crew. 29. All expenses incurred by any Sanitary authority in carrying out these Regulations shall be defrayed from Muni- cipal or District or Taluk funds in such proportions as the District Collector may, subject to the orders of the Local Government, direct. 9
?66 30. Any person disobeying or contravening any of the foregoing Regulations shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable on conviction to be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. APPENDIX I. * Underclothing, bedding, wearing apparel, mattresses, carpets, &c., which are contaminated or suspected and other articles to be disinfected should be exposed for 15 minutes to saturated steam-under pressure, if possible-at a temperature of not less than 100 C. (212 F.), care being taken that the steam shall reach all parts of each article to be disinfected. Disinfecting solutions- (a) Solution of corrosive sublimate, of one part in 1,000, with the addition of ten parts of chloride of soda. The solution should be coloured with aniline dye or indigo. It should not be placed in metal vessels. (b) A 5 per cent. solution of pure crystallized carbolic acid or 5 per cent. of crude commercial carbolic acid free from tar oils in a warm solution of soft soap. The carbolic solutions will be useful, more particularly for disin- fecting articles, such as metals, instruments, &c., which can neither be subjected to a temperature of 100 centigrade, nor placed in contact with corrosive sublimate. They may also be used at ports not provided with a disinfecting stove of the prescribed pattern. (2)-REGULATIONS FOR THE INSPECTION OF OUTWARD-BOUND VESSELS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897. (G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897; Noti- fication No. 181, "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 2nd November 1897, Part I, pages 1382-1383.) IN exercise of the powers conferred by Act III of 1897, the Epidemic Diseases Act, His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to declare that all vessels and persons * As revised by G.O., No. 702, Marine, dated 18th August 1898; Notification No. 98, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 30th August 1898, Part I, page 815.
?67 leaving the undermentioned ports of the Madras Presi- dency for Burma and ports out of India direct, shall be subjected, as a temporary measure, to the Regulations herein- after contained, and that the duties of Health Officers under these Regulations shall be discharged by the Medical officers named below, or by such other Medical officer as may from time to time be appointed for the purpose by the Govern- ment or "Sanitary authority" as defined in the Regulations * published in the Fort St. George Gazette of the 31st August 1897, the definitions contained in which are applicable to the regulations herein contained. These Regulations will super- sede those now in force for the inspection of outward-bound vessels and which are published in the Fort St. George Gazette of the 14th September 1897, Part I:- Ports. Health Officers. Gopalpur    ... Civil Apothecary. Calingapatam  Do. Baruva Hospital Assistant, Smpta. Bimlipatam Civil Apothecary. Vizagapatam District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or,  in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon  of the District. Cocanada Civil Surgeon,  or,  in his absence,  the  Assistant Surgeon in charge. Masulipatam District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or,  in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon  of the District. Madras Port and Marine Surgeon, and Officer in  subordinate charge of the  Port  and  Marine Dispensary. Cuddalore   ... District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or,  in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon  of the District. Negapatam Civil Surgeon. Tranquebar Civil Apothecary. Tuticorin    ... Do. Pmban      ...... Do. Kilakarai    ... Hospital Assistant. Calicut District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or,  in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon  of the District. Cochin Civil Surgeon, or,   in his absence,   the  Assistant Surgeon in charge. Tellicherry ... Do.                do.                do. * Printed on pages 58 to 66.
?68 Ports. Health Officers. Cannanore ... Civil Surgeon,   or,  in  his absence, the  Medical    officer    in   charge    of   the  Central Jail. Mangalore ... District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or,  in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon  of the District. REGULATIONS. 1. No person shall be permitted to embark on board a vessel within any such port bound direct for any port in Ceylon who has within the preceding ten days resided in a part of India believed by the Health officer of the port to be infected with plague. Any port may be declared " infected " by the Government or by the "Sanitary authority." 2.  * No  deck passenger who  appears   to belong  to the labouring classes  shall be permitted to embark on board a vessel at the port of Tuticorin or Ammpatnam bound for a port in Ceylon until he has satisfied the Medical officer of the Government of that Colony stationed at Tuticorin or Amm- patnam that he has not within the preceding ten days resided in a part of India infected by the plague and that he is free from infection with the plague and until the said Colonial officer has so  certified in respect  of  such passenger.    The Health officer of the port of Tuticorin or Ammpatnam shall not deliver a bill of health in respect  of any such vessel if there be on board any such passenger in respect of whom the Colonial officer has not certified as aforesaid. 3.  No vessel shall leave any  such port  for any port  in Burma or  out of India direct, until she has been inspected by the Health officer of the port, and the master or person in charge of such vessel has obtained from such officer a bill of health or certificate in the form given below that the officers and crew of, and also  the passengers (if any) by, such vessel are free from the bubonic plague.      Provided that in the case of passengers a certificate in the form annexed as appendix I, by   a  Commissioned  Medical  officer  appointed  for  this purpose, and dated not more than 12 hours before the de- parture of the vessel, shall be accepted in lieu of examination * As revised by G.O., No. 1063, Marine, dated 29th December 1898; Notification No. 3, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 3rd January 1899, Part I, pages 14 and 15. - Added by G.O., No. 414, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; Notification No. 63, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 14th June 1898, Part I, page 549.  Added by G.O., No. 512, Marine, dated 17th June 1898; Notification No. 71, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 28th June 1898, Part I, page 602.
?69 by the Port Health  officer.    Such certificate  shall  be an- nexed to, and form part of, the bill of health.* Bill of Health.  Including        master, mates, engineers, appren- tices and private servants when the latter are not mentioned in the ship's articles. This is to certify that the ship (or steamer) sailing under the                                                            flag and under the command of                                as master of                         tons bound for with a crew of                            persons  and passengers and laden with a cargo of is at the time of leaving this port in a satisfactory sanitary condition, and that no case of bubonic plague exists among her officers, passengers, or crew, all of whom have been inspected by me.  Or as the case may be. It   is  further certified that the  town  and port of are at present free  from plague. Provided that- () || all vessels belonging to the Ceylon Government which may leave ports in the Madras Presidency with emigrants for Ceylon shall be exempted from medical inspection. 4. The medical inspection of passengers and other persons prescribed in these Regulations must be made of each indivi- dual by day, on shore, at the time of embarkation; provided that-  In the case of the officers and crew of a vessel being brought on shore for inspection they may come in batches.  (i) in the case of vessels anchored in the Madras roadstead (i.e., outside the enclosed harbour) and at out-ports the inspection of officers and crew may be conducted on board; and || (ii) in the case of a vessel starting from Calcutta and calling at Madras or any other port in the Madras Presidency on her way to Europe, neither the crew nor the passengers already on board need be brought on shore and inspected there. The form of bill of health under this proviso will be as follows:- * Added by G.O., No. 512, Marine, dated 17th June 1898; Notification No. 71, Fort St. George Gasette, dated 28th June 1898, Part I, page 602.  As amended by G.O., No. 412, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; Notification No. 58, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 7th June 1898, Part I, page 515. || As amended by G.O., No. 414, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; Notification No. 63, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 14th June 1898, Part I, page 549.
?      70  Bill of Health. This is to certify that no case of bubonic plague exists among any of the passengers or other persons embarked at the port of on board the ship (or steamer)                                 under the command of                            as master bound for                                                It is further certified that the town and port * Or as the case may be.  of are at present free * from plague.  5.  Vessels    not  leaving  port  before  6 A.M. of  the  day following the   medical  inspection   may   not  leave   without re-inspection and the grant of a fresh bill of health. 6.  Should the Health officer of the port be of  opinion that any person on board of any vessel so inspected is suffering from the bubonic plague or from any illness which he suspects may prove to be plague, he shall  refuse to give a bill of health  as aforesaid  unless  and until such  person together with his or her attendants and relatives and their baggage and personal effects have been removed from the vessel and such parts  of the vessel as have been frequented by such persons shall  have   been disinfected  to the satisfaction   of the Health officer.    Such removal and disinfection  shall be noted on the bill of health.    The baggage and effects of such persons as are removed from any vessel under this rule shall be disinfected on shore in  such manner  as the Port Health officer directs before such baggage and personal  effects are permitted on board any vessel. 7.  Should a case of plague be discovered among the persons about to embark on any vessel, the sick person with his or her non-professional attendants shall be prevented from em- barking.    The baggage and personal effects of such persons shall also be detained and disinfected on shore. 8.  All persons so removed or prevented from sailing shall be detained in a plague  hospital or place   of  observation appointed by the Sanitary authority,  as the case may be; and shall not leave such hospital or place until the Chief Medical officer present at the spot shall have certified that they are free from the infection of the plague.  Note.-Mail bags are included in " cargo " under this Regulation. 9.  After the master or person in charge of the vessel has obtained a bill of health under the provisions of these Regulations no person or cargo   or goods of any kind shall be embarked or disembarked before the vessel leaves the port  As amended by G.O., No. 211, Marine, dated 6th March 1899; Notification No. 24, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 14th March 1899, Part I, page 309,
?71 unless such vessel is again inspected by the Port Health officer and another bill of health obtained from such officer by the master or person in charge of such vessel. 10.  * No port clearance shall be delivered to any vessel bound from any such port to any port in Burma or out of India until the master or person in charge shall produce a bill of health obtained as aforesaid, provided that the Customs officer may entrust the port clearance to  the Port Health officer for delivery by him to the master or person in charge with the bill of health if he determines to give one. 11.  Any person  disobeying or contravening any of the foregoing Regulations shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under Section  188 of the Indian Penal Code and shall be liable on conviction to be punished with imprisonment of either  description for a term   which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. APPENDIX  I.  Certificate. I do hereby certify that I have examined who is personally known to me (or, whose identity has been proved to, my satisfaction), a passenger on the ship not more than twelve hours before the departure of the ship from the port of                                                      , and find him in good health, except as noted in the margin, and free from any symptoms of bubonic plague. Rank. Official Designation. APPENDIX II.  Underclothing, bedding, wearing apparel, mattresses, carpets, &c., which are contaminated or suspected and other articles to be disinfected should be exposed for 15 minutes to saturated steam-under pressure, if possible-at a temperature of not less than 100 C. (212 F.), care being taken that the steam shall reach all parts of each article to be disinfected. * As amended by G.O., No. 278, Marine, dated 16th April 1898; Notification No. 44, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 26th April 1898, Part I, page 343.  Added by G.O., No. 512, Marine, dated 17th June 1898; Notification No. 71, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 28th June 1898, Part I, page 602.  Inserted by G.O., No. 702, Marine, dated 18th August 1898; Notification No. 98, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 30th August 1898, Part I, page 815.
?72 Disinfecting solutions- (a) Solution of corrosive sublimate, of one part in 1,000, with the addition of ten parts of chloride of soda. The solution should be coloured with aniline dye or indigo. It should not be placed in metal vessels. (b) A 5 per cent. solution of pure crystallized carbolic acid or 5 per cent. of crude commercial carbolic acid free from tar oils in a warm solution of soft soap. The carbolic solutions will be useful, more particularly for disin- fecting articles, such as metals, instruments, &c., which can neither be subjected to a temperature of 100 centigrade, nor placed in contact with corrosive sublimate. They may also be used at ports not provided with a disinfecting stove of the prescribed pattern. (3)-(G.O., No. 283, Marine, dated 18th April 1898 ; Notifi- cation No. 37, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 26th April 1898, Part I, page 340.) In exercise of the powers conferred by Act III of 1897 (The Epidemic Diseases Act), His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to declare that the Regulations * for the inspection of outward-bound vessels, published in the Fort St. George Gazette, of the 2nd November 1897, pages 1382 and 1383, Part I, shall be brought into force in the undermen- tioned ports of the Madras Presidency, with effect from such date as may be settled in each case by the " Sanitary authority," who will also appoint the Medical officers to discharge the duties of Port Health officers at the said ports under these Regulations :-  Ports. Name. District. Narsapur   ... Gdvari. Porto Novo           ...        ...... South Arcot. Tirumulavsal Tanjore. Tpputturai  Point Calimere  Muttupet   ...        ...   Adirmpatnam  Ammpatnarn  Kttaipatnam        ...         ...        ...         ..  Tondi         ............... Madura. Devipatnam  Hangarakatta South Canara. Coondapoor  * Printed on pages 66 to 72.
?73 CHAPTER V. RULES UNDER THE DISTRICT MUNICIPALITIES ACT, 1884, FOR COMBATING PLAGUE IN MUNICIPALITIES. (G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897; Notification No. 185, "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 16th March 1897, Part I-A., pages 67-71.) UNDER Section 250 (1) (m) of Act IV of 1884, His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to make the follow- ing rules for combating bubonic plague in municipalities. These rules shall come into force three months after their first publication in the District Gazettes in English and in the Vernacular language of the district:- Rules for combating Bubonic Plague ("Mahammari") in Municipalities. NOTE. The following is a description of the disease known as bubonic plague:- (a) After date of acquiring infection a period of a few hours to three or, in exceptional cases, even ten days may elapse. There occurs a gradually increasing feeling of lassi- tude, the colour of the skin may change till a yellowish tint is acquired; at times there is much restlessness and drowsi- ness; frontal head-ache of a severe character, attended with darting pains in the back, loins and abdomen, are frequent. High fever is ushered in with shivering and after two or three days of usually continuous fever, glandular swellings may appear in the groins, arm-pits, or neck, or in all three positions. On appearance of the swellings the fever may diminish slightly. The disease may then abate, accompanied by disappearance of the swellings or their breaking down by suppuration. But if the disease continues, the patient may vomit blood, and blood may be discharged from the nose, the mouth, the bowels, and mixed with urine; the swellings may become gangrenous and hmorrhage may occur from their 10
?74 sites; death may be ushered in by convulsions, delirium, insensibility, &c. (b) The prime cause of the disease is believed to be a microbe found in the blood and especially in the neighbour- hood of the enlarged glands. Its mode of dissemination has not been fully ascertained, but there is good reason to believe its propagation is favoured by foul soil, and that not only the bloody discharges, but the excretions, more especially the fcal, demand special care as to disinfection. The rela- tion of infection to water is open to doubt, but certain facts have been observed that point to this being a possible medium. The clinging of the infective agent to clothing and rooms is more certain. Foul soil, crowded and narrow streets, and badly-ventilated dwellings are specially favouring causes. Rats, snakes and cats being liable to infection may act as conveyers of the disease. (c) It is the object of these rules, therefore, to ensure (1) that the earliest possible information of every attack of plague should be conveyed to the authorities, so that the plague microbes may be at once prevented from being con- veyed into situations in which they might spread the infec- tion; (2) that the microbes should be at once completely destroyed; and (3) that medical assistance may be provided for those who, in spite of precautions, are attacked by the disease. They accordingly follow these three divisions. RULES.* 1. These rules shall be applicable to all municipalities in the Madras Presidency except Madras town. 2. Municipal councils shall be responsible for the general carrying out of the scheme, and District Medical and Sanitary officers for the necessary medical arrangements both in their head-quarters and elsewhere, except in municipalities where there are Civil Surgeons. In these, the Civil Surgeons shall be responsible. The preventive staff referred to in Rule 12 shall be under the Medical officer designated by the District Medical and Sanitary officer or the Civil Surgeon, as the case may be, to carry out the necessary arrangements, or, in the absence of such designation, under the Senior Medical officer on the spot, while the observation staff mentioned in Rule 6 shall be directly under the Chairman. * "These rules are ancillary to the Regulations issued under the Epidemics Diseases dAt III of 1897, and must be read subject to the Regulations." (G.O., No. 522-M., acted 13th March 1897, para. 2.)
?75 3. For the purpose of these rules, every municipality to which they apply shall be divided into " circles," which should, as far as possible, follow ward divisions so that they may be readily comprehended. In municipalities where there are wards containing less than 1,200 houses and a population of less than 5,000 persons each, two or more wards may be comprised in one circle. Three circles shall ordinarily form a division, and in no case shall a division contain more than four circles. Chairmen will at once map out their towns into "circles" and "divisions," and after approval by the Col- lector record the maps in their offices and send a copy to the Senior Medical officer of the municipality. 4. For each division, the Chairman shall at once procure and retain in the municipal stores not less than the following apparatus and disinfectants, and will be responsible that these stores are always maintained and in good condition:- 12 portable tin canisters for disinfectants. 9 lb. perchloride of mercury. 9 lb. commercial hydrochloric acid. 60 lb. carbolic acid. 600 lb. of sawdust and 600 lb. of unslaked lime. [Note.-The prices of these articles are approximately as follow:-     RS. A. P. One tin canister   1 8 0 One ounce perchloride of mercury 0 3 0 One ounce commercial hydrochloric acid 0 2 0 One lb. carbolic acid .. . 0 4 0 One lb. sawdust   0 1 9.] One lb. unslaked lime ...    I.-Observation. 5. Should it appear to the Collector of the district that plague imminently threatens to attack any municipality to which these rules apply, he shall warn the Chairman of the Council and the District Medical and Sanitary officer and the Senior Medical officer of the town accordingly. 6. Upon receipt of such warning or otherwise receiving information, the Chairman shall immediately appoint in each circle of the town an observation staff consisting of an In- spector, a peon and a toti, and in each division a Divisional Inspector and an orderly, or such smaller establishment as the Collector may, under the circumstances of the particular occasion, consider sufficient. The orderly should be allowed
?76 a jutka or pony to enable him to carry without delay such orders to Circle Inspectors as may be given. The Chairman shall, without delay, report to the Collector the date on which these appointments were made. [Note.-The salaries and allowances of this staff should not ordi- narily exceed the following rates:-  RS. Circle Inspector 15 Circle peon 8 Circle toti ............ 7 Divisional Inspector ... 35 Jutka or horse allowance 15 Orderly 8 Jutka or pony allowance to orderly ... 7.] 7. This staff may consist of temporary hands if available and competent. Otherwise, it should be drawn from the existing sanitary establishment of the municipality, whose local knowledge will be valuable. In the latter case, the vacancies so caused should be filled by temporary hands, who should be paid at the rates sanctioned for that establishment. 8. It will be the duty of the members of the observation staff to constantly and systematically patrol the whole of their circle in order to gain intelligence of the first case of plague in it, so that immediate action may be taken. The members of the observation staff should also be employed in removing, with the aid of the ordinary conservancy estab- lishment, all defects in sanitation which would favour the propagation of plague (such as accumulations of rubbish or stagnant sewage, absence of perflation of groups of dwellings and ventilation of individual buildings) and should report their action to the Chairman. 9. They should further warn the inhabitants of the circle to adopt the precautions against plague prescribed in the extract from Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel King's "Simple Sanitary Rules" which is printed as an appendix to these rules, and should distribute gratis and as widely as possible copies of this, which the Chairman will keep ready printed in the vernacular. 10. The Chairman and councillors and municipal servants of all ranks should assist the observation staff in every way possible, and the police in every way that is compatible with their other duties, both in getting information of the first attack and in removing sanitary defects in the circle.
?77 II.-Prevention of Infection. 11. On receipt of information under the above system of the first attack of plague, the Chairman shall at once employ in the circle in which it has occurred (but not in other circles) three peons and three toties or such smaller estab- lishment as the Collector may, under the circumstances of the particular case, consider sufficient, and shall report to the Collector and the District Medical and Sanitary officer the date on which he did so. [Note.-The salaries of the peons and toties appointed under this rule should not, respectively, exceed Rs. 8 and Rs. 7 each per mensem.] 12. This staff, like the observation staff, may consist of temporary hands if available and competent. Otherwise, it should be selected from the ordinary existing municipal establishment, the vacancies caused in the latter case being filled by temporary men on the sanctioned rates, and it should be combined with the observation staff of the circle, so that the whole may thenceforth form "a preventive staff" to carry out the duties set forth below. 13. The preventive staff shall visit every house in which plague has occurred and shall use the greatest care in seeing that all sputa, vomit, fluid and solid excreta are at once collected in separate vessels, mixed with carbolic sawdust,* paddy husk, or other combustible matter, and, where neces- sary, with kerosine-oil, and thoroughly, completely, and immediately burnt on or near the premises. The burning shall, when possible, be carried out in the presence of the Divisional or Sanitary Inspector, but, in the absence of both, it may be carried out in the presence of the peon-the Divi- sional Inspector, Sanitary Inspector or peon, as the case may be, being responsible that it is thoroughly done. The Chair- man shall delegate to the Senior Medical officer of the town, and to such others as may have to act under this rule, his powers under section 231 (1) of Act IV of 1884 of entering and inspecting houses. 14. Rags, clothes and bedding stained with vomit or excreta, or blood passed from any part of the body, or discharges from the nose, mouth, open sores, boils or wounds should similarly be burnt upon the spot under the same precautions, the danger of keeping such articles being fully explained to the owners and full compensation in money or * One part of carbolic acid to ten parts of sawdust.
?78 kind being offered in the case of the really poor, but, where the owners or other persons concerned so desire, articles of clothing proved to the satisfaction of the Medical officer appointed under Rule 2 to be of great value may be dis- infected in such manner as he may direct. In each such instance, that officer, by a certificate signed by him, shall define the method of disinfection employed and certify to its having been conducted with care. 1/2 oz. perchloride of mer- cury. 1 oz. hydrochloric acid. 3 gallons (one small chatty full) of water with a * pinch of aniline blue to colour it to prevent acci- dents. 15. Floors and furniture stained with vomit or excreta, or blood or any discharge, should be dis- infected by being thoroughly sprinkled with a solution of perchloride of mer- cury made up as shown in the margin. The burning of tar and sulphur in houses and streets should be discon- tinued as it is inefficient as a disin- fectant, but street drains outside the houses attacked and the drains of these houses where possible should be flushed with the above solution. [Note 1.-Wooden buckets or earthen pots should alone be used for carrying about this solution, as it destroys metal vessels, and the packets of the solid perchloride should be labelled " Poison " in English and the vernacular and entrusted only to the Inspectors themselves.] [Note 2.-As the solution is highly poisonous, the greatest care must be taken to see that drains flushed with it are not connected with any tank or well which is likely to be used for drinking purposes.] 16. The greatest courtesy and consideration should be used by the preventive staff to all classes in carrying out these instructions, as the exercise of extreme tact is essential to the success of the scheme. 17. Special measures should be taken to ensure free ven- tilation of the room in which the patient is under treatment. 18. Removal to isolation hospitals provided for under section 233 of Act IV of 1884 should be freely exercised. If the patient be treated in his own house, however, the utmost care should be taken to strictly limit the number of persons entering the room or house to those absolutely neces- sary for the patient's welfare. Disinfectants for washing the hands of persons touching the patient should be available. * As amended by G.O., No. 2373-M., dated 29th October 1897; Fort St. George Gazette, dated 16th November 1897, Part I-A., page 286.  " In cases in which it becomes necessary to entrust non-professional persons with perchloride of mercury for use as a disinfectant, the solution should be, as. a further precaution, mixed with crude carbolic acid in the proportion of 1 to 100." (G.O., No. 1500-M., dated 1st July 1897, para. 2.)
?79 *Where the attendants are bare-footed, the feet should be care- fully disinfected at suitable intervals daily.* Native food vessels used by the patient would be best disinfected by heating, till they cannot be touched directly over fire. 19. After a patient has recovered, the house, and espe- cially the room which he occupied during the attack, should be thoroughly disinfected. The floors should be dug up wherever stained with plague matter and the earth burnt, or, if this cannot be easily done, the floors should be burnt over. The floor, the walls, the house-drains and the furniture should also be liberally sprayed and washed with the perchlo- ride of mercury solution above described. The walls should subsequently be brushed with a dry broom, and be white- washed with fresh slaked lime in the proportion of one part of lime to five of water. [Note.-It is most desirable that the excreta of a patient for at least ten days after he has recovered from an attack should be carefully collected, disinfected and carried away. These probably still contain plague microbes. For this purpose, a Dindigul bullock lorrie costing Rs. 50 and air-tight iron excreta drums costing Rs. 2-8-0 each may be provided. The purchase of these will, however, be left to the option of the councils.] 20. Rats, cats and snakes suffer from the disease. If found alive in infected localities, these animals should be got rid of as quickly as possible by killing them as a matter of prevention. Where found dead, their bodies should invariably be burnt. 21. The Chairman shall provide the Medical officer re- sponsible for working the rules with a permanent advance of Rs. 50 per division, which shall be recouped from time to time by bills supported by vouchers where possible. 22. The preventive staff shall continue to be maintained in an affected circle for ten days after the last attack of plague in it, and the observation staff in all circles or groups of circles as the Collector may approve for twenty-one days after the last attack in the town. During this time, they should be employed in remedying sanitary defects. III.-Medical Aid. 23. There shall be a head-quarters in each division at which a medical subordinate shall reside, who shall be supplied with medicines and medical comforts from the municipal *--* Added by G.O., No. 1719-M., dated 4th August 1897; Notification No. 560, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 10th August 1897, Part I-A, page 176.
?80 hospital for the treatment of those attacked, and who shall be available for attendance gratis on the sick in their own houses. This shall also be the head-quarters of the Divisional Inspector and of the preventive staff on night duty. 24. In one place at least in each town, there shall be isolation huts with separate accommodation for males and females for the treatment of those who desire it or who are brought there. These shall be in charge of a medical subor- dinate with the necessary staff, and supplied with equipment, medicines and medical comforts. This subordinate shall be deputed to no other duty. He shall reside with his staff on the spot and shall be adequately housed. 25. Charges for medical treatment under these rules shall be met from the allotment in the budget under Grant 3, Hospitals and Dispensaries. 26. The head-quarters of the divisions and the sites for the isolation hospitals shall be at once selected, and shall be marked on the maps referred to in Rule No. 3 above. 27. In order to make provision for meeting the charges under the portions of this scheme relating to observation and prevention, the council of every municipality to which the scheme applies shall be required to allot in every budget under "Epidemic charges" a sum which shall be in the proportion of Rs. 1,000 to every 25,000 inhabitants in the municipality-provided such provision has not already been made under G.O., No. 1536-M., dated 9th September 1896, when such funds shall also be applicable to the purpose of these rules. This shall be called the "Epidemic reserve," and shall not be spent upon any object but the carrying of this scheme into execution. 28. The provision of this reserve should not be allowed to disturb the existing percentages to the total municipal income of the expenditure upon communications, education, sanitation, &c., or to swell the total of the allotment made for sanitary purposes under Grants 1, 3 and 4 taken together, but should be set aside from funds which are at present annually expended upon sanitary works of a permanent nature. 29. Municipal councils are hereby authorized to employ establishments on the scales above laid down as the necessity for them arises, and to defray the charges from the "Epi- demic reserve" in anticipation of the sanction of Govern- ment, but this sanction should be obtained without delay.
?81 30. The Medical officer responsible for working these rules shall, within seven days of the final withdrawal of the special staff, forward a report on the epidemic and the opera- tion of the rules through the Chairman of the municipality to the Collector for the orders of Government. In cases where the Medical officer in question is subordinate to the District Medical and Sanitary officer or the Civil Surgeon, such report shall be forwarded through those officers. In every case, such communications shall be submitted to Gov- ernment through the Sanitary Commissioner. APPENDIX. [EXTRACT from Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel King's " Simple Sanitary Rules."] Precautions to be observed on the approach of Plague. A.-HABITATIONS. 1. Each house must be thoroughly cleansed, that is, all manure, dirty water, washings of cattle stalls and collection of dirt of any description, must be completely removed. 2. Where the earth remains damp and foul after such removal, it should be dug up till dry and clean earth is reached. 3. The old earth should be taken far from the town and may be used as manure for the fields; new earth from a clean place should be laid down. 4. The interior and exterior of houses should be white- washed. If persons cannot afford to do the outside, the inside at least should be whitewashed. 5. Bundles of clothing and other materials hanging from the beams, or occupying in any other way the rooms in which persons sleep, should be removed. 6. Doors and windows should at all possible hours be left open, so that free ventilation be obtained. 7. If private latrines are used, they must be kept free from fcal matter by removal at least twice daily. 8. The drains leading from houses should be cleansed twice daily. 11
?82 9. Cesspools and pits for receipt of urine of cattle should be emptied daily. B.-THE PERSON. 1. The body and clothing should be kept scrupulously clean. If delicate, persons should use warm, not cold, baths. 2. The food should be plain, nourishing and of good quality. 3. All vegetables, or leaves, or fruits, likely to cause diarrha, should be abandoned. 4. All forms of drinking to excess, debauchery, late hours and exposure to wet and cold should be avoided. 5. Cold cooked food should never be used. Care should be taken not to allow flies to settle upon food. Vegetables and leaves should never be eaten otherwise than after cooking. Before being cooked, they should be well washed in water that has been purified by boiling. Salt should be freely used with the diet; but, on the other hand, it must not be used in such unusual amounts as to excite uneasiness or looseness of the bowels. 6. An inferior quality of water should not be kept in the house; only the cleanest available should be employed. 7. Water for drinking purposes and for washing the mouth or eating and drinking vessels, and milk, should be boiled before use. 8. * Persons with cuts or abrasions on their hands, feet or other exposed parts of the body should avoid attendance on plague patients. But if attendance is essential, the wounded parts should be covered, and on occasions of temporary with- drawals from attendance, the parts should be washed with disinfectants which can be obtained from the sanitary staff on application.* *-* Inserted by G.O., No. 1500-M., dated 1st July 1897.
?83 PART II. CHAPTER VI. (1)-RESOLUTION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME DEPARTMENT, SANITARY, No. 227-240, DATED THE 3RD FEBRUARY 1898. THE Epidemic Diseases Act (III of 1897) * empowers the Governor-General in Council when satisfied that India or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, to take special measures over and above those permissible under the ordinary law, with the object of preventing the outbreak of such disease and the spread of it, and further authorizes the Governor- General in Council by general or special order to direct that the powers conferred by the Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories adminis- tered by it. By the Home Department Notification No. 302,  dated 4th February 1897, the Governor-General in Council directed that the appropriate powers conferred by the Act might be exercised within their respective territories by the different Local Governments and Administrations in British India, and by notifications issued in the Foreign Depart- ment, the Agents to the Governor-General were also em- powered to issue Regulations under the Act both in respect of parts of British India under their charge and in respect of territories in India under the Administration of the Governor- General in Council which are not parts of British India. The Government of India have themselves from time to time issued Regulations under the Act in respect of matters in which Imperial interests were involved or action had to be taken by Departments under their direct control, but their object in delegating the powers conferred by the Act to Local Governments was to avoid hampering them in action taken by them to prevent the outbreak or spread of the plague, and to admit of the Regulations under the Act being adapted, so far as this is possible without preventing them from being effective, to local conditions and so as to respect local prejudices. Copies of all the Regulations issued by Local * Printed on pages 5 and 6.  Printed on page 6.
84 Governments and Administrations have been communicated as they were issued by the different Local Governments and Administrations to the Governor-General in Council for information, and under the orders of His Excellency in Coun- cil these have been examined on their receipt, and in any case in which they have been found to be in conflict with the general principles which have guided the Government in dealing with the plague the Local Government or Adminis- tration concerned has been requested to cancel or modify them. Experience in the working of the rules has been mainly obtained in the Bombay Presidency to which, with very few exceptions, plague has been hitherto confined, and, in view of the fact that the Plague Commission under Mr. Wingate accompanied by Dr. Cleghorn, Director-General of the Indian Medical Service, have recently visited all the infected areas in the Bombay Presidency and, after examining the arrangements in force in each place, devised a set of rules * of which the Government of India, subject to the remarks made in paragraph 11 of this Resolution as to the principles to be followed by Medical officers in detaining passengers, approve, the Governor-General in Council proposes to take the opportunity of communicating these rules to the different Local Governments and Administrations with the suggestion that they should be utilized as a model upon which to frame rules for other Provinces. 2. The Government of India desire to express their con- currence in the statement contained in Rule 3 of the rules as to the measures which must be taken to combat an outbreak of the plague. The essential measures to be taken are (1) the early recognition of the disease in a locality, (2) the treatment of the sick in places of segregation, (3) the removal of the other inhabitants from the infected house, locality or area, (4) their segregation for a specific period, (5) the disinfection of their persons, clothing and personal effects, (6) the disinfection of the houses in the infected locality and their contents, (7) the improvement of the ventilation of the houses, the abatement of overcrowding, and the prosecution of general measures of sanitary reform. 3. One of the main difficulties which have to be contended with in dealing with the plague is the absence of any efficient organization for the detection of cases before the outbreak has attained proportions which make it impossible to suppress it for a considerable time. Considering the extent to which * Printed on pages 92 to 102.
85 fever prevails in the country and the ignorance of the agency responsible for reporting the occurrence and cause of deaths, it can hardly be expected that every case of plague will be brought to notice immediately after it has occurred, and it is very desirable that where there is any reason to suspect the existence of the disease a regular system for the detection of suspicious cases of sickness should be devised. Rules 4 and 9 of the Bombay Rules contain directions designed to secure the detection of the disease by improving the arrangements for reporting sickness and mortality, and the arrangements for rural areas described in Rules 5 and 6 have for some time past been in force in the North-Western Provinces, the Punjab, the Central Provinces and Bengal. The occurrence of cases of plague in villages in the neighbourhood of Kankhal in the Saharanpur district of the North-Western Provinces has also led the Lieutenant-Governor and Chief Commissioner to issue orders for the employment of a special organization for ascertaining whether it has extended to places other than those in which it has been detected. This organization is based upon that which was so successfully utilized in distri- buting relief during the recent famine, and the essence of it is that a sufficient number of European officers should be employed to render the powers of search effective and at the same time prevent the subordinate establishments from abus- ing their authority. A copy of the orders issued by the Gov- ernment of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh to the Commissioner of the Meerut Division is appended * to this Resolution, and the Governor-General in Council desires to commend them to the consideration of other Local Govern- ments and Administrations in case there should at any time be reason to suspect that plague exists and has not been detected. For the purpose of supervising work of this nature, young officers of the Staff Corps will, the Government of India believe, be found to be a most suitable agency should the Civil establishments be insufficient, and though it may not be possible to procure the services of such officers in any num- bers at the present juncture, the Government of India will endeavour, should the necessity arise, to procure them from the Military authorities when the operations at present being carried out on the North-Western frontier have terminated. 4. Another measure which has been put forward as an effective means for ascertaining the existence of plague is the inspection of corpses. The Government of India have * Not printed.
86 consulted Local Governments and Administrations as to the question whether corpse inspection is a reliable means of bringing facts to light and whether the feeling of the people is opposed to it or not. The Governor-General in Council has not yet received all the replies to the reference made upon this question and it will be dealt with separately later on. On the information at present before them it appears to the Government of India to be doubtful whether the measure is likely to be of great assistance, and they fear that its general introduction would be repugnant to the feelings of the people. 5. The system prescribed in Rule 10 and the following rules issued by the Bombay Government for the division of towns which are infected or liable to infection into quarters or divisions of a size convenient for effective supervision meets with the approval of the Government of India, and in this, as indeed in all the measures taken for the suppression of the plague, it is essential to secure the supervision of an European official who will carry the people with him, and see that their customs and susceptibilities are as far as possible respected. When search parties are organized to ensure that all cases of the disease are brought to notice, and this measure will, it appears to the Government of India, be found to be a very necessary one at any place where an outbreak occurs, endeavour should be made to associate respectable native gentlemen with them, and female medical attendants should accompany them for the purpose of examining females. 6. When plague actually breaks out the segregation of the sick and of the persons who have been in immediate con- tact with them is a fundamental precaution which is essential to the successful issue of any operations against it. In devising means to secure this object it is necessary on the one hand to consider the urgent necessity of preventing sufferers from plague from spreading the infection among their neighbours, and on the other hand the great importance of interfering as little as possible with the customs and the feelings of the community. The Governor-General in Council considers that experience has shown that in order that segre- gation may be efficacious it must be carried out in hospitals or other suitable places specially appointed for the purpose. A measure of this nature can hardly be expected not to cause alarm among a people many of whom regard the privacy of their houses as sacred, and this feeling can only be allayed if those affected by it have confidence in the motives of Govern- ment and believe that it is actuated solely by a desire to stay the pestilence. The Governor-General in Council has been
87 much impressed by the readiness and docility with which the people in many of the infected areas have discarded their prejudices and submitted to removal from their houses, and His Excellency in Council feels confident that, if the neces- sity for the measure is carefully explained to them, the co-operation of leading men obtained as far as possible, and every consideration shown to the feelings and habits of those to whom the Regulations have to be applied, this measure will be accepted without objection by the people of a locality in which plague has made its appearance. But it appears to His Excellency in Council that the prospect of such action being required of them in the event of plague appearing in their midst may not unreasonably seem distasteful to them so long as there is no immediate danger of an outbreak, and it is therefore desirable to, as far as possible, remove any cause for discontent by encouraging the people themselves to make arrangements for the establishment of private hospitals and segregation camps for particular castes, classes, joint families and associations of families in anticipation of the necessity for their removal from their own houses arising. The equipment and administration of such hospitals must be approved by duly appointed authority. They should be conveniently placed and it is not necessary that they should be located in remote situations. They should not, however, be situated in houses which are actually inhabited or blocks of houses or streets, for in the event of an outbreak of plague, cases of the disease might occur in the house or block which it would then be necessary to completely evacuate. While His Excellency in Council is strongly of opinion that in carrying out any measures of segregation regard should be had, as in the case of Europeans, to the position in society of those classes of the native community who can be relied on to take efficient measures with the object of preventing the spread of infection, and to other considerations of a like nature, it is not, he fears, possible save in the most exceptional cases (as for instance that of a house located in a large garden, in which a hospital or private camp can be located at a distance from the house actually infected) to permit the residents of an infected house not to evacuate the area in which it stands. His Excellency in Council therefore anticipates that in a crowded city there will be few (if any) houses, which it will be safe to license as hospitals or for segregation purposes. In public as well as in private plague hospitals, all possible consideration should be shown to the feelings of the inmates, and in especial caste distinctions and the privacy of females who do not appear in public should be carefully respected. His Excellency in
88 Council also considers that it is neither necessary nor humane to separate the sufferers from their families and friends, and all plague hospitals, whether Government hospitals or private caste hospitals, should therefore be arranged so as to provide separate accommodation for the immediate family or friends of the patients. For the public hospitals it will be found convenient to utilize schools and other public buildings which are available and suitable. 7. Before leaving the subject of segregation, the Gov- ernor-General in Council desires to say that, while it has not yet been shown that inoculation with prophylactic serum such as has been prepared by Mr. Haffkine, C.I.E., can be relied on as a means to prevent the spread of plague, the results of the experiments made are so distinctly encouraging that he is not without hope that it may be demonstrated that protection may be ensured by means of prophylactic inoculation. It is desir- able that every opportunity should be taken to test the efficacy of inoculation, and the Governor-General in Council will feel obliged if Local Governments and Administrations, within whose territories plague now exists or may appear in the future, will place themselves in communication with M. Haffkine in order to procure a supply of serum for the use of persons who desire to have themselves inoculated. No person should be inoculated except with his express consent. In the event of the efficacy of inoculation being eventually established, it will, it appears to the Government of India, become possible to dispense with segregation in the case of persons who have undergone the process of inoculation, Even in this case it will, however, still be necessary to require the evacuation of infected houses and localities with a view to their thorough disinfection for the purpose of destroying the germs of infection. 8. The rules issued by the Bombay Government for the removal and burning of the clothing of a patient suffering from plague, for the disinfection of all those removed from the infected area whether to the camp for suspected persons or to that for the healthy, and for preventing the re-occupation of houses in the infected area until a certain time after they have been evacuated, cleaned and disinfected, appear to the Govern- ment of India to be full and satisfactory. The Governor- General in Council desires to impress upon Local Govern- ments and Administrations the paramount importance of making efficient arrangements to prevent people from return- ing to occupy evacuated houses before the time specified, and of securing that all articles likely to convey infection are
89 without exception removed from infected houses and immedi- ately destroyed or disinfected. 9. It seems to the Government of India desirable to express their views upon the subject of quarantine in relation to the suppression of plague. Her Majesty's Government and the Government of India have continuously been opposed to the view that the spread of epidemic disease can be effectively checked by the imposition of quarantine so as to prevent the movement of the people to other places from areas in which epidemic disease prevails. The first reason which has led the Government of India to this conclusion is that it is impossible to make any system of land quarantine in India effective. It could, indeed, be arranged that every traveller by railway should, on leaving the infected area, be placed in a segrega- tion camp for a given time, but any attempt to block all the roads and paths from the infected area must be defeated, firstly, because the Government has not at its disposal the necessary establishments to make such a stoppage of the traffic effective, and, secondly, because the establishments could not be relied on to carry out the duty. But even could it be made effective, a system of land quarantine would, in the opinion of the Government of India, be mischievous in itself and calculated to foster rather than to suppress an outbreak of epidemic disease. It is in appearance so easy a remedy that if adopted it would be apt to distract attention from those surer and most essential measures which, if plague is to be suppressed, must be taken at the place where the out- break occurs. It causes hardship and suffering to the people who have to be detained, and it affords opportunities of every kind for bribery, blackmail and extortion to the subordinate establishments employed to enforce it. The collection in camp of large bodies of people who have previously been subject to the risk of plague infection involves danger of an outbreak of the disease in the camp, and may thus establish fresh foci for the dissemination of the disease. The views held by the British Government and the Government of India on the subject of quarantine were for a long time resisted on the Continent of Europe, but they have now been accepted by the European powers, and in the Dresden Conference of 1893, to which the Government of India declined to become a party for other reasons, the uselessness of land quarantine was for the first time recognized by them in respect of cholera. Prior to the assembly at Venice in the spring of 1897 of the delegates deputed to concert measures to prevent the introduc- tion and spread of the plague in Europe, the Governor-Gene- ral in Council had considered and rejected a proposal to place 12
?90 in quarantine the whole of the Bombay Presidency owing to the outbreak of plague within it, against the rest of India. In paragraph 3 (iii) of the Home Department letter No. 1623-26, dated June 1st, 1897,* addressed to the Maritime Governments, it was noticed that the Venice Convention provided that the modern principles of disinfection should be substituted for the obsolete system of land quarantine, but, with a view to the protection of countries which may find it difficult to thus protect their borders, each of the Governments who are parties to the Convention is at liberty to close its frontiers to travel- lers and merchandise. The Convention also, while condemn- ing land quarantine in general terms, permits Governments to reserve to themselves the right to take special measures with regard to certain classes of people specially- A.-Gipsies and vagabonds. B.-Emigrants and persons travelling or crossing the frontier in large bodies. 10. Proceeding on the principles embodied in the Venice Convention the Government of India have from time to time expressed an opinion adverse to the establishment of cordons designed to keep the population within an infected area and have declined to agree to the general prohibition of the book- ing of passengers by railway to or from particular places, or to the prohibition of the booking of passengers travelling by a particular class. The detention of the inmates of an infected locality within the area of infection by means of a cordon is apt to increase the virulence of the disease, and therefore also the danger of its dissemination, by fostering the local conditions which are a main cause of its development. Expe- rience shows that ordinarily on the outbreak of plague in a town of which part is infected and part is not, it is desirable, concurrently with the removal to a segregation camp of the inmates of the infected localities, to encourage the healthy population to leave the infected area before the disease becomes thoroughly diffused through it. But there may be cases in which the area of infection being small it may be possible to entirely evacuate it and to place the inmates of it in isolation at a place in the near neighbourhood. A guard may unobjectionably be utilized to keep the population under medical supervision within the healthy area in which it is determined to isolate them both with the object of prevent- ing their return to the infected houses and also to minimise the possibility of infection being carried elsewhere. In such cases if proper arrangements are made for separate camps for * Vide page 199.
91 the sick, the suspected, and the healthy, there is little or no danger of establishing a focus for the dissemination of the disease, while the control of the guard can be made effective and malpractices on the part of the subordinate establish- ments be prevented if European agency is employed on the spot to supervise such establishments, and to check, by a system of registering the inmates of the camps, the attempts which may be made to leave them. 11. In accordance with the principles explained above, the Government of India have restricted the interference with the movement of the general public by railway to medical inspection. In the terms of the Venice Convention medical intervention is restricted to the inspection of travellers with a view to the detention of those who show symptoms of plague and to the care of the sick. The Convention also dwells on the desirability of keeping under supervision all travellers from an infected area at their homes for a period of ten days from the date of their departure from the infected area. The Government of India approve of the medical inspection being conducted so as to provide for the detention in the observation camp provided for this purpose not only of persons in whom symptoms of plague or suspicious symptoms are discovered, but of all persons from the infected area who appear to be suspicious by reason of their appearance, the dirty condition of their clothes, the fact that they are travel- ling in gangs or belong to classes which are likely to dissemi- nate the disease or cannot be traced on arrival at their destination or depended upon to give information should plague occur among them after arrival at their destination. All other persons should be allowed to proceed to their destination after inspection, and the rules should not, under any circumstances, exempt from their operation any class of persons as such, or be limited to persons who travel by railway by a particular class. 12. While these are the general principles which should guide the different Local Governments and Administrations in their control over the movements of the general public travel- ling by railway from an infected area it may often be advisable to interpose special checks either on the movement of pilgrims from an infected area to a place of pilgrimage beyond that area, or on the movement of pilgrims to a place of pilgrimage at which plague exists. When plague exists at a place of pilgrimage it may indeed be generally the most prudent course as well as the course which will in the end cause least inter- ference with the people to definitely prohibit the religious fair
92 at which the pilgrims intend to collect. But there may be special circumstances in which this course may seem to be inadvisable, and in such cases it appears to the Government of India that the booking of pilgrims to the place of pilgrimage or the neighbouring railway stations may be, without objec- tion, entirely interdicted for the time. Where, on the other hand, the place of pilgrimage lies outside the infected area and it is ordinarily visited by pilgrims from the infected area, it is legitimate and advisable to prohibit for the time the passage by railway of pilgrims from the infected area to the place of pilgrimage, and in accordance with these considerations the Government of India have from time to time, during the out- break of plague, issued orders prohibiting the sale of tickets in the Bombay Presidency to pilgrims desirous of visiting other parts of India. Enclosure. INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING PLAGUE ADMINISTRATION ISSUED BY THE BOMBAY PLAGUE COMMISSION FOR THE GENERAL GUIDANCE OF DISTRICT AND OTHER OFFICERS. 1. Plague is a disease which is essentially associated with insanitary conditions in human habitations, the chief of which are accumulations of filth, overcrowding and the absence of light and ventilation. 2. It is, in the first instance at least, a disease of locality, and is mainly conveyed from place to place by individuals in their person, clothing and personal effects, who have resided in the infected locality. 3. The essential measures to be taken for preventing the spread of the disease are its early recognition in a locality, the removal of the inmates from the infected locality or area, which, in the first instance, may be only a room or house, their segregation for a specific period, the disinfection of their persons, clothing and personal effects and of the houses with their contents, situated within the infected locality. 4. The first steps to be taken are in connection with the sickness and mortality. There are, at present, no methods in actual operation by which these can be accurately ascer- tained. Infectious diseases are not notified, and the registra- tion of deaths is imperfect. Means must be adopted to improve the latter, and check the results by recording in towns all funerals which pass the octroi posts, noting the name of the deceased and the locality of the house in which
?93 the death occurred, and by posting trustworthy subordinates, either members of the Police force or of the Revenue Depart- ment, at all burying and burning grounds, noting similar information. These subordinates, not being connected with the municipality, will afford valuable aid in checking the returns, and they will assist the Municipal authorities in arriving at correct results. 5. In villages, the Ptils must submit weekly returns of deaths in each village, within their respective jurisdiction, to the Mmlatdr,* who will forward them to the Collector of the district, after noting on each any peculiarity in the incidence of the deaths, the mortality for the corresponding week during the past three years, and explaining, if he can, any excess. When the Mmlatdr is not satisfied as to the cause of any excessive or unusual mortality, he should cause special en- quiries to be made, and, if necessary, call in the assistance of the nearest medical subordinate. 6. The Ptils should also be required to give notice at the police station of the arrival in their villages of any persons from an infected locality. The names of such persons should be entered in a register at the police station, and they should be kept outside the village under observation for ten days and on no account allowed to sleep within the village site. The cause of the death of any person who has recently been in an infected locality should be investigated. In villages remote from a police station the police Ptil should discharge these duties, but the Revenue Ptil and the Kulkarni  should be held equally responsible. 7. The returns referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 will show, both in towns and villages, any unusual mortality over the average of previous years, and also the occurrence of two or more deaths in one house or localised area when immediate special enquiry is necessary. 8. For the discovery of cases of sickness it will be necessary to obtain the assistance of the more respectable residents in each quarter, street or group of houses. In any doubtful case of sickness they could obtain the services of the medical subordinate attached to the dispensary, or a hospital assistant may be specially deputed to aid the residents in the work of detection. 9. It should be made obligatory under the Epidemic Diseases Act for the occupier of each room or house in an infected town to notify all cases of sickness and death, * i.e., the Tahsildar,  i.e., the Karnam,
?94 occurring in the room or house occupied by him, and for every medical practitioner practising in such a town to report all cases of sickness and death coming to his knowledge in the practice of his profession. 10. When there is reason to believe that cases of plague are occurring in a town or are likely to occur, owing to its proximity to an infected area, the town should be divided into quarters or divisions of a size convenient for effective supervision, and each quarter should be placed, as far as possible, under the charge of an European official, who may be a civil officer, taken from any department, a military or a Medical officer according to circumstances. 11. The quarter under each officer should be sub-divided into defined areas, which might consist of a street, a portion of one, or a group of houses, and each of these sub-divisions should be placed under the charge of a district or local sub- ordinate, who may, for convenience, be called a supervisor. With each Supervisor will be associated one or more residents of the sub-division, who will assist the supervisor in obtaining information regarding sickness and mortality in the areas respectively allotted to him. Under each Supervisor will be a gang of coolies, varying in number to suit the requirements of each locality. The gangs working in the more populous towns should be divided into three sections, each with defined duties as follows:- (a) for the detection of cases and their removal to hospital; (b) for the evacuation of houses and for the removal of the inmates to camp; and (c) for the disinfection of houses. 12. So long as plague exists in the Presidency, it is advisable that the above organisation should be prepared for each town and district area, Native Superintendents being substituted for Europeans in the latter, and the members should be ready to act when the necessity arises. At each town exposed to danger an observation camp should be pro- vided where all suspicious arrivals from infected areas may be detained for ten days. 13. It is believed that under such a scheme information regarding all cases of sickness will be easily and readily obtained, but should the people be unwilling to assist the authorities, or withhold the necessary information, then it will be advisable to organise search parties under the charge of the Divisional Superintendent. Each search party should be
?95 accompanied by a Medical officer or subordinate, and by a female, either European or native. 14. It is absolutely essential to success that all the mea- sures mentioned above for the suppression of the disease should be carried out promptly and effectively. To ensure this being done all the members of the staff engaged in the work should have a clear idea of their duties: the opera- tions will then be conducted in a methodical and systematic manner. 15. The Superintendent should be provided with a suit- able office situated in his own division, where he should remain the whole day, except at intervals for meals. The office will be his head-quarters to which all communications should be sent, and at which the Supervisors will make their daily reports. He will exercise a general supervision over all the operations and will issue orders for the necessary action to be taken by each section of the gang of coolies. 16. No house vacated on account of plague may be re- occupied without his sanction, and he may cause a notice to that effect, to be affixed to each vacated house. He should place a seal on boxes containing valuable property left in houses which have been evacuated on account of plague. Such property may be removed by the owner, but if he declines to do so, it will remain at his risk. 17. Property of any value belonging to the poorer classes which it may be considered necessary or advisable to destroy as being infected should be appraised by two or more respect- able natives and the value paid to the owner by the Superin- tendent of the division. Compensation should also be given without delay to the very poor for the destruction of cloths, &c., which although they may be of no market value yet serve a useful purpose to the owners. 18. After a house has been disinfected, the door will be secured by a padlock, of which the Superintendent will retain the key or entrance may be barred by any other effectual method. 19. The stock of disinfectants, padlocks and all surplus appliances for divisional use will be kept in or near the office. 20. Each Supervisor will keep a list of all residents in each house in his sub-division. He will inspect all new arrivals, and will obtain information from them as to their previous place of residence. He will, in company with the local resi- dent appointed to assist him, visit all the houses in his sub- division, and obtain information regarding the health of the
?96 different inmates, and will, on the conclusion of his rounds, report verbally to his Superintendent the occurrence of all cases of sickness and death and any information regarding arrivals from infected localities. Any case of plague, and all doubtful ones of sickness should be at once reported to the Superintendent at his office by day, and at his house by night. 21. The Supervisor will be provided with a sufficient supply of disinfectants ready for use, with tubs, buckets, watering pots, one or two hand-pumps, either jet or spray, and imple- ments required for unroofing houses and making holes in the walls. There should also be a dooly, charpoy or bamboo frame for the removal of the sick. It should be thoroughly washed or sprayed with perchloride of mercury solution, either at the hospital or sub-divisional depot after use. This is necessary, as the same dooly may be used for carrying sus- pected cases to the observation ward. All the above articles should be kept in a room or yard near the centre of his sub-division or at the Superintendent's office. 22. On a report being received by a Superintendent, of the occurrence of a case of plague, he should at once proceed to the house, and when he has satisfied himself that the case is one of plague or of a suspicious nature, he will at once give orders for the removal of the patient, either to the Plague hospital or to the observation ward, according to the opinion he has formed of the case. The other inmates of the house, with their moveable property, should be taken to the segre- gation camp, in charge of one or more policemen or other responsible persons. 23. They will be supplied with passes by the Superintend- ent admitting them into hospital and camp. These passes after countersignature by the Medical officer or the officer at the camp will be returned through the policemen to the Superintendent. 24. After evacuation of the house, the walls and floors of all rooms, with their contents, except articles of food which it is not intended to destroy, and of all enclosures, should be thoroughly drenched with a solution of perchloride of mercury, and in the course of two or three days coated with freshly pre- pared limewash. All rags and refuse found in the house or enclosure should be burned in the presence of the Supervisor. 25. The roof, if not a pucka one, should be removed, and holes should be made in the walls to admit freely air and light to the smaller rooms and enclosures. On the completion of these operations, the door should be secured with a padlock.
?97 26. The coolies engaged in the work of disinfection, &c., should be provided with boots or shoes to protect their feet from the danger of infection through abraded surfaces. 27. It may be necessary, owing to the occurrence of several cases in the one area, to vacate a group of houses or a whole sub-division. Should any necessity exist for the adoption of such a measure, it should be carried out as soon as possible by placing a cordon of police or troops around the area and remov- ing the whole population to the segregation camp. Disinfec- tion and unroofing of the houses to be carried out in due course. 28. Experience has abundantly proved that the evacuation of an infected house or houses is seldom in itself sufficient to stamp out the disease. When plague manifests itself in one house, in an indigenous form, those in the neighbourhood have, as a rule, already become infected, and it usually follows that cases subsequently appear in them. It is, therefore, always a wise and prudent course on the occurrence of an indigenous case, not only to evacuate the one house but also all those in the immediate neighbourhood. 29. On the evacuation of the houses in the infected areas all the other inhabitants should be encouraged to leave the town and any obstacles which may tend to delay their depar- ture should, if possible, be removed. The time for prescribing the issue of passes should be carefully considered by the Collector, as, if the rules prohibiting departure without passes are applied prematurely, the exodus of the inhabitants gene- rally will be retarded, more particularly of the poorer classes, who feel diffident about applying for passes or are too apa- thetic to do so. 30. In a large town where the disease has become of general prevalence, every quarter being affected, and the arrangements for dealing with the epidemic are incomplete and defective, measures must be taken to regulate the departure of the population and prevent them carrying infection to healthy areas. Every effort should in the meantime be made to provide sufficient accommodation in huts for a large proportion of the population. 31. In the case of villages badly infected the whole of the inhabitants should be turned out. Villagers are accus- tomed to erecting shelters for themselves, but, if necessary, materials for hutting should be supplied. The sick and suspected villagers should be carefully separated from the healthy, and an officer should be appointed to examine the 13
?98 daily health of the population and prevent migration to other villages. 32. Daily inspection of villages situated in the neigh- bourhood of an infected locality should be instituted and maintained during the outbreak, and continued for ten days after the occurrence of the last case, with special reference to the exclusion of refugees who should be required to camp out. 33. A site for the hospital should be selected as near as possible to the infected population, but a permanent building, suitable in all respects for a hospital, may sometimes be obtained either inside or on the outskirts of the town. It can be easily disinfected when it is no longer required for an hospital, and such a building would be more popular and con- venient than huts erected at a distance from the town. 34. If a suitable building is not available it will be neces- sary to erect huts for plague patients, for convalescents and for the observation of doubtful cases, on the nearest site. The hospital huts intended for females should be some dis- tance apart from those intended for males. The size of each hut will depend on the number of patients expected, but it is advisable not to place a large number of patients in one hut. A series of huts, each capable of accommodating six to twelve patients, will be the best arrangement, and it is one which will admit of the higher and lower castes securing separate accommodation. Moveable mat screens should be provided between the beds to secure as much privacy as is possible to each patient. Every patient should be supplied with a cheap substitute for a spittoon, and both it and the vessels used as bed pans, should contain a sufficient quantity of an effective disinfecting solution. The floor of the hospital huts should be freely watered daily with the perchloride of mercury solution, and vessels containing the same solution should always be available for the disinfection of the hands and feet of the native attendants. 35. One relative or friend may be permitted to attend a patient, and a stated time should be set apart for the visits of relatives and friends of the patients. 36. On the arrival of the patient at the hospital, all his clothing should be removed and burnt in the presence of the medical subordinate. Hospital clothing should then be sup- plied. On recovery the patient may be transferred to the convalescent ward or dismissed. In either case he should be given a warm bath and supplied with new clothes. The
?99 hospital clothing, on the discharge or death of the patient, should be disinfected, washed and exposed to the sun for a few hours, after which it may be again taken into use. 37. The hospital and observation wards should be sur- rounded with a bamboo or other fence. 38. Huts for the segregation of individuals removed from infected houses, and of all suspected persons, should, if pos- sible, be erected at a convenient distance from the hospital compound, and should be surrounded by a bamboo or other fence. Individuals brought for admission into this camp should, for purposes of cleanliness, be bathed in a solution of carbolic acid, one to a hundred parts of water, and their clothing soaked in a solution of one to twenty; if there are no children, perchloride of mercury solution may be used for the latter purpose. 39. All the inmates should be inspected daily, either by the Medical officer or a medical subordinate, and any case of plague detected should be removed at once to hospital, and doubtful cases of fever to the observation ward. If no case occurs amongst them, after an interval of 15 to 30 days, they may be allowed to return to their houses, if such houses have been cleaned and disinfected and if the local authority considers that they are fit for re-occupation, or be admitted into the camp for healthy individuals, after a second disinfec- tion of their clothing. 40. Both the hospital compound and the segregation camp should be guarded by troops or police, to prevent the egress of inmates. 41. The establishment of separate hospitals and segre- gation camps for the reception of members of special castes and religions should be encouraged and every assistance should be given by the local authority for their erection and supervision. The treatment of the patients admitted into these hospitals may, if desired, be placed in the hands of Vaids and Hakims and the internal management of both hospitals and camps may be conducted by members of the caste or religion concerned, subject, however, to the general supervision of a European doctor where possible and control of the local authorities and to the usual arrangements as regards guards. 42. A camp for the healthy, i.e., for the people removed from houses not infected, should also be arranged for. All individuals admitted into it should also be bathed and their clothes disinfected as with admissions into the segregation
?100 camp. They should be allowed to pursue their daily employ- ments, on condition that they sleep in camp. The huts should be numbered, inmates registered and a daily inspection made of all the residents. If no case of plague has occurred in a hut for 15 to 30 days, the inmates may, after a second disinfec- tion of clothing, be allowed to return to their houses if such houses have been cleaned and disinfected and if the local authority considers that they are fit for re-occupation. 43. Should a case of plague occur in a hut, the patient should be removed to hospital, and the other inmates to the segregation camp. The hut should be removed, the site disinfected with the perchloride of mercury solution, and the materials of the hut should be similarly disinfected and exposed to the sun for a couple of days, when they can be utilized in the erection of another hut on a new site. 44. The best arrangements should be made for a plenti- ful supply of water to the different camps. If the water- supply to the town is conveyed through pipes, connections should be carried into the camps. Bathing platforms at some distance apart for the two sexes should be constructed, and provided with surface drains for the removal of surplus water. 45. Separate latrines for the sexes should be erected in connection with the two camps and hospital, and they should be well lighted with ordinary post lamps. 46. Bunniahs' shops with all supplies should be provided for each of the camps. 47. Cases of plague imported into towns and villages, if they are not at once discovered and isolated, will, under existing conditions, develop new centres of the disease and thus infect fresh localities. It is a difficult matter to detect such cases in transit from an infected area. 48. Medical inspection of travellers by rail and road is useful in discovering those actually suffering from the disease or affected with the preliminary symptoms of fever, but as the period of incubation may extend to eight or nine days, it is evident that inspection is of no avail in detecting infected travellers, who are in the stage of incubation. Such travellers cannot be discriminated from the non-infected, and it is necessary for their detection that they should be kept under observation for a period not exceeding ten days. 49. Passengers or travellers who can produce satisfactory evidence that they have not been exposed to infection, may be
?101 exempted from detention, as it frequently happens that only one or a few places may be infected in the particular district. The local authorities should give certificates to all persons wishing to travel from the non-infected areas in the district, stating that the holders (giving names, &c.) have not been exposed to infection. 50. The period of observation may, in the case of travellers of ascertained respectability, be converted into one of sur- veillance at places of destination, if they give satisfactory assurance (or furnish security) that they will report them- selves daily to an authorised Medical officer. Lists of such passengers should be forwarded either by wire or post to the local authority at place of destination, and any one failing to report may be prosecuted. The Medical officer is not at liberty to exempt the individual from attendance without the concurrence of the local authority. 51. The inspecting officer may, however, exercise his discretion as to the necessity of detaining any particular individual. 52. In addition to medical inspection at selected stations a Medical officer or subordinate should, if available, be appointed to travel by each train from or passing through an infected district for the purpose of examining passengers booking and alighting at all stations along the line. 53. The object in exercising control over the movements of travellers from an infected area is for the general welfare of the public and not to harass the individuals. It is hoped that by detaining passengers from an infected area, the healthy or non-infected will be eliminated after a few days, and allowed to proceed on their journey. If the preparatory measures as previously detailed for the suppression of the disease are carried out in an efficient manner, there is every reason to believe that restrictions on travelling will be unnecessary. 54. Any arrangement calculated to prevent the exodus of the healthy from an infected locality or area must tend to produce a more virulent form of the disease and its more rapid diffusion among the community. 55. Camps will be established, under the orders of Government, at selected stations suitable for detention of passengers and for the disinfection of clothing and baggage. 56. The above rules will also apply to travellers by road.
?102 57. For preparation of the perchloride of mercury solu- tion for disinfection, see Appendix. APPENDIX. The most convenient and satisfactory way of preparing the solution of perchloride of mercury, on a large scale, is that which has been recommended by Dr. Maynard, now on plague duty in Nasik. The ingredients should be mixed in a 50-gallon cask in the following quantities: to 77 lb. of perchloride of mercury and 381/2 lb. of pure salt add 15 gallons of boiling water, stir well with a wooden stick, and then fill up the cask with cold water. The solution contains one part of perchloride to 61/2 of water and one ordinary quart bottle of it, added to 25 gallons of water-the capacity of the ordinary wooden tubs in use- will give a strength of 1 in 1,000. The standard solution can be carried about in quart bottles placed in partitioned boxes, and is always ready for use with- out further weighing or measuring. If the solution is prepared with cold water, the perchloride of mercury must be powdered and two parts of pure salt to one part of perchloride added. The whole should be well stirred until the solids are completely dissolved. It is of advantage, for several reasons, to add one half per cent. of crude hydrochloric acid to the solution. Iron hoops of all casks, tubs and buckets should be dam- mered. If iron receptacles are used they should be dammered inside and outside. If metal pumps are employed for distributing the solution, they should, previous to use, be worked in vegetable oil, and after use thoroughly cleaned in water. This will tend to lessen the corrosive action of the mercury. (2).-GOVERNMENT ORDER No. 396-P., DATED 27TH APRIL 1898. Communicated to all Collectors, the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, Surgeon-General, Sanitary Commissioner, and Chairmen of Municipalities for information and guidance. 2. Paragraph 2 of the Resolution.-The measures referred to in this paragraph have been already prescribed in the Madras Regulations as summarized below:-
?103 (a) The early recognition of the disease. (1) Rules 5-10 of the Rules * printed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897. (2) Mufassal Regulation 17 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897, as revised by G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898. (3) Mufassal Regulations 6 and 7 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (4) Quarantine Regulation 15 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (b) The treatment of the sick in places of segregation. (1) Rules 18 and 24 of the Rules * printed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897. (2) Mufassal Regulations 3, 14 and 14-A of the Regala- tions  issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) City Regulations 11 and 12 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (4) Regulations 5, 17 and 19 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (5) Regulations 15, 21 and 22 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (6) Regulation 6 of the Regulations || issued in G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897. (c) The removal of the other inhabitants from the infected house, locality or area. (1) Mufassal Regulations 3, 6, 14, 14-A and 23 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th Decem- ber 1897.  (2) City Regulations 4, 11, 12 and 14 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) Regulations 5, 17, 19, 20, 22, 23 and 24 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (4) Regulation 22 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (5) Regulation 6 of the Regulations || issued in G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897. * Printed on pages 73 to 82.  Printed on pages 24 to 40.  Printed on pages 41 to 57.  Printed on pages 58 to 66. || Printed on pages 66 to 72.  Printed on pages 10 to 23.
?104 (d) Their segregation for a specific period. (1) Mufassal Regulations 3, 6, 14 and 23 of the Regula- tions * issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (2) City Regulations 4, 11, 12 and 14 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) Regulation 5 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (4) Regulations 15 and 19 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (5) Regulation 8 of the Regulations || issued in G.O. No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897. (e) The disinfection of their persons, clothing and personal effects. (1) Mufassal Regulations 21, 21-A and 29 of the Regula- tions * issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (2) City Regulation 7-A of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 2830 M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) Regulations 5, 19, 20, 22, 24 and 35 of the Regula- tions  issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (4) Regulation 25 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (5) Regulation 6 of the Regulations || issued in G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897. (f) The disinfection of the houses in the infected locality and their contents. (1) Rule 19 of the Rules  |printed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897. (2) Mufassal Regulations 6 and 11 of the Regulations * issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) City Regulations 4 and 5 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (4) Regulations 19 and 22 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (5) Regulation 23 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. * Printed on pages 24 to 40.  Printed on pages 10 to 23.  Printed on pages 41 to 57.  Printed on pages 58 to 66. || Printed on pages 66 to 72.  Printed on pages 73 to 82.
?105 (g) The improvement of the ventilation of houses, the abate- ment of over-crowding and the prosecution of general measures of sanitary reform. (1) Rules 8, 9, 10 and 17 of the Rules * printed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897. (2) Mufassal Regulations 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20, 24, 25, 26 and 27 of the Regulations issued  in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) City Regulations 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (4) Regulations 4 and 26 of the Regulations  issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. 3. Paragraph 3 of the Resolution.-The mortuary returns received from rural tracts are believed to be at present so imperfect that little reliance can be placed upon them for purposes of comparison, so that no object would be gained by making them weekly, supposing this could be done with the existing establishment. For detecting the existence of plague in villages special reports prepared by the local authorities from local knowledge seem preferable and should be submitted accordingly under clauses 5 and 11 of the revised Mufassal Regulation  17 issued in G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898. As regards municipal towns the case is different, and weekly returns will be useful and should be submitted hereafter. The co-operation of the residents in discovering cases of sick- ness (Bombay Rule 8) should be secured as far as possible, and the returns should be checked in the manner suggested in Bombay Rule 4 or in such other ways as Collectors may con- sider preferable with reference to local circumstances. Bombay Rules 6 and 20 correspond to the revised Madras Mufassal Regulation  17 (G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898) which provides for a complete system of observation of persons arriv- ing from plague-infected tracts; but in the event of an actual outbreak of plague the more elaborate procedure prescribed by these rules should be adopted. As regards the legal obligation referred to in Rule 9, the provisions of Mufassal Regulations  1 and 17 (G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897), City Regulation  1 (G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897), and Additional Regulation || 17 (G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898), seem sufficient. * Printed on pages 73 to 82.  Printed on pages 24 to 40.  Printed on pages 10 to 23.  Printed on pages 58 to 66. || Printed on pages 41 to 57. 14
?106 4. Paragraph 4 of the Resolution.-Original Mufassal Regu- lation 25 * and City Regulation 16  deal with the mode of disposal of plague corpses. They in no way interfere with the religious customs of any class of Her Majesty's subjects, but merely authorise the local authorities to insist on certain neces- sary precautions as to the routes to be taken by funeral proces- sions and as to the place and manner of burial. Under the first part of Regulation 16  of the Regulations issued in G.O., No. 93 P., dated 26th February 1898, the Collector may require in respect of any particular area that the certificate of a Medical officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death, but no one will be compelled to allow the inspection of the corpse of a deceased relative. In the event, however, of a certificate not being produced or inspection invited, it may be presumed that the death has been caused by plague and the rules regarding segregation may be enforced. It must be clearly understood that the examination of the corpses of women must be made by women, and that Additional Regulation 16 (G.O., No. 93 P., dated 26th February 1898) should not be put in force unless and until it is found that the people are concealing deaths from plague. 5. Paragraph 5 of the Resolution.-All Collectors will now report whether the instructions contained in rule 3  of the rules printed in G.O., No. 522 M., dated 13th March 1897, for the division of municipal towns into circles have been carried out, and how many European officers and of what classes will be required for each town should plague break out. They should see how far the recommendations regarding the employment of certificated Sanitary Inspectors (G.O., No. 4 M., dated 3rd January 1897) have been complied with in each municipality, and that a stock of disinfectants is maintained as required by rule 4  of the rules printed in G.O., No. 522 M., dated 13th March 1897. The Sanitary Commissioner will report if the quantities of disinfectants prescribed in this rule should be increased in any municipal town. 6. Paragraph 6 of the Resolution.-Collectors should take every opportunity of explaining to the people that the segrega- tion of plague-stricken patients and of those who have been in immediate contact with them is found by experience to be a measure absolutely necessary to stamp out the disease, especially in its early stages, and that Government seeks to enforce it only because other measures without it are not of much avail. In * Page 37.  Page 16.  Page 46.  Page 75.
?107 doing so, Government desires to meet every reasonable wish of the people and to interfere as little as possible with their habits, feelings and prejudices. They will be permitted, and should be encouraged and aided, to erect their own hospitals and their own segregation huts in sites shown to them or selected by them and approved by the authorities. Friends and relatives will be allowed to visit the patients, and, if desired, to reside near them. They can have their own food and they can bring their own doctors. Every arrangement will be made to respect the privacy of women. No particular mode of treatment will be forced upon any one, and women will, under no circumstances, be required to be examined by men. All that will be required of the people when plague breaks out is that they should vacate the infected houses or locality and reside temporarily at a place shown to them subject to certain sanitary restrictions until the disease has passed away. During their absence their houses and such of their property as may be left behind will be taken care of by Government. Adequate compensation will be paid on the spot in the case of poor people for articles condemned by the sanitary authorities. In exceptional cases, where a house is situated in the midst of a spacious compound and where no sanitary objections exist, the sick and the other inmates of the house will be permitted to be segregated under shelter within the compound, provided they vacate the house to be disin- fected. In the North-West Provinces' districts of Kumaun and Garwhal, where plague has existed for a long time in an endemic form, the villagers have learnt by experience that evacuation of the plague-infected locality is their best chance of escape, and it is now their common practice to vacate the village as soon as plague appears and to camp on the hill sides (page 93, Vol. I., Nathan's Plague in India). It is desirable that each class or caste of persons in towns should arrange with the district authorities for sites for hospitals and segregation camps and organize measures at once to keep everything ready for erecting them without delay when necessity arises. Collectors will make it their duty to give them every assistance. G.O., No. 333 M., dated 1st March 1897. G.O., No. 367 M., dated 4th March 1897. G.O., No. 2621 M., dated 26th Nov. 1897.* 7. Paragraph 7 of the Resolution.-The results of inocula- tion with M. Haffkine's prophylactic have been published from time to time and so far have been very encouraging. Not only is the percentage of attacks reduced, but the case mortality is materially les- sened. These facts are for the people themselves to consider. * Vide also G.O., No.  485-P., dated 16th May 1898; Notification No.  436, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 27th May 1898, Part I-A, pp. 134-136.
?108 It will be left entirely to them to decide whether they will or will not adopt the system. If they should determine to do so, the officers of Government should afford every facility in their power to those who wish to be inoculated. 8.  Paragraph 8 of the Resolution.-The matters referred to in this paragraph are sufficiently provided for in the Madras Regulations, and the Bombay rules dealing with them should be taken as subsidiary suggestions for adoption subject to modifi- cations according to local circumstances. 9.  Paragraphs   9-12   of the Resolution.-The  principles enunciated by  the Government of  India on  the subject  of quarantine are those which have actuated the framing of the Madras  Plague  Regulations.    This   Government  has  always endeavoured to substitute observation for quarantine.    Under this system all travellers except those found or suspected to be suffering from plague or considered " suspicious " are allowed to move freely, provided they report to the authorities their move- ments for a period of ten days after arrival from an infected area and present themselves daily for examination during that period. 10.  The measures explained above apply to all alike with- out distinction of class or rank.    Their sole object is to prevent the importation of plague into this Presidency and promptly to check its spread and stamp it out should it nevertheless appear. That object can only be fully attained if the people themselves, for whose benefit  the regulations have been framed, loyally accept them and support the action of the authorities.    His Excellency the Governor in Council has no doubt that in this respect he can rely on the hearty co-operation of all classes of the community.
?109 CHAPTER VII. (1)-INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF PLAGUE HOSPITALS AND PLAGUE CAMPS. GENERAL DIRECTIONS. THE principle which should guide the choice of sites, the structure, and accessory arrangements of plague camps and hospitals are those dictated by the necessity for preventing the propagation of the plague bacillus. Plenty of sunlight, plenty of air-change due to free ventilation and perflation, dryness of the soil and its freedom from contamination by any organic matter-more especially that derived from human excretions and secretions-conjoined with a pure water-supply, must therefore be important considerations when selecting a site for, and in subsequent management of, plague camps. Consequently, having regard to reasonable distances from the village affected, a site should be preferred well elevated, open to free access of wind and sun. The soil should be dry, and have a slope that will readily carry off surface water. In the interest of the patients as well as of attendants, a minimum cubic space in closed wards of 2,000 feet is desirable; free ventilation is also necessary. 2. The Government will, whenever necessary, construct either itself or through local bodies temporary segregation and health camps and plague hospitals and will also by grants of money help private persons or bodies to construct them on sites shown to them or selected by them and approved by the authorities. It is also prepared to restrict, as far as possible, the employment of subordinate officials of the Medical and Police departments and to place both public and private plague hospitals and camps in charge of native practi- tioners so far as the public can find suitable men who will undertake the responsibilities and can be trusted to carry out the prescribed rules. The hospitals and camps will, however, be under the general supervision of Government officials, but these officials will have nothing to do with the treatment of the sick except at their request, and their duties will be confined to preserving order, preventing theft and keeping guard, and attending to sanitation.
?110 3.  The  Government has sanctioned the following rates of contribution towards the cost of the construction and main- tenance of private plague hospitals and segregation camps in places which are or may be threatened with plague:- (a) For construction, half the cost will be paid by Government provided the charges are considered reasonable. In any case of doubt or dispute the Government will have the right to estimate by means of the Public Works Depart- ment the value of the work done. The buildings shall be erected on sites approved by the Sanitary authorities. (b) For maintenance, grants not exceeding half the actual expenses may be sanctioned by the Plague Commis- sioner on the following conditions:- (1)  The arrangements for the  sanitation and   supply of food must meet with the approval of the local Medical officers and the Collector or the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, as the case may be. (2)  The amounts  will be paid,  month by month, in arrears to the manager or managers approved by the Collector or the President. These grants will be met from Provincial funds. The sale-proceeds of private hospitals to which Govern- ment has made a contribution should be equally divided between Government and the Plague Committee concerned. 4.  In agricultural villages, District Boards may find  it cheaper to give poor people grants not exceeding Rs. 3 a household and let them make their own arrangements than to build sheds for them.    Such advances should be kept at as low a figure as possible, and should be granted as a rule only to those who are otherwise unable to furnish themselves with shelter. 5.  It may become necessary at any moment for Collectors or other Plague authorities to occupy buildings belonging to other departments than the Revenue Department,  for plague purposes.    In  such cases the earliest  possible intimation of such occupation should be given  to the authorities in charge of   such buildings.    Before  occupying them, any moveable articles in the building at all likely to retain infection should be first carefully removed and placed under proper guardian- ship. 6.  Patients removed to hospital may use, should they so elect, their own   food and  medicines.    They    may also  be
111 attended by such number of relations and servants as the Medical officer in charge may think reasonable. Friends and religious instructors should be allowed to visit them. All persons accompanying patients for purposes of rendering attendance shall reside within the precincts of the hospital and shall be subject to such rules as the Medical officer may, from time to time, dictate. 7.   Officers in charge of  health  and suspect camps may, at their discretion, allow the inmates to leave the camps during daytime to pursue their  daily employments, taking security, if necessary, from them or their friends  for their due return at sunset.    Persons who are allowed this freedom should be medically examined, and their persons and clothing disinfected, both before they leave the camp and  after they return. 8.  The scales of diet for European and Native patients and their attendants who have  not their own food are  given in chapter VIII.    As regards persons detained in the suspect or health camps, Europeans  and Eurasians  should be allowed, according to circumstances, the " Half," " Mixed " or " Full " diet prescribed for plague patients of their class, caste natives the   scale  prescribed  for   caste plague patients,   and  other natives the diet prescribed for attendants on plague patients. 9.  An officer who, not being on leave, is unable to perform his official duties  owing to a short period of segregation on account of plague may be treated as  on duty on full pay.    In the   case,   however,   of   officers   who   are   segregated  while returning   from leave   and  thus  overstay  their  leave,  the period of detention may be treated as duty on  half-pay, if it is  considered  that  some concession is required, but officers who are suffering from plague should be treated in accord- ance with the   ordinary rules.    Officers in charge of plague camps should give certificates of   detention to  officers who may ask for them. URGENT HOSPITAL HUTTING. 10.  In  dealing with the temporary isolation of one or two patients in fair weather, pending the erection of a more sub- stantial building, any mode that may, in the judgment of  the officer in charge,  be considered to afford sufficient protection may be employed for making huts, provided not less than a superficial area of 12 feet square is secured per patient. SEMI-PERMANENT HOSPITALS. 11.  In the case of municipalities, and of special castes or classes of persons erecting private hospitals, it is  advisable,
?112 where funds and time are available, that the floors should be impervious. This can be arranged for by the use above lime concrete of Cuddapah stone-slabs cement pointed, or Portland cement plastering. In the event of impervious floorings being made, a small refuse water cistern should be constructed, in which the washings of the wards can be received in disinfect- ants. 12. The support of the structure may usefully be made of old rails, wooden beams, or rough-hewn jungle wood, according to resources available. The sides may be formed of bamboo matting, or, so long as the weight of the roof is not allowed to be upon it, the sides may be made of screen walls formed of single lines of brick in mud or mortar between the supports, the surface of the wall being maintained well white-washed. The roofing may be formed of corrugated iron covered with thatch to secure coolness, or may be made of thatch, hill grass, paddy or cholam straw, reeds and the like convenient material. The rectangular forms of hospitals described in paragraphs 16 -19 should be followed. TEMPORARY HOSPITALS. 13. A typical plague hospital should have all its surfaces smooth and non-absorbent, with the object of preventing ready adherence of organic matter of any description and of material containing plague microbes in particular, and of facilitating their ready removal by ordinary cleansing and disinfectants. This perfection cannot be obtained in making temporary hos- pitals, but these principles should be held in mind when choosing material and directing construction. 14. The basement should be not less than 9 inches in height. The flooring should be formed of gravel, or, failing this, red earth well rammed. Care should be taken to have a store of gravel at hand, so as to replace with facility portions of the flooring fouled by the sick. Quick-lime should not be used for the flooring. 15. In the case of rural areas or where hospitals are required quickly, the sides must usually be of bamboo matting. Where this is not available, cholam stalks or reeds run together in parallel lines, or, even small boughs of trees will, if inter- laced, suffice. The roofing should be formed of the material in common use for huts of a superior class in the district concerned, and should be at a pitch of 45 degrees so as to throw off rain. 16. A single building should not be made for accommodat- ing more than 20 patients; preferably, 10 patients should be
?113 the standard. Whether or not the patients should be accommo- dated in double rows will depend upon the nature of the material obtainable locally. As the amount of superficial or floor space per patient must not be less than 12  12 feet, the breadth of such a ward would be 24 feet, and for ten patients the length would be 120 feet. This would necessitate the use of beams, giving a span of 24 feet. 17. In many temporary rural plague hospitals, therefore, it may be found necessary to accommodate single rows of patients; allowing them sufficient room for convenient nursing, the breadth of the single rectangular ward should be not less than 16 feet, and the length-12 feet multiplied by the number of patients for whom the shed is intended. 18. The eaves should be 9 feet high. The side walls should extend up to 61/2 feet; above this height, the whole length of the shed should be open. The opening of 21/2 feet all round should, however, be protected by a thatched verandah extend- ing to 5 feet from the ward walls, supported on poles 7 feet in height, and with the thatch projecting beyond the 5 feet to the extent of 21/2 feet; at regular intervals between each bed flap windows in each side wall of the shed 3  3 feet should be formed, so as to be exactly opposite each other. 19. Where it is difficult to obtain hutting material, and economy must be studied, the verandahs may be dispensed with. In this case, the opening between the eaves and the wall should be protected by flaps formed of matting throughout the length. These flaps should be supported on bamboo, so that, in the presence of rain, the interior shall be protected. The flap windows should also be omitted. 20. Circular buildings may also be employed. These are economical, convenient for effective administration, and offer less obstruction to perflation of camps than the rectangular form. The only difficulty in making this form is that the ser- vices of a blacksmith are required for the making of one part of the structure, viz., the bracket, on which rests the roofing. Thus, in making a circular shed of 25 feet diameter which will give 2,000 cubic feet per head for three persons, a palmyra or cocoanut palm tree is selected of 24 feet height. Of the tree, 4 feet may be sunk in the ground surrounded with concrete, or firmly packed with stone. Near the top of the centre pole is placed a circular iron bracket, which is secured by iron bands. On this, bamboos intended for the roofing are placed, each one having a projecting piece fastened to it at right angles. The bamboo or jungle wood posts used for the side walls supporting 15
114 the external ends of the roofing should be 8 feet from the ground to the eaves. The walls should be formed of matting; 2 feet from the eaves, a space should be left in the side walls open throughout. Thatched roofing should be used in the ordinary manner. This should project 2 feet beyond the eaves, so as to protect the open space. The entrance door should have a special pent porch roof at right angles to the main roofing. Opposite the main door and at the two sides, the side matting may be made so as to form doors capable of being supported on bamboo props in fine weather, and closed during rain. The opening over the circular bracket should be guarded by a pent roof structure, having a space pro- tected by its projection from entrance of rain. This forms an admirable ventilator. An intelligent village artizan ought also to be able to make two ventilators in the roof itself, which can be protected by bamboo matting flaps from entrance of rain. These can be made moveable by attaching strings, but the formation of these extra ventilators should not be attempted unless the requisite skill is available. 21. The internal surface of mat walls may be, and, after occupation by plague cases, should be, whitewashed. Daubing with earth or cow-dung should be prohibited. 22. In the case of wards intended for Europeans, there should be approached by a small thatched covered verandah, a room having an impervious space of not less than 6'  10', that may serve as a bath-room. A cistern should be attached to catch waste water. For natives, there should be formed bathing platforms for each sex. Where time will allow, the flooring and the cisterns to which waste water from them is led should be rendered impervious. Where time does not allow of these arrangements, the water should be led into a small excavation, which should be carefully disinfected at intervals. These bathing spaces should be protected so as to provide for decency. 23. A latrine should be provided for each sex. If time allows, the surfaces and receptacles should be of impervious material. 24. Huts at the rate of one for each patient for whom accommodation is provided should be supplied for the relations of the sick, who may choose to reside in the hospital camp, with the object of looking after the patients. A floor space of 10'  10' will usually suffice; a verandah of 5 feet should be attached. The front should have a blank space for ventilation of 9 inches
115 breadth at the eaves. The verandah should project downwards sufficiently to allow of protection of the open space 25. For every ten patients there should be erected huts for the accommodation of four superior and four inferior menial servants. These may be of the same character as for "rela- tions," but without the verandahs. 26. If nurses are attached, quarters must be provided for them with a floor area of 12'  12' for each, with bath-room and cook-room attached. For each hospital assistant, accom- modation of the same nature must be provided. 27. A cook-room, 12'  6', should be formed for the sick for the preparation of patients' food. This, as well as those for the hospital assistants and nurses, should be formed of corrugated iron so as to prevent the danger of their catching fire. A dead- house, measuring 20'  10', should be prepared, the side walls being formed of corrugated iron, if available, or the lower parts may be of wire-netting. In both cases, if corrugated iron cannot be procured, stone slabs or any other device may be used that will diminish in the one case the risk of fire and in the other, of animals entering. 28. Sheds for females should be separated by reasonable intervals from those occupied by males. 29. The general disposition of the hospital and of the buildings attached to it should follow the plan circulated with G.O., No. 256-P., dated 23rd March 1898. EQUIPMENT OF HOSPITALS. 30. If "urgent hutting" or other method of isolation is used pending the arrival of the Ambulance Staff,* the officer in charge should see that tarred mullays containing disinfectants for spittoons are used by the patient, and that solid and fluid excreta are suitably received, that soiled rags are burnt, and that special arrangements are made for the bringing of water to the patient, without the employment of any person likely to have been in contact with plague matter. On the arrival of the Ambulance Staff, all requisites for hospital equipment as per list on pages 128-133, except bazaar products, will be brought by it. THE SUSPECT CAMP. 31. The object of this camp is to afford shelter to persons who, it is suspected, may be undergoing incubation of plague * Vide Regulations 9 and 21 of the Regulations printed on pages 41 to 56.
116 and whom it is determined to keep under observation so as to secure their isolation at the earliest moment in the event of an attack. This being so, it is evident that the camp should be arranged so that the shed occupied by a person eventually attacked may be destroyed or disinfected with the least practi- cable disturbance of sheds inhabited by the unaffected, and with the least expenditure. It follows that it is better to make each shed as small as compatible with the comfort of a single family, which may be taken as the unit. The average family consists of five souls. Where this is exceeded and, in consequence, overcrowding occurs, all male adults over 12 years of age should be provided with sleeping accommodation in huts separate from the family. 32.  Each hut should afford an area of 12 feet in length by 10 feet in breadth.    The roofing may be formed of any shape or material that can be conveniently obtained; but a plan having been adopted, it should be adhered to throughout the camp. Each hut should be 20 feet distant from its neighbour in the same line.    Each line of huts should be 40 feet distant from its neighbour.    Each line should  consist of four huts; four such lines would form a block.    Each block should be 60 feet distant from the neighbouring block.    Blocks may be arranged in lines not exceeding two deep to   any length desirable.    If  it be desired to make a second series of such blocks opposite to one already formed, an interval of 100 feet should be allowed.    The second   series   of  blocks   should  have   huts   en  echelon   with reference to those opposite to it.    Where economy of space is desirable, the intervals may be reduced to one-half the measure- ments here suggested. 33.  In places where, in consequence of want of funds or space, it is found impracticable to construct, in accordance with Rule 32, separate detached huts, they may be replaced by large sheds, each containing twenty rooms in rows of ten arranged back to back.    The rooms may be separated by partitions of matting, 7 feet high, so that the space under the roof slope will be common to all the rooms.    No windows are necessary and it will be enough to provide each room with a single door, 2 feet 6 inches in width. 34.  Blocks should be distinguished by initial letters.    These should be exhibited on boards placed in front of each.    Each hut should have its number and block distinctly painted on a board, in white letters on black ground.    The boards for huts should be large enough to allow the number of inhabitants to be shown in chalk letters.
117 35. No camp should contain more than 1,000 inhabitants. When more have to be accommodated, a distance of at least a quarter of a mile should be allowed between the camps. In this event, completely separate executive staffs should be pro- vided for the respective camps. 36. The whole camp should be effectually fenced. Huts for the police guard should be placed in such position that the whole camp is under view. 37. Huts should be provided for the menial servants. 38. Attached to the "suspect" camp should be an observa- tion ward. This should be built for accommodation of patients at the rate of 1 per cent. of suspects. The design should be in all respects as stated in paragraph 13 et seq. In this ward should be placed persons who having fever or other complaints simulating plague must await the decision of the medical officer before transport to the plague hospital. HEALTHY CAMP. 39. The object of this camp is to provide shelter for the healthy and those not suspected of being subject to incubation. The structure as stated for the suspect camp would in all respects suit, except that no fencing need be employed. It would, however, rest with the officer responsible to use large huts for accommodation of several persons at a time, if it be found impossible to meet the demand for small huts on the family principle, on account of want of labour. In this case, sheds should be classed for males and females, respectively. Association in this manner is not likely to be otherwise than distasteful except to the poorest classes, and should not be followed unless excessive expenditure or absence of the neces- sary labour at command requires it. Sheds on this system, preferably of the circular form described in paragraph 20, should be made. These sheds might be arranged in triangular form, so that the base of the camp is exposed to the prevailing winds. 40. Persons should be encouraged in the healthy camp to erect their own huts, but care should be taken that old material from unknown sources is not used in their erection. When persons build their own huts, the site must be carefully measured, and any attempt to exceed defined limits should be prohibited.
118 WATER-SUPPLY fOR HOSPITALS AND CAMPS. 41. The water-supply should be secured from a source reliable as to its purity. When open water-sources are used, care must be taken to prevent contamination by plague-infective matter borne on chatties, ropes or hands. The only way to secure this is to see that no person connected with the handling of plague patients or the disinfection of material, is allowed to have anything to do with the drawing of water or its distribu- tion. In other words, specially-selected persons should be employed. If a stream or tank, the use of impervious platforms or special lifting apparatus designed so as to prevent contami- nation should be arranged for. Wells should be effectually covered in. Where pumps can be obtained and are suitable in respect to extent of lift required, these should be employed. If pumps are not employed, at least the water-source should have a special guard, and the water should be lifted by use of a metal bucket and light chain reserved for this purpose. The water thus lifted by any of these means should be stored in covered barrels provided with taps, or, still better, in iron cube tanks provided with taps. On no account should the promis- cuous plunging of vessels into water-supplies by persons in camps and hospitals be permitted. At the same time, every facility for the observance of caste sentiments should be afforded by the employment of caste natives, wherever handling of vessels, &c., is unavoidable. In towns having public water-supplies, the extension to hospitals and camps of the supply by means of a temporary line of pipes is advisable. 42. Where open wells are unavoidably employed, disinfec- tion by means of permanganate of potash at intervals of three days is desirable. In the case of tanks of such size that expense of using permanganate of potash must be regarded as undoubt- edly excessive, the alum process should be employed either to the bulk if comparatively small, or to the breadth of 25 feet from the edge, if unmanageably large. LATRINES IN CAMPS AND HOSPITALS. 43. In camps, one latrine should be provided for every block. If time permits, the surface should be made impervious. If this is not feasible and earthen flooring is unavoidable, it should be burnt over daily, and the earth should be renewed at intervals. In hospitals and suspect camps, all excreta should be received in impervious vessels, in which disinfectants are ready placed.
?119 DISPOSAL OF CORPSES. 44. The clothes surrounding the corpse of a person dead of plague should be saturated with coloured perchloride of mercury solution-the necessity for so doing having been carefully explained to the relatives. Cremation is the preferable method of disposal, but great care should be taken before burning a corpse to ascertain whether there are caste or race objections to this being performed. If there be reasonable objection, the corpse should be buried not less than six feet deep. It is advisable to select a place for cremation in reasonable proximity to the plague hospital, so as to prevent corpses being carried through inhabited parts. If plague corpses are to be buried, the burial-ground should be specially selected by a Medical officer after careful examination. GENERAL SANITARY PRECAUTIONS. 45. When disinfection of a person is to be effected, all clothing should be removed in a shed protected from public view. If women are treated, a female attendant only should be present. Any useless rags should be burnt. The clothing should be removed, and be plunged into a wooden tub contain- ing a solution (1-1,000) of perchloride of mercury, and be allowed to soak for 30 minutes. It should then be removed, washed in the ordinary manner, and dried in the sun with free exposure to the air. Suitable clothing for temporary use should be provided. When the disinfected clothing is ready for use, the whole body should be carefully cleansed with soapnut; but preferably, soft soap should be employed. If the latter be used, it should be explained to the person that soft soap is made from vegetable oils, but its use should not be insisted on. Except as to method of disinfection of clothing, as to which special rules have been issued, the same procedure should be pursued at stations where disinfection by steam is practised. It would suffice to use the disinfecting bath in the following cases only:- (1) where the dirty condition of the skin of the traveller is, on inspection, found to be of a decidedly pronounced type; (2) before discharge from hospital after treatment for plague; (3) where persons are known to have been in intimate contact with plague cases.
?120 46. The treatment of a person before admission to the healthy camp shall be as laid down in paragraph 45. But, in the case of the suspect, the persons may be required to throw over the body, after careful cleansing, a solution of phenyle in the proportion 1-100. A bath of plain water may be used subsequently. 47. Bathing of patients admitted to hospital should be conducted only under orders of the Medical officer responsible. The method of disposal and disinfection of clothing just de- scribed will, however, be applicable. CAMP STAFFS. 48. Subordinate Superintendents of camps should be ap- pointed as held requisite by the officer responsible. No sub- ordinate charge should be for a larger population than 1,000. CONSERVANCY STAFF. 49. One toti of each sex and one sweeper should be appointed for every 300 inmates of the suspect and health camps. For every 12 servants of the menial conservancy staff, one peon should be employed. CONSERVANCY ARRANGEMENTS. 50. At each camp and hospital, an incinerator should be made. Any native mason who has seen a country "chunam kiln," will be able to make an incinerator of mud and brick or stone, sufficiently well for the purpose. They should be circular structures 4 feet in internal diameter at the bottom and 3 feet at the top.* Openings should be left at the bottom for vents. In these, all rubbish, rags, and other destructible matter collected from the camp site should be burnt daily. If the plague hospital is attached to a large town, it is well to obtain a field "Silchar incinerator." If such an incinerator is possessed, all excreta from the suspect camp and hospital should be burnt in it. 51. All excreta from the hospital and suspect camp having been received on disinfectants should be buried in pits not less than 5 feet deep in a locality well removed from habitations and water-supplies. Excreta from the healthy camp should be * In rainy weather these can be provided with corrugated iron covers with protected smoke vents.  Vide G.O., No. 487-P., dated 17th May 1898; and G.O., No. 636-P., dated 2nd July 1898.
?121 treated in trenches of the ordinary breadth and depth, that is, not exceeding 18 inches, but quick lime should be added freely to the trench contents. 52. Care should be taken to see that no slops are thrown on the ground in any camp. In the suspect camp and plague hospital, all waste water other than that from the kitchen should be received in open tarred dhobie tubs, in which disin- fectants are already placed. Their contents should be removed at regular intervals to trenches at a suitable distance from the camp. In the case of the healthy camp, the inhabitants should be required to transport all slops to trenches specially prepared for the purpose. BAZAARS. 53. Arrangements should be made in the proximity of each camp for the maintenance of bazaars. Only dealers having the written authority of the officer in charge of the camp should be permitted to ply their trade. It should be seen that these persons are not inhabitants of affected villages. If the number of persons segregated is not so large as to demand the opening of a special bazaar, the officer in charge should make such arrangements compatible with sanitary requirements as will prevent inconvenience to the inmates. PRECAUTIONS IN HOSPITALS. 54. Bottles of lysol or phenyle, and solution of perchloride of mercury should always be placed beside conveniently arranged basins for the washing of the hands of Medical offi- cers, nurses and attendants, respectively. It is better not to dry the hands with towels after disinfection. 55. All excretions and secretions and rags soiled with them should be received into vessels already containing disinfectants. Promiscuous spitting in the wards should be specially prohibited -all sputa should be carefully received into small tarred mullays or earthen receptacles having disinfectants in them. Soiled mats should be burnt; soiled clothing should be steeped in perchloride solution directly it is removed from hospital. Soiled patches of flooring should be disinfected with perchloride solution, and be replaced by fresh material. 56. Clothes used during duty in wards and disinfection should be exposed to sun action as soon as the person has fulfilled duty. Before washing, they should be soaked in 16
?122 perchloride of mercury solution. Menial servants in wards and disinfectors should be provided with shoes during work. (G.Os., Nos. 629-P., dated 30th June 1898; 964-P., dated 31st August 1898; 1023-P., dated 7th September 1898; 1196-P., dated 28th September 1898; 1245-P., dated 5th October 1898; 757-P., dated 20th May 1899; 935-P., dated 17th June 1899; 991-P., dated 26th June 1899; 1443-P, dated 30th September 1899; and P.C., Nos. 102, dated 8th October 1898; 110, dated 8th October 1898; 354, dated 22nd October 1898; 534, dated 5th November 1898; 1019, dated 27th December 1898; 296, dated 31st January 1899; 321, dated 3rd February 1899; 981, dated 14th April 1899.) (2)-PLAGUE COMMISSIONER'S HINTS REGARDING THE PRO- VISION OF PRIVATE PLAGUE HOSPITAL ACCOMMODA- TION IN THE CITY OF MADRAS.* 1. Three means of providing private plague hospital accommodation exist- (a) Temporary sheds can be erected to suit the purpose on ground sites to be approved of by the Special Medical officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras. (b) Houses may be taken up, such houses having been approved of for the purpose by the Special Medical officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras. (c) A site can be selected and materials for hospital sheds collected ready for use at a moment's notice. 2. To save initial expense and at the same time to provide suitable accommodation, the Plague Commissioner would suggest that, wherever possible, arrangements may be made by a sub-committee to select suitable houses, either unoccu- pied, or houses which can be vacated for occupation in a few hours. The Plague Commissioner should be furnished with the addresses of such houses. He will then arrange to have them examined and reported upon by the Special Medical Officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras. It is, however, pointed out that buildings will almost always require some alteration to fit them as hospitals. It would probably save much expense and much reduplication of staff if committees would unite to form one large private caste hospital for the north and one for the south, carefully equipped. A central committee * Note.-These may also be adopted in the mufassal as far as practicable. For plar, lists of equipment, specification, estimate forms, &c., see Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 220-A., dated 18th October 1898.
?123 elected by divisional committees and containing one member from each such committee might be formed to carry out two large central caste hospitals. Afterwards, if the plague at- tacked divisions one after another in force, separate divisional hospitals would no doubt be necessary. 3. The chief points about such houses are these- (a) The house should have a compound. This need not be large, but it should be sufficient to prevent any chance of contact with the neighbouring houses. As a minimum stand- ard, no buildings included in the hospital premises should be nearer neighbouring dwellings than 40 feet. In judging of the required size of a compound, it should be remembered that if suitable permanent buildings be not available, space must be at disposal for temporary buildings so as to bring up the total accommodation to the standard shown in the accompanying plans.* (b) There should be a supply of Red Hills pipe water either laid on at the house or within 50 yards of it. (c) The room in the house should be well ventilated and of considerable height. (d) If possible, there should either be godowns in the compound or room available for the erection of sheds in the compound for families and attendants of patients. (e) Each patient should be allowed 144 square feet and 2,000 cubic feet. If ventilation is not suitable, structural alterations will be required to secure it. 4. If, instead of obtaining the use of houses, which, in most cases, will probably be very difficult, temporary shed hospitals are preferred, arrangements should be made, as soon as possible, to fix the sites of such hospitals and to report on the matter to the Plague Commissioner, who will obtain the opinion of the Medical officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras on the sites. 5. In choosing a site, the following points should be noticed:- (a) The site should be as near as possible to the locality inhabited by the people for whom it is intended. (b) The site should, if possible, be on gravelly dry soil and as free from vegetation as possible. * Not reprinted.
?124 (c) The site should be close to a supply of Red Hills water. 6.  In   order   to   avoid   expense,  it  is   suggested   that materials to make the hospital (which should now be built, if possible, on the lines of the plan circulated with G.O., No. 256-P., dated 23rd March 1898) should be collected at once and held ready-stored near the approved sites of the proposed hospitals ready for immediate use when necessary. 7.  The    Plague    Commissioner     understands    that,   if possible, the Municipal Commission would be willing to erect hospitals when  asked to do  so on the approved sites,  the money being advanced to it by the committees appointed for the purpose.    This, no doubt, would meet a great difficulty. 8.  The Plague Commissioner, on behalf of Government, will be ready to advance half the cost of any bon fide plague hospital erected with his sanction on an approved site; also he will advance half the cost of such structural alterations as are referred to in paragraph 3 (e). 9.  In the   matter  of expenditure   on  account of   staff, it would not be found advantageous to open hospitals  with so limited accommodation as five beds.    The nursing attend- ance that must be rendered to patients in the grave condition usual in plague, is of a peculiarly harassing nature; therefore, unless circumstances such as the limited number of the caste, the   nature of the site available, or the funds   at   disposal, forbid, it is advisable that accommodation for not less than ten beds in  one  locality  be   provided; because   to   secure effective nursing,  and reasonable hours of rest, in practice, the staff for nursing five patients should be as complete as for nursing ten.    However, following the principle of securing that which is essential before the appearance of plague, and trusting to expanding   the  scope   subsequently,   it may be held that the following staff  should be kept in readiness for a hospital for five (say, three males and two females) and not exceeding ten patients:- 1 qualified nurse. 1 waterman. 2 male ward attendants. 1 dhoby. 1 female ward attendant. 1 hospital assistant. 1 male toty. Police guard to be estimated 1 female toty for   by  the   Police  officer 1 cook. responsible in each locality.   10. When permanent buildings are selected, care as to the following points is desirable, in addition to such matters as are applicable to temporary structures already described:-
?125 Ventilation, preferably by perflation by means of doors and windows, should be carefully provided wherever feasible. Similarly, the free admission of light should be systematically arranged for. As a minimum, the windows of the wards should measure one square foot for every 50 cubic feet. Rooms that do not permit of entrance of air and light direct from the outside should not be used for wards. If it can be so arranged, a window should be placed so as to separate each bed from its neighbour. In reckoning the cubic capacity of the rooms under paragraph 3 (e), no height above 13 feet should be regarded as contributing to the total available. Each ward should have stated at the doorway, on a painted board, the cubic capacity of the room, its superficial area, and the number of patients for whom it is intended, having regard to the standard laid down in paragraph 3 (e). Irregular brick tile floors, such as commonly found in dwellings, cannot be considered suitable for plague wards. These should be plastered with cement. It should be seen that a suitable exit for the washing of the floors is made, and that these are received in special impervious reservoirs for subsequent disposal. Walls out of repair should be put in order and rendered reasonably smooth, and be subsequently white- washed. Every care should be taken to see that no dark corners or recesses exist in the house. All such places should be opened up, so as to admit light and air freely. Bath-rooms and kitchens in existing houses are generally defective in these respects, and should be freely opened up. It should not be hastily assumed that the existing bath-rooms or latrines will suffice; the condition of their floors (which should be cement-plastered) and the nature of the exit for water, and its ultimate disposal should be carefully ascer- tained in each case. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 11. Committees for caste hospitals will be primarily responsible, and will issue their own orders, for all matters connected with observances of caste, gosha, or race require- ments, and for appointing persons responsible to them for the feeding, nursing and medical treatment of patients after such methods as they may approve. They are advised to make their arrangements conform with the wishes of the uneducated masses-not of the educated minority only. It is presumed that treatment by vydians and hakims will prove most popular, and should ordinarily be provided for. Where, in exceptional cases, European treatment is specially desired
?126 no difficulty need be experienced in securing it by application to private practitioners. For instance, if it be felt that the majority of subscribers would prefer treatment by indigenous methods (rendering it unnecessary to store European medi- cines and appliances), it might be possible to secure that private practitioner practising European methods attend, and that a chemist supply medicines on contract rates; or, in the case of a patient well off, he might be allowed to select his own medical man practising European methods. 12. The Special Medical officer appointed by Govern- ment for the city, is responsible that the caste hospitals are conducted with such care as to sanitary details as shall prevent the possibility of danger of spread from infected patients and material. Unless so required in writing by the committee responsible for the caste hospital concerned, he shall not interfere-unless with reference to sanitary pre- cautions-in any matter concerning the medical treatment, food or attendance of the patient. 13. If, at any time, in the opinion of the Special officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras, reasonable sanitary precautions have not been taken in a caste hospital, he may give such orders, and may incur such expenditure recoverable from the com- mittee responsible, as he may think absolutely necessary; provided he furnish a certificate that he considered the amount expended essential for protection of the public interests. If the committee so elect, before discharging the bill, they may obtain the opinion of the Surgeon-General as to the necessity for the action taken. 14. All caste hospitals should be open to the inspection of the Surgeon-General, the Sanitary Commissioner, the Special officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras, the Municipality, or the Plague Commissioner, who should give such advice on  sanitary matters to the committee responsible as they may consider the nature of the circumstances demands. 15. Relatives of patients should be encouraged to assist in nursing persons for whom they are responsible. For this purpose, special dwellings should be provided within the hospital compound. The number of relatives that may thus be accommodated should ordinarily not exceed two per patient; discretion on this point will rest with the officer in immediate charge, subject to revision by the Special officer appointed
?127 by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras. 16. Patients and relatives must regard themselves as subject to the following general rules for segregation:- (a) Patients will not be allowed to leave the hospital precincts without receiving a certificate of discharge signed or countersigned, as he may desire (having regard to the status of the Medical officer in immediate charge), by the Special officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras. (b) Relatives of patients who have undertaken nursing shall not finally leave the hospital without the permission of the Special officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras in writing, and until arrangements have been made by him to maintain them under observation either in their own houses, or in segrega- tion camps. Temporary leave of absence may be given at any time if the Special officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras is of opinion that the persons are of a class that may be trusted to keep their promise to return, provided disinfection of the body and of the clothing be previously conducted to the satisfaction of the Medical officer. (c) Superior nursing and medical staffs will not be sub- jected to segregation, provided such measures be taken for disinfection of their bodies and clothing as may satisfy the Special Medical officer appointed by Government to be in charge of Plague Hospitals in the City of Madras. (d) Visitors to patients who have not handled the patient will be permitted to leave the hospital after disinfection with perchloride solution of their feet if bare, or of their boots if these be used. Menial servants may be allowed temporary leave of absence under the same rule as affects relatives of patients. (e) Medical, nursing and menial staffs shall wear shoes and "putties," or other efficient protection, for their feet during hours of duty. GENERAL SANITARY PRECAUTIONS. 17 (a) In each ward, solutions of lysol and of perchloride of mercury coloured with aniline blue should be kept in suitable bowls or basins for disinfection of the hands of the attendants.
?128 (b) Each patient should be provided with a suitable impervious spittoon, such as tarred " mullays," containing coloured solutions of perchloride of mercury. (c)  Immediately outside of each ward should be kept a tub   containing  a  coloured   solution of   the perchloride of mercury   (1-1,000).    Into this, all bedding and clothing, which it is not desired to destroy by fire, should be placed previous to sending them for final disinfection and washing. (d)   Clothing and bedding,  which it is intended the hospital dhoby should wash,  should,  on removal from the tubs,  be again plunged   into clean perchloride of  mercury solution (1-1,000) for an hour.    They should then be boiled for an hour previous to final washing.    All rags and sweepings should be carefully burnt.    Collection and subsequent burn- ing   of   the   latter  may   be  facilitated  by using   carbolized sawdust. (e)  Fcal matter both in the latrines and in bedpans should be  received on disinfectants, and should be deposited in a special closed receptacle.    Kerosine   iron  drums with close-fitting lids will be found sufficiently convenient. (f) In hospitals of and above twenty beds, Field Silchar incinerators will offer convenient facilities for destruction of all infected matter, including fces. Where destruction of fcal matter cannot be thus effected, committees should arrange for a special form of conservancy cart, which could receive the air-tight drums above mentioned containing fces from one or more hospitals. The contents of each could be disposed of at points specially indicated by the municipality. (3)-EQUIPMENT OF A TEN-BED HOSPITAL. The following equipment should be maintained for a ten-bed hospital. If articles not mentioned in the list are required, the reason should be explained and the sanction of the Plague Commissioner or Government applied for through the Surgeon- General. It should be possible to transport all articles with the Ambulance Staff when proceeding to an infected locality:-- SANITARY EQUIPMENT.  Soapnut .. .. .. .. .. ..  lb.     10 Soft soap .. .. .. ..   ,,    10 Perchloride of mercury .. ..  ,,     100
?129 SANITARY EQUIPMENT - cont.  * Commercial sulphuric acid  lb.    30 *  Do.       hydrochloric acid         30   Phenyle                 60 * Permanganate of potash                 3 * Chinese pumps    No.     5 * Slippers (native), pairs          50 Tins, kerosine-oil, 125           6 Half-casks (wooden tabs)          8 Galvanized iron buckets           6 * Paint brushes            ,, 4 * Black paint (ready made)   lb.    10 * Red paint     ,, 5 * Whitewashing brushes, country  No.    50 * Mops                   20 MEDICAL STORES.  Chentsu cots        . .         . .         . .         . . No.     15 Date mats          . .         . .        . .        . .        30 Cumblies           15 Pillow cases        . .         . .         . .         . .      15 Carpets            30 Native clothing, men          15 Native clothing, women          15 Slippers for ward coolies   Pairs.    2 Copper deckchas, large size, for boiling  Clothing     No.     2 Frying pan            1 Iron enamel cooking-pots          6 Zinc buckets            3 Firewood axe       1 Kitchen knife            1 Iron kettles     ...            2 Hanging meatsafe           1 Hanging lamps          2 Hurricane lanterns     4 Portable tables            2 Portable chairs            2 Time-piece            1 Folding screens      1 Bed-head ticket frames          12 Temperature charts          50 Zinc dressiug trays    Set. -  1 Large jars (old arrack) for disinfectants.  No.     2 Hand-basins for disinfectants      2 Washstand with basin complete          1 Lotion bowls      4 * Articles marked with an asterisk are intended for ambulance staffs; for stationary hospitals, the amounts should be reduced or the articles be omitted at the discretion of the indenting officer. 17
?130 MEDICAL STORES-cont.  Bed-pans            ..        ..     ..        ..   No.     7 Ice box      ..              ,, 1 Pewter or enamel urinals    ,,      6 Earthen pots and mullays as required.  FOR NURSES.  Camp portable dining table    No.      1 Camp portable side table             ..         ..  ,,  1 Chairs            ..         ..    ,,  2 Easy chairs      ,,       2 Hanging meatsafe     ,,       1 Box with lock and key for stores    ,,       1 Table lamp      ,,       1 Dinner table cloth     ,,       2 Table napkins      ,,       6 Vegetable dishes     ,,       2 Pudding dish      ,,       1 Soup plates      ,,       2 Meat plates      ,,       4 Tumblers                 ,,      4 Spoons     . .         . .         . .         . .   ,,       4 Knives         ,,       2 Forks              ,,       4 Kettle             ,,       1 Frying pan      ,,       1 Deckchas or saucepans     ,,       2 Kitchen knife      ,,  1 Tea-pot       ,,       1 Coffee-pot      ,,       1 Cups and saucers     ,,       2 Sugar-basin      ,,       1 Butter-pot      ,,   1 Portable  cots   with  beds,   pillows  and  Curtains      ,,       2 Sheets       ,,       4 Counterpanes      . .         . .            2 Blankets      ,,       2 Portable waahstands with enamel bowls.          2 Zinc baths      ,,       2  Commodes              2 Chamber-pots              2 Candle-stick      ,,  1 Hurricane lamps     ,,  2 FOR MEDICAL SUBORDINATE.  Cots (bed and pillow)    . .    No.      2 Washstand (complete with enamel basin,  &c.)             ,,  2 Towel rack      ,,       1
?181 FOB MEDICAL SUBORDINATE-cont.  Table No. 1 Chair  1 DISPENSARY FURNITURE.  Portable shelf for drugs and appliances. No. 1 Box with lock and key for poisons  1 Dispensary table  1 Writing table  1 Chair  1 Wash stand (complete with enamel basin, &c.)  1 Towel rack  1 Towels  3 Tin kettle  1 Books and stationery as required by District Sanitary Officer.  MEDICAL AND SURGICAL APPLIANCES.  (a) Appliances.  Small pocket dressing-case No. 1 Gum elastic catheters  2 Hypodermic syringe  1 Enema syringes  2 Two-ounce syringes  2 Sponges  3 Ice bladders  12 Ice bags  2 Waterproof sheets  2 Pestle and mortar  1 Glass rod  1 Roll of sticking plaster  1 Bandage cloth Yds. 6 Flannel  2 Carbolic soap Cakes 12 Lint lb. 2 Cotton wool  2 Tow  10 Linseed  10 Spirit lamp No. 1 Test tubes  6 Urinometer   1 Nitric acid oz. 1 Liquor potass  2 Fehling's solution  2 Drainage tubing Yds. 2 Scales and weights, with spare set of grain weights Set 1
?132 MEDICAL AND SURGICAL APPLIANCES-cont.  (a) Appliances-cont.  Dispensing bottles No. 30 Corks Gross  Draught glasses No. 20 Large pewter measure  1 One-ounce and one-minim glass measure  1 Slab  1 Spatulas  2 Large mixture bottles  6 Clinical thermometers  4 Jars for disinfectants  6 (b) Drugs.  Acid Boracic lb. 1  Carbolic  3  Gallic oz. 4  Hydrocyanic  1  Sulphuric  12 Ammonia Bromide  6 Ammonia Carbonas  2 Aqua Distillata lb. 2 Argenti Nitras dr. 1 Bismuth Subnitras oz. 4 Cafeine Citras   Camphor  2 Cocaine Hydrochloras dr.  Extractum Belladonna oz.   Ergot Liquid  2 Tincture Ferri Perchloridum  2 Glycerine lb.  Gum Acacia   Hydrargyri Perchloridum    Subchloridum   Iodoform oz. 2 Liniment Camphor lb.   Iodi oz. 4 Liquor Arsenicalis  2  Ammonia lb. 1  Epispaticus oz.  Oleum Anethi    Menth. Pip.  1 Potassi Citras  2  Iodid  2 Pulvis Ipecac.  1 Tincture Digitalis  2 Pulvis Ipecac. Co.  1  Jalap Co.  2 Santonine   Soda Bicarbonas  1
?133 MEDICAL AND SURGICAL APPLIANCES-cont.  (b) Drugs-cont.  Tincture Aconite oz.   Cardamom Co.  2  Cinchona Co.  2 Hammamalis  2 Tincture Hyosciami  2  Iodi  4  Opii  4 Unguentum Hydrargyri lb.   Simplex  1 Vaseline   Spirits of Wine, methylated "  Zinc Oxide "  Soda Salicylas   Tincture Nucis Vomic oz. 4 Liquor Strychnia  4 Liquor Hydrargyri Perchloride lb. 1 Spirits Ammonia Aromatici " 1 Magnesia Sulphatis  4 Spirits ther Nitrosi " 1 Quinine Sulphatus oz. 2 Acid Nitric Hydrochlor, dil. lb. 1 Ammonia Chloride oz. 6 Potassi Bicarbonas lb. 1 Spirits Chloroform oz. 8 Cerri Oxalat " 2 Liniment Terebinthin lb. 2 Phenacetin oz. 1 Lysol lb. 5 (G.O., 629-P., dated 30th June 1898 ; P.C., 241, dated 26th January 1899.) (4)-EQUIPMENT OF CAMPS ATTACHED TO RAILWAY INSPECTION STATIONS. Collectors are authorised to provide the following equip- ment without further sanction. Articles marked with an asterisk can be obtained from the Medical Store Dept, Madras. Other articles should be obtained locally, or from the jails or from Madras :-
134 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100 " Suspects," and for ten hospital beds, attached to a Railway Inspection Station.  Minimum scale.  Additional stores to be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded. Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in Suspect Camp. Hospital of ten beds. For one nurse. For one medical subordinate. For office and dispensary.            Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.       At two per cent. of total accommodation for each sex. One male and one female. Four males and for females. One male and one female.                                  Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans. SECTION I.            Furniture.            Almirahs     1  2     Almirahs, small, for poisons       1     Basin-stand with enamelware basin and jug  2  2 1  1  2   Bath tubs, zinc  2  2     2   Bee time-piece     1  1     Box with padlock     1 1 1     Bins for soiled clothing 1 1 1 1   1     Buckets, zinc 1 1 1 1 1 1 1  As required for fire purposes.  Chairs, long arm  2  2 1  1      Chairs, cane bottomed  2  2 1  1  2  2   Commodes, Ry. Pattern  2  2 1    2   * Corkscrews        1     Cots, bamboo 4  8     16    Cots, iron, with spring mattresses  2  2 1 1   6   Casks, half 1 1 1 1        Forms without back, feet 5 2  2      As required. Frames for diet sheets 4 2 8 2    16 6   Frames for Temp. charts. 4 2 8 2    16 6   Ladder, lamp       1     Lanterns, hand 1 for each shed.  1   1 2 1 for each shed. Lanterns, hanging     1   1  Do.    Meatsafe, hanging  1  1 1       Padlocks        6     Racks, towel   2  2 1  1  2   Racks, open, for storing clothing 1 1 1 1    1 1   Rat traps 1 1 1 1         Rods, lamp      1   1  1 for each hanging lamp. Ropes (15 feet) with hooks for examination of trains       2     * To be obtained at the Medical Store Depot, Madras,
`135 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100 " Suspects," and for ten hospital beds, attached to a, Railway Inspection Station-cont.  Minimum scale. Additional stores to be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded. Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in Suspect Camp. Hospital of ten beds. For one nurse. For one medical subordinate. For office and dispensary.            Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.       At two per cent. of total accommodation for each sex. One male and one female. Four males and four females. One male and one female.                                                      Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans. SECTION I-cont.            Furniture-cont.            Screens, moveable 1 1 1 1   1  1 per hut. Soap dishes  2  2 1  1    2   Stands to hold 3 earthen goblets 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2  2   Stretchers with awning 1 1 1 1        Table, compounding       1     Table, office, with drawers.       2     Table, camp, in 2 pieces     1 1      Table, bed-side, with 2 shelves and open all round 4 2 8 2     1 for each cot. Tubs, wooden, disinfecting. 1 1 1 1     1  hut. Teapoys     1       Tin pots, 1-pint 4  8    1 As required. Urinals, iron, with covers.  1  1        2   SECTION II.            Bedding and clothing.            Blankets, country 12  24     3 for each spare cot. Do. European  6  6    3   bed. Cloths, women's           6  Cloths, men's 12  24     3 for each spare cot. Dusters 4 4 16 4     8  4   Dressing gowns (long cloth)  3  3     3 for each spare bed. Jackets for native women. 12  24     3 for each spare cot. Night gowns (long cloth).  3  3    3   bed. Palliasses 12 6 24 6    3   cot. Do. covers 12 6 24 6    3   cot. Pillows  4 2  8 2    1   cot or bed. Do. covers 12 6 24 6    3    Quilts, gingham 12 6 24 6    3    Sheets for beds  6  6    3   bed. Sleeping suits  3  3    3    Slippers  2  2    1 pair for each spare bed. Table cloths, small  6  6    3 for each spare bed. Towels  6  6   6 3
136 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100 "Suspects," and for ten hospital beds, attached to a Railway Inspection Station-cont.  Minimum scale. Additional stores to be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded. Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in suspect camp. Hospital of ten beds. For one nurse. For one medical subordinate. For office and dispensary.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.       At two per cent. of total accommodation for each sex. One male and one female. Four males and for females. One male and one female.                                            Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans. SECTION III.            Table and kitchen requisites.            Butter pots  2  2 1 1   2   Boiler with steamer  1  1     1 spare   China bowls 4  8     1 for each spare cot.  Cups and saucers  2  2 1   1      Coffee pots  1  1 1   1 spare.   Deckchas (sets of 3) 1  1  1   2 spare sets.   Dishes, meat  2  2 1   2 spare.   Frying pan  1  1 1    1 spare.   Forks, table  2  2 1   One for each spare bed. Forks, dessert  2  2 1   Do. do. Grinding stone and roller. 1  1  1       Hatchet, hand 1  1 1 1       Knives, dessert  2  2 1   One for each spare bed. Kitchen knife 1 1 1 1 1    1 spare  Kettle  1  1 1    1   Kitchen towels (Dungry). 6 6 20 6 4    6   Kitchen blocks, wooden 1 1 1 1 1    1   Milk jugs  2  2 1   One for each spare bed. Mortar with pestle (kitchen) 1  1         Plates, soup  2  2 1   One for each spare bed. Plates, meat  2  2 1   Do. do. Plates, dessert  2  2 1   Do. do. Potato and dholl masher. 1 1 1 1 1       Salt cellars  2  2 1   One for each spare bed. Sugar basins  2  2 1    3 spare  Sauce-pans, large  1  1 1    2   Sauce-pans, small  1  1 1    2   Spoons, table  2  2 1   One for each spare bed. Spoons, dessert  2  2 1   Do. do. Spoons, tea  2  2 1   Do. do. Tumblers  2  2 1   Do. do. Tea pots  1  1 1    1spare   Table napkins  6  6 3   Three for each spare bed. Vegetable dishes  2  2 1    2 spare
?137 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100 "Suspects" and for ten hospital beds, attached to a Railway Inspection Station-cont  Minimum scale. Additional stores to be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded. Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in Suspect Camp. Hospital of ten beds. For one nurse. For one medical subordinate. For office and dispensary.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.  At two per cent. of total accommodation for each sex. One male and one female. Four males and for females. One male and one female.        SECTION IV.            Sanitary Equipment.            * Soap nut lb.       10     * Soft soap        10     Perchlo-mercury        40     * Com. Sulphuric acid        15     * Com. Hydro : acid        20     * Phenyle        50     * Permanga. potash        3     Chinese pumps No.       2     Slippers, native prs.       20     Kerosine-oil (tins)       4     SECTION V.            Drugs and Chemicals.            * Acid, Acetic lb.            *  Boracic        1     *  Carbolic        4     *  Gallic             *  Hydrochloric dil        2     *  Hydrocyanic dil oz.       1     *  Nitrioum lb.       1     *  Sulphuricum.        2     *  Tannicum. oz.       2     *  Tartaricum. lb.            * Ammo. Chloride        1     * Ammonia Bromide.        1     * Alumen             * Amonii Carbonas.        1     * Aq. distillata        2     * Argenti Nitras oz.            * Bismuth Subnitratis.        4     * Caffeine citras        1     * Camphora lb.            * Camphorodyne        1     * Cocaine Hydrochlor oz.            * Chloroform lb.       1     * Collodium Flexile. oz       4     * To be obtained at the Medical Store Depot, Madras. 18
?138 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100 "Suspects," and for ten hospital beds, attached to a Railway Inspection Station-cont.  Minimum scale. Additional stores to be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded. Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in Suspect Camp. Hospital of ten beds. For one nurse. For one medical subordinate. For office and dispensary.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.  At two per cent. of total accommodation for each sex. One male and one female. Four males and for females. One male and one female.        SECTION V-cont.            Drugs and Chemicals-cont.            * Creasotum oz.       2     * Cupri Sulph        1     * Ext. Belladonna.        2     * Ext. Ergot Liq.        4     * Ext. Col : Co.        1     * Ext. Hyoscyami.        1     * Ext. Nucis Vom :             * Ferri et Quin lit.        4     * Glycerinum lb.       2     * Pulv. Gum acacia.             * Hydr. with creta. oz.       2     * Hydr. Subchlor :        4     * Iodoform lb.            * Pulv. Jalap             * Lin. Belladonna        1     * Lin. Camph : Co.        2     * Lin. Iodine             * Liq. Ammonia        1     * Liq. Arseni Hydrochlor oz.       4     * Liq. Epispasticus.        4     * Liq. Plumbi Subact. lb.            * Liq. Potass (strong)        1     * Liq.      Strychnine Hydr. oz.       4     * Liq.         Hydrar : perchlor lb.            * Mag : Sulph :        8     * Morph : Hydro : drs.       1     * Ol. Terebinth lb.       4     * Ol. Menth : Pip : cz.            * Opium        3     * Ol. Ricini lb.       4     * Pot: Bicarb             *  Chloras oz.       8     *  Iodide        8     *  Nitras        8     * Plambi acetas        1     * Pulv. Ipecac :        4     *  Ipecac : Co.        4     * To be obtained at the Medical Store Depot, Madras,
?139 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100 "Suspects," and for ten hospital beds, attached to a Railway Inspection Station-cont.  Minimum scale. Additional stores to be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded. Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in suspect camp. Hospital of ten beds. For one nurse. For one medical subordinate. For office and dispensary.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.  At two per cent. of total accommodation for each sex. One male and one female. Four males and for females. One male and one female.        SECTION V-cont.            Drugs and Chemicals-cont.            * Phenacetin oz.       1     * Quinine Sulph :        8     * Spts. thens lb.       1     *  ther Nit :        2     *  Ammon : arom.        2     *  Chloroform        1     *  Rectificafrus        2     * Santonine oz.       1     * Soda Bicarb : lb.       1     * Sulphonal oz.       4     * Sulph : Sub. lb.       1     * Soda Salicylas        1     * Strychnine drs.       2     * Tr. Aconite oz.       1     * Tr. Belladonna        2     *  Calumba lb.       1     *  Cauiph : Co.        1     *  Cannabis Indica oz.       4     *  Cardamom Co. lb.       1     *  Cinchona Co. oz.       8     *  Catechu lb.       1     *  Hyoscyami oz.       8     *  Iodine lb.       1     *  Opii        1     *  Nux Vomica oz.       8     *  Scill        8     *  Seneg        12     *  Senn lb.       1     *  Fevri Perchl. oz.       12     *  Zingiberis        8     *  Digitalis oz.       8     * Ung. Acidi Borici. lb.       2     *  Simplex        2     * Vaseline        2     * Zinc sulph :        4     *  Oxide             * To be obtained at the Medical Store Depot, Madras.
?140 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100  " Suspects," and for ten hospital beds, attached to a Railway Inspection Station- cont.  Minimum scale. Additional stores to be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded. Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in suspect camp. Hospital of ten beds. For one nurse. For one medical subordinate. For office and dispensary.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.  At two per cent. of total accommodation for each sex. One male and one female. Four males and four females. One male and one female.        SECTION VI.            Medical and Surgical Requirements.            * Catheters, gum, elastic, sets of 12      1      * Surgeon's pocket case      1      * Needles, exploring      1      * Urinometer case      1      * Reid's stomach pump      1      * Stethoscopes      2      * Glass urethral male syringes      2      * Hypodermic syringes      2      * Thermometer, clinical, self-registering      4      * Tubing, India rubber (small) yd.      1      * Tubing, India rubber (large) yds.      2      * Basins, pus      2      * Basins, drsssing, sets of 5      2      * Funnels, composition      2      * Gallipots      6      * Lint lb.      3      * Measure glass 4 oz.      1      Do. do. 2       2      * Minim measure      1      * Pewter measure (1 lb.)      1      * Bed-pans (earthenware).      3      * Pestles and mortar (widgewood)      2      * Rods, glass      2      * Scales and weights (gr. and dr.)      1      * Scissors, shop      2      * Slabs, widgewood      1      * Spatula, bolus      2      * English tow lb.      12      * Urinals, pewter, male      2      * Water-proof sheeting 1 yd. sq.      4      * To be obtained at the Medical Store Depot, Madras.
?141 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100 " Suspects, " and for ten hospital beds, attached to a Railway Inspection Station-cont.    Minimum scale. Additional stores to  be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded.  Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in Suspect Camp. Hospital of ten beds.    For one nurse.  For one medical  subordinate. For office    and  dispensary.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.  At two per cent. of  total accom-modation for  each sex. One male  and one  female.   Four males and for  females.  One male  and one  female.        SECTION VI-cont.            Medical and Surgical            Requirements-cont.            * Cotton, wool, absorbent lb.       4     Ice bags       2     * Spirit lamp       1     * Sponges oz.       8     Irrigation can with tube and nozzle       1   * Bandage cloth yds.       10     * Flannel        4     Carbolic soap cakes.       12     Linseed meal lb.       6     * Corks, of sizes gross.       1     * Mixture btls.       24     Winchester qts.       6     SECTION VII.            Sundries.            Toilet paper pks.   2  2     2 spare  6 Kitchen lamps tin. 1 1 1 1 1       Cocoanut shell ladles         As required. Earthen goblets    mullays, tarred,  for spittoons    vessels   Mats, date   Rice strainers  Ropes, coir  Straw pot-rests  Straw               SECTION VIII.            Hospital comforts and            emergencies.            Brandy btls       3     Benger's food           3  * To be obtained at the Medical Store Depot, Madras.
?142 Scale of equipment for a Suspect Camp with accommodation for 100 "Suspects," and for ten hospital beds, attached to a Railway Inspection Station-cont.           _  Minimum scale. Additional stores to  be obtained when the number provided for, is exceeded.  Supplemental list of articles to be issued on payment.  Special observation ward in Suspect Camp. Hospital of ten beds.    For one nurse.  For one medical  subordinate. For office    and  dispensary.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.    Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans.  At two per cent. of  total accom -modation for  each sex. One male  and one  female.   Four males and for  females.  One male  and one  female.        SECTION VIII-cont.            Hospital comforts and            emergencies-cont.            Brand's essence of            mutton        12   6 6 "Milkmaid" Brand            condensed Swiss            milk   tins.          6 12 Mustard btls.       3     Brown and Windsor            soap   pks.  2  2   1    3 Butter in tins  lb.           6 Van Houton's cocoa, tins.           6 Sardines              6 Strawberry jam            4 Corned beef 1 lb. tin.           4 Vencatachellum's            pickles   btls.           3 Potted meat -            Ham and chicken, tins.           4 Turkey and tongue.            2 Sauce, L. and P.'s            (small)  btls.           4 Tea, orange pekoe, pks.           6 Curry powder  btls.          2 4 Claret   pt.           6 Whiskey. Club No. 1            4  (P.C., No. 785, dated 20th March 1899.) (5)--EQUIPMENT OF CAMPS ATTACHED TO ROAD FRONTIER INSPECTION STATIONS. The following articles should be maintained at Road Frontier Inspection Stations. The District Medical Officer may increase the quantities named if he considers the traffic on the road
143  concerned warrants it. The medicines should not be supplied unless a Medical subordinate be in charge.   Disinfectants.   LB.  Soapnut    5  Soft soap    3  Perchloride of mercury  2  Common salt    2  Permanganate of potash  1   Sanitary Equipment.    4 Wooden tubs (25 gallons).  6 Earth chatties.   Hospital Equipment.   2 Bamboo stretchers with  Native hospital clothing for six  awning.  males.  3 Galvanized iron buckets,  8 Cumblies.  with two iron hooks.  6 Matresses.  5 Kerosine hand lanterns.  12 Pillow cases.  5 Country rope charpoys,  24 Mats.  or chentsu cots.  2 Camp tables.  Native hospital clothing  2 Do. chairs.  for six females.    Hospital Comforts.  Arrack       bottles.  4  Arrowroot        lb. 2  Condensed milk (Milkmaid Brand)   tins.  6  Bovril         6   Cooking utensils.  2 Two-pint block tin sauce  6 China bowls of sizes.  pans.   1 Frying pan.   Medicines, &c.   oz.  Tinctura Cinchon.    2  Ammonii Carbonas.      1  Spirits Ammon Aromat.    2  Spirits ther Sulph.    4   Caffeine.     1/4  Quinine Sulph.      1/2  Acid Sulphuric dil.     2  Hydrargyri Subchloridum.   1/3  Pil. Rhea Co.     1/4
144                         Medicines, &c.-cont.                                                        OZ.         Pil. Col. Co         1/4         Oleum Ricini           2         Tinctura Opii         1         Opium                     1/2         Tinctura Assafoetid           2         Oleum Menth Pip          1/2         Spirits theris Nitrosi       4         Liquor Ammonia Acetatis       10         Antipyrin                    1/2         Potass Bromidum          2         Scales and weights        1 set.                                   No.         Glass mortar            1           Spatula                    1         Slab                1                Clinical Thermometer          1         Ounce glass          1            Minim measure             1         Pocket case                1     (G.O., No. 93- P., dated 26th February 1898; No. 257-P., dated 18th April 1898; and No. 602-P., dated 22nd June 1898.)
145 CHAPTER VIII. TREATMENT OF PLAGUE. 1. Remarks on the treatment of Plague by James Cantlie, M.B., Aberd., F.R.C.S., Eng., Lecturer on Applied Anatomy at Charing Cross Hospital Medical School. "At first sight it would seem as though the treatment of plague was a subject which it is useless to discuss, as it is repeatedly stated that we have no cure for plague. We have no " cure " for many- nay, most-of our diseases; yet experience has shown that although no specific treatment is known, still with care, judicious nursing and medical supervision, ailments, such as typhoid, cholera and zymotic diseases generally, can be, and are, conducted to a successful termination. Much, therefore, as it is desirable to know what will " cure " the disease, it is not consistent with our behaviour in other illnesses to stand by and wait until it is discovered what form of attenuated virus may be tried as a specific remedy. Once for all let it be understood that in no disease does one get such immediate results from careful and prompt medical treatment, and as a direct outcome of watchful nursing, as in plague; and perhaps one ought to add to that, " in the case of Europeans." Natives, whether of China or India, succumb more readily to plague than Europeans. There are one or two reasons for this: (1) A native seldom comes to a doctor (a European doctor most of all) until the disease is well advanced. (2) In point of stamina the poorer natives are a long way below northern Europeans. (3) The inherited dislike of the native for all forms of stimulants, be they medicinal or alcoholic, during illness. (4) The belief of the natives in the old adage that " to starve a fever" is correct. The difference between Europeans and natives was well illustrated, during the 1894 epidemic in Hong Kong, by the fact that, out of 11 British patients, 9 recovered-a mortality of only 182 per cent.-whilst the Chinese died at the rate of something like 95 per cent. This favourable result cannot, however, be ascribed altogether to racial influence; it was rather due to the effect that medical treatment and good nursing had upon the course of the disease. The British patients were seen early in the disease, They could take, and stand, stimulants, medicinal and alcoholic, well, and the result was the satisfactory number of recoveries which took place. Even with such Asiatics as would submit to similar treatment, most markedly in the case of the Japanese doctors, were the satisfactory results of treat- ment during plague manifest. The attendance of the doctor must be prompt, and his treatment must be decisive. In fact, during the first five days of illness in plague the doctor must be within a few minutes' call. To each ward of a hospital a doctor should be assigned, or, if a valuable life is at stake in a private house, medical aid must be obtainable in a few seconds. The changes are so rapid in plague, the features of the disease so fulminant, that without immediate treatment being possible success is hopeless. 19
146                                NURSING.     In a hospital ward, during the first five days of illness, practically two patients require an attendant to themselves if the utmost good possible is to be done. A nurse must never let her patient out of sight for a moment, be the patient asleep or awake. She cannot leave the ward or room, without posting a deputy, for any purpose whatever. No nurse should be on duty for more than eight hours at a time ; still better is it to follow the four hours' " watches " kept at sea.     The number of nurses required may seem outrageous, but we have in many illnesses a day and night nurse for private patients, and no more is demanded in this the most fatal illness known. Of course, plague comes in epidemics, and the number of nurses is limited, no doubt; but we must not lose sight of what is necessary in con- sidering what is expedient. Shortly, it may be put that a liberal supply of doctors and nurses is essential if the lives of the plague-stricken, be they native or European, are to be saved.     Enough has been said as to the rapidity of the onset, the develop- ment, and the fatality of plague, to make the importance of early treat- ment in the disease and of the requisite promptness in its administration understood. The symptoms and signs change so rapidly, and in such varying succession, that no stereotyped line of treatment can be followed. Now it is delirium which calls for relief, now cardiac distress, or vomit- ing may supervene; or an unexpected loss of pulse, or a collapse totally without warning, may carry off the patient before any help is obtainable. The much despised legend " Treat symptoms as they arise " is the maxim in plague, and if the word "promptly " were added, the summary of plague treatment is before us. The disease is caused by a bacillus, the toxic effects of which upon the blood give rise to functional derange- ments of possibly all organs, but most markedly of the nervous system, central and peripheral. The poison is so acute that, with the exception of the glandular inflammation, but little structural change is met with in the more vital organs. The cardiac trouble which is so marked an accompaniment of the disease is evidently a functional one and the result of derangement of the nervous supply of the heart. This has constantly to be borne in mind when the subject of drugs is dealt with.                           GENERAL TREATMENT.      The essentials are free ventilation, a cool room (60 to 70 F.  where such is possible), a plentiful supply of hot and cold water, ice,  a sufficiency of servants, and, of course, all the appliances of a modern  hospital.  Deaths are so frequent and so sudden that when the hospital  is large it is necessary to have men employed whose duty it is to remove,  to disinfect and to dispose of the dead.      Nothing should be allowed to leave the ward but to be disinfected.  Crockery and glass should be scalded. Fces should be sprinkled with  quicklime; bed and bedding if not burnt are to be disinfected by heat;  the steam disinfector is well nigh essential. Scrupulous cleanliness of  the floor and bedsteads, obtained by washing with a disinfectant solution,  are of primary importance, and all doorways should be curtained by a  sheet wet with carbolic acid, Jeyes' or other reliable antiseptic.      The patient should not be allowed to get out of bed for any purpose,  but the use of the bedpan and urine bottle should be insisted on. So
147  many times has it occurred that the patient has tumbled over dead whilst getting up to stool, &c., that this is an imperative measure to insist upon.                         MEDICINAL TREATMENT.     Purgation.-When the patient is first seen, the foul state of the tongue, the foul breath, the jaundiced tinge of the conjunctiv, and a generally bilious aspect, suggests a purge. For this purpose, calomel in 5-grain to 10-grain doses recommends itself. This is to be followed by a saline in some five hours' time. Against this treatment it may be argued that the drain upon the system and the lowering action of calomel are deleterious, but, if given quite early in the disease and not when the pulse is flagging, it undoubtedly seems to do good. It frequently stops vomiting, which is often present; it clears away the jaundiced aspect, it restores the power of taking nourishment, and it seems to diminish mental aberration and cardiac distress. If a full gall-bladder justifies the exhibition of calomel, post-mortem evidence of that condition is not wanting. So far as is known, bacilli of plague escape from the body in greatest numbers by the bowel. In the breath, sweat or urine, bacilli are but sparsely met with, but in the fces a rich supply is found. This points to the necessity of ample disinfection as being requisite for all latrines, bedpans, closets, &c., but it also proclaims as justifiable and rational the attempt to assist nature in expelling the poison of plague by a free action of the bowels.     Stimulation.-From the very first onset, or certainly after twenty-four  or forty-eight hours, it will be found necessary to stimulate the plague  patient by food, by alcohol, or by medicine.     Food.--Unless the patient is actually delirious, there is not usually much difficulty in feeding plague patients. In fact, in comparison with allied ailments, appetite is wonderfully good. One encourages this in a general way, but the occurrence of sudden death supervening after the ingestion of a full bowl of rice, for example, and its accompaniments, in the case of Chinese patients on several occasions, leads one to the belief that a full meal is not without its danger. The heart is in such a condi- tion that it takes but little to disconcert its rhythm, and the pressure consequent upon a full stomach is calculated to do this. Food should be in small quantities frequently repeated and of a kind which is easily digested. Brand's essence of beef, in fluid or jelly form, is excellent, but any beef jelly will do. ()x-tail soup, mutton broth, beef and chicken tea should be constantly on hand to suit the varying palate of the patient. Conjee water-that is, the water in which rice is boiled-is useful as a drink and serves as nourishment. Milk with ice (sipped slowly) and ice cream (Lowson) are particularly grateful.     Drink.--Thirst is at times a marked symptom, and its relief should  be attended to by allowing the patient anything in reason. Ice to  suck, if not kept up too long; water or lemon and water (not lemonade)  to drink, if not in such quantity as to distend the stomach; beer and  stout iced, especially for Europeans, is " at once stimulant, soporific,  nutritious and thirst-quenching " (Lowson). Brandy or whisky diluted  with not more than three or four times its quantity of water (not arated  waters) should be freely supplied. When the pulse shows signs of  failing or collapse or faintness supervenes, then, of course, alcohol is  doubly beneficial, and brandy is preferable to whisky as a cardiac  stimulant.
148     Delirium.-When active the delirium of plague is best combated by cold to the head. Leiter's coil would be perhaps the readiest method, provided the patient could be kept still, but an ice-bag or a constantly- wetted cloth is efficient. These applications combined with tepid spong- ing of the body at frequent intervals seem grateful to the patient, are useful means of reducing temperature, and seem the safest and readiest method of quietening active delirium.     Hyoscine.--In most cases, but not in all, hyoscine administered hypodermically in doses of gr. 1/100 is perhaps the most efficient and safe of the hypnotics. It calms the nervous system and induces sleep when everything else fails. Hyoscine should be one of the first drugs in the armamentarium of a plague hospital.     Morphine.--At times nothing but morphine administered hypodermic- ally in doses of gr. 1/8 to 1/4 is of any avail. A priori one would not select it as a hypnotic or anodyne, but experience has proved it to be reliable, and not so unsafe as to exclude its use. It is almost certain that, when painful adenitis complicates the cerebral intoxication, mor- phine effects its purpose. The safest method of administration is in combination with atropine.     Bromide of Potassium.--An occasional dose of bromide of potassium during delirium is useful and without danger, but its prolonged use is not permissible.     Diarrha.--An occasional looseness should not be stopped unless it  continues over twelve hours and the patient seems exhausted thereby.  It is but seldom obstinate and yields to salol in gr. x doses, or to an  enema of starch and opium; or, still better, a suppository of morphine  and cocaine, gr. 1/4 and gr. 1/2 respectively, more especially when continued  straining.persists (Lowson).      Vomiting frequently ushers in an attack of plague, and may persist  throughout the illness. When the latter condition obtains, it is an  unfavourable sign, as loss of strength ensues owing to the rejection of  food and medicines. A mustard plaster to the epigastrium, ice to suck,  and an effervescent draught of a few drops of hydrocyanic acid and  liquor morphi are generally sufficient to check this untoward symptom  (Lowson).     Pyrexia, no doubt, accounts for some of the delirium, the restlessness,  the headache and subsequent collapse. Hyperpyrexia is exceptional.  The usual chemical antipyretics, antipyrin and phenacetin, are such  severe depressants that they are at a discount and should not be used.  Should hyperpyrexia necessitate its use, one hypodermic of antipyrin  is, no doubt, justifiable, but only as a last resource. Frequent sponging  with tepid water, ice to the head and nape of the neck, iced drinks, and  a short application of the wet pack, with the administration of brandy by  the mouth or by the rectum, are useful when promptly and rationally  used.      Stimulants, Externally.--Flying blisters of mustard to the limbs,  abdomen and over the heart are useful. Smelling-salts and strong  ammonia applied to the nostrils often succeed in restoring the pulse,  rousing the patient in collapse, and not infrequently cause him to rally  from  what seems a moribund state (Lowson). Nor is this kind of  stimulation of mere passing effect, for in several instances when death  seemed inevitable and at hand, patients have revived and actually  recovered permanently.
149     Stimulation by hypodermic injection of ether is a treatment that gives grateful response, and must be used freely and frequently. The collapse from plague does not take place at that period of the disease when organic structures are played out, but it occurs early in the disease, in two or three days, and is therefore more of a functional or toxic than of an organic nature; consequently, the use of stimulants, in whatever form, is more likely to be attended by remedial results and not by a mere temporary flicker of response.     Internally, the form of drug most useful is either a general stimulant, such as ammonia, or a cardiac tonic or specific.     The prescription of every practitioner who treats plague will be found to be one in which carbonate of ammonia and the tincture or decoction of cinchona are met with, and with this mixture now given, now withheld, will be exhibited digitalis, strophanthus, or camphor. More good is ascribable to ammonia in some form than to any other known and more specific drug.     Digitalis in infusion, tincture or in leaf-the latter perhaps the best  -seems the one drug called for when the pulse becomes dicrotic and  the nervous stimulation of the heart gives out. In practice, however,  it is unsatisfactory, and seldom can any good results be traced to its  administration. No doubt, the slowness of its action is against it; but,  what is still more, positive evidence is against its being considered a  reliable drug in an acute illness like plague.     Strophanthus is in the same category with digitalis.     Camphor in its double action as a direct cardiac stimulant and a  stomachic carminative is useful as an alternative drug. Undoubtedly  the best form is in pill in doses of gr. ij. Camphor may advantage-  ously be used hypodermically dissolved in sterilised oil. Caffeine also  is worthy of trial.     Musk, in the few  cases treated therewith, seems to justify its  administration, and it is a form of circulatory stimulant which one wel-  comes as an addition to one's resources. The musk, as fresh as can be  obtained, may be given in 5-grain doses every six hours as an expedient.      Strychnine, administered by the mouth or hypodermically, is of the  greatest use Granted that a functional abeyance of the nervous in-  fluence, more especially of the heart, is the essence of the toxic effect of  the plague bacillus, strychnine ought to be a drug of importance in the  treatment. This expectation was borne out in practice, and Dr. Lowson  in his report, and all who have reported on the treatment of plague,  regard strychnine as a most reliable agent in the form of stimulation  required in plague. Liquor strychnin in 5 to 10 minim doses, given  every four hours, is the most convenient form; but when vomiting is  present, a hypodermic solution of gr. \ill\ of the sulphate of strychnine  in 10 minims of distilled water is advisable.      Other drugs may be mentioned, but, though useful as a change and  a stand-bye on occasions, they do not justify more than a passing  notice. Among the more important are qunine when malaria compli-  cates the disease, as evidenced by a large spleen; aconite in the early  stages, when high fever and a full pulse are present; chloride of  ammonium as an alternative is occasionally useful.      The inhalation of oxygen (Lowson) is not to be neglected, and the   gas ought to be always at hand and ready for immediate use.
150 The result of experience gained by local, radical or tentative treat- ment of the glands does not lead one to expect much benefit from there. That abscesses should be opened when they point, or when fluctuation is perceptible, is, of course, natural; but that local remedial steps should be undertaken for the purpose of affecting the course of the disease by acting on the gland is, from what we know of the pathology of the disease, scarcely rational. Injection of a swollen gland when it is accessible, as in the groin, with such substances as carbolic acid, per- chloride of mercury, or a solution of the perchloride of mercury and iodide of potassium, has perhaps a theoretical basis of justification, but practically little good can be ascribed to it. The latter-mentioned solution may have a higher claim, as in several cases in which it has been administered temperature falls and the patient seems easier. It may be, however, that the mere pricking of the tense capsule of the gland, even by needle punctures, may serve to relieve tension and thereby pain. This leads one to the belief that subcutaneous incision of the gland may be attended with beneficial results, and it is a method of surgical procedure not without precedent. Early free incision of the gland is not to be recommended, nor can excision be in any way justified. The disease is a polyadenitis, and of so extensive a nature that eradication of infected glands is an impossibility. A gland when swollen, red and painful may be smeared with glycerine and belladonna or poulticed to relieve pain, and when fluctuation is perceptible it should be opened, but further procedure is useless. When pus is evacuated, dusting the wound with iodoform and ensuring thorough drainage are the means by which the best results are obtainable.     Retention of Urine, a frequent concomitant during the delirium  of plague, renders the use of the catheter imperative."                  (G.O, No. 298-M., dated 26th February 1897.)    2. Extract from the Report of Major Bannerman, M.D., B.S c.,                       dated 27th March 1897.     "It is necessary that a medical officer should be able to recognise at the earliest possible date the occurrence of a case of plague, both for the sake of the patient himself, and for the prevention of the spread of the the infection. In cases presenting the classical signs there can be little difficulty in arriving at a correct diagnosis, but when the glan- dular swellings are absent, as they often are, it may be necessary to keep a patient under observation for some days before a decision can be arrived at.     The following signs and symptoms may be regarded as typical :-A  rise of temperature on the first day of the disease, of a very pronounced  character, 106 or more being common, accompanied by severe shivering  and frequent vomiting. In 95 per cent. of the cases the conjunctiv  are found to be injected on the second day of the disease. The tongue  may be described as being like wash-leather, or of a rusty brown  " typhoid " appearance, with red or even inflamed edges. When spoken  to, the person answers in a slow hesitating indistinct manner, the sylla-  bles being separated from one another, and the impression conveyed  being that the individual is under the influence of alcohol. The gait is  also in many cases suggestive, being like that of a drunken man. Some  cases, on the other hand, may present violent maniacal symptoms, or the
151  man may answer in an irritable manner as if resenting being ques- tioned. But the typical appearance is the stupid dazed look of one newly wakened from a deep sleep, and there is evident difficulty in realizing new surroundings, and understanding what is going on around. Vomit- ing or diarrha or both, may be present or not. Buboes should of course be carefully looked for in the groins, armpits, sub-maxillary regions, and in fact in all places where glands are known normally to exist, as they are sometimes found in most unexpected spots. The bacteria characteristic of plague are found in the fces, sputum, blood and lymphatic glands. They are easily detected in fluid with- drawn from the glands both by the microscope and by cultivation in agar tubes. As far as the Bombay epidemic shows, it is often impossi- ble to detect them in the blood, and if they are detected it is generally of evil omen for the patient. The fces and sputum contain so many bacteria in the normal state that it is a matter of difficulty to separate the plague bacillus from the more robust forms already present, and though they may be detected by the microscope, it is impossible to tell for certain without cultivation, whether the forms seen are really the specific bacillus or not. For ordinary diagnostic purposes, then, it is best to rely on matter withdrawn from the affected glands, and the following is the method recommended by M. Haffkine as the easiest and best. The apparatus required is, a supply of Pasteur's pipettes, microscopic slides, carbol-fuchsin stain, a spirit lamp, turpentine and absolute alcohol. Pasteur's pipettes are prepared as follows, from ordi- nary glass-tubing.  The tubing being heated to redness in the flame of a Bunsen burner is removed from the flame and immediately drawn out, so that a pipette with very fine tapering point is formed. The tapering end is about 6 inches long and in diameter a little stouter than a hypodermic needle. The point is closed by melting in the flame, and the other end of the tube being closed with a plug of cotton wool inserted a quarter of an inch within the orifice; the whole is sterilised by being rotated in the flame until the cotton is stained of a uniform brown colour. The skin over the gland must be carefully disinfected by washing with soap and warm water, and the application of tur- pentine and alcohol. Then the pipette having been sterilised  by passing several times through the flame of the spirit lamp, the sealed point is broken off leaving a sharp edge which easily penetrates the skin. The skin over the gland is now put on the stretch by the finger and thumb of the left hand, while the pipette is given a final heat in the flame, and by means of rotatary motion imparted by the thumb and fore- finger of the right hand is made to penetrate the skin and tissues till it is felt to enter the gland. The capsule of the gland offers some resist- ance to the point of the pipette, and when it is pierced the sudden cessation of resistance intimates the fact at once. In most cases the contents of the gland will ascend the capillary tube of the pipette at once, but if not, the mouth may be applied to the end and suction employed as the mouth will be effectually protected by the cotton plug. The pipette is now withdrawn, and agar tubes inoculated in the ordinary way, after which smear preparations may be made on the slides, which should be allowed to dry, when they can be stained and examined. The stain may be left to act for two minutes or so. To study the appearance of the bacterium, a one twelfth immersion lens is required. The characteristic appearance is that of a bacterium
152  rounded at the ends and joined together in pairs, so as to form what M. Haffkine calls a " diplo-bacterium."  The division may appear complete or only an indication of it may be seen, and the poles staining more easily than the rest of the organism, a most characteristic appear- ance is obtained by which it may be easily diagnosed. The appearance of a cultivation in agar, is also very characteristic. Almost no growth is seen for two days, then a peculiar dotted or ground-glass appearance is to be noticed spreading out from the inoculated spot, which once seen is easily recognised. It has been compared to the appearance of the back of a mirror when the growth is viewed from behind, and when looked at from the side with the light reflected from its surface it has a peculiar varnished look, not easily mistaken.  Specimens taken from cultures in agar and broth present many and various appearances under the microscope; thus, in the early days of agar culture threads of varying diameter and without divisions may be seen, and in broth cultures, chaplets or chains may be found. In the tissues involution forms are found which it is difficult to recognise, unless a careful study of the transition forms is made. The treatment pursued in Bombay differs little from that laid down by Dr. Cantlie in his paper in the British Medical Journal of 30th January 1897, i.e., stimulants, good nursing and the treatment of symp- toms as they arise, special care being taken of the heart, which is so apt to fail suddenly even during convalescence. At the Parel Hospital, Surgeon-Captain Thomson appears to have achieved a considerable amount of success by treating his patients with large doses of per- chloride of mercury with the object of acting on the bacteria in the intestines. He gives two drachms of the liq. hydrarg. perchlor. on admis- sion and a drachm every two hours thereafter for the first 24 hours, and then every three hours till canvalescence sets in. His death-rate in cases that survive for 24 hours after admission is 3627 per cent., and as no salivation is produced, the plan seems worth trying. The glands at this hospital are treated with glycerine and belladonna and hot fomentations when inflamed, with the result that only about 2 per cent. suppurate, which is a great matter as when opened the incisions take a very long time to heal. At the Arthur Road Hospital under the care of Dr. Chowksey, no perchloride is used, but injections of liquor iodi are made into the affected glands, with the result that nearly all the glands suppurate and tedious sores remain open for weeks, retarding convale- scence. Dr. Chowksey maintains that the temperature falls after the injection, and that the practice is an endeavour to imitate Nature's mode of care which he alleges is brought about by supparation, but this contention is not borne out by the experience of the Parel Hospital noted above. The cases admitted here are probably of a more acute type than those sent to Parel, for the mortality up to the end of February was 5471 per cent. of the admissions." (G.O., No. 887-M., dated 13th April 1897). 3. Extract from the Report of Major Bannerman, M.D., B. Sc., dated 13th October 1897. "As regards treatment, I need only repeat what was contained in the former report submitted to Government, viz., good feeding and nursing, the patient being kept in the recumbent position till four days at least after temperature has come to normal as heart failure is so much to be
153  dreaded, large quantities of stimulants, alcoholic and medicinal, nervine tonics such as strychnine, and such drugs as ammonium carbonate, caffiene citrate, tincture of strophanthus, tincture of digitalis and nitrate of pilocarpine.  Fever is best treated by sponging and ice-cap, antifebrin and phenacetin not being suitable and having a transient effect only. Headache by bromide of ammonium, opiates, ice-cap or evaporating lotions. Sleeplessness by bromides, opiates or camphorodyne. Vomiting by bismuth and hydrocyanic acid in effervescing draughts. Pulmonary congestion by diffusable and alcoholic stimulants, with digitalis, tur- pentine stupes and blisters. Surgeon-Captain Thomson, I.M.S., who was in charge of the Parel Hospital and from whose report the above information is taken, notes that " As a special. mode of treatment, liq. hydrargyri perchloridi was resorted to from a conviction of the value of such a powerful disinfectant in specific disease  *  *. At first it was given in drachm doses well diluted three times daily; later, in half- ounce doses every two hours for four doses; and then in the same quantities every eight hours. In no case of plague did these enormous doses induce salivation, though this phenomenon was carefully sought for."  In one case which turned out to be another disease, salivation was produced after the third dose, so he concludes that " this mode of treatment is therefore both diagnostic and rational." As regards the treatment of buboes, he strongly deprecates attempts to induce suppuration, and holds that when they are left to themselves the tendency is for them to subside, and that when irritants are avoided and sedative applications used, only 7 per cent. end in suppuration. On the other hand if irritants are applied, a very large number suppurate and having to be opened lead to the formation of large granulating surfaces slow to heal and retarding convalescence." (G.O., No. 2448-M., dated 6th November 1897.) 4. The following simple rules for the treatment of plague may   be   adopted   when there    is no professional medical attendance:- "The patient should be treated as much in the open air as possible. A tent well protected from the sun and with the side kanats raised to allow wind to blow through, makes an excellent sick ward. The floor should be kept covered with lime-wash, renewed once in two days or so. Everything leaving the sick-room should be disinfected.  Glass, cutlery and crockery should be scalded. Bedding and clothes should be boiled for half an hour or soaked in disinfectant for some hours before washing. The most convenient disinfect ant is 1/2 oz. mercuric chloride, 1 oz. hydro- chloric acid in 3 gallons (a stable-bucket full) of water, coloured with red-ink powder. No metallic vessels should be used for storing this solution, and any clothes soaked in it should be steeped for an hour in water before being sent to the dhobio.  All discharges of the patient should be sprinkled with lime and at once burned. The patient should be kept constantly lying down, not being allowed to sit up even to relieve bladder or bowels until at least four days after fever has ceased. This is to avoid danger of sudden collapse and death from failure of heart's action. As the tongue is generally coated, calomel in a dose of 5 to 10 grains should be given, followed by a dose of salts some hours after, if 20
?154 necessary. Sponging and ice to the head for the fever, but no phenacetin or antifebrin, as the heart is early affected. Stimulants are early called for and should be given with a liberal hand. For the thirst, ice to suck, and any ordinary cooling drink in moderation. Food should be given in small quantities and frequently, chicken or other soup or essence, conjee, milk, milk and soda iced. The stomach should not be distended with large quantities of food or drink. Retention of urine may occur early in delirium, and will require the catheter." (P.C., No. 777, elated 23rd November 1898.) 5.  The pneumonic  variety of plague is the   most contagious, and officers in charge of hospitals should not treat such cases in general wards,  but should isolate them in separate wards of the greatest possible air space.    It is further in- advisable that pneumonic cases should be treated in private houses, unless in the opinion of the Medical officer, the room occupied by the case is suited for a complete isolation of such case, and proper control over the number of attendants could be had. (G.O., No. 126-P., dated 24th January 1899 ; No. 318-P., dated 2nd March 1899.) 6.  The following are the scales and time-tables of diets for plague patients :- (1) Minimum Diet Scale for European and Eurasian Plague Patients, Spoon. Milk. Half. Mixed. Full. Arrowroot,  oz.  1 Bread     oz.   12 Mutton or chicken Mutton  oz. 8 Mutton    oz. 12 Sugar         1 Hoppers.    no.    2  oz. 10 Bread           12 Bread     lb. 1 Tea,             Milk       pts. 2 Bread          16 Rice            8 Hoppers.    no.   2 or  Butter     oz.  1 Hoppers.    no. 2 Hoppers,     no. 6 Butter     oz.   1 Coffee          1 Tea,             Butter     oz. 1 Butter     oz. 1 Potatoes.          8 Milk            4 or  Potatoes.        8 Country Country  Coffee         1 Salt            vegetable.    6 vegetable.    8  Sugar          1 Ghee           1 Curry- Salt              Milk           4 Tea             powder.         Ghee       1   or Tamarind.    Tea                Coffee         1 Salt             or   Sugar          1 Ghee         1 Coffee          1   Milk           4 Tea            Sugar           1   If "half boiled." or Milk            4   Onions    oz.1 Coffee     1 If " full boiled.  "   Barley              Sugar        1 Onions oz.   1   Flour            Milk         4 Barley           and omit ghee.  Flour              If "Stewed, "  and omit ghee.   Pepper  grs.30     Onions    oz. 1      Flour                Mint and parsley     grs.30    Notes.- (1) The meat in the "half diet" may be chops, cutlets, grilled, stewed, minced, or boiled; in "full," roasted, grilled, or boiled only. (2) Extras may be ordered on all diets except "full" and "mixed."   But stimulants and eggs may be given with any diet. (3) The meat in the various diets should weigh in its raw state, exclusive of bone the amount specified in the diets.   If meat is issued with bone, 4 oz. per lb. should be allowed. (4) Each hopper should weight 2 oz. (5) Medical officers may, in exceptional cases, diet patients on extras alone.
?155 Time-table of Diets for European Patients. Spoon. Milk. Half. Mixed. Full. Early morning breakfast, 6 or 6-30 a.m. Tea or coffee, pt. 1 Hoppers, no.   2  Hoppers.   no. 2  Hoppers.   no. 2  Hoppers.   no. 2   Tea or coffee, pt. 1 Tea or coffee. pt. 1 Tea or coffee, pt. 1 Tea or coffee. pt. 1 Breakfast, 9-30 or 10 a.m. Arrowroot Milk          pt. 1 Bread      oz. 12 Hoppers.    No. 4 Bread      oz. 12 conjee        pt. 1 Bread        oz. 8 Butter       1 Bread.      oz. 3 Mutton       6  Butter         1 Mutton or Butter.       1 Potatoes.       4   chicken.        5 Vegetable.      4    Potatoes.       4 Mutton chops  4  Dinner, 2 p.m. Arrowroot Milk         pt. 1 Mutton or Rice      oz. 8 Mutton    oz. 6 conjee       pt. 1  chicken,    oz.   5 Mutton      4 Potatoes.      4   Potatoes.       4 Vegetable.     6 Vegetable.     4 Supper, 5-30 or 6 p.m. Tea or coffee. pt. 1 Bread       oz. 4 Bread      oz. 4     Bread      oz. 4 Bread     oz.  4  Tea or coffee, pt. 1 Tea or coffee. pt.1     Tea or coffee. pt.1 Tea or coffee. pt. 1  (2) Minimum Diet Scale for Native Plague Patients.  Spoon. Milk. Coffee. Half. Full. Rice     oz.     6 Bread or  Bread      oz. 12 Rice       oz. 12 Rice       oz. 20 Salt      grs. 180 rice    oz. 12  Coffee     pt.  1 Mutton.         4 Buttermilk, pt.   Milk    pt. 1  Sugar      oz.  1 Ghee          Pepper-  Sugar   oz. 2  Milk          4 Curry. water          For conjee-  Hoppers.     no.   2 powder.          Mutton  oz.    6  Rice    oz. 2  Sugar     oz.   2 Tamarind.     3/8 or  Salt.  grs. 60  For conjee - Vegetable.      2 Fish         4   Rice     oz.   2  Salt          Dholl        1             Salt     grs.   60 Coffee    pt.   Vegetable       4    Sugar     oz.   Curry-    Milk         2 powder.             Hoppers    no.   2 Tamarind.        Buttermilk, pt.    Gingelly-oil      1    Pepper- Salt               water         Hoppers,    no.   2      Coffee   pt.        Sugar    pt.       Milk         2 Notes.-(1) On half-diet mutton is given every day; on full diet it is given one day, vegetables, dholl and fish the next day. (2)  Extras may be ordered on all diets except full.   But stimulants and eggs may be given with any diet, (3)  Arrack is the only stimulant allowed for natives, except under special circumstances (G.O., No. 1, dated 1st January 1889). (4) The meat in the various diets should weigh in the raw state, exclusive of bone, the weights specified in the table.   If meat is issued with bone, an additional 4 oz. per pound  should be allowed. (5) Each hopper should weigh 2 oz. (6) Medical officers may, in exceptional cases, diet patients on extras alone. (7) Rice conjee is prepared by natives;  if any other kind is required it can be Ordered as an extra.
?156 Time-table for Native Patients. Spoon. Milk. Coffee. Half. Full. Early breakfast, 6 or 6-30 a.m. Rice conjee, pt. 1     First meal, 10-30 or 11 a.m. Rice conjee, pt. 1 Milk pt. 1 Bread oz. 6 Rice oz. 6 Rice oz. 10  Bread or rice.'oz.6 Sugar  2 Mutton  2 Mutton  8  Sugar  2 Rice conjee, pt. 1 Vegetable.  1 or    Buttermilk, pt.  Vegetable  4     and     Dholl  1     Buttermilk, pt.  Night meal, 5-30 or 6 p.m. Rice conjee, pt. 1 Milk pt.  Coffee pt. 1 Rice oz. 6 Rice oz. 10  Rice or bread, oz.6 Bread oz. 6 Mutton  2 Mutton  3    Vegetable.  1 or    Pepper- Fish  4    water pt.  Pepper-     water pt.   Note.-The water used for boiling rice should have a little salt added to it from the diet and be served out in half pints to those patients getting rice.  (3) Minimum Diet Scale for Native Caste Patients. Full diet. Milk diet. Raw rice oz. 20 Same as for other natives except that Ghee  1 raw rice is supplied in place of boiled Dholl  2 rice and two eating leaves are issued Curry powder    as an extra.  Gingelly-oil    Salt    Tamarind    Pepper water pint.   Buttermilk    Coffee  1  Vegetable oz. 8  Firewood lb. 2  Eating leaves No. 2  Plantains  4     (4) Attendants on (1), (2), and (3).    Full. Mutton for curry oz. 8 Rice *  8 Curry-powder   Country vegetables  4 Hoppers  no. 6 Bread oz. 8 Butter or ghee  1 Salt  1  * Or rice 1 lb. omitting the bread.   Hoppers to weigh 2 oz. when cooked.
?157 TIME-TABLE. FULL. Early morning meal. Hoppers no. 6 Butter or ghee oz.      Mid-day meal. Mutton for curry oz. 8 Vegetables    4 Rice            8  Evening meal. Bread oz. 8 Butter or ghee        Composition of curry-powder.  Native. European. Chillies  lb.   3 lb.  1 Black pepper oz. 10      Coriander lb.   6     8 Turmeric oz. 10     2 Cummin seed         10     1 Mustard     10      Vendium     10      Garlic     3  Dry ginger  lb.   Poppy seeds        Ingredients for pepper-water, 1 Pint. Chillies  oz.      Pepper          Garlic  Drs.   20 Tamarind  oz.         Salt       Drs.      List of Extras. Almonds.* Bread. Apples.* Bread-pudding. Appums. Butter. Arrowroot blanc mange. Butter milk. Do.    conjee. Chicken, boiled.* Do.    jelly. Do.     broth. Barley. Do.     curry. Barley-water. Do.     cutlets.* Beef juice. Do.     fricassee.* Do. tea. Do.     grilled.* Do. jugged. Do.     jelly.* Biscuits.* Do.     kusee. Blanc mange. Do.     pepper-water. Bran-biscuits. Do.     stew.* * Note.-The extras with asterisks are only for Europeans and Eurasians,
?158 List of Extras-cont. Cocoa.* Mutton stew. Coffee with milk. Oatmeal porridge.* Cornflour blanc mange.* Oranges. Do.      conjee. Peas.* Do.      pudding.* Pepper. Curry-powder. Pepper-water. Custard.* Pigeon roast.* Dholl. Do.   stew.* Eggs. Plantains. Do.   fried.* Plums.* Do.   omelette.* Pomegranate. Do.   poached. Potatoes. Essence of beef, Brand's. Potatoe cutlets.* Extract of beef, Liebeg's. Rabbit. Fish. Rice. Do. boiled. Do. conjee-water. Do. fried. Do. pudding. Do. moli. Sago conjee. Fruit, stewed.* Do. jelly. Ghee. Do. pudding. Ginger tea. Scotch broth, beef. Grapes.* Sheep-trotter jelly. Ice. Do.          stew. Lemonade. Soda-water. Lime-juice. Soojee conjee. Lime-pudding .* Do.    jelly. Limes. Do.    pudding. Linseed tea. Spice powder. Mangoes. Sugar. Milk. Tapioca conjee. Mutton broth. Do.    pudding.* Do.    chops. Tea with milk. Do.      do.   boiled. Teal roast.* Do.    curry. Tyre. Do.    cutlets. Vegetable, country. Do.   fat Do.  curry, Europe. Do.    fried. Do.        Europe.* Do.    minced. Vermicelli pudding. Do.   pepper-water. Wheat cakes. Wines and stimulants. Arrack.                          Gin (Old Tom). Beer.                            Porter.* Brandy. Portwine. Burgundy.* Sherry.* Claret.* Whiskey.* Constantia.* Champagne. Frontign.*    * Note.-The extras with asterisks are only for Europeans and Eurasians.
159                                                             Hospital. Diet sheet of                   month of                     1899. Occupation                   Religion Disease Admitted Age     Years  Discharged                                        1899. Date Diet. Extras. Initials of Surgeon.           1          2          3          4          5          6          7          9          10          11          12          13          14          15          16          17          18          19          20          21          22          23          24          25          26          27          28          29          30          31            (P.C., No. 981, dated 14th April 1899, G.O., No. 1272-P., dated 22nd August 1899),
160 7.  Plague patients have full liberty to use their own food and  medicines   even  in public  hospitals,  and  it should  be publicly announced, when plague breaks   out, that no person attacked by plague  will be compelled to be treated by an European or to take European medicines. (G.O., No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898; No. 1023-P., dated 7th September 1898.) 8.  As a rule, plague patients  should not be  discharged from  the hospitals  until   the   expiry   of   one   month  from subsidence of symptoms and one week  after healing of  any bubo.    Their  clothing  and  other   property   should, before discharge, be disinfected under the personal superintendence of the Medical officer. (P.C., No. 245, dated 26th January 1899.) 9.  In carrying out  the removal   of plague  patients   to hospitals, the instructions contained in Plague Commissioner's Confidential Proceedings, No. 350, dated 8th February  1899, should be carefully noted.
?161 CHAPTER IX. IMPORTANT ORDERS RELATING TO PLAGUE MEASURES. (1)-Agency for Working Plague Regulations. Special attention should be directed to the restriction, so far as possible, of the employment of subordinate Government officials of the Medical and Police departments and in especial to the advisability of working with the help of native practitioners appointed by the people themselves. Where subordinate native agency is used, it is absolutely necessary that Europeans should be appointed as supervisors over small and convenient units. Police officers should hold no inquiry into suspicious cases of plague. Public and private hospitals and camps may be placed in charge of native practitioners. Medical subordinates are not required for the supervision of disinfection work. Staff Corps officers have been found of the greatest use and should be largely employed when the services of Assistant Collectors are not available. (G.O., No. 1023-P., dated 7th September 1898.) 2. As far as circumstances permit Hindus should be em- ployed in those parts of a city where Hindus predominate, and Muhammadans where Muhammadans are in a majority. Small committees of the inhabitants may be appointed in various parts of a city to bring to the notice of the authorities matters requiring attention or inquiry. (G.O., No. 1196-P., dated 28th September 1898.) (2)-Evacuation of Infected Houses and Segregation. When plague breaks out, the segregation of the sick and of the persons who have been in immediate contact with them is a fundamental precaution which is essential to the success- ful issue of any operations against it. Experience has shown that in order that segregation may be efficacious, it must be carried out in hospitals or other suitable places specially appointed for the purpose. To enable this measure being carried out without prejudice to the feelings and habits of the people, the Government has authorised the establishment of private hospitals and segregation camps for particular castes or classes under the conditions stated in Chapter VII. (G.O., No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898.) 21
?162 2.  Where, however, in the opinion of the Plague Commis- sioner, the Collector, or the President of the Madras Munici- pal Commission,  the circumstances are  such that complete isolation  can be ensured without removal to a hospital  or camp, the patient may be treated, and those who have been in contact with him may be put under observation, at home. The conditions under which this course may be adopted are indicated in Confidential G.O*., No. 1210-P., dated 1st October 1898.    It must, however, be noted that home segregation on a large scale is extremely difficult, and that, even if attempted, it cannot be as efficacious as isolation in well-ventilated and sanitary hospitals  and  camps.     No batta should be paid to home segregated persons. (G.O., No. 303-P., dated 1st April 1898; No. 1196-P., dated 28th September 1898; No. 822-P., dated 31st May 1899; No. 1225-P., dated 10th August 1899.) 3.  The instructions contained in the appended orders of the Bombay Government should be carried out in this Presidency as far as practicable, subject to the following remarks of the Plague Commissioner.    A census is costly and may create alarm and it is undesirable to look upon the taking of a census of an infected village   or town as a necessary part of plague operations.    Free access to evacuated houses should be pro- hibited, and the prohibition enforced by prosecution where considered advisable and practicable.    As regards mainten- ance of the prohibition that no one from a village which has been vacated  shall be  allowed to take  up his residence  in another village without a pass, the measure involves a large expenditure under establishment  as well as great inconveni- ence to the people.    Persons from infected villages are, as a rule, refused admission by the people of healthy villages and the cases of such men must be left to be dealt with under the passport rules by village officers, who must be carefully super- vised by the plague and the ordinary district establishments. Resolution of the Bombay Government, No. 6013-6105-P., dated 1st November 1898. His Excellency the Governor in Council desires to impress upon all officers that Government continue to attach the highest importance to the following measures:-  (a) Early  and  accurate information  of the appearance  of any suspicious cases of sickness and death. * This should be kept in the personal custody of the Collector or the President, Municipal Commission, Madras.  Vide also Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 321, dated 3rd February 1899, and No. 1130, dated 25th April 1899.
?163 (b) Prompt and complete evacuation of a village on the occurrence of the first well ascertained local cases or where mortality among rats is apparent. N.B.-The people should receive sufficient notice and all their reasonable requests be met as far as possible. (c)  A sufficiently accurate census of the population of the infected village to prevent people leaving the village lands and entering other villages. (d)  Well-organised arrangements  to prevent  surreptitious access to the houses vacated and to permit access when necessary, under due precautions. N.B.-If the cases occur among the evacuated population, the reason may in almost every case be traced to surreptitious communication with the vacated village. (e)  Thorough  and careful disinfection under responsible super- vision of infected houses and clothing and admission of light and air. N.B.-In small villages where the entire effects of the people can be exposed to the sun and the houses can be easily opened out to sun and air and two or three months can elapse before re-occupation is permitted, it may be left to the discretion of the Collector, advised by medical opinion, whether disinfection is necesary. Unless disinfection is conducted by a trusted officer, it is no use. (f) Maintenance of the prohibition that no one from a village which has been vacated must be allowed to take up his residence in another village, except with the written permission of the Plague authority. This prohibition must be enforced by a Circle Inspector or other authority (according to the extent of infection) systematically moving in the villages round the infected area. As soon as any popu- lation is pronounced to be healthy, the prohibition should be cancelled and the population be free to move about. N.B.-As a rule no passes should be given to leave an infected village till the population have been ten days in the open. The Circle Inspector's work must be carefully supervised. (g) The separation of the sick and infected families from the healthy. N.B.-The healthy families should first be moved into the open. Then the sick with their families should be moved to a separate spot, for example, the opposite side of the village site. 2. For the effective supervision of these measures, the plague-infected area must be sub-divided under responsible officers, Staff Corps officers being employed where necessary. These officers should enlist to the utmost possible extent volunteer agency to assist in carrying out the measures. The measures are new to the people, particularly in fresh areas of infection and, if injudiciously or overzealously pressed, must defeat themselves by exciting opposition instead of gradually winning the co-operation of the people, or by scattering the people instead of inducing each village as soon as it is infected to settle down quietly on its own lands. His Excellency in Council trusts that every officer on plague duty will continue to make it his special aim to train his subor- dinates to work with sympathy and consideration. Complaints should be encouraged and, where possible, the objection should be removed. The importance of these considerations cannot be overrated.
?164 Circular of the Bombay Government, No. 6977-7068-P., dated 21st December 1898. With reference to Government Resolution, No. 6013-6105-P., dated the 1st November 1898, General Department (Plague), Government are aware that a large number of villages have now been vacated. The next step is to ensure that proper effect is given to clause (g), the separation of the sick from the healthy. 2.   Officers on plague duty when visiting a village should first endea- vour to make the people understand the meaning of what they enjoin and the reason for the separation of the sick and for prohibiting visits to infected families, houses and sites.    Unless the people understand, their intelligent co-operation cannot be secured and without their good- will no effective organization is possible. 3.  Next, the infected families should be completely   separated from the rest of the population; and the sick person in an infected family should have a hut apart from that occupied by the as yet  healthy members of his family.    That is, the healthy should not be suffered to live in the same hut with the sick person.    On  any case occurring in a healthy family the family should be immediately removed from the neighbourhood of other healthy families. 4.  In the towns and larger villages a proper organization can be established with means for treating the sick.    But in all villages the danger of infection must be taught and guarded against or plague will linger on.    Wherever cases are occurring in the fields, the officer on plague duty should give his earnest attention to these points, and endea- vour to get at and remove the cause of infection continuing. 5.  Collectors will be held responsible for the efficient working of these instructions and that officers on plague duty understand what they have to do.    As cases diminish, the establishment should be massed on the place remaining infected and the last cases should be sought for and segregated with ever-increasing vigilance. (P.C. No. 405, dated 10th February 1899; No. 1179, dated 1st May 1899.) (3)-Search Parties. Should there at any time be reason to suspect that plague exists and has not been detected, search parties should be organized. A sufficient number of European officers should be employed to render the powers of search effective and at the same time prevent the subordinate establishment from abusing their authority. Failing officers of the Civil estab- lishments, young officers of the Staff Corps should be deputed for this duty. Respectable inhabitants who volunteer for the service should be employed to assist in searching for concealed cases of plague; as far as possible houses should be allowed to be entered only by persons of caste or of the same religion as the occupants; and subject to the same limitation, women
?165 should be utilized in examining women and in searching any room or place exclusively occupied by them. (G.O., No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898; No. 1196-P., dated 28th September 1898.) (4)-Inspection and Burial of Corpses. Original Mufassal Regulation 25 (page 37) and City Regulation 16 (page 16) deal with the mode of disposal of plague corpses. They in no way interfere with the religious customs of the people, but merely authorise the local autho- rities to insist on certain necessary precautions as to the routes to be taken by funeral processions and as to the place and manner of burial. It is not intended that public undertakers should alone touch the corpses. The dead may be dressed for the grave by their own relations or in whatever manner may be customary among the class to which the deceased belonged. (G.O., No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898; No. 1196-P., dated 28th September 1898.) 2. Under the first paragraph of Additional Mufassal Regulation 16 (page 46), the Collector may require in respect of any particular area that the certificate of a Medical officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death. But it must be understood that medical examination of a corpse is entirely optional on the part of the relations, and that no one will be compelled to allow the inspection of the corpse of a deceased relative. In the event, however, of a certificate not being produced or inspection invited, it may be presumed that the death has been caused by plague and the rules regarding the segregation of the contacts and the disinfection of the house may be enforced. The examination of the corpses of women by men should never be required. The orders of the Govern- ment should be obtained before this regulation is acted upon in any area, and in applying for sanction, the Collector should report fully on the following points:- (1)  What classes of  officers will be authorized to issue certificates under the regulation. (2)  Whether any fee will be required for the grant of this certificate. (3)  Whether there  is  such  a  number  of   Government Medical officers, male and female,  at the station as will be sufficient to carry out inspection promptly so as not to  cause any delay in burials.
?166 (4)  Whether there has been any increase in the rate of mortality. (5)  Whether there is any reason to believe that deaths are  concealed  or  that   causes  of  death  are   not  correctly reported. (G.O., No. 330-P., dated 14th April 1898; No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898; No. 1023-P., dated 7th September 1898; No. 278-P., dated 22nd February 1899; and P.C. No. 359, dated 8th February 1899.) (5)-Disinfection. The utmost importance should be attached to the perfec- tion of the system of disinfection, for any flaw in it may render nugatory carefully devised and executed operations against plague. The advice and instructions contained in the following memorandum drawn up by the Sanitary Com- missioner with the Government of India should be carefully followed:- MEMORANDUM. 1.  "It has been brought to the notice of the Government of India that the disinfection of plague-infected houses and clothing is often carried out in an imperfect way.    In most cases this depends upon the lack of proper appliances and   of skilled workmen, but occasionally it seems to be due to incomplete acquaintance with the principles  that underlie the   art of  disinfection.    This is, to  some extent,  inevitable where much of the agency is directed by non-professional persons, and it has been considered advisable to review  for the guidance of those concerned the general principles on which disinfection should be carried out. 2.  The purpose of disinfection is the destruction of the specific germs of disease.    In the case of plague, the germ, in any stage in which it has been hitherto found, is fortunately easy to destroy, if it is reached by the means used for its destruction.    The germs of plague may be killed by means of- (a) moist heat, (b) chemicals. Without undervaluing the great efficacy of direct sunlight and ventilation, it may at once be stated that these agents should be used as aids only. 3.  Moist heat is most effectively employed in one of  the numerous apparatus specially   devised for the  purpose.   All  these apparatus are not of equal value; but the three essential conditions in  determining whether an apparatus is efficient or not are (1) that the steam employed shall be saturated; (2) that the temperature of the steam  shall reach
?167 212F. or more ; and (3) that articles suitable for disinfection by  moist heat shall not be spoiled during the process. 4. Special apparatus * should be available at all ports and in large cities. Efficient disinfectors can some times be extemporised, especially on lines of Railway where steam from locomotives can be provided, but it must be ascertained that all such contrivances fulfil the three con- ditions mentioned above. Every disinfector must be worked by a trustworthy man who under- stands it, the workman having been instructed in the use of the parti- cular apparatus by a Medical officer who has ascertained experimentally how to get effective work from it, and has laid down definite rules  for the guidance of the operator. 5.  But expensive disinfectors are not always available,  and a boiler of some kind must often be used.    Even in such cases, rules for the guidance of the men using the boiler must be prescribed.    It is less difficult to secure a high and uniform temperature when the vessel used can be covered, and it must not be forgotten that the temperature of the water will be lowered whenever a fresh article is plunged  into it.    It is essential, then, that arrangements should be made to secure that every article to be disinfected by boiling should be completely immersed, and exposed to the boiling temperature for not less than ten minutes. 6.  Chemicals  must be used when the employment of moist heat is impossible ; and it is well to add that there is at any rate a theoretical objection to the use of chemicals for the disinfection of organic  matter such as clothing, because albuminous substances may combine with the chemicals, and form a protecting envelope to the germs it is desired to reach . 7.  It is of the first importance that the chemicals should be sufficiently pure to be effective, and although it is impossible here to discuss more than two of the disinfectants in most general use,-perchloride of mer- cury and carbolic acid-it may  be remarked that a sample of " crude perchloride  of mercury " recently purchased in Calcutta contained no perchloride at all, and that much of the commercial carbolic acid in general use contains very little phenol and very much comparatively inert tar oils. * Note.-The Madras port has a disinfecting machine obtained from England. Tunga- bhadra and Arkonam have apparatus designed by Mr. Moss, Public Works Department, in consultation with the Sanitary Commissioner, Madras, while at Hospet disinfection is carried out with a machine lent by the Southern Mahratta Railway.  Note.-Rules for working efficiently the steam disinfecting machines are in the pos- session of the officers in charge. Copies can be obtained on application to the Sanitary Commissioner.  Note.-The following remarks of M. Haffkine should be noted: "The general tendency to seek protection, during epidemics, in bonfires, fumigation, gaseous disinfect- ants, &c., is based upon a notion that infection exists in, and may be carried and com- municated by, 'vicious air.' This notion is deprived of any experimental foundation whatever ; on no occasion was there reason, in the least sufficient, to believe that the air was the actual vehicle of contagion in any of the diseases which have been put into the category of the so-called ' air-born diseases ;' and all investigations made up to the present go to show that air is free from pathogenic microbes."- G.O., No. 1306-P., dated 11th October 1898  Note.-Hence the importance of using hydrochloric acid with the solution when employing perchloride of mercury.
?168 To secure the purity of the chemicals, it would be of advantage to issue them from a depot* or depots in each province. In any case chemicals should be tested before being taken into use, and for this purpose specimens should be sent to the Chemical Examiner for report as to whether they are sufficiently pure to be efficient. Where it is not possible to obtain the assistance of the Chemical Examiner, the following rough tests may be employed, as they require for their performance no special apparatus except a few test-tubes with corks to fit them, and a 9-per cent. solution of caustic soda. Perchloride of mercury should be of a white or glassy colour; heated on an iron spoon over a flame it should disappear without leaving more than a trace of residue. It is soluble in 16 parts of cold water-60 F. The impurity most likely to be present is calomel, which is insoluble in water. Take a little of the ' perchloride ' to be examined, powder it, place it in a test-tube and add pure water. Shake and pour off the clear fluid into a second test-tube. The clear fluid should contain the perchloride of mercury. Add some of the caustic soda solution to it, a yellow precipitate indicates perchloride of mercury. If any salt is left in the bottom of the original test-tube, a little of the caustic soda solution should be poured on it. Blackening indicates the presence of calomel. The examination of the carbolic acid is less satisfactory. A long test-tube should be taken and sufficient of the carbolic acid poured into it to fill it for 11/2 inches. Twice the quantity of the 9 per cent. so- lution of caustic soda should then be added to fill the test-tube up to 41/2 inches. The tube should then be corked, well shaken, and the con- tents allowed ample time to settle. If tar oils are present, they will separate in a dark layer, and if this layer measures more than 1/20 of an inch in the test-tube, the carbolic acid contains too much tar oil to be efficient. 8. The strength  of the disinfecting perchloride solution should be 1 in 1,000 with the addition of 2 per thousand of hydrochloric acid, and a little aniline blue or other colouring matter. The solution of perchlo- ride of mercury should be prepared in concentrated form  and specific directions should be given on the label of the vessel containing it to show the amount of the concentrated preparation necessary to make a solution of 1 part of perchloride in 1,000 in strength, on the addition of one gallon, or other convenient quantity, of water. But care must be taken that the proper dilution is always observed, and that the solution is not stored in a porous receptacle or brought into contact with metal. * Note.-Collectors and Chairmen of Municipal Councils should obtain their supplies of disinfectants by submitting indents to the Medical Store Depot, Madras, through the Surgeon-General. (P.C.'s Proceedings, No. 774, dated 18th March 1899.)  Vide Rule 15, page 77 and the Sanitary Commissioner's letter printed in Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 308, dated 1st February 1899.  Note.-A useful alternative is to carry 4 oz. packets of the perchloride of mercury in a bamboo and the acid packed with sawdust in a tin.
?169 9.  The carbolic acid * disinfecting solution should contain at least 5 per cent. of phenol; consequently, if the examination has shown that the carbolic acid supplied is of doubtful quality, the dilution with water should be 1 in 18 or 19, instead of 1 in 20. 10.  Disinfection may be naturally divided under three headings- Disinfection of houses and household effects. Disinfection of personal effects. Disinfection of the person. 11.  A. Of houses.-On opening the house a stream of the perchloride  solution should be poured by means of a syringe through the door over the furniture and as much of the walls as can be seen from the door. This lays the dust and renders entry to the house comparatively safe. The house may then be entered and the walls, ceiling and everything within reach thoroughly covered with the perchloride solution till they are wet and dripping.    The furniture should be collected in one place and thoroughly disinfected, piece by piece, by means of the solution. Clothing should be collected, placed in a canvas bag sealed with a lead clamp seal and sent to be disinfected by moist heat- by steam if there is an apparatus, if not by boiling.    Worthless articles should be burned at once. After thorough disinfection of the furniture, it should be placed out- side to dry in the sunshine. Each room, passage, staircase, etc., should be systematically cleansed in the same way. There may be certain parts of a room that require special treat- ment. If the floor is of earth, it should not be dug up,  but should be thoroughly saturated with the perchloride solution. If the floor is of earth mixed with cowdung,  it should be saturated with acid perchloride solution of double strength i.e., 2 per 1,000 of perchloride and 4 per 1,000 hydrochloric acid. Sometimes wooden and stone walls or articles of furniture are covered with a greasy coat of dirt, through which no solution will pene- trate. After such a coating has been thoroughly irrigated with the perchloride solution, it should be scrubbed with a hot 5 per cent. solution of carbolic acid and soft soap. All crevices and cracks should be thoroughly syringed out with the perchloride solution. * Note.-In deference to Mr. Hankin's opinion as to feebleness of action of carbolic acid on the plague microbe, its issue has not been advised in this Presidency. Phenyle is relied upon when the use of perchloride of mercury with hydrochloric acid, or a solution of sulphuric acid, is deemed unsuitable. Beyond those stated no other disinfectants are considered necessary.  Note.-For the best mode of applying perchloride of mercury to the walls and floors of houses, see Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 308, dated 1st February 1899, and G.O., No. 852-P., dated 3rd June 1899.  Note.-Vide paragraph 4 of the Sanitary Commissioner's letter printed in Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 308, dated 1st February 1899, in which he proposed to give up the kiln method of disinfection.  Note.-Vide paragraph 2 of the Sanitary Commissioner's letter printed in Plague Commissioner's Proeedings, No. 308, dated 1st February 1899 ; paragraph 1 of this letter also directs attention to the use of sulphuric acid. It should be used in the strength of 1-250 (Hankin), where thick mud charged with organic matter is dealt with. 22
?170 When the rooms and furniture have been disinfected in this way, it is generally advisable to open * the roof of the house to admit sunlight and air. For this purpose holes, not less than six feet by four feet, should be made in the roof, care being taken that no beam runs across the opening. Sometimes it may be necessary to remove the whole roof. Next day the house should be whitewashed . For this purpose fresh lime-preferably stone lime and not kankar lime-must be used. The fresh lime should be added gradually to water placed in convenient vessels, until a hot, caustic wash is obtained, and this should be applied at once over walls, ceiling, floor and doors. 12.  The disinfection of a house is always attended by danger, but this may be minimised by suitable precautions. (a) Disinfecting gangs should be inspected daily, and no one who has any cut or abrasion of the skin should be allowed to go out with the gang. (b) Shoes should always be worn inside infected houses.   (c) Workmen should, if possible, have special clothing to wear while disinfecting, and this should be taken off at night and the body cleansed with water. (d)   Each workman should be warned of the danger of inhaling dust and enjoined to avoid raising it, to wrap a fold of his puggri round his mouth when entering a house, and to lay the dust by means of the perchloride spray as soon as possible. (e)  The hands of workmen should be protected from the effects of the carbolic solution and lime wash by the plentiful application of oil. (f)  Whenever they stop working, the workmen should wash their hands thoroughly outside the infected locality. (g) No food or drink should ever be taken within an infected place, and hookah-smoking in such a place should be prevented. 13.   B.  Clothing, etc.-The disinfection of clothing should be carried out by means of moist heat, either in an apparatus specially constructed for the purpose or in a boiler as described in paragraph 5.    When a boiler is used, care must be taken that each article is exposed throughout for at least ten minutes to water at a temperature of 212 F. Leather and other articles which would be damaged by exposure to moist heat, must be immersed in a disinfecting solution, or thoroughly scrubbed with 5 per cent. carbolic acid solution and soft soap. *  Note.-For detailed instructions see Sanitary Commissioner's letter printed in G.O., No. 1005-P., dated 29th June 1899.  Note.-Attention is invited to the following remarks of the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras:- "It seems to me that the correct place for lime-washing of houses is not as a method of disinfection, but of improving the general sanitary condition of houses before the arrival of an epidemic. Lime-washing has an effect upon organic impurities on walls that is of value in decreasing the chances of a favourable nidus for microbes, but the act of white-washing includes a general clean-up and airing of a house which is of greater moment. When such action is taken, not with reference to a solitary house here and there, but to a whole town, or large section of it, there can be no doubt of its being possible to look for important sanitary results. Whilst upon this subject, there- fore, I would advise your reminding Collectors of the power given under section 186 of the Madras District Municipalities Act. Provided that no farce is enacted-it being frequent for inhabitants to attempt to satisfy an order by splattering a little whitewash on the outside of a house-I believe the enforcement of the order in municipal towns suffering from, or threatened with, plague, would be a most judicious measure."
?171 14. C. The person.-"For disinfection of the person reliance must be placed upon soap and warm water, but there is no objection to the additional use of any weak disinfectant which will not injure the skin." (G.O., No. 1154-P., dated 27th July 1899.) 2. In the case of articles that are regarded as "specially liable"-in the sense emyloyed by the Venice Convention-to infection, namely, rags, used apparel and bedding, and waste paper, their import from plague-infected areas is prohibited and any articles brought in contravention of such prohibition should be destroyed, it being impossible to estimate the extent of liability to infection these have  undergone or to rely fully upon available  means of disinfection.    Ordinarily,   it is not necessary to  take special  action in regard to articles  other than those to which this term is applicable.    But when, for exceptional reasons, other articles of merchandize not deemed specially liable to infection are treated it should be arranged that, on arrival of a consignment, it should be stored, when weather permits in the  open air; but if this is not feasible in a well-ventilated shed.    The flooring should be impervious; by preference the walls should also be of impervious material -for example, of corrugated iron or cement plastered.   Earth that can be removed should be soaked with the milk of lime and then be mixed with sawdust and kerosine  oil, and be burnt on the spot.    Packages or wrappings, earth-or other- wise-stained should be painted over with milk of lime-one part of lime to four of water.    When feasible  having regard to weather, the whole of the packages before  opening should be exposed to the direct rays  of the sun,  and   be   carefully turned so as to  subject all surfaces to this influence during a period of  two   days-it being  held  that even four hours' exposure, sufficient to produce desiccation, is fatal to   the plague bacillus (Yersin).    When   the contents of packages are not food-articles, the   complete spraying of them with a solution of perchloride of mercury would prove a most effect- ive method of treatment.    Godowns or places in which these articles have been stored should have their flooring washed down, with a solution  of perchloride of mercury (1-1,000), whilst the walls should be sprayed with the  same solution. Subsequently, as  soon as the walls are  dry, a freshly-slaked lime should be employed as whitewash.    If impervious floor- ing is not available, the earth should be disinfected with milk of lime, and be removed and replaced from time to time. The time requisite for detention of articles for the purpose of the above treatment is as follows:- (a) If the spray of perchloride of mercury be used- a process not applicable where  articles connected with the
?172 production or distribution of food, or articles of food, are dealt with-sufficient time after application should be allowed to enable the surfaces to become thoroughly dry. (b)  If milk of lime be employed, not less than two hours after application is requisite. (c)  When disinfection by exposure to  sun is trusted to, although four hours is held   to be   sufficient to compass  the death of the bacillus of plague, so  many  uncertainties attend the process in practice that two successive days' exposure to the sun under careful supervision  as to  all  surfaces being under its influence should be demanded. (G.O., No. 779-M., dated 2nd April 1897; No. 1170-M., dated 11th May 1897.) 3.  Persons who obtain supplies from plague-infected parts are strongly   advised to burn all the litter and straw in the baskets which  arrive and  either to   destroy the baskets or, at all events, thoroughly disinfect them.    Any basket may reasonably be regarded as   dangerous,   as it may have  been stored  by   sufferers   from plague.    Unless,   however,   they have been contaminated with damp earth from infected loca- lities, the retention of infection for long by baskets is not likely.    Collectors are requested to give the widest publicity to these remarks and endeavour to pursuade  people as far as possible  to  cease importing    eatables   from plague-infected parts until danger of plague has passed; and, in any case, to attempt to ensure that the precautions mentioned  above are always observed. (P.C.'s Progs.,  No. 109, dated 8th October. 1898.) 4.  All articles known or suspected to be infected should be burnt unless they can be properly disinfected, especially when a case of plague is first discovered. (G.O., No. 929-P., dated 27th August 1898.) 5.  Persons should not be considered entitled to compen- sation because it becomes necessary to destroy property in their possession which is dangerous to the public health, and  the prescribed authorities should always retain the discretion to award or refuse compensation according to the circumstances of the case.    At the same time, it is of importance  that the disinclination of the poorer classes to disclose cases of plague should, by all reasonable means, be reduced, and the Govern- ment of India consider that, in the case of the destruction of bedding, clothing and similar articles, the authorities may be reasonably liberal in. admitting payment   of compensation, when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circum- stances, to whom it  whould be a great hardship to bear it. As regards damage caused to houses during disinfection, the
?173 Madras Government has ruled that no compensation should in any case be given either for replacing floors, or for filling up holes in the walls, but where roofs have been destroyed, so much may be given as will enable the occupiers to place the roofs in fair repair. Any such compensation should be given only where the disinfecting work has been done by organized gangs of coolies or sepoys. (G.O., No. 864-M., dated 12th April 1897 ; No. 1066-P., dated 12th July 1899.) 6. The following table shows the efficient strength of some of the principal disinfectants as ascertained by laboratory experiments. In actual practice greater strengths are relied upon:- Perohloride of mercury 1 in 5,000 Permanganate of potash 1 in 5,000 Chloride of lime 1 in 2,000 "Lysol"         1 in 2,000 Hydrochloric acid 1 in 1,428 Quick lime 1 in 1,000 Sulphate of copper    ... 1 in 1,000 Izal     ...        ...... 1 in 1,000 Nitric acid 1 in    500 Sulphuric acid 1 in    500 Phenyle or Lawes' fluid 1 in    400 It will be seen that perchloride of mercury, permanganate of potash, chloride of lime and " lysol" proved to be by far the most potent substances examined. That most classical of germicides-carbolic acid-cannot be included, its efficient strength being but 1 in 50. Perchloride of mercury is a thoroughly reliable germicide. As already known, its power is enhanced by the addition of a certain quantity of hydrochloric acid. The drawback to its indiscriminate use is its very poisonous nature. Permanganate of potash though non-poisonous is speedily rendered impotent in the presence of oxidisable organic material. Chloride of lime possesses the merits of cheapness and great efficiency. It is not dangerous, in any marked degree, to animal life. " Lysol " is a potent germicide, but its cost is against its use on a large scale. Quick lime is a harmless disinfectant, and is readily obtain- able in most parts of the country. Sulphate of copper exerts its germicidal properties in a somewhat irregular and uncertain manner. Phenyle is fairly cheap.    It is harmless to animals.
?174 Very hot or boiling water is an excellent surface disin- fectant for plague; its practical application would probably be inconvenient. (G.O., No. 740-P., dated 2nd August 1898.) (6)-Railway Inspection. 1.   Original Mufassal Regulation 14 (page  29) and Addi- tional Mufassal Regulation 5 (page 42).-All inspecting officers, male and female,   at railway inspection stations,  and clerks employed at important stations such as Pdanur, Arkonam and Perambore, should always carry with them a note-book of a special   conspicuous colour with the  words "Government of Madras Plague officials' note-book" printed on the back. A copy of the appointment order should be attached to the note-book.    Copies of the book may be obtained from the Superintendent,   Government Press,  through  the   Surgeon- General. (G.O., No. 724-P., dated 15th May 1899; No. 895-P., dated 12th June 1899.) 2.  Railway Administrations are requested to instruct their staff to give every assistance to the Medical officers conduct- ing the inspection in order to  minimise the detention  of the trains, and to detain the trains until the medical inspection is over.    Railway Ticket Collectors may be allowed to accom- pany the plague inspecting officers, if this course is found to economize time. (G.Os., No. 332-M., dated 1st March 1897, No. 1425-P., dated 25th Sept. 1899.) 3.  All passengers should be required to quit their carriages and be examined on the  platform or in some suitable place, cases of  suspicion being removed for more careful investi- gation to a place reserved for the purpose.    Care must be taken that the carriages are locked before the arrival of the train   at the  inspection   station,  and  that  no passenger is permitted to leave  his  carriage until in orderly   course the arrangement shall be complete for such examination. (G.O., No. 351-M., dated 2nd March 1897.) 4.  The   inspecting   officers   should  not   only thoroughly examine passengers and passenger vehicles, but also  inspect guards, drivers and firemen  and their vans and engines,  so that no person may escape inspection.    No distinction should be made between railway people and others, and  before any train, whether carrying passengers  or goods,   leaves  the in- spection station, a thorough search should be made to discover if any persons have concealed themselves  with the  object of evading inspection. (G.O., No. 977-P., dated 1st September 1898.)
?175 5. In the absence of any symptoms showing a passenger to be suffering from fever, it is unnecessary to examine his person for the purpose of finding out whether buboes are present. This practice, if it is at present enforced anywhere, should be discontinued. (G.O., No. 10-P., dated 8th February 1898.) 6. Female passengers should, under no circumstances, be required to be examined by men. For their inspection, one or more nurses are attached to each inspection station. (G.O., No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898.) 7.  Only persons showing symptoms of plague, or those from infected areas who can give no satisfactory  information as to their destination or who cannot be relied upon to observe the passport rules should be detained for observation for ten days or as   long as   may be necessary.    Others should be detained only for such period as is necessary for  the  careful disinfection of their persons and clothing.    It must, however, be noted that the clothes and personal effects of persons who are not themselves suffering from infection or show suspicious symptoms need not be   disinfected,  unless such  clothes  and personal effects are dirty or in such a condition  as to raise a suspicion that they  may be contaminated. (G.O., No. 692-P., dated 9th May 1899; No. 764-P., dated 22nd May 1899.) 8.  If a detained person has plague when removed   from the   train,   all  who  have travelled with  him   in   the   same compartment  are   "contacts" and   must  also  be   detained unless   they  have   been  inoculated.    But if he  is detained merely because "suspicious", i.e., dirty or likely to evade the rules,   then there  is   no   need   to   detain   those   who   have travelled with him. (P.C., No. 471, dated 29th October 1898.) 9.  To enable detained persons to  resume their railway journey  after  their   discharge from   the plague   camp,  the Plague officer should give them   certificates in the following form:- Detention Certificate. ..............................Camp. 1.  Name of passenger 2.  Number and description of ticket 3.  Detained from                                     to 4.  Name and designation of issuing officer
?176 The passengers should take the certificates to the Station- master and get them endorsed by him. (P.C., No. 17, dated 5th January 1899.) 10.  A weekly return of persons detained for observation at the camps attached  to  railway inspection stations  should be submitted to the Plague Commissioner (or Government) in the following form.    Persons  detained   merely for disinfec- tion and allowed to proceed by the next train  should not be included in the return:- Detention Camp. Return for week ending Monday, the                                          1899. 1.  Number admitted up to the end of the preceding week. 2.   Number accounted for up to the end of the preceding week    ...        ...        ...        ...        ... 3.  Balance (i.e., 1-2) 4.  Number admitted during the present week    ... 5.  Total number to be accounted for (i.e., 3 + 4) 6.  Number accounted for- (a) by deaths ...        ...        ...        ...        ... (6) by removal to plague hospital    ... (c) by discharge on expiration of detention period. (d) otherwise (give details)   ... Total (a+b+c+d) ... 7.  Balance at the  end of the week (5-6)         ...        ... (G.O., No. 1017-P., dated 5th September 1898 ; P.C., No. 852, dated 6th December 1898.) 11.  The Inspecting Medical officer, Jalarpet, should send telegraphic intimation to the Medical officer of the Ceylon Government at Tuticorin when passengers pass from Banga- lore to Tuticorin. (P.C., No. 753, dated 22nd November 1898.) 12.  Any   expenditure incurred  in  providing  inspection sheds on railway platforms in cases where there are no proper facilities in the  railway  station for the examination of pass- engers in accordance with the Plague Regulations should be borne by the   Civil   Department  and  not  by  the   Railway Administrations. (G.O., No. 55-P., dated 9th January 1899.) 13.  Persons sending horses from plague-infected areas by rail  through  Tungabhadra,   Hospet   and Jalarpet   Railway Plague Inspection Stations are informed that the syces accom- panying the animals are liable to be detained at the inspection stations for a period of ten days under the Plague Regulations. They are therefore requested to arrange for a second syce
?177 from a non-infected area being present at the inspection station, through which an animal belonging to them has to pass, to relieve the man coming from the infected area. If such an arrangement is not made, both the animal and the syce will be liable to be detained and the owner will be required to pay 8 annas a day for stabling besides the keep of the horse during the period of detention, unless the syce brings with him sufficient provender. (G.O., No. 1022-P., dated 7th September 1898.) 14.  Original Mufassal Regulation 16 (page 30).-The mark used at Tungabhadra Inspection Station has been ordered to be adopted at all other railway inspection stations.    It should be made only on the tickets of those passengers who come, or are  suspected to come, from plague-infected areas or from places notified by Government for the purposes of the pass- port rules.    The special mark should be made at the first inspection station at which the passenger arrives.    It is not necessary to punch his ticket again at any subsequent station through  which he  may  pass,  but  he  must  be   medically examined nevertheless.    Tickets of persons who come from an uninfected area, or who, though coming from an infected area, have been detained for ten days at one of the observa- tion camps established in the Madras Presidency, need not be so marked. (G.O., No. 1326-P., dated 13th October 1898; P.C., No. 931, dated 17th December 1898.) 15.  Care should be taken that the plague punches are not used except by responsible persons and that they are kept in safe custody when not in use.    The wrong punching of tickets should be specially guarded against, as the annoyance caused thereby and the consequent liability to take out a passport is very great. (G.O., No. 519-M., dated 13th March 1897; P.O., No. 1018, dated 14th April 1899.) 16.  Passengers who attempt to evade the plague mark by re-booking should be watched.    If they break their journey for a considerable period, the passport rules should be applied to them.    If they alight for a few hours with the intention of proceeding by a subsequent train, the right-hand lower corner of their new tickets should be clipped with scissors.    If this course be adopted, it will be unnecessary to communicate their names and addresses to the new places of destination by telegraph or otherwise.    The Railway Administrations have been authorised to supply stationmasters with scissors and 23
?178 bill the Collectors concerned for their cost, which should be met from Local or Municipal Funds. (P.C., No. 302, dated 21st October 1898; No. 461, dated 21st February 1899; No. 717, 14th March 1899.) 17. Original Mufassal Regulations 18 and 19 (page 34).- The special attention of the railway authorities should be drawn to the necessity for the careful working of these regula- tions. If they are properly worked, there can hardly be any cases where passengers will break journey and escape observ- ation altogether. (G.O., No. 766-P., dated 6th August 1898.) (7)-Observation System and Passport Rules. 1.   Original Mufassal Regulation 1 (page 24).-This regu- lation should be strictly carried out throughout the Presidency as a check on the working of Regulation 17 (page 31) and prosecution  should be resorted to in places where the duty of reporting arrivals from plague-infected parts is  neglected in spite of repeated warnings.    If in any municipal town the existing sanitary staff is unequal to the task of properly carry- ing out the system of observation, it should be strengthened. (G.O., No. 556-P., dated 11th June 1898.) 2.   Original Mufassal Regulation 17  (page 31) and Addi- tional Mufassal Regulation 5 (page 42).-All Railway Adminis- trations are requested to put up in a conspicuous place in every railway  carriage  a   copy of   the following notice in English and vernacular:- Notice. "The Madras Plague Regulations require all passengers arriving from plague-infected parts to take out passports at the station where they alight, or in the case of passengers proceeding to Mttuplaiyam, at Pdanr. Persons infringing the regulations render themselves liable to prosecution." (G.O., No. 741-P., dated 2nd August 1898.) 3.  It is the duty of railway authorities assisted  by the platform  police to see that passengers alighting at a railway station do not leave the premises except by the proper exit, and to afford every facility for the  working of the Plague Regulations.    Ticket collectors should be required to stop all passengers holding tickets issued at infected or notified stations until their names and addresses are taken down, and passports issued to them either by the plague official appointed for the purpose, or at smaller stations, by the station staff. (G.O., No. 273-M., dated 23rd February 1897; No. 816 A.M., dated 6th April 1897; No. 1165-P., dated 26th September 1898.)
179 4.  When  a large body  of troops or police or coolies en- gaged in plague operations are returning to a healthy district, previous intimation of their departure should be given to the local authorities of the place of destination.    Before starting, they should be  carefully examined and disinfected, and on arrival at their destination, they should be given passports according to the rules. (G.O., No. 835-P., dated 2nd June 1899.) 5.  Persons who pass to and fro between an infected and a healthy district should be kept under surveillance, but a passport need not be issued to them more than once during each period of ten days. (G.O., No. 1080-P., dated 15th September 1898.) 6.  Passport-issuing officers  should not suppose that they have merely to issue passports to those who come and apply for them.    The main object of declaring persons from infected parts to be bound to take out passports is to punish cases of wilful evasion of the rules, and it was never the intention to relieve the passport-issuing officers of their duty of tracing out such passengers and not allowing them to go away without passports.    Passengers who fail to take out passports should be prosecuted at the discretion of the Collector, but whether prosecuted or not, they must be required to present them- selves for inspection for ten days as soon as their arrival has been detected. (G.O., No. 741-P., dated 2nd August 1898.) 7. Arrangements should be made to have all arrivals at large towns like Salem, Trichinopoly, Madura not only ex- amined by a medical subordinate at the railway platform, but also similarly inspected daily for ten days afterwards. The Collectors concerned must see that this is done and should not leave the matter wholly into the hands of Municipal Chairmen. At stations where medical subordinates are not available for the duty of watching arrivals, granting them passports and inspecting them for ten days, the work should be entrusted to stationmasters or competent persons already in the employ of Government, and if they are found neglecting their duty, they should be prosecuted. Collectors are requested to check their action carefully from time to time. (G.O., No. 1105-P., dated 17th September 1898.) 8. Passport-issuing officers should note that every person who holds a ticket marked in the manner indicated in para- graphs 14 and 16 of section 6 of this Chapter, should be given a passport. To ensure that none escapes taking a passport,
?180 the passport-issuing officer should question passengers where they come from, in cases where they do not hold specially marked tickets. In cases where a passport has been wrongly issued owing to erroneous plague-marking of the railway ticket, the President or the Health Officer of the Municipality in the City of Madras and the Municipal Chairman or any Revenue officer not below the grade of Deputy Tahsildar in the mufassal are authorized to cancel the passport on satis- factory proof that it was wrongly issued. (G.O., No. 1326-P., dated 13th October 1898; No. 1183-P., dated 2nd August 1899; P.C., No. 560, dated 1st March 1899.) 9.  Regulation 17(ii) (c).-The Collector should settle with the railway  authorities of each district at which stations the railway staff shall be required to perform the duties connected with the issue of passports, and at which stations the Collector should make   other arrangements.   Stationmasters requiring forms or service postage stamps should apply to the Collectors concerned, and should use the following designation in frank- ing covers containing correspondence  connected with their passport work-"Stationmaster and Honorary Plague Pass- port-issuing officer." (G.O., No. 454-P., dated 9th May 1898; No. 673-P., dated 15th July 1898; P.C., No. 381, dated 25th October 1898.) 10.   Regulation 17(iv).-Intimation of the issue of passport or   any  change in the residence of the passport holder is now made by  sending the triplicate copy of the passport.    The following procedure should be followed in respect to passport holders who change their residence within ten  days of their arrival:- (i) When the new place of destination is within the Madras Presidency- (a)  The local authority of the original place of arrival should send the triplicate copy of the passport to the local authority of the new place of destination after noting therein the number of days for which the passport holder has been observed. (b)  If the new place of destination is in another district, the change of residence should also be intimated directly to the District Medical and Sanitary officer (or Collector) of that district, and through the Tahsildar or Municipal Chairman concerned to  the District Medical and Sanitary officer (or Collector) of the original place of arrival. (ii) When the new place of destination is in the Mysore Province-
?181 (c)  When a traveller from an infected place situated within or outside the Madras  Presidency proceeds to   any place in the Mysore Province either  direct or after breaking his journey in any infected district in the Madras Presidency, no intimation need be given to the authorities in Bangalore or in the Mysore State. (d)  When, however, a passenger from an infected place arrives in a non-infected district and then proceeds to Mysore before the  expiry of the ten days'   period of observation, intimation of his departure should be at once given to the authorities in Bangalore or Mysore.    If the passenger travels by railway, the intimation should be addressed to the Assistant Surgeon, Yesvantpur, or the Residency Surgeon, Bangalore, as the case may be.    If the passenger  goes by road,  the intimation should be sent to the local authority or the Amildar of the place of the destination.    In either case the passport given to the passenger may be recovered by the local authority of the place of departure  or at the road frontier inspection station through which he may pass. The intimation should contain the following particulars:- Passport number, date and station of issue. Passenger's name and his father's name. How long observed and where. New place   of   residence-District,   taluk,   village,    street,   and number or name of the house. The forms should be printed at the District Presses. (P.C., No. 193, dated 15th October 1898; No. 1183, dated 1st May 1899; G.O., No. 1395-P., dated 20th September 1899.) 11.  Where a person from an infected area is passported at his destination, but returns to his starting point within ten days, the passport may be given up on return, and further observation need not be insisted upon. (P.C., No. 452, dated 20th February 1899.) 12.  Regulation 17  (v).-Collectors   should instruct their officers to deal with the utmost care with persons arriving from infected parts and presenting symptoms of fever with acute affection of the lungs, until an opportunity is afforded for a competent medical officer to pronounce whether there is reason to suspect the existence of pneumonic plague. (P.C., No. 978, dated 22nd December 1898.) 13.  Regulation 17 (viii).-The object of sending intima- tion of arrivals from infected parts to  the District Medical and Sanitary officer is not merely to inform that officer of the movements of such persons, but to make him responsible
?182 that the passport-issuing officers, the local authorities, and the Tahsildars respectively carry out their duties under the passport rules. He should maintain a register of all intima- tions received by him and should see that all persons men- tioned therein are duly accounted for. The intimation forms will be supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press, to Collectors on indent. In filling up the form, the ticket number and the name of railway station of destination should also be entered. (G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898; No. 997-P., dated 3rd September 1898; P.C., No. 131, dated 10th October 1898.) 14.  Regulation 17 (viii).-Does not require  the mainten- ance of a register.    The information referred to therein should be recorded in duplicate with the aid of carbon paper,  a separate slip of paper being used for each passenger.    One set of copies should be forwarded at once to the respective destinations and the other kept for reference at the inspection station.    No such intimation is necessary in the case of persons exempted from the passport rules under paragraph 19 of this chapter, as the officers to whom they are immediately subordi- nate are responsible for their observation ; but it should be forwarded in  the case  of inoculated persons from infected areas  who hold   valid  certificates as  they are  liable to   be observed at their own houses. (G.O., No. 1200-P., dated 7th August 1899; No. 1277-P., dated 22nd August 1899; No. 1415-P., dated 23rd September 1899.) 15.  If the guards of the trains and other railway subordi- nates do not carry out the instructions given to  them with regard to the transmission of the  names and addresses of passengers, there should be no hesitation to prosecute them under the Epidemic Diseases Act. (G.O., No. 1220,-P., dated 3rd October 1898.) 16.  The  duties   of   the  District  Medical  and  Sanitary officer under clauses   viii,  ix and x may  be performed by the Collector in Districts where this course is found con- venient.    In such cases, the intimations  should be sent to the Collector. (P.C., No. 353, dated 22nd October 1898; G.O., No. 754-P., dated 20th May 1899.) 17.   Regulation 17 (ix).-The form in which the informa- tion referred to  should be recorded is prescribed in G.O., No. 1074-P., dated 15th September 1898.    Copies of the form are supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press. 18.   Regulation 17 (x).-The Tahsildar should file together the reports received from the District Medical and Sanitary
?183 officer (or Collector) and return each to that officer with the corresponding original passport recovered from the traveller under clause v. No separate register need be maintained by the Tahsildar. (G.O., No. 997,-P., dated 3rd September 1898.) 19. Additional Mufassal Regulation 30 (page 50).-The extent to which passport rules may be relaxed and the classes of persons in respect to whom the relaxation may be made by the Collectors or the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, are indicated in the following note of the Plague Commissioner appended to his Proceedings, No. 16, dated 5th January 1899 :- NOTE. The inconveniences and difficulties attending the working of the passport rules in the case of railway officers have been brought to notice both by the railway authorities and Collectors. A general relaxation of the rules cannot be made in favour of any particular class, and in the case of railway servants is especially undesirable, for there is reason to believe that it has been by this class that infection has been carried to several places. The trouble that is now experienced by those con- stantly on the move may be avoided by them if they are willing to be inoculated, and no relaxation of the rules is called for in the case of those who are unwilling to be inoculated and to whom the inconvenience is merely personal. 2. There are persons, however, constantly employed on the railways such as engine drivers, firemen, guards and mail sorters, with regard to whom, as long as they are on actual duty from day to day, the strict enforcement of the passport rules may result in public inconvenience and in their cases some relaxation may be granted. The duties of these men are of a fairly constant nature, and they halt for any length of time only at the larger stations, where their absence from regular duty must come at once to the notice of a superior officer. On the appli- cation of the railway or postal authorities, Collectors may exempt by name from the ordinary passport rules individual servants of the classes mentioned, on the understanding that the officer to whom they are immediately subordinate must report at once to the nearest local authority every case of sickness among the servants to whom the exemption is given. Any permanent change in the nature of the duties performed should be reported to the officer granting an exemption certificate. Persons so exempted shall be provided with tickets in the following form:- (Name)                                , son of                              , employed as and ordinarily residing at                               , has been exempted from the  passport rules (Original  Mufassal   Regulation 17) as long as he travels on duty as such                            between the stations of and Mark of left thumb. Signature, designation and seal of officer issuing the ticket.
?184 It should be understood that exemption from the passport rules does not carry exemption from any of the other regulations framed under the Epidemic Diseases Act. 3.  Other classes of railway servants are probably less frequently on the move and the enforcement of the rules among them is likely to result less frequently in public inconvenience.    In cases of real diffi- culty, it may be possible to arrange under Original Mufassal Regulation 17 (i) for the inspection of the passport holder at the railway station, or, under Additional Regulation 26, railway officers of known   and approved character and responsible position may be appointed Honorary Assistant Plague officers, and empowered under Original Regulation 17 (i) (d) as "local authorities" at certain stations for the working of the passport rules among railway servants. 4.  Under additional Regulation 30, Collectors may exempt from the necessity of taking out passports any person with regard to whom there are no reasonable grounds for suspicion of infection.    Such exemptions must  be  made  personally,   not   generally,  and should  be   granted sparingly. 5.  Any concession may be withdrawn at any time without assigning a reason. 19. The  following papers   relate to cases in which the rules were relaxed under special circumstances :- (1) G.O., No. 763-M., dated 1st April 1897. His   Highness   the   Graekwar of Baroda's visit to Ootacamund. (2) P.C.,   No.    932,   dated 17th December 1898. Captain   Jennings,    Supervising Medical       officer,       Railway Medical Inspection, Bombay. (3) P.C.,   No.    677,    dated 11th March 1899. Director-General of Telegraphs. (4) P.C.,    No.    760, dated    Visit   of Their  Highnesses  the Maharaja   and   Maharani   of Mysore to Ootacamund. 17th March 1899.  P.C.,    No.    776,    dated  19th March 1899.  P.C.,   No.    1108,   dated  21st April 1899.             (8)-Inoculation. The Sanitary Commissioner for Madras is entrusted with the making of arrangements for inoculation in the whole Presidency including the City of Madras. (G.O., No. 1379-P., dated 26th October 1898). 2. All commissioned Medical officers in Military or Civil employ, Military and Civil Assistant Surgeons and such Civil Apothecaries as the Commissioned Medical officers under whose orders they are serving may permit, may, at the dis- cretion of the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, be supplied with M. Haffkine's anti-plague serum and all necessary
?185 apparatus for inoculation against plague at Government ex- pense. Private practitioners having qualifications not below those permitting of entertainment in the service of Govern- ment as Military or Civil Assistant Surgeons may, at the discretion of the Sanitary Commissioner, be supplied with M. Haffkine's anti-plague serum and with the necessary apparatus for inoculation at the expense of Government, provided they undertake the duty for the public benefit solely, that is, that they take no fee from the subjects inoculated by them and maintain registers and submit information required in such forms as the Sanitary Commissioner may from time to time direct. Only the most careful among the Civil Apo- thecaries should be selected for inoculation work, and they should, as far as feasible, be deputed first to work for a short time at least in a place where inoculations are being done under commissioned medical officers. (G.O., No. 1463-P., dated 21st November 1898; G.O., No. 1543-P., dated 8th December 1898; P.C., No. 1025, dated 27th December 1898). 3. The following rules founded upon those drawn up by M. Haffkine for the guidance of inoculating officers should be carefully observed:- Instructions for keeping records of results of Inoculation by Haffkine's Anti-Plague Vaccine. As the operation does not leave any mark as vaccination does, it is necessary to keep accurate lists of all those operated on. The following method has been found easy to carry out in practice and has proved effectual in checking rusults :- 1.  Inoculation forms   should be  used-one for  each  person-on which are recorded-name in full and father's name, caste, occupation or title, sex, age, birth-place, present address, general health, date of inoculation, dose and number of bottle.    Forms may be had from the Superintendent,  Government Press,   Madras,  or they may be printed locally if more convenient.    All the entries, except the dose and number of bottle, may be filled up by a clerk before the  operation; the  dose and number should invariably be written by the operator himself at the time he operates. 2.  Certificates granted under the terms of G.O., No. 837, Public, dated 17th August  1898, may also be filled up beforehand, but the thumb-mark must be impressed immediately after injection in front of the operator.    To save time this operation should be done by a peon and the certificates can then all be signed together after the close of the operations. 3.  At the close of each day's operations,  all the sheets should be sent to one central  office where they may be arranged and indexed. They should  be arranged alphabetically and then numbered serially, the first number for any day running on from the last of the previous one.    The object of numbering is to make sure that none of the papers go astray at any time.    The names should then be entered in the index 24
?186 book, giving also the date of inoculation and the number of the name sheet. The sheets for each day should be tied up together and arranged in order, when it will be a matter of a few moments only by means of the index to ascertain whether any individual has really been inoculated or not, and by referring to the sheet full details will be forthcoming. In this manner, statistics can be subsequently compiled showing the extent to which protection of a population subjected to an epidemic of plague has been secured by inoculation. Instructions for the use of the Plague Prophylactic. 1.  Parcel to be opened and unpacked carefully.    Any bottle found open, cracked or with the sealing wax broken, is to be sent back to the Laboratory without being used.    Prolonged exposure of the prophylac- tic to daylight is to be avoided. 2.  The prophylactic is to be given by injection under the skin.    For this purpose a hypodermic syringe of a suitable size is to be disinfected, in the beginning, by keeping it filled with a 5 per cent. solution of carbolic acid for 24 hours.    After that, if the syringe is not used for other purposes, it will be sufficient to keep it filled for one hour before commencing operations.    After the completion of each series of injec- tions the syringe is to be washed out with the same antiseptic solution. The needle is cleaned outside with a wet cotton pad soaked with carbolic lotion.    Syringes may be obtained from the Plague Research Labora- tory, Bombay, or by indent on the Sanitary Commissioner, Madras. 3.  Each bottle before being opened is to be shaken, and the contents well mixed up each time before being absorbed into the syringe. 4.  For opening a bottle a pair of dissecting forceps is used, the branches being heated beforehand in a spirit lamp, and guarded from contact with any other unsterilised object. 5.  While opening a bottle, the mouth of it is passed several times through the flame of a lamp, and the sealing wax melted.    The cork is then withdrawn with the sterilised forceps, both branches of which are shoved in between the cork and the neck of the bottle, on two opposite sides  of the   cork  simultaneously.    After the  bottle is  opened  any contact between its mouth and other unsterilised objects is to be avoided; and if contact inadvertently occurs, the mouth is to be heated again in the flame, for disinfecting it.    The contents, or a part of it, is absorbed into the syringe.    For this purpose the bottle is kept as nearly horizontal as possible. 6.  For an adult man, in average state of health, the standard dose is 21/2 cubic centimeters  (15 minims counting for 1 c.c.).    This is to be injected under the skin of the back of the upper arm, preferably the left one, avoiding as carefully as possible the muscles or the big vessels. For a woman the dose is 2 c.c. ; for weakly persons the initial injection is tried with a reduced dose.    A child of 10 gets 1 c.c.,  of three years from 0.1   to 0.3 c.c.    The symptoms commence as a rule 8 to 5 hours after inoculation, and consist chiefly of swelling and pain at the seat of inoculation, and of rise of temperature.    The pain is felt particu- larly on movement of the part.    The fever is accompanied by general discomfort usual to this condition.    No treatment of the symptoms is required, beyond applying ice for the relief of headache, if any felt,
?187 and taking some rest. General symptoms subside after 24 to 36 hours; the pain at the seat of inoculation lasts for 3 or 4 days, disappearing gradually; a painless induration remains there for some time longer. It is desirable to produce a rise of temperature of at least 102 F. If the reaction is less marked, the operation may be repeated 3 or 4 days later, with the same or an increased dose, according to the result of the first inoculation. There is no harm in leaving a longer interval between the two inoculations, or in dividing the doses in several parts to be given at an interval of a few days; but it is preferable to inject a full dose on the first occasion, unless some medical reason exists indicating caution as being necessary. In case the supply of prophy- lactic is accompanied by a direction of doubling or trebling the standard doses, this should be attended to; please, therefore, note the instructions on the label of each bottle. 7.  No  changes in   diet or  occupation  are  necessary,   beyond,   if possible, taking some rest. 8.  The prophylactic material is harmless, and can be thrown about without danger; but it is liable to get infected.    A bottle, once opened, is therefore not to be corked again, but used up at once, or the rest of the contents thrown away.    While a bottle is open, it should be guarded from insects flying or walking into it, or dust falling in, by being leaned against the syringe box in a slanting position.    The  empty bottles, the boxes and, if possible, also the cotton in which they were packed, are to be returned to the Laboratory, Parel, Bombay. 9.  In sealed-up bottles, and when kept in dark and sufficiently cool places, the prophylactic is likely to retain its power indefinitely. 10.  It is requested that a detailed account of all operations done, and of any observations made, be communicated at the earliest convenience to the Sanitary Commissioner, Madras,-the inoculation forms being filled up at the time of inoculation, and the occurrence of plague in families of the inoculated being noted, in the observation sheets at the close of the outbreak.    These latter sheets will be supplied to any Medical officer desirous of compiling statistics at the close of any outbreak. 11.  Indents for serum should be made on the Sanitary Commissioner in the annexed form:- DATE__________________________ PLACE Indent on the   Sanitary   Commissioner,   Madras, for Haffkine's  Anti-Plague Vaccine required for the use of To be sent by rail/post to  Addressed to By whom required Number of doses asked for Number of doses supplied  Sent by rail/post on addressed as above. On receipt of the vaccine the  receipt below to be signed and returned to the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Park Town, Madras.
188 Received from the Sanitary Commissioner,  Madras,______________ doses of Haffkine's anti-plague vaccine. Date District Medical and Sanitary Officer,  District. (G.O., No. 1345-P., dated 21st October 1898; Sanitary Commissioner's Circular No. 2585-S, dated 4th November 1898). 4.  The plague prophylactic and syringes are supplied from the  Plague   Research  Laboratory, Parel, Bombay, upon an indent forwarded by the  Sanitary Commissioner.    Forms of inoculation certificates and observation sheets will be printed at the Government Press, Madras, and supplied by the Sani- tary Commissioner to officers applying for them.    Care should be taken that the inoculation certificate forms do not fall into the hands  of unscrupulous persons.    The forms should be issued from the Press in books of one hundred each, and each officer   supplied with them  should be required  to keep an account. (G.O., No. 998-P., dated 3rd September 1898; G.O., No. 1463-P., dated 21st November 1898; G.O., No. 1236-P., dated 12th August 1899). 5.  Inoculation certificates, which do not absolutely satisfy the requirements prescribed in original Mufassal Regulations 31 and 32, pages 39 and 40, and City Regulations 21 and 21-A, pages 18 and 19, should not ordinarily be recognized.    Each certificate should bear the thumb-mark of the person inocu- lated.    But where from any cause the thumb-mark has been omitted, the officer responsible shall satisfy himself as to the genuineness of the certificate by such other indications as are available, especially relying upon the trustworthiness of the bearer.    All District Medical and Sanitary officers, Civil Sur- geons, Treasury officers, and most Police Station-house officers have been supplied with the finger-print apparatus ; one is also issued with each set of inoculation apparatus by the  Sanitary Commissioner.    The inoculation certificate should be issued immediately  after   one   full   dose  has   been  given,  but the recipient   should be   recommended   to return for  a  second inoculation after ten days.    The full dose should always be given at one time, unless for medical reasons it is considered advisable to divide it.    If it is necessary to do this, a certifi- cate should not be given until the equivalent of two full doses has been given.    If, however, no undue re-action ensues after the  first fractional  dose has   been taken,  it is  advisable to give the full dose at once on the second occasion, after which a certificate may be given. (G.O., No. 1181-P., dated 26th September 1898; P.C., No. 778, dated 23rd Nov- ember 1898; P.C., No. 547, dated 28th February 1899; and G.O., No. 876-P., dated 12th June 1899.)
?189 6. Submission to inoculation is entirely voluntary. No compulsion of whatever kind should be employed, and before starting inoculation at any place, the inoculating officer should consult the District Magistrate, who is responsible if any disturbance takes place. Collectors are desired to take such measures as they consider best suited for the pur- pose to bring home to the people that no one will be inocu- lated against his will, and to impress upon village heads the necessity for making villagers understand the difference between anti-plague inoculation and vaccination. The atten- tion of all officers is drawn to the following remarks of M. Haffkine :- " While it is fairly safe to trust a careful subordinate in charge of a local dispensary with performing inoculation in a place where a spontaneous demand to that effect has arisen, or where the Medical subordinate has had himself the inspira- tion of talking on the subject to the local residents, and unconsciously creating a demand, it is desirable that where such a demand does not yet exist, the subordinates should not be commissioned to preach or popularise the idea, excep- tion of course being made for particularly able and authori- tative men, enjoying confidence and influence among the inhabitants. The reason of this evidently being that an awkward attempt at persuasion is liable to create opposition, resistance, and, occasionally, unfounded apprehension. Until inoculation becomes better known in the country, it is desirable to request the local Magistrate and Civil Surgeons to try to introduce inoculation, at first, into places under their immediate control and after having personally ascertained that the leaders of the community have been won to the idea." (G.O., No. 999-P., dated 3rd September 1898; G.O., No. 1463-P., dated 21st Novem- ber 1898; G.O., No. 1513-P., dated 6th December 1898; G.O., No. 1532-P., dated 7th December 1898; P.C.'s Pro., No. 937, dated 18th December 1898; and P.C.'s Pro., No. 1025, dated 27th December 1898.) 7. The privileges* attached to inoculation are mentioned in original Mufassal Regulation 31 and City Regulation 21. As a further encouragement the Government has authorized the grant of three days' extra casual leave on full pay to all public servants for the purpose of being inoculated. Students attending Government and aided schools, who undergo inoculation, will be marked in the registers for not more than three consecutive days as " under inoculation," and such an entry will be regarded as equivalent to attendance. * Note.-These are not admissible in the case of persons who have recovered from plague.    (P.C., No. 594, dated 2nd March 1899.)
?190 No subsistence allowance can be granted to inoculated persons for the period during which they are incapacitated for work owing to the operation. (G.O., No. 1532-P., dated 7th December 1898; G.O., No. 742-P., dated 17th May 1899.) 8.  The following note, copies of which in  English and vernacular languages may be obtained from the Government Press, Madras, may be supplied to each inoculated person after he has been operated upon :- "Persons desirous of being inoculated- (1)  May take on oil-bath a day or two before; (2)  if subject to constipation, it is as well to take a dose of a purgative or a laxative a few days beforehand; (3)  after inoculation, the diet should be simple and light; milk, conjee, sago, coffee, soda water, &c., might be taken freely with advan- tage; (4)  people sometimes suffer from faintness and giddiness after operation; this need cause no anxiety.    The best remedy is to lie flat on the ground, and to loosen all articles liable to constrict the throat or chest.    Soda water or strong coffee mixed with a little milk might be taken; (5)  if the arm inoculated gives much pain, bran or any other dry fomentation may be used and the arm should be supported by sling; (6)  inoculated persons should   avoid exposing themselves until the fever entirely  subsides; pain in the arm may continue for some days, but this need not prevent the ordinary work; (7)  for three or four days, even ordinary bath should be avoided; or if it is absolutely necessary, a sponge-bath should be taken in a closed room so that the person may not catch a chill; cold baths should be avoided; (8)  oil-bath should  not be  taken   for  eight  or ten  days after inoculation; (9)  no treatment is necessary for the fever which will subside by itself in two or three days.    Head-ache, if present, may be treated by external application of menthol or ice or cold lotions, such as vinegar and water.    Should, however, the fever rise high, the inoculated person would do well to seek the advice of a competent medical officer or send intimation to the nearest dispensary and not trust to quacks; (10)  sickness and nausea, when present, are best treated by a little iced soda water or soda water and milk mixed; (11)  sexual abstinence should be observed at least for two or three weeks; (12)  females will find it convenient to be inoculated a week or ten days before  menses; they may be operated on one week after the period; (13)  persons with a weak heart or lungs and persons subject to hysterics, heart disease or nervous disability  should get themselves carefully examined by a medical officer before they subject themselves to inoculation." 9.  The Sanitary Commissioner should submit to Govern- ment a weekly return showing the progress of inoculation in
?191 the whole Presidency. He should also forward direct to the Financial Department by the 5th of the first month of each quarter an estimate of all charges relating to inoculation. (P.C.'s Ref. on C, No. 97, dated 4th January 1899; G.O., No. 864, Finl., dated 31st July 1899). 9-Fairs, Festivals and Pilgrimages. The views of the Government of India with regard to the imposition of special checks on large gatherings during times of plague are contained in para. 12 of their Resolution printed on pages 83-92. 2.  Any proposals which Collectors may desire to make in the matter should be forwarded through the Sanitary Com- missioner  (and the Plague  Commissioner)   so as   to  reach Government a month and-a-half previous to the holding of the fairs and festivals.    Proposals submitted at later dates do not allow proper measures being taken to enforce them.    In view to avoid delay in their submission, Collectors should prepare in their office every month a list of all the fairs and festivals to take place in the ensuing three months, and should send by the 15th of each month their recommendations relating to religious and other gatherings to be held in the next month but one. (G.O., No. 279-P., dated 25th March 1898; No. 645-P., dated 1st May 1899; P.C., No. 462, dated 22nd February 1899.) 3.  The Collector's reports should be invariably  accom- panied by draft notifications under the  Epidemic Diseases Act and by a statement in the following form :- Name of festival or fair. Place  where  held. Distance  to  nearest railway station. Date of commence- ment and termination of festival  or fair. Average attendance during the past three years. From what districts in the Madras Presidency and from what places  outside the Presidency, pilgrimage should be prohibited, and the number of people expected from each of such districts or places. 1 2 3 4 5 6         (G.O., No. 279-P., dated 25th March 1898; P.C., No. 843, dated 3rd December 1898; No. 462, dated 22nd February 1899).
192 4.  As Stationmasters and booking clerks are not likely to find out in the case of small fairs and festivals whether the purchasers of railway tickets are going as pilgrims or not, the prohibition of the issue of tickets in such cases does not work satisfactorily and need not be recommended.    As, how- ever,  pilgrims  to large fairs  and  festivals  can  perhaps be recognized, and it is of considerable importance to  reduce the number of visitors to these festivals, the issue of tickets in their case may continue to be prohibited.    It is left to the discretion of Collectors to decide which of the fairs and festi- vals are small and which   large.    In the case of unimportant local festivals, a careful working of the passport rules should suffice.    Notice  of the prohibition  of the issue of railway tickets should be given to the Railway authorities at least a week previous to the date of commencement of the prohibition. (G.O., No. 645-P., dated 1st May 1899; No. 651-P., dated 2nd May 1899.) 5.  Where pilgrimage to a fair or festival has been prohi- bited  by  Government,  the Collector  should,  as far as  the means at his disposal permit,  watch all the roads round the village or town and prevent pilgrims from entering the place. Persons who are suspected to have come from infected parts should  be  watched for ten days, and, if  not suffering from fever or any suspicious complaint at the end of that period, should be allowed to proceed on their journey.    It must be distinctly understood that the prohibition is not in any way intended   to   interfere   with  the   performance  of   the  usual religious ceremonies at the temple,  and that its only object is to  prevent the assemblage of persons who might import or spread the plague. (G.O., No. 208-P., dated 15th March 1898; No. 823-P., dated 31st May 1899.) 6.  As regards pilgrimage to the Hedjaz,  the Government of  India issues  orders  either   prohibiting it  altogether   or allowing it under certain conditions from uninfected  parts only.    In the latter case, the intending pilgrims are collected at convenient observation camps,  they are  not   allowed to purchase  passage  tickets   to   the   Hedjaz   except at   those observation camps, and   after   they  have been  detained   for the prescribed  period and certified to be free from infection, they are sent in special trains  or carriages to  the  selected ports for embarkation.    Pilgrims returning from the Hedjaz in healthy vessels are, after disinfection of their clothing and baggage,   sent at once  to   their  destination  without   being allowed to mix with the population  of the port of landing. Those returning in a plague-infected vessel  are subjected to ten days'  observation in a camp before being sent to their
?193 homes. The authorities of the port of landing are required to send nominal rolls of the pilgrims to the local Governments and Administrations concerned, and to give previous intimation of their departure, in order that they may be watched for a few days after arrival at their destination. (G.O., No. 148-M., dated 18th January 1898; No. 851-P., dated 3rd June 1899.) (10)-Rats. There is a general belief, supported by medical opinion, that rats are peculiarly susceptible to the infection of the bubonic plague and are active agents in its dissemination. Granaries are the favourite haunts of rats, and grain bags arriving from any place suspected to be affected by the plague should be very carefully examined, and any rats found with them at once destroyed and their bodies consumed by fire. Infection once brought into a granary spreads rapidly among the healthy rats, and thence in time to human beings living in the neighbourhood. The attention of all Collectors, Presidents of District Boards, Chairmen of Municipal Councils, and the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, is therefore drawn to the necessity of taking special precautions to prevent the danger of infection from this source. Arrangements should be made for the constant inspection of granaries and grain baazars and care taken to keep them clean and disinfected and to have the rats destroyed. In inspecting these gra- naries particular inquiries should be made whether any dead or sick rats have been observed. Rats sick with the plague seem careless in the presence of men and run about in a dazed way with a peculiar limping gait in the hind legs owing to painful glands in the groin. The Port and Sea Customs authorities should be instructed to see that no rats are landed with goods imported by sea into this Presidency, and that rats found in ships are destroyed forthwith. (G.O., No. 274.M., dated 23rd February 1897; No. 459-P., dated 10th May 1898.) 2. The Traffic Manager, South Indian Railway, has issued the following circular to his subordinates:-" Stationmasters and their staff should carefully inspect consignments of grain from plague-infected areas to see that any rats that may arrive concealed in the grain are destroyed; should also destroy bandicoots, rats and mice where grain is deposited on railway premises in case they may have eaten of the grain and so become infected. This vermin should be tracked and 25
?194 exterminated by all possible methods, the dead bodies being consumed by fire at once. Stationmasters and others of the staff concerned with these instructions should make a special report to this office, if they destroy 20 or more of these rodents in any one week, and if a rat trap is wanted they should send an indent for one." Other Railway Adminis- trations have been requested to issue similar instructions to their staff. Collectors should satisfy themselves that these instructions are actually carried out. (G.O., No. 738-P., dated 2nd August 1898.) 3.  The Plague  Commissioner has ruled that ordinarily, the destruction of rats should be confined to- (a)  infected places and the surrounding  area within a radius of ten miles round it (paragraph 10 of  G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898); (b)  landing places and railway goods-sheds, where rats from infected places are likely to be imported with goods brought by sea or railway. In the case of (a), rewards may be necessary but the maximum rate should not exceed three pies. In other cases, the Port or Railway authorities are expected to do all that is required without the reward system. (P.C., No. 191, dated 14th October 1898.) 4.  The charges incurred in the destruction of rats should be debited to Local or Municipal funds according to the area within which such charges are incurred. (G.O., No. 494, Financial, dated 11th April 1899.)
?195 CHAPTER X. ORDERS AFFECTING THE REGULATIONS ISSUED IN THE MARINE DEPARTMENT. (1)-Instructions regarding the admission of healthy vessels from infected ports and the working of cargo (vide Regulation 17-A, page 63). 1. Port Health officers may admit healthy vessels from infected ports and allow them to work cargo on the following conditions:- (i) Ships' crews to be inspected night and morning and not to leave the ship. (ii) A list with addresses of shore coolies employed to be maintained. (iii) Shore coolies who do not return to work next day, to be inspected under the orders of the Municipal Health officer. (iv) Policemen to be employed to prevent any but registered coolies from boarding ships, to prevent ships' crews from landing, to guard bathing enclosures and to compel their use by coolies. (v) All coolies and police who have boarded ships to take a disinfecting bath on the beach after landing and before going home. (vi) Their clothes also to be disinfected. (vii) Boats and cargoes to be examined for rats. (viii) The coolies and others to be disinfected on shore at night must be kept until the Health officer can land after inspection of ships' crew. (ix) As an exception to clause (i) above, officers and crews of the Bombay Steam Navigation Company's vessels are allowed to land at Mangalore under the precautions pre- scribed for passengers, and provided they embark again; or, if they do not, are brought under supervision in the same way as passengers are. (G.O., No. 367, Marine, dated 11th May 1898; No. 591, Marine, dated 7th July 1898) No. 920,  Marine, dated 3rd November 1898.)
?196 2.  The above rules apply to the port of Madras as well as to all outports of the Madras Presidency  where the Port Health officer is not below the rank of Apothecary. (G.O., No. 382, Marine, dated 13th May 1898.) 3.  One inspection of a vessel is sufficient in the case  of the twin ports at which steamers call on the same day, pro- vided that no sickness shall have declared itself on board after inspection at the first, and before arrival at the second, port. (G.O., No. 432, Marine, dated 27th May 1898.) (2)-Precautions to be adopted in identifying passengers, by Bombay Steam Navigation Company's Steamers, from infected ports in the Bombay Presidency. (i) Passengers  embarking at infected ports are to be provided with specially clipped tickets. Note.-Each ticket will bear two clips- (1)  that ordinarily adopted by the Shipping Company for its own purposes; and (2)  the clip of one of the corners to indicate to the Plague autho- rities at the port of arrival that the holder has started from an infected port. (ii) Tickets are not to be issued by the Steamer Agent at an uninfected port to passengers who have already voyaged from an infected port. (iii) To prevent the transfer of tickets, the following precautions should be observed:- (a) The name of each passenger is to be written on his ticket. (b) A way bill in the appended form is to be fur- nished to the master of the vessel by the book- ing agent at an infected port, such bill to con- tain the name and description of all passengers embarking from the port. (c)   The clipper of each infected port is to have some distinguishing characteristic. (iv) The way bills are to be filled up at the office issuing the tickets and are to be handed over to the master of the vessel, who should present them to the officer on duty at the port of destination.
?197 APPENDIX. Port of__________ Way Bill of passengers proceeding by S.S. on the 1899. Number. Name. Sex. Caste. Age. Occupation. Destination.         (Signed) ________, Shipping Agent. (G.O., No. 133, Marine, dated 9th February 1899; No. 22, Marine, dated 8th March 1899; No. 484, Marine, dated 31st May 1899.) (3)-Precautions for embarking passengers at Madras Ports on vessels arriving from infected ports. (i) No persons other than intending passengers to be allowed on board. (ii) No person after embarkation to quit the vessel while she is in the port. (iii) No communication to be allowed between crews of boats and crew of vessel. (iv) A Police Constable to go off in each boat carrying passengers or luggage. (v) In ports in the Ganjm district, a Police Constable need not accompany each boat carrying passengers or luggage; but the embarkation of passengers should be watched by constables posted on board and on shore. (G.O., No. 359, Marine, dated 8th May 1898; No. 591, Marine, dated 7th July 1898.)
?198 (4) -Circular issued by the Belgian Government to Belgian Consular Agents in all Ports, dated 14th January 1899. Notice to Mariners. Bills of Health.-Agreeably to the terms of Article 12 of the Royal Orders of the 17th August 1831, modified by the Order of 15th December 1898, every vessel arriving from any port (vessels having merely called for orders excepted) must, whatever their port of destination and their nationality, carry a bill of health delivered by a Belgian Consular Agent certi- fying as to the Sanitary condition of the place of departure and as to the vessels own sanitary condition at the time of departure. This is an accordance with Article 13 of the Order of 17th August 1831, modified by the Order of 15th December last, in virtue of which Order every vessel without a bill of health has to remain under observation for a period to be regulated by the local sanitary authorities besides being subject to such measures as its own sanitary condition may require. It may happen that vessels sail from a foreign port where there is no Belgian Consular Agent; in this case besides all other documents which may be given them by the authorities of the country and by the Consuls of other nations, they should also provide themselves in the first port of call where a Belgian Consular Agent resides with a license delivered by him (Article 15 of the Order-vide 17th August 1831, modified by the Order of 15th December 1898). Moreover Article 16 modified by the Order of 17th August 1831 lays down that the license delivered by the Belgian Consular Agent at the port of departure or at the first port of call should be vise by the Belgian Consular Agent residing in the last port of call where the vessel touches before reach- ing Belgium. This Agent will state on the license if the vessel has received free pratique or if it has had to undergo any sanitary measures. In case of a vessel bound for Belgium neglecting to fulfil any of these formalities, the Consular Agent should imme- diately inform the Department of Foreign Affairs, if necessary by telegraph. (G.O., No. 185, Marine, dated 28th February 1899.)
?199 (5)-Letter from the Secretary to the Government of India (Home Depart- ment-Sanitary), to the Secretary to the Government of Madras, Local and Municipal Department, dated Simla, the 1st June 1897, No. 1624. I am directed to forward, for the information of the Government of Madras, a copy of a translation of the Con- vention framed at the Sanitary Conference recently held at Venice for the purpose of considering measures to prevent the spread of the plague. 2.  The regulations prescribed by  the present Convention are based on the conclusions of the Sanitary  Conferences of Venice, 1892; Dresden,  1893 ; and Paris, 1894; these con- clusions have been modified to meet the special peculiarities of the plague, and in accordance with modern scientific views regarding sanitary   precautions  for  the   prevention   of  the spread of epidemic disease. 3.  The following are the most important points in which the present Convention differs from the previous Conventions on which it is based:- (i) The fact that the period of incubation in the case of plague may be considerably longer than in the case of cholera has led to several important modifications. By the Venice Conference of 1892 the period of incubation for cholera was fixed at five days. Proposals have been made to fix the period of incubation for plague as high as fifteen days, but the period which has been adopted by the Conference for the purpose of the Plague Regulations, is ten days. (ii) The list of articles of commerce which may be considered "susceptible" has been considerably increased; but it has been left to the option of the Governments con- cerned to allow or prohibit the importation of the commodi- ties, on the "susceptible" list, no article being subject to absolute prohibition. (iii) It provides that the modern principles of disinfec- tion should be substituted for the obsolete system of land quarantine, but, with a view to the protection of countries which may find it difficult to thus protect their borders, each of the Governments who are parties to the Convention is at liberty to close its frontier to travellers and merchandise. (iv) It embodies the provisions of the Paris Convention on the subject of the regulation of the pilgrim traffic, but in several respects those provisions have been altered in the
200 directions for which the Government of India have contended. A separate communication will be sent on this subject. 4. The first chapter of the Convention deals with the measures for the prevention of plague which are to be adopted outside Europe. In the first place, it is laid down that the Governments who adhere to the Convention are to notify to other Governments the existence of plague within their several jurisdictions, and must communicate to them a state- ment of the measures of prevention that are being carried out to prevent its diffusion. This requirement as to notifica- tion is, however, subject to certain important conditions. Thus the area to be deemed infected is strictly limited to the actual district, town, village, &c., where the disease prevails; and no locality is to be deemed infected merely on account of the importation into it of a few cases of plague which have led to no diffusion of the malady. 5. The Regulations next deal with the measures to be taken on the departure of vessels from infected ports. It is laid down that every person sailing on the vessel must be examined on shore immediately before embarkation by a Medical officer appointed by the Government and that the Consular authority interested in the ship may be present at the inspection. All infected and suspected articles must be subjected to careful disinfection on shore and in the presence of the Government Medical officer in accordance with the rules for disinfection prescribed in Chapter III of the An- nexure to the Convention and no persons showing symptoms of plague may be permitted to embark. (a) Rules have been issued by the Governments of Bombay, Madras and Bengal under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, which have been in force for some time, prescrib- ing precautions to be taken on the departure of vessels. The rules framed by the Government of Bombay, which are in force at the ports of Bombay and Karachi, prescribe medical inspection and the removal from the vessel of any person suspected to be suffering from dangerous epidemic disease. The rules framed by the Government of Madras, which are in force at the principal ports of the Presidency, authorising the grant of a bill-of-health after medical inspection, the removal of any person suspected to be suffering from plague or not to be free from plague infection, and the disinfection of the infected portions of the ship. The rules framed by the Government of Bengal, which are in force at the port of Calcutta, prescribe medical inspection, the removal of persons
201 suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague, and the detention of the vessel from which such persons have been removed for a period of seven days, after the lapse of which the vessel may proceed if no fresh case has occurred. (b) In order that the obligations imposed by the Con- vention may be fulfilled at an infected port it is essential that the medical inspection and disinfection should be conducted exactly in the manner prescribed by the Regulations and summarized above. The Government of India consider that it is also desirable that all non-professional attendants and relatives of any persons, who on examination appear to be suffering from plague, shall be prevented from embarking. If after the medical examination has been completed and all the passengers and crew are on board, a case of plague occurs, the patient and his non-professional attendants and relations must be landed and isolated on the first opportunity. The ship will then become an infected vessel within the definition given below in paragraph 7. Although the ports of Madras and Calcutta are not infected, the Local Governments have, with the approval of the Government of India, made the special rules for medical inspection referred to above, and, in the opinion of the Governor-General in Council, it is desir- able that they should be assimilated, in the case of vessels sailing for ports out of India, as far as possible to those which will, under the terms of the Convention, have to be adopted at the infected ports of the Bombay Presidency. (c) I am to request that the rules issued by the Govern- ment of Madras may be altered in accordance with these instructions. 6.  The rules regarding pilgrim-ships which form the next portion of the Regulations will, as stated in paragraph 3 above, be dealt with in a separate communication. 7.  The  Regulations for the control of the general traffic in the Red Sea and the Suez Canal are based on the threefold classification of ships into healthy,  suspected and infected adopted in the Venice Convention of  1892, with the modifi- cations rendered necessary owing to the period of incubation in the case of plague having been fixed at 10 days. (a) Healthy vessels are those which have left an in- fected port for ten days or more and have had no case of plague on board; suspected vessels are those on which, though cases of plague have occurred, no fresh case has occurred within twelve days; and infected vessels are those on which plague has been present within twelve days of arrival. 26
202 (b)  The period of twelve days is  arrived at, as in the case of the seven days' period in the Convention of 1892, by adding two days to the period of incubation. (c)  A healthy   vessel thus   becomes   entitled to  free pratique at a port at which it  arrives ten days or more after leaving an infected port, but the adoption of this period has the serious result that fast vessels sailing from Bombay will arrive at the Suez  Canal before pratique  can  be granted. This difficulty has been satisfactorily overcome by permitting healthy vessels to pass  through the canal in quarantine, and to complete in the Mediterranean the ten days necessary to receiving free pratique at a port of arrival.    Vessels passing through the canal in quarantine  may, subject to the use of electric light, coal in quarantine at Port Said by night as well as by day, and passengers may embark in quarantine at that port. (d) The rules for infected and suspected ships follow those of the Venice Convention of 1892. Vessels carrying a doctor and a disinfecting stove are allowed to pass through the canal in quarantine after, in the case of infected vessels, landing those suffering from plague and persons who have been in actual contact with the sick or with infected articles and after disinfection of the infected compartment of the vessel. Vessels without a doctor and disinfecting stove are detained at Moses' Wells. Such vessels, if suspected, are detained for the period required for disinfection and for ascertaining the condition of the ship's health, while, if in- fected, the passengers are detained on shore under observ- ation for a maximum period of ten days. The medical and sanitary staff at Moses' Wells is to be increased for the purpose of carrying out these Regulations. 8. The last matter to notice in the chapter of the Regula- tions dealing with the measures to be adopted against the plague outside Europe is that of the measures to be taken in the Persian Gulf. The conclusions of the Conference on this question differ greatly from those embodied in the Paris Con- vention. Healthy vessels reaching Ormuz before the expir- ation of ten days since they last touched at a port infected with plague must either complete that period at Ormuz or may, after medical inspection, continue their voyage up the Gulf or the Shatt-ul-Arab, provided they do so in quarantine for such term as is required to complete the ten days. The same provision will apply to suspected vessels, that is, vessels on which there has been a case of plague, but no fresh case for twelve days, subject to submission to certain processes
?203 of disinfection, &c., at Ormuz; and infected vessels will, after landing their sick, together with those persons who have been in actual contact with them, and after disinfection of that part of the vessel deemed to be infected, likewise have permission to proceed on their voyage in quarantine. The final arrangements as to the sanitary station at Ormuz are to be a matter of agreement between the Turkish and Persian Governments, and until these arrangements are completed, a temporary sanitary station will be established on one of the islands in the Straits of Ormuz. 9. The second chapter of the Regulation deals with the measures to be adopted by the European Governments who have assented to the terms of the Convention. The provisions relating to notification have been mentioned in paragraph 4 above. Allusion has also been made in paragraph 3 to the Regulations regarding the importation of merchandise. (a) This matter requires some further notice. The following are of the commodities which are classed as sus- ceptible and the import of which may be prohibited:- (1)  Used body linen, clothes, bedding and other per- sonal effects. (2)  Rags, including  rags  compressed by  hydraulic pressure   and  transported   in  bales   as  mer- chandise. (3)  Used sacking, carpets and old embroidery. (4)  Green and untanned hides and skins. (5)  Animal refuse,   claws, hoofs,  horsehair, hair  of animals generally, raw silk and wool. (6)  Human hair. The prohibition of import is only to be enforced at the option of the Government concerned. The only articles which must of necessity be subjected on arrival to any pre- cautionary measures, such as disinfection, are clothing, bed- ding and similar articles, which have been actually worn or used, and which are carried as ordinary luggage, if they have been brought from an infected area and are considered by the local sanitary authority to be contaminated. The Govern- ment of India do not consider it necessary to add to the list of articles, the import of which by sea from infected ports into other ports in British India is prohibited in Home Department Notification No. 513, dated the 17th February 1897, and the bringing of which from the Bombay Presi- dency and Sind into other parts of British India is prohibited in Home Department Notification No. 1033, dated the 22nd
204 March 1897.    This remark applies only to  the import of articles  from the Bombay Presidency and Sind for use in other parts of India.    In reciting the  obligation imposed on the countries which are parties to the Convention to confine their   precautionary   measures   to   goods   coming  from  the infected local area, it is stated in Chapter II, section iii of the   Regulations,   that  this   obligation only   exists   on   the express understanding that the Government of the infected country takes the necessary measures to prevent the export- ation of susceptible articles derived from the infected area. In other words a Foreign Government would be at liberty to decline to receive articles classed as susceptible coming from a clean port unless measures  are taken in India to prevent the exportation from that port of susceptible articles coming from the infected area.    The orders  contained in the  Home Department Notifications of February and March last alluded to above only partly fulfil this condition since they only refer to used apparel and bedding, rags, waste paper and used gunny-bags.    All Foreign  Governments have not, however, availed themselves of the option of prohibiting the import of all   the articles classed as  susceptible even  from  Bombay itself, and the decree of the French Government of the 16th April 1897, which was published in the   Gazette of India of the 22nd  instant under Home Department Notification  No. 1545, dated the 21st instant, and is based on the Venice Con- vention of 1897, only prescribes prohibitory and precaution- ary measures against goods derived from the infected area. The  decree  only forbids the importation  into   France and Algeria   of  rags,   animal  refuse,   claws   and   hoofs   coming directly or indirectly from the infected local area.    Raw and manufactured wool is admitted  after disinfection,  and this restriction is only imposed when the commodity comes directly from the infected area.    Used and new linen, wearing apparel, personal effects and bedding and raw hides, coming directly or indirectly from the infected area, are admitted after disin- fection.    The decree further provides that any vessel coming from an infected area, or  having on board any of the articles coming   within   the  description given  above may   only enter certain specified ports.    In these circumstances and in view of the  optional nature of this  part of the regulations, the Government of India do not propose at present to issue orders in addition to the orders  of February and March last, with the view of prohibiting the exportation  from  clean ports of articles included in the " susceptible " list and coming from the Bombay Presidency and Sind.    But if the Governments
205 of Madras, Bengal and Burma, after consulting the Mercantile Community, consider that prohibitive orders should issue with regard to all or any of the susceptible articles for the protection of clean ports, the Government of India will be prepared to consider proposals with this object. (b) It is to be remarked that new gunny-bags are not in the list of articles classed as susceptible by the Confer- ence. 10. The portion of Chapter II which relates to traffic by sea and the measures to be adopted at ports of arrival is of great interest, not only because of its direct bearing on the conditions of intercourse between India and Europe, but also because it contains the conclusions of the Conference on the important subject of the quarantine of vessels. (a) The threefold division of vessels, referred to above, is maintained in this chapter. The regulations respecting infected vessels, are that the sick are to be landed and iso- lated, and the remainder of those on board to be subjected, at the discretion of the local authority, either to " observation " or to " surveillance " for a period which is not to exceed ten days from the occurrence of the last case of plague. The term " observation" means the detention under observation of the person either on board a ship or in a place of segrega- tion on shore. Persons subjected to " surveillance " are not to be isolated, but are to be allowed to proceed at once to their destination where they are to remain under medical supervision. In case of an infected ship the dirty linen and other effects of the passengers and crew which the local sanitary authorities may consider likely to be contaminated, must be disinfected. So also must the parts of the ship where the sick have resided, and the local authorities may require a more extensive disinfection to be carried out. Lastly the bilge-water must be thrown out after disinfection and fresh drinking-water supplied. (b) In the case of suspected vessels, a medical inspec- tion and the same process of disinfection, discharge of bilge- water and supply of fresh drinking-water is prescribed. It is further recommended that the crew and passengers should be subjected to " surveillance " for a period of ten days from the date of arrival of the vessel. Pratique is to be given at once to healthy vessels, but it is also provided that, at the option of the local authority, the precautionary measures en- forced in the case of suspected ships, except the disinfection of the vessel, may be required; and it is also recommended
206 that the passengers and crew should be subject to " surveil- lance " for a period sufficient to complete a term of ten days from the date of departure of the vessel from the infected port. 11. The quarantine rules made by the Governments of Madras, Bengal and Burma under the powers conferred by section I, Act I of 1870, with previous sanction of the Gov- ernor-General in Council to protect their ports from being regarded by the European powers as infected, prescribe fifteen days' quarantine for all vessels in which a case of plague is found on arrival, or on which it is believed that a case has occurred during the voyage, with this exception that the rules for Calcutta apparently prescribe only eight days' qua- rantine in the latter case. In the Bombay Presidency all the principal ports are infected and the Government of Bombay have issued special rules regarding inspection, segregation and disinfection at these ports. Under the rules of the other Maritime Governments, no communication may be held with other boats or vessels or with the shore whilst the vessel remains in quarantine, but the Health officer may direct the removal of so many of the passengers and crew as may not be suffering from illness, and whose services may not be required on board, to places of segregation on shore where they are required to complete the period of quarantine. If a case of plague occurs whilst the quarantine is in pro- gress quarantine recommences for a further period of fifteen days. (a) The period of fifteen days' quarantine was fixed in view of the possibility that some of the Governments in Europe might not regard quarantine as effective if it were prescribed for a shorter period, but now that the Conference has authoritatively pronounced that the period of incubation may be taken at ten days, the period of observation should be reduced from fifteen to ten days. The quarantine rules in the case of vessels on which there is a case of plague at the time of arrival, or on which it is believed that a plague case has occurred during the voyage, should also be modified in accordance with the regulations framed by the Conference for infected vessels. The Government of Madras have already revised their rules in a similar direction. The Governor-General in Council lays special stress upon the undesirability of detaining the sick and healthy on boardship together. The sick should be landed and treated in an iso- lation hospital, and the healthy should be landed and detained under observation in suitable segregation shelter for a period
207 of ten days from the occurrence of the last case. The disin- fection and other precautionary measures prescribed by the Conference should also be complied with. 12. The quarantine rules framed by the Maritime Govern- ments differ somewhat from one another as regards the treatment of vessels on which no case of plague has occurred during the voyage. Their general purport is to the effect that eight days' quarantine may be imposed at the absolute or limited discretion of the Health officer unless pratique has been granted at Colombo or some other intermediate port. (a) The maximum period of detention of a vessel on which the Health officer is  satisfied that no case of plague has occurred should be ten days from the date of departure from the infected port.    If the Health officer is  not satisfied that there has really been no case on board or if ten days have not elapsed since the date of departure from the infected port, the   vessel may be  detained, at his discretion, up to this period.    In any case in which a vessel is given free pratique less than ten days after her departure from the infected port, the Health officer should be empowered, on  the analogy of the rules for the observation of persons travelling by railway which have been framed by several of the Local Governments, to detain under observation in a suitable place of segregation, up to a maximum of ten days from the date of the departure of the vessel, any person landed from the ship whom he may consider to be in any way likely to carry infection.    Any articles of clothing or other effects  belonging to the persons detained or to other persons which by reason of their dirty condition or otherwise may be considered likely to be conta- minated, should be disinfected.    Discretion may be given to the Health officer  to apply the other provisions regarding disinfection, &c., prescribed by the Convention in the case of suspected ships.    The Local Government may also make such arrangements as are possible for the surveillance of persons who are not detained, on arrival at their destination.    Free pratique   granted at  Colombo  or other   intermediate  port should be recognized. (b) I am to request that, with the permission of the Gov- ernor in Council, the quarantine rules in force in the Madras Presidency may be modified in accordance with the above remarks, and that a copy of the revised rules may be for- warded to this Department for insertion in the Government of India Gazette. 13. The remainder of the Convention does not call for special comment.
?208 CHAPTER XI. MISCELLANEOUS ORDERS. (1)-Plague Correspondence. 1.  All correspondence about plague and pilgrims returning from the Hedjaz should  be addressed   to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal Department, and should be marked with the word ' Plague ' in red ink on the out- side covers and on the left hand corner of the papers.    All communications, except reports or returns on printed forms, should be forwarded with a docket sheet, copies of which are supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press. (G.O., No. 379-M., dated 4th March 1897; No. 2414-M., dated 2nd November 1897; P.C., No. 94, dated 11th January 1899.) 2.   All references  regarding  account matters should be addressed to, or forwarded through, the Accountant-General. (P.C., No. 672, dated 14th November 1898.) 3.  Plague correspondence should be entered in a separate current register, and the papers shown against a new item ' Plague ' in the quarterly business returns.    A separate series of numbers should be given to the disposals, and the question of destroying or retaining them settled in accordance with the mode indicated in Board's Proceedings, No. 101, dated 18th April 1898.    As regards passports, however, they are of no use after the expiration of the ten days' period of observa- tion and may then be destroyed except in cases where they are required or likely to be required in connection with any prosecution or for any special purpose. (B.P., Land Rev., No 19, dated 21st January 1899; No. 45, dated 14th February 1899; P.C., No. 1171, dated 1st May 1899; and G.O., No. 1213-P., dated 7th August 1899.) 4.  The Government does not consider it necessary that copies of all printed Government orders relating to plague matters should ordinarily be  supplied to Medical Subordi- nates, Sanitary Inspectors or Chairmen of Unions, or to each Member of a Municipal Council.    Where necessary, district circulars should be issued to subordinate officers embodying the  purport of  the   Government orders.    Spare  copies   of Government orders are at present distributed in accordance with the statement printed in Plague Commissioner's Proceed- ings, No. 982, dated 14th April 1899. (G.O., No. 580-P., dated 15th June 1898.)
?209 5.  The Deputy Adjutant-General, Madras Command, has requested that copies of all orders passed by the Government, the Plague Commissioner and the District officers in regard to the prevention and suppression of plague may be forwarded to him and to the General Officers Commanding. (P.O., No. 803, dated 28th November 1898; No. 944, dated 18th December 1898.) 6.  The Superintendent, Government Press, should supply all Collectors with the required number of copies of notifica- tion  of lists of  plague-infected  areas  for circulation   with District Gazettes. (G.O., No. 1392.P., dated 20th September 1890.) ( )-Plague Regulations. 1.  Copies of all regulations issued by the Government of Madras under the Epidemic Diseases Act should be furnished to the Government of India as soon after issue as possible, and also to all other local Governments and Administrations as it is desirable that all local  Governments and Adminis- trations should be aware of the measures adopted in other parts of India, and the experience of one province may be of assistance to other provinces. (G.O., No. 238-M., dated 18th February 1897; No. 294 M., dated 25th February 1897.) 2.  Due notice will be given by Government as soon as it is considered safe to relax any of the restrictions now imposed on trade and on the movement of passengers.    Until then, they should be carefully observed. (G.O., No. 1574-M., dated 9th July 1897.) 3.  Collectors  and Presidents of  District Boards  should exercise prudence and care in working the regulations and obtain the best medical, sanitary or other advice before taking action. (G.O., No. 219-A.M., dated 15th February 1897.) 4.  In Cantonments,  the  Military authorities   are imme- diately responsible for carrying out the plague measures, and Collectors should delegate to them the necessary powers under the Plague Regulations. (P.O., No. 886, dated 9th December 1898; No. 165, dated 19th January 1899.) 5.  By Command Order, No. 687, dated 18th November 1898, all ranks in the Madras Command are directed to obey the Plague  Regulations,  and any infringement  of them  is punishable as a military offence.    And the Superintendent of Pensions has,  under instructions from Command  Head- quarters, issued a  circular (No.   II,  dated  14th  December 1898) warning all pensioners that any disobedience or wilful 27
?210 neglect of the regulations or obstruction to any official on plague duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required by Government as a condition of the continuation of their pensions, and that any pensioner being guilty thereof will be liable to have his pension stopped forthwith, and the same reduced or permanently withdrawn. (P.C., No. 684, dated 16th November 1898; No. 956, dated 19th December 1898.) 6.  If the Police are informed that a person is evading the Plague Regulations by giving a false name or a wrong address, they  can act under section  57  of the Criminal Procedure Code, and detain the person until satisfied that they have got his true name and address.    Failing information as  to true name and address or the execution of a bond, the Police can forward the person to a Magistrate. (G.O., No. 1206-P., dated 30th September 1898.) 7.  The Plague Commissioner has published, for the infor- mation of the village officials and of the general public, three circulars explaining briefly the plague rules and the policy of Government with regard  to  Plague administration.    They have been translated in Tamil, Telugu, Canarese, Malayalam and Hindustani.    Officers requiring copies should  apply to the   Superintendent,  Government Press,   who   has been re- quested to keep   the circulars in type in all the  languages, and to supply copies according to requirements. (P.C., No. 652, dated 11th November 1898.) (3)-Plague Reports and Returns. 1. When a case of plague, genuine or suspected, is first discovered in any place, the Collector or any gazetted officer, who may be at the head-quarter station of the district, should immediately telegraph the fact to the Plague Commissioner (or to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal Department, when there is no Plague Commissioner), to the Sanitary Commissioner and to the Surgeon-General, stating how the case was discovered, whether it was indigenous or imported, and in the latter case, whence it was imported, what steps have been taken for the treatment of the patient and for the segregation of the contacts, and such further particulars with dates as may be thought necessary. Further details should be furnished by post as early as practicable, if possible within 48 hours. This report should be in the form prescribed in Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 845, dated 5th December 1898, and need be sent only to the Plague and Sanitary Commissioners. A separate report should be
211 furnished for each imported case unless the persons attacked belong to the same party, but where plague is indigenous, it is sufficient if the officer in charge of operations sends to the Plague Commissioner a brief weekly report stating the number of attacks and deaths, the measures taken and the success they meet with, the attitude of the people, the method of infection (e.g., by air, imperfectly dried dust, infected soil and habitations, articles of apparel, merchandise and domestic use, by medium of rats, mice, squirrels, cats and infected water and food) and any other matters of interest. This report should contain the latest information available on Thursday, and should be despatched direct to reach the Plague Commissioner not later than Saturday morning. (G.O., No. 829-P., dated 17th August 1898; No. 945-P., dated 29th August 1898; P.C., No. 845, dated 5th December 1898; No. 979, dated 22nd December 1898; No. 457, dated 21st February 1899; and No. 559, dated 1st March 1899.) 2. All attacks and deaths should be telegraphed daily by Collectors to the Plague Commissioner (or Government), the Sanitary Commissioner and the Surgeon-General in the form communicated with Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 357, dated 8th February 1899. Nil telegrams are not required. The Plague Commissioner should send a daily telegram of plague cases to the Ceylon Government. The Collectors of Chingleput, South Arcot, Tanjore, Trichinopoly, Madura and Tinnevelly should also give telegraphic intimation of plague in their districts to the Medical officer of the Ceylon Government at Tuticorin. The cost of these telegrams will be debited to the Ceylon Government by the Accountant- General. (G.O., No. 829-P., dated 17th August 1898; No. 440-P., dated 25th March 1899; P.C., No. 951, dated 12th April 1899; No. 866, dated 6th December 1898; and No. 25, dated 5th January 1899.) 3. Each Collector should keep in his office a plague record, to which officers on plague duty in his district should be requested to contribute brief notes on any matter they may consider of importance in perfecting measures against the disease, or desirable of being placed on record with a view to adding force to theories already assented to, or controverting them from (1) an administrative, (2) medical, and (3) sanitary point of view. Weekly extracts from this record of the por- tion bearing on sanitation should be sent to the Sanitary Commissioner. (P.C., No. 951, dated 12th April 1899.) 4. In Mysore, the amildars and deputy amildars in charge of taluks and sub-taluks bordering on the British districts are
?212 required to give immediate information of the occurrence of plague within their jurisdiction direct to the Tahsildars of the neighbouring British taluks, and Deputy Commissioners have been requested to keep the Collectors of adjoining British districts promptly informed of the occurrence of plague in the neighbouring districts in Mysore. Collectors of British districts bordering on Mysore should arrange to give similar information direct to the officials of the Darbar. (P.C., No. 481, dated 22nd February 1899.) 5. The Sanitary Commissioner is required to publish a weekly return of plague in the Presidency as soon as possible after the close of each week, and send copies of it direct to- the Government of India, the Governments of Madras, Bombay, Bengal and Ceylon, the Residents in Hyderabad, Mysore and Travancore and Cochin, the Chief Commissioner, Coorg, all Collectors, all Chairmen of Municipal Councils and the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, the Surgeon-General, the Editors of the Madras Newspapers. (Memorandum No. 104-P., dated 17th August 1898; G.O., No. 1033-P., dated 8th September 1898.) (4)-Sanitary Commissioner's Tours. 1. The Collector should invariably be informed of the Sanitary Commissioner's visits to his district, and whenever possible such timely notice should be given as may enable him. to make any arrangements that may be necessary for the attendance of a local officer on the Sanitary Commissioner during his inspection. (G.O., No. 1354-M., dated 3rd June 1897.) 2. The Sanitary Commissioner is requested not to address the general public on plague measures without the special consent of the Collector of the district. It is very doubtful whether at present anywhere any good is gained by trying to explain the Plague Regulations to any public audience. Unless done with the greatest care, opposition is stirred up rather than allayed. (P.C., No. 527, dated 5th November 1898.)
?213 (5)-Duties of the Railway Staff. The following are the duties of the Railway officials under the Plague Regulations: (1) To prevent passengers from infected areas from alighting at any station other than an inspection station, and to insist on their proceeding to the inspection station if it is suspected that the passengers are evading the inspection by so alighting. (Regulations 18 and 19, page 34.) (2) To see with the aid of the platform police that passengers alighting at a railway station do not leave the premises except by the proper exit. (Paragraph 3, page 178.) (3) To see that the railway tickets issued in an infected area and the fresh tickets issued to persons from infected areas who rebook are clipped as prescribed. (P.C. No. 302, dated 21st October 1898; No. 461, dated 21st February 1899.) (4) To stop all passengers presenting plague-punched tickets from infected or notified stations until their names and addresses are taken down, and they are given passports either by the plague official appointed for the purpose or by the station staff themselves at smaller stations. (G. of I. Order printed in G.O., No. 273-M., dated 23rd February 1897, and G.O., No. 816-A. M., dated 6th April 1897.) (5) To carry in a railway compartment vacated for the purpose persons suffering from plague and their contacts to the nearest station where segregation accommodation is available. (Regulation 14-A, page 30.) (6) To disinfect railway carriages from infected areas and carriages in which persons suffering from plague have travelled. (Regulations 20 and 20-A, pages 35 and 36.) (7) To take steps for tracing and destroying rats that may arrive from infected areas concealed in the goods imported. (G.O., No. 738-P., dated 2nd August 1898; P.C., No. 191, dated 14th October 1898.) (8) To put up a notice in all railway carriages inti- mating that passengers from infected parts should take out passports at stations of destination. (Paragraph 2, page 178.)
?214 (9) To lock the carriages before the arrival of the train at the inspection station.   (Paragraph 3, page 174.) (10) To detain the train until the medical inspection is over. (Paragraph 2, page 174.) (11) To see that no passenger is permitted to leave his carriage until in orderly course the arrangement shall be complete for his examination. (Paragraph 3, page 174.) (12) To give every assistance to the medical officers conducting the inspection in order to minimise the detention of trains. (Paragraph 2, page 174.) (13) To carry out the instructions regarding the trans- mission of the names and addresses of passengers. (Regulation 17 (viii), page 33; paragraph 15, page 182.) (14) To afford every facility to wards the working of the Plague Regulations generally. (G.O., No. 1165-P., dated 26th September 1898.) (6)-Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay. 1. The following rules should be observed by officers when sending fresh materials to the Research Laboratory for bacteriological examination:- A.-Dead animals, rats, &c.- (i) These should only be sent if freshly dead or at least before any signs of putrefaction are evident. (ii) If sent by post from outlying stations, they should be most carefully packed in ice, no spirit or other pre- servative fluid of any kind being used: water-tight bottles or cases being used in each case. (iii) In Bombay they ought to be sent by special messenger at once, or if found late at night, to be packed in ice and despatched early the following morning. B.-Excreta, sputa and the like- (i) These should be sent in carefully stoppered and sealed bottles. (ii) No fluid of a preservative nature ought to be added to them. C.-When any of the above articles are sent by post, the rules laid down by the Government of India in Resolution No. 1077-1086 of 9th August 1898 should be observed, viz., " great care should be taken that the stopper or cork of the bottle fits tightly." " The stopper should be carefully tied down with bladder or leather and sealed."
?215 "The glass bottle or jar should then be placed in a strong wooden or tin box, which should be large enough to allow of a layer of raw cotton, at last three-fourths of an inch thick, being put between the vessel and the box. The box itself should be encased in common grah cloth which should be securely closed and selaed. The seals should be at intervals not exceeding three inches along each line of sewing." 2. Cultures and slides for the bacteriological diagnosis of Plague may be prepared as follows: Requirements- 1. Spirit lamp. 2. Spatula. 3. Scalpel. 4. Forceps. 5. * Glass pipettes (sterile). 6. * Agar slants (dry). 7. Microscopic slides. 8. Carbolic lotion (1-20). A.-To make cultures from a bubo post-mortem, wash the skin over the bubo well with soap and water and then with carbolic lotion and dry it. Heat the spatula strongly in the flame until it is hot enough to sear the skin. Do this. Heat the scalpel (previously boiled) and make a small stab over the centre of the bubo, piercing the true skin. Then having carefully passed one of the straight pipettes through the flame six times, break off the sealed end with the forceps (also pre- viously boiled). Push the pipette with a twisting motion into the bubo through the stab aperture made by the sealpel, and suck up a little fluid or semi-solid material. Quickly take an agar slant in the left hand and remove plug with forceps and place between ring and middle fingers of left hand. Heat the mouth of the tube. Insert the pipette into the agar tube and blow out a small amount of material on the surface of the agar leaving a drop to spread over the centre of a microscopic slide. Then take one of the bent pipettes or spreaders, heat six times in the flame and pass into agar tube and quickly spread the material deposited there over the surface. N.B.-Rest the heated end of the spreader on the surface of the agar jelly to cool it, before spreading the material. The mouth of the agar tube should be kept hot by turning it in the flame of the lamp while it is open, and the cotton plug ought to be burnt in the flame before putting it back in the tube with the forceps. While open, keep the agar tube mouth downwards or in a hori- zontal position. The remaining drop in the pipette should be blown out on the centre of a microscopic slide and spread over. The slide should, when dry, be passed three times through the flame. Care should be taken not to over-heat the slide. * These will be sent from the laboratory on application.
?216 The slide and the tube should be labelled, wrapped in paper and carefully packed in cotton wool and sent off to the laboratory for report. If sent by post, the instructions contained in Rule "C" of paragraph 1 should be observed. The straight pipette used should be destroyed by melting the end in the flame. The bent pipette should be sterilized by holding in the flame of the spirit lamp till all the matter on it is charred. B.-In a similar manner cultures can be obtained from the heart, blood, liver, and spleen, and it is always better to send cultures from various organs in every case. (G.O., No. 1456-P., dated 7th October 1899.) (7)-Plague Appointments and Plague Allowances. Though, the Plague Regulations empower Collectors and Chairmen of Municipalities to employ certain classes of sub- ordinates, the formal sanction of Government or the Plague Commissioner is necessary for each appointment. (P.C., No. 1047, dated 28th December 1898; P.C., No. 205, dated 20th January 1899; G.O., No. 800 M., dated 6th June 1899.) 2. Collectors and the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, should prepare every month printed lists of officers of all classes, including troops, employed on plague duty, in accordance with, the instructions contained in Plague Com- missioner's Proceedings, No. 762, dated 22nd November 1898, and No. 1047, dated 28th December 1898, and G.O., No. 1504-P., dated 17th October 1899. The Inspector-General of Police and the Commissioner of Police, Madras, should prepare similar lists of all Police engaged in plague work, and the Surgeon-Greneral should also submit a return showing all Medical officers on plague duty and all temporary doctors obtained from England, with their stations, pay and allow- ances. The lists should be distributed as follows:- Three copies to the Chief Secretary to Government, Financial Department. Four copies to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal Department. (When there is a Plague Commissioner, three of these copies should be sent to him.) Two copies to the Accountant-General. (G.O., No. 134, Financial, dated 24th January 1899.) 3. The use of troops for plague purposes should be avoided as far as possible and their employment should be confined to disinfection when local labour is not available. When so employed, they should not wear uniform or carry arms. The sanction of Government or the Plague Commis- sioner should be obtained before requisitioning them, and
?217 where the employment of troops has once been sanctioned, the men may be changed without reference to the Plague Commis- sioner or Government. Arrangements should be made for the relieving detachment to be inoculated before departure. 4. The following procedure should be adopted in obtain- ing the services of Military officers for plague duty:- I. A Local Government or Administration requiring an officer or officers for plague duty will apply to the Government of India, in the Home Department, detailing the number of officers required, and where and when they should be ordered to join. II. The Government of India will then address the Adjutant-General in India, who will issue instructions under the orders of the Commander-in-Chief to one or more Com- mands to supply the officers wanted, the Government of India being at the same time informed of the instructions issued. III. On learning from the Adjutant-General's Department from what Command the officers asked for will be supplied, the Government of India will inform the Local Government or Administration concerned, and all further correspondence in reference to the individual officers detailed by Commands, or their replacement, should they for any reason revert to Military duty, will be conducted between the Local Gov- ernment or Administration and the Lieutenant-General Commanding. IV. When the officers selected have joined their appoint- ments, the Lieutenant-General Commanding will communicate their names to the Adjutant-General's Department, and their services will then be placed at the disposal of the Government of India. V. When an officer's services are no longer required, he should be directed by the Local Government or Administra- tion to rejoin his regiment, the Lieutenant-General Com- manding and the Government of India being at the same time informed, and the latter will then replace the officer at the Commander-in-Chief's disposal. (G.O., No. 718-P., dated 26th July 1898; P.C. No. 2?, dated 29th September 1898  P.C. No. \8/991\, dated 25th October 1898; P.C. No. 605, dated 3rd March 1899.) 5. No officers of the Indian Medical Service or the Royal Army Medical Corps lent for plague duty should be permitted to revert to Military duty without the previous sanction of the Government of India. (G.O., No. 1139, Public, dated 9th October 1899.) 28
?218 6. The temporary doctors obtained from England must be utilised to the best advantage. They should be required to travel and organize, and be employed less as direct exe- cutive officers. It is impossible to allow a Medical officer for each infected town, and it is only at places where plague is, or is likely to be, very bad that the resident doctors should be stationed. (G.O., No. 209, Public, dated 18th February 1899.) 7. The charge of plague operations in an infected district must be regarded as part of the general duty of an executive officer. No encouragement should be given to an impression that duty connected with the plague involves greater risks or is deserving of more favourable treatment than attendance in the infectious wards of a hospital or in a camp afflicted with cholera, which is accepted as part of the officer's ordinary duty. Except in exceptional cases no recommendation should be made for the grant of special salary, allowance or pension for plague duty. (G.O., No. 175 P., dated 3rd February 1899; G.O., No. 218, Financial, dated 11th February 1899.) 8. The following leave concessions have, however, been temporarily sanctioned by the Secretary of State:- (i) To officers who have been employed on duties connected with the plague for a period of not less than five months- Either (a) one month's extra privilege leave, or (b) full pay instead of half pay for the first two months of furlough or other leave for which half pay is ordinarily admissible. (ii) To officers so employed for a period of not less than ten months- Either (a) two months' extra privilege leave, or (b) full pay instead of half pay for the first four months of furlough or other leave as above. These concessions may be availed of at any time before the 29th June 1900 for plague service rendered at any time before that date. The leave may, however, with the consent of the Local Government, be enjoyed after the 29th June 1900 in cases where the exigencies of the public service have necessi- tated the refusal of leave when applied for, and have thus prevented the grant of the full concessions earned within the prescribed period. For the future plague duty performed in addition to ordinary work is to be remunerated specially (if
?219 sufficiently arduous to deserve special remuneration) by the grant, in the case of medical officers only (but not others), of special allowances during the performance of such duty instead of leave concessions subsequently enjoyable. The above concessions are not admissible- (i) to officers whose duty in connection with plague has not, in the opinion of the Local Government, been so unusually arduous as to render them deserving of the concessions ; (ii) to officers who have been specially appointed to such duty and have been remunerated during the performance of it by special salary or allow- ances ; (iii) to Secretariat and other officers whose additional work in connection with plague has been office work. (G.O., No. 2387 L., dated 8th December 1897 ; G.O., No. 1506 L., dated 17th August 1898; G.O., No. 1074 L., dated 18th May 1899 ; G.O., No. 1043, Financial, dated 26th September 1899.) 9. The special allowances given to certain classes of officers for plague duty and the salaries attached to special temporary appointments created on account of the plague are given below. All questions relating to the grant of allowances to medical officers should be referred for the orders of Govern- ment :- A.-Allowances of officers deputed to Plague Duty. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. A. Military  officers and troops. (a) When employed on guard duty. Nil.  (b) When employed on sanitary   duty, such  as  searching,   disinfecting,        superin-   tending,     scavengering,   &c.-   (i) Combatant   British Rs. 300 a month.  Commissioned    officers   of   over   5 years' service.   (ii)  Combatant  British Rs. 200 a month.  Commissioned   officers   under   5   years' service.   (iii) British              non- Re. 1  +  annas 6 extra ration  commissioned money per day.  officers.   (iv) British privates ... Annas    12   +   annas   6   extra   ration money per day.
?220 A.-Allowances of officers deputed to Plague Duty-continued. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. A. Military officers (b) When employed on sanitary  and troops- duty, such as searching,  Cont. disinfecting, superin-   tending, scavengering,   &c.-cont.   (v) Native officers Rs. 1-8-0 a day.  (vi) Native         non- Annas 12 a day.  Commissioned   officers.   (vii) Sepoys       ... Annas 8 a day.  Before engag-   ing   on    plague   duty,    the   sepoys will be inoculated and   supplied   with  two  suits of   white drill, one pair of boots   and two white turbans.    The   clothing    will    be    supplied   regimentally,   and   the   cost   recovered subsequently from   the local bodies concerned. Note.-When the troops employed on plague duty have been performing guard and sanitary duties in the same place together, that is to say, when some of the party have been employed on sanitary duties while others have been doing guard duty, the duties being interchangeable, all the troops should be paid allowances. On the other hand, where the duties assigned to any one body of troops have been exclusively of the nature of guard duties no allowances should be granted. The allowances shall be paid only for the days on which the troops are actually employed on plague duty. All doubtful cases should be referred for the special orders of Government. (G.Os., No. 753, Public, dated 19th May 1899 ; No. 1194, Public, dated 3rd August 1899.) B. Medical   officers (i) Commissioned         officers Same as in the case of British wholly        em- transferred  from   regi- Commissioned        Military ployed        on mental  or purely mili- officers. plague duty. tary duty.   (ii) Commissioned  officers   in Rs. 5 a day.  civil employ.   (iii) Senior Military Assistant Rs. 5 a day.  Surgeons      with      the   honorary rank of  Cap-   tain or Lieutenant.   (iv) Military   Assistant    Sur- Rs. 3 a day                                        In  addition    to    geons in Civil or  Mili-  any      acting,  tary   employ,   on   pay  charge          or  exceeding Rs. 150.  house    allow-    ance they may   Rs. 2 a day      have        been    drawing at the           time of   their    deputation to    plague     duty    and        which    they      would  (v) Military   Assistant   Sur-  have      conti-  geons in Civil or Mili-  nued to draw  tary   employ,    on   pay  but    for such  not exceeding Rs. 150.  deputation.
?221 A.-Allowances of officers deputed to Plague Duty- continued.   Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. B. Medical officers wholly       em- ployed       on plague duty - cont. (vi) Civil Assistant Surgeons. Rs. 2 a day.  (vii) Civil Apothecaries Rs. 25 * a month, or in the case   of men, who, at the  time of   their deputation, were in in-   dependent  charge,  the   full   charge   allowance   of    their   grades.  (viii) Hospital  Assistants Annas  8* a   engaged    on     plague day.   duty    involving    per-  In addition    to  sonal   risk,    such  as  house-rent or  attending   on    plague  free quarters,  patients.  but   in    lieu  (ix) Hospital    Assistants Rs. 10 * a of         charge  engaged      on      light Month. allowance.  plague duty,  such   as    inspection     of    pass-   engers.  C. Medical  officers, (1)  Commissioned officers Such local allowance, not ex- doing    plague  ceeding     one-fifth     of the work in   addi-  salary, as may be  fixed in tion   to    their  each case  by Government. ordinary  The   allowance   should   be duties.  given only to officers whose   additional     plague     work,   such as that of medical in-   spection   of   passengers by  (2) Medical subordinates road or railway, is entirely   separate from, and  outside    the sphere of, their ordinary   duties  and   not  to  officers   whose ordinary and legiti-   mate work, such as that of   attending   on  the   sick   in   hospital, has been increased  (3) Nurses or Midwives owing to the occurrence of   plague. D.   Plague    super- (i) Appointed  in non-munici- Allowance  of   25   per cent.  of visors  belong- pal areas. the  salary   +   Rs.  30  fixed ing to the Salt,  travelling allowance + Rs. 15 Abkri       and  horse allowance, provided the other   Depart-  permanent  pay    +    25   per ments.  cent.   thereof  does  not   fall   below Rs. 80.  (ii) Appointed  in municipal Same as in the case of D (i), but  towns. minus   the   fixed   travelling   allowance. E. Compounders on  Allowance  of  20 per  cent. of ambulance  the   salary,   to   be   granted staff.  only   when   the    ambulance   staff    is    on    active   plague   duty.   * These allowances are admissible only to officers who have been deputed to a  dis- tance from the scene of their ordinary work to duty solely connected with plague.
?222 B.-Salaries of officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty. Designation. Salary. Remarks. A. Retired Commis- Rs. 500 a month (in addition The  officer must have retired sioned Medical to their  pensions which will before  the  1st   April 1898, officers. continue   to   be   a   military and his re-employment must  charge). be either on Plague  duty or   in a  post which  cannot be   filled in the ordinary way by   reason  of  the  officers,  who   would, in ordinary course, be   available for it being required   for  plague  duty.     The   ap-   pointment      requires       the   previous sanction of the Gov-   ernment of India. B. Temporary Rs. 500 a month or such salary  English as  may be fixed in  their  Doctors. agreements with the  Secre-   tary of State.  C. Retired Military Pay of their grade at the time The officers should be required Assistant of  retirement  +   Rs.  100 to    produce   certificates   of Surgeons. allowance subject to a maxi- physical  fitness,   and    their  mum of Rs.   350   a month. appointments should, in   the  In special cases the local first instance,  be   made  for  Government may  raise  the periods   not    exceeding   six  limit to  Rs. 500. A Retired months.  Honorary      Commissioned   officer of the Indian Subordi-   nate Medical Department is   entitled to double first-class   travelling allowance  by rail,   and  eight  annas  a mile by   road.  D. Uncovenanted Such pay not exceeding Rs. 350 The term of employment may, Medical      offi- a  month   as   the   Surgeon- subject to their good conduct cers. General may find necessary, and efficiency, be for a period  with travelling allowances to of three months ; the engage-  and from the places to which ment being terminable after  they are posted at the rates the  expiry   of the  first  two  of double second-class fares months  by a written notice  for journeys by rail and annas given by either the Govern-  4   a   mile   for   journeys by ment or the officer.  road.  E. Private Hospital Pay   assigned   to   the   corre-  Assistants. sponding grades of Hospital   Assistants    in    Government   service + 50 per cent, thereof   with compensation for quart-   ers.  F. Lady    Nurses (a) Rs.   175  a  month in If   free quarters  are not   pro- obtained  from addition to free quarters, vided, an allowance of Rs. 3 England. fuel, lights and punkah- a day should be paid.  pullers,       commencing   from date    of   embark-   ation to India ;   (b) double  first-class fare  by   rail  when travelling   on   duty ;   (c) first-class    passage    when   proceeding   by   steamer   from one   part  of India   to another on duty.
?223 B.-Salaries of officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-continued. Designation. Salary. Remarks. G. Qualified  Euro- Such pay not exceeding Rs. 100 When   the  nurses   attend   on pean, Eurasian a  month as Collectors may Plague patients, a  boarding or      Native find necessary. allowance of Rs. 1-8-0 a day nurses   locally  in the case of Europeans and recruited.  Eurasians, or  one  rupee  in   the case of natives should be   paid. H. Private   gentle- Rs.  2 a day   +  Rs. 15, horse Such supervisors should usually men appointed all owance. be Europeans  or Eurasians, as Plague  and they need not be appoint- supervisors  in  ed   unless the   outbreak   of municipal  plague    requires    a    special towns.  organization to deal with it. J. Private  gentle- Rs. 80 pay   +  Rs.   30, fixed  men appointed travelling allowance + Rs. 15,  as      Plague horse allowance.  supervisors  in   rural areas.     Allowances should not be paid   to every Sanitary Inspector   indiscriminately, but should   be    sanctioned   only   when   circumstances render their   grant       necessary.     Fixed   travelling allowance should K. Plague Inspect-  be given only in the case of ors-     Inspectors placed in charge (1) if   Certifi- Rs. 45  pay  +   Rs.  15, fixed of Plague observation circles, cated travelling allowance + Rs. 15,   or in the case of those whose Sanitary horse allowance. duties    require    them    to Inspect-  travel   constantly.    In  the ors.  case  of all others ordinary (2) if special- Rs. 40  pay  +  Rs.  15, fixed travelling allowance accord- ly   train- travelling allowance   +   Rs. ing to the rates given in the ed    for 15, horse allowance. Civil    Service   Regulations tempo-  should alone be sanctioned. rary  The   Collector  will  decide Plague  the   question in each case. duty.  The grant of  horse   allow-   ance   depends   on   circum-   stances ;   if an Inspector is   required by the Collector to   keep a horse, he will  draw   horse allowance as long as a   serviceable animal is actu-   ally kept and a certificate    to that effect obtained. L. Assistant Plague Rs. 15 to Rs. 25           Intended to serve in unions and Inspectors.  get no allowances. M.  Other     tempo- Such rates as  would bo  suffi- Menial servants are not eligible rary    subordi- cient  to induce   persons . to for any allowances, and should nates including take up the appointments. be  conveyed   from  place to menial       ser-  place at the cost of Govern- vants.  ment.  (G.O., No. 984 P., dated 23rd June 1898.)
?225 (8)-Plague Expenditure and Accounts. No expenditure in connection with plague establishments or for the carrying out of works shall be incurred without the previous sanction of the Plague Commissioner (when one has been appointed) or of Government. 2. Plague Commissioner.-The Plague Commissioner * is authorised to accord such sanction himself subject to budget provision in the latest quarterly estimate passed by Govern- ment (save as respects appointments carrying a salary in excess of Rs. 200 per mensem), reporting the fact immediately to Government. As regards establishments, this power of sanction extends only to such establishments as are treated as direct plague charges; the sanction of Government is required to all appointments which constitute indirect plague expenditure, i.e., the cost of which is debitable to the ordinary service heads. (G.Os., No. 868, Financial, dated 11th October 1898; No. 1115, Financial, dated 25th November 1898.) 3. The Plague Commissioner is also empowered to sanc- tion grants-in-aid for the construction and maintenance of private plague hospitals and segregation and health camps at the rates prescribed in G.O., No. 1245-P., dated 5th October 1898, up to a total limit of Rs. 10,000. He shall immediately report all such expenditure to the Financial Department, intimating whether provision for the same exists in the most recent estimates. He shall, in no case, exceed the total limit of Rs. 10,000 without obtaining the orders of Government. (G.O., No. 868, Financial, dated 11th October 1898.) 4. The Plague Commissioner has control over all expendi- ture connected with plague operations, and may call for such returns and information as regards expenditure as may seem to him necessary, and all returns from Collectors and other officers regarding plague expenditure shall be sent to Govern- ment through him. (G.O., No. 1122-P., dated 20th September 1898.) 5. Plague Estimates.-All Collectors, the Surgeon-General, the Inspector-General of Police, the Commissioner of Police and the Sanitary Commissioner are required to submit quar- terly estimates  of plague expenditure. These estimates should be forwarded direct to the Financial Department * The appointment of the Plague Commissioner requires the previous sanction of the Government of India. (G.O., No. 977-P., dated 22nd June 1899.)  Duplicate copies are not required, 29
226 (or the Plague Commissioner) so as to reach their destination not later than the 5th of the first month of each quarter. The estimate submitted by the Surgeon-General includes provision for all Medical officers, nurses, &c., who have been sent out by the Secretary of State and are temporarily attached to hospitals, &c., in Madras prior to their being posted to duties in connection with plague work. Estimates are also framed in the Secretariat Departments in which additional establishments in connection with plague corre- spondence are entertained. (P.C., No. 910, dated 14th December 1898; G.Os., No. 154, Financial, dated 27th January 1899; No. 864, Financial, dated 31st July 1899.) 6. In order to enable Government to obtain an approxi- mately correct revised estimate of plague expenditure for inclusion in the preliminary edition of the Civil budget estimate which is forwarded to the Government of India, the estimate for the third quarter shall be submitted so as to reach its destination on the 5th November instead of the 5th October and shall show (1) actual expenditure up to the 31st -October, (2) estimate for November and December, (3) estimate for the last quarter of the official year, and (4) total estimate for the year. This estimate shall be accompanied by an estimate for the ensuing official year based on the con- ditions existing at the time of framing the estimate. This latter estimate need not provide for each quarter of the year separately. (G.O., No. 906, Financial, dated 17th August 1899.) 7. The estimates shall cover all plague charges-direct and indirect-under Provincial, Local, Municipal, Canton- ment and Port and Marine Funds. Provision shall be made therein for requirements based on conditions existing at the time of framing the estimates. (G.Os., No. 899, Financial, dated 19th October 1898; No. 1054, Financial, dated 14th November 1898.) 8. If Collectors and other officers find that their estimates as passed by Government are inadequate, it is their duty to apply for extra grants at once. It should be clearly under- stood by all officers that expenditure can be incurred only against the quarterly allotments passed by Government, and that although it is not the intention that plague operations should cease, because it is found that the allotment is being exceeded in any quarter, the officer concerned will be held responsible for exercising proper supervision over the expendi- ture and applying at the earliest possible moment it becomes
227 apparent that funds are becoming exhausted. Balances aris- ing from the fact that the quarterly estimates do not utilize fully the allotments existing in their sanctioned annual bud- gets shall not be utilized for non-plague purposes. (G.Os., No. 868, Financial, dated 11th October 1898; No. 569, Financial, dated 3rd May 1899; No. 906, Financial, dated 17th August 1899.) 9. Forms of the estimates will be printed and supplied by the Accountant-General. No changes shall be made in the form without the approval of the Financial Department. The figures for each municipality shall be given separately. (G.Os., No. 478, Financial, dated 1st April 1899; Mia. No. 522. Financial, dated 17th April 1899, P.C.'s No. 1144, dated 26th April 1899.) 10. Plague Expenditure.-Each municipality shall bear its own plague charges. As regards district boards, the measures adopted in frontier districts proper, i.e., those districts which adjoin plague-stricken areas outside the Madras Presidency, while benefiting those districts themselves as being nearest the seat of infection, at the same time have the direct result of protecting other portions of the Presidency as well. This condition is also fulfilled, in some measure, by districts in which Railway Inspection Stations have been established by Notification in the Fort St. George Gazette. Expenditure incurred by district boards in such districts on plague preventive measures is therefore distributed by Government in the ratios of one-third in frontier districts proper and of one-fourth in railway inspection districts against the district in which the expenditure is incurred, the remaining two-thirds or three-fourths, as the case may be, being contributed by the other districts of the Presidency rateably to their annual receipts as shown in their budget estimates for the year. The estimates shall, however, provide for the gross expendi- ture to be incurred by each district board, credit for the contribution being taken as subsequently advised by the Accountant-General. (G.Os., No. 547, Financial, dated 18th June 1898; No. 883, Financial, dated 13th October 1898; No. 1122, Financial, dated 28th November 1898; No. 7, Financial, dated 3rd January 1899; No. 947, Financial, dated 30th August 1899.) 11. If any district board or municipality finds its funds unequal to the burden of plague charges, it shall revise its budget by omitting all avoidable expenditure, and in the last resort may apply for an advance from Provincial Funds or for a loan from the Government of India. Care shall be taken that advances granted by Government to local bodies to meet plague expenditure are applied to the precise purposes for 30
228 which the advances were made, and are not utilized to relieve their ordinary funds of expenditure on sanitary, medical and other objects. (G.Os., No. 514-P., dated 25th May 1898; No. 261, Financial, dated 18th February 1899.) 12. The Accountant-General shall submit monthly state- ments of charges-direct and indirect-under Provincial and Local (audited) and under Municipal, Port and Marine and Cantonment Funds, together with summaries under each head showing totals to date and the latest grants for each district. These statements shall also include all expenditure incurred in connection with the plague which has not been brought to book as direct or indirect, e.g., the emoluments of officers and establishments forming part of existing departments or ser- vices and not replaced by substitutes, but exclusively engaged on plague duties, and shall reach Government early in the month succeeding that in which the accounts are received by the Accountant-General. (G.Os., No. 865, Financial, dated 1st August 1899; No. 939, Financial, dated 29th August 1899.) 13. Classification of Plague Charges.-(i) The appended list shows the proper classification of charges commonly incurred in connection with plague. (ii) "Direct" plague expenditure means expenditure exhibited in the Government accounts under the head 24-D. MEDICAL-Grants for Medical Purposes-Expenses in connec- tion with Bubonic Plague. "Indirect" plague expenditure means extra expenditure due to plague but brought to account under the ordinary appropriate service heads. (iii) The amount of "Indirect" plague expenditure is therefore not ascertainable from the ordinary Provincial and Incorporated Local Fund Accounts and special state- ments are prepared in the course of audit by the Accountant- General in the case of expenditure from General Revenues and by the Treasury officer in the case of expenditure from Incorporated Local Funds. (iv) To facilitate the preparation of these statements all officers who draw bills for " Indirect" plague expenditure should write conspicuously at the head of each such bill, beside the account head, the word PLAGUE in red ink. If only some of the items in a bill are Indirect plague charges, the word PLAGUE should be written against each such item instead of at the head of the bill.
229 (v) It is to be noted that pay and allowances of officers and establishments forming part of existing departments or services whose employment on plague duty does not involve the payment of salaries to other persons for the performance of their legitimate duties (even though they may be exclusively engaged on plague duties) and not receiving extra allowances on account of plague, do not constitute "Indirect" plague charges (and of course are not "Direct" plague charges) because they do not involve extra expense. A statement should be forwarded to the Accountant-General by the 20th of each month showing the pay and allowances, drawn in the previous month, of officers and establishments so employed. (vi) From the above it will be seen that the distinc- tion between "Direct" and "Indirect" plague expenditure affects the accounts of Incorporated Local Funds expenditure and Provincial expenditure. As regards Excluded Local Funds this distinction is unnecessary and all extra expenditure, i.e., expenditure which would not have been incurred but for the occurrence or imminence of plague may be shown under the head Plague. (vii) It is a general principle that the salaries and allowances (including travelling allowance) of officers whether belonging to the Indian Civil Service, the Indian Staff Corps, the Indian Medical Service or the Army Medical Service, and of superior officers of the Forest, Survey, Customs, Salt and other departments deputed, wholly or in addition to their own duties, to perform plague duty as well as the emoluments of nurses procured from Europe and of medical men similarly procured, should be met entirely out of Provincial Funds and should not be charged directly to the funds of municipalities or local bodies. (viii) Contingent expenditure on account of plague, e.g., stationery, postage, telegrams, office furniture and such like, should be charged against the head of account to which the salaries of the officers incurring such expenditure are debited. As between independent establishments entertained to deal with plague, the principle that officers of superior grades should be charged to Provincial and officers of inferior grades to Local should be applied. With regard to dependent establishments, the principle that the charge should follow the pay of the officer on whom the establishment is dependent should hold both in regard to establishments and contin- gencies.
?230 LIST OF PLAGUE CHARGES. [Note.-The Regulations referred to in the list are the Additional Mufussal Regula- tions-G.O., No. 93 P., dated 26th February 1898.] PROVINCIAL-INDIRECT. 3. LAND REVENUE-Charges of District Administration. General Establishments- Salaries. Establishment. Allowances. Contingencies. Sub-divisional Establishments- Establishment. Allowances. Contingencies. (1) Cost of   additions to    office establishments of Revenue officers necessitated by plague (Regulation 13).  (2) Pay and allowances of tem- porary additions   to   the Revenue staff necessitated by plague.        15. POST OFFICE-District Post Charges. Establishments. Allowances. Contingencies.        (3) Additional   Post   Establish- ments for serving plague camps.     18. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION-Civil Secretariats. Chief Secretariat- Establishment. Local   and   Municipal   Depart- ment- Establishment. (4) Extra establishment required for dealing with plague correspond- ence. 19-A. LAW AND JUSTICE-COURTS OF LAW-Criminal Courts. Charges of Stationary Sub-Magis- trates. Special Sub-Magistrate. Temporary Establishment. Allowances. Contingencies. (5) Court required in consequence of plague. 20. POLICE. Presidency Police. District Executive Force. Railway Police. (6) Additional police entertained in consequence of plague. 24-A. MEDICAL-Medical Establishment. District Medical and Sanitary Officers- Allowances. Reserve Medical Subordinates- Allowances. (7) Extra allowances on account of plague of Medical officers  and subordinates performing plague duties in addition to ordinary duties.
?231 24-C. MEDICAL-Sanitation and Vaccination.     (8) Extra establishment employed  Sanitary Department - in the office of the Sanitary Commis- Establishment.  sioner  in  connection  with plague  work. 30-C. STATIONERY AND PRINTING. 8. (a) Cost  of printing passports and passes at the  Government Press (Regulation 29). PROVINCIAL-DIRECT. 24-D. MEDICAL-Grants for Medical Purposes. Salaries - (9) Pay and allowances of Medi- Salaries of  Superior   Medical cal officers and subordinates includ- officers and Military officers. ing clerks and passport-issuing officers Plague allowances of Superior exclusively employed on plague duty Medical officers and Military in connection with the inspection and officers. observation of travellers by sea and Salaries of Subordinate Medical by railway and the segregation and officers. medical treatment of  such as  are Plague allowances of Subordi- affected or suspected to be affected nate Medical officers. with plague, at seaports, or at rail- Exchange compensation allow- way    stations  notified   as  railway ance. inspection stations in the Fort St. House-rent allowances. George Gazette. Local allowances. (10) Temporary    establishments  entertained for the purposes men- Establishments - tioned in No. (9).  (11) Grants for the  construction, Allowances - &c., of private plague hospitals. Tentage of officers. (12) Cost of construction of sheds Travelling      allowances      of and cost of medical stores, disinfect- gazetted officers. ants,  &c., required strictly for the Travelling allowances of non- purposes specified in No. (9). gazetted officers and estab- (13) Pay and allowances of Mili- lishments. tary officers whose services are form- Supplies and Services -  ally placed at the disposal  of the Petty construction and repair  Civil department for employment on of buildings. plague duty and of clerks and ser- Contribution   to  private  hos- vants  attached to  them   wherever pitals. they may be employed. Dieting charges. (14) Pay and allowances of Gov- Cost of instruments, medicines ernment  officers  other than those and disinfectants. mentioned in items Nos. (9) and (13) Hospital clothing and bedding. specially deputed by   Government Other hospital equipment and for employment in connection with necessaries. plague   measures,  and  clerks  and  servants attached to them.
?232 Contingencies - (15) Extra allowances on account Tour charges. of plague of Military officers and Service postage. men who remain on the strength of Do.    telegrams. their regiments though detailed for Purchase of furniture. plague duty, and all extra expendi- Repairs    of      do. ture due to their deputation if (in Carbon paper supplied to pass- the case of men only) their services port-issuing officers at sea- are utilized for purposes mentioned ports or  at railway stations in No. (9). notified as railway inspection The extra allowances on account stations in the Fort St. George of  plague  of  Military  officers  are Gazette debitable to Provincial, whether they Office expenses. are engaged for purposes mentioned Miscellaneous.                              in No. (9) or not.  LOCAL-INDIRECT. 81-J. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION-General Establishment of Local Funds. Establishments.                   (16) Extra   establishment    em- Allowances.                   ployed in Local Fund offices. Contingencies.                                       24-A. MEDICAL-Medical Establishment. District   Medical   and  Sanitary  Officer's establishment-  (17) Additions to the office estab-      Establishments. lishment  of  District  Medical   and Allowances. Sanitary Officer. Contingencies.                             24-B. MEDICAL-Hospitals and Dispensaries. Salaries.  Establishments.   (18) Extra expenditure in exist-     Allowances. ing hospitals and dispensaries due Supplies and Services. to plague. Contingencies.   24-C. MEDICAL-Sanitation and Vaccination. Sanitation and Conservancy-  Establishment. (19) Additions to existing sanitary Allowances. staff for plague work. Supplies and Services.  Contingencies.
?238 LOCAL-DIRECT. Salaries-  Salaries of Subordinate Medical  officers.  House-rent allowance.  Plague allowance.                                Establishment-   (20)  Pay and   allowances    of Matrons and nurses.                         Medical   subordinates,  clerks  and Compounders.                                  passport-issuing officers employed Ward attendants and servants.        in plague hospitals and at railway Storekeepers.                 stations not notified as railway Establishments   entertained   at      inspection stations in the Fort St. plague camps and road frontier               George Gazette and  the road frontier inspection    stations    and   at         inspection stations. railway, stations not notified      (21) Cost   of   observation  staff as railway inspection stations       Consisting of    plague        supervisors, in the Fort St. George Gazette.      plague         inspectors, assistant plague  inspectors and their peons (Reg. 6). Allowances-                                          (22) Ambulance    staff  (Regs. Travelling allowances.                     9, 10 and 21). Supplies and Services-                           (23) Cost    of    camp   establish- Petty construction   and  repairs     ments        superintendents       and of buildings.                                 gumastahs   and   menial   servants Funeral expenses.                          (Reg. 27). Dietary charges.                                  (24) Cost    of    construction   of Clothing and bedding                                plague hospitals and "observa Cost   of  medicines  and instru-      tion," "suspect," "health" and ments and disinfectants.               "staff"  camps (Reg.19). Other hospital necessaries.                   (25) Cost of stretchers, medi- Contingencies-                                  cal stores,           disinfectants, comforts Purchase of furniture.                     and   furniture   and   clothing     for Repairs of         do.                           plague hospitals (Eeg. 8). Tour charges.                                   Nos. (20) to (25) must be Postage charges.                              understood as referring to ex- Telegraph charges.                          penditure for purposes other than Carbon paper supplied to pass-      those specified in No. (9). port-issuing officers at railway          (26)  Extra expenditure due to stations not notified as rail-      the deputation of troops    on   plague way inspection stations in the      duties other than those specified in Fort  St.   George   Gazette and      No. (9)-See also No. (15). at   road   frontier   inspection              stations.  Office expenses.  Miscellaneous.  (G.O., No. 1093, Financial, dated 5th October 1899.) 14. Fines recovered in prosecutions under the Plague Regulations should be credited to fines under Law and Justice. (G.O., No. 83, Judicial, dated 12th January 1899.)
