THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. (Revised up to 2nd October 1906.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1906. [PRICE, 4 annas.] [6 pence.]
THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. (Revised up to 15th November 1903.) MADRAS: PRINTED   BY  THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1903.
?CONTENTS.      PAGE I.-  The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 1 II.-  Notification of the Government of India in the Home Department  No. 302, dated 4th February 1897, delegating to Local  Governments powers under the Epidemic Diseases Act 3         III.-  Plague regulations in force outside the Presidency Town 4 APPENDICES.    APPENDIX  I. Notes on certain matters connected with plague -    (1) General remarks  51   (2) Advantages of early discovery of plague  52   (3) Segregation of contacts  53   (4) Evacuation  54   (5) Inoculation 55    (6) Disinfection  57   (7) Rat-plague and destruction of rats 61         APPENDIX II-A. - Plague passport 63  II-B. - General pass, for journeys by road or boat 64  II-C. - General pass, for journeys by rail 65  II-D. - General pass, for persons leaving an infected or notified plane, &c. 65  II-E. - Special pass   for   persons   leaving   an   inhabited infected area 66  II-F. -Plague inoculation certificate 67  II-G. - Register of permanent  passes   issued   to   persons attending markets 68  II-H. - Relaxation of passport rules 68  II-L -Intimation form 71  II-J. - Time allowed  at  inspection   stations   for   plague examination 72  II-K. - Detention certificate 72  * *                          *                          *   II-M. - Statement to   accompany proposals   for   placing  restrictions on fairs and festivals 73  II-N. - Notifications for  placing restrictions on fairs and festivals 74  II-O. - Plague report 75  II-P. - Destruction of plague records 76
?iv    PAGE APPENDIX II-Q. - Distribution of spare copies of printed orders of  Government  77  II-R. ---Part I - Allowances of officers deputed to plague duty  78  II-R. ---Part II - Salaries of officers   temporarily   entertained  for plague duty   80  II-S. ---Pay   and    allowances of sanitary inspectors  employed on plague duty  82  II-T. ---List of plague charges  85
?THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE TEE PRESIDENCY TOWN. I. THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897). An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Short title, extent and commencement. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897: (2) It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive of Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti); and (3) It shall come into force at once. Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2. (1) When at any time the Governor-Generalin Council is satisfied that India or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the Governor-General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary Regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of persons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including com- pensation if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene- rality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in Council may take measures and prescribe Regulations for- (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary; and
?2 [Epidemic Diseases Act. (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected with any such disease. (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred by this Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories administered by it. Penalty.. 3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made Penalty. under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. XLV 1860 Protection to persons acting under Act. 4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done or in good faith intended to be clone under this Act.
?3 II. NOTIFICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA IN THE HOME DEPARTMENT (No. 302, DATED 4TH FEBRUARY 1897), DELEGATING TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS POWERS CON- FERRED BY THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897. WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, is pleased to direct- that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised by Local Governments with regard to their respective terri- tories as follows:- (a) All the said powers by the Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal and Chief Commissioner of Burma. * * * *
?4 III. PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. WHEREAS certain parts of the presidency of Madras are visited by, and other parts are threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force in the presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease: In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub- section (1) of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and delegated to him under sub-section (3) of the same section by the notification of the Government of India in the Home Department, No. 302, of the 4th February 1897, the Governor of Fort St. George in Council is pleased to prescribe under the said Epidemic Diseases Act, and in super- session of all regulations previously issued on the subject, the following regulations to be observed throughout the presi- dency except the city of Madras:- Part I.-The Passport System and other General Precau- tionary Measures to be adopted in all Towns and Villages outside the Presidency Town. Infected area. 1. The local Government, or, subject to its control, the Collector of a district, may issue an order declaring that any town, village or other area is infected with plague; and a copy of such order shall be notified in the next issue of the Fort St. George or District Gazette. As a rule, only places in which one or more indigenous cases of plague have occurred should be so notified. The Local Government may in the same manner notify railway stations, which, from their proximity to infected areas, are liable to be used by persons leaving such areas. Surveillance or passport rules. Every arrival from an infected or notified area bound to obtain a passport and place himself under surveillance for ten days. 2. (1) Every person arriving, or suspected of having arrived, from any place notified under the last preceding rule shall, unless he is exempted under rules 89 and 121 or unless he already holds a passport or a permanent pass under rules 82-84 or unless he has been detained for the full period of in- cubation at a road or railway inspection station or in a plague camp, before leaving the railway station at which he has alighted, or before disembarking from the steamer, ship or boat in which he has travelled, or in the case of arrival by road either immediately on reaching a road frontier inspec- tion station or within twelve hours from the time of arrival
?Part I-Rule 3.] 5 at any other place, obtain from the officer mentioned in Rule 3 infra a passport in the form shown in Appendix II-A binding him to present himself for inspection daily for the next ten days before the local authority of the town or village where he may be; and he shall be bound so to present himself. Definition of "local authority". (2) By a "local authority" is meant any of the follow- ing officers:- (a) The local medical officer; (b) The station-house officer; (c) The headman of the village; (d) Any person appointed by the Collector of the district for the purpose. In places where there is more than one local authority, the duties of local authority shall be performed by, or with the permission of the Collector under the orders of, the officer who stands first in the order given in this clause. In large towns, such as Madura, Trichinopoly, Salem, etc., the duties of local authorities under these rules should ordinarily be performed by a medical subordinate and should not be left to any lower class of officer. Penalty. (3) Any person refusing to comply with or attempting to evade this rule may be detained for ten days at the nearest inspection station or other place appointed by the Collector for the purpose in addition to being liable to the penalty prescribed in Rule 100. Note-1. This rule does not apply to passengers from a non-infected or non-notified area who pass through an infected or notified station without breaking journey at that station. 2. Persons who make frequent or daily journeys from an infected to an uninfected area may in lieu of passports be given general passes as laid down in Rule 84 infra. 3. The Collector, or any plague officer or assistant plague officer not below the rank of Deputy Tahsildar may, by written order, exempt any person from personal attendance before the local authority and may permit him to be inspected at his residence instead. For the definition of plague officer and assistant plague officer see Rule 103. Passport issuing officers. 3. The following officers are authorized to issue passports:- (a) To travellers alighting at rail-  The medical officer in charge or  way inspection stations. other officer acting under his  orders. (b) To travellers alighting at rail- Such medical, sanitary or other way stations included within  officer as may be appointed municipal limits.  by the chairman with the  Collector's approval.
?6 [Part I-Rule 4. (c) To travellers alighting at other  The stationmaster or other officer  railway stations.  appointed by the Collector for  the purpose. (d) To travellers arriving by  The medical, sanitary or other steamer, ship or boat. officer appointed to examine  such travellers. (e) To travellers arriving- by road. The medical, sanitary or other  officer appointed to examine such  travellers, or if no such officer  has been appointed, the local  authority of the place of arrival. The Collector should arrange with the railway author- ities at which stations the railway staff shall be required to perform the duties connected with the issue of passports and at which stations the Collector should make other arrange- ments. Stationmasters requiring forms or service postage stamps should apply to the Collectors concerned, and should use the following designation in franking covers containing corre- spondence connected with their passport work-" Station- master and Honorary Plague Passport-issuing officer." Duties of passport- holders. 4, Every person required by these rules to take out a passport shall declare truly his name, address, and such other particulars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport. He shall, unless exempted, for ten days from the date of the issue of the passport, daily present himself with his passport at the appointed time before the local authority of the place where he may be for the time being, and shall daily obtain that officer's signature on his passport in token of his having so presented himself. If he becomes ill or if any sickness occurs in the house in which he is or has been residing during the said period of ten days, he shall give immediate information of the same to the local authority. He shall report similarly any change in his residence occurring within ten days from the date of the issue of the passport, and if he changes his residence, he shall, before departure, get the entries under headings 11 and 12 of his passport altered by the local authority. On the expiry of the said period of ten days, he shall deliver up his passport to the local authority of the place where he may then be. Intimation of issue of passports. 5. Every officer issuing a passport shall immediately send the triplicate copy of it by post, or by special messenger or in any other manner which the Collector may direct, to the local authority of the place of destination of the person passported. If the local authority of the place of destination is not known, the triplicate copy of the passport shall be sent
?Part I-Rule 6.] 7 to the tahsildar concerned for transmission to the ' local authority. Intimation of the issue of passport need be telegraphed only in urgent cases. Change of residence during surveillance. 6. The following procedure shall be followed in respect to passport-holders who change their residence within the Madras presidency within ten days of their arrival:- (a) The local authority of the original place of arrival shall send the triplicate copy of the passport to the local authority of the new place of destination after noting there- in the number of days during which the passport-holder has been observed. (b) If the new place of destination is in another district, the change of residence shall also be intimated direct to the district medical and sanitary officer of that district, and through the tahsildar or municipal chairman concerned to the district medical and sanitary officer of the original place of arrival. The intimation should contain the following particulars:- Passport number, date and station of issue. Passport-holder's name and father's name. How long observed and where. New place of residence-District, taluq, village, street, and number or name of the house. The forms should be printed at the District Presses. Duties of local authority or passport examiner. 7. The local authority of the place of destination shall keep himself promptly informed of all arrivals from infected or notified areas, shall report to higher authority every arrival who is not passported, and shall see that, on the arrival of a passport-holder, he is observed daily for ten days. Any case of illness or death in the house in which such passport-holder is or has been residing shall be forthwith reported with full details to the nearest plague officer or assistant plague officer or to the nearest medical officer. Particular attention should be paid to cases of fever accom- panied with acute affection of the lungs, as these symptoms may indicate the existence of pneumonic plague. The appearance of glandular swellings even though attended by constitutional disturbance so slight as not to prevent the patient moving about, the occurrence of abortion amongst women, of convulsions amongst children and of sudden death in the aged should be regarded as suspicious and should be reported. After ten days, the duplicate passport shall be recovered from the passport-holder and sent to the tahsildar.
8 [Part I-Rule 8. Register to be maintained by local authority. 8. Every local authority shall maintain a register, which may be in manuscript, in the following form :- (1) Date of receipt of triplicate copy of passport or other intimation. (2) Name of passport-holder. (3) From what infected or notified area arriving. (4) Date of arrival of passport-holder. (5) Number, date and place of issue of passport. (6) How long kept under observation. (7) State of health of the passport-holder and other persons. living in the house in which he is or has been residing. (8) Date of departure if occurring within ten days. (9) Destination. (10) Date of despatch of triplicate passport to the local author- ity of the place of destination, and of intimation to the tahsildar or municipal chairman and district medical and sanitary officer. (11) Date of despatch of the duplicate passport to the tahsildar and how despatched. If sent by messenger, his name and time of his departure: Persons passing through a railway inspection station. 9. In the case of persons passing through a railway frontier inspection station, the medical officer in charge shall record the following information in respect to every traveller from an infected or notified area who is not detained by him under the provisions of Rule 24 and shall send it without delay-if possible by the railway guard of the same or next train-to the district medical and sanitary officer of the district to which such traveller is proceeding :- (1) Date of arrival.  (2) Name of traveller (in full, including house-name and caste-  title).  (3) Father's name.  (4) Caste.  (5) Age and sex.  (6) Whence coming.  (7) Railway station of destination.  (8) Number of railway ticket.  (9) Destination and resi-  dence during the  next ten days. District.  Taluq.  Village (or amsam and desam)  Street.  Number or name of the owner of the house. 10. The foregoing rule does not require the maintenance of a. register. The information referred to should be recorded in duplicate with the aid of carbon paper, a separate slip of paper being used for each passenger, except in the case of the members of a family proceeding to the same
?Part I-Rule 11.] 9 destination, when their names may be entered in one slip. One set of copies should be forwarded at once to the respective destinations and the other kept for reference at the inspection station. No such intimation is necessary in the case of persons exempted from the passport rules under Rule 89 as the officers to whom they are immediately subordinate are responsible for their observation; but it should he forwarded in the case of inoculated persons from infected areas who hold valid certificates, as they are liable to be observed at their own houses. The intimation forms will be supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press, to Collectors on indent. If the guards of the trains and other railway subordinates do not carry out the instructions given to them with regard to the transmission of the names and addresses of pass- engers, they may be prosecuted. The object of sending inti- mation of arrivals from infected parts to the district medical and sanitary officer is not merely to inform him of the move- ments of such persons, but to enable him to see that the pass- port-issuing officers, the local authorities, and the tahsildars respectively carry out their duties under the passport rules. He should maintain a register of all intimations received by him and should see that all persons mentioned therein are duly accounted for. Intimation in respect to other travellers. 11. In the case of persons coming from an infected or notified area and not passing through a railway frontier inspection station, the duty of recording the information mentioned in Rule 9 (excepting items 7 and 8) and of communicating it to the district medical and sanitary officer shall devolve on the officer issuing the passport. The form in which the information referred to should be recorded is prescribed in Appendix II-I. Copies of the form are supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press. Duties of district medical and sanitary officer and tahsildar. 12. The district medical and sanitary officer shall forward the reports referred to in Rules 6 and 9 to the tahsildar concerned, within whose jurisdiction the place of destination lies, and it shall be his duty to see that the persons mentioned in the reports are duly observed, and that any case of sickness or death in the houses occupied by them is promptly reported, and to bring to the Collector's notice all instances of omission to issue passports and all attempts to evade these regulations. The tahsildar should file together the reports received from the district medical and sanitary officer (or Collector). No separate register need be maintained by him. As soon as a passport is recovered from the B
?10 [Part I-Rule 18. passport-holder under Rule 7, it should be forwarded without delay to the district medical and sanitary officer after the num- ber of the item in the report has been noted on it and after the fact that the passport has been recovered has been noted against the corresponding entry in the report. Incapacitated persons and minors. 13. In the case of incapacitated persons and persons who are under twelve years of age, the obligation to take out, passports for them, to present them for daily inspection, to report truly their names and addresses, to intimate any change in their residence, and to comply otherwise with the requirements of these regulations shall rest on their legal guardians or on any person in whose charge they travel or who receives them at the railway station of destination. Tahsildar's duties may be performed by municipal chairman and those of district medical and sanitary officer by Collector. 14. The term "tahsildar" in these regulations includes deputy tahsildar. In municipalities, the tahsildar's duties under these regulations shall be performed by the municipal chairman. The duties of the district medical and sanitary officer under Rule 12 may be performed by the Collector in districts where this course is found convenient. In such cases, the intimations referred to in Rules 6 and 9 should be sent to the Collector. Note.-Rules 82-90 also relate to the subject of passports and should be referred to. Notice in railway carriages regarding passports. 15. Every railway administration shall put up in a conspicuous place in every railway carriage a copy of the following notice in English and in the principal vernacular language of the country through which the railway line passes:- Notice. The Madras plaguo regulations require all passengers arriving from plague-infected parts to take out passports at the station where they alight, or (1) in the case of passengers proceeding to Madras by the North- East line of the Madras Railway, at Bitragunta; (2) in the case of those arriving at Madras by the other lines of the Madras Railway, at Perambr; and (3) in the case of passengers proceeding to Mttuplaiyam or to stations on the Nilgiri Railway, at Coimbatore. Persons infringing the regulations render themselves liable to prossecution.
?Part I-Rule 16.] 11 Copies of Rules 1-4 shall also be hung up in English and the vernacular in all railway stations. Inspection of railway passengers. 16. (1) At or near any railway station which has been appointed by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette to be an inspection station, any medical officer appointed in this behalf may detain any train and require every person travelling therein to alight and submit himself to such medical examina- tion as the medical officer may direct, and may for this purpose, with the assistance, if necessary, of the police, use such reasonable force as may be required in order to detain such passenger either on the railway premises or in some other suitable place which the Collector shall provide for the purpose. (2) All inspecting officers, male and female, at railway inspection stations, and clerks employed at important sta- tions such as Jalarpet should always carry with them a note-book of a special conspicuous colour with the words "Government of Madras Plague officials' notebook " printed on the back. A copy of the appointment order should be attached to the note-book. Copies of the book may be obtained from the Superintendent, Government Press, through the Surgeon-General. 17. Every passenger shall be bound to submit himself to examination and shall furnish the information referred to in Rule 9 supra and any other particulars which the medical officer or any person acting under his orders may demand. Any person refusing to comply with this rule may be detained for such period as may be necessary, and shall also be liable to the penalty prescribed in Rule 100. 18. All passengers should be required to quit their carriages and should be examined on the platform or other suitable place, suspicious cases being removed for more careful investi- gation to a place reserved for the purpose. Care must be taken that the carriages are locked before the arrival of the train at the inspection station, and that no passenger is permitted to leave his carriage until the arrangements for such examination are complete. 19. Railway administrations are required to instruct their staff to give every assistance to the medical officers conduct- ing the inspection in order to minimise the detention of the trains, and to detain the trains until the medical inspection is over. Railway ticket collectors may be allowed to accom- pany the plague inspecting officers, if this course is found to
?12 [Part I-Rule 20. economize time. The table given in Appendix II-J shows the time within which medical officers are required ordinarily to complete plague inspection, and every endeavour should be made to complete the inspection of trains within the time there mentioned. If, on special occasions, the time is exceeded, a report explaining the delay should be imme- diately sent to the Collector for his information and for such action as he may think necessary. 20. It is the duty of railway authorities assisted by the platform police to see that passengers alighting at a railway station do not leave the premises except by the proper exit, and to afford every facility for the working of the plague regulations. Ticket collectors should be. required to stop all passengers holding tickets issued at infected or notified stations until their names and addresses have been taken down and passports issued to them either by the plague official ap- pointed for the purpose, or at smaller stations, by the station staff. 21. The inspecting officers should not only thoroughly examine passengers and passenger vehicles, but should also in spect guards, drivers and firemen and their vans and engines, so that no person may escape inspection. No distinction should be made between railway employs and others, and before any train, whether carrying passengers or goods, leaves the inspection station, a thorough search should be made to discover if any persons have concealed themselves with the object of evading inspection. 22. In the absence of any symptoms showing a passenger to be suffering from fever, it is unnecessary to examine his person for the purpose of finding out whether buboes are present. This practice, if it is at present enforced any where, should be discontinued. 23. Female passengers should, under no circumstances, be required to be examined by men. For their inspection, one or more nurses are attached to each inspection station. 24. After examination, all persons shall be allowed to proceed to their destination except- (a) those suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, plague or those who have so recently suffered from plague as to be possibly in an infectious state; (b) pilgrims or persons belonging to any other class who appear for any reasons to be specially dangerous
?Part I-Rule 25.] 13 whether travelling singly or in numbers, or persons who cannot be depended upon to present themselves daily for medical examination for ten days on arrival at their destination, or to give information should plague occur among them. Persons coming under class (a) shall be detained until they are cured or as long as the infection or suspicion of plague remains. Information of such cases shall be sent urgently to the Collector and the district medical and sanitary officer of the district. All contacts shall also be detained for a period of ten days from the occurrence of the last case of plague among them. Persons coming under class (b) may be detained at the discretion of the medical officer till the full period of incubation (i.e., ten days) has elapsed since they left the infected area, or if that date is not known, for ten days. 25. Care should be taken that inspection stations are not converted into detention camps. Any attempt at wholesale detention will only produce evasion of inspection. Unless a passenger shows symptoms of plague or cannot be trusted to observe the passport rules, he should not be interfered with. This rule applies also to road frontier inspection stations. 26. Officers in charge of plague camp should give a certi- ficate in the form shown in Appendix II-K to every person discharged from the camp. In order to enable such persons to resume their railway journey they should take the certi- ficates to the Stationmaster and get them endorsed by him. 27. . . . 28. Any person arriving at, or passing through, an inspection station may, at the discretion of the inspecting medical officer, be compelled to obtain a passport in accord- ance with Rule 2 supra and to undergo surveillance for ten days. 29. The inspecting medical officer may also require any passenger to deliver up his ticket, in order that the prescribed mark indicative of his having arrived from a plague-infected locality or an area notified under Rule 1 and therefore of his being liable to obtain a passport at the station of desti- nation may be impressed thereon; and such passenger shall be bound to deliver it up accordingly. 30. The mark thus used is a hole four-tenths of an inch square punched in the long side of railway tickets.
?14. [Part I-Rule 31. It should be made only on the tickets of those passengers who come, or are suspected to come, from plague-infected areas or from places notified by Government for the pur- poses of the passport rules. The special mark should be made at the first inspection station at which the passenger arrives. It is not necessary to punch his ticket again at any subsequent inspection station through which he may pass, but he must be medically examined nevertheless. Tickets of persons who come from an uninfected area, or who, though corning from an infected area, have been detained for ten days at one of the observation camps established in the Madras presidency, need not be so marked. 31. Care should be taken that the plague punches are not used except by responsible persons and that they are kept in safe custody when not in use. The officers in charge of railway inspection stations will be held responsible for the safe custody of the plague punches, and under their orders the punches may be used by their assistants, but under no circumstances by the police. The wrong punching of tickets should be specially guarded against, as the annoyance caused thereby and the consequent liability to take out a passport is very great. 32. In cases where a passport has been wrongly issued owing to erroneous plague-marking of the railway ticket, or otherwise, the municipal chairman or any revenue officer not below the grade of deputy tahsildar is authorized to cancel the passport on satisfactory proof that it was wrongly issued. 33. The passport rules should be worked in such a manner as to cause the minimum of inconvenience to gosha women, and persons belonging to that class should, whenever it is possible to do so, be exempted from attendance at the hospital or elsewhere and be inspected at their own houses. The examination of gosha women should always be conducted by females, who, when not trained or duly qualified, should work under the instructions of the local medical officer. No fee should be charged for the inspection of passport-holders at their own houses. 34. With a view to facilitate the working of the passport rules, railway employs holding periodical railway passes and Government officials holding standing passes should be required to provide themselves before departure with certifi- cates signed by the stationmasters concerned showing the places from which they start.
?Part I-Rule 35.] 15 Attempts to evade inspec- tion. 35. If a passenger from a plague-infected or notified area appears to be attempting to evade inspection either by alight- ing at a railway station short of that for which his ticket has been taken or of an inspection station, or by arriving other- wise than by train at or beyond an inspection station, and is unable to show any business at the place of alighting or arrival, he may be detained by the stationmaster or railway official in charge or by any officer specially authorized by the Collector in this behalf at the railway station at which he has alighted or arrived and with the assistance of the Police be forwarded or returned, as the case may be, to the inspection station by the same or next train proceeding thereto and there handed over to the medical officer in charge. The railway fare of the person so detained and forwarded to the inspection station shall be paid by the passenger and, if not paid, shall be recovered from him by the railway authorities as excess fare. Note.-The powers conferred by this rule should only be exercised under exceptional circumstances to prevent evasion of the passport rules. 36. Special care should be taken to prevent evasion of the rules by passengers halting or re-booking at intermediate stations. If a passenger coming from a plague-infected area breaks his journey at any station short of his destination, his ticket should notwithstanding, be punched, or if the station has not been supplied with a plague punch, the right-hand lower corner of the ticket should be clipped with scissors. If a passenger coming from a plague-infected area alights at any station, he should be brought under the passport rules. If he announces his intention of re-booking within twelve hours, his new ticket shall be punched or clipped as above. If ne- cessary, the powers conferred by the last preceding rule may also be employed, and passengers whose conduct gives ground to suppose that they intend to evade the rules should be watched. Intimation to Ceylon medi- cal officer at Tuticorin. 37. The inspecting medical officer, Jalarpet, should send telegraphic intimation to the medical officer of the Ceylon Gov- ernment at Tuticorin when passengers pass from Bangalore to Tuticorin. The cost of these telegrams will be recovered from the Ceylon Government by the Accountant-General. Movement of troops, police and coolies. 38. When a large body of troops or police or coolies engaged in plague operations are returning to a healthy district, previous intimation of their departure should be given to the Collector of the District in which the place of destination
?16 [Part I-Rule 39. is situated. Before starting, they should be carefully exam- ined and disinfected, and on arrival at their destination, they should be given passports according to the rules. With regard to troops and their families and followers leaving in- fected areas, the orders issued by the military authorities require (a) that they should be inspected and disinfected before departure, (b) that they should also be disinfected on arrival at their military stations, and (c) that, where possible, regimental arrangements should be made to house them separately for from ten to twelve days. Expenditure on inspection sheds. 39. Any expenditure incurred in providing inspection sheds on railway platforms in cases where there are no proper facilities in the railway station for the examination of pass- engers in accordance with the plague regulations or in the supply of punches or scissors for marking railway tickets should be borne by the civil department and not by the railway administrations. Fairs, Festi- vals and Pilgrimages. 40. When a festival, fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from plague-infected parts is about to take place in an uninfected area, the Collec- tor may apply to Government for orders to prohibit attend- ance thereat and to enforce the prohibition by stopping temporarily the issue of railway tickets to persons from infected areas or by other means. A similar course should be adopted when a festival, fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from healthy parts is about to take place in a plague-infected area. 41. Proposals submitted under the preceding rule should be forwarded through the Sanitary Commissioner so as to reach Government a month and-a-half previous to the holding of the fair or festival. In order to avoid delay in their submission, Collectors should prepare in their office every month a list of all the fairs and festivals to take place during the ensuing three months, and should send by the 15th of each month their recommendations relating to religious and other gather- ings to be held in the next month but one. Notice of the prohibition of the issue of railway tickets should be given to the railway authorities at least a week previous to the date of commencement of the prohibition. 42. The Collector's reports should be invariably accom- panied by draft notifications under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and by a statement in the form shown in Appendix II-M. Skeleton notifications are printed as Appendix II-N.
?Part I-Rule 43.] 17 43. The prohibition of attendance at fairs and festivals should ordinarily be applied only to the larger fairs and festivals. In the case of unimportant local festivals, a careful working of the passport rules should suffice. 44. Where pilgrimage to a fair or festival has been pro- hibited by Government, the Collector should, as far as the means at his disposal permit, watch all the roads round the village or town in order to prevent pilgrims from entering the place unobserved. Persons who are suspected to have come from infected parts should be passported and watched for ten days. It must be distinctly understood that the prohibition is not in any way intended to interfere with the performance of the usual religious ceremonies at the temple, and that its only object is to prevent the assemblage of persons who might import or spread the plague. 45. A special establishment to carry out the measures prescribed in the foregoing rule is not ordinarily required. As far as practicable they should be carried out with the aid of the existing district establishment. If in any special case extra establishment is needed, a separate recommendation should be made when suggesting the imposition of restric- tions on the holding of the festival or fair. It is not necessary for the purpose of these measures to build costly structures at each place where a festival or fair is held. It will suffice if the Collector has in stock materials for one or two sheds, which may be utilized if required, but if not, may either be sold or carted to another place where they may be required after the close of the festival. 46. As regards pilgrimage to the Hedjaz, the Government of India annually issue orders either prohibiting it altogether or allowing it under certain conditions from uninfected parts only. In the latter case, the intending pilgrims are collected at convenient observation camps, they are not allowed to purchase passage tickets to the Hedjaz except at those observation camps, and after they have been detained for the prescribed period and certified to be free from infection, they are sent in special trains or carriages to the selected ports for embarkation. Pilgrims returning from the Hedjaz in healthy vessels are, after disinfection of their clothing and baggage, sent at once to their destination without being allowed to mix with the population of the port of landing. Those returning in a plague-infected vessel are subjected to ten days' observation in a camp before being sent to their homes. The authorities of the port of landing are required to send c
?18 [Part I-Rule 47. nominal rolls of the pilgrims to the Collectors concerned, and to give previous intimation of their departure, in order that they may be watched for a few days after arrival at their destination, Information regarding plague cases and arrivals from infected areas. 47. Every house-holder and every medical practitioner who becomes cognizant of the occurrence in his house or in any public or private dwelling or place within the limits of the municipality, town or village in which he resides, of any case of plague or of fever with glandular swellings, and in the case of persons who live within an area that has been notified as infected or who have been in any way exposed to plague infection, of acute affections of the lung, of convulsions in children, abortion in women and sudden death in the aged, shall be bound to give information of the same, with the least practicable delay, in a municipality to the chairman of the council and the medical officer in charge of the municipal dispensary or hospital, and in a non-municipal town or village to the village head or to other nearest officer of the revenue or medical department, who shall report the fact at once to their immediate official superiors. 48. Every house-holder and every keeper or person in charge of an hotel, chattram or other place of public resort, shall also in the same manner forthwith report the arrival at the house, hotel, chattram or other place, of any person from any area which has been declared by the Governor in Council or by the Collector to be infected or which has been notified by the Governor in Council for the purposes of these rules. Power to enter any building or place for the purpose of inspecting plague cases and taking necessary measures. 49. The Collector or any officer authorized by him for this purpose may at any time enter any building or place in which plague is reputed or suspected to exist, and may inspect and, if necessary, detain or remove and isolate any person suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague or to have so lately suffered from plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, or believed to have recently arrived from an infected or notified area. Bringing of susceptible articles from infected areas prohibited, 50. The bringing, taking, sending, or consigning, by sea or land, of soiled linen and used bedding (except when carried as the personal baggage of travellers), rags, and waste paper from a plague-infected place in India into or through any other part of India to which the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, applies, having been prohibited by the Government of India, the Collector shall take due steps to make the prohibi- tion known and to enforce it. Articles brought in contra- vention of this prohibition shall be destroyed, and no person
?Part I-Rule 51.] 19 shall be entitled to claim compensation on account of such destruction. See also Appendix I, note (6) on Disinfection. Destruction of ruts. 51. The Collector shall arrange for the frequent inspec- tion of consignments of grain arriving from plague-infected areas and of landing places, railway goods-sheds, and grain bazaars, and for the killing and subsequent destruction by burning of all rats found therein. When any place is infected, steps shall be taken to destroy rats in it and in the surrounding area within a radius of ten miles. See also Appendix I, note (7) on Rat-plague and Destruction of Rats. Part II.-Rules applicable to places under observation or imminently threatened with plague. Areas under observation. 52. The Governor in Council may, if it appears to him that any district, town, village, or other area is imminently threatened with plague, issue an order declaring such district, town, village, or other area to be under observation. A copy of such order shall be published in the next issue of the Fort St. George Gazette. Frontier inspection stations. 53. Upon the issue by the Governor in Council of an order declaring any area to be under observation, the Collector shall, subject to the sanction of Government, establish frontier inspection stations with the necessary staff for the examination of persons entering the notified area. These frontier inspection stations shall be placed both at railway stations and on roads and shall be as near as may be to the frontier. Inspection stations on roads shall be located at places where the nature of the country forces traffic to converge between narrow lines and should not be located in flat and open country where they could be easily evaded. In special cases, and when the country is unfavourable for inspection at fixed points patrols may be substituted for stations. 54. At each frontier inspection station shall be erected a sufficient number of sheds for hospital and observation pur- poses; and a sufficient supply of disinfectants and stores shall be maintained. 55. All passengers arriving by rail at these inspection stations shall be there examined and dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Rules 16-36 supra and those arriving by road shall also be provided with passports under Rule 2. Observation circles and staff, 56. (1) The Collector shall divide the area under obser- vation into observation circles, ordinarily with a diameter not
?20 [Part II-Rule 57. exceeding ten miles, and shall appoint an inspector for each circle. For each non-municipal town with a population in excess of 5,000 an assistant plague inspector should be appointed. (2) Every municipality which is declared to be under observation or which is included in the area under observation shall be divided into circles, which should, as far as possible, follow the municipal wards, and for each circle an inspector shall be appointed. When any ward contains less than 1,200 houses or a population of less than 5,000 persons it may be combined with other wards to form one circle. Three circles shall ordinarily form a division and each division shall be placed under a divisional inspector. (3) The Collector may also appoint plague supervisors to check the work of inspectors and assistant inspectors. (4) As far as possible such plague inspectors and assist- ant plague inspectors shall be certificated sanitary inspectors, or such as have received a special training for dealing with plague to the satisfaction of the Sanitary Commissioner. Hospital assistants, when available, may in all cases be employed in place of sanitary inspectors on plague work. Duties of the observation staff. 57. (1) Subject to the Collector's control, this observation staff shall work under the district medical and sanitary officer or other officer appointed by the Collector for the purpose. In municipalities the Collector may place the staff under the control of the municipal chairman, and may vary or cancel any such order. It shall be the duty of the observation staff constantly and systematically to patrol the circles in order to gain the earliest possible information of any suspicious death or of the occurrence of any case of plague, to report immediately any such case or any suspected case and to remove with the aid of the ordinary conservancy establish- ment all defects in sanitation which would favour the pro- pagation of plague, such as accumulations of filth, sewage, or the like. It should also check the possession of passports or passes in the case of persons arriving from an infected locality. Should any person so arrive without a passport or pass, or having broken its conditions, any member of the observation staff may detain him and shall produce him at the earliest possible date before a plague officer having jurisdic- tion. (2) It shall also be the duty of this staff to ascertain whether any special sickness or mortality has occurred among rats, and to examine any rats that may be found, in
?21 Part II-Rule 58.] order to see whether any enlarged glands are present.   Houses in which sick or dead rats are found should be disinfected. (3) Inspectors and assistant inspectors for their re- spective charges and village headmen for their villages shall keep a record of all persons suffering from continuous fever for more than twelve hours, and inspectors and assistant inspectors shall arrange with the village headman to have such persons inspected twice daily. If a member of the observation staff shall discover a case of plague, he shall proceed in accordance with Rule 67 et seq. Ambulance staff. 58. In municipalities or districts which appear to him to be imminently threatened with an attack of plague, the Collector  should make all arrangements necessary to enable him to concentrate at any point on short notice an ambulance staff together with the equipment prescribed by Government.    The ambulance staff should ordinarily be constituted as follows : - Sanitary Section. Medical Section. One certificated  sanitary   inspec- tor. Two hospital assistants.  One or more trained nurses. One dhoby. Four male ward attendants. Two male toties. Three female ward attendants. One female toti. One dhoby. Two dhooly bearers. Two cooks. Disinfectors (any  number up  to 50 for a single section, to be re- cruited locally in the infected area, if sepoys be not employed).   Of the foregoing staff the ward attendants, dhoby and cooks belonging to the medical section need not be entertained unless and until cases of plague occur, and it will usually be sufficient to appoint a single hospital assistant until plague occurs. Plague camps. 59. The Collector may call upon any municipal council or local board within an area under observation to provide and maintain any or all of the following :- (a)  a hospital camp for the  isolation and treatment of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague ; (b)  a suspect camp for the detention of contacts ; (c)  a health camp for the occupation of persons who may be required to vacate any building or ground under these regulations and who may be unable to procure necessary accommodation for themselves.
?22 [Part II-Rule 60. 60. The municipal council or district board shall be bound to provide these camps in accordance with the requi- sition of the Collector, and at such places (whether within or without the local jurisdiction of the municipality or local board) as the Collector, or subject to the Collector's control, the district medical and sanitary officer or such other medical officer as the Collector may depute, may determine. For the camps so provided the municipal council or the district board, as the case may be, shall furnish such hospital establishment equipment and supplies as the Collector may direct, and shall also make arrangements for feeding persons detained under any of these regulations on payment by them of the cost. In the case of indigent persons, the municipal council or the district board, as the case may be, shall supply them with food free of charge: provided that any person so detained shall have full liberty to supply his own food subject to such rules and conditions as the medical officer in charge may prescribe. Acquisition of lands or buildings required for plague purposes. 61. The Collector or the chairman of the municipal council or the president of the local board may without notice enter upon, occupy and use, or may depute any person to enter upon, occupy and use, without having recourse to the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, any building or place which is required for and is, in the opinion of the district medical and sanitary officer or other medical officer deputed in this behalf, suitable for the purposes mentioned in the last preceding rule, provided that if the building or place is occupied twenty-four hours' notice in writing shall be given to the occupier or shall be conspicuously affixed on such building or place. The owner or the lessee of such building or place shall be entitled to a reasonable rent to be fixed by the Collector for the period during which the ground or building may remain in the occupation of the municipal council or the Collector and president of the district board, as the case may be: and the Collector, chairman of the municipal council or president of the local board, as the case may be, shall, when the building or place ceases to be occupied for the purposes of the last rule, thoroughly cleanse and disinfect it, and if the owner so desires, shall whitewash internally and externally any building so occupied. Nothing in this rule shall authorize the chair- man of a municipal council to enter upon, occupy or use any building or place which is the property of Government without the previous permission of the Collector. Private plague camps. 62. Contributions towards the cost of the construction and maintenance of private plague hospitals and segregation camps in places which are or may be threatened with plague will be
?Part II-Rule 63.] 23 made by Government from provincial funds in accordance with the following scale:- (a) For construction, half the cost will be paid by Government provided the charges are considered reasonable and the buildings erected on sites approved by the Collector or Plague officer acting under his control. In any case of doubt or dispute the Government will have the right to estimate by means of the Public Works department the value of the work done. (b) For maintenance, grants not exceeding half the actual expenses will be sanctioned by Government on the following conditions:- (1) The arrangements for the sanitation and supply of food must meet with the approval of the Collector. (2) The amounts will be paid, month by month, in arrears to the manager or managers approved by the Collector. 63. Hospitals and camps to which a grant is made under the last preceding rule will be under the general super- vision of Government officials, but these officials will have nothing to do with the treatment of the sick except at their request, and their duties will be confined to preserving order, preventing theft, keeping guard, and attending to sani- tation. Detailed instructions with regard to the construction, equipment and management of plague camps will be issued by the Sanitary Commissioner and of plague hospitals by the Surgeon-General. The sale-proceeds of private hospitals to which Govern- ment has made a contribution should be equally divided between Government and the plague committee concerned. Grants for erection of sheds in rural areas. 64. In rural areas district boards may find it cheaper to give poor people grants not exceeding Rs. 3 per household and let them make their own arrangements rather than to build sheds for them. Such grants should be kept at as low a figure as possible, and should be made as a rule only to those who are otherwise unable to furnish themselves with shelter. Occupation of buildings belonging to Government departments. 65. It may become necessary at any moment for Collectors or other plague authorities to occupy buildings belonging to other departments than the Revenue department, for plague purposes. In such cases the earliest possible intimation of such occupation should be given to the authorities in charge of such buildings. Before occupying them, any moveable articles in the building at all likely to retain infection should be removed and placed under proper custody.
?24 [Part II-Rule 66. Conveyances for the carriage of the sick and of infected articles. 66. The Collector, or the chairman of the municipal council or president of the local board, as the case may be, shall provide suitable conveyances for conveying to the plague camps established under Rule 59 persons suffering, or suspected to be suffering, from the plague, and for the transport of any clothing, bedding or other articles which have been exposed to infection. Part III.-Measures to be adopted on the Occurrence of a case of Plague. Report by local officers of occurrence of plague and isolation of patient and contacts. 67. On the occurrence of a suspected or actual case of plague in a village or town whether in a district declared to be under observation or not, it shall be the duty of the village headman or other local officer- (1) To isolate the patient and all who have been or are suspected to have been in contact with him in the camp provided under Rule 59 supra. If no camp has been provided under Rule 59 it shall be the duty of the village headman or other local officer to cause a hut or shed to be immediately constructed on a site remote from inhabited houses and to isolate the patient and contacts therein. (2) To send intelligence by express to the tahsildar or the municipal chairman and, if plague inspectors have been appointed, to the nearest plague inspector. Report by plague inspector and tahsildar or municipal chairman. 68. Upon receiving information of the occurrence of a case of plague, the tahsildar, the municipal chairman or plague inspector shall inform all superior officers up to the Collector by the quickest possible means, and shall go at once to the infected locality. The tahsildar or the municipal chairman shall arrange to be accompanied or followed by the nearest medical officer with a supply of medicines and disinfectants and by a sufficient staff of constables and peons. Action to be taken by plague inspector and tahsildar or municipal chairman. 69. On arrival at the infected place, the plague inspector (or medical officer if there is no plague inspector) shall supervise the isolation of the patient and the disinfection of his residence, clothing and excreta, and the clothing, and at his discretion, the person of all who have been in contact with the patient and shall continue such supervision until relieved under the orders of a plague officer and sent back to other duty. Houses immediately adjoining that in which the case of plague has occurred shall also usually be disinfected. 70. The tahsildar or the municipal chairman shall, if the plague patient and contacts have already been completely isolated, arrange for the efficient maintenance of such isolation, for the provision of medical attendance on the patient and. for thorough disinfection as above. If the patient or his contacts
?Part III-Rule 71.] 25 has not been isolated, the tahsildar or municipal chairman shall at once provide for the isolation of the patient and contacts, and if necessary, shall provide the accommodation referred to in Rule 59 supra. Action to be taken by plague officer. 71. On receiving  information of a case of plague, the duties of a plague officer (see Rule 103) shall be as follows:- (1)  He  shall send  telegraphic  information   to  the Collector and the district medical and sanitary officer. (2)  He shall then go to the scene of outbreak, and shall enforce the measures mentioned above. (3)  He shall see that the hospital, the suspect camp and the health camp are properly organized  and guarded. (4)  He shall see that the patrols and guards round the infected   area completely isolate it, or such part of it as he deems fit, so  as  to  prevent the return of the  inhabitants without his written permission. (5)  He may also, when authorized by the Collector, direct the evacuation of the village or town or any part of it, and the removal of the inhabitants to a health camp, provided sufficient  shelter is available, and their detention there for a period not exceeding ten days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague among them. (6)  On the evacuation of houses, he shall cause them to be surrounded by a cordon with the object of preventing the return of the inhabitants without his written permission, and to be thoroughly disinfected. (7)  He may also cause the village to be disinfected. Note.-For further information as to the steps to be taken in plague outbreaks, the importance of early discovery of plague cases, and the segre- gation of contacts, see notes (1), (2) and (3) in Appendix I. Report by Collector and the action to be taken by \ill\ him. 72. (1) The Collector, on receiving information, shall tele- graph to Government, the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioner, and shall despatch the ambulance staff with its equipment to the village under the district medical and sanitary officer, or his assistant. (2)  He may notify by tom-tom (the notification to be as soon as possible published in the District Gazette) that any town or village,  or part of a town or village,  or group of villages, is infected, and thereupon the regulations contained in Part II shall come into force in the district if they have not been brought into force by Government already. (3)  He may order the evacuation and disinfection of infected houses and houses  in  their neighbourhood, or of P
?26 [Part IV-Rule 73. infected villages and towns, and may prohibit their re- occupation without permission. Note.-For further remarks regarding Evacuation, see note (4) in Appendix I. (4) He may require the evicted people to reside in any place which he may appoint, under such restrictions as he may deem necessary, provided proper shelter is available. (5) He may requisition the services of any public servant or, for work connected with a railway, of any railway employ. (6) He shall, if possible, go to the village and direct operations. Part IV.-Rules applicable to Areas declared to be infected. Preventive circles. 73. If an observation staff has already been appointed in the neighbourhood of an infected area, the Collector shall modify the observation circles so as to contract them to five miles diameter, within a radius of twenty miles or less distance around the infected area. If an observation staff has not been already appointed, he shall at once organize one so as to meet this requirement. Circles so formed round infected areas shall be termed preventive circles to distinguish them from the observation circles mentioned in Rule 56 supra. These circles shall be placed in the charge of plague inspectors, whose duty shall be to frequently visit every inhabited part of their circles, check the working of the passport system, and maintain a watch over the health of the inhabitants with the object of quickly discovering cases of plague and preventing the spread of the disease. Inoculatcion. 74. The Collector shall arrange with the Sanitary Com- missioner for a sufficient supply of Haffkine's vaccine in order to bring inoculation within the reach of the inhabitants of plague-infected and plague-threatened localities and shall afford them every facility for being inoculated. Note.-For further information regarding Inoculation, see note (5) in Appendix I. Certificates of causes of death. 75. (1) When he has. a sufficient medical staff at his disposal to secure immediate inspection, so that there may be no chance of funerals being delayed, the Collector may, with the previous sanction of Government, order in respect of any particular area that a certificate of a medical officer showing the cause of every death shall be obtained within two hours
?Part IV-Rule 76.] 27 after such death. It must be understood that medical examination of a corpse is entirely optional on the part of the relations, and that no one will be compelled to allow the inspection of the corpse of a deceased relative. The examina- tion of the corpses of women by men should never be required. The orders of the Government should be obtained before this rule is acted upon in any area, and in applying for sanction, the Collector should report fully on the following points:- i.  What   classes    of  officers   will  be authorized to issue certificates under the rule. ii. Whether any fee will be  required for the grant of this certificate. iii. Whether there is such a number of Government medical officers, male and female, at the station as will be sufficient to carry out inspection promptly so as not to cause any delay in burials. iv. Whether there has been any increase in the rate of mortality. v. Whether there is any reason to believe that deaths are concealed or that causes of death are not correctly reported. (2) If after the issue of an order under clause (1) of this rule, a burial or cremation takes place without such a certificate having been obtained, the death may be presumed to have been due to plague, and the rules regarding the segre- gation of the contacts and the disinfection of the house may be applied. House search. 76.  With  the  previous   sanction  of   Government,   the Collector may organize search parties to visit houses for the purpose of detecting cases of plague, when there is reason to believe that the residents are attempting to conceal them. Special enquiries  shall also be made as to any sickness or mortality among rats, and houses in which sick or dead rats have been found shall be disinfected. 77.  The system of house-visitation and house-search will ordinarily be permitted only when plague exists in small and well defined areas, such for instance as an isolated quarter or ward of a town, or a single village in a neighbourhood which is otherwise completely free from infection.    When this mode of discovering plague is adopted, care should be taken that a sufficient number of European officers are employed to render the powers of search effective and at the same time prevent
?28 [Part IV-Rule 78. the subordinate establishments from abusing their authority. Failing officers of the civil establishments, young officers of the Staff Corps should be deputed for this duty. Respectable inhabitants who volunteer for the service should be employed to assist in searching for concealed cases of plague. As far as possible, houses should be allowed to be entered only by persons of caste or of the same religion as the occupants, and women should be utilized in examining women and in searching any room or place exclusively occupied by them. Removal of plague patients to hospital. 78.  Plague patients who are left without any one to look after them or who have no home should in all cases be removed to  hospital, and in dealing  with imported  cases or with an outbreak in a small place upon which it is possible to concen- trate a sufficiently strong establishment, the first measure to adopt is the compulsory removal of the   sick to hospital.    In dealing with   early indigenous cases   the same policy may be advisable.    But if   plague   continues   a   point   may soon be reached when it will cease to be possible to obtain information as to all cases.    When this point is reached, the continuance of attempts to remove the sick to hospital may result in the sick being carried from house to house for purposes of con- cealment, and at this stage the less the sick are interfered with the better.    All that can then be done is to endeavour to palliate the evils that result from leaving people in their houses by arranging for continual visitation of the sick at home, the frequent disinfection of the infected room, and the encouragement of inoculation among persons left in the houses with the sick. 79.  Except as mentioned in the last preceding rule the removal of patients to hospital should not be compulsory. Every effort should, however, be made to induce patients to go voluntarily to hospital and to lessen the aversion to hospital by the following means-(1) by encouraging the establish- ment of private and caste hospitals; (2) by locating hospitals near to infected quarters; (3) by limiting the size of hospitals so that patients may receive more individual attention; (4) by arranging for the provision of an adequate number of medical attendants and nurses and of ample and comfortable accom- modation  for  patients  and   their   immediate   relatives   or friends; (5) by permitting at least two relatives or friends to be in attendance on each patient so that the patient may never be left alone;  (6) by allowing the patients to have their own food and medicines and to receive visits from their relations, friends and religious instructors; (7) by taking care that all
?Part IV-Rule 80.] 29 arrangements for observance of caste customs and for the comfort and convenience of patients and their attendants are completed before inviting admission to hospitals. 80. Moribund patients should never be removed to hospital except at the express wish of the friends or relations of the patients. The risk of leaving in his house a patient whose case is so serious that the medical officer thinks he has not a fair chance of recovery is not great after the existence of the case has become known. The pneumonic variety of plague being the most contagious, persons suffering from this type of the disease should not be removed to the general wards of plague hospitals, but should be isolated in separate wards of the greatest possible air space. It is further advisable that such cases should not be treated in private houses, unless in the opinion of the medical officer, the room occupied by the patient is suited for his complete isolation, and proper control over the number of attendants and enforcement of disinfection can be had. Sanitary restrictions with regard to funeral processions and burials. 81. (1) The Collector of the district may make rules (a)  prescribing the   route which  shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the grave-yard, burning ground or other place for final disposal of the corpse, and the places, if any, at which such procession may halt on its way for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes; (b)   for enforcing burial in certain  places or  at a certain depth, ordinarily not less than six feet.; (c)  requiring  that the   bathing of  persons attend- ing the funeral shall be conducted at a place prescribed by him. (2)  He may also prohibit the  burial  or  burning  of corpses of persons reasonably supposed  to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than ground specially assigned by him for such purpose. (3)  When   a person dies   of  plague   elsewhere   than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it  for the funeral. The dead may be dressed for the grave by their own relations or in whatever manner maybe customary among the class to which they belong, but such persons shall disinfect themselves according to the orders which may be issued by the Collector in this behalf.
?30 [Part IV-Rule 82. Persons leaving an infected place should obtain pass- ports. 82. The Collector may direct that every person wishing to leave an infected or notified town, village or area with a view to reside in another town, village or area, whether infected or not infected, shall, before doing so, apply to and obtain from such officer as may be appointed in this behalf passports in the form shown in Appendix II-A; provided that no passport shall be issued to any person suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague, or to persons who have so lately suffered from plague as to be in an infectious state or who are likely from recent contact with plague cases to be infected or to be in an infectious state; and the said officer may always require, before granting a passport, that all clothes and other articles which are proposed to be taken away shall be disinfected in such manner as he or superior authority may direct. Other kinds of passports. 83. In lieu of the passport prescribed under the last pre- ceding rule, the Collector may issue or permit to be issued other kinds of passports, namely- (1) A general pass in the form shown in Appendix II-B covering frequent or daily journeys by road or boat, but not journeys by rail nor residence outside the affected area. (2) A general pass in the form shown in Appendix II-C covering frequent or daily journeys by rail but not residence outside the affected area. (3) A general pass in the form shown in Appendix II-D covering visits to a periodical market. General passes. 84. General passes in Forms B and C may be given to agriculturists and others having occasion to make daily or frequent journeys from an infected area, and may be given for an indefinite period, but they will not cover residence outside of the infected area. In the case of agriculturists, if the officer granting the pass is satisfied that it is necessary for the whole family to go and work in the fields, a single pass may be given for the family, but in the case of railway journeys a separate pass in Form C must be issued to each individual. General passes should be given freely, and in the case of agri- culturists working in the fields need not be revoked even should a case of plague occur in the family of the pass-holder. In the case of persons who regularly visit weekly markets in adjoining non-infected areas and return to the infected or notified place within a period not exceeding 24 hours, a permanent pass in the form given in Appendix II-D should be issued. Intimation of the grant of such passes should be
?Part IV-Rule 85.] 31 duly communicated to the officers concerned in the non- infected area, and a register should be maintained in the form shown in Appendix II-G of all permanent passes issued. Special passes. 85. Instead of the passport or passes referred to in the last three rules a special pass in the form shown in Appendix II-E may be issued permitting persons to leave inhabited areas of an infected or notified town or village and reside on fresh sites approved by an officer authorized in this behalf. Such passes may be granted for households, provided that the name and description of each person covered by the pass is entered therein. The officer issuing the pass may always re- quire, before the pass is given, that all clothes and other articles to be taken away shall be disinfected in such manner as he or superior authority may direct. Persons holding these passes shall not be allowed to return to the inhabited area except under such restrictions as the said officer may from time to time require or until the pass shall have been cancelled by him and until all clothing and articles to be taken back with them shall have been disinfected. Establish- ment of pass- port-issuing offices. 86. At convenient spots within, or in the proximity of, the inhabited area of an infected or notified town or village, the Collector shall establish one or more offices for the issue of passports and passes and shall notify by tom-tom the locality of such office or offices at such intervals as he shall consider sufficient to inform the inhabitants of their purpose and position. Duties of passport- issuing officers. 87. Passport-issuing officers are required, not merely to issue passports to those who apply for them, but also to trace out persons who have evaded or infringed the passport rules. Evasion of rules. 88. Any person evading or infringing these rules should be prosecuted, unless the Collector sees reason to the contrary, and any such person, whether prosecuted or not, should be placed under the passport system as soon as the evasion is discovered. Exemption from rules requiring passports and passes. 89. The Collector shall have power also to exempt from the necessity of taking out passports or passes the following classes of persons:- (1) Railway, Postal or other Public servants of such grades as may, from time to time, be determined by Govern- ment. Reference on this subject may be made to the Plague Commissioner's proceedings No. 16, dated 5th January 1899, which are printed in Appendix II-H.
?32 [Part IV-Rule 90. (2) Any person with regard to whom there are no reasonable grounds for suspicion of infection. Observation camp to protect a town or large village threatened with plague. 90. When there is a town or large village in the vicinity of an infected area, the Collector may establish a camp of observation at such town or village and may order detention and disinfection in such camp of all suspected persons coming from the infected area without passports or passes. He may appoint special places where markets may be held and may prescribe limits beyond which it shall not be lawful for persons bringing articles for sale from or to an infected area to pass. Use of public conveyances by plague patients prohibited. 91. No owner, driver or person in charge of a public conveyance shall carry any person suffering from the plague; nor shall any person suffering from the disease enter or be taken in a public conveyance. Infected houses not to be let until disinfected. 92. No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know, that a person has suffered or is suffering from the plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected to the satisfaction of the medical officer appointed by the Collector in this behalf. Destruction of infected huts or sheds. 93. If the Collector of the district or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf is of opinion that the destruction of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of the plague, the Collector or such officer as aforesaid may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and the materials of which it is constructed. Disuse of buildings unfit for human habitation. 94. If it appears to the Collector or an officer appointed by him in this behalf that, in view of the prevalence of the plague within his jurisdiction, any building within such juris- diction, intended or used as a dwelling, is in so insanitary a condition as to be unfit for human habitation, he may summarily cause the same to be vacated, and may prohibit, by a written order, the further use of such building as a dwelling. After such prohibition no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives written permission in this behalf. Abatement of overcrowd- ing. 95. When any building or place is, in the opinion of the Collector or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf, so overcrowded as to make the inmates or occupiers specially liable to an attack of plague,
?Part IV-Rule 96.] 33 the Collector or officer authorized as aforesaid may, by a notice posted on some conspicuous part of the building or place, require the owner or occupier, if actually residing in the building or place, or the tenants or the actual occupants thereof, to abate, as prescribed in the notice, the overcrowd- ing within twenty-four hours by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or other occupants of the said building or place, and, in default of compliance with the requisition in the said notice, may summarily eject all the inmates or occu- pants, or reduce the number of the same in such manner and to such extent as may appear necessary. Abatement of nuisances. 96. The Collector or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may, when he considers necessary, enter upon any premises, whether situ- ated in a municipality or not, at any time during daylight and summarily execute any work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in, sections 186, 220, 221 and 228 of the District Municipalities Act, 1884, or sections 99 and 101 of the Local Boards Act, 1884. Closing of places used for supply, preparation, &c., of arti- cles of food and drink. 97. The Collector of the district or any officer specially authorized by him in this behalf may close any shed used for accommodation of animals whose milk or milk products are sold by the owner or his agent, and any place used for the supply, preparation or storage of articles of food and drink in infected localities or in the immediate neighbourhood of infected houses, and may direct the removal and, if necessary, the destruction of all articles of food and drink found in such places. Restrictions on the wash- ing of clothes. 98. The Collector of the district may prescribe that no person undertaking for hire the cleansing of clothing or other laundry process within an infected area shall store or wash or otherwise deal with clothing except at such places and at such times and under such conditions as he may direct. Closure of plague hospitals and camps. 99. No hospital, suspect camp or observation camp shall be closed without the special orders of the Collector, and until the receipt of such orders the municipality or the district board shall maintain such places in efficient repair. If there have been no actual or suspected cases of plague therein, the Collector may allow a health camp to be closed after ten days, and a village or town or section of a town in which no death or fresh case of plague has taken place for ten days after the recovery or death of the last case to be reinhabited as soon as it has been thoroughly disinfected. E
?34 [Part V-Rule 100. Part V.-Penal Provisions. Penalty for breach of regulations. 100. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such regulation, has been required or empowered to take under any such regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both. 101. The plague regulations being orders formally made and issued by Government under the Epidemic Diseases Act, no sanction is required as a condition precedent to prosecution for disobeying them (Judgment of the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 551 of 1899). 102. If the Police have reason to believe that a person is evading the plague regulations by giving a false name or a wrong address, they can act under section 57 of the Criminal Procedure Code, and detain the person until satisfied that they have got his true name and address. Failing inform- ation as to the person's true name and address or the execution of a bond, the Police should without delay forward him to a Magistrate. Part VI.-Miscellaneous. Administra- tive staff. 103. (1) For the purposes of these regulations the general control of all measures connected with plague is vested in the Collector of the district unless Government shall in any case otherwise direct, and all officers of Government, of local boards and of municipalities shall obey and carry out the Collector's orders. (2) In subordination to the Collector the following classification of plague authorities will be observed:- (a) Plague officers including the following: divisional- officers (special or otherwise), Assistant Collectors (extra or otherwise), the district medical and sanitary officer, additional medical officers, chairmen of municipalities when specially so appointed by Government and any personal assistant to the Collector and any one specially so appointed by Government; (b) Assistant plague officers including tahsildars and deputy tahsildars (ordinary or special), chairmen of municipal
?Part VI-Rule 104.] 35 councils who have not been specially appointed to be plague officers by Government, and such other persons of known and approved character and responsible position as the Collector may specially appoint. Jurisdiction and powers of plague officers. 104. The Collector may, from time to time, assign to plague officers and assistant plague officers jurisdiction over such local areas, and confer on the latter officers such powers as he may deem fit. The plague officers shall have the powers of assistant plague officers and such additional powers as may be conferred by Government. 105. The employment on plague duty of Government officials of the medical and police departments should be restricted as much as possible and volunteer agency should be utilized as much as possible to assist in carrying out plague measures. Whenever practicable, public and private hospitals and camps may be placed in charge of native practitioners. Police officers should not hold enquiries into suspicious cases of plague. Small representative committees of the inhabitants may be appointed in various parts of a city to co-operate with the authorities and to bring to their notice matters requiring attention or inquiry. 106. As far as circumstances permit, Hindus should be employed in those parts of a city where Hindus predominate and Muhammad ans where Muhammadans are in a majority. Officers of all grades should show the greatest courtesy and consideration to the people, and should interfere as little as possible with their habits, feelings and religious prejudices. Where subordinate native agency is used, it is absolutely necessary that Europeans should be appointed as supervisors over small and convenient units. Military Officers. 107. The following procedure should be adopted in obtaining the services of military officers for plague duty:- I. A Local Government or Administration requiring an officer or officers for plague duty will apply to the Govern- ment of India, in the Home department, detailing the number of officers required, and where and when they should be ordered to join. Such applications shall always be accom- panied by an intimation whether the officer should bring horses with him. II. The Government of India will then address the Adjutant-General in India, who will issue instructions under the orders of the Commander-in-Chief to one or more Com- mands to supply the officers wanted, the Government of India being at the same time informed of the instructions issued,
36 [Part VI-Rule 108. III. On learning from the Adjutant-General's depart- ment from what Command the officers asked for will be supplied, the Government of India will inform the Local Government or Administration concerned, and all further correspondence in reference to the individual officers detailed by Commands, or their replacement, should they for any reason revert to military duty, will be conducted between the Local Government or Administration and the Lieutenant- General Commanding. IV. When the officers selected have joined their appoint- ments, the Lieutenant-General Commanding will communicate their names to the Adjutant-General's department, and their services will then be placed at the disposal of the Govern- ment of India. V. It is not considered desirable that a military officer should remain absent from his regiment on plague duty for more than a year at a time. The Lieutenant-General Commanding has therefore instructions to arrange with the Local Government for the relief by a substitute of any such officer who has been employed on plague work for over a year. VI. When an officer's services are no longer required, he should be directed by the Local Government or Adminis- tration to rejoin his regiment, the Lieutenant-General Com- manding and the Government of India being at the same time informed, and the latter will then replace the officer at the Commander-in-Chief's disposal. Troops. 108. No officers of the Indian Medical Service or the Royal Army Medical Corps lent for plague duty should be permitted to revert to military duty without the previous sanction of the Government of India. 109. The use of troops for plague purposes should be avoided as far as possible and their employment should be confined to disinfection when local labour is not available. Before being sent on plague duty, the sepoys should be inoculated and each of them should be supplied with two suits of white drill, one pair of boots, and two white turbans; they should not wear military uniform or carry arms while so employed. The sanction of Government should be obtained before requisitioning them, but where the employ- ment of troops has once been sanctioned, the men may be changed without reference to Government, arrangements being made for the relieving detachment to be inoculated before being despatched to plague work. Plague measures in Cantonments, 110. In Cantonments, the military authorities are imme- diately responsible for carrying out the plague measures, and
?Part VI-Rule 111.] 37 collectors should delegate to them the necessary powers under the plague regulations. Broach of plague re- gulations by troops and pensioners. 111. By Command Order, No. 687, dated 18th November 1898, all ranks in the Madras Command have been directed to obey the plague regulations, and any infringement of them is punishable as a military offence. Military pensioners have been warned (Superintendent's circular No. II, dated 14th December 1898) that any disobedience or wilful neglect of the regulations or obstruction offered to any official on plague duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required by Government as a condition of the continuation of their pensions, and that any pensioner being guilty thereof will be liable to have his pension stopped forthwith and the same reduced or permanently withdrawn. Duties of the railway staff. 112. The following are the duties of the railway officials under the plague regulations:- (1) To prevent passengers from infected areas from alighting at any station other than an inspection station, and to insist on their proceeding to the inspection station if it is suspected that the passengers are evading inspection by so alighting. (2) To see with the aid of the platform police that passengers alighting at a railway station do not leave the premises except by the proper exit. (3) To see that the railway tickets issued in an infected area and the fresh tickets issued to persons from infected areas who re-book are punched or clipped as prescribed. (4) To stop all passengers presenting plague-punched tickets from infected or notified stations until their names and addresses have been taken down and they have been given passports either by the plague official appointed for the purpose or at smaller stations by the station staff themselves. (5) To disinfect railway carriages from infected areas and carriages in which persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague have travelled. (6) To take steps for tracing and destroying rats that may arrive from infected areas concealed in the goods imported. (7) To put up a notice in all railway carriages inti- mating that passengers from infected parts should take out passports at stations of destination. (8) To lock the carriages before the arrival of the train at the inspection station. (9) To detain the train until the medical inspection is over.
?38 [Part VI-Rule 113 (10) To see that no passenger is permitted to leave his carriage until the arrangements for his examination are complete. (11) To give every assistance to the medical officers conducting the inspection in order to minimise the detention of trains. (12) To carry out the instructions regarding the trans- mission of the names and addresses of passengers. (13) To afford every facility towards the working of the plague regulations generally. Plague staff entitled to, and bound to give, one month's notice. 113. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every inspector, assistant inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, scavenger or other menial servant employed to do duty in connection with plague shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge, or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and is discharged at the end of it. Similarly every supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall be entitled to one month's notice before his coolies are discharged. (2) No such inspector, assistant inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, scavenger or other menial servant shall, in the absence of a written contract authorizing him so to do and without reasonable cause, resign his employment or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice, or shall neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. In like manner no supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall withdraw his coolies without giving one month's notice. Detention of public ser- vants. 114. An officer not being on leave who is prevented from discharging his duties through segregation on account of plague may be treated as on duty on full pay. In the case of an officer who is segregated while returning from leave and thus overstays his leave, the period of detention may be treated as duty on half-pay. Officers who are suffering from plague should be dealt with in accordance with the ordinary rules. Mode of disinfection. 115. Whenever disinfection is prescribed by any of these regulations, it shall be carried out in accordance with the general principles laid down by Government and such subsi- diary instructions as may be issued by the Sanitary Com- missioner or, in respect to management of hospitals, by the Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras. Compensa- tion. 116. When in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these regulations any damage or loss is caused, no
Part VI-Rule 117.] 39 person shall be entitled as a matter of right to claim any compensation, but the Collector of the district or any person authorized by him may award compensation at the cost of local, municipal or provincial funds as the case may be, and shall do so when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circumstances, to whom it would be a great hardship to bear it, or may, in such cases, provide other necessary articles in the place of those destroyed or damaged and debit the charge to the proper funds. Supersession of district board or municipality by Collector in emergen- cies. 117. The Collector of a district may, in case of emergency or to save delay, provide for the execution of any work or the doing of any act which a district board or municipality is empowered or required to execute or to do in accordance with these regulations, and the immediate execution or the doing of which is in the said Collector's opinion necessary for the safety of the public, and may charge the expense of executing the work or doing the act to the local board or municipality concerned. Contents of certificates, passes, &c. Their im- proper use prohibited. 118. Any certificate, passport or pass granted under these regulations shall contain an accurate description of the person named in it to prevent, so far as possible, its being used by another person; nor shall such a certificate or passport or pass given to any person to enable him to go from one place to another or for any purpose be used by any other person or for any other purpose. Segregated or detained persons bound to obey directions given to them. 119. Every person segregated or detained under any of these regulations shall obey the directions issued to him by the officer in charge of the place of segregation or detention and shall not leave such place except with the written permis- sion of the said officer, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition. Canal boats, subject to same regulations as buildings. 120. (1) A canal boat shall be subject to all the regula- tions applicable to buildings; and passengers by a canal boat shall he subject to interrogation, inspection and detention in the s me manner as passengers by railway. (2) In order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague either by or to a canal boat, the Collector of the district or any officer generally or specially empowered by him in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to step during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or may direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspi- cuous position of the boat.
?40 [Part VI-Rule 121. Privileges granted to inoculated persons. 121. (1) Persons who hold certificates that they have been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, shall be entitled to the following privileges, provided such certificates bear a date not earlier than six months and not later than ten days previously:- (a) Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffer- ing from, plague, they shall not be liable to detention at any railway or road observation camp when travelling, except for such period as may be required to disinfect their baggage and clothes, if those are considered suspicious. (b) They shall not be liable to take out passports and present themselves daily for observation for ten days after arrival from a plague-infected place, or from any place noti- fied by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes of these rules; but they may be observed at their own residence and shall, with this view, be bound when required by any plague officer to give their names and addresses for the next ten days. (c) Inoculated persons who have been living in an infected house or have otherwise been exposed to plague infection shall not be liable to be segregated, but may be required to evacuate the infected house and to have their clothes and personal effects disinfected. When, however, all the occupants of a house have been inoculated, neither the patients nor the other inmates of the house shall be required to be segregated, provided arrangements are made to the satisfaction of a plague officer for the disinfection of the house and its contents, and for the prevention of the spread of plague to the neighbouring dwellings. (2) The inoculation certificate shall be in the form shown in Appendix II-F. But when in a certificate issued under authority, the thumb impression has not been taken, other satisfactory evidence of identification may be accepted. Inoculated persons bound to produce their inocu- lation certifi- cates and make an im- pression of thumb-marks. 122. Every inoculated person who is exempted from segregation, detention and observation under the preceding Rule 121 shall be bound, when called upon to do so by the officer mentioned in Rule 3, to produce the certificate showing that he has been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, and also to make 'an impression of his thumb-mark for the purpose of identification. Note.-Further information regarding Inoculation is given in Note (5) in Appendix I.
?Part VI-Rule 123.] 41 Plague reports and returns. 123. When a case of plague, genuine or suspected, is first discovered in any place, not declared infected, the Collector or, in his absence, any gazetted officer at the head-quarter station of the district, shall immediately telegraph the fact to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal department, to the Sanitary Commissioner and to the Surgeon-General. This telegram shall state whether the case was indigenous or imported, if the latter whence it was imported, how the case was discovered, and any other further particulars, with dates, which appear necessary. Within 24 hours (if possible) of the despatch of this telegram a special report in the form pre- scribed in Appendix II-O shall be despatched to Government and to the Sanitary Commissioner. A similar course shall be followed with each subsequent case up to and including the third case. Names of hamlets should not be telegraphed, but only the names of the villages to which such hamlets belong. Provided that no special report of imported cases need be forwarded from railway inspection stations, unless the medical officer in charge considers that there are special points requiring notice, e.g., the detection of a case from an area hitherto unnotified, or the occurrence of attempts at evasion of plague rules. 124. After the first three cases have been reported in accordance with Rule 123 special reports in the form given in Appendix II-O regarding indigenous cases need not be sub- mitted, but a special report of each imported case shall be forwarded without delay to the Sanitary Commissioner, who will transmit it to Government with a copy of any remarks thereon which he may have issued. For the purposes of these rules, cases of plague among contacts who have not been, within the preceding fortnight, in an infected place should be treated as indigenous and not as imported. 125. All attacks and deaths should be telegraphed daily by Collectors to Government, the Sanitary Commissioner and the Surgeon-General in the form communicated with Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 357, dated 8th February 1899. Nil telegrams are not required. All Collectors should also send daily telegraphic reports of plague to the medical officer of the Ceylon Government stationed at Tuticorin whenever plague cases occur in their districts. The cost of these telegrams and of similar telegrams sent by Government will be debited to the Ceylon Government by the Accountant- General. F
?42 [Part VI-Rule 126. 126. The following reports and returns are sent by the Government of Madras to the Government of India:- (a) An ordinary telegram every Monday showing separately the number of seizures and deaths from plague during the week ending with the previous Saturday (i) in the presidency town, (ii) in towns of 50,000 or more inhabitants, (iii) in the rest of the district, and (iv) in all ports of the presidency. (b) Special telegraphic reports whenever plague extends to any new district or important place. (c) A monthly return showing daily plague seizures and deaths in each district during the previous month, to be despatched with a brief narrative of any events of importance in connection with plague, so as to reach the Government of India not later than the 7th of each month. (d) A special report by letter when a district or town of over 50,000 inhabitants previously included in the weekly returns is considered or declared to be entirely free from plague. Copies of this report are circulated to all Local Governments and Administrations and all Political officers. 127. To enable the Local Government to prepare the monthly narrative required by the Government of India, Collectors of districts affected with indigenous plague will forward on the 25th of every month a concise report on plague in their districts, showing whether the disease is increasing or decreasing, what measures have been taken to suppress it and with what degree of success, the attitude of the people, the readiness with which they permit segregation of the sick and contacts, or with which they evacuate houses of their own accord, whether they accept treatment or desire inoculation, what steps they are taking to help themselves and any other matters of interest. This report should reach Government not later than the 27th of the month to which it relates. When- ever a place previously included in the list of infected areas is considered to be entirely free from plague, the Collectors concerned should report the fact to Government so that it may be removed from the list. This report should state the date of the last case and should certify that no plague patients remain under treatment and that all necessary measures of disinfection have been taken.
?Part VI-Rule 128.] 43 128. Each Collector should keep in his office a plague record, to which officers on plague duty in his district should be requested to contribute brief notes on any matter they may consider of importance in perfecting measures against the disease, or desirable of being placed on record with a view to adding force to theories already assented to, or controverting them from (1) an administrative, (2) medical, or (3) sanitary point of view. Weekly extracts from this record of the portion bearing on sanitation should be sent to the Sanitary Commissioner. 129. In the event of recrudescence of plague in any town or village which has been free from the disease for any length of time, particular efforts should be made by the local officials to ascertain whether any definite facts bearing on the probable cause or source of re-infection are available, and a special report should be submitted by the Collector to Government through the Sanitary Commissioner. Information sufficiently reliable and relevant to be of value will be communicated to the Government of India. 130. The amildars and deputy amildars in charge of taluqs and sub-taluqs of Mysore which border on British districts are required to give immediate information of the occurrence of plague within their jurisdiction direct to the tahsildars of the neighbouring British taluqs, and deputy commissioners have been requested to keep the Collectors of adjoining British districts promptly informed of the occurrence of plague in the neighbouring districts in Mysore. Collectors of British districts bordering on Mysore should arrange to give similar information direct to the officials of the darbar. Similar arrangements are in force with regard to districts bordering on the Nizam's Dominions. A system of inter- communication among the Sanitary Commissioners of the various provinces has been sanctioned by the Government of India with regard to news about the progress of plague. Under this system, the appearance of plague should be telegraphed at once by the Sanitary Commissioner in whose area cases occur to the other Sanitary Commissioners on receipt of a report of a first case in taluqs and important towns. Plague correspond- ence. 131. All correspondence about plague should be addressed to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal depart- ment, and should be marked with the word ' lague' in red ink on the outside covers and on the left-hand corner of the papers. Telegrams should be addressed to "Madras, Plague."
?44                   [Part VI-Rule 132 All communications, except reports or returns on printed forms, should be forwarded with a docket, sheet, copies of which are supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press. 132.  All  references   regarding  account matters   should be addressed  to,   or  forwarded  through,   the  Accountant- General. 133. Plague correspondence should be entered in a separate current register, and the papers shown against a new item 'Plague' in the quarterly business returns.    A separate series of numbers should be given to the disposals, and the question of  destroying or retaining them  should  be  dealt  with  in accordance with Board's Proceedings, No. 101, dated 18th April  1898.    As regards passports, however, they are  of no use after the expiration of the ten days' period of observa- tion and may then be destroyed except in cases where they are required or likely to be required in connection with any prosecution or for any special purpose.    In Appendix II-P is given a list of plague records showing when each item may be destroyed. 134. Copies of printed Government orders relating to plague matters need not ordinarily be supplied to medical subordinates, sanitary inspectors or chairmen of unions, or to each member of a municipal council. Where necessary, district circulars embodying the purport of the Government orders should be issued to subordinate officers. Spare copies of Government orders are at present distributed in accordance with the statement printed as Appendix II-Q. 135. Copies of all important orders passed by the Govern- ment in regard to the prevention and suppression of plague will be supplied from the Government office to the Deputy Adjutant-General, Madras Command, and the General officers -Commanding Districts, who should also be furnished by Collec- tors with similar orders issued by themselves. 136. The Superintendent, Government Press, should supply all Collectors with the required number of copies of notifications of lists of plague-infected areas for circula- tion with District Gazettes. Vernacular translations of these notifications may be prepared and issued by the Collectors themselves. Plague appoint- ments. 137. All appointments on account of plague require the sanction of Government. In the case of appointments which are added to an existing establishment in consequence of extra work occasioned by plague, and the cost of which is under the standing orders debitable to the ordinary service
?Part VI-Rule 138.]                         45 heads, the application for sanction should be forwarded with the prescribed proposition statement through the head of the administrative department concerned. No proposition state- ments are necessary in the case of temporary appointments which are not additions to existing establishments and which have been created solely on account of plague. Appointments sanctioned without reference to limit of time require renewal of sanction every six months. 138. Collectors should submit every month a printed list of officers of all classes, including troops, employed on plague duty, in accordance with the instructions contained in Plague Commissioner's Proceedings, No. 762, dated 22nd November 1898, No. 1047, dated 28th December 1898, and G.O., No. 1504-P., dated 17th October 1899, and No. 656, dated 7th March 1899. The Inspector-General of Police should prepare similar lists of all police engaged in plague work, and the Surgeon-General should also submit a return showing all medical officers on plague duty and all temporary doctors obtained from England, with their stations, pay and allow- ances. The lists should be submitted not later than the 5th of each month and should be distributed as follows:- One copy  to   the  Chief   Secretary to  Government, Financial department. Three copies to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal department. Two copies to the Accountant-General. One copy to the Sanitary Commissioner. The lists need not be reprinted every month, any minor alterations being made in manuscript. Allowances. 139. The charge of plague operations in an infected district must be regarded as part of the general duty of an executive officer. No encouragement should be given to an impression that duty connected with the plague involves greater risks or is deserving of more favourable treatment than attendance in the infectious wards of a hospital or in a camp afflicted with cholera, which is accepted as part of the officer's ordinary duty. Save in exceptional cases no recommendation should be made for the grant of special salary, allowance or pension for plague duty. 140. The Government of India have, however, author- ised the grant of special allowances to medical officers for plague duty performed in addition to their ordinary work in cases where it is sufficiently arduous to deserve special remuneration. The Local Government may also sanction
?46                             [Part VI-Rule 141. local allowances to officers of other classes provided their plague work lies entirely outside the ordinary and legitimate duties of their offices. The Secretary of State has also sanctioned the grant of extraordinary pension to the families of police men who die of plague contracted in the execution of their duties in plague-stricken localities, provided such duties entail imminent risk from plague. 141. The special allowances given to certain classes of officers for plague duty and the salaries attached to special temporary appointments created on account of the plague are shown in Appendix II-R. and II-S. All questions relating to the grant of such allowances should be referred for the orders of Government. Plague expedniture and accounts. 142. No expenditure in connection with plague establish- ments or for the carrying out of works shall be incurred without the previous sanction of Government. Collectors are, however, authorised to incur, subject to the existence of budget provision, expenditure on the following items in connection with plague preventive measures :- (1)  Petty repairs to sheds up to a limit of Rs. 250 in each case. (2)  Compensation  for  destruction   of grain, clothes, roofs of houses, &c. (3)  Entertainment  of temporary  servants   on   daily wages for short periods for disinfection purposes or for attendance upon stray plague cases in out-of-the-way places. (4) Purchase   of   fuel   and   tacks   for    disinfecting machines. 143.  All Collectors, the Surgeon-General, the Inspector- General    of    Police,    and    the    Sanitary     Commissioner are required to submit  quarterly  estimates of  plague ex- penditure.    These  estimates  should be forwarded direct to the  Financial department so as to reach their destination not later than the 5th of the first month of each quarter. The  estimate   submitted   by   the   Surgeon-General   should include provision for all medical officers, nurses, &c.  (if any) who have been sent out   by the   Secretary of State and are temporarily attached to hospitals,  &c., in Madras prior to their being posted to duties in connection with plague work. 144.  In order to enable Government to obtain an approxi- mately correct revised estimate of plague expenditure for inclusion  in  the  preliminary   edition   of  the  civil  budget estimate which is forwarded to the Government of India, the
?Part VI-Rule 145.]                   47 estimate for the third quarter shall be submitted so as to reach its destination on the 5th November instead of the 5th October and shall show (1) actual expenditure up to the 31st October, (2) estimate for November and December, (3) estimate for the last quarter of the official year, and (4) total estimate for the year. This estimate shall be accompanied by an estimate for the ensuing official year based on the conditions existing at the time of framing the estimate. This latter estimate need not provide for each quarter of the year separately. 145.  The estimates shall cover all plague charges-direct and indirect-under provincial, local, municipal, and canton- ment  funds.    Provision shall be made therein for require- ments based on conditions existing at the time of framing the estimates. 146.  Collectors, chairmen of municipal councils and other officers should see that plague expenditure is kept as near as possible to the latest plague estimates sanctioned by Gov- ernment.    If they find  that  their  estimates  as  passed by Government are inadequate, it is their duty to apply for extra grants at  once.    It  should  be  clearly  understood  by  all officers  that expenditure can be incurred only  against the quarterly allotments passed by Government, and that although it is not the intention that plague operations should cease because it is found that the allotment is being exceeded in any quarter, the officer concerned will be held responsible that proper supervision is exercised over the expenditure and that application is made for a  further grant immediately it becomes apparent  that  funds are  becoming exhausted.    In any case, therefore, where the expenditure is found to exceed the latest sanctioned estimate, the officer concerned should report the fact to Government and should state also whether the amount exceeds the provision made in the annual budget. Balances arising from the fact that the quarterly estimates do not utilize fully the allotments existing in their sanctioned annual budgets shall not be utilized for non-plague purposes. 147. Collectors can themselves effect transfer of funds from one detailed head to another under the same minor head, and, subject to budget provision, they may also sanction all deviations and excesses in estimates previously sanctioned by Government up to a limit of 5 per cent. of the total amount of each estimate. In the case of urgent works and repairs costing Rs. 25 or less, estimates may be dispensed with pro- vided the bills are passed by the Collector, and the usual
?48                   [Part VI-Rule 148. certificates are furnished by the officers responsible for the work being properly carried out. 148.  Forms of estimates will be printed  and supplied by the Accountant-General.    No changes shall be made in the form without the approval of the Financial department.    The figures for each municipality shall be given separately. 149.  Each municipality shall bear its own plague charges. As regards district boards, the measures adopted in frontier districts proper, i.e.,  those  districts which  adjoin plague- stricken areas outside the Madras presidency, not only benefit those districts themselves as being nearest the seat of infection, but also protect other  portions of the presidency as well. This condition is also fulfilled, in some measure, by districts in   which  railway inspection stations have been established by notification   in the Fort St. George  Gazette.    Expenditure incurred by district  boards   in   such  districts   on   plague preventive measures is therefore distributed by Government in the ratio of one-third in frontier districts proper and of one- fourth in railway inspection districts against the district in which the expenditure is incurred, the remaining two-thirds or three-fourths, as the case may be, being contributed by the other districts of the presidency rateably to their annual receipts as shown in their budget estimates for the year.    The budget  estimates  shall,   however,  provide   for   the   gross expenditure to be incurred by each district   board,    credit for the contribution being taken subsequently on advice from the Accountant-General. 150. If any district board or municipality finds its funds unequal to the burden of plague charges, it shall revise its budget by omitting all avoidable expenditure, and in the last resort may apply for an advance from provincial funds or for a loan from the Government of India. Care shall be taken that advances granted by Government to local bodies to meet plague expenditure are applied to the precise purposes for which the advances were made, and are not utilized to relieve their ordinary funds of expenditure on sanitary, medical and other objects. 151. The clothing specified in Rule 109 will be supplied to the troops regimentally; and as soon as it has been issued, and the bill countersigned by the Collector, the military department will debit the cost to the civil department in the exchange account rendered by the Controller of Military Accounts to the Accountant-General, who will make
?Part VI.-Rule 152.]                   49 the necessary adjustments and recover the amount from the local body concerned. 152.  The Accountant-General shall submit monthly state- ments of charges-direct and indirect-under provincial and local    (audited)   and    under   municipal,   and   cantonment funds,  together  with  summaries under  each  head  show- ing totals to  date and the latest grants for each district. These statements shall also include all expenditure incurred in connection with the plague which has not been brought to book as direct or indirect, e.g., the emoluments of officers and establishments forming part of existing departments or ser- vices and not replaced by substitutes, but exclusively engaged on plague duties, and shall reach Government early in the month succeeding that in which the accounts are received by the Accountant-General. 153.  Appendix II-T shows the proper classification of charges commonly incurred in connection with plague : (i) " Direct" plague expenditure means expenditure exhibited in the Government accounts under the head 24-D. MEDICAL-Grants for Medical Purposes-Expenses in connec- tion with Bubonic Plague. "Indirect" plague expenditure means extra expenditure due to plague but brought to account under the ordinary appropriate service heads. (ii) The amount of indirect plague expenditure is therefore not ascertainable from the ordinary provincial and incorporated local fund accounts and special statements are prepared in the course of audit by the Accountant-General in the case of expenditure from general revenues and by the treasury officer in the case of expenditure from incorporated local funds. (iii) To facilitate the preparation of these statements all officers who draw bills for indirect plague expenditure should write conspicuously at the head of each such bill, beside the account head, the word PLAGUE in red ink. If only some of the items in a bill are indirect plague charges, the word PLAGUE should be written against each such item instead of at the head of the bill. (iv) It is to be noted that pay and allowances of officers and establishments forming part of existing departments or services whose employment on plague duty does not involve the payment of salaries to other persons for the performance of their legitimate duties (even though they may be exclusively engaged on plague duties) and not receiving extra allowances  on account of plague, do not constitute indirect plague G
?50                     [Part VI.-Rule 154. charges (and of course are not direct plague charges) because they do not involve extra expense. A statement should be forwarded to the Accountant-General by the 20th of each month showing the pay and allowances, drawn in the previous month, of officers and establishments so employed. (v) From the above it will be seen that the distinc- tion between direct and indirect plague expenditure affects the accounts of incorporated local funds expenditure and provincial expenditure. As regards excluded local funds this distinction is unnecessary and all extra expenditure, i.e., expenditure which would not have been incurred but for the occurrence or imminence of plague may be shown under the head Plague. (vi) Contingent expenditure on account of plague, e.g., stationery, postage, telegrams, office furniture and such like should be charged against the heads of account to which the salaries of the officers incurring such expenditure are debited. In regard to establishments newly entertained to deal with plague, the principle that officers of superior grades should be charged to PROVINCIAL, and those of inferior grades to LOCAL, should be applied. With regard to establishments dependent on officers newly entertained to deal with plague, the principle that the charge should follow the pay of the officer on whom the establishment is dependent should hold both in regard to establishments and contingencies. The cost of tents supplied to officers on plague duty will follow the debit of the pay of the officers. 154. Fines recovered in prosecutions under the plague regulations should be credited to fines under Law and Justice.
?51 APPENDIX 1. NOTES ON CERTAIN MATTERS CONNECTED WITH PLAGUE. (1) General Remarks. 1. In dealing with an outbreak of plague, a combination of the following measures is likely to produce the maximum of good:- (a)  The prompt discovery and isolation of every case of plague. (b)  The thorough disinfection of the personal effects, clothes, and houses of patients. (c)  The segregation and inoculation of contacts. (d)  The removal and destruction by burning of plague- infected rats,  and the disinfection of the houses in which they are found. Of these four measures the first is the most important, because it is only at the commencement of an outbreak that the remaining three measures can be carried out with success and with reasonable expenditure. When once the plague has obtained a footing in a large place or has spread to a number of villages it will be found very difficult to apply the measures of isolation, disinfection and segregation. The policy to be adopted at a particular place will depend, on its physical features, the season of the year, the general senti- ment and state of education of the people in regard to plague measures, the strength of the staff available, and the influence of the local authorities. 2. In the larger places, i.e., towns with a population of more than 10,000, the measures that will be found most applicable are disinfection, inoculation, the evacuation of specially infected quarters, and (so long as infection has not spread through the town) the isolation of the sick. In villages, the chief measure to be relied on is evacuation, but inoculation and chemical disinfection should also be resorted to so long as there is sufficient staff to supervise those measures. Evacua- tion in both towns and villages should be conjoined with an opening up of houses sufficient for the admission of sunlight
?52  [APPX. I.-Discovery of Plague. and air whenever this is required. In carrying out these measures it should be borne in mind that it will always be better to apply one method efficiently and thoroughly than to apply a number of methods with an inadequate and insufficiently trained staff. Another point of importance is that in places, where plague is constantly recurring and the amount of plague is liable to great seasonal variations, plague measures should be carried out with special vigour at the season when the epidemic is at its minimum. 3. Experience has shown that it is hopeless to carry out effectively any system of plague administration which is not supported by the people, and in a wide-spread epidemic the resources of Government in the matter of funds and establish- ment being limited, much must necessarily be left to the people themselves. Steps should therefore be taken to inform them beforehand of the measures they will be required to submit to, and to convince them of the utility of the par- ticular methods selected, so that they may be induced to carry them out not by force but by the exercise of their own free- will and as a consequence of their appreciating and under- standing the benefits to be anticipated therefrom. The measures are new to the people, particularly in fresh areas of infection, and if injudiciously or over-zealously pressed, must defeat themselves by exciting opposition instead of securing the co-operation of the people. On the other hand, if the leading inhabitants are induced to assist the Government officials in carrying out measures which are clearly beneficial, it may often be possible, with their help, to carry out with good results measures which would be ineffectual or injurious if enforced by definite orders upon a population ignorant of their advantages and suspicious of the objects with which they are adopted. (2) Advantages of Early Discovery of Plague. 4. The most important and the most difficult matter in all operations against plague is to obtain early information regarding the cases that occur. The prompt discovery of an imported case of plague may enable the local authorities to prevent a local outbreak, and even where a few indigenous cases have occurred, early information regarding each new case may make- it possible to prevent the outbreak from spreading beyond a confined area. Every endeavour should therefore be made to obtain information of each case of plague that occurs, as soon as possible after the patient has been attacked, or where this is not possible, soon after death.
?Appendix I.-Segregation.]          53 5.  For this purpose, the passport  system as   described in the rules 1-36, should be mainly relied  upon,  and  the co-operation of the people in working it should be secured by pointing out to them the advantage of protecting themselves by not mixing with persons coming from infected areas and by giving the  authorities prompt notice of their arrival and of any cases of plague or suspicious  fever among them.    In towns,  one   or   more volunteers  of each  caste  should be invited to assist the circle officers in prosecuting enquiries and discovering plague cases.    The risk of concealment of cases is lessened where people see that  their leaders have ranged themselves on the side of the authorities. 6.  Besides   carrying   out the   other measures  prescribed in the regulations, attention should be paid to the  improve- ment   of  the   existing   system   of   registering   deaths.    In municipal towns special daily returns of mortality may be called for and checked with the aid of trustworthy subordi- nates   posted   at burning   and burial   grounds.    In villages whenever the deaths reported are found to be more frequent than usual,   or   when  any   case   of    fever with   glandular swellings is reported, the tahsildar with the nearest medical officer should at once proceed to the village and make inquiries with a view to ascertain whether plague exists in the village; and the medical officer and the tahsildar should report to the district medical and sanitary officer the facts and the reasons for the decision arrived at by them as to the  cause of the mortality. (3) Segregation of Contacts. 7.  Persons who have been   in   immediate contact   with plague patients are known as contacts.    By segregating them, persons who are likely to develop plague are isolated and cease to be a danger to other people; the plague-infected houses are emptied for the process  of  disinfection,   and the contacts themselves are protected from further risk of infection from those houses.    To render segregation effective, the following measures are necessary:- (1)  All contacts should be diligently searched for and be  detained for  the  maximum period   of incubation,   and prevented from mixing with healthy people; (2)  Those in contact with each successive case of plague that occurs in the segregation camp must be similarly dealt with;
?54          [Appendix I.-Evacuation. (3)  All clothing must be effectually disinfected on entry into the camp and if plague cases have occurred in the camp since the date of entry, at the time of departure also; and (4)  The staff employed must be very strong relatively to the number of cases that occur and must be trustworthy. 8. These measures are not always practicable and the Indian Plague Commission was of opinion that the facts it collected do not justify the conclusion that in an out- break the contacts from a house in which a case of plague has occurred must be regarded from the point of view of the protection of the rest of the community as so dangerous that they ought to be compulsorily removed to a segregation camp. The Government of India have accordingly ordered that the compulsory segregation of contacts should be aban- doned as ineffective and harassing except when dealing with imported cases or when the infection is confined to so small an area that contacts can be accurately known and establish- ments can be provided sufficient to secure the detention of every contact. Where these conditions do not exist, it is better merely to subject the contacts to surveillance at their houses, as any attempt to segregate them will not only lead to the general concealment of cases but also tend to scatter the people and thus spread the infection to distant places. While under surveillance, the contacts may be allowed to pursue their daily avocations. (4) Evacuation. 9. By evacuation is meant the emptying of all or some of the houses in an infected town or village, so that they may not be used as dwelling houses until it is believed that they can again be occupied without risk of infection, the people thus removed being lodged in temporary camps in the open country. To make such evacuation thoroughly effective, the following conditions are required: (1) the people should all be got out promptly; (2) their effects should all be dis- infected; (3) each new case of plague should be immediately isolated; (4) suitable accommodation should be available; (5) the people should be effectually prevented from visiting or sleeping in the infected houses until either the houses have been disinfected or until sufficient time has elapsed for the infection to disappear; (6) and lastly they should not be permitted to scatter and spread the infection in the neighbourhood.
?Appendix I.-Inoculation.]          55 10.  Evacuation  provides  the  most   effective   safeguard against the spread of plague that has yet been discovered.    Its advantages are self-evident and it should be resorted to wher- ever practicable.    In villages and small towns (population not exceeding 10,000) complete evacuation (i.e., evacuation of all the houses) will be found to be generally possible.    In large towns, the extent to which it can be carried out will depend on the willingness of the people, the season of the year, the situation   of the  town,   the  facilities  for   providing  camp accommodation, and the strength of the available staff.    It will be found to  be of the greatest value at the very com- mencement of the outbreak, for the removal of the small number of people affected will not present any great difficul- ties, and prompt evacuation of the infected quarter may save the rest of the town. 11.  Evacuation is, however, likely to do more harm than good in the following cases :-                                                                                                                                 y (a) During the rainy season, when it is impossible to keep the people, after they have once been removed from their houses, from going back to them. In such circum- stances, the people who are removed are exposed to great inconvenience and misery without any countervailing advan- tages being derived from evacuation. (b) When the infection is widely distributed among the inhabitants of a large place, it is then advisable to agitate the people as little as possible, especially when there are among them a considerable number of artisans and traders who may lose their occupation by being removed from the town and are therefore likely to run away and infect other places. (5) Inoculation. 12. The exhaustive inquiries made by the Indian Plague Commission have established the fact that inoculation with Haffkine's vaccine lessens the liability to plague and greatly increases the chance of recovery from an attack of the disease, and disproved the statement that serious ill-consequences have resulted from such inoculation. The maximum period for which protection is afforded by inoculation has not yet been determined. For practical purposes, it has been fixed, for the present, at six months, but it should be noted that inocu- lation does not confer any great degree of protection within the first few days. Recently inoculated persons therefore incur risk of infection by remaining in infected places.
?56          [Appendix I.-Inoculation. 13.  Inoculation should be encouraged wherever possible and in particular among disinfecting staffs and the attendants of plague hospitals.    In places which, either owing to their nearness to plague-infected places or to  their having pre- viously suffered from an attack of plague, appear to be specially threatened with a visitation of the  disease, no effort should be spared to explain to the people the advantage of being inoculated before the disease is among them and to secure the  co-operation  of the more  enlightened  members  of the communities.    At the same time, no compulsion of any sort, direct or indirect, should be used.    An awkward attempt at persuasion   is   liable  to create   opposition,   resistance,   and occasionally, unfounded apprehension, and great circumspec- tion is necessary  in introducing inoculation in places where there is no demand for it.    The District Magistrate should be consulted before starting inoculation at any place  and the people   should be  distinctly warned that inoculation  is not a certain  prophylactic, but that it considerably reduces the chances of getting  plague, that an inoculated person when attacked   has increased  chances  of recovery, and   that the process, if properly conducted, is harmless. 14.  Only trained and reliable persons should be entrusted with  the actual   operation   of inoculation,  and   supervision should be exercised over them to ensure that they use only sterilized implements.    To remove any possible ground for distrust as to the conveyance of disease from one person to another, the inoculation syringe should be  sterilized in the presence of the person about to be inoculated.    The steriliza- tion  should be  effected by immersion  in  carbolic acid,   or preferably carbolized oil kept hot by the flame of a spirit lamp underneath.    After a bottle has once been opened and only a portion of its contents used, the remainder should invariably be thrown away. 15.  Inoculated persons  should be furnished with certifi- cates in the prescribed form [Appendix II-F].   The certificate should bear the left thumb mark of the person inoculated and should be issued immediately after one full dose  has been given, but the recipient should be recommended to return for a  second inoculation  after ten days.    The full dose should always be given at one time, unless for medical reasons it is considered  advisable to  divide it.    If it is  necessary to do this, a certificate should not be given until the equivalent of two   full   doses   has   been   given.    If,   however,   no   undue reaction ensues after the first fractional dose has been taken,
?Appendix I-Disinfection.]          57 it is advisable to give the full dose at once on the second occasion, after which a certificate may be given. 16.  The privileges attached to inoculation are mentioned in   Rule   121.     They are    not   admissible    in    cases    of persons  who  have  recovered  from  plague.    As a further encouragement the Government  has  authorized  the  grant of three days' extra casual leave on full pay to all public servants   for   the  purpose   of  being  inoculated.    Students attending Government and aided schools, who undergo inocu- lation, will be marked in the registers for not more than three consecutive days as " under inoculation," and such an entry will  be  regarded as   equivalent  to   attendance.     No subsistence allowance can be granted to inoculated persons for the period during which they are incapacitated for work owing to the operation. 17.  The Sanitary Commissioner is in charge of all measures connected with inoculation and will issue the necessary rules as to the   conduct  of the operation,  supply   of. Haffkine's vaccine, inoculation syringes, &c. (6) Disinfection. 18.   Chemical disinfection ought to be resorted to wherever possible.    Of all measures of disinfection, it is the only one which,  when effectively  carried out,   immediately destroys the infective material present in a room and renders the room at once practically safe for re-occupation.    It is, however, essential that it should be carried out by a trained agency, and experience shows that where such an agency cannot be employed, it is better to rely on gradual desiccation rather than   on   a   process   of  disinfection  which   is  likely   to  be incomplete and ineffective.    Imperfect disinfection involves waste of energy and material, brings discredit on the system by   exhibiting unsuccessful  results,  and engenders a false sense of security with regard to localities which have been incompletely disinfected   and still contain the living germs of plague. 19.  According to present knowledge, perchloride of mer- cury is the most effective chemical disinfectant.    It should be used in a strength of 1 in 1,000, to which 2 per 1,000 of hydrochloric acid and a little aniline blue should be added. If the owners have no objection, interiors of plague-infected houses should, as a rule, be treated with Wilkinson's coloured solution which contains the perchloride in the strength stated H
?58           [Appendix I-Disinfection. above. To ensure that the chemical is free from impurities, it should be obtained from the Madras Medical Store depot by submitting indents through the district medical and sanitary officer and the Surgeon-General. The perchloride should be issued in the form of a concentrated solution in acid and clear instructions should be forwarded with each consignment as to the amount of water to be added. With a view to securing that the dilutions prescribed should be the solutions in which the disinfectant shall actually be employed, the capacity of the vessels used for measuring out the concentrated solution shall be accurately adjusted to that of the wooden buckets in which that solution is diluted for use. Further, the buckets employed should be of such capacity as to hold just the quantity of water sufficient to dilute the measure of concen- trated solution to the desired effect. The perchloride may also be issued in the solid form in packets, the contents of which are accurately adjusted to the size of the vessels in which they are to be dissolved for use. 20.  Steam-sterilisers,  unless their working is committed to skilled and trustworthy operators, are found in practice to be quite ineffective, and are therefore not suitable for general application.    Their use is limited to ports for the disinfection of the effects  of  native   crews and native ship passengers bound for ports out of India.    Full instructions as to the mode of working them should be supplied with each machine. 21.  In cases where it is not possible to carry out chemical disinfection,   the  disinfecting  agency of desiccation  should be relied upon.    For this purpose, the house ought to be thoroughly cleaned out; the removal  from   the   house   of cowdung and other moist accumulations should be particularly insisted upon, and the inmates of the house should be induced to remain away for a period of at least two  months until the process of desiccation is complete.    Disinfection by desicca- tion cannot, however, be relied upon during the rains. 22.  The    breaking of   holes  in the roof or   walls and partial untiling will not accelerate the process of desiccation to such a degree as to counterbalance the damage done to the house.    This measure should not therefore be adopted in the case of masonry houses with   concrete roofs.    As a rule, such houses can be disinfected without great difficulty and  are   to   a certain extent open  to light and air.    But in rural  areas,  where the majority of the buildings are of a comparatively poor character it will rarely be  possible   to provide for efficient chemical disinfection.    The  removal of
?Appendix I-Disinfection.]            59 portions of the roof of such huts can be done with no structural injury to the huts and at small cost and is permitted. 23.  Owing to the risk of infection from the blowing about of the floor-dust and owing to the fact that it is practically impossible to secure that the whole material shall be carried away, the digging up of floors with a view to kiln-burning them ought not to be resorted to. 24.  The actual  burning down of  houses should not be resorted to except in the case of temporary structures which are of little or no value or in the case of houses which are unfit for human habitation. 25.  With a view  to encourage people to   produce their goods for disinfection  and  to prevent  them from secreting them,   nothing   which   could   by   any  possibility  have   any value for its owner  should   be broken up or destroyed by fire.    Liberal compensation should be promptly paid for any articles  that   may be   necessary  to  destroy,   when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circumstances to whom it would be a great hardship to bear it. 26.  Disinfection of personal effects should not be attempted in the case of travellers by road or railway  but should be carried out in the case of- (a)  native  crews, third class or deck passengers and native servants leaving infected or healthy ports for ports out of India. This should be done on shore; (b)  plague    patients    and    contacts     removed   from infected houses, ships or railway carriages; (c) plague   patients    discharged   from   hospitals   and persons returning to their houses from health or suspect camps. 27.  That  the disinfection of the person   is  effective is indubitable  as   is proved by   the practice   of washing   the hands with disinfectants in bacteriological laboratories and in surgical operations.    The measure, however, is extremely unpopular, and has  been ordered to be abandoned  in the case of travellers as very little is to be gained by disinfect- ing them.    It  will be found useful in the case of persons taken out from plague-infected houses into health camps and in the case of plague convalescents leaving hospital. 28.  Laboratory    experiments   and   practical   experience alike tend to show that there is little danger of the spread
?60           [Appendix I-Disinfection. of plague by means of ordinary articles of merchandise, and that it is therefore neither advisable nor necessary to take any steps towards their disinfection. The only restriction found necessary is the prohibition against the importation from infected localities of rags, waste paper and soiled linen. Any such articles brought in contravention of this prohibition should be destroyed. Old newspapers and any paper used for packing purposes are not included within the prohi- bition, but washed linen articles such as washed dhotis, come within the meaning of the term " soiled," although they have not been worn since they were last washed. Persons who send parcels by railway or post from plague-infected areas are required to declare in writing that the parcels do not contain any soiled linen and bedding, rags or waste paper 29.   When any carriage from an infected area is detached from a train at any railway station in the Madras presidency, it shall be disinfected and ventilated by the railway author- ities in the following manner as soon as possible and before it is again brought into use, and if such carriage is detached at an inspection station such disinfection and ventilation shall be effected to the satisfaction of the inspecting medical officer:- (i) Third and intermediate class carriages- The interior wood-work of the carriages, especially the floors and seats, shall be thoroughly washed with a solution of perchloride of mercury (1 in 1,000) and of hydrochloric acid (2 in 1,000); the doors and windows shall be opened, and the vehicle exposed to the air; the sweepings shall be carefully collected and be burnt. (ii) First and second class carriages- The floors and wood-work shall be treated as above, the cushions being also brushed and thoroughly cleansed and exposed to the sun for not less than four hours. 30.  (1) Any railway carriage from which a passenger who is suffering from the plague has been removed shall be detached at the nearest convenient  station, and shall be disinfected by the railway authorities as follows, and if that station is an inspection station, such disinfection shall be  effected to the satisfaction of the inspecting medical officer :- (i) The carriages, after being detached from the train, should be thoroughly washed with soft soap. After an interval of two to three hours, this should be washed off with plain water, and then the following disinfecting solution
?Appendix I-Rat-Plague.]           61 should be thoroughly sprayed all over the interior as well as the exterior of the carriages by means of a syringe : - Corrosive sublimate 1/2 oz. Hydrochloric acid 1    Water 3 gallons. This solution should be allowed to dry on the car- riages. Special care must be taken to direct the solution into all the cracks and crevices and jilmills. (ii) After disinfection, the carriage should be kept out in the open for 48 hours. They can then be brought into use again. (iii) In the case of rst and second class carriages, which afford greater facilities than third-class compartments for the harbouring of plague germs, it will be necessary, if the carriages are contaminated, to burn the cushions and to disinfect the wood-work in the manner indicated above, and re-paint the interior. (2) If a compartment has been used by a suspicious case of plague, it shall be treated as directed in the preceding section. If of the third or intermediate class, its use may be permitted as soon as it is thoroughly dry ; but if it be of the first or second class, it shall, after such disinfection, be kept locked and unused until the nature of the case be definitely ascertained, when the question as to whether or not the cushions be destroyed and further disinfection be effected, shall be decided in accordance with the preceding clause (1) (iii) of this paragraph. 31.  Detailed instructions as to the mode of disinfection to be adopted in   each case  will be issued by the Sanitary Commissioner and, in respect to the management of hospitals, by the Surgeon-General. (7) Rat-Plague and Destruction of Rats. 32.  Rats have been observed, and have been proved by experiment, to be very susceptible to plague, and a large mortality among rats has often been found to precede an epidemic of plague among human beings.    It is probable that rats, when infected, carry the disease from house to house, and are thus important agents in its dissemination.    Their destruction, and the observation of any special sickness or mortality among them is thus very important. 33.  Granaries    are   the   favourite   haunts of rats,  and grain bags arriving from any place suspected of being infected
?62            [Appendix I-Rat-Plague. with plague should be carefully examined, and any rats found should be destroyed and their bodies burnt. Infection once brought into a granary spreads rapidly among the healthy rats, and thence in time to human beings living in the neighbourhood. Collectors, presidents of district boards, chairmen of municipal councils, should therefore take special precautions to prevent infection from this source. Arrange- ments should be made for the constant inspection of granaries and grain bazaars and care should be taken to keep them clean and disinfected and to have the rats destroyed. In inspecting these granaries particular inquiries should be made whether any dead or sick rats have been observed. Rats sick with the plague seem careless in the presence of men and run about in a dazed way with a peculiar limping gait in the hind legs owing to painful glands in the groin. The port and sea customs authorities should be instructed to see that no rats are landed with goods imported by sea into this presidency, and that rats found in ships are as far as possible destroyed. Bandicoots, mice and other rodents are also liable to become infected with plague and should therefore be destroyed. 34  It has  been ruled that ordinarily the destruction of rats should be confined to- (a) infected places and the surrounding area within a radius of ten miles round it; (b) landing places and railway goods-sheds, where rats from infected places are likely to be imported with goods brought by sea or railway. In the case of (a), rewards may be necessary but the maximum rate should not exceed three pies. In other cases, the port or railway authorities are expected to do all that is required without the reward system. 35.  The charges incurred in the destruction of rats should be debited to local or municipal funds according to the area within which such charges are incurred.
?63 APPENDIX II-A. PLAGUE   PASSPORT. [See Rule 2 on page 4.] 1. No. of passport. 2. District.  3. Station of issue. 4. Date of arrival.  5. name of person (in full).  6. "Father's name.*  7. Caste and occupation. 8. Age.                 9. Sex.* 10.  Whence coming (give district, taluq, and village). 11. Destination and residence during the next ten days (give, district, taluq, village,  street and number or name of the owner of the  house). 12. To whom t he triplicate copy of the passport sent and when. L declaro the information set forth above under headings 5 to 11 to be correct, and I do hereby land myself (a) to appear . for inspection, daily, for the next ten days, present the above-mentioned person before the  passport-examining officer of the place where 1 may he for the time being, (b)  to   report to   the said officer   before departure  any   change   in  my residence the residence of the above-mentioned person within the said period of ten days, and (c) 1o deliver 10 the said officer this passport on the expiry it he said period. Date Signature or mark of the traveller or   person in charge of him,  Declared and signed before me. Date Signature and designation of officer issuing the passport. * May be omitted when clearly not required for identification. * For village in Malabar, give the names of amsam and desam. Date.                                           Signature. INSTRUCTIOUTS 1st day 1.  This  passport should be prepared in triplicate. The original should be retained for record, the duplicate delivered to the  traveller,   and   the  triplicate  sent without delay to the officer who has to examine him for ten days.   The full designation and address of this officer should be entered under heading 12.    One pass- port form should not   be  used  for  more than  one individual.   Only persons  coming  from   infected or notified places can be required to take out passports.    2nd ,,     3rd ,,     4th ,,     5th ,,    2.  The passport-issuing officer should explain to the traveller or his guardian the terms of the passport and warn him that any breach  of its terms will entail prosecution and punishment  with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to Es. 1,000 or both. 6th ,,     7th ,,     8th ,,    3.  The passport-holder should, unless exempted by a written order endorsed on the pasport, appear daily for ten days with his passport before the passport- examining officer and obtain that officer's signature on the margin of his passport in token of inspection. 9th ,,     10th ,,     Forwarded to the   tahsildar                                deputy tahsildar of-                                municipal chairman the traveller having been duly observed. 4.  The passport-holder is not  obliged to remain at a place for ton days by reason of his passport, but should he desire to change his residence within that period, he should give due intimation to the passport-examining: officer and get the entries under headings 11 and 12 altered   before   departure.     On   the   tenth  day   he should deliver his passport to the passport-examining officer.                  5.  The   passport-examining  officer  should   satisfy himself that the person presenting the passport, is the person described therein.   He should ascertain from the traveller -whether there is any sickness or death in his house,   lithe traveller exhibits any symptoms of plague or if any sickness or death is reported in lus house or if he fails to appear for inspection, the said officer should take immediate steps for detaining him or for making the necessary inquiries as to the cause of sickness, death or absence.          Signature und Designation of Passport.examining officer.           Date.   Station  6.   for  further particulars, see city plague regula- tions when  residing   in Madras or mufassal plague regulations when residnig elsewhere.
?64 APPENDIX II-B. GENERAL PASS. [See Rule 83 on page 30.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by road or boat from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. This pass protects the person named above and the members of his family mentioned on the reverse, but it does not authorize journey by rail, for which a separate pass shall be obtained by each individual requiring it, nor does it cover residence outside the village of It will be in force until revoked. Signature Deaignation. Date. (Reverse of Form.) Name. How related to pass-holder. Signature. Designation. Dato.
65 APPENDIX. II-C. GENERAL PASS. [See Rule 83 on. page 30.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by rail from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. Signature. Designation. Date. APPENDIX II-D, GENERAL PASS. [See "Rule 83 on page 30.] (To be issued to persons who leave an infected or notified place to attend markets in the adjoining non-infected area.) 1. Inspection station through which the holder will pass.  2. Railway station where the holder will alight.  3. Name of person.  4. Father's name.  5. Caste.  6. Age.  7. Sex.   District. 8. From what infected or notified place Taluq.  Village. 9. To what market ... ... District.  Taluq.  Village. 1
?66 [Appendix II-E. This pass allows the holder to remain in the village of-------------- for 24 hours at a time without a passport. On the expiry of the period he must either have left the village or have provided himself with a passport. He must show this pass to the officer in charge of the inspection station through which he will have to pass when proceeding to the village where the market is held and to the passport-issuing officer at the railway station where he alights as also to the local authority of the village at or near which the market is held and obtain their initials on the reverse. He will likewise show this pass on his return to the officers mentioned above and obtain their initials. There is, however, no necessity to present it at the railway inspection station if there be no medical inspection on his return journey from the village. Holder's signature Date Signature of issuing officer. APPENDIX II-E. SPECIAL PASS. [See Rule 85 on page 31.] (To be issued to persons leaving an inhabited infected area to reside in its neighbourhood.) No. District. Station of issue. Number of office of issue.* Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Occupation. Age. Ordinary residence. The above-named person (and his family consisting of males and females as per reverse) is permitted to reside temporarily at (name of site or number of field) on his producing this pass, with the accompanying certificate  duly filled in by the officer responsible for disinfection. Date. Signature and designation. * To be entered when there is more than one office of issue in a town.  If the family leaves a healthy area of the town or a house that has not been infected, this part of the certificate may be dispensed with at the discretion of the issuing officer.
?Appendix II-F.] 67 (Reverse of Form.) Name. How related to pass-holder. Signature. Designation. Date. Disinfection Certificate. I hereby certify that having satisfied myself that arrangements for residence at the site named by the above-described person (and his family) were complete, I immediately before his/their departure carefully disinfected all clothing and property removed by him/them. Date. Signature of officer in charge of  disinfection. APPENDIX II-F. [See Rule 121 on page 10.] [(COUNTERFOIL ] No. Name Father's name Street Village Town Taluq. District Date Initials of operator, Plague Inoculation, Certificate. No. CERTIFIED that , son of  Street , resident of Tillage Town   , District ' Taluq , has been inoculated by mo, and that his thumb-mark was at the time impressed before me. Space for left thumb-mark. Sigmtlir& md  designation.  Dated NOTE.-Unlesss suffcnng from, or suspected to be suffering from. plague, the holder of the certificate is exempted from segregation from detention when travelling, and from ten days' observation under the passport rules. It does not, however, exempt him from house, execpt jr. the case where all e been moeulated, or to have his  lling. The certificate is valid for u period of six months,
68 APPENDIX II-G. Register of permanent passes issued to persons attending markets. [See Rule 84 on page 30.]   Name of person. Pass number. Date of Remarks.   Arrival.  Return.            APPENDIX II-H. Relaxation of Passport Rules. [See Rule 89 on page 31.] The inconveniences and difficulties attending the working of the passport rules in the case of railway officers have been brought to notice both by the railway authorities and Collectors. A general relaxation of the rules cannot be made in favour of any particular class. The trouble that is now experienced by those constantly on the move may be avoided by them if they are willing to be inoculated, and no relax- ation of the rules is called for in the case of those who are unwilling to be inoculated and to whom the inconvenience is merely personal. 2. There are persons, however, constantly employed on the railways such as engine drivers, firemen, guards and mail sorters, with regard to whom, as long as they are on actual duty from day to day, the strict enforcement of the passport rules may result in public inconvenience and in their cases some relaxation may be granted. The duties of these men are of a fairly constant nature, and they halt for any length of time only at the larger stations, where their absence from regular duty must come at once to the notice of a superior officer. On the
?Appendix II-H.] 69 application of the railway or postal authorities, collectors/the President of the Municipal Commission, Madras may exempt by name from the ordinary passport rules individual servants of the classes named, and such other employs of a railway also as, in their/his opinion, are required to travel so frequently on duty that compliance with the requirements of the passport rules would cause impediment to the execution of their duty, on the understanding that the officer to whom they are immediately subordinate must report at once to the nearest local authority every case of sickness among the servants to whom the exemption is given. Any permanent change in the nature of the duties performed should be reported to the officer granting an exemption certificate. Persons so exempted shall be pro- vided with tickets in the following form:- Passport Exemption Certificate. District of Register No. (Name), son of, employed as and ordinarily residing at, has been exempted from the passport rules as long as he travels on duty as such between the stations of and Mark of left thumb Date of issue Signature, designation and seal of officer issuing the ticket, NOTE.-1. This certiticate is valid up to the 31st March next. It must be exhibited by the bearer on demand to any person authorized under the plague regulations to inspect or issue passports, or to examine the health condition of travellers. 2. The holder of this certificate is bound to report to the nearest local authority any case of sickness, whether in himself or another person, occurring in the house in which he resides within ten days of his last visit to an infected area. Failure to comply with this direction will render the holder liable to prosecution. It should be understood that exemption from the passport rules does not carry exemption from any of the other regulations framed under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. 3. Other classes of railway servants are probably less frequently on the move and the enforcement of the rules among them is likely to result less frequently in public inconvenience. In cases of real diffi- culty, it may be possible to arrange under mufassal Rule 2 (1) for the inspection of the passport-holder at the railway station, or, under mufassal Rule 103, railway officers of known and approved character and responsible position may be appointed honorary assistant plague officers, and empowered under mufassal Rule 2 (2) (d) as "local authorities" at certain stations for the working of the pass- port rules among railway servants.
?70 [Appendix II-H. 4 Under Mufassal Rule 89, Collectors/City regulation 25 the President of the Madras Municipal Commission may exempt from the necessity of taking out passports any person who is neither a railway nor a postal servant. Such exemptions must be made personally, not generally, and should be granted sparingly. They must be in following form:-  Under Mufassal Rule 89/City regulation 25, (name) whose signature and thumb-  mark are exhibited Signature. in the margin, and who is employed as a  , is hereby Left thumb-mark. exempted from the plague passport  rules.  Date of issue. (Signature.)  Number in Collector's/President's register. Collector of/President, Municipal Commission, Madras. NOTE.-1. This certificate is valid up to the 31st March next. It must be exhibited by the bearer on demand to any officer authorized under the plague regulations to inspect or issue passports or examine the health condition of travellers. 2. The holder of this certificate is bound to report to the nearest local authority any case of sickness whether in himself or another person, occurring in the house in which he resides, within ten days of his last visit to an infected area. Failure to comply with this direction .will render the holder liable to prosecution. 5. The certificates of exemption prescribed in paragraphs 2 and 4 above will be issued by the Collector of the district or the President of the Municipal Commission, Madras, according as the head-quarters of the individual exempted or his usual residence is within a mufassal town or the city of Madras. Exemption certificates issued by a Collector should be countersigned by the President of the Municipal Commission, Madras, or the Health officer of the city, if exemption from surveillance is claimed thereunder in the Madras city. Elsewhere they should be recognised without countersignature of any local authority. Certificates issued in the Madras city should similarly be recognized in the districts. 6. Any concession may be withdrawn at any time without assigning a reason.
71 APPENDIX II-I. Intimation Form. [See Rule 11 on page 9.] Date of arrival. Name of traveler. Father's name. Caste. Age. Whence coming. Destination and residence during the next ten days.   Remarks.       District. Taluq. Village. Street. Number or name of the owner of the house.  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12             N.B.-A single form may be used for more than one traveler proceeding on the same day to the same district.
72 APPENDIX II-J. Time allowed at inspection stations for plague examination, [See Rule 19 on page 11.] Railway administration. Inspection or passport station. Time required for inspection or issue of passports. Madras Railway  Guntakal  Thirty-six minutes for all trains from Bombay or Raichur. Do. Jalarpet   Fifty minutes for mail trains and thirty minutes for passenger  trains from Bangalore. Do. Coimbatore   Twenty minutes for mail trains and thirty minutes for other  trains from p?dau?r. Sonthern Mahratta Railway. Hindupur   Thirty- two minutes for all trains from Bangalore, APPENDIX II-K. Detention Certificate. [See Rule 26 on page 13.] ...................Camp 1. Name of passenger 2. Number and description of ticket 3. Detained from to 4. Name and designation of issuing officer
73 APPENDIX II-M. Statement to accompany proposals for placing restrictions on- fairs and festivals. [See Rule 42 on page 16.] Name of festival or fair. Place where held.  Distance to nearest railway station.  Date of commencement and termination of festival or fair.  Average attendance during the past three years.  From what districts in the Madras presidency and from what places outside the presidency, pilgrimage should be prohibited, and the number of people expected from each of such districts or places.  1 2 3 4 5 6 K
?74 APPENDIX II-N. Notifications for placing restrictions on fairs and festivals. [See Rule 42 on page 16.] NOTIFICATION No. I. [To be used when the village where the festival or fair is held is infected.] WHEREAS there is plague in , in the taluq of the district, and whereas it is desirable to prevent its spread: His Excellency the Governor in Council, in exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, prohibits pilgrimage to the ensuing  festival of from the  to the  , inclusive, [and also the holding of the usual cattle fair in connection with the said festival,] [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold within the district[s] for the station[s] of on the  Railway and for the station[s] of  on the Railway to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back. Secretary to Government. NOTIFICATION No. II. [To be used when the village where the festival or fair is held lies in the vicinity of an infected area and it is necessary to prohibit all pilgrimage.] WHEREAS His Excellency the Governor in Council is satisfied that there is danger of an outbreak of plague at  in the taluq of the  district, if pilgrims are permitted to visit that place on the occasion of the ensuing- festival of  [and the usual cattle fair is per- mitted to be held at that place]: In exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, His Excellency in Council prohibits [the holding of the said fair and also the] pilgrimage to the said festival from the to the  , inclusive, [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold within the  district[s] for the station[s] of on the  Railway and for the station[s] of  on the  Railway to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back. Secretary to Government.
?Appendix O.] 75 NOTIFICATION No. III. [To be used in cases where pilgrimage from infected areas is prohibited."] WHEREAS His Excellency the Governor in Council is satisfied that there is danger of an outbreak of plague at in the taluq of the district, if persons from the and other parts declared to be infected with plague are permitted to visit that place on the occasion of the ensuing festival [and cattle fair]: In exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, His Excellency in Council prohibits [the holding of the cattle fair and also] the attendance at the said festival [or fair] from the to the , inclusive, of persons from the said parts, [and further directs that be- tween the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold within the district[s] for the station[s] of on the Railway and for the station[s] of on the Railway to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back. Secretary to Government. APPENDIX II-O. Plague Report. [See Rule 123 on page 41.] Plague Report District. Date No. 1. Name of town or village-. 2. Population of town or village-. 3. Plague cases up to date of last report Number of seizures-.  Number of deaths-.  Date of last report-.  Imported. Indigenous. 4. (a) Date of commencement of illness-. (b) Name and designation of person who first reported the case, and date on which he did so-. 5. When reported by telegram-. 6. Imported or indigenous- ? 7. Brief history of case-.
76 [Appendix II-P. 8.  (a) If imported, had patient a passport on arrival-?  (b) If he had no passport, did the local authority supply him with   one-?  (c) In any case was proper surveillance maintained over the patient   from the first-? 9. Steps taken to isolate and treat the patient-. 10. Steps taken towards the segregation of contacts-. 11. Steps taken towards the evacuation and disinfection of the infected house and property-. 12. Was there any opposition on the part of the inmates of the infected house or of the people of the village to the plague measures- ? 13. Remarks. APPENDIX II-P. Destruction of Plague Records. [See Rule 133 on page 44.] Description of records. When to be destroyed. 1. Daily reports relating to passports. At the same time as the  passports to which they relate. 2. Daily intimations furnished to the district medical and sanitary officer by the medical officer in charge of a railway inspection station under mufassal Rule 9.           3. Daily intimations furnished to the district medical and sanitary officer by passport-issuing officers under mufussal Rule 11.        4. Intimations of change of residence of persons while under observa- tion.       5. Daily reports of plague cases and deaths in the Mysore State. At the close of the month succeeding that to which they relate. 6. Daily reports of plague cases and deaths in Bangalore.  7. Weekly reports of plague cases and deaths in the Bombay presidency and the Hyderabad State.  8. Weekly returns of deaths in muni- cipalities. After one year. 9. Daily telegrams of plague cases received by the Collector and the district medical and sanitary officer under mufussal Rule 71.
Appendix II-Q.] 77 10. Weekly diaries of plague supervisors and sanitary inspectors in charge of observation circles.  After one year. 11. Daily reports of passengers inspected and of those detained at railway inspection stations.  12. Weekly returns of inoculations received from the district medical and sanitary officer.  13. Weekly returns received from divisional officers of breaches of passport rules dealt with by them.    APPENDIX II-Q. Distribution of spare copies of printed orders of Government. [See Rule 134 on page 44.] A. Collector's office (three copies). B. Divisional officers (each one copy). C. Treasury deputy collector (one copy). D. Tahsildars (each one copy). E. Deputy tahsildars in independent charge (each one copy). F. District medical and sanitary officer and civil surgeons (one copy). G. Additional medical officer on plague duty (one copy). H. Medical officer in charge of plague inspection station (one copy). J. Special plague officers (each one copy). K. Municipalities (each two copies). L. President, district board (one copy). M. Taluk boards (each one copy).
?78 APPENDIX II-R. PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty. [See Rule 141 on page 46.] Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. A. Military officers  (a) When employed on Nil. and troops. guard duty.*     (b) When employed on     sanitary duty, such as      searching, disiufect-     ing, superintending,      scavengering, &c.-      (i) Combatant British  Rs. 300 a month.   commissioned      officers of over 5      years' service.     (ii) Combatant British  Rs. 200 a month.   commissioned      officers under 5      years' service.      (iii) British non-com- Re. 1 + annas 6 extra ration   missioned  money per diem.   officers.     (iv) British privates.  Annas 12 + annas 6 extra   (v) Native officers.  ration money per diem.   (vi) Native non-com- Rs. 1-8-0 a day.   missioned  Annas 12 a day.   officers.      (vii) Sepoys ... Annas 8 a day.   B. Medical (i) Commissioned officers  Same as in the case of British officers wholly transferred from regi-  commissioned military officers. employed on  mental or purely mili-   plague duty. tary duty.     (ii) Commissioned      officers     in civil em- Rs. 5 a day.   ploy.     (iii) Senior military assist Rs. 5 a day.   ant surgeons with      the honorary rank      of Captain or Lieu-      tenant.     * When the troops employed on plague duty have been performing guard and sanitary duties in the same place together, that is to say, when some of the party have been employed on sanitary duties while others have been doing guard duty, the duties being interchangeable, all the troops should be paid allowances. On the other hand, where the duties assigned to any one body of troops have been exclusively of the nature of guard duties no allowances should be granted. The allowances shall be paid only for the days on which the troops are actually employed on plague duty. All doubtful cases should be referred for the special orders of Government.  Medical officers whose sole duty is the inspection of ships for plague purposes are not entitled to any special fee for conducting inspection in rough weather.  Fort health officers called on to inspect vessels from plague-infected ports on Sundays and closed holidays will be granted a special fee of Rs. 16 for each inspection, but not more than double fee in respect to the same vessel inspected more than once on the same day. No port health officer shall, in any one month, receive foes aggregating more than one-fifth of his salary.
?Appendix II-B.] 79 PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-continued. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances.   B. Medical officers (iv) Military assistant  Rs. 3 a In addition to any wholly em- surgeons in civil or day. acting, charge or ployed on military employ, on   house allowance plague duty-  pay exceeding Rs. 150.   they may have been cont.     drawing at the time       of their deputation   (v) Military assistant Rs. 2 a to plague duty and   surgeons in civil or day which they would   military employ, on   have continued to   pay not exceeding   draw but for such   Rs. 150.   deputation.   (vi) Civil assistant sur- Rs. 2 a day.     geons.       (vii) Civil apothecaries Rs. 25 a month, or in the case of     men, who, at the time of their     deputation, were in independ-     ent charge, the full charge     allowance of their grades.   (viii) Hospital assistants Annas 8 a day.     engaged on plague       duty involving per-       sonal risk, such as   In addition to house   attending on plague   rent or free qnar-   patients.   ters, but in lieu of   (ix) Hospital assistants Rs. 10 a month. charge allowance.   engaged on light       plague duty, such as       inspection of pas-       sengers.     C. Medical officers, (1) *  Commissioned officers.  Such local allowance, not   doing plague   exceeding one-fifth of the   work in addi-   salary, as may be fixed in   tion to their   each case by Government.   ordinary   The allowance should be   duties   given only to officers whose       additional plague work, such       as that of medical inspection        of passengers by road or     (2) *  Medical sub- railway, is entirely separate     ordinates. from, and outside the sphere       of, their ordinary duties and       not to officers whose ordinary       and legitimate work, such as       that of attending on the sick       in hospital, has been in-       creased owing to the occur-     (3) Nurses or midwives. rence of plague.    * A special fee of Rs. 15 will be paid for every inspection of vessels conducted in bad weather when it involves extraordinary risk.  See note  on the previous page.  When the out-door plague work of a medical subordinate is so heavy as to necessitate the use of a conveyance, carts or jutkas may be provided for him by the local body concerned. The actual charges incurred in the payment of hire should be debited to 'Contingencies.'
80 [Appendix II-R. PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-continued. Class of officers.  Particulars. Allowances. D. Plague supervisors  belonging to the salt, abkri and other departments. (i) Appointed in non- municipal areas. Allowance of 25 per cent, of the salary + Rs. 30 fixed travelling allowance + Rs. 15 horse allowance, provided the permanent pay + 25 per cent, thereof does not fall below Rs. 80.  (ii) Appointed in municipal towns.  Same as in the case of D (i), but minus the fixed travelling allowance. E. Compounders on ambulance staff.  Allowance of 20 per cent, of the salary to be granted only when the ambulance staff is on active plague duty. * PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty. Designation. Salary. Remarks. A. Retired commissioned medical officers. Rs. 500 a month (in addition to their pensions which will continue to be a military charge). The officer must have retired before the 1st April 1898, and his re-employment must be either on plague duty or in a post which cannot be filled in the ordinary way by reason of the officers, who would, in ordinary course, be available for it being required for plague duty. The appointment requires the previous sanction of the Government of India. * B. Temporary English doctors. Rs. 500 a month or such salary as may be fixed in their agreements with the Secretary of State. .... c. Retired military assistant surgeons. Pay of their grade at the time of retirement + Rs. 100 allowance subject to a maximum of Rs. 350 a month. In special cases the local Government may raise the limit to Rs. 500. A retired honorary commissioned officer of the Indian Subordinate Medical Department is entitled to double first-class travel-Hug allowance by rail, and eight annas a mile by road. The officers should be required produce certificates of physical to fitness, and their appointments should, in the first instance, be made for periods not exceeding six months.    * The Secretary of State has laid stress on the need for showing consideration towards doctors and nurses sent from England for plague duty in this country and the Government of India have decided that some liberality should be exercised in the grant of allowances to nurses to defray such expenses as they may be called upon to incur in the discharge of their duties, and that they should not be expected to defray the cost of carriage from their salary.
Appendix II-R.] 81 PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation. Salary. Remarks.  D. Uucovenanted medical officer.  Such pay not exceeding Rs. 350 a mouth as the Surgeon-General may find necessary, with travelling allowances to and from the places to which they are posted at the rates of double second-class fares for journeys by rail and anuas 4 a mile for journeys by road. The term of employment may, subject to their good conduct and efficiency, be for a period of three mouths ; the engagement being terminable after the expiry of the first two months by a written notice given by either the Government or the officer. E. Temporary civil assistant surgeons. Pay Rs. 100 a month + allowance of Rs. 2 a day, with travelling allowance to and from the place to which they are appointed. .... F. Private hospital assistants. Pay assigned to the corresponding grades of hospital assistants in Government service + 50 per cent. thereof with compensation for quarters. .... G. Retired hospital assistants. Pay of their grade at the time of retirement (in addition to their pension). .... H. Lady nurses obtained from England. (a) Rs. 175 a month in addition to free quarters, fuel,lights and pankahpullers, commencing from date of embarkation to India ; If free quarters are not provided, an allowance of Rs. 3 a day should be paid.   (b) double first-class fare by rail when travelling on duty ;   (c) first-class passage when proceeding by steamer form one part of India to another on duty.  J. Qualified European, Eurasian or Native nurses locally recruited.  Such pay not ordinarily exceeding Rs. 75 a month with free quarters or Rs. 10 for house-rent. When the nurses attend on plague patients, a boarding allowance of Rs. 1-8-0 a day in the case of Europeans and Eurasians, or one rupee in the case of natives should be paid. When employed on duties entailing a considerable amount of moving about within a limited area and necessitating the frequent hiring of vehicles, they may be paid actual conveyance allowances irrespective of the five miles limit prescribed in article 1157 of the Civil Service Regulations. For terms on which caste native nurses may be trained, see G.O., No. 1835-P., dated 23rd December 1899. * See note * on the previous page.
82 [Appendix II-S. PART II. Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation. Salary. Remarks. K. Private gentlemen appointed as supervisors in municipal towns. Rs. 2 a day + RS. 15, horse allowance.  Such supervisors should usually be Europeans or Eurasians. They need not be appointed unless the outbreak of plague requires a special organization to deal with it.  L. Private gentlemen appointed as plague supervisors in rural areas. Rs. 80 pay + Rs. 30, fixed travelling allowanc + Rs. 15, horse allowance. .... M. Plague Inspect-ors [As in Appendix II-S].   N. Other temporary subordinate including menial servants. Such, rates as would be sufficient to induce persons to take up the appointments. Menial servants are not eligible for any allowances, and should be conveyed form place to place at the cost of Government.           APPENDIX II-S. PAY AND ALLOWANCES OF SANITARY INSPECTORS EMPLOYED ON PLAGUE DUTY. Classification of Sanitary and Assistant Sanitary Inspectors. Sanitary Inspectors for plague purposes are classed as follows :- Certificated Sanitary Inspectors, or those who possess certificates signed by the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioner to the effect that they have passed the Government Technical Intermediate Examination in Hygiene and have attended a course of theoretical and practical instruction in Hygiene in the Medical College, Madras. Temporary Sanitary Inspectors,* or men who have been specially trained for plague duty by the Sanitary Commissioner and have satis- fied him as to their fitness after undergoing examination by him, Assistant Sanitary Inspectors, or men who have taken low places in the examination lists of either certificated or temporary sanitary inspectors and for this or for reasons of temporary convenience are so classified by the Sanitary Commissioner. Reserve Sanitary Inspectors are men of any of the above classes who are kept in reserve, at disposal of the Sanitary Commissioner, for duty in districts or municipalities to any number not exceeding ten. * Should those trained tip to date prove insufficient. Collectors of districts may nominate for training by the Sanitary Commissioner, at times notified by him, men who have passed the Matriculation examination of the Madras University or have been educated up to that standard,
?Appendix II-S.]                         83 Nature of duties in rural areas.  Certificated Sanitary Inspectors may be posted as plague inspectors to charge of observation and preventive circles and frontier inspection stations, and as disinfection inspectors attached to sanitary sections of ambulance staffs. Temporary Sanitary Inspectors * may be posted as plague inspectors to charge of observation and preventive circles and frontier inspection stations, but shall not be posted to charge of preventive circles or as disinfection inspectors unless neither by rearrangement of duties of the sanitary inspectors at disposal of the Collector concerned for the time being, nor by special application to the Sanitary Commissioner for additional men, is it possible to secure the services of certificated sanitary inspectors. Assistant Sanitary Inspectors may be posted as assistant plague inspectors and are intended solely for observation duties in non-muni- cipal towns. They should not be put on other duties in rural areas, but may be transferred for duty in municipalities as circle inspectors.  Pay and Allowances of Plague Inspectors in Rural Areas: t  Rs. Certificated sanitary inspectors  in charge of observation and  preventive circles.  45    Rs. 15 pony allowance  and Rs. 15         fixed travelling allowance.   Certificated  sanitary inspectors  in charge of frontier inspec tion stations.  45  Rs. 15 pony allowance and Rs. 15 fixed travelling allowance at the discretion of the Collector.   Temporary   sanitary  inspectors  in charge   of     observation  circles.  40 | Rs. 15 pony allowance  and Rs.15 fixed travelling allowance.       Temporary   sanitary inspectors  in charge of frontier inspec tion stations.  40 | Rs. 15 pony allowance and Rs. 15 fixed travelling allowance at the discretion of the Collector.   Certificated  sanitary inspectors  detailed for disinfection duties  with the  sanitary section of  an ambulance staff.   45  When kept in reserve 15 per cent,          above pay ; when on actual duty 25 per cent, above pay and when they travel on duty daily allowance of As. 8 under article 1063 of the Civil Service Regulations.   Assistant sanitary inspectors in  charge of non-municipal towns. 25 If the population of the town is more than 5,000, a pony allowance of Rs. 15 may be given at discretion of the Collector.  * See note * on previous page. t Request for supply of sanitary inspectors should be made to the Sanitary Commissioner. Reports of their arrival for duty and relief from duty should be made promptly to the same officer.                 ,  Certificated, temporary, and assistant sanitary inspectors are entitled on joining and leaving appointments to travelling allowance under articles 1083-Ex. and 1132 of the Civil Service Regulations. They are required to give a month's warning before resignation. Similarly, Collectors and chairmen of municipal councils should give them a month's warning before dispensing with their services or equivalent pay in lieu.  Under no circumstances should these men be unmounted. On first joining advance of pay may be allowed for purchase of ponies. | Entitled on first joining to full pay for the period daring which they were under training in Madras.  Entitled to a tent and certain equipment when on disinfection duties,
?84                        [Appendix II-S. Nature of duties in Municipal Areas. Certificated Sanitary Inspectors only will be employed in municipal areas as plague inspectors in charge of divisions (in the proportion of one to each three assistant plague inspectors in charge of circles) and as plague disinfection inspectors in charge of the sanitary sections of ambulance staffs. Assistant Sanitary Inspectors will be employed as assistant plague inspectors in charge of observation and preventive circles only. NOTE.-When a municipal town has not a chief sanitary inspector on the perma- nent staff, one certificated sanitary inspector shall be employed for plague purposes by the chairman in consultation with the Sanitary Commissioner. Pay and Allowances in Municipal Areas.* RS.  Divisional plague inspec-         tor   in    charge   of   a division 35    And 25 per cent. of pay on  appearance of plague in     any circle in his charge and up   to  one month after occurrence of last case. Rs. 15 pony                            allowance. with    Mounted     orderly     for divisional   plague   inspector. 10 ... Rs. 15 pony allowance.     Assistant plague inspector  in charge of observation or preventive circles. 20 And 25 per cent. of pay on          appearance of plague in  the circle in his charge and up to  one  month  after the occurrence of last case. ....     or    25                   Chief sanitary inspector     As   drawn                           in his last permanent sanitary appointment. And 25 per cent. of pay.  Rs. 15 pony allowance.         with    Mounted orderly   10 .... Rs. 15 pony allowance.     Certificated sanitary   in- spector     detailed     as plague  disinfection inspector in charge of sanitary  section  of ambulance staff. 40 And 25 per cent . of pay on appearance of plague in any circle in which  he is liable to perform duty, and up to one month after occurrence  of the  last case.  * See note  on previous page.   When a municipality is financially in a position to do so, certificated sanitary inspectors should be placed in charge of circles on pay not exceeding a sum amounting to Rs. 5 less than allowed for a divisional sanitary inspector.
?85 APPENDIX II-T. List of Plague Charges. [See Rule 153 on page 49.] PROVINCIAL-INDIRECT. 3. LAND REVENUE-Charges of District Administration. Greneral Establishments-  (1) Cost of additions to office establishments of revenue officers necessitated by plague. Salaries.  Establishment.   Allowances.   Contingencies.  (2) Pay and allowances of temporary additions to the revenue staff necessitated by plague. Sub-divisional Establishments-   Establishment.  Allowances.   Contingencies.  15. POST OFFICE-District Post Charges. Establishments. (3) Additional post establish ments for serving plague camps. Allowances.   Contingencies.  18. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION-Civil Secretariats. Chief Secretariat-  (4) Extra establishment required for dealing with plague correspondence. Establishment.   Local and Municipal Depart-  ment  Establishment.  19-A. LAW AND JUSTICE-COURTS OF LAW-Criminal Courts. Charges of Stationary Sub- (5) Court required in consequence of plague.Allowances. Magistrates.   Special Sub-Magistrate,   Temporary Establishment.   Contingencies.  20. POLICE. Presidency Police.  (6) Additional police entertained in consequence of plague. District Executive Force.   Railway Police.  24-A. MEDICAL-Medical Establishment. District Medical and Sanitary  (7) Extra allowances on account of plague of medical officers and subordinates performing plague duties in addition to ordinary duties. Officers-   Allowances.   Reserve Medical Subordinates-   Allowances.   M
?86 [Appendix II-T. 24-C. MEDICAL-Sanitation and Vaccination. Sanitary Department-  (8) Extra establishment employed Establishment. in the office of the Sanitary Commis-   sioner in connection with plague   work. 30-C. STATIONERY AND PRINTING. Government Press (9) Cost of printing passports and    passes at the Government Press. PROVINCIAL-DIRECT 24-D. MEDICAL-Grants for Medical Purposes. Salaries- (10) Pay and allowances of medi- Salaries of Plague Commissioner, cal officers and subordinates includ- sioner, gazetted medical ing clerks and passport-issuing officers officers and military officers.  exclusively employed on plague duty Plague allowances of gazetted in connection with the inspection and medical officers and military  observation of travellers by sea and officers.  by railway and the segregation and Salaries of subordinate medical  medical treatment of such as are officers.  affected or suspected to be afected Plague allowances of subordi-  with plague, at seaports, or at rail- nate medical officers. way stations notified as railway Exchange compensation allow-  inspection stations in the Fort St. ance. George Gazette. House-rent allowances. (11) Temporary, establishments  Local allowances.  entertained for the purposes men-   tioned in No. (10). Establishments-  (12) Grants for the construction,   &c., of private plague hospitals, Allowances- (13) Cost of construction of sheds Tentage of officers. and cost of medical stores, disinfect- Travelling allowances of  ants, carbon paper, &c., required gazetted officers. strictly for the purposes specified in Travelling allowances of non- No. (10). gazetted officers and estab-  (14) Pay and allowances of mili- lishments.  tary officers whose services are from- Supplies and Services- ally placed at the disposal of the Petty construction and repair  Civil department for employment on of buildings. plague duty and of clerks and serv Contribution to private hos-  ants attached to them wherever pitals.  they may be employed. Dieting charges.  (15) Pay and allowances of Gov- Cost of instruments, medicines  ernment officers other than those and disinfectants.  mentioned in items Nos, (10) and Hospital clothing and bedding.  (14) whether belonging to the Indian Other hospital equipment and Civil Service, Forest, Survey, necessaries. Customs, Salt or other department   specially deputed by Grovernment
?Appendix II-T.] 87 Contingencies- for employment in connection with Tour charges.  plague measures, and clerks and Service postage.  servants attached to them; also the Do. telegrams.  emoluments of medical men and Purchase of furniture. nurses procured from Europe and  Repairs of do.  clerks and servants attached to them. Office expenses.  (16) Extra allowances on account Miscellaneous. of plague of military officers and   men who remain on the strength of   their regiments though detailed for    plague duty, and all extra expendi   ture due to their deputation if (in    the case of men only) their services   are utilized for purposes mentioned   in No. (10).   The extra allowances on account   of plague of military officers are   debitable to provincial, whether   are engaged for purposes mentioned   in No. (10) or not. LOCAL-INDIRECT.  18-J. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION-General Establishment of Local Funds. Establishments. (17) Extra establishment  Allowances.  employed in local fund offices. Contingencies.   24-A. MEDICAL-Medical Establishment, District Medical and Sanitary    Officer's establishment-  (18) Additions to the office estab- Establishments.  lishment of district medical and Allowances.  sanitary officer. Contingencies.   24-B. MEDICAL-Hospitals and Dispensaries. Salaries.    Establishments.  (19) Extra expenditure in exist- Allowances. ing hospitals and dispensaries due Supplies and Services. to plague. Contingencies.   24-C. MEDICAL-Sanitation and Vaccination. Sanitation and Conservancy-    Establishment.    Allowances. (20) Additions to existing sani- Supplies and Services. tary staff for plague work.  Contingencies.   N
?88 [Appendix II-T. LOCAL-DIRECT.   (21) Pay and allowances of   medical subordinates, clerks and   passport-issuing officers employed Salaries- in plague hospitals and at railway Salaries of subordinate medical stations not notified as railway officers. inspection stations in the Fort St.  House-rent allowance.  George Gazette and at road frontier Plague allowance. inspection stations. Establishment- (22) Cost of observation staff Matrons and nurses. consisting of plague supervisors, Compounders. plague inspectors, assistant plague Ward attendants and servants. inspectors and their peons. Storekeepers. (23) Ambulance staff. Establishments entertained at (24) Cost of camp establishments, plague camps and road frontier ments, superintendents and inspection stations and at gumastahs and menial servants. railway stations not notified (25) Cost of stretchers, medical as railway inspection stations plague hospitals and "observation in the Fort St. George Gazette. "suspect," "health" and " Allowances -  staff" camps. The cost of sheds Travelling allowances. constructed in cantonments should Supplies and Services -  be borne by cantonment funds. Petty construction and repairs (26) Cost of stretchers, medi- of buildings. cal stores, disinfectants, comforts Funeral expenses. and furniture and clothing for Dietary charges. plague hospitals. Clothing and bedding. Nos. (21) to (26) must be Cost of medicines and instru- understood as referring to expenditure ments and disinfectants. for purposes other than Other hospital necessaries. those specified in No. (10). Contingencies- (27) Extra expenditure due to Purchase of furniture. the deputation of troops on plaguo Repairs of do. duties other than those specified in  Tour charges. No. (10)- See also No. (16). Postage charge (28) Rewards for the destruction Telegraph charges. of rats. Office expenses. (29) Cost of carbon paper Miscellaneous. supplied to passport-issuing officers   at railway stations not notified as   railway inspection stations in the   Fort St. George Gazette.
?INDEX-  A   PAGE RULE ABORTION. - Obligation Lo report cases of    .......   .......  18 47 ACCOUNTS. - Plague       ........................ 46 142    ADMINISTRATIVE  STAFF 34 103 AFFECTIONS OF THE LUNG.- Obligation to report cases of          ...... 18 47 ALLOWANCES. -   Plague         ...        ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       45 ,139, 140,   141 Statement showing rates of - to officers on plague duty      78-80  Statement showing rates of' - to Sanitary Inspectors on plague duty 82  AMBULANCE STAFF. - Composition of           ............... 21 58 APPOINTMENTS. - Plague              ..................... 44 137 AREA UNDER OBSERVATION. -Notification of 19 52 ARTICLES OF FOOD AND  DRINK. - Closing of places used for the supply   and preparation of   ... 33 97 ASSISTANT PLAGUE  OFFICERS ................ .,, 34 103 B   BEDDIN. - Prohibition against the transmission of - used 18 50 BUILDINGS -   Abatement of overcrowding of   ... 32 95 Acquisition Of - for plague purposes   ... 22 61 Collector's power of entry into   ... 18 49 Disuse of - unfit for human habitation          ...          ..         32 94 C   CANAL BOATS. - Rules regarding       .................. 39 120 CANTONMENTS. - Responsibility for carrying out plague measures in 39 110 CAUSE OF DEATH. - Certificate of 26 75 CERTIFICATE. - Improper use of - prohibited 39 118 COMPENSATION - for loss of property             ............... 38 116 CONTACTS. - Segregation of - 53  CONVEYANCES FOR THE CARRIAGE OF THE SICK AND INFECTED ARTICLES. -   Provision of                 ...         . .         ...         ...         ... 24 66 CONVULSIONS. - Obligation to report cases of         ............ 18 47 CORRESPONDENCE -   Plague         ...........................       43, 44 131, 133   -36 relating to account matters         ...        ...        ...        ...         44 132 D   DETENTION CERTIFICATE -   Form of       ........         ......        ...........  72  Persons under - bound to obey directions given to them    ...... 39 119 DISINFECTION      .......................... . 57  Mode of       .......................... 38 115
?90  E PAGE RULE    EMERGENT WORK. - Collector's power to carry out           ......... 39 117 EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT 1  Powers under - delegated to Local Government 3  ESTABLISHMENT LIST     ........................ 45 138 ESTIMATES. - Plague      ....................... 46-48 143-50 EVACUATION        ........................ 54  F   FAIRS AND FESTIVALS -   Form of - to accompany proposals regarding           ......... 73  Forms of notifications imposing restrictions on  74, 75  Restrictions on the attendance at 16, 17 40-45 FEMALE PASSENGERS. - Examination of       ............... 12 23 FEVER WITH GLANDULAR SWELLINGS. - Obligation to report cases of   ...  18 47 FRONTIER INSPECTION STATIONS -      Establishment of   ...        ...        ...        ...         19 53, 54 Examination at     ...        ...        ...        ...        ...       19 55 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. - Restrictions with regard to       ...         29 81 G   GOSHA WOMEN. - Examination of      ....... . .......... 14 33 GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS. - Occupation of - for plague purposes 23 65 GOVERNMENT ORDERS.- Distribution of printed copies of ......... 77  H   HEALTH CAMP. - Establishment of 21              59,60 HEDJAZ. - Pilgrimage to the   ..................... 17 46 HOSPITAL CAMP. - Establishment of .................. 21 59, 60 HOUSE SEARCH. - When permissible ................. . 27 76,77 I   INCAPACITATED PERSONS. - Obligation to take passport in the case of   .. 10 13 INFECTED HOUSES -   Letting of - prohibited   ... 32 92 Destruction of 32 93 INOCULATION 26, 55 74 Form of - certificate 67  Obligation of inoculated persons            ............... 40 122 Privileges of inoculated persons            ...        ...        ...    40 121 INSPECTION SHEDS ON BAILWAY PLATFORMS. - Expenditure on ... 16 39 INTER-COMMUNICATION OF PLAGUE NEWS - between British, Mysore and   Hyderabad officials   ...        ...        ...        ...        ...    43 130 INTIMATION -   Duties of district medical officer and tahsildar in regard to ... 9 12 Form of       ........................... 71  of passengers from Bangalore proceeding to Ceylon ...        ...         15 37 of the move of a large body of troops, police or coolies        ... 15 38 of travellers by rail         ..................... 8 9,10 of travellers by road        ................ ..        ... 9 11
91 L PAGE RULE LOCAL AUTHORITY -   Definition of           ...        ...        ...       5 2  Duties of                ...        ...        ... 7 7 Exemption from personal attendance before   ... 5 2 His register            .................. 8 8 M   MILITARY - should obey plague regulations            ............ 37 111 MILITARY OFFICERS. - Procedure   in obtaining  the services  of - for plague duty    35 107 MINORS. - Obligation to take passport in the case of        ......... 10 13 N   NATIVE  MEDICAL  PRACTITIONERS. - Employment of - at public   and private hospitals       ........................ 35 105 NUISANCES. - Abatement of    ..................... 33 96 O   OBSERVATION -   Circles of    ......................... .. 19 56 Control of - staff ........................ 20 57 Duties of - staff   ........................ 20 57 OBSERVATION  CAMP. - Establishment of - near large towns threatened with plague    ..................... 32 90 OFFICERS. - Treatment of the absence of - who suffer from plague or are segregated for plague          .......... , ....... 38 114 P   PASS -       Forms of    ........................... 64-66  General       ........................... 30 84 Improper use of - prohibited    ........... .       ...... 39 118 Special        ........................... 31 85 PASSPORT -   Different kinds of ...        ...        ...        ...        ...           30 83 Erroneous issue of 14 32 Exemption, from taking    ............    .  ......... 31 89 Form of 63  Improper use of - prohibited   ...        ...        ...        ...        ...  39 118 Intimation of the issue of           .................. 6 5 Notice in railway carriages regarding  ............... 10 15 Obligation to take .....................            4,10, 30 2, 13,      82 PASSPORT EXAMINER. - Duties of       .................. 7 7 PASSPORT-HOLDERS. - Duties of 6 4 PASSPORT-HOLDERS WHO CHANGE THEIR RESIDENCE WITHIN THE OBSERVA- TION PERIOD. - Procedure in respect of    ...        ...   .    ...        . .. 7 6  PASSPORT-ISSUING OFFICERS - defined-          ...       ...       ...       ... 5 3    PASSPORT ISSUING OFFICES. - Establishment of   ... 31 86
?92  PAGE RULE PASSPORT RULES -   Penalty for infringement of       ..... .        ...        .. 5 2 Relaxation of         ..................... 68 ... PLAGUE -   Discovery of           ..................... 52 ... Measures to be taken on the occurrence of a case of 24,25 67-72 Obligation to report cases of 18 47 PLAGUE CAMPS. - Closure of   .................. 33 09 PLAGUE CHARGES -   Classification of     ...        ...        ...      ...       49 152, 153  Statement showing classification of 85  PLAGUE HOSPITALS. - Closure of       ............... 33 99 PLAGUE-INFECTED AREA -   Notification of 4 1 Obligation to report the arrival of persons from 18 48 PLAGUE MEASURES. - General remarks on   ... 51 ... PLAGUE OFFICERS        ..................... 34 103 Jurisdiction and powers of         ...        ...... 35 104 PLAGUE PATIENTS. -   Collector's power to segregate or isolate 18 49 Their removal to hospital          ...        ............ 28 78,79 PLAGUE RECORDS. - Destruction of   ......        ......... 76 ... PLAGUE REGULATIONS -   Penalty for the breach of           ............... 34 100 Procedure in case of evasion of -by giving false name or address 34 102 Prosecution for the infringement of     ............ 34 101 PLAGUE REPORT. - Form of     .................. 75 ... PLAGUE SHEDS. - Grants towards construction of   ... 23 64 PLAGUE STAFF. - Notice of discharge in the case of           38 113 PREVENTIVE CIRCLES. - Formation of          ............ 26 73 PRIVATE HOSPITALS. - Sale-proceeds of         ............ 23 63 PRIVATE PLAGUE CAMPS -   Government grants towards        ......... 22 62 Supervision of        ..................... 23 63 PUBLIC CONVEYANCES. - Use of - by plague patients prohibited 32 91 PUNCII-MARKING of railway tickets    .............. 13, 14 29-32 R   RAGS.- Prohibition against the transmission of      ...         18 50 RAILWAY INSPECTION -   Appointment of - station         ............... 11 16 Attempts to evade 15    35,36 Detention - Certificate of 13 26 Duties of railway staff     ..................   11,12 19, 20 Examination of passengers         ...        ...        ...   11-13 17, 18,   21-25 Intimation in respect of passengers passing through - station 8 9, 10 Penalty for refusal to submit to examination 11 17 Time of examination at              ...        ...        ...     72  RAILWAY  PASS-HOLDERS. - Stationmaster's   certificate as to place of departure in the case of     .................. 14 34 RAILWAY STAFF. - Duties of   ... 37 112  RATS -   Destruction of      .....................  19. 61 51 Plague among       ...        ...        ...        ...        ..       61 ... REPORTS AND RETURNS ........... .       ...       ......  41-43  123-129
?93 S    PAGE RULE SEARCH PARTIES-   Control of 27 77 Organization of 27 76 SEGREGATION -   of contacts 53 ... Persons under - bound to obey directions given to them 39 119 SOILED LINEN. - Prohibition against the transmission of 18 50 SUDDEN DEATH. - Obligation to report cases of     ......... 18 47 SUSPECT CAMP. - Establishment of    ............... 21 59,60 T   TROOPS. -   Clothing for           ..................... 48 151 Use of -  for plague purposes    ............... 36 109 V   VOLUNTEER AGENCY. - Employment of       ......... 35 105 W   WASHING OF CLOTHES. - Restrictions on the          ......... 33 98 WASTE PAPER. - Prohibition against the transmission of ... 18 50
?AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Mount Road, Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Esplanade, Madras G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. * T. K. SITARAMA AIYAR, Kumbaknam. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER & Co. (Limited), Bombay. M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, MUFID-I-AM PRESS, Lahore. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. SUPERINTENDENT, NAZAIR KANUN HIND PRESS, Allahabad.  IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, London, W.C. CONSTABLE & Co., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. P. S. KING & SON, 9, Bridge Street, Westminster, London, S.W. SAMPSON Low, MARSTON & Co., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRBNER & Co., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. B. QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. WILLIAMS & NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON, BELL & Co., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. FRIEDLNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. * Agent for sale of the, Legislative Department publications.
