?29 From SURGEON-CAPTAIN L. F. CHILDE. To THE PRESIDENT, Plague Research Committee. Bombay, 20th October 1897. SIR, I have the honour to forward herewith my report on plague. It is mainly confined to the pathology of the disease and the mode of entry of the plague-bacillus into the body, with its exit therefrom, as this was the portion of the enquiry assigned to me at a meeting of the Committee held in October 1896. A clinical account of plague-pneumonia has been added, as well as some notes on cases of unusual interest. I regret that this report is not more complete, as I could have made more post-mortem examinations had time permitted, and it is possible that there may be some other varieties of plague which have escaped me; but as I have had to perform all my ordinary duties during the whole of this enquiry, and those of the First Physician, Sir Jamsetji Jijibhoy Hospital, in addition, during a part of it, I have been unable to devote as much time to this research as I could have wished. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, L. F. CHILDE, Surg.-Capt., I. M. S., Member, Plague Research Committee. B 1751-8
?30 II.-Report by Surgeon-Captain Childe, I. M. S. I.-ON THE POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES OF PLAGUE. The bodies examined were for the most part those of well-nourished adults of the servant and labouring classes. Usually the skin was found intact, except that there were cracks and abrasions about the hands and feet, resulting from occupation, and also in many cases marks of the common parasitic skin diseases, especially ringworm and itch; and although clinically various skin- lesions were met with, such as sloughing at the site of the bubo, boils and ulcers, yet in these cases recovery generally took place, and I had no opportunity of observing such conditions in the post-mortem room. The following varieties of plague were met with:- The Bubonic Form. The Septicmic Form or Plague-Septicmia. The Pneumonic Form or Plague-Pneumonia. A.-THE BUBONIC FORM. The bubo was usually situated in the groin of either side, less commonly in the axilla, rarely in the neck, and most rarely in the supra-trochlear or popliteal region; the limb corresponding to the bubo was swollen and dematous and petechi were usually seen upon it, but they were always in greatest number over the site of the bubo itself; and though there might be some over the body generally, still these were but few. In the case of an axillary bubo the whole axilla looked full and smooth, and the swelling extended down the side nearly to the margin of the ribs, down the inner part of the arm to the elbow, and over the anterior and posterior axillary folds. On dissection there was an enormous mass of dark coagulated blood and serum which occupied the whole axilla and included the glands, so that the whole mass had to be removed together; and on incision this was found to consist of the connective tissue of the part gorged with blood and of coagula due to hmorrhages, whilst within were seen the glands. In recent cases, of 4 or 5 days' duration, there were some of a deep red and some of a lighter red colour, but all intensely engorged and solid, not breaking down but a little soft from the amount of blood in them; whilst in older cases, of 7 or 8 days, the glands were softer, more pink in colour and almost diffluent, suggesting in fact the appearance of a rather soft spleen. The glands were rounded or oval in shape, and varied in size from a walnut to a pea. As a rule too, the smallest glands were the deepest in colour and most solid, whilst the largest were of a lighter red colour and softer consistence. The axillary vessels were pressed upon and surrounded by the enlarged glands and extravasated blood, so that in fact they became incorporated in the bubo, and it was mainly by this pressure on the axillary vein that the dematous condition of the arm, as referred to above, was produced. The hmorrhage and coagula extended beyond the axilla and were found in the areolar tissue, as well as amongst the muscles, but more between them than in their substance; this con- dition also extended down the arm and could be seen in the areolar tissue as far as the elbow. There was also much clear dema fluid which assisted in forming the swelling, and it was found in the axilla as well as beyond its borders. The bubo thus was found to consist, not of a single enlarged gland, but of a chain of glands of various sizes, surrounded by a mass of engorged areolar tissue coagulat- ed blood and dema fluid. In the case of a bubo in the groin there was a similar diffuse swelling in Scarpa's Triangle extending to the neighbouring parts; whilst when the bubo was in the cervical region this swelling was enormous, and pressed upon and embarrassed the larynx and trachea (hence the dyspua in these cases). With regard to the remaining lymphatic glands of the body in a bubonic case, there is but little to be said. Thus in the case of a left axillary bubo the following condition was found. The left supra-trochlear gland was intensely engorged and the size of a large bean, rather firm and full of dark blood; the right supra- trochlear, right axillary, cervical of both sides and bronchial looked normal or just slightly engorged. The mesenteric, iliac, lumbar and popliteal were in the
?31 same condition; whilst the inguinal were some as large as beans, pinkish and slightly engorged, others of about the normal size and appearance. It may be mentioned here that the lymphatic vessels presented no abnormality as a rule, except that in some cases those near the bubo seemed to be slightly swollen; the thoracic duct too was either normal or possibly slightly swollen. Condition of the other Organs.-Hmorrhages were frequently found beneath the conjunctiv, in the connective tissue under the scalp, and under the periosteum on the surface of the cranial bones, also extravasations sometimes of large size were occasionally found amongst the muscles, especially in those of the abdominal wall. The occurrence of petechi in the skin has been already mentioned. Nervous System.-The dura mater and pia mater were much engorged, and the appearance of lymph was seen along the course of the larger vessels in the latter membrane; the puncta cruenta in the brain were well marked, but the brain substance itself looked normal, as did the fluid in the ventricles. The spinal cord presented a similar engorged appearance but showed no other abnormality, and the nerve-trunks appeared to be normal. Alimentary System.-The tonsils were either normal or enlarged to the size of almonds, of a dusky purple colour, soft and engorged; and similarly the pharyngeal tonsils were either normal or engorged. The parotid and sub-maxillary salivary glands were either normal or engorged to some extent the mucous membrane of the pharynx and sophagus was usually dusky from engorgement. The stomach showed constantly a distinctly engorged appearance with hmorrhages into the mucous membrane which were usually petechial but sometimes of a larger size. Similar engorgement and petechi were frequent in the large intestine and rectum, but were less generally found in the small intestine. (This applies especially to petechi.) In some cases Peyer's patches and the solitary follicles looked distinct, prominent and slightly swollen; but usually they were either somewhat distinct or of the normal appearance. The Liver was always distinctly enlarged and full of blood, but the sub- stance itself was usually rather pale and soft from parenchymatous degeneration, there was bile in the gall bladder either of the usual appearance or thin and watery. Hmorrhages into the mucous membrane of the gall bladder were rarely seen. In one instance small necrotic patches were scattered through the liver. This case will be described hereafter. The Pancreas was either normal or engorged. The Spleen was always enlarged, sometimes to two or three times the ordinary size, the capsule was normal, the spleen-pulp of a brick-red or purple colour and always markedly engorged. It was either fairly firm or rather soft and the Malpighian bodies plainly seen as if each were engorged, so as to give the section sometimes almost a granular appearance. Urinary System.-The kidneys were always enlarged and much engorged, the capsule stripped easily and petechial hmorrhages were constantly found beneath it; the kidney substance itself was pale and soft from parenchy- matous degeneration. There was distinct engorgement of the pelvis of the kidney with petechial hmorrhages and sometimes a large clot distending the pelvis and calices. The whole ureter was frequently engorged, and distinct hmorrhages could be seen under its inner coat. The bladder was usually dis- tended with urine, which was either of the normal or a slightly blood-stained colour; small hmorrhages were frequently seen in the mucous membrane of the bladder. The Genital System showed nothing abnormal beyond some engorgement. The supra-renal capsule and thyroid body were engorged but otherwise normal. The Peritoneum showed considerable engorgement, and hmorrhages into the retro-peritoneal tissue were frequently found; thus, they were seen on the under surface of the diaphragm, on the upper surface of the liver, especially close to the ligaments, and in one instance there was a hmorrhage completely enclosing the gall-bladder, so that there was a casing of coagulated blood
?32 between the peritoneum and gall-bladder. Similar hmorrhages behind the peritoneum were found on the surface of the spleen, kidneys and intestines, and sometimes large coagula in the retro-peritoneal tissue of the lumbar region. Circulatory System.-The pericardial cavity usually contained a few ounces of blood-stained or clear fluid, and petechial hmorrhages were constantly seen beneath the visceral and parietal pericardium. The heart-muscle was either normal or in some cases rather soft and friable; considerable dilatation of the right side, with post-mortem clots in the cavities, was often present. There was not much engorgement of the walls of arteries, but the vena cava and other large veins showed this condition very markedly. On opening the veins distinct petechial and larger hmorrhages were seen under the inner coat, giving it a mottled appearance. Where a large vein, e. g. axillary or femoral, was included in the bubo, this hmorrhage into its walls was constantly seen so that the extravasated blood in the gland itself, in the areolar tissue outside it and in the walls of the vein was all directly continuous. I think that the blood itself was rather more fluid and showed less tendency to clot than is usually seen after death. The Respiratory System.-There was some engorgement of the larynx and trachea, and the mucous membrane of the bronchial tubes was usually swollen and engorged, sometimes greatly so. There was much general engorgement of the lungs with dema, and small hmorrhages into the lung tissue were seen rather frequently. Frothy sero-mucous fluid which was sometimes blood-tinged was found in the bronchi. The pleura showed marked engorgement, and its cavity often contained some blood-stained or clear fluid; sub-pleural hmor- rhages, sometimes of large extent, were commonly found on the upper surface of the diaphragm, on the chest-wall and on the surface of the lungs, especially between the lobes. In cases of cervical bubo the engorgement and dema extended to the larynx, and dema of the glottis was present. Note.-A variety of the bubonic form of plague must be mentioned here; for, instead of finding one large bubo, such as has been described above, the following condition was observed. A chain of enlarged glands was found in the inguinal region and it extended into the pelvis right along the iliac artery as far as the lumbar glands. These glands were dark-red, soft and friable and intensely engorged and looked like soft spleen tissue; there was great engorge- ment, extravasation and dema around them, and they surrounded the iliac artery and vein, so that in dissecting out the gland mass these vessels came away enclosed in it. The glands were as large as almonds or smaller and were so incorporated in the coagulated blood that it was scarcely possible to dissect them out. The remaining glands and other organs in the body were in the condition described above. B.-THE SEPTICMIC FORM OR PLAGUE-SEPTICMIA. In the bubonic form of plague, one set of glands with extravasated blood around them forms the bubo, and there is practically no alteration in the remain- ing glands of the body; but in the septicmic form there is no such bubo, yet there is a general involvement of nearly all the lymphatic glands. Yet though so many glands show evidence of disease, one gland or several glands of one set show characteristic changes which are pathognomonic of this type of plague. These appearances are:-The gland is enlarged to the size of an almond or less, is rounded, firm and pink in colour; on section it shews some but not much engorgement and some dema, its substance is rather soft and can be easily scraped off with a knife, and sometimes small softening areas were present. There was no hmorrhage in the areolar tissue around this gland and at most only a little dema and trifling engorgement of the vessels. Commonly there were one or several such glands in one inguinal region, and usually the lowest gland of the chain was most markedly affected; whilst those higher up varied in size from a bean to an almond, and had the same firm pink appearance, though there were at times some which looked nearly normal in size and shape. The iliac glands of the same side were similarly affected, as large as almonds and either pink and firm or softer and of a dark red colour. The inguinal glands of the opposite side showed similar changes, but sometimes to a less extent, and
?33 the iliac sometimes showed slighter changes or some of them looked normal. The lumbar usually showed slight enlargement and were either pale and soft or somewhat pink and firm. The cervical and axillary varied in size from hazel- nuts to peas and usually shewed merely engorgement, being full of dark blood; but sometimes some of them showed the pink firm appearance described above. The mesenteric were enlarged to the size of peas and beans and were either slightly or considerably engorged. The supra-trochlear and popliteal were normal or engorged. There was no hmorrhage or dema around any of the above- mentioned glands, and no enlargement of the lymphatic vessels was observed. The condition of the remaining organs was such as has already been described under the bubonic form. Note.-In several cases of plague-septicmia where death had occurred shortly after attack, the glands were found slightly enlarged of a dark red colour and contained much blood and dema fluid. This appeared to be an earlier form of the characteristic pink plague glands described above. The difference between the bubonic and septicmic form of plague appears to be this:-In the bubonic form the plague bacillus after entering the body is arrested at the nearest group of glands, grows here vigorously, and as a result of its growth the bubo is formed. Here the bacillus forms the toxins which are discharged into the system and cause the symptoms of plague, but the glands of the bubo form a barrier which prevents the bacilli from passing on and growing generally throughout the body; and it is only shortly before death, in fatal cases, that this resistance is overcome and the bacilli are able to pass on into the system generally. But in the septi- cmic form the bacillus, after entering the body, meets with feeble resistance at the nearest glands; it speedily overcomes all opposition and passes on to infect other glands and organs where it grows abundantly. These points will be illus- trated later in the detailed account of autopsies. It may be mentioned here that no bubo of the mesenteric glands was ever found; these glands were always examined, and though changes might be found in them, they were always less marked and less distinct than plague glands found in other parts of the body. In short, there was no autopsy which went to show that the plague bacillus had reached the stomach or intestines, e.g. in food, and thence infected the mesenteric glands. C.-THE PNEUMONIC FORM OR PLAGUE-PNEUMONIA. In this form of plague the only marked evidences of disease are found in the lungs, whereas the lymphatic glands and other organs are scarcely affected at all. The lungs were in the following condition:-There was general engorge- ment with considerable dema, a reddened condition of the mucous membrane of the bronchi, but no marked evidences of bronchitis, and frothy watery fluid, some- times blood-stained, could be squeezed from the bronchi. (Pus in the bronchial tubes was only found on one occasion.) A number of pneumonic patches were found scattered through the lungs, varying in size from a pea to an egg. They were light pink or red grey in colour, solid, airless and sank in water; they were rounded in shape and usually separated by a distinct ring of engorgement from the crepitant lung around. Some, instead of being pink, were of a deep blood colour throughout and less solid, and some of these had a small greyish more solid centre. Those of the patches which were situated on the surface of the lung were prominent and projected distinctly from the surface; whilst the pleura over them was roughened and shewed signs of early inflammation. These patches had in fact the appearance of the first and second stages of lobular pneumonia, but no patches were found which had passed on to the third stage of softening and breaking down. In a few cases larger masses of pneumonic lung than these were found, and once about half the lower tube was found in this condition. Petechial hmorrhages were usually found on the surface of the lung; the bronchial glands were either enlarged, swollen, dematous, soft and distinctly engorged, or else they were small and of the usual appearance, perhaps a little engorged. The remaining lymphatic glands throughout the body showed none of the appearances of either the bubonic or septicmic form of plague; most of them looked absolutely normal, and the only noticeable change was that the axillary, and sometimes the cervical chains were a little engorged. B 1751-9
?34 The description of the remaining internal organs already given applies equally to this form of plague, except that the large hmorrhages were absent, but petechi on the surface of the heart, in the pelvis of the kidney, bladder, stomach and intestines were commonly present. Petechi in the skin were not observed in this form of plague. Reference must be made here to a variety of this form of plague which may be shortly described as a combination of Plague-Pneumonia with Plague-Sep- ticmia. In this condition the lungs were found in the state which has just been described, pneumonic patches being scattered through them; and in addi- tion the lymphatic glands of the body presented the appearances seen in cases of Plague-Septicmia. Thus in these cases the plague-bacilli had specially infected both the lymphatic glands and lungs, whereas in the varieties of plague treated of above, only one or other of these tissues was the special focus of disease. Allusion must also be made at this place to one case of Plague-Septicmia, in which the lungs contained a patch of ordinary pneumonia which was not due to plague. This case will be described in detail later on. II.-MICROSCOPIC PATHOLOGY OF PLAGUE. A.-THE BUBONIC FORM. The areolar tissue around the glands of the bubo is intensely engorged, free hmorrhage is seen in the arcolar tissue and fat, and all the vessels visible are full of blood, and their walls deeply engorged. The glands are uniformly full of extravasated blood throughout, with more intense hmorrhages here and there, and the gland tissue is so overlaid with blood as to be scarcely visible; in some, probably earlier, glands the blood-cells are distinct; in others, probably older, they are not so distinct, and the gland is stained with blood-colouring matter, softer, showing granular debris, and beginning to break down in parts. Still there is no distinct appearance of pus, and it seems to be a necrotic soften- ing. In some of the smaller glands the exact early appearance is seen; the whole gland is infiltrated with blood, the blood corpuscles being distinct, and at parts there is a large deeply-stained hmorrhage occupying half or more of the gland. So intense is the hmorrhage that in most glands there is no dis- tinction between cortex and medulla, nor can the gland tissue or blood and lymph-vessels be easily made out, but the walls of such vessels as are seen are deeply engorged both in the gland as well as at the hilus. Such lymph-vessels, as can be seen particularly at the hilus, are full of lymph corpuscles, and there is some engorgement of their walls, and sections of the lymph-vessels, seen out- side the gland, shew the same appearance. Specimens were cut to shew the glands of the bubo lying against and around the axillary artery and vein; here there is intense engorgement of the walls of these vessels with hmorrhage into them, but much more of the vein than of the artery; in the vein the extravasated blood comes in most parts right through its wall into the inner coat and as far as the lumen; so that at these parts the inner coat cannot be properly seen at all. Hence one sees the plague gland lying right against the vein, with extra- vasated blood in the gland in the little connective tissue outside it, and then in the vein-wall as far as the lumen; and thus there is a direct path for the passage of the plague bacillus from the gland to the lumen of the vein and so into the general circulation. A similar condition of affairs was observed in those cases in which, instead of a bubo, there was a chain of enlarged plague glands, e.g., along the iliac artery and vein. The remaining glands of the body in a bubonic case showed either a normal appearance or a little engorgement of vessels. Lung.-A section of the lung shows blood-cells in all the vessels as well as in the alveolar capillaries; the vessels under the pleura always contain blood, and large hmorrhages are sometimes present here; scattered about, areas are seen where blood-cells are present in the alveoli themselves, and similarly blood- cells may be seen in the smaller bronchial tubes. The vessels of the walls of the bronchi, like those of the rest of the lung, are distended with blood; the bronchial mucous membrane shows no special change. Specimens of lung stain well.  Liver.-All vessels are engorged and the specimen has the appearance of early nutmeg disease. The central veins are wide, as are the capillaries round
?35 them, and the portal veins are also distended with blood-cells; around the disten- ded central and portal veins there is fine granular pigmentation of the liver cells. Engorged vessels are usually seen well just beneath the capsule of the liver, and there may be hmorrhages here. The nuclei of the liver-cells stain badly and the cells have a cloudy indistinct appearance as of parenchymatous degeneration. Spleen.-The vessels generally, both large and capillary, are distended with blood-cells, and this is more marked in certain distinct areas; here a dilated vessel is seen full of blood and round it an area of engorged capillaries, with hmorrhage into the spleen tissue, blood-cells being seen amongst the spleen- cells. Engorged vessels are also seen in some glorimeruli, and a vessel distended with blood leading to the glomeruli; further distended vessels with hmor- rhages around them are usually well marked under the capsule of the spleen. Section of spleen stain well and the cells are distinct. Kidney.-The vessels, both large and capillary, are distended with blood-cells at places, vessels have ruptured and hmorrhage is seen into the kidney sub- stance. This condition is marked immediately beneath the capsule. Blood-cells are seen in many of the tubules, but more so in the straight than in the convu- luted tubes, and some of the glomeruli are likewise engorged. The epithelium of the tubules is swollen and in a condition of parenchymatous degeneration and the nuclei of the cells stain badly; but this condition is more plainly seen in the convuluted than in the straight tubes. Some specimens show engorged vessels with hmorrhage at the pelvis of the kidney. Ureter.-The vessels of the walls of the ureter are distended with blood, and hmorrhage has occurred into the walls, blood-cells being seen in the mucous membrane even as far as the lumen; the condition is similar to that found in the walls of veins. Stomach and Intestines.-The vessels are distended with blood, this condi- tion being best seen in the sub-mucosa; at places small hmorrhages have occurred. The epithelium does not stain well. Nothing abnormal was seen in Peyer's patches. Brain and Spinal Cord.-The large vessels and capillaries of the pia mater are distended with blood, but no special changes have been seen in the substance of the brain or spinal cord. Muscle.-In specimens of voluntary muscle some fibres are seen well-stained and distinctly striated, but mixed with them are others which are badly stained, with striation faint or absent, and the muscle-substance is swollen, broken up into irregular lumps and of a shiny homogeneous appearance. Specimens of the heart-muscle showed this condition also. Note.-This degeneration of heart-muscle is associated with the dilatation of the heart and nutmeg condition of the liver found post-mortem; and also with the fact that plague-patients are liable to die suddenly of heart-failure. Blood-vessels.-In the outer coat of large arteries the blood-vessels are found full of blood, and the capillaries of the middle coat may also be seen distended; but the inner coat is always perfect, distinct and intact, and its elastic tissue plainly visible. The walls of large veins, however, show much more engorge- ment, and, in these, large collections of blood may be seen immediately beneath the inner coat, extending as far as the lumen, and at parts the inner coat is either extremely thin or cannot be traced over the hmorrhage. This condition is best seen in vessels incorporated in a bubo, but is also to be found in the vena cava, iliac veins, &c. The following organs were also examined, but nothing was observed under the microscope except some engorgement. The tonsils, salivary glands, thyroid body, breast, male and female generative organs, cartilage, nerve and thoracic duct. Sections of the skin were also made and showed engorged capillaries with small hmorrhages where petechi were visible on the surface. B.-THE SEPTIC\ill\EMIC FORM. Lymphatic Glands.-The areolar tissue around the plague-glands (i. e., the characteristic glands already described) shows none of the intense engorgement seen in the bubonic form. The plague-glands themselves are well stained and
?36 all their anatomical features are distinct. All the blood-vessels in the gland are distended with blood-corpuscles, and at parts hmorrhage has occurred into the gland-substance, which is most frequently seen beneath the capsule, but may also be at other parts. The lymphatic vessels and lymph channels in the gland are wide and distended with lymph-corpuscles. The distension of the blood and lymph vessels is always most marked at the hilus, and there may be hmorrhages into the areolar tissue here. In some glands small areas may be seen, where softening and breaking down is taking place, granular debris and broken-down cells being seen here. The glands shew these changes in varying degree; in some there is merely slight engorgement with some distension of lymph-vessels, in others there is wide distension of both kinds of vessels, with some amount of hmorrhage into the gland tissue; whilst in others again there are many hmorrhagic areas which may occupy half or more of the gland, and it is in these glands that breaking down is usually seen. In a septicmic case the glands, which have not the characteristic plague appearance, shew under the microscope either slight engorgement or normal features. With regard to the remaining organs the appearances described under the bubonic form apply also to the septicmic form of plague. C.-THE PNEUMONIC FORM. A section of lung-tissue, apart from a pneumonic area, shows great engorge- ment of all large blood-vessels, and of the alveolar capillaries as well, and patches of hmorrhage into the alveoli around these engorged vessels are seen scattered about. In a pneumonic area three zones can be made out. At the circumference there is intense engorgement of all vessels including alveolar capillaries, the alveoli are full of blood, and the hmorrhage is so intense that many of the alveolar septa are broken down, entirely absent, or represented by mere shreds. Within the circumference is seen a zone in which the alveoli are intact and are completely filled with well-stained cells, so that there is no interval between the alveolar walls and their contents; and at the centre is one universal mass of similar cells, and the cellular infiltration is so extreme that the walls of the alveoli are scarcely visible. Such is the general arrangement of the pneu- monic patch, although there many be alveolar hmorrhage in parts of either the middle or central zone. Under a higher power the alveoli of the circumference are seen to be com- pletely filled with blood-corpuscles, and there is scarcely any appearance of fibrin, or none at all; in the middle zone the alveolar contents consist for the most part of catarrhal epithelium with some white and a few red blood-corpus- cles, and a little fibrin or none at all, whilst the dense central mass of cells consist of catarrhal epithelium and leucoceptes with some granular debris. Thus the pneumonic area has the appearance of very extreme lobular or catarrhal pneumonic. The walls of the bronchial tubes, as well as of the large veins, show great engorgement, and there are hmorrhages into the vein-walls. Blood and catarrhal cells may be seen in the finer bronchi, but the bronchial mucous membrane is scarcely altered, there being at most a little cellular proliferation. There are the appearances of acute pleurisy over those pneumonic areas which project upon the surface of the lung, with hmorrhages beneath the pleura. The bronchial glands show engorgement of blood-vessels, some hmorrhage into the gland tissue and distended lymphatic vessels; but in some cases these conditions are only slightly marked and the glands looked nearly normal. The remaining lymphatic glands in the body looked either normal, or presented the characters described above to a slight extent. With regard to the other organs, the description given under the bubonic form of plague applies here also, except that generally engorgement and hmorrhage are less marked. D.-THE PLAGUE BACILLUS IN SITU. Sections of the various organs and lymphatic glands were prepared to show the plague bacillus in situ; they showed best when stained with Lffler's methy- lene blue or carbol-fuchsin, but they could not be demonstrated with Gram's method.
?37 In the glands of the bubo the bacilli could be seen in enormous numbers, both amongst the cells of the gland-tissue and also in the lymphatic vessels; they were also seen amongst the blood-corpuscles extravasated into the gland, as well as in the hmorrhage outside the gland. In cases of plague septicmia they were similarly present in the enlarged characteristic glands. In the kidney the bacilli could also be seen especially among the blood-cells of the tubules into which hmorrhage had occurred; in the spleen they were also present, sometimes in large numbers amongst the cells of the spleen-tissue and in the hmorrhagic areas; similarly they were found in the liver, especially in those cases where engorgement and extravasation were marked. In cases of plague-pneumonia, the bacilli were seen in abundance in the pneu- monic areas; they could be found in profusion amongst the catarrhal epithelial cells and leucocytes which filled the alveoli and terminal bronchioles, as well as among the blood-corpuscles of the alveoli into which hmorrhage had occurred. Similarly in the lungs of non-pneumonic cases they could be seen, but in far less numbers, and mostly where small hmorrhages had occurred into the alveoli. Note.-These specimens were only prepared from cases where the post- mortem was made immediately after death, and in which the presence of the plague-bacillus had been proved to be present by the method of cultures, so as to avoid the fallacy of diagnosing plague bacilli from their microscopic appear. ance alone. III.-CASES TO ILLUSTRATE THE VARIOUS FORMS OF PLAGUE. A.-THE BUBONIC FORM. Bubo in the Left Axilla.-R. N., male, Hindu, aged 40 years, admitted 1st March 1897, says he got suddenly ill four days ago with fever and severe rigors; temperature on admission 104.8 F., pulse 110, has pain in left axilla. March 2nd.-Temperature 1032, pulse 110, still pain in left axilla, and swollen glands are felt. During the day a large, doughy, diffuse swelling arose in the axilla, and there was much more pain. March 3rd.-Temperature 100, the swelling filled out the whole axilla and was very painful. Patient died at 9-30 A.M. Post-mortem examination one hour after death.-dema and petechi of left arm; old abrasions on hands and feet; large swelling in left axilla, with small petechi on the skin over it. The whole of the left axilla was occupied by a mass of coagulated blood and serum, and within the mass the axillary glands were found; they varied in size from almonds to peas, and were all in- tensely engorged, deep or lighter red and a little soft; the axillary vessels were included in the bubo thus formed of coagula and swollen glands. The hmor- rhage and dema extended beyond the borders of the axilla in all directions. Left supra-trochlear gland intensely engorged and the size of a large bean. Right supra-trochlear, right axillary, and cervical chains on both sides were a little engorged but of normal shape; the popliteal were normal; the inguinal were some as large as beans, and some smaller or of normal size; they were all slightly engorged, on the right side rather more than on the left. The iliac and lumbar were a little engorged, and the mesenteric slightly so, the bronchial glands looked normal. There was no hmorrhage or dema round any of these glands. Heart.-Some sero-sanguineous fluid in pericardial cavity and small sub- pericardial petechi; dark blood in cavities of heart, mostly on right side. Hmorrhages into walls of vena cava seen well under inner coat. Lungs.-A little blood-stained fluid in pleural cavities, many sub-pleural hmorrhages of petechial and larger size. Intense engorgement, with some hmorrhages into lung tissue and some dema of lungs. Liver.-Large, and all vessels, both hepatic and portal, gorged with blood; liver-substance rather soft; large sub-peritoneal hmorrhages on the surface of the liver, specially along the ligaments. Tonsils.-Swollen and engorged; mucous membrane of stomach and intestines engorged, and small hmorrhages in stomach and large intestine. Hmorrhages under serous coat of intestines. B 1751-10
?38 Spleen.-Large, brick-red and somewhat soft, and many small hmorrhages under its serous coat. Kidneys.-Large, and all vessels engorged, the kidney-substance itself rather pale and soft. Many small hmorrhages under the kidney-capsule and coagula distending the pelvis of each kidney. Hmorrhages into walls of ureters and bladder distended with urine. Distribution of the Plague Bacillus.-In this case the plague bacillus was found in the various organs as follows:-It was present in enormous numbers in the glands of the bubo, and in immense but diminished numbers in the blood, as well as the dema fluid from the left axilla. The right axillary glands, the supra-trochlear and cervical of both sides showed a considerable number of plague bacilli, but far less than the bubo. The lumbar also showed them in considerable numbers, but they were rather less in the iliac and inguinal chains of both sides. A few were seen in the mesenteric glands. A specimen of blood taken from the left ventricle of the heart and from various large veins in the body showed many plague bacilli, but far less than in the blood taken from the bubo. Immense numbers were found in the spleen and liver, almost as many as in the glands of the bubo; and some, but far less, in the lung and kidney. In point of fact it appeared from these specimens that the bacillus had grown most abundantly in the glands and blood of the bubo, and next in the spleen and liver; whereas in the remaining lymphatic glands and other organs it was present in about the same numbers as in the blood of the general circulation, and the bacilli seen in these specimens were probably those contained in the blood of the respective organs. Possibly it might have grown to some extent in some of the lymphatic glands, as indicated by the above specimens. Note.-In a case of this nature, where there is extravasated blood around the glands of the bubo, which extends through all the coats of the large vein (the axillary in this instance), and where there are enormous numbers of plague bacilli in this extravasated blood, there appears to be a direct path for the passage of the plague bacilli into the lumen of the vein and so into the blood of the general circulation. B.-CASE OF A BUBO EXTENDING ALONG THE ILIAO VESSELS. M. R., Hindu, male, aged 27 years, admitted January 26th, 1897, says he has been ill two days. The left inguinal glands are large, painful and tender and the left leg is swollen, is much exhausted, and died one hour after admission. Post-mortem examination made three hours after death. Body well-nourish- ed, rigor-mortis present. The Left Inguinal glands were as large as almonds, rather soft, red and distinctly engorged; the lower ones showed this condition markedly, but some of the higher to a less extent. There was no hmorrhage around these glands. The Left Iliac were all dark red, soft, friable and intensely engorged and looked like soft spleen tissue; there was great engorgement, extravasation, and dema around the glands, and they surrounded the iliac artery and vein, so that the whole mass of coagula, glands and vessels had to be removed together. There was no rounded bubo as in the former case, but a chain of swollen glands with hmorrhage around them extending along the vessels. Lumbar Glands.-The lower ones were rather large, soft and engorged, but much less than the iliac, and there was but little extravasated blood around them. The upper ones showed even fewer changes, and some looked normal. The Right Femoral and Right Iliac were normal. The remaining glands looked normal, except that the right axillary were engorged, two of them being as large as almonds, and the right supra-trochlear was likewise engorged to the size of a large pea.  With regard to the remaining organs, the heart showed some dilatation of the right side, and the lungs a great deal of engorgement and dema; there were petechi under the pleura and pericardium. The liver and spleen were both
?39 large, dark and full of blood, and the kidneys large, soft and engorged. There were some petechi in the stomach, and the brain and its membranes were engorged. Distribution of the Plague Bacillus.-The enlarged left inguinal glands con- tained well-stained plague bacilli in considerable numbers; specimens of the left iliac glands showed them in immense numbers, as did those from the lower lumbar glands, but the higher lumbar showed less. The right inguinal and iliac, the axillary and cervical of both sides and the bronchial glands showed only a few plague bacilli, but of this series the right axillary specimens showed rather more than the others. The lung, liver, spleen and kidneys similarly contained a few, as did the specimen of blood taken from the heart; in fact, apart from the bubo the remaining lymphatic glands and organs merely showed about as many plague bacilli as the blood. C.-THE SEPTICMIC FORM. P. S., Hindu, male, 30 years old, was admitted on the 19th February 1897. His friends said he had been ill with fever for about four days and had been delirious for one day. He died immediately after admission. The post-mortem examination was made one hour after death.    No petechi on surface of body. Lymphatic Glands: Right Inguinal.-The lowest was the largest, of the size of a small almond, and of the others some were nearly as large and some smaller; they were rather firm and pink and of the characteristic plague appearance. Left Inguinal.-The lowest was like a small almond, those above quite small and the highest as large as beans; all were slightly firm and pink, but in an earlier stage than on the right. Right Iliac.-The three lowest were like large almonds, pink and firm, but the upper were smaller. Left Iliac.-The lowest was like a small almond, but red and full of blood and rather soft, the upper ones were like small beans and less engorged. The Lumbar were like small peas and beans, all rather red and firm. The Mesenteric were enlarged to the sizes of small almonds, beans and peas, and were all dark red, engorged and soft. The Right and Left Axillary were light red in colour, and rather firm, some being as large as hazelnuts and some smaller. The Cervical chains showed a similar appearance, whilst the Supra-trochlear and Popliteal glands were small and pale. There was no inflammation of lymphatic vessels and no hmorrhage or dema round the glands in this case, so that there was no appearance like the bubo described in former cases. The condition of the remaining organs was such as has been already described, and it only remains to notice that there were many small hmorrhages in the lungs. Distribution of the Plague-Bacillus.-Specimens taken from the inguinal, iliac and axillary glands of both sides showed enormous numbers of distinct well-stained plague-bacilli; specimens of the lumbar and mesenteric glands showed the same appearance. The cervical glands showed them also, but in less numbers, and the bronchial, supra-trochlear and popliteal glands still less. A large number of specimens to show the bacilli were made from the glands of each region, and, as a general rule, those glands which were largest and most distinctly altered showed the greatest number of plague bacilli. Specimens of the spleen contained many of the bacilli, but less in number than the plague glands. The liver and kidneys showed plenty, but fewer than the spleen, and the lungs still fewer. The blood contained a fair number, about as many as in the lung. Note.-In this case the mesenteric glands showed distinct changes and contained many plague bacilli, but in some other cases of this type these glands were only slightly altered and presented a few plague-bacilli: and, as a general rule, the peripheral glands were most obviously altered and contained the bacilli in the greatest numbers, whereas the visceral were more normal-looking and showed the bacilli only in small numbers.
?40 D.-THE PNEUMONIC FORM. R. F., Hindu, male, 23 years old, admitted on January 31st, 1897, complain- ing of fever and cough of four days' duration. He looked very ill, temperature 102, and he had dyspna and cough. There were physical signs of pneumonic patches in the lungs. He complained of no pain whatever, nor was any enlarge- ment of lymphatic glands made out. He remained very well and died on February 2nd. Post-mortem examination seven hours after death. No petechi on surface of body, body well-nourished and plenty of subcutaneous fat. Heart.-Muscle rather soft and flabby and dilatation of the right side with slightly coagulated blood in the cavities.  Lungs.-Much general engorgement and dema of lung-substance, some congestion of bronchial mucous membrane, with frothy sero-mucous fluid in trachea and bronchi. Distinct rounded nodules in the early second stage of pneumonia were distributed in the lungs as follows :-There were five such nodules in the right upper lobe, varying in size from a hazelnut to an egg, and a few in the rest of this lung, with one mass quite at the base; also the left lung contained a few similar pneumonic patches. Those on the surface projected and there was early pleurisy over them, also petechi under the parietal pleura generally. The nodules were surrounded by a ring of engorged lung in the first stage of pneumonia. The liver, spleen and kidneys were large and engorged, and the bladder full of urine; the intestines rather engorged with some petechi in the stomach, the brain and its membranes engorged. Condition of Lymphatic Glands.-Bronchial, enlarged and a little swollen and engorged. Cervical, normal; Axillary, a little swollen, mostly on the right side. Supra-trochlear and Popliteal, normal. Inguinal, slightly enlarged. Iliac, Lumbar and Mesenteric, normal. Distribution of the Plague-Bacillus.-The pneumonic lung in the second stage shows immense numbers of early well-stained bacilli, and some of them are collected into large masses or groups; the pneumonic lung in the first stage shows the same appearance, but not so many of the masses. The general lung- tissue shows many of the bacilli, but far less than the pneumonic patches. The fluid obtained from the trachea and bronchi also shows the bacilli in large numbers. The bronchial glands contained plague bacilli in considerable numbers. The spleen showed a few, the liver rather more and the kidneys still more, but nothing like the numbers in the lungs. The blood of the general circulation showed extremely few, just one here and there. The axillary and cervical chains, the lumbar, iliac, mesenteric and inguinal glands showed extremely few, only one here and there as was seen in the blood. Thus the plague-bacilli were present in enormous numbers in the lungs and only to a very slight extent in the lymphatic glands and remaining organs. Note.-In some other cases of the pneumonic form of plague, fewer of the bacilli were seen in the bronchial glands and kidneys than in this instance. E.-PLAGUE-PNEUMONIA WITH PLAGUE-SEPTIC-MIA. K. B., Hindu, 31 years of age, was admitted on February 23rd, 1897, for fever and cough, said to be of five days' duration. He was extremely ill and there were physical signs of pneumonic patches in the lungs; also enlarged glands could be felt in the groins and axill. His temperature varied between 103 and 105, delirium set in, and he died on February 26th. Post-mortem on February 27th, twelve hours after death; there were no petechi on the skin. Heart.-Right side dilated, muscle rather soft. Lungs.-Much blood-stained, watery fluid in trachea and bronchi, much general engorgement and dema of lungs. There were many distinct, solid pneumonic patches, each surrounded by a well-marked ring of engorgement;
?41 six such patches in the right lung and five in the left. The patches on the surface had early pleurisy over them, and there were sub-pleural petechi. There were also five or six areas of mere engorgement, not consolidated but full of blood and of intense purple-red colour; they were patches in the first stage of pneumonia. Bronchial glands, rather engorged and soft. Liver, Spleen and Kidneys, large and engorged. Stomach and Intestines engorged and some petechi. Lymphatic glands: Right Popliteal, two the size of beans rather red and firm, the left one normal. Inguinal on both sides. The lowest were the largest, like walnuts partly red, partly cream-colour, all rather firm; the upper were all smaller, like beans, some being red and some pale. Iliac.-The lowest on each side was like a large almond, the others like beans; all were of a cream colour and rather soft. Lumbar.-Pink, soft and as large as beans, some of them almost diffluent. Mesenteric.-Some normal, some like beans and slightly red. Supra-trochlear.-Right, like a large bean, purple-red, engorged and firm. The left was normal. Cervical.-The highest on each side was like an almond, swollen, firm and deep-red; of the lower ones some looked normal and some engorged. Axillary, as large as hazelnuts, beans and peas, the larger ones being much engorged and the smaller less so. There was no hmorrhage, engorgement or dema of the areolar tissue around these sets of glands respectively. Distribution of the Plague-Bacillus. Lung.-Second stage of pneumonia; enormous numbers of plague bacilli; firt stage of pneumonia, plenty, but not so many as above; and general lung tissue far less. Fluid in Trachea and Bronchi.-Enormous numbers of plague bacilli, The Bronchial Glands showed only a few. Liver and Kidney a few; Spleen rather more. Blood, present, but not in large numbers. Lymphatic Glands. Right Inguinal showed enormous numbers and so did the left, and generally the larger glands showed more of them than the smaller. The Right and Left Iliac showed immense numbers. The Lumbar showed large numbers, but not so many as the above. The large upper Cervical glands on each side showed huge numbers, and the lower glands less. The large Axillary glands of both sides showed large numbers, and the smaller glands a few. Right Supra-trochlear gland contained immense numbers, and the left extremely few. Right Popliteal contained a few, and the left scarcely any. The Mesenteric contained very many, presenting almost the appearance of the large inguinal glands. Thus in this case the plague-bacillus was found in enormous numbers in the pneumonic patches of the lungs, as well as in nearly all the lymphatic glands of the body; whereas the remaining organs showed it to an inconsiderable extent. It will be convenient here to give an account of two further cases which were of considerable interest. B 1751-11
?42 F.-CASE OF PLAGUE SEPTICMIA. WITH SECONDARY DEPOSITS IN THE LIVER, AND PNEUMONIA WHICH WAS NOT DUE TO PLAGUE. S. D., Hindu, female, aged 60, was admitted on 9th March 1897. She was delirious, was in a very weak condition and had some cough; the inguinal glands were felt to be enlarged, but were not painful; temperature 102.8. She remained delirious and very ill, and died on March 12th. The duration of illness was unknown. Post-mortem examination made two hours after death. Heart.-Some dilatation of right side. Lungs.-Old thickened pleura with firm adhesions over both lungs, with some engorgement and hmorrhage in the adhesions. Considerable engorgement and dema of both lungs generally were present. There was one patch of pneu- monia in the early second stage, the size of an egg, behind and below the right apex; it was irregularly oval in shape, of a dusky red colour and not distinctly round and marked off from the lung-tissue, as in the cases of plague-pneumonia described above. The Liver was most peculiar; it was slightly enlarged and congested as in the early nutmeg condition, and was stuffed throughout with small yellow round- ed masses in size from pin's heads to peas. They were rather soft and friable but not fluid, and there was no area of engorgement around them. They were found both on the surface and throughout the whole substance of the liver. They looked like necrotic foci. Spleen, rather large and a little engorged. Kidneys, senile degenerative changes and a little engorgement. Intestines, some general engorgement of the stomach and intestines, and distinct petechi in the mucous membrane of stomach and large intestine. There were no deposits in any of these organs such as were found in the liver. Condition of Lymphatic Glands. Right Inguinal, the lowest was the largest like a walnut, light red and firm; the higher ones were smaller and paler and one of them contained a small softening area. Left Inguinal, the lowest was like that on the right side and the upper ones slightly enlarged and red. Right and Left Iliac, the lowest was like an almond, light red and rather firm, and the upper ones much smaller and paler. Lumbar, small and nearly normal. Bronchial, rather large and engorged. Supra-trochlear, right, small and normal-looking; left, slightly large, soft and pink.  Axillary on both sides, were all red and engorged, and varied in size from a pea to a hazelnut. Cervical, like the axillary. Mesenteric, some looked a little enlarged, soft and pink, and some looked normal. Distribution of the Plague-Bacillus. Glands, Right Inguinal-A consider- able number of well-stained plague-bacilli. Left Inguinal-Enormous numbers; on both sides, fewer seen in the smaller glands. Right Iliac, a fair number, and Left Iliac many more; seen best in the large glands.  The Axillary and Cervical glands showed a few plague-bacilli; the Right Supra-trochlear very few and the Left Supra-trochlear an enormous number, just like the large Left Inguinal glands.  Liver-In the yellow masses described above an enormous number of dis- tinct plague-bacilli were seen, whereas the liver generally showed only a few,  about as many as in an ordinary case, and far less than in the yellow patches. Sections of the liver were also examined and presented the following appear- ance:-The liver was in the early nutmeg condition, the central veins dilated, with some blood corpuscles extravasated around them, the portal vessels also
?43 congested and fat globules in the adjoining liver-cells. The liver-substance was stained badly and, scattered through it, the above-mentioned masses were seen, all better-stained than the liver-cells and looking finely granular; some were large, some small, and some seen under the microscope which were not visible to the naked eye. The small ones were granular and stained well throughout, but the large were breaking down in parts and irregularly stained. The small ones were distinctly rounded and no liver-tissue was seen in them, but some of the large were less regular in shape and contained some distinct remains of liver- cells: these were probably two or three adjoining masses which had coalesced. Speaking generally, the small masses were mostly situated near the portal spaces, but this could not be said of the larger, as some were as big as two or three lobules. Under higher power the masses were seen to consist of leucocytes, pus- cells, granular debris and remains of liver cells, and there appeared to be an excess of leucocytes in the surrounding capillaries; in fact the structure of the masses resembled that of small early abscesses. Specimens of the liver were also prepared to show the plague-bacilli in situ in the sections; enormous numbers of them could be seen in the masses and only a few in the general liver-tissue. Cultures also were made from the masses, and typical colonies of the plague- bacillus grew in abundance. Thus these small necrotic masses resulted from the growth of the plague-bacillus in innumerable definite areas throughout the whole liver, and are comparable with the pneumonic patches found in cases of plague- pneumonia due to the same cause. This condition of the liver was extremely rare and was only observed in two other cases during the Bombay epidemic, once by the Austrian and once by the Russian Plague Commission. No similar con- dition was ever found in the spleen or kidneys to the best of my belief. Lung.-Cultures made from the pneumonic patch showed the appearance not of plague but of Fraenkel's Pneumococcus; and specimens taken from the patch showed the same pneumococcus under the microscope. Cultures made from the inguinal and axillary glands, from the spleen and from the heart's blood all showed the typical growth of plague. These cultures were made by Professor Bitter, who has kindly permitted me to make use of his results. Note.-This was the only case amongst the autopsies on plague made by myself in which secondary pneumonia was found, not due to plague. G.-CASE OF PLAGUE IN A PREGNANT WOMAN. SURVIVAL OF THE FTUS: DEATH OF THE MOTHER. D. R., Hindu woman, 25 years old, was admitted to hospital for child-birth on 15th April 1897 at 11 P.M. She stated that she was five days short of her full term of gestation, that for the past several days she had had fever preceded by rigors, and that a few hours before admission she felt some pains in the abdomen of a bearing-down character and thought she was about to be confined. On admission she was examined and found not to be in labour, and the pains were thought to be false. She was quite conscious and able to walk; temperature 102. She stated that she had two children and that her previous confinements were normal. On 16th morning, temperature 102, no pain in abdomen, slight pain and tenderness over right inguinal region, and some glands could be felt a little enlarged. Patient had a peculiar drowsy expression of features, with injection of conjunctiv, and looked very ill. The temperature remained high and at 4 P.M. was 104. At this hour labour pains commenced. She now complained of some pain in both sides of the neck, and the cervical glands were tender and slightly enlarged; also the pain in the right inguinal glands persisted. At 10 P.M. the patient was very restless; temperature 105; labour was progressing normally. At 10-50 P.M. labour was completed normally. There was no unusual hmorrhage, merely the average loss of blood. Patient was much exhausted, temperature 102, pulse 140, respiration 72 per minute, with considerable dyspna. The temperature gradually rose to 104, and there was much prostration, dyspna and cardiac failure.
?44 17th, patient died at 7-55 A.M. The child was 18 inches in length and weighed 4 lbs., and although small, it was fully developed. It remained perfectly well, throve, and after 20 days was sent to a foundling home. When last heard of on June 1st, it was still in good health. It never showed the slightest sign of plague or of any illness whatever. Post-mortem examination of the mother was made three hours after death. Body well nourished, no petechi on skin, hmorrhages under conjunctiv, rigor mortis present. Heart.-Petechi under visceral and parietal pericardium; heart-muscle looked firm; there were post mortem clots in the cavities and in the aorta. Vena Cava.-Great engorgement of its coats and many hmorrhages under the inner coat, giving it a mottled appearance; these were seen in the abdominal vena cava as well. Lungs.-Intense engorgement and dema; there was one small round patch of early pneumonia at the back of the left lung, it was light red and fairly solid, with recent pleurisy over it. There were small hmorrhages under both pleur. Bronchial mucous membrane much engorged, purple and swollen; the tubes contained frothy watery fluid, but no pus. Liver.-A little large, its substance rather pale and soft and much engorge- ment of vessels. Spleen.-Rather large and soft, of purple colour and engorged; the Malpi- ghian bodies were prominent and appeared to be engorged. Kidney.-Hmorrhages under capsule, engorgement of vessels, the kidney substance pale and soft. There were hmorrhages in the pelvis and calices and the whole ureter was purple red with distinct hmorrhages under its inner coat. The bladder contained urine, and there were hmorrhages into its mucous coat. Uterus.--Large, as of a woman recently delivered. There was much recent clot in its cavity of the normal appearance, and a well-marked corpus luteum in the left ovary. All the generative organs looked normal. Peritoneum.- Considerable engorgement and large hmorrhages in the retro-peritoneal tissue, mostly in the lumbar regions. Brain.-Hmorrhages under scalp and beneath periosteum on surface of cranium; cerebral membranes engorged, with puncta cruenta in brain distinct; no excess of fluid in ventricles; brain-substance looked normal. Lymphatic Glands. Inguinal, on both sides, some as large as beans, and some smaller, engorged, light red in colour and dematous, but some of the upper ones were flatter and more normal-looking. Iliac right side, the lowest was like an almond, deeply engorged and rather soft, the upper ones were smaller and paler. Left side, lowest like a large bean, and the others smaller. Lumbar, rather large and a little engorged. Mesenteric, slightly swollen and engorged. Bronchial, of normal size, slightly engorged. Axillary, in size from hazel-nuts to peas, dusky red, dematous and much engorged. Cervical, as large as hazel-nuts, deeply engorged and dematous, and some with a little hmorrhage into the surrounding connective tissue. Supra-trochlear, as large as peas and engorged. Alimentary System.-Tonsils small, slightly engorged, sophagus rather engorged but no hmorrhages in its walls; there were distinct petechi in the stomach, a few in the small intestine, and more in the colon and rectum; all these parts being likewise engorged. The sub-maxillary and parotid salivary glands and the pancreas were slightly engorged. The Breast looked normal and contained good secretion of normal-looking milk, and its vessels were rather full of blood. Under the microscope plague-bacilli in large numbers were seen in the inguinal, cervical and axillary glands: they were also present in the blood to a considerable extent.
?45 This account of the pathology of plague is based upon fifty complete autopsies, of which twelve were examples of the pneumonic type. Sections for the microscope of the various lymphatic glands and organs were made in twenty- three of the cases, and from these the minute anatomy has been described. Further, in all the cases, many specimens were prepared to show the distribution of the plague-bacillus in the various parts of the body, and cultures were made as well in nearly every instance. As the results obtained from cultures have not been stated above in the post-mortem descriptions, it will be convenient to group them together here. By the method of cultivation the plague-bacillus has been isolated from the following organs and secretions;-from the bubo, and, in septicmic cases from plague glands in the various regions (e. g. in one case from the inguinal, iliac, axillary and cervical glands); from the lung, liver, spleen and kidney; from the blood and urine. In one instance the plague- bacillus was proved by Dr. Bitter to be present in the mucus obtained from the large intestine. In cases of plague-pneumonia the bacillus could be isolated from the sputum during life, from the fluid contained in the trachea and bronchi after death, from the pneumonic patches and in several instances from the bronchial glands. IV.-MODE OF EXIT OF THE PLAGUE-BACILLUS FROM THE BODY. From consideration of the post-mortem appearances it is seen that engorge- ment and hmorrhage are marked features of plague, and further that hmor- rhage is constantly found on the surface of mucous membranes; consequently, as soon as the bacillus has entered the blood of the general circulation, it is possible for it to escape from the body in the hmorrhages on mucous surfaces. Thus in the urinary system blood may be found in the urine during life, and after death in the tubules and pelvis of the kidney; and, besides, there may be extravasations on the surface of the ureter and bladder; hence by the urine there is a direct route for the bacillus to leave the body. Again in the alimentary system, petechi are nearly always present in the stomach, and as vomiting is a very constant symptom of plague, the bacillus may escape in the vomit; similarly petechi are generally found in the colon and rectum, and hence the bacillus may escape in the fces. As for the respira- tory system, blood may be found in the alveoli of the lungs in ordinary cases of plague, whilst in cases of the pneumonic type it is invariably present; besides in these latter cases the bacillus is present in enormous numbers in the pneumonic patches and in the sputum, and it is extremely probable that plague-pneumonia for this reason plays an important part in spreading the disease. (In the preced- ing section the secretions have been named from which the plague-bacillus was isolated by the method of cultures.) With regard to the bubo itself, in certain cases it suppurates, and it would seem possible for the bacillus to escape in the pus; but this was not found to be the case, for in several instances where cultures were made from the pus, no growth of the plague-bacillus was obtained. It remains to make a remark about the presence of the bacillus in the blood. In a number of early plague cases which will be detailed hereafter, cultures were made from the finger-blood, but the bacillus could not be isolated from them, in fact they all remained sterile: whereas in fatal cases the bacillus could always be grown from the blood after death, even when the post-mortem was made one hour after death, and in one instance it was grown from the finger-blood twenty- four hours before death. Hence one may say that at least in fatal cases, which form the large majority in this disease, the bacillus is present in the blood for a certain time before death, and is able to leave the body in the various secretions which contain blood. V.-MODE OF ENTRANCE OF THE PLAGUE-BACILLUS INTO THE BODY. Having regard to the fact that the initial bubo in plague is usually situated in the glands of the extremities, especially the inguinal and axilliary chains, it appears probable that the bacillus may enter the body through a lesion of the skin-preferably of the extremities-and thence travel upwards to the nearest B 1751-12
?46 group of lymphatic glands and thus form the bubo. In order to test this theory a large number of plague cases were examined to see if any primary lesion in the skin could be discovered through which the bacillus had entered; and as the patients mostly belonged to the lower classes, who commonly go bare-footed and bare-legged, it was usual to find cracks and abrasions about the feet, and also about the hands, the latter resulting from occupation. Further, as various parasitic skin diseases, such as ringworm and itch, are very common among these people, it will be seen that there are many opportunities for the bacillus to enter the body through the skin. Bearing in mind the analogy of anthrax and syphilis, the skin was examined to see if any characteristic lesion was similarly present in plague. No such definite lesion was found, but in certain cases the bacillus was proved to be present in a particular lesion on the skin and as in each instance the bubo was situated in the glands corresponding to the lesion, this place was believed to be the point of entrance of the bacillus. There was nothing characteristic about the lesion. It was usually a small ordinary-looking papule on a slightly inflamed base, with a little serum at its apex and partly covered by a scab. In some cases a hair was found growing through its centre, and it seemed to be merely an inflamed hair-follicle which had been scratched. Those cases will now be given in detail. B., Hindu man, aged 40, came to hospital on 5th October 1896. Three days ago he was seized with fever and shortly afterwards found pain and swelling in the left axilla. On admission he looked very ill, temperature 103, and there was a large bubo in the left axilla. On the outer side of the left fore- arm near the wrist there was a small papule the size of a pea, with a hair growing through it; it was slightly red at the base, contained a little serum at the apex and was partly covered by a seab. It was not painful, and the patient knew nothing about it; there were no inflamed lymphatics leading from it. Cultivations were made from the serum squeezed from the papule, and a typical growth of plague was obtained. Part of the culture was injected into a rat, and the rat died of plague after 60 hours. On the same date, 5th October, cultures were made from the finger blood, but all remained sterile. This man died on 8th October. N. S., Hindu man, aged 28, came to hospital December 1st, 1896. There was a large bubo in the vertical set of the right-inguinal glands. He said he had been ill three days. There were many old cracks and fissures about the feet and toes, the skin being thick and horny, and some scratch marks on both legs. On the outer surface of the right calf there was a slightly raised de- matous portion of skin about one inch long, and on it there was a small bleb, the size of a large pin's head. From the bleb some thin serum was squeezed out. Cultures were made from the fluid in the bleb and from the finger blood. A pure growth of the plague-bacillus was ultimately obtained from the bleb, whereas the cultures of the blood remained sterile. In this case too, the patient could give no history of the dematous patch on the leg, and there was no pain in it. N., Hindu man, aged 30 years, was admitted on March 3rd, 1897, with a bubo at the back part of the right axilla. He had been ill two days. On the back, near the angle of the right scapula, there was a papule, the size of a pea, on a slightly-reddened base and partly scabbed over; it looked like a pimple which had been scratched. Cultures were made from the serum squeezed from this papule and from the finger-blood; a pure growth of the plague-bacillus was ultimately obtained from the papule, but the cultures of the finger-blood remained sterile.   P., Hindu boy, aged 16, admitted on October 26th, 1896. On either side several of the oblique inguinal glands were enla\ill\ged to the size of walnuts, and painful. There was a small unopened papule on the glands penis exactly in the dorsal middle line; its apex contained a little pus and serum. It did not look at all like a chancre, and the boy said he knew nothing about it. Cultures were made from the papule and from the finger-blood. From the former a pure growth of plague was ultimately obtained. This was injected into a rat, and the rat died of plague. Cultures of the finger-blood remained sterile. This patient recovered.
?47 As confirmatory of the above observations, I may quote as follows from "A report on the Epidemic of Bubonic Plague at Hong-Kong in the year 1896" by Staff Surgeon Wilm of the Imperial German Navy:-" As regards infection through the skin, two incontestible cases were observed in the epidemic of 1894. Two Japanese physiciana were infected, while making post-mortem examinations, and were attacked a few days later by plague. They had axillary buboes and lymphangitis of the arm, which spread upwards from the small inflamed wounds of the fingers. The above are the four cases in which the plague-bacillus was found in a certain definite situation on the skin, and this place was believed to be the seat of inoculation of the disease; moreover, in each instance the corresponding proximal glands formed the bubo, and there was nothing characteristic about the skin lesion. It looked like an ordinary pimple which had been rubbed or scratched, and no local reaction had occurred in it, due to the presence of the bacillus; also it was not painful and the patient was unaware of its existence. It may be stated here that in a large number of other patients small papules or abrasions were similarly examined, but the plague-bacillus was not proved to be present. Thus, in one instance a man had acne extensively on the face and a bubo in the left cervical region; in another, three small scabbed wounds on the right foot with a bubo in the vertical right inguinal glands; in a third, a number of papules on the left arm with a left axillary bubo, and other cases could be quoted. Some of the papules were examined in these cases, but with a negative result. A point remains to be noticed; it may be objected that if the bacillus were already in the blood, it could pass with the serum into a papule wherever situated, and its presence there would be the result, and not the cause, of the disease. But against this view there are the facts, 1st, that in the above four cases, which were all early, the bacillus could not be isolated from the blood on the same day that it was found in the papule; and 2nd, that in a number of other early cases pimples situated in various parts of the body were examined, not only on the limb corresponding to the bubo, but the bacillus was not found in them. Also in three early cases of inguinal bubo, a small blister was raised upon the chest, but the plague-bacillus could not be isolated from the contain- ed serum. The conclusion drawn is, that the bacillus of plague can enter the body through a trifling lesion in the skin, that it produces no local reaction at the seat of inoculation, and that the bubo is formed at the nearest proximal glands. With regard to infection by food, no evidence was found post-mortem that the bacillus had entered through the stomach or intestines; but cases of cervical bubo might have resulted from infection through abrasions on the lips, tongue or tonsils. As for the cases of primary plague-pneumonia, no evidence of the path of infection was found, but the bacillus was thought to have entered by the respira- tory tract, as its growth had mainly occurred in the lungs. APPENDIX A. On the clinical aspect of Plague-Pneumonia. When plague appeared in Bombay, and as the disease developed, one was struck by the following facts:-First, in all published accounts of the disease, although the ordinary phase of the malady, viz. plague with buboes, is princi- pally described, still mention is always made of another and more fatal form without buboes; whereas here in Bombay it seemed as if the bubonic form were alone appearing, for at the beginning one saw no examples of the other form. Then one observed that coincidently with the increased death-rate due to plague, there was a large and unexplained increase assigned to remittent fever and respiratory diseases. Week by week as the plague mortality increased, so did that under these two headings, and though it was possible that all these were cases of known but concealed plague, still one could not help suspecting that some of them might be due to plague which was not diagnosed because of the absence of buboes. So I resolved to examine the bodies of all hospital patients
?48 who had died of fever, pneumonia or any acute illness, to see if there were evid- ence that any of them had really died of plague. And at the end of December I met with a case which had been diagncsed as broncho-pneumonia, but which turned out to be one of plague affecting the lungs, without causing any marked enlargement of the lymphatic glands-a case, in fact, of plague-pneumonia; and as this post-mortem is exactly like many others that I have since made, and is typical of the disease, I will give a few notes of it. B. L., Hindu, male, 25 years old, admitted for fever and cough, December 26th, 1896, under Dr. S. He said he had been ill for about seven days. He had symptoms in the chest which led to the diagnosis of broncho-pneumonia being made. No lymphatic glands were found to be enlarged or painful, and a specimen of blood taken by Dr. S. showed no plague-bacilli under the micro- scope. He coughed up about two ounces of blood-stained fluid on the night of the 27th, and died at 3 A.M. on December 28th. Post-mortem on December 28th, seven hours after death. Lungs.-Much general engorgement and dema, with sero-sanguineous frothy fluid in the bronchi, but no pus; and the usual appearances of acute bronchitis were absent. There was one small pneumonic patch, the size of a walnut, in the early second stage, situated a little below the apex on the front of the right lung, and two similar but smaller patches at about the same part of the left lung. These patches stood out a little from the surface and were light grey in colour, airless, friable and sank in water; and each was surrounded by a dark ring of engorged lung in the first stage of pneumonia, which merged into healthy lung; there was some recent pleurisy over the pneumonic areas. All the other organs were examined and showed considerable engorgement, but no special lesion was observed. Condition of the Lymphatic Glands.-The bronchial were quite small and of normal appearance; the cervical were slightly enlarged, but pale and not en- gorged; the axillary were pink and slightly enlarged; the left iliac were some- what large, red and soft; the lumbar were swollen but pale; and all the other glands looked absolutely normal. Cultures were made on agar-agar from the pneumonic lung and spleen, and ultimately a pure growth of the plague-bacillus was obtained from each. Microscope.-The pneumonic patches in both stages showed an immense number of plague-bacilli, and the rest of the lung showed a large number; the left supra-trochlear and the left femoral glands shewed a fair number, and all the other glands extremely few; the spleen and blood also showed a few. So this was a case of plague, in which during life all the symptoms pointed to disease of the lungs, and in which there were no evidences of glandular en- largement, whilst after death there was clear proof of enormous growth of plague- bacilli in the lungs, and of only very slight growth in the lymphatic glands. I have made up to the present twelve post-mortems on such cases, all pre- senting appearances similar to the above; and I may add that all the patients were brought to hospital by their friends, supposed to be suffering from cough and fever, and, as far as I know, they were quite unaware of the nature of the disease. I have also to say that in nearly all the other cases the fluid from the trachea or bronchical tubes has also been examined; it shows an immense num- ber of plague-bacilli, and cultures of plague can always be obtained from it. With regard to the clinical symptoms of these cases, it fell to me to attend on the late Dr. Manser, and as he died of this form of plague, I will mention a few facts about his case. He was in his usual health on January 2nd, and had a sudden rigor in the morning and felt fever coming on. During the day a bad headache developed, he felt nausea and vomited several times, and he had pains and a tired feeling in his limbs; his tongue remained clean and moist, and his skin was slightly moist. At 2 P.M., temperature 103.4, pulse 116, respiration 25, and there were but slight variations during the day. On January 3rd, had pass- ed a bad night and felt worse, and all the symptoms persisted, except the aching in the limbs, and he felt very ill. The temperature remained between 103.5 and 104.5, pulse about 110, and respirations about 23 throughout the day.    During
?49 the afternoon he felt some pain at the lower part of the left axilla just under the anterior fold, but there was no glandular enlargement or pain in the glands anywhere. On January 4th, had passed a bad night and felt very ill, temperature 104.6, pulse 113, respiration 25, tongue still moist, with a little fur behind, and no sordes about the lips or teeth; the other symptoms as before. During the night he began to cough and brought up some watery sero-mucous fluid, slightly blood-tinged, and the pain remained in the same place, only more diffused now, being felt over an area of a square inch.- At this part some moist sounds could be heard like those of early pneumonia, and they could also be heard just below the left clavicle; the rest of the lungs and other organs appeared to be normal, as did the lymphatic glands. Patient considered that he had pneumonia, but the symptoms were not like ordinary pneumonia. For the onset was different, the condition of the tongue and mouth different, there was no dyspna or pneumonic disproportion of pulse and respiration, and the sputum was not at all like rusty sputum; for it was loose and free, coming up with the slightest cough, it was watery, looking more like serum than mucus, and it was  slightly pink, not rusty yellow at all.    Also there was the striking fact that the patient's general condition was far worse than could be explained by the small amount of lung-disease present.    So I examined the sputum under the miscroscope, and found it full of bacilli looking like those of plague, and cultures were made from which a pure growth of the plague-bacillus was obtain- ed.    During 4th and 5th, patient became steadily worse, his temperature re- mained about 104, and his expectoration became most profuse; the moist sounds were heard over a larger area, as well as slightly at  the bases; the respirations increased to 35, and then to 45, and the pulse to 120 and 135; and he ultimately died early on January 6th. There is also the case of the nurse who attended him,  who unfortunately died of a similar form of plague.    In  brief she became  ill on the evening of January 7th, and showed symptoms of pneumonia on January 8th.    She rapidly became worse and died on the 10th, but her sputum was  not nearly so profuse as in the former case, and symptoms of exhaustion came on much earlier.    She also had no glandular pain or enlargement whatever, and bacteriologically   her sputum was exactly as described above.    Other cases were met with in which, besides plague-pneumonia, there was also general enlargement of the glands,- plague septicmia; and clinically it was found that either the pneumonia was primary, and the glandular enlargement secondary, or that the disease first shewed itself in the glands and later on in the lungs; and whilst  some of the latter recovered, the former were usually rapidly fatal.    Also the sputum was not always as has been described above, for in some cases the presence of blood in it was a marked feature, and it was either moderate or abundant in quantity. These pneumonic forms of plague are highly infectious and probably take a large share in the spread of the disease; for in these cases the patient's sputum is practically a virulent pure culture of the plague-bacillus,  and as there is reason to believe that many of the cases are not recognised as plague at all, precautions are not taken by the patients' friends, and the dangerous nature of the disease is not appreciated.    I have no means of knowing how frequent this variety of plague has been in the present epidemic, but there is some evidence to show that a considerable number of cases have occurred.    Moreover, it seems likely that a ship's passenger suffering from this form of plague might escape detection by sanitary officers, and might be permitted to land at his destination as though he were the subject of simple pneumonia; and so a centre of infection for the spread of plague would be established.    With regard to the literature on this subject, I have not been able to find a published description of this variety of plague; but an allusion to it is  made in the accounts of the Pali epidemic of 1836, and it is stated that the Astrakhan outbreak of 1877 was first regarded as croupous pneumonia or as typhus complicated by pneumonia; from the reports on the Hongkong epidemic it appears that plague-pneumonia did not occur there.    There is just this to add: the usual definition of plague in works on medicine is-" A specific fever attended by bubo of the inguinal or other glands," but it is clear that such a form of words does not include all varieties of the disease.    (This paper was read before a meeting of the Bombay Medical and Physical Society on April 2nd, 1897.) B 1751-13
?50 APPENDIX B. On the occurrence of involution forms of the Plague Bacillus in the human body. In January last Mons. Haffkine shewed me involution forms of the bacillus which he had found in a rabbit dead of plague, and he suggested that I should examine human bodies to see if similar forms could be found. Accordingly in many instances a large number of lymphatic glands and other organs were examined and involution forms were frequently present. The forms seen were mostly of the rounded or swollen oval shape, and always stained more faintly than the young early bacilli. This investigation was made for the following reason. In cultures of plague, as the culture becomes old, involution forms begin to appear, and the older the culture, within limits, the more distinct are the involution forms. So it was thought possible that a similar condition of affairs might be found in the human body, and that most involution forms would be present in that part where the bacilli had been longest situated, that is, where they had first begun to grow: thus, in a case of plague-septicmia, for example, if most involutions were found in some particular gland, one might infer that the bacilli had first infected and grown in this gland. The enquiry, however, did not bear out this theory, for it was found that the involution forms had a direct reference to the period after death at which the autopsy was made, and in fact they appeared to be a post-mortem change. Thus, in autopsies made between one and five hours after death, the plague-bacili always shewed a distinct well-stained normal form; in those made between five and ten hours after death early involution forms were seen, rounded in shape and less distinctly stained; whereas in the few post-mortems made more than ten hours after death involution forms were plainly seen of rounded and oval shapes and still more faintly stained. It may also be noted that in cases of plague-septicmia some glands shewed more involution forms than others, but the variations followed no rule, and no conclusions could be deduced from them. APPENDIX C.  Case of Plague with a Carbuncle. R. B., Hindu, aged 30, admitted on 24th December 1896, looking very ill. There is a large mass looking like a carbuncle situated over the hepatic region and towards the right axilla; it is round, four inches in diameter and half an inch above the skin level. It has a red ulcerated surface with beads of reddish serum exuding from it at various points, and there is no skin remaining on it. There is a large mass of glands in the right axilla with effusion around them, the whole filling out the axilla and having the usual appearance of a plague-bubo; glands can also be felt in the left axilla and both groins, but they are only a little enlarged and are not buboes. Patient states that the ulcerated mass began fifteen days ago as a small boil or pimple; some native ointment was applied to it, and then it increased and reached its present size. Four days before admission he felt a painful swelling in the right axilla, which has since increased to its present condition, and during this time he says he has had high fever. Cultures were made from the bubo in the right axilla, and a pure growth of plague was obtained from them. This patient was very ill and there was no means of ascertaining the truth of the history he gave. But if it was true that the first symptoms of plague had shown themselves in the formation of the right axillary bubo four days before admission, it seemed likely that infection had occurred through the carbuncle. I have to express my thanks to Professor Bitter, Director of the Institute of Hygiene, Cairo, to Mons. Haffkine, C.I.E., and to Mr. Hankin for assistance in this research; and also to Dr. A. C. Viegas for showing me cases of plague immediately after he had discovered the existence of the disease in Bombay in September 1896. L. F. CHILDE, Surgeon-Captain, I. M. S. 20th October 1897.
